
Billionaire property developer Christian Candy’s hopes of annexing a strip of 
road to create a private garden for his Regent’s Park mansion in centralLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> have been thrown out by Camden council.

The rejection is a surprise setback for the controversial tycoon, who said he 
would appeal against the decision. Officers at the council had recommended the 
proposals be approved by the planning committee, which met on Wednesday night.

Candy’s plans would have removed an entire road lane and scrapped up to nine 
parking spaces to make way for a 400 sq metre garden and private entrance to 
his home. The work involved transplanting railings and lampposts in one of 
London’s most important conservation areas.

The plans were fiercely opposed by local residents, pitting the developer best 
known for creating the super-luxe One Hyde Park apartment complex in 
Knightsbridge against a group of influential neighbours, including doctors, 
surgeons, entrepreneurs, university professors and the psychiatrist and 
broadcaster Raj Persaud.

Neighbour Michael Weber praised the result, saying residents were “absolutely 
delighted”. The 12-member panel, led by councillor Heather Johnson, rejected 
the scheme by 10 votes. One member abstained and one voted in favour.

Candy holds a 150-year lease on Chester Gate, a private road that borders 
seven listed houses designed by the regency architect John Nash, which he 
bought in 2014. He has planning permission to knock them together into a family 
home and two other residences in a development said to be worth £200m.


His firm CPC London, which is developing the site, had claimed the new design 
would “reinstate a historic garden” in keeping with the original design. The 
ordinance survey map of 1875 shows a green space where Candy hoped to build 
one, but planning officers found it had not been designed by Nash or created 
during his lifetime.

Camden received 45 letters of objection. Residents dug up pictures from the 
1800s that showed during Nash’s time the land in question was occupied by 
pavement and a narrow strip of railings. They commissioneda report 
<http://camdocs.camden.gov.uk/webdrawer/webdrawer.dll/webdrawer/search/rec&sm_ncontents=2016/1479/P&template=reclistplanning&rows=1000>
 from the Oxford university professor Geoffrey Tyack, a world expert on Nash.

He concluded: “What is being proposed now is not a reinstatement of a garden 
designed by John Nash, or even of the Victorian garden indicated in the 1875 
Ordnance Survey map – which was significantly narrower than the garden now 
proposed – but the creation of a new private garden through the appropriation 
of space that has been within the public domain for all but a few of the past 
190 years.”

Tyack condemned the design as “imposing a spurious version of a garden that 
never existed on a historic and much-valued urban landscape that has been 
preserved and maintained over many generations”.

Neighbours also claimed reducing the road from two lanes to one could lead to 
traffic gridlock and create an enclave for drug dealers and antisocial 
behaviour. A spokesman for the objectors described the garden proposals as 
about “personal gain” and benefiting only one person “at the expense and 
inconvenience of thousands”.

The battle with Camden council is the latest legal complication for Candy. 
Earlier this summer, Christian and his brother Nick Candy wereaccused of tax 
evasion and blackmail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/nick-christian-candy-accused-tax-evasion-high-court>
 in a bruising £130m high court battle with a former business associate. They 
deny the claims.

The case exposed their financial affairs to unprecedented scrutiny. After 
years of living as a tax exile in Monaco, Christian Candy’s barrister told the 
court his client was now tax resident in Britain. It was revealed that the 
Chester Gate properties were in fact held in his wife’s name. Candy is married 
to Emily Crompton, a former girlfriend of Prince Charles’s stepson Tom Parker 
Bowles.

CPC London responded to Camden’s verdict saying: “We are extremely 
disappointed with this decision. Camden council’s rejection of the proposal, 
which seeks to bring additional green space to London, defies logic. The 
proposal had been fully supported by the council’s own planning officers. 
Camden council have not yet provided reasons for their decision, which we will 
appeal through the inspectorate.”
 