
David Cameron has accused Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> of “literally making it up” as he 
goes along, in the latest round of hostilities between the two senior Tories on 
opposite sides of the EU referendum debate.

The prime minister attacked Johnson’s position after the London mayor appeared 
to backtrack on the idea that Canada would be the best role model for a UK 
outside of the EU.

Cameron’s criticism did not mention Johnson by name but it was clearly a 
reference to the London mayor’s statement on Friday that theUK could do a trade 
deal in the same mould as Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/11/boris-johnson-on-brexit-we-can-be-like-canada>
.

Boris Johnson on Brexit: 'We can be like Canada'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/11/boris-johnson-on-brexit-we-can-be-like-canada>
Johnson then stopped short of wholly endorsing this model during his Ask Boris 
LBC session on Tuesday, saying “there are elements of the Canada deal I like … 
we should do a British deal.”

Speaking in Felixstowe, the prime minister dismissed the arguments of leave 
campaigners, who he said cannot make up their minds about what the UK outside 
of the EU should look like.

“Canada is a country 4,000 miles away from the continent of Europe that does 
10% of its trade with the EU. We are a country just 20 miles away from the 
continent of Europe and we do 50% of our trade with theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. So a Canada deal is not the right deal 
for us,” Cameron said.

“Today, the leaders of the leave campaign are saying they don’t really want a 
Canada deal at all, that they weren’t right about that. They are literally 
making it up as they go along.

“They are rolling the dice, they are taking a risk and they are taking a risk 
with people’s jobs, taking a risk with families’ finances and I don’t think 
that is good enough for the British people.”

Cameron also used the speech to say the remain campaign only had 100 days to 
guarantee the future of the Felixstowe port where he was speaking, but Matthew 
Elliott, chief executive of the Vote Leave campaign, responded by saying the 
port would be harmed by damaging regulations that Brussels was seeking to 
impose.

“The prime minister could not have chosen a more fitting place to highlight 
the risks of remaining in the EU. Brussels is seeking to impose damaging 
regulations which will harm UK ports’ competitiveness and cost our economy 
jobs. Despite the fact that employers, the unions and the government are 
against these proposals, we will be powerless to stop them if we vote remain. 
The safe option is to vote leave,” Elliott said.

With Johnson now the most high-profile politician campaigning for Brexit, the 
London mayor also came in for criticism from Labour grandee Peter Mandelson, 
who said he “doesn’t really think Boris knows what he’s talking about”, and had 
anon-air spat with Chuka Umunna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/15/chuka-umunna-radio-spat-boris-johnson-brexit-stance>
, the former shadow business secretary.

Chuka Umunna in radio spat with Boris Johnson over Brexit stance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/15/chuka-umunna-radio-spat-boris-johnson-brexit-stance>
Calling in to the LBC show as “Chuka from Streatham”, Umunna challenged 
Johnson over his suggestion that Britain could emulate Canada when striking a 
deal with the EU if the country were to vote to leave on 23 June.

Umunna, the Labour MP for Streatham, also attacked Johnson for the way he 
revealed his position on the EU in/out debate, accusing the mayor of selfishly 
putting himself at the heart of the discussion.

In a barbed exchange, Johnson accused Umunna and the remain campaign of 
running the country down.


Johnson said: “There’s a massive opportunity for us to strike deals around the 
world and I think it’s running this country down, and the sheer negativity and 
lack of optimism about our ability rise off the remain campaign like a vapour.”

Umunna replied: “If anyone is talking down our country and has been doing so 
for some time now it is you.” “Rubbish,” Johnson retorted.

On Canada, the former shadow business secretary said the deal took seven years 
to negotiate and does not give the North American country full access to the 
single EU free market area that the UK has now.

“We’ve been in the EU for 40 years. We are a massive economy. There’s no 
reason why we shouldn’t do a deal very rapidly indeed,” Johnson responded.

Earlier, Lord Mandelson had claimed Johnson’s endorsement of the Canada model 
was “a major strategic error” which would offer an “inferior, weaker 
alternative future” for the British economy.

He made the remarks in a speech warning of another risk of Brexit: “The 
possible re-emergence of a hard Irish border between North and South means a 
vote to leave could irrevocably reorder our UK.”

Downing Street said that a UK exit from the EU would raise security issues for 
Northern Ireland.


The prime minister’s spokeswoman said in response to Mandelson’s remarks: “The 
prime minister visited Northern Ireland early on in the campaign after the deal 
was reached in Brussels and the date for the referendum was set. While he was 
there he talked about the economic risks to Northern Ireland, but there are 
security issues too for people of Northern Ireland to think about and about 
relations with Ireland.

“The real issue here is it is unknown what the impact of leaving would be. 
There are security and broader relation issues to think about, and the 
contribution that the strength of the economic relationship between Northern 
Ireland and Ireland and broader relations that have had for Northern Ireland – 
all of which would be put at risk by leaving the EU.”
 