




Since Windows Mail is going out, what would you recommend for another free 
email server? What about Gmail? I haveWindows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows> 10. Thanks, Laurel

I answered a topical question about Microsoft’s changes to Windows Live Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/jun/02/microsoft-killing-windows-live-mail-what-should-i-do-hotmail-msn-outlook>
, which I fondly imagined answered everybody’s questions. The result was 
roughly three dozen confused emails. I’ve tried to cover most of the points 
raised, but apologise for picking on Laurel. She sent the shortest question, 
not, by a long way, the most confused one.

Most of the confusion is Microsoft’s fault. Once upon a time, it wanted people 
to use Windows Live Mail to collect mail from its Windows Live email service. 
Well, it should be easy if they both had the same name, right? Now it wants 
people to use Outlook (a Windows or smartphone app) or Outlook (a Microsoft 
Office program) to collect their email from outlook.com (a mail service), which 
is even more confusing. It’s no wonder people get them mixed up.

In fact, no version of Windows Mail is going away, and nobody needs to change 
to a different email service. Even Windows Live Mail 2012 is still available, 
though it doesn’t follow Microsoft’s modern finger-friendly style, and the 
Windows Live Essentials suite is being phased out.

Yes, you may need to change your email settings, but ONLY if you use Windows 
Live Mail 2012 (the PC email program) with a Microsoft email service such as 
Hotmail, Live, or outlook.com.

If you use Windows Live Mail 2012 with any other email service – for example, 
if you have a BT, Virgin, Comcast, Yahoo, Gmail or other email address – then 
you don’t need to change anything. You are not affected. This does not concern 
you.

How we got here

Microsoft started this mess by writing to people who used Windows Live Mail 
with Microsoft email accounts to say that Windows Live Mail would stop working 
by 30 June 2016. It was moving all the Microsoft Hotmail and Live Mail accounts 
to a new version of outlook.com, which Windows Live Mail would not support. 
Microsoft said users could switch to Outlook, the free email app, or Outlook, 
the Microsoft Office email program, which it offered free for one year.

My answer said that people with Hotmail and Live Mail email addresses could 
still use Windows Live Mail 2012 with outlook.com if they changed the settings 
to use the IMAP mail protocol.

Well, the deadline has gone, and there’s at least one case where Windows Live 
Mail 2012 is still working unchanged after an upgrade to Windows 10. I know 
this because my wife has an old Hotmail.co.uk address, and I’m still waiting 
for her Windows Live Mail to break.

If yours has broken, you will get Server error 3219 and Windows Live Mail 
error 0x8DE00005, and you will be unable to send or receive messages. This 
means your mail service has been moved to a new outlook.com server, and you 
will have to change your email settings manually, or switch to a different 
email program.

Some people changed the settings in Windows Live Mail 2012 to work with the 
IMAP protocol, as I suggested in June. However, one reader – Gerry from Sweden 
– says this has stopped working: he can receive email but not send it.

If you’re in a similar position, with non-working email, the best answer is to 
change the settings to POP3. Helpful reader Terry Hewitt recently wrote in to 
say that Microsoft had enabled POP3, so you just have to log on tooutlook.com 
<https://www.outlook.com/> (the website) and turn it on.

To do this, click the cogwheel, select Options, and click “POP and IMAP” in 
the left hand menu (see photo). Click Yes to “Let devices and apps use POP” but 
don’t allow them to delete messages. Save your changes and hit the back arrow.

After enabling POP3, open Windows Live Mail 2012, create a new account for 
your old email address, and check the box that says “Manually configure server 
settings”. For “Incoming server information” select POP with the server address 
pop-mail.outlook.com and Port: 995 with a secure connection (SSL). For the 
“Outgoing server information” use smtp-mail.outlook.com and Port: 25, or Port: 
587 if 25 is blocked. These settings work for me with a hotmail.com address and 
Windows Live Mail 2012 running in Windows 10.

Where’s the problem?

If you have an email problem, it could be in the mail server on the internet, 
which receives and stores your email, or in the email program on your PC, which 
collects it from the server. Here’s a brief guide to which does what.

First, the email service provides your email address and hosts your inbox. 
Most consumer email addresses include the name of the mail service. Examples 
include gmail.com, yahoo.com, fastmail.com and any local variations such as 
hotmail.co.uk. (Laurel: Gmail is a great alternative email service, if you 
don’t mind changing your email address.)

Second, an email client program collects your emails from the server, and 
sends any replies. Nowadays you can access most email services directly, via a 
web browser, so you don’t have to use a program to do it. However, many people 
prefer to use client programs, which can handle two or more email services at 
the same time. They can also provide more powerful sorting, filing and back-up 
options, and they work even when you are not online. They may be faster, too.

Email client programs include Windows Live Mail, Microsoft Office Outlook, 
Mailbird, eM Client, Mozilla Thunderbird, Pine and many more. You can use 
whichever you like. Most popular email clients already know the settings for 
most popular email servers, though sometimes you may have to enter them 
manually.

Third, there’s the operating system, which doesn’t matter. As long as you use 
a standard client program, email services don’t care which OS you use.

Almost everybody uses email, so almost every major operating system comes with 
a usable email client. This includes Windows, macOS (Mac OS X), Linux, Apple 
iOS, Google Android and so on. Of course, if you don’t like the bundled email 
client, you can usually download an alternative.

PC manufacturers used to ship Windows Live Mail as the client program on 
machines running Windows 7, and now they ship the Outlook mail app with Windows 
10. But Windows Live Mail still runs perfectly well on Windows 8.x and 10, so 
you can still use it: you just have todownload it 
<https://support.microsoft.com/en-gb/help/17779/download-windows-essentials>.

If you have a copy of the Outlook program from Microsoft Office 2007, 2010 or 
later, that will also work on all supported versions of Windows.

However, if you log on to Windows 10 with a Microsoft Account, the Outlook 
mail app will check your email automatically even if you don’t tell it to. It 
will also show details of new emails in the Mail tile in Windows 10’s Start 
menu, without downloading them. The built-in Outlook mail app is therefore the 
easiest way to start using email in Windows 10, but it’s not compulsory. You 
can use whatever you like.

Either way, if you’re going to write in with an email question, please 
distinguish between Windows Live (the email service) and Windows Live Mail 2012 
(the email program); and between outlook.com (the email service), Outlook (the 
Windows app) and Microsoft Office Outlook (the email program). It saves time in 
the long run.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 