
I am getting my son a new laptop for Christmas. My budget is around £500. He 
is adamant that he wants a 15in HP laptop – he won’t be lugging it anywhere – 
but I’ve also been looking at Dell and Asus ZenBooks. My question is: Can I 
future-proof my purchase to take him through his GCSEs to A-levels, or should I 
just go for an entry-level laptop with the view of replacing it in a couple of 
years?

His usage will be mostly be Microsoft Office, web browsing and watching 
YouTube videos. From my headache-inducing searches of various forums and 
guides, I think my basic requirements would be a Core i5, 8GB and SSD 
(solid-state drive) storage.Marie

Hardly any of today’s laptops are upgradeable, and the number gets smaller all 
the time. When laptops cost £2,000 to £4,000, it makes sense to provide upgrade 
options. When they cost around £150 to £600, people generally replace them 
rather than upgrade them. People also replace smartphones, fitness bands, 
digital watches, compact digital cameras and other gadgets in the same price 
range.

The people who are buying high-priced laptops are usually looking for the best 
possible performance for gaming, video editing, computer-aided design and 
similar applications. They want to be able to upgrade their systems every year 
or so to improve performance and save time, which usually saves money. Typical 
upgrades include more memory, better graphics cards and bigger SSDs 
(solid-state drives).

Corporate IT departments may also look for upgradeable laptops because they 
are simpler to maintain. Large companies will buy hundreds or even thousands of 
identical machines because it means they don’t have to stock a lot of spares to 
do running repairs. They can also cannibalise broken machines to keep their 
fleets running. TheDell Latitude E5470 
<http://www.zdnet.com/article/review-the-new-dell-latitude-e5470-is-a-great-laptop-for-windows-7-pro-users/>
, which I reviewed at ZDNet.com, is a good example, but it’s out of your price 
range.

Consumer laptops are designed to be thinner, lighter and cheaper, so memory 
and storage chips are often soldered directly to the motherboard. They don’t 
have removable backs or “access hatches” because companies don’t want users 
messing around inside.

If you want to know if a laptop can be upgraded, try two things. First, check 
Crucial’s website <http://uk.crucial.com/gbr/en> to see if it offers memory or 
SSD upgrades for that specific model. Second, search for and download the 
laptop’s service manual in PDF format. This will describe how to change parts 
that are changeable.

Meet Clevo

One exception is Clevo 
<http://forum.notebookreview.com/threads/clevo-guide-v3-0-faq-and-reseller-info-read-before-posting.592609/>
, which makes laptops that can be assembled and customised by resellers such as 
PC Specialist Ltd in the UK. (Sager sells Clevo laptops under its own brand 
name.) Many Clevo buyers are gamers looking for high-end specs, or techie Linux 
users, but you could get a 15.6inClevo UltraNote III 
<https://www.pcspecialist.co.uk/notebooks/ultraNoteIII-15/> within your budget.

The base UltraNote III costs £357 with an Intel Celeron processor and 2GB of 
memory. Upgrading to an Intel Core i5-6200U, 8GB of memory and 120GB Samsung 
750 SSD, while downgrading the optical drive to a read/write DVD, pushes the 
price up to £528. Upgrading the standard 1366 x 768-pixel screen to a much 
better 1920 x 1080-pixel IPS screen would add £35.

In sum, you can get an upgradeable laptop with the spec you want for £563, 
which is a bit more than your budget, but includes a three-year warranty. You 
could get it under budget by switching to a Core i3-6100U, which brings it down 
to £461.

The UltraNote III can handle a Core i7-6500U processor, 16GB of memory, a 2TB 
SSD and a Blu-ray writer, so there are plenty of upgrade options, though you 
should discuss these with PC Specialist before buying.

But your son is not going to need any upgrades, unless he starts doing some 
serious gaming or video-editing. Windows 10 and Microsoft Office (available 
free to most students) are relatively lightweight programs, and today’s 
processors have no problems playing videos.

Desktop PCs and all-in-ones

If you don’t actually need portability, do you have room for a desktop PC or 
an all-in-one? Desktop tower systems are far easier to upgrade or repair than 
laptops. You can easily change your desktop PC’s screen, upgrade the graphics 
card, add numerous drives, or even change the motherboard and/or the processor.

Tower systems are usually faster because the processor doesn’t have to run in 
a confined space or use low power to extend battery life. They also last 
longer: I bought my last desktops in 2005 and 2011, and I expect the latter to 
last at least another three years or more.

All-in-ones also have ergonomic advantages over laptops, and bigger screens, 
though most of them are not easy to upgrade. See my earlier answer,which 
all-in-one PC should I buy for home use? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/oct/20/which-all-in-one-pc-should-i-buy-for-home-use>

HP laptop choice

The laptop that most closely matches your request is the 15.6in HP Pavilion 
15-au074sa 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/laptops/laptops/hp-pavilion-15-au074sa-15-6-laptop-silver-10146646-pdt.html>
, which is going for £479.99 at Currys PC World, though you may be able to find 
it elsewhere. This has a Core i5-6200U, 8GB of memory and a 256GB SSD. Its main 
drawback is its limited 1366 x 768-pixel screen, though it’s not untypical for 
this class of machine.

The Pavilion 15-au074sa isn’t upgradeable, but you probably won’t need to 
upgrade it. Many university students and business users still have laptops with 
4GB of memory and conventional hard drives, and very few users have more than 
8GB. Many casual users only have 2GB.

Somebody who spends £999.99 on a 13.3in HP Spectre x360 will also get a Core 
i5-6200U, 8GB of memory and 256GB SSD, although the Spectre has other 
advantages. For example, it has a much better 1920 x 1080-pixel IPS touch 
screen, and a tougher, thinner and more stylish design. What it won’t do is run 
Microsoft Word noticeably faster.

Whether your HP Pavilion 15 will need replacing has less to do with the 
specification than its durability, and how well it’s looked after. Careless 
kids can destroy a laptop such as this in a year, by repeatedly picking it up 
by the screen – which breaks the hinges – or dropping it on a hard floor. If 
properly cared for, a Core i5 laptop should survive A-levels and university use.

Cheaper options

There are, obviously, lots of cheaper options. For some examples, see my 
recent answer,Which laptop should I buy my YouTube-friendly 14-year-old? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/sep/01/which-laptop-should-i-buy-my-youtube-friendly-14-year-old>
 Cheap laptops typically have much slower processors, only 4GB of memory and 
rotating hard drives, so they are not necessarily better value. However, a 
machine such as an Asus X540LA with a Core i3-5005U, 4GB of memory and 1TB hard 
drive (£305 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/ASUS-Notebook-i3-5005U-Processor-Windows/dp/B01HIWOJYK/>
) would be powerful enough for most students.

If you want to consider a disposable entry-level option, look at the HP 
Pavilion x2 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/hp-pavilion-x2-detachable-laptop-intel-atom-2gb-ram-64gb-emmc-10-1-touch-screen-with-free-ms-office-mobile-sunset-red/p2491743>
 detachable. This has a quad-core Intel Atom Z8300, 2GB of memory and 64GB of 
eMMC Flash memory for £219.95. Try to avoid models with 32GB of storage because 
Windows 10 is probably going to be re-installed twice a year.

The Pavilion x2 is an ultra-portable that doubles as a 10in tablet, has a 
usable keyboard and feels durable for the price. It’s my first thought when 
anyone asks for a cheap computer for a child.

Have you got a question? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com
 