
When George Pell <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-pell> 
dumped on Melbourne’s Catholic Education Office in March the question was: 
would the church strike back or hunker down behind the cardinal? On Wednesday 
the royal commission into institutional responses to child sexual abuse gave 
the answer: strike back hard.


At issue is Pell’s credit. Time and again as he has defended his record as a 
priest in Ballarat and bishop in Melbourne, the cardinal’s best answer to his 
accusers has been: my word can be trusted against yours.


That’s not looking so good now.


To recap: when Pell came to Melbourne as an auxiliary bishop in 1987 there was 
an erratic and violent priest called Peter Searsonterrifying children at the 
parish school in Doveton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/26/letters-show-melbourne-archbishop-failed-to-act-on-allegations-about-priest>
.


Was George Pell, now scourge of the Vatican, once hoodwinked by all around 
him? | David Marr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/02/was-george-pell-now-scourge-of-the-vatican-once-hoodwinked-by-all-around-him>
He hit them. They fled screaming from the presbytery. He packed a gun. He hung 
round the boys’ toilet. He sat little girls on his lap during confession. He 
took gruesome delight in showing kids a corpse in a coffin. He stole parish 
funds.


Father Searson was plainly nuts, but the Catholic Education Office couldn’t 
get rid of him. They’d run complaints up to the then archbishop of Melbourne, 
Frank Little, but nothing would be done.


The headmaster of the school Graeme Sleeman gave the church an ultimatum: the 
priest had to go or he would. The church backed the priest. Sleeman never 
worked in the Catholic education system again.


Along came Pell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/02/was-george-pell-now-scourge-of-the-vatican-once-hoodwinked-by-all-around-him>
. Doveton was in his territory. But the new bishop did nothing effective about 
this vicious priest despite receiving a delegation of teachers complaining 
about him in 1989 and another of parents in 1991.


Searson would stay in Doveton for eight more years until he bashed another 
altar boy whose parents went to the police. Pell was archbishop when the priest 
was finally sacked in 1997.


But why did he do nothing in the early years?


Giving evidence from Rome in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/02/was-george-pell-now-scourge-of-the-vatican-once-hoodwinked-by-all-around-him>
, the cardinal put much of the blame on the Catholic Education Office. He 
declared himself the victim of a coverup. He told the royal commission that 
when it came to Father Searson, the office had given him “no adequate 
background briefing on the long-term problems at all”.


Why? To protect the office, he told counsel assisting the commission, Gail 
Furness SC. And to protect the archbishop.


“I was a new boy on the block. I was known to be capable of being outspoken. 
They might have been fearful of just what line I – I would take when confronted 
with all the information. They were very keen to keep the lid on the situation.”


Furness called that story implausible at the time. Now four retired executives 
of the Catholic Education Office have come to the royal commission to describe 
their shock, surprise, disappointment and anger at Pell’s evidence.


“Our number one priority for the Catholic Education Office for some period of 
time was that something would happen which led to the removal of Searson from 
Doveton,” said Peter Annett, a former supervisor with the office.


“I would have thought that our staff would be completely frank with Bishop 
Pell and be cheering from the rooftops if he was able to do anything.”


All four men and women said the same thing: there was no conspiracy to deceive 
Pell, no understanding to keep the lid on the Searson scandal, and no reason to 
soft-pedal the ongoing crisis in Doveton.


They wanted Searson gone but Pell was no help.


These four veterans of church bureaucracy were represented before the 
commission by lawyers for the Archdiocese of Melbourne. They were giving their 
evidence with the full backing of the church.


Not that their efforts to get rid of Searson were particularly impressive. 
Sitting in the gallery to hear their evidence was Graeme Sleeman, the former 
Doveton headmaster. He ridiculed their claim that dealing with this priest was 
the top priority of the Catholic Education Office.


He told the Guardian: “That’s fucking bullshit.”


George Pell presumed paedophile teacher would get 'help', he tells royal 
commission
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/02/george-pell-presumed-paedophile-teacher-would-get-help-he-tells-royal-commission>
Even so, Pell’s accusation that the office set out to deceive him seems now to 
lie in ruins. And if he can’t be believed here, can the elaborate accounts of 
his ignorance of paedophile scandals in Ballarat be believed?


And what about, his crucial denial that he offered young David Ridsdale an 
inducement not to report to the police his abuse at the hands of his uncle, the 
notorious paedophile Gerald Ridsdale?


All the evidence against Pell in relation to his Melbourne career has now been 
heard. Between now and August the royal commission has to decide one 
fundamental question: is Cardinal Pell a man of his word?
 