
New Zealand duly booked their quarter-final place but the world champions are 
still to shake off the ring rust and look to have lost their veteran prop Tony 
Woodcock.

Ahead of them in Cardiff lie the losers of Sunday’s Pool D meeting between 
France and Ireland and both have given the All Blacks headaches in the past.
Against Ireland in Dublin a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/24/ireland-new-zealand-autumn-internationals>
 New Zealand just scraped home, while France have a history of upsetting the 
All Black apple cart at World Cups.

Stuart Lancaster’s Rugby World Cup pain could eventually be his gain | Graham 
Henry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/09/england-australia-rugby-world-cup-new-zealand-france>
Not that the All Black coach, Steve Hansen, seemed particularly worried about 
his side’s form so far: “How you play at the moment doesn’t mean anything. 
What’s happening now is irrelevant. What happens next week will be,” said 
Hansen. “Its about maintaining performances from here on in.”

New Zealand have eight days to put things right, and shake off Friday’s bumps 
and bruises, although that probably will not be long enough for Woodcock. After 
saying that more would be known about the prop’s torn hamstring on Saturday, 
Hansen added: “It doesn’t look as though he’ll be OK. If this is the end of his 
tournament it is a poor way for a great All Black to finish.”

Eleven points down at the interval, Tonga continued to give the favourites a 
tough time, reducing the lead by three, but almost immediately the Blacks 
struck back and two tries in six minutes from the wing Nehe Milner-Skudder 
ended the game if not the contest.

Bonus point in the bag, New Zealand emptied their bench and finally went 
through the gears, the most delicate of inside balls putting in Sonny Bill 
Williams before Sam Cane added a sixth, all converted by Dan Carter before the 
man of the night Ma’a Nonu finally had his say.

With England still struggling to find a midfield partnership that is still 
happy and effective in each other’s company for more than 100 minutes, New 
Zealand emphasised the settled nature of their squad by handing Nonu his 100th 
cap and pairing him with Conrad Smith for the 59th time. Nonu, possibly the man 
the England coach Stuart Lancaster thought of when he decided to give Sam 
Burgess the No12 shirt, is very much the All Blacks’ weapon of choice. But it 
was not always so. Nonu arrived on the scene as something of a one-trick pony, 
pretty good at running through walls, but struggling to offer more until he 
added a side-step, a decent pass and something of a kicking game. According to 
coach Steve Hansen he has become a leader as well: “He doesn’t say a lot, but 
when he does speak it’s right on the money.”

Not that he was given much chance to do a lot of speaking early on, the 
Tongans dishing out what they dish out best and the All Black midfield, 
completed by 109-cap Carter, seeing plenty of the action although it was at its 
smooth best for the first try. Carter, Nonu and Smith made the most of a 
lineout turnover and after only 13 minutes the full-back Ben Smith was cruising 
in for the first five points, another two added by Carter who has missed a few 
recently.

Nerves settled, Carter did everything right for what looked like a certain 
second try, but the wing Waisake Naholo fumbled, taking an early black mark in 
his competition with Milner-Skudder to partner Julian Savea in the quarter 
final. Not that it mattered. The wing did everything right six minutes later, 
coming on to another Carter pass to make the dent that Woodcock capitalised on.

Again Carter had no trouble and after 30 minutes New Zealand were 14-3 up, 
although not all the rust had disappeared. The All Black pack had been under a 
bit of pressure for most of the evening and ended the half distinctly on the 
back foot. First the captain Kieran Read was sent to the sin-bin for pulling 
down the maul, then the scrum was twice penalised under its own posts but the 
defence just held out with the help of the TMO.

New Zealand B Smith; Milner-Skudder, C Smith (Williams, 62), Nonu, Naholo 
(Barrett, 57); Carter, A Smith (Kerr-Barlow, 72); Woodcock (Crockett, 42), 
Coles (Mealamu, 66), O Franks (B Franks, 62), Romano (Retallick, 49), Whitelock 
(Messam, 66), Kaino, Cane, Read (capt).

Tries: B Smith, Woodcock, Milner-Skudder 2, Williams, Cane, Nonu. Cons: Carter 
6.Sin bin: Read 37

Tonga Lilo; Veainu (Helu, 66), Piutau, Fosita, Vainikolo; Morath (Tahitua, 
62), Takulua (Fisilau, 69); Tonga’uiha (Taumalolo, 55), Taione (Ngauamo, 49), 
Aulika, Lokotui, Tuineau (Mafi, 54), Kalamafoni, Latu (capt), Ma’afu (Ram, 66).

Pens: Morath 3. Sin-bin: Ngauamo 69.

Referee: John Lacey (Ire). Attendance:  50,985.
 