


A senior Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> executive has 
defended the documentaries Benefits Street and Skint, saying the broadcaster 
has no “malign intent” and is trying to tell stories about “some of the 
distressed parts of our society”.

Ralph Lee, Channel 4 deputy chief creative officer and head of factual, 
admitted the negative publicity surrounding the shows, dubbed “poverty porn” by 
critics, had made it harder to go out and make follow-up series. However, Lee 
said Channel 4 would not be cowed by the backlash, which he argues is “a form 
of censorship”, admitting that even agreeing to change the title ofBenefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/benefits> Street spin-off Immigration 
Street could be interpreted as the broadcaster backing down.

Channel 4 will broadcast the second series of Skint, filmed in Grimsby, in 
November, with a follow-up to Benefits Street and a separate documentary, 
Immigration Street, also in the works.

The broadcaster has faced vocal protests from local politicians and residents 
in Grimsby, Stockton-on-Tees – where the second series of Benefits Street is 
being filmed – and in Southampton, the location for Immigration Street.

Lee said in an interview with the Guardian that Channel 4 was planning to go 
ahead with the three documentary series, adding that the intention with Skint 
is “not to say this is what life is like in Grimsby, but this is what life is 
like for people who are skint”.

He said: “We can’t let this kind of criticism have a chilling effect on making 
programmes. In a way what they are calling for is a form of censorship and I am 
always really suspicious of that. I defend our right – and the necessity – to 
tell the stories of some of the distressed parts of our society.”

Grimsby MP Austin Mitchell asked the broadcaster to “consider the ethics of 
the trend Channel 4 has embarked on, demonising the poor and making poverty 
entertainment”.

The first series of Benefits Street, filmed on James Turner Street in 
Birmingham and broadcast in January, attracted the most notoriety, dubbed by 
one critic “a medieval stocks updated for a modern format”. Residents found 
themselves pilloried both in the street and on Twitter.

Teesside residents have reacted to the presence of documentary-makers from 
Love Productions, the company behind Benefits Street, in Stockton by unfurling 
a banner during a match at nearby Middlesbrough’s football ground declaring: 
“Being poor is not entertainment”.

Love Productions is also making Immigration Street in Southampton, where the 
production team has been pelted with flour and eggs.

“[The backlash] did have an impact on how easy it was to go out and make these 
documentaries,” Lee admitted.

In Southampton, the “community is very split”, he added. “Some are very happy 
to show their lives, others less so, and those who aren’t have received a lot 
of support and encouragement from everyone from the local MP to community 
groups.

“Rather than just close the door and ignore it, people have tried to obstruct 
it. That’s a real shame. They seem to assume there is a malign intent, a 
guaranteed negative impact of trying to tell the story about immigration and 
integration. We don’t have a malign intention; there isn’t an agenda.”

As with the first series of Benefits Street, Lee said the biggest complaint 
was about the programme name. It has been suggested Channel 4 regards 
Immigration Street as a “working title”. “We could change the title or we might 
not,” he said. “The danger is we would look like we were backing down.”
 