
In the world’s richest football league the trading of players, compressed into 
two transfer windows, has become a billion-pound whirlwind, involving a flurry 
of agents whose roles and rewards have never been openly disclosed to 
supporters or the public. Earlier this year the Football Association injected a 
sudden gleam of daylight into this market of human talent by publishinga list 
of the agents 
<http://www.thefa.com/news/2016/Apr/21/agents-intermediaries-220416>, now 
termed “intermediaries,” who acted on all the deals done by England’s Premier 
and Football League clubs in the summer of 2015 and January 2016.

New regulations introduced last year, replacing the old licensed agents 
system, require that anybody advising or negotiating on behalf of a player or 
club, on the “substantive” terms of any deal, must be registered as an 
“intermediary” with the FA and reported to the governing body on an official 
form recording the transfer. The document lists the intermediaries, including 
familiar big operators such as Jonathan Barnett’sStellar 
<http://stellargroup.co.uk/>, Leon Angel’s Base 
<http://www.basesoccer.com/people/>, “super agents” Jorge Mendes, Mino Raiola 
and Pini Zahavi, who acted in the deals when thousands of players joined clubs, 
signed new contracts or were sold by English clubs to overseas sides.

Association of Football Agents admits system is open to abuse amid Allardyce 
fallout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/association-football-agents-divided-response-sam-allardyce-exit>
Although the document sets out only the names of intermediaries and who they 
acted for, whether the player, signing club or selling club, giving no detail 
about the work they did or how much they were paid, its bare essentials 
nevertheless provide more illumination than ever about how deals are done. In 
the vast majority, the same agent advised both the player and the club signing 
him. This “dual representation” of two parties in the same deal is now allowed 
in English football, if both sides sign an agreement to waive any objection 
that the agent may have a conflict of interest.

This system was developed in agreement with HMRC, after it won a landmark 
tribunal victory against Birmingham City a decade ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2007/oct/10/clubsaskedagentstoplaybot>. 
The case established that agents who were recorded as having acted only for the 
club, with nobody representing the player, were in fact the players’ agents and 
had acted for both parties to the deal. HMRC had challenged this practice, 
known as “switching,” arguing that the public were being deprived of tax in two 
ways. First, when a player pays an agent for advising him, the player as an 
individual pays VAT and cannot reclaim it, whereas a club, as a VAT-registered 
company, can reclaim the VAT.

Secondly, if a club takes care of the player’s agent’s fee, pays it on behalf 
of the player, which is common practice across football, that payment 
constitutes a financial benefit for the player, on top of his salary. So the 
player must pay income tax on that benefit, invariably at the higher rate of 
40%. Where an agent has acted for the club, the fee is paid and there is no 
such income tax payable on it. HMRC’s successful challenge, arguing that 
Birmingham had not been “truthful” when claiming the agents acted only for the 
club, led to a reclaiming of VAT from many clubs which had indulged in the same 
practice, going back several years.

In today’s transfer swirl, in which the spending of Premier League clubs alone 
reached £1bn during the year covered by the FA document, it is rare for any 
player not to have an agent advising on the galactic pay and bonuses, duration 
and other key terms of a windfall contract in English football. Some may still 
choose not to. The vast majority of players signing deals are noted in the 
document as having paid advisers: at Everton, every player had a registered 
intermediary. At Arsenal, every player who joined or signed a new contract, 
including senior stars such as Petr Cech, Santi Cazorla and Theo Walcott, 
together with 25 others, is noted as having an adviser. The only exception was 
the 16-year-old Vlad Dragomir, who signed from the Romanian club Poli 
Timisoara.The most noticeable exceptions to that standard pattern were atChelsea
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, where among the 28 deals the 
then Premier League champions concluded, five players were reported to the FA 
on the official forms as having had nobody representing them in negotiations, 
while the club instructed an agent in each case.

At newly promoted Watford, the Pozzo family ownership engaged in a rapid 
series of acquisitions to stock a squad which could stay in the Premier League. 
Of those, 16 deals are listed in which players joined the club with nobody 
recorded advising them, whileWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> themselves employed and paid an 
agent to secure these signings. At West Ham, the former captain, Kevin Nolan, 
agreed a termination of his contract in July 2015 after the manager for whom he 
previously played at Bolton Wanderers and Newcastle United, Sam Allardyce, 
left, and Slaven Bilic took over. Nolan is recorded as having agreed this 
termination with nobody advising him on the substantive terms, while West Ham 
employed an agent, Kenneth Asquez, based in Gibraltar, to negotiate with Nolan.

Nolan himself is said to have decided that as an experienced player, he no 
longer needed to pay an agent to advise him, and some sources say that young 
players making their dream Premier League move might not insist on having 
anybody to negotiate for them.

Inquiries by the Guardian have discovered that some of the intermediaries 
listed as having acted only for Chelsea and Watford, in deals to sign players 
who had no advice, in fact have apparent connections to those players. That 
makes the record disclosed to and by the FA confusing to the football public, 
who are given no explanation as to why these clubs chose to pay an agent to 
secure the deal with a player, while the player himself had no professional 
advice at all.

There is no suggestion that these clubs or agents have done anything 
irregular, or that there are any investigations by any authority, including 
HMRC, into any of these transfer dealings. All three clubs and the agents 
concerned have emphasised to the Guardian that the deals were reported to the 
FA exactly as they happened and the correct tax was paid.

The clearest instance of this, where an agent who acted only for the club had 
an apparent connection to the player being signed, was in Watford’s deal to 
sign the midfielder Étienne Capoue for £5.7m from Tottenham Hotspur last 
summer. Mino Raiola, the Monaco-based “super agent,” who delivered this 
summer’s record £93m transfer of Paul Pogba from Juventus to Manchester United, 
has been widely quoted in the media describing himself as Capoue’s agent, since 
before the player moved from Toulouse to Spurs in 2013.

When Watford bought him, Capoue was reported to the FA as having no agent or 
adviser. Watford, though, stated that Raiola, cited by his full first name, 
Carmine, was employed and paid to act as the club’s agent.

Confused by the contradiction in this position, the Guardian asked Raiola in a 
telephone conversation if he is in fact Capoue’s agent. Raiola replied: “Yes.” 
Asked why, then, he was reported to the FA as Watford’s agent, with Capoue not 
represented by anybody, Raiola responded: “Take it up with my lawyers if you 
have a question.”

We did ask that question of Patrice van Oostaijen, who confirmed he is 
Raiola’s lawyer at the firm Maguire Tax & Legal, in Holland. Van Oostaijen did 
not then respond to an email asking the question as to why Raiola was declared 
to have acted only for Watford, and not for Capoue, when the player moved to 
Vicarage Road.

Of Chelsea’s five signings where the players had no representation but the 
club paid an agent, three were young players, brought to England from overseas. 
They were the then 19-year-old Brazilians Nathan and Kenedy, and the US 
defender Matt Miazga, who was 20. Of the other two unrepresented players one 
was Chelsea’s own Brazilian first team star, Ramires, then 28, who is stated to 
have agreed a new four-year contract in October 2015, possibly the most 
important of his career for earning potential, with no advice from anybody on 
its substantive terms or pay. The Brazilian midfielder Alexandre Pato, who 
joined Chelsea on loan from an unhappy spell at Corinthians in January 2016, 
was the other player recorded as having no advice on the substantive terms of 
his contract.

In all five of these deals, Chelsea reported on the official records to the FA 
that the club themselves did appoint and pay agents. Sports Invest, the 
London-based agency owned by Kia Joorabchian, was paid to act for Chelsea on 
Pato’s loan deal, and on the £3.5m signing of Miazga from New York Red Bulls.

On the other three deals, including the new contract with Ramires 
<http://www.chelseafc.com/news/latest-news/2015/10/ramires-signs-new-contract.html>
, the Brazilian agent Giuliano Bertolucci was paid by Chelsea to act for it.

Neither Chelsea nor Bertolucci himself responded to questions from the 
Guardian with an explanation as to why the club needed an agent to negotiate 
this new contract with a player who had been at the club already for five 
years, and was not advised by anybody himself. Three months after Ramires 
signed that four-year contract, in January 2016, Chelsea sold him to the 
Chinese club Jiangsu Suning 
<http://www.chelseafc.com/news/latest-news/2016/01/ramires-departs.html>; 
again, the records sent to the FA stated that nobody represented Ramires.

Bertolucci was also appointed by Chelsea and paid an agent’s fee for the £3m 
signing of Nathan from the Brazilian club Paranaense, and Kenedy, for £6.3m 
from Fluminese, while neither teenager had anybody negotiating for them and are 
stated to have themselves agreed the pay, terms and conditions to come to the 
English Premier League. Nathan and Miazga were immediately loaned to Vitesse 
Arnhem in Belgium, while Kenedy made four league appearances last season before 
Chelsea loaned him to Watford.

Chelsea, Sports Invest and Bertolucci, citing confidentiality, declined to 
discuss why the club appointed agents when these players joined, or what the 
agents’ role was for Chelsea. Via their lawyers, they emphasised that the 
details of the deals as published by the FA are correct, that these five 
players did not have agents or intermediaries advising them or negotiating with 
Chelsea, and that there was no question about whether the correct tax was paid.

Sports Invest’s lawyers explained that Chelsea sometimes uses Joorabchian’s 
agency as an intermediary when it has connections with the selling club and 
also if a number of clubs are competing for a player’s signature. Chelsea 
appointed Sports Invest to secure Pato on loan because of a “close 
relationship” with Corinthians, the lawyers said. Joorabchian first came to 
prominence when he represented a fund, MSI, which financed Corinthians from 
2004, then owned the rights to the club’s players, including the Argentinian 
World Cup stars Carlos Tevez and Javier Mascherano, when theytransferred to 
West Ham United in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/mar/17/david-conn-west-ham-tevez-mascherano>
.

Joorabchian remained involved with Tevez throughout the controversies over 
players’ third party ownership and through its subsequent outlawing in English 
football, including when Manchester City bought the striker outright in 2009 
for a fee understood to have been £45m.

Joorabchian is registered at Companies House as the owner and sole director of 
Sports Invest UK, and his lawyers confirmed: “It is a matter of public record 
that Mr Joorabchian is a director of Sports Invest and that Sports Invest is 
involved in Chelsea-related transfers.”

Joorabchian was never licensed as an agent under the old rules; he is now a 
registered intermediary although he did not personally act for Chelsea on the 
Pato or Miazga deals. Nojan Bedroud, a former Sports Invest director, is 
recorded as the agency’s representative acting for Chelsea when they signed 
Pato. Amir Ali Kohansal, Sports Invest’s representative acting for Chelsea when 
the club signed Miazga, has a working relationship with the Joorabchian family.

Sports Invest does have an apparent connection with four of the players 
Chelsea signed who were recorded as having no advice: Nathan, Kenedy, Miazga 
and Ramires. These players are all listed as Sports Invest’s own clients on the 
player performance database,Wyscout <https://wyscout.com/>.

Wyscout, established in Genoa, is a well-respected platform featuring player 
statistics and film of matches, to which 85 of England’s 92 Premier and 
Football League clubs subscribe. On it, Sports Invest lists 99 players as its 
clients, and names Nojan Bedroud, the agent who acted for Chelsea on the Pato 
loan deal, as its main contact. Others among the mostly Brazilian players 
listed as Sports Invest’s clients are Chelsea’s David Luiz, Willian and Oscar, 
Liverpool’s Philippe Coutinho, and Tevez, now playing for Boca Juniors in his 
home country.

A spokesman for Wyscout said agencies such as Sports Invest themselves 
actively subscribe to be on the database, and name their own clients. The 
agencies are on Wyscout only if they have paid for their profile then, they 
state, “claim” which players they represent, so building a portfolio of 
clients. Wyscout’s purpose is to ensure the data is reliable, so nobody else 
can input agents’ clients. Contact details are provided so that clubs are able 
to contact the named agents if they are interested in discussing the players.

“Any agency which wants to ‘claim’ their clients on Wyscout has to subscribe 
to the system,” the spokesman said, ”otherwise they wouldn’t have the access 
necessary. Any players listed under an agency would have to be ‘claimed’ by 
them.”

The Guardian asked Sports Invest and Bertolucci why the four players, recorded 
as unrepresented when they joined Chelsea, with the agents acting only for the 
club, are listed as Sports Invest’s clients on Wyscout. Via their lawyers, 
Sports Invest and Bertolucci declined to explain. Chelsea said it was a matter 
for Sports Invest and Wyscout.

Chelsea said they would pass the Guardian’s questions to the players, 
including why they chose not to have any advice from any intermediary when they 
negotiated with Chelsea, while the club was represented by Bertolucci or Sports 
Invest. At the time of writing, no response had been received from any of them.

On the FA’s published document, for five of the players who were not 
represented when Watford signed them in the summer of 2015, there is publicly 
available evidence which states that they are in fact clients of the agents 
named as acting for the club. Besides Raiola’s confirmation that he is Etienne 
Capoue’s agent, in the cases of three players: Matej Vydra, Valon Behrami and 
Almen Abdi, the agents reported as having acted only for Watford list the 
players on their own websites as their clients.

When the Czech striker Vydra signed a permanent deal last July, having been 
one of the players controversially loaned by Udinese, the Serie A club also 
owned by the Pozzo family, Watford reported to the FA that they employed Ondrej 
Chovanec as their agent, with Vydra having no adviser. However, on Chovanec’s 
own website for his agency, Chovanec Sport, he lists Vydra, who joined Derby 
County in August, as one of the players he represents.

The Guardian has also seen a copy of the official filing for Vydra maintained 
by the Czech Football Association in a register of all its members. That also 
records Chovanec as Vydra’s agent. Chovanec did not respond to emails asking 
him about this apparent contradiction, and when contacted by telephone said 
that he does not talk to the press.

When Watford signed the Swiss midfield player Behrami for £2.5m from Hamburg, 
Nikola Damjanac, a Serbian former goalkeeper, is recorded as having acted 
exclusively for Watford, with the player unrepresented by any adviser. On 
Damjanac’s website for his agency Lian Sports, Behrami isfeatured in the list 
of players represented <http://www.liansports.com/>. News is also prominently 
displayed about him, most recently his role in Switzerland’s 2-0 victory over 
the Faroe Islands in last month’s World Cup qualifying match. Damjanac did not 
respond to emails asking about this discrepancy, nor to telephone calls to 
numbers listed for him on a register of Serbian agents.

When Behrami’s fellow Swiss midfielder, Abdi, signed a new three-year contract 
in July 2015 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%40watfordFC%20Almen%20Abdi%203-yr%20deal&src=typd>
, he had already been at Vicarage Road for three seasons, having in 2012 been 
another of the players loaned from Udinese. The FA document shows that Watford 
nevertheless employed and paid an agent to negotiate for the club the new 
contract with Abdi, who is stated not to have been advised. The agent the club 
employed was Dino Lamberti, founderof theFair Play Agency 
<http://www.fairplayagency.com/en/> based in Zurich. On its website, Abdi, who 
has since joined Sheffield Wednesday, islisted prominently as a client  
<http://www.fairplayagency.com/en/>

Abdi’s official Twitter account <https://twitter.com/AlmenAbdi> states that it 
is jointly managed by Fair Play Agency; Lamberti’s agency is listed as the
contact for Abdi on his Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/pg/Almen.Abdi/about/?ref=page_internal>, and on the 
agency’s own Facebook page it lists Abdi’s. Lamberti did not respond to emails 
or telephone messages left at Fair Play Agency’s Zurich office, asking why he 
was reported to the FA as having acted only for Watford on the negotiation of 
Abdi’s new contract last year, while the player was unrepresented, when he 
lists Abdi as one of his clients.

The Lithuanian goalkeeper Giedrius Arlauskis, who joined Watford from Steaua 
Bucharest last summer and has since been loaned to Espanyol, was also recorded 
as having negotiated the deal himself to join Watford in the Premier League. 
The agent employed and paid to act for the club was Leonid Istrati. On the 
Soccer Assocation database, Istrati’s iFootball agencylists Arlauskis as one of 
its clients <http://www.soccerassociation.com/agents/838.htm>

In a statement, West Ham said: “FA registered intermediary Kenneth Asquez 
acted on behalf of the club to assist with the negotiation of the termination 
of Kevin Nolan’s West Ham United contract, which was declared on the relevant 
FA Forms. To the club’s knowledge, Kevin Nolan has never been represented by 
Kenneth Asquez.

“Furthermore, when Kevin joined West Ham United from Newcastle United in 2011, 
neither he nor the Club were represented by an FA licensed agent.”

The FA declined to comment on apparent relationships revealed between some of 
these agents and players, but indicated it believes the public naming of the 
intermediaries who acted in all deals is a progressive move, allowing more 
information to be known. “Transparency of transactions is an important part of 
the new regulations,” an FA spokesman said.
 