
The moment when things went wrong for victims of child abuse in Australia was 
a very precise one. In the 1990s, Jeff Kennett, then premier of Victoria, met 
with George Pell, who was at that stage the Catholic archbishop of Melbourne. 
According to Pell, Kennett told him to “clean this [child abuse] thing up and 
there won’t be a royal commission”.

Kennett told The Age last year 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/jeff-kennett-warned-pell-to-deal-with-abuse-20140327-35lrw.html>
 that he was “reassured that George said ‘yes’, he’d get stuck into it ... it’s 
not for me to sit in judgment … of whether the response was adequate or not”.

We know what the church’s action was: Pell took matters into his own hands and 
set up the Melbourne Response in 1996. In doing so, he went out ahead of the 
rest of the church which, we know from the commission, was in the process of 
developing a more integrated, national version of what would become its 
response to abuse, Towards Healing.

By being unconcerned with the quality of the church’s response and leaving it 
to its own devices, Kennett made a serious mistake.

His response laid bare a question that the commission is now grappling with: 
do we believe the state has a moral duty to care for its vulnerable citizens, 
or not? Of course, many don’t believe that governments should “sit in judgment” 
on matters that are properly the domain of the private sector, civil society, 
or the impersonal order of the market.

We can see this tension in play as the commission embarks on its most 
important case study, to determine what kind of justice is due to victims in a 
post-commission redress scheme.

Governments were invited to make written submissions to three major issues 
papers and oral submissions to the commission’s hearing regarding victims’ 
redress. These would be compiled into a report and recommendations, to be 
released in July.

Only three state governments accepted the commission’s invitation to appear to 
give oral submissions – Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia. The 
commonwealth also declined to attend.

And the written submissions of many governments not in attendance were 
manifestly insufficient, giving the impression that the states are keeping 
their political options open or have not made the time and effort to contribute 
constructively.

Commissioners are obviously bound by tact and political considerations in what 
they may say, but Peter McClellan, the chief commissioner, spoke yesterday in 
very strong terms, particularly about the absence of the commonwealth. One 
passage deserves to be read in full:

The commissioners are disappointed that although our terms of reference 
suggest that the need for effective redress has been accepted by all 
governments, the structural approach that is overwhelmingly supported by 
survivor advocacy and support groups and by many institutions as being most 
likely to ensure a just, fair and consistent outcome for all victims, wherever 
they may have suffered abuse, is not presently supported by the commonwealth.

The commonwealth’s reasons for declining to support the commission’s preferred 
option – a federally-run redress scheme with buy-in from state governments and 
churches, schools and the like – included complexity, time, the necessary 
bureaucracy and potential overlap with existing state schemes.

This is no more than a grab bag of excuses, including of the cowardly 
federal-state “blame game” genre. More disappointing is the reckless and 
anti-intellectual nature of refusing to participate in the commission’s work in 
good faith. It sends the message that the commonwealth is prepared to proceed 
against the best advice of the world’s best integrated system for investigating 
and addressing child abuse.

Few are interested in it, and it’s certainly not sexy, but the commission is 
making up for a knowledge gap by conducting intensive academic and policy 
research, alongside interviews with victims and the highly-publicised hearings.

That’s vital to get the best outcome for Australian victims. The result of our 
royal commission will also be scrutinised by international inquiries, legal 
systems, academics and support workers. How we administer justice here will 
influence the outcomes for countless people around the world.

The commonwealth’s failure to attend also says, and McClellan made this point 
in no uncertain terms, that it is prepared to refuse support for the preferred 
solution of survivors’ groups, service providers and the accumulated evidence 
given in private sessions by victims themselves. McClellan noted that:

It also seems clear from the commonwealth’s submission that it does not 
support an expansion of the public provision of counselling and psychological 
care for survivors, other than through improving survivors’ awareness of 
existing services and their level of confidence in these services.

Where does that leave victims? We already know that private forms of redress – 
civil litigation being the most powerful – are expensive and often 
traumatising. It has been hammered home again and again that victims do not get 
good outcomes when they have to negotiate outcomes with the institutions that 
were responsible for allowing abuse to occur and in some cases, engaged in 
coverups.

Nevertheless, the commonwealth submitted to the commission that it is 
“strongly of the view that the institutions in which child sexual abuse 
occurred should bear responsibly for providing redress to survivors of that 
abuse”.

Let’s be very clear: some victims have killed themselves or been plunged 
further into despair after being fed through the courts. Others cannot afford 
private counselling, or need support to access services because they have been 
so broken by the crimes committed against them.

Others distrust the church or school in which they were abused to the point 
where they would rather not engage. Others still were abused in institutions 
that no longer exist.

That’s why a national redress scheme is so important. But when the final 
report is released in a few months, we already know it won’t have the 
confidence of the tier of government responsible for creating the commission in 
the first place.

This is the second time the commonwealth’s commitment to the commission has 
been questioned: in 2014 George Brandis was left to explain why $7m was
redirected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/28/sex-abuse-royal-commission-funds-redirected-to-home-insulation-inquiry>
 to the home insulation inquiry. All this comes after Tony Abbott, as 
opposition leader, gave his support for the commission’s establishment in 2013.

Where is that support today? At the very least, the commonwealth and absent 
state governments could have supported the commission’s solution in principle 
as best practice, and argued over whether it was feasible to implement. But no 
– they had to come out ahead of the commission and cruel any goodwill for the 
redress scheme’s establishment, even before the release of the final report in 
a mere few months.

From the moment I began writing about the commission, I thought the Catholic 
Church would be the institution tooppose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/12/celibacy-and-child-abuse-why-is-the-catholic-church-pre-empting-the-royal-commission>
 the establishment of a national redress scheme. I no longer believe that, 
because it is in the church’s interests to support such a scheme. They realise 
that, which is why they are clamouring for it to be established.

The church is responsible for the largest number of institutions in which 
abuse occurred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/01/the-truth-is-that-child-abuse-in-australia-has-a-distinctively-catholic-character>
, and the biggest proportion of known victims. Unless it supports a 
well-structured national scheme, its finances and moral witness may well 
disintegrate.

The truth is that child abuse in Australia has a distinctively Catholic 
character | Adam Brereton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/01/the-truth-is-that-child-abuse-in-australia-has-a-distinctively-catholic-character>
Perhaps that will happen anyway; the important thing is that the church has 
learned that it can no longer go out ahead of the commission – something 
governments have not learned.

Of course, it is not in the “private” interests of other institutions (like 
the wealthy, Protestant private schools) and government to be yoked to the 
ongoing process of assisting the Catholic church to deal with the care of 
countless damaged people.

But when the commission was put in place, we recognised that abuse is a 
whole-of-society problem, not something that can be dealt with piecemeal, 
privately, institution by institution. That was the Pell-Kennett compact made 
in the 1990s, that failed and led to the situation we face today.

By taking us back to that moment, the commonwealth government risks the 
commission resulting in the worst possible outcome we might have imagined.
 