
At Château Latour in Pauillac, horses plough the vineyards just as they did in 
the 14th century, when vines were first grown on the estate. But this is a 
recent return to tradition at Latour, one of the five renowned "Premier Grand 
Crus" of Bordeaux, and it's based on sound commercial considerations rather 
than sentimentality.

Prices of fine wines have surged on the back of an explosion of interest from 
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and other Asian countries in 
recent years. Unable to increase production – land is limited and there can be 
only one harvest a year – Bordeaux's leading producers focus relentlessly on 
quality.

The wines are picked and sorted by hand and the owners are investing heavily 
in wine-making techniques. The reintroduction of horses at Latour 18 months ago 
is part of that drive for quality – they plough with more precision than 
tractors and do far less damage to the soil and vines, some of which are 100 
years old.

Fuelled by the seemingly insatiable Asian demand, the wine market is booming 
despite the continued difficulties of the global economy.

Prices plummeted in the wake of the Lehman Brothers collapse in 2008 but the 
setback was short-lived. In 2010, top-end bordeaux outperformed not just 
equities, but gold and crude oil too, according to Liv-ex, which tracks the 
prices of the top five Bordeaux châteaux.

Its Fine Wine 50 index <http://www.liv-ex.com/pages/static_page.jsp?pageId=195>
 rose by 57% last year, far outstripping gold (+35%), crude oil (+20%) and the 
FTSE 100 (+11%). This year so far, the Fine Wine 50 index is up just over 9%.

China last year overtook the UK and Germany to become the leading export 
market by value for bordeaux wines. And the Chinese are not just buying 
bordeaux by the bottle and case but by the vineyard too – earlier this year, 
Cofco, the huge Chinese state-owned conglomerate and owner of the Great Wall 
wine brand, bought a 20-hectare estate, Château de Viaud, in Lalande de 
Pomerol. It is unlikely to be the last such deal.

China's growing influence on the global wine market was underlined last week 
when the wine bibleDecanter published its Power List  
<http://www.decanter.com/people-and-places/wine-articles/527040/the-decanter-power-list-2011>
of the 50 most influential figures in wine world.

Leading the pack was Pierre Pringuet, chief executive of Pernod Ricard, owner 
of Mumm champagne, Perrier-Jouët and Jacob's Creek, but shooting up from 20th 
to 2nd place – and displacing the legendary wine critic Robert Parker in the 
process – was Eric de Rothschild of Domaines Barons de Rothschild, which has 
owned Château Lafite since 1868.

Rothschild won his elevation on the back of China's passion for Château 
Lafite, and the knock-on effect which that is having on the industry, said 
Decanter editor Guy Woodward. "As the world's premium producers blaze a trail 
east, it is in Lafite's footsteps they tread," he noted.

With limited supplies of Lafite and surging prices, other Premier Crus are 
increasingly in demand. Last month, a single bottle of 1961 Château Latour sold 
to a Chinese buyer for £135,000 at Christie's in Hong Kong, more than three 
times the expected price.

The decision by Château Latour, which is owned by the French businessman 
François Pinault, to release part of the Chateau's treasured cellar was seen in 
the industry as an attempt to ramp up Asian interest in Latour as a rival to 
Lafite. The auction raised $7m (£4.3m) in total, with 95% of the lots exceeding 
their estimates.

Meanwhile the 2010 vintage, which is just being released en primeur (while a 
vintage is still in barrels, before it is bottled), looks like being another 
top quality year. The 2009 bordeaux was hailed as the "vintage of the century" 
and there is every sign that 2010 is just as good. Producers are currently in 
the process of announcing their prices and there have already been some steep 
increases – last week (8 June) the price of Château Pontet-Canet was set at 
€100 (£88) a bottle – up almost 40% on its record 2009 price. The huge increase 
did little to dampen demand, however – London-based fine wine merchant Bordeaux 
Index sold out its supply within half an hour, and other merchants reported 
enthusiastic interest despite the hefty increase.

Robert Parker, the world's most influential wine critic, has warned of a 
speculative bubble in bordeaux prices and that the region, which he has done 
much to promote, is in danger of pricing itself out of the European market as 
it chases wealthy Asian buyers. Raising prices while the world economy is in 
such a fragile state is "a very dangerous game", he said.

Not everyone agrees: "There is no bordeaux bubble," says Sam Gleave of 
Bordeaux Index. "There was a slight slowdown several months ago but that was 
what the market needed. People are drinking as much as ever and are realising 
that it's worth looking at second growths from the better vintages.

"Second growth quality now is as good as first growths were 15 or 20 years 
ago. As people's palates become more educated, we expect to see buyers 
branching out into other areas, such as burgundy and rhône."

Only a tiny proportion of global wine production – less than 1% – is 
considered investment grade and thus the surging prices at the top end will 
have little impact on the everyday wines sold by supermarkets and off-licences, 
says Gleave. "The only thing that really affects prices at the mass-produced 
end of the market is exchange rates."
 