
Claudio Ranieri described Leicester City’s progress to the knockout stage of 
theChampions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> as 
group winners and with a match to spare as an “unbelievable” achievement, yet 
demanded his players now show the same level of performance domestically in 
order to climb well clear of the relegation zone.

Leicester secured a place in the last 16 of the Champions League with a 2-1 
victory over Club Brugge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/leicester-city-club-brugge-champions-league-group-g-match-report>
 courtesy of goals from Shinji Okazaki and Riyad Mahrez, and can look forward 
to the draw in Nyon on 12 December with Ranieri not bothered in the slightest 
about who they will play. “It’s not important, believe me,” the Leicester 
manager said. “I hope to be there in good condition, that is important. The 
name is not important. It will be another fairytale, win or lose it’s not 
important.”

Leicester City top dogs after Shinji Okazaki leads win over Club Brugge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/leicester-city-club-brugge-champions-league-group-g-match-report>
Ranieri was full of praise for his players, who are guaranteed top spot in 
Group G after Porto could only draw with Copenhagen. “It’s unbelievable. Top of 
the group, very happy, very proud for my players, very happy for the chairman, 
for the fans, for everybody. Another journey to the knockout – unbelievable.”

Yet Ranieri was quick to stress the importance of addressing their form in the 
Premier League, where Leicester have lost six times. “Now our mind must go on 
the Premier League because I want to push my players to think about that,” he 
said. “Our job is done [in the Champions League]. I don’t know which team we 
play, it will be a fantastic team, and we are very happy. But now we have to go 
back.

“In the Premier League we are very close to the relegation zone and we must 
play at the same level as the Champions League because when we want to do 
something, we achieve something. We must concentrate on the Premier League now.”

The bad news for Ranieri is that it looks increasingly likely his team will be 
without Danny Drinkwater for their next three matches, with the England 
midfielder set to be charged with violent conduct after appearing to elbow 
Watford’s Valon Behrami during the 2-1 defeat at Vicarage Road on Saturday.

The FA has been examining footage of the incident, which took place in the 
67th minute and went unpunished at the time. If Drinkwater is charged and 
banned he will miss the Premier League matches against Middlesbrough, 
Sunderland and Manchester City.
 