
Of all the causes Sarah Palin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/sarahpalin> 
has embraced in her varied career as hockey mom, Alaska governor, Republican 
vice-presidential nominee, Fox television commentator and Donald Trump 
supporter, none perhaps may be as bold or – as she still likes to say, “rogue” 
– as trying to take down a much-beloved children’s television personality: Bill 
Nye the Science Guy.


But that was where hardcore climate change denial landed Palin on Thursday: a 
wood-panelled committee room in Congress where she disputed the credentials of 
a hugely popular science educator who has designed devices for Nasa and been 
awarded several honorary degrees.


“Bill Nye is as much a scientist as I am,” Palin told the gathering. “He’s a 
kids’ show actor. He’s not a scientist.”


And that was not even the low point of the event.


The occasion was the premiere for the Climate Hustle, a film that dismisses 
global warming as an excuse for government takeover and makes the outrageously 
false claim that rising carbon emissions are beneficial.


But the real mission for Palin and the makers of the movie – in addition to 
airing various conspiracy theories – was to register the continued existence of 
a small but still powerful fringe, even as the rest of the world accelerates 
its efforts to fight climate change.


On a day when the World Bank president and ministers from Canada, France and 
Morocco urged governments to step up their commitments to fight climate change, 
there was a strong whiff of desperation to Palin’s efforts.


At the United Nations next week more than 130 leaders are expected to attend 
the formal signing of the Paris agreement, a symbolic show of support for 
cutting climate pollution.


 The event in Congress was hosted by Lamar Smith, the Texas Republican who 
chairs the House committee on science, space and technology. He did not appear 
but his prepared remarks accused government scientific agencies of fiddling 
with climate data.

Outside Republicans in Congress and the Republican presidential race, the 
world is moving on. Arecord number of Americans  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/18/climate-change-record-concern-us-global-warming-poll>
see climate change as a serious threat.

Palin and other speakers made plain they felt increasingly isolated, 
complaining of “group think” and “peer pressure”, and warning of government 
takeovers, “energy police” confiscating microwaves and plasma TVs, and 
brainwashing school children.

The former vice-presidential nominee admitted she did not believe scientists 
about anything any more – and appealed to presidential contenders to intervene, 
somehow.


“The science is kind of getting thrown out of the window in discussions about 
changes in the weather,” Palin said. “It’s something that our candidates should 
be talking about and giving us their view on and hopefully acknowledging that 
it needs to become in the science community less political. Otherwise, it leads 
us to believe that so many things then coming from the scientists could be 
bogus. If this is bogus, what else are they trying to tell us and control us 
around?”


To Palin’s mind, efforts by government, business leaders, campaigners – and 
yes, scientists like Nye – to fight climate change were a mere smokescreen for 
a huge power grab. She did not say by whom.


Nye’s efforts to educate the public about climate change – and counter the 
disinformation campaigns funded by corporations and conservative groups – has 
become a target of Palin and others who claim “extreme doubt” about climate 
change.

Among the majority of Americans, however, Nye is respected for his efforts to 
promote scientific literacy, through his educational television series and a 
not-for-profit group that encourages critical investigation. He has also worked 
as a visiting professor at Cornell and an executive at the Planetary Society.

“There is a predetermined agenda definitely of those who I think are 
controlling the narrative right now on changes in the weather,” Palin said. 
“There is definitely a political agenda behind all of this and as you suggested 
people who are involved in this issue they are not stupid. They have studied 
this stuff. They have studied the data that they are erroneously delivering to 
the public to make us think that we can somehow change the weather and how they 
do that is to grow government and allow the government to have more control 
over us, our homes, our businesses, our families, our lives, and it’s quite 
unfortunate because these people must be purposely doing this, right? Because 
they are smart enough to know better.”


Parents should be vigilant against attempts at mind control, Palin said. “We 
need to keep in mind how important it is for parents to understand this issue 
and to understand the political agenda behind global warming. It is being used 
as a fundraiser, it is being used as a partisan issue unfortunately so that 
parents can be first and foremost in their child’s life and influence them to 
trust science and believe in science and not leave it to the teachers.”


With proper training – of the sort Palin said she received growing up at home 
with a schoolteacher for a father – children could then go on to take on 
figures such as Nye. Just like she did.

 