
Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> poses 
a serious danger to public health – worse than polio in some respects – and 
will strike especially hard at pregnant women, children, low-income people and 
communities of color, an authoritative US government report warned on Monday.


The report, The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United 
States: A Scientific Assessment <>, formally unveiled at the White House, 
warned of sweeping risks to public health from rising temperatures in the 
coming decades – with increased deaths and illnesses from heat stroke, 
respiratory failure and diseases such as West Nile virus.

Obama administration pays out $500m to climate change project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/07/obama-administration-pays-out-500m-to-climate-change-project>
“Every American is vulnerable to the health impacts associated with climate 
change,” John Holdren, the White House science adviser, told reporters on 
Monday. “Some are more vulnerable than others,” he went on.


These included pregnant women, children, the elderly, outdoor workers, 
low-income people, immigrants, communities of color and those with disabilities 
or pre-existing medical conditions.


The diversity of risks – and vulnerable populations – made climate change a 
far more challenging threat to public health than even the polio epidemics in 
the past in some regards, said Vivek Murthy, the surgeon general.

“I don’t think we have seen something like this before where we have a force 
that has such a multitude of impacts,” Murthy said.

Polio was eradicated with a specific vaccine, but there was no such quick fix 
for climate change, he said. “Climate change is not like that. There is not one 
single source that we can target,” he went on. “As far as history is concerned 
this is a new kind of threat that we are facing.”

 The grim, climate-inflected scenarios in the report – including projections 
of an additional 11,000 heat-related deaths by 2030 – intensify the efforts by 
the White House to rally public support for the Paris climate agreement and the 
clean power plant rules, which face a legal challenge on 2 June.

Governments will gather in New York on 22 April to formally sign on to the 
agreement reached in Paris. TheObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> is leading a push by 
the United Nations to get the agreement signed and into force by the end of 
this year – a process that requires the support of 55 countries representing 
55% of global greenhouse gas emissions.


The White House, Democrats in Congress and campaign groups are also working to 
gin up public support for the clean power plant rules ahead of the 2 June 
hearing into a legal challenge brought by a coalition of states and industries.

The findings in the report were broadly in line with a draft released by the 
White House in April last year.

Barack Obama and Justin Trudeau to join forces on climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/08/barack-obama-and-justin-trudeau-to-join-forces-on-climate-change>
The research – conducted by 100 scientists working across eight government 
agencies – represents the most exhaustive look to date at the health impacts of 
climate change within the US, officials claimed on Monday.


Earlier researchers have called attention to the risks of heatwaves, air 
pollution and illnesses borne by insects such as mosquitoes under climate 
change as well as the declining nutritional value of food staples such as wheat 
and rice. Last year, scientists warned thatextreme heat could make outdoor work 
perilous and parts of the Middle East uninhabitable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/26/extreme-heatwaves-could-push-gulf-climate-beyond-human-endurance-study-shows>
.

The officials made it clear they hoped the findings would broaden public 
support for cutting the carbon emissions that cause climate change.

“Climate change is already under way and no matter what we do it can’t be 
stopped overnight,” Holdren told reporters. “But there is a huge difference in 
magnitude of impacts if we fail to act and the much smaller magnitude we expect 
if we take aggressive action set out in the president’s climate action plan.”


The urgency of the warning reflects growing understanding among scientists of 
the widespread impacts of climate change.

It also lays to rest the false claim by those obstructing efforts to cut 
emissions that there are more positives than negatives in warmer temperature 
conditions.

Hot, sunny days cook more smog which makes breathing conditions worse for 
sufferers of asthma, emphysema and other respiratory conditions. Warming 
temperatures also extend the allergy season and fuel the risk of wildfires – 
whose smoke also worsens air quality.

Climate change may be a burning issue – but election campaign tells another 
story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/26/climate-change-may-be-a-burning-issue-but-election-campaign-tells-another-story>
“By the end of the century we are looking at an increase of tens of thousands 
of illnesses and death episodes because of climate change,” the surgeon general 
told reporters.

Higher temperatures were also encouraging the spread of illnesses carried by 
ticks and mosquitoes such as Lyme disease and West Nile virus, Murthy went on. 
The report did not look at Zika.

The public health threats laid out in the report were on the cards for future 
generations of Americans even with the emissions commitments contained in the 
Paris climate agreement, the officials said.

Governments have been clear from the outset that the agreement reached in 
Paris last December was only a preliminary step towards limiting warming to 2C 
above pre-industrial levels.

Under the agreement, governments committed to make even deeper cuts in 
emissions in the coming decades.

“We will need a big encore after 2030 in terms of further deep cuts in order 
to avoid the bulk of the deeper impacts described in this report,” Holdren said.
 