
Millions of public records used to track down white collar criminals and 
combat money laundering would be deleted under proposals being considered by 
the government’s company registration agency.

Companies House maintains a database 
<https://www.gov.uk/get-information-about-a-company> on every firm incorporated 
in the UK, providing access to their accounts and listing all directors and 
shareholders. But the agency is facing mounting pressure from businesses – and 
reportedly from members of parliament – to take down valuable information.

Proposals are being considered to reduce the amount of time the records of 
dissolved companies are retained, from 20 years to six. If the rules are 
changed, more than 2.5m records could be lost. Campaigners are warning that 
such a move would be a major step back in the global fight against corruption.

Police investigators, the National Crime Agency, the Serious Fraud Office, 
lawyers, journalists and bank compliance teams all make extensive use of the 
data, with many searches involving dissolved companies and their directors.

Alex Cobham, director of research at the Tax Justice Network 
<http://www.taxjustice.net/> said the proposal “flies in the face of the 
government’s previous leadership on corporate transparency, and against the 
criminal market abuse that follows from opacity”.

“The marginal cost of storing and maintaining open access to data is near zero 
– so the only possible reason for this proposal is to make it easier for people 
to hide their track record. And what gets hidden? Little that is good. 
Histories of administration and liquidation, along with the trails that might 
otherwise be followed by law enforcement officials from the UK and elsewhere 
tracing various forms of corruption and tax abuse.”

Complaints have increased since Companies House made its information available 
free to the general public, via a rapidly searchable website, in June last 
year. Requests for previously paid-for information are running at 2m a day. 
Approximately 64m searches were made in the nine months from June 2015 until 
the end of March 2016, according to the organisation’s annual report.

A Companies House spokesman said: “We are currently considering the correct 
period for which records of dissolved companies should be kept on the register. 
This issue is being considered following a number of complaints made by members 
of the public who believe that retaining, and making publicly available, 
information relating to long-dissolved companies is inconsistent with data 
protection law.”

There is no time limit for records to be kept under data protection law, but 
business people linked to dissolved companies have been citing the legislation 
when arguing for a shorter retention period, and complaints have been filed 
with the data protection watchdog, the Information Commissioner’s Office.

The Opencorporates group, which works to improve transparency by publishing 
free information on 107m companies worldwide including those on the UK 
register, said it was currently receiving a dozen requests a day from those 
keen to have their details taken down. It believes records should be retained 
for as long as possible.

“It is essential that the greatest publicity be given to companies so that 
everyone knows who they are doing business with,” said Opencorporates founder 
Chris Taggart. “While directors and owners enjoy protection from company debts 
under the law, the quid pro quo for that is transparency. The vast majority of 
people in any country are not company directors or shareholders, but they do 
work for companies and buy from companies.”

Companies House records currently stretch back to 1996. A look back through 
the earliest available annual reports shows that between 2000 to 2010, about 
2.3m companies were dissolved in the UK.


Information on companies associated with Dominic Chapell, the three times 
bankrupt director who was running the BHS department store chain when it 
collapsed, would no longer be available if the proposals to keep records for 
six years only were in place today.

Earlier this year, Spain’s industry minister, José Manuel Soria 
<https://blog.opencorporates.com/2013/04/18/what-makes-a-good-company-register-part-1-the-public-purpose/>
, was forced to resign after his links to an offshore company in the Panama 
Papers was exposed using information on long-dissolved UK entities controlled 
by his family.
 