
Well, he didn’t lose. The Palm Beach state attorney has declined to prosecute 
Trump campaign manager Corey Lewandowski, who manhandled Breitbart reporter 
Michelle Fields on 8 March, allegedly bruising her in the process, after she 
tried to askDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> a 
question about affirmative action.


There are no winners here. Not Trump, nor his people, nor the conservative 
press.


Trump didn’t win. The Lewandowski incident was a sideshow, the first that 
didn’t work on any level. Until this point, outrages have merely focused the 
24-hour media’s free-advertising on the candidate and made him appear like some 
relatable low-level maverick.


But Trump and his people played this one wrong. Lewandowski and Trump both 
denied that the alleged assault happened, in spite of video footage and a 
cluster of journalists around the incident. You can’t gaslight a videotape.


Ordinarily, who are you going to trust – me, or your lyin’ eyes? is a decent 
tactic to use against journalists when it comes to the trivial stuff: foreign, 
tax, social and environmental policy. You can make up junk about those issues 
because Beltway reporters will find somethinktank “scientician” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UhoHwQ0cwIQ> to substantiate a claim that, 
say, sharks eat gorillas in the jungle. Hey, they objectively covered both 
sides of the issue; crisis averted.


But, perhaps emboldened by the fact that his insults of Fox News’ Megyn Kelly 
didn’t hurt him at the time, the Trump camp forgot that the one injustice 
journalists will not accept is one committed against their own. Those are real 
injustices, not just abstract things that happen somewhere else. There are real 
victims involved.


Trump’s security had already been goony enough to merit comment, but it was 
relegated to bellyaching on Twitter or vapid thinkpiece comparisons to Sinclair 
Lewis’s It Can’t Happen Here, and in any case hostility for the press is a 
conservative staple. (And still many of Trump’s rallies passed without incident,
akin to a baby boomer concert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/13/donald-trump-tampa-republicans>
.) Trumpian gooniness was still more a thought exercise than an immediate 
problem involving meat and bone.


Lewandowski didn’t win either. He’d always seemed like a chronically aggro 
used car salesman. Now he seemed like one who’d try to sell you a Chevrolet 
reclaimed from the bottom of one of the Great Lakes by unbuttoning his jacket 
and resting his hands on his hips to reveal the 9mm in his holster before 
saying: “Now, what is it gonna take to put you in this primer-gray 1984 
Citation?”


Lewandowski is now reportedly being downgraded within the Trump campaign 
hierarchy after the candidate had to waste time deflecting ugly attention and 
changing his story. His role as Prime Meathead is now more liability than 
menace.


Breitbart Media didn’t fare too well either. If anything, the incident exposed 
their slavish devotion to the Trump campaign. Despitea founding legacy of lies 
and contempt 
<http://gawker.com/5890660/andrew-breitbart-big-deal-big-coronary-big-corpse>, 
Trump put Breitbart Media in the uncomfortable position of having to decide 
whether their candidate or their reporter was wrong. They chose the latter, 
because nothing adds dignity to drinking from the toilet like letting someone 
kick you in the rear-end while you do it.


Underlying all this, of course, was the decades-long conservative escape-hatch 
excuse that the media lies about everything. What had once been a useful tool 
for wishing away anything inconveniently addressed by mainstream media – like 
recorded history – turned on its most frequent users. Breitbart was essentially 
forced to say: “Everyone in the media lies, including us”, while conservative 
journalism-ish outlets had to make the argument that everyone was lying but 
them.


Ordinarily, this would make for some amusement for the mainstream media, but 
they didn’t win either. Years of quailing “gotta hear both sides!” reporting 
created a space in which the Trump campaign and its adherents could claim that 
there was another side to a videotape of an assault.


Every dead-soul ratings-humping segment on 24-hour media on which Trump was 
allowed to lie paved the way for this moment.


Every gutless wad who decided that pushback with the truth was too much hassle 
or would lose viewers, every invertebrate meat sack who decided that every take 
deserved an audience and that facts could be counter-programmed sent us 
careening into this ditch.


We’re in a place where Donald Trump and his feral bullet-headed stooge could 
claim something caughton tape didn’t happen because a lot of people decided a 
long time ago that objective reality is just the null outcome of two opinions 
colliding with each other mid-screen.


The only person who won anything here was Michelle Fields, who, at the very 
least, won a moral victory. Too bad that, given the circumstances, she has very 
little reason to celebrate.
 