
 Frustrated council leaders have accused government officials of dragging 
their heels over the slow transfer of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children who 
have arrived from Calais and elsewhere.

 An estimated 320 unaccompanied children from Calais have been allowed entry 
to the UK so far, but very few have been settled in new homes.

 Under a voluntary national transfer scheme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-launches-national-transfer-scheme-for-migrant-children>
 established in July, some local authorities have offered to take in limited 
numbers of children. These include many of the 3,000 who claimed asylum in 
Britain last year, usually after entering the country illegally, putting 
particular pressure on local authorities in Kent, which is home to the ports of 
Dover and Folkestone and the Channel tunnel.

 All 10 local authorities in Greater Manchester agreed in August to take four 
children each, whether from Calais, Kent or elsewhere. Bury council said it had 
been ready to accept its allocation for several weeks, with social workers 
making costly arrangements to house the four either with foster carers or in 
special supported accommodation. None has arrived, however, and the Home Office 
has given no explanation nor indication of which children will be coming or 
when.

Last of Calais refugee children evacuated as camp clearance ends
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/calais-refugee-children-evacuated-as-camp-clearance-winds-up>
 Rishi Shori, Bury’s leader, said: “We put a lot of thought and work into 
plans to welcome four unaccompanied asylum-seeking children in Bury after 
central government asked us to accept these vulnerable children. We were 
expecting to pick some of them up last Monday and had booked a minibus to 
collect them, as well as specialised accommodation at significant cost, yet at 
the last minute the Home Office effectively went awol and the pick-up didn’t 
take place.

 “The communication has been very poor from the Home Office. We are happy to 
do our bit and help, but we need to know which children we are receiving, what 
their needs are and when we will be able to fetch them. We know from the news 
that several hundred children have arrived in Britain, so what is the delay in 
transferring them to local authorities like ours which have offered to look 
after them?

 “Surely it is in the best interests of the children to have them settled in 
their new communities as soon as possible. We have also yet to receive the 
promised funds from central government to help pay for the children’s care, 
despite the fact we are already having to pay for accommodation. We don’t want 
to give up those places in case they are then not available when the children 
do arrive.”

 Nick Forbes, the leader of Newcastle city council, said he had offered to 
accept one child a month but so far just one had arrived under the so-called 
Dublin III convention, which reunites lone asylum-seeking children with family 
members already in the UK.

 Forbes said: “It’s gone very quiet. I’ve heard the same issue from other 
places, that the Home Office are dragging their heels and have a very poor 
on-site assessment process. It’s frustrating when we’ve worked hard against the 
clock to put support arrangements in place for these vulnerable children and 
prepare our communities to welcome them but the government hasn’t met its 
responsibilities on time.”

The treatment of Calais camp children isn’t just neglectful – it’s abusive | 
Bronwen James Crowther
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/calais-camp-children-refugees>
 Shori added: “The government issued the clarion call for action a few weeks 
ago and we have answered, but there has been no movement whatsoever.

“Local authorities in Greater Manchester have been disproportionately affected 
by austerity and are having to deal with huge financial demands on our adult 
and children’s social care budgets. In spite of all of that, and the 
uncertainty around the funding from government for these placements, we have 
stepped up to the plate because it is the right thing to do to support these 
vulnerable children at their time of greatest need.”

 The Local Government Association has complained that councils are not being 
offered adequate funding to care for the children, whooften have very high 
levels of need 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/05/child-refugees-calais-traumatised-and-depressed>
.

 When contacted by the Guardian, the Home Office did not respond to the 
complaints from local authorities but said daily rates for local authorities 
providing care for unaccompanied children had increased by more than 20%, with 
an additional £60,000 available for each area.

 A spokesman said: “Local authorities are now provided with £114 per day for 
unaccompanied asylum seeking children under 16 and £91 per day for those aged 
16 or 17. This equates to £41,610 and £33,215 per year respectively.”

 Not all local authorities have offered to take in child asylum seekers. 
Wakefield in West Yorkshire said it already had a disproportionate number of 
such children because of its proximity to two motorways. Sir Peter Box, 
Wakefield’s leader, said: “We’ve got approximately 26 unaccompanied 
asylum-seeking children, all off the back of lorries – more than all our 
neighbours –and because of our M1/M62 location. So we have no further capacity.”

 The Home Office spokesman said: “We have consulted with every region in 
England, Scotland and Wales on their capacity and substantially increased the 
levels of funding we give to local authorities for providing care. We are 
grateful to the significant number who have stepped forward and provided 
assistance and would encourage others to take part.”
 