
The work and pensions secretary, Damian Green, has dismissed a critical UN 
report <http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CRPD/Pages/InquiryProcedure.aspx> that 
concluded that the UK government’s austerity policies“systematically violated” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/uk-austerity-policies-amount-to-violations-of-disabled-peoples-rights>
 the rights of disabled people.

Green said the report was “patronising and offensive” and presented an 
outdated view of disability in the UK. He said Britain was “a world leader in 
disability rights and equality”.


But disability activists and charities welcomed the report, saying it 
accurately highlighted the real economic and social pressures faced by disabled 
people after years of harsh spending cuts to social security and social care.

The shadow work and pensions secretary, Debbie Abrahams, said the UN report 
was “crystal clear” in its identification of UK government failures. “It 
confirms that, despite Theresa May’s warm words, this government is failing 
sick and disabled people,” she said.

The UN committee said a range of measures introduced since 2010, including the 
bedroom tax and cuts to disability benefits and social care budgets, had 
disproportionately and adversely affected disabled people.

Spending cuts had negatively affected the rights of disabled people to live 
independently, to work and to achieve an adequate standard of living, the 
report said. It urged UK ministers to ensure the rights of disabled people were 
upheld.

Government ministers contributed to the inquiry that led to the report and are 
understood to have been presented with the findings earlier this year.

Green said: “At the heart of this report lies an outdated view of disability 
which is patronising and offensive. We strongly refute its findings. The UN 
measures success as the amount of money poured into the system, rather than the 
work and health outcomes for disabled people. Our focus is on helping disabled 
people find and stay in work, whilst taking care of those who can’t.”

The government said it spent about £50bn a year to support sick and disabled 
people – a bigger proportion of GDP than countries including Canada, France and 
the US.

It said the recent publication of its work and health green paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/31/government-aims-to-halve-disability-employment-gap-in-uk>
, which included ambitious proposals to increase employment levels among 
disabled people, was “a turning point in our action to confront the attitudes, 
prejudices and misunderstandings within the minds of employers and across wider 
society.”


But Abrahams said the report echoed warnings Labour had been making since 2011 
about the effects of the government’s policies on disabled people.

 “The UN committee is clear that its report examines the cumulative impact of 
legislation, policies and measures adopted from 2010 to October 2016, so the 
government’s claim that it is outdated does not stand up to scrutiny.

“I am also concerned that the government is labelling the report as 
patronising, when they are the ones dismissing the concerns raised by disabled 
people who helped instigate the inquiry in the first place.”

Vicki Nash, head of policy and campaigns at the mental health charity Mind, 
said the UN findings were extremely concerning but came as no surprise.

“The government has ambitions to help many more people with mental health 
problems back into work but, as this inquiry points out, the current approach 
is cruel, inappropriate and doesn’t work.”

Liz Sayce, the chief executive of Disability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> Rights UK, said the government 
was right to emphasise its commitment to helping disabled people get into and 
stay in work, but it had failed to invest sufficiently in inclusion and 
participation in recent years, leaving many people reliant on social protection.

Neil Crowther, an independent disability rights expert, said: ‘It’s deeply sad 
to see the UK – once a proud global leader on disabled people’s rights – being 
found guilty of systematically violating them.

“Britain’s own joint parliamentary committee on human rights warned of the 
risks to disabled people’s human rights that would result from the combined 
effect of reform and spending decisions in 2012. After extensive research and 
consultation, the UN committee has found that these risks have come to pass.

“With further cuts to social security still to come and no plans for 
additional investment in social care, it seems likely that things are only 
going to get worse. The government’s complacent response offers little 
reassurance to the contrary.”

Dan Scorer, head of policy at Mencap, said: “This report is further 
acknowledgement that cutting disabled people’s benefits will only make life 
harder and isolate people further from inclusion in employment and wider 
society. People with a learning disability face massive exclusion from the 
labour market, and have seen their benefits and funding for vital social care 
services reduced.”

Michelle Mitchell, chief executive of the MS Society, said: “This is yet more 
evidence that there’s a clear need for changes to disability benefits. The 
system is currently failing too many people with MS.”

Linda Burnip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/16/disability-un-investigation-uk-government-violations-human-rights>
, a founder ofDisabled People Against Cuts <http://dpac.uk.net/>, a grassroots 
campaign group that helped trigger the UN inquiry in 2013, said the findings 
“came as no surprise to anyone who has followed the stripping away of disabled 
people’s rights over the last six years”.”

The inquiry report was based on an 11-day tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/20/un-inquiry-uk-disability-rights-violations-cprd-welfare-cuts>
 of the UK undertaken by two UN envoys in October 2015. The inquiry team met 
more than 200 individuals, including officials and MPs as well as activists and 
academics.


The UK has been a signatory to the UN convention on the rights of people with 
disabilities 
<https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html>
 since 2007. The convention includes articles on the right to live 
independently, to work and to enjoy social protection without discrimination on 
the basis of disability.
 