
Dan Cole believes his club-mate and new England call-up Ellis Genge has “an 
edge” to him, saying he has been impressed with the newLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> signing’s attitude and 
physicality.

Leicester confirmed the ​permanent ​signing of the 21-year-old prop on 
Thursday, with Genge having previously been on loan at the Tigers from Bristol. 
The Leicester director of rugby, Richard Cockerill, described him as a great 
prospect and Eddie Jones ​recently ​named the forward in his England squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/22/ben-teo-four-uncapped-players-england-squad-tour-australia-manu-tuilagi-rugby-union>
 for the Test with Wales on Sunday and the summer tour of Australia.

Ten newcomers named in 39-man Wallabies training squad for England series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/26/ten-newcomers-named-in-39-man-wallabies-training-squad-for-england-series>
Genge is one of four uncapped players in the squad and having been a team-mate 
of his in recent months, Cole believes ​Genge’s​ ball-carrying skills ​are a 
major asset. “He’s a young loosehead and he’s impressed everybody,” said the 
England tighthead prop. “His ball carrying is there to be seen. He has fitted 
in seamlessly at Leicester and has impressed everyone with his general attitude 
and demeanour. Obviously Eddie has picked up on it here and he’s training well 
and doing a very good job.

“Gengey has got a bit of an edge about him, he’s quiet but when he needs to be 
physical he is. I think he enjoys the confrontation of the set piece. He came 
on against Wasps in the Premiership and was always looking to carry the ball 
and dented them a few times, similarly against Bath. I think he has that extra 
bit to his game and it’s good, it’s what you need.

“I think if you look at the way he carries the ball I think he has a unique 
part to his game, which is probably his standout feature. Having seen him for 
the past three-four months at Leicester he’s got that. The other parts of his 
game are solid.”

The England forward​s​ coach, Steve Borthwick, added: “I met him very early on 
in my time [at Bristol]​ and he was so keen for feedback on how he could get 
better. He wanted to look at his video, he wanted to do things and practise. 
What I saw was a guy who wanted to maximise what he had. He’s come here and 
done really well this week.

“My experience of Ellis, in my short time at Bristol and here, has been 
entirely positive. He is incredibly competitive, wants to be in the team, wants 
to carry the ball and scrummage well, and is desperate to learn. He’s been a 
very good guy around the group.”

England’s game ​against​ Wales on Sunday at Twickenhamis expected to be a 
sell-out, although there have bee​n​ criticisms of the fixture, given the 
timing at the end of the season and the fact that many players will be 
​unavailable because of the Premiership final between Saracens and Exeter on 
Saturday.
 