
David Moyes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes> might have 
turned down the chance to take charge of Sunderland last July had he known 
there would be so little money to spend on players.

Martin Bain, the club’s chief executive, recently acknowledged that the 
manager would have “very limited” funds during next month’s transfer window as 
Ellis Short, the owner, attempts to reduce a £140m debt while keeping his £73m 
wage bill within Premier League remuneration cap rules.

Sunderland v Watford: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/sunderland-watford-match-preview>
“Managing Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> always 
had an appeal to me but, if I’d known about the financial situation, I’d have 
needed to look at it in a different way,” conceded Moyes, whose bottom-placed 
team are at home to Watford on Saturday. “I’d have had to have thought a lot 
more about taking the job. I didn’t see us having no money in January. I’m 
disappointed I won’t be able to do some work in January and build on what we’ve 
done so far.”

When Moyes succeeded Sam Allardyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/21/david-moyes-sam-allardyce-sunderland>
, he remained unaware Short was willing to sell Sunderland in the near future. 
“It’s a bigger challenge than I thought because of the situation the club are 
in and the situation I’ve been put in,” said the former Everton, Manchester 
United and Real Sociedad manager. “It’s a bigger job than I expected. I didn’t 
know the club could be going up for sale. I wasn’t made aware of it before.

“That would probably be what I’d say is the difficulty. I knew what we were 
spending in the summer was small in comparison to other clubs – and I said that 
to the owner but I didn’t see us having no money now. I hoped we’d get things 
done in January but that has shown itself not to be the case. But I’m going to 
move on. I’ve dealt with it in my head and we’re getting on with it.”

Moyes’s downbeat comments make quite a contrast to his optimistic message to 
Sunderland’s website on taking charge five months ago. “Martin Bain and Ellis 
have been terrific,” he enthused at the time. “They’ve given me some guarantees 
and reassurances about what we can do because we’ve got a big club here that we 
need to take forward. Celebrating staying up can’t be the goal. I’ve been 
really impressed by the owner and his guarantees to make sure that we keep 
improving.”

What particularly puzzles the Scot now is that Short had seemed so delighted 
to finally recruit him after four failed previous attempts. “I find that 
difficult,” said Moyes. “When I joined I was saying I’ve come here to improve 
the club. I don’t want to be here and us be a team at the bottom. This club has 
the infrastructure, the stadium, incredible support, some of the biggest crowds 
in Europe. That’s the appeal of Sunderland. And I knew the owner had wanted me 
for a long time.”

Fàbregas sweeps Chelsea past Sunderland and six points clear at top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/sunderland-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
Many managers in similar positions would be strongly tempted to quit but Moyes 
has resolved to battle on. “I’ve not been tempted to walk because I’ve seen 
some steel from the players, a belief in what we’re doing,” he said. “The 
players didn’t know anything about the club’s situation either and we need to 
give them a lift. There have been some shoots of improvement but now we need to 
get in a huddle and stick together.”

It does not help that an already injury-ravaged squad has now lost Jan 
Kirchhoff, a key midfielder, for some months with a serious knee injury but 
Moyes remains inspired by Bain’s unstinting support. “I’ve a lot of respect for 
the chief executive, who was big and brave enough to say it how it is to the 
supporters and everyone here,” he said.

He hopes to repay such honesty by creating something of a siege mentality. 
“We’ve got some serious injuries and we’re very short, particularly in central 
midfield, but we have to say: ‘Let’s pull together and give 100%,’” Moyes said. 
“Patch yourself up whether you’re injured or not and get out.Sometimes that can 
galvanise you.”

“There’s frustration and disappointment but I’m going to stand up, stick my 
chest out and get on with it. I’m going to fight and I expect everyone else at 
the club to do the same.”

Even so, there is recognition that, in the current context, survival would be 
comparable to winning a trophy. “Staying up would be a good achievement,” he 
said, with considerable understatement. “Other managers have done it here but 
my task might be slightly harder.”
 