
Pop quiz! Cool or not cool? Please tick yes or no to the following.

Green furry monster slippers. Mullet haircuts. Ties with piano keyboards 
running down them. Stonewashed denim. Giant headphones with a union jack 
design. Coffee mugs reading: “You don’t have to be mad to work here but it 
helps!”

For me, these things are much of a muchness. It’s simply a list, constructed 
by me, of the sort of thing that’s been uncool and untrendy and slightly 
embarrassing for 30 years.

However, I took my eye off fashion’s pendulum long ago. It turns out to have 
swung, on one of the above items, in a different direction entirely. Giant 
headphones with a union jack design have not only stopped being uncool and 
untrendy but have gone so far the other way that – having been spotted in a 
pair –David Cameron 
<http://www.the-star.co.ke/news/2016/03/31/in-a-pair-of-oh-so-trendy-headphones-david-cameron-tries-too-hard-to_c1323141>
 is slammed by a newspaper headline: “In a pair of oh-so-trendy headphones, 
portrait of a PM trying too hard to be cool.”

Is he? If I were David Cameron, sitting on a plane home from holiday in giant 
headphones with a union jack design, I would not be “trying to be cool” at all. 
I would assume that all the cool kids have tiny little earphones, perhaps 
invisible ones, called iSomethingOrOther. Sitting there in my giant headphones 
with a union jack design, I would feel marked as old and out of touch – 
onlookers would know at once that I could only be listening to Barry Manilow, 
or Status Quo, or perhaps Charlene’sI’ve Never Been To Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SZgIk2b68gQ> – but, I would reason: I’m not a 
teenager and it’s only a plane home from holiday and nobody cares.

Well, HOW WRONG I’D BE. I have now learned from a scornful press and internet, 
perhaps along with Mr Cameron himself, that the “ultra-cool Beats By Dre brand” 
of headphone is sported by Cara Delevingne, Harry Styles and Rita Ora and is 
quite the hottest thing going. That showed me. For all I know, Status Quo is 
also 2016’s coolest band.

Fellow passenger Wesley Grego said it was “hysterical” to see the prime 
minister in such hip attire, and social media positively exploded with 
derision. According to theDaily Mail, even a source within the Beats company 
itself said: “Mr Cameron in his ‘cans’? Seemingly wanting to curry favour with 
the UK population by aligning himself with the coolest names… You’re not 
fooling us Dave.”

The source isn’t named, so perhaps they don’t really work for the company. But 
looking at its website (“TURN ME ON, NEW BEATS PILL+” … “Designed for sound, 
tuned for emotion” … “BEATS BY DR. DRE AT INTERNATIONALE FUNKAUSSTELLUNG 
BERLIN” … “Beats has effectively brought the energy, emotion and excitement of 
playback in the recording studio to the listening experience”…) I can certainly 
imagine such a smug, snobbish, self-satisfied statement oozing from the lips of 
someone who works there.

Under “careers” on the website, the company smirks: “We’re building an 
incredible organisation and need driven, innovative, and fearless individuals 
to help us bring better sound to the world. Where will you fit in?”

I think I can imagine the person who’s getting that job. A wanker. Come on: 
would you advise a bright, hardworking, smartly-dressed friend of 58 to apply?

Quite why you have to be “fearless” to sell headphones, I don’t know (do 43% 
of them explode?), but why celebrate that particular quality anyway, while 
simultaneously trying to spread fear in the world? Fear of being uncool. Fear 
of looking stupid. Fear of not being good enough, fashionable enough, young 
enough, thin enough, to use their product. This is everything I despise in the 
world.

When David Cameron is being prime minister, I don’t generally see eye to eye 
with him. When he’s just a man trying to fly quietly home from holiday on 
EasyJet, I would rather be him – innocently putting on a pair of headphones 
that I was probably given as a Christmas present – than standing sneering on 
the side, slyly taking his photo and pasting it up online so he can be shamed 
and ridiculed for all the wrong reasons.

Even as prime minister, whatever other divisive policies Mr Cameron may have 
shepherded through, in presiding over the Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Act 2013 
he is in the rare position of being someone who’s actually done something to 
make the world a happier, kinder and more inclusive place. What have the PR 
department at Beats By Dre done to achieve that?

If marriage is for everyone, God knows a pair of overpriced headphones should 
be.

Beware, those of you who squat happily in the cool camp today. Live by the 
sword, die by the sword. In other news last week, actress Emma Watson and model 
Candice Swanepoel were savaged online: the former for having advertised a
skin-lightening 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/emma-watson-lancome-blanc-expert_uk_56fba8dee4b0c5bd919a7d47>
product for a cosmetics company, the latter for having “arm hair 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3516347/Should-removing-hair-forearms-M-S-model-pilloried-light-arms-FEMAIL-investigates-phenomenon.html>
” visible in a photo. How quickly they turn.

I’d bet anything that Emma Watson’s modelling contract involved having lots of 
photos taken and no say in the products they were used for – and I don’t have a 
sense that either of these women has ever directly, consciously tried to make 
others feel bad about themselves. But it’s all part of the same thing.

In my personal Weltanschauung, there is nothing wrong with arm hair, giant 
headphones are silly and skin-lightening products are creepy and grim. Others 
may grade them differently, but that’s all part of the same thing too. As soon 
as you opt in to a belief system where any type of hair, skin or style is 
“right” or “wrong” – where you include or exclude others accordingly, whether 
they’re a Weltanschauung, a model or the prime minister – you are in the jaws. 
And then, sooner or later, they’ll come for you.
 