
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> will use a 
speech on Thursday to dismiss claims by anti-EU Conservatives that a short, 
sharp economic shock if Britain voted to leave the EU on 23 June would be a 
“price worth paying” for gaining freedom from Brussels.

Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, the London mayor 
who has become the leading voice advocating Brexit, has argued that leaving the 
EU would cause “an initial period of dislocation and uncertainty”, but that 
would be “followed by very rapid improvement” – comparing it to the tick logo 
of Nike.

But the prime minister will use a speech to take on that argument directly, 
saying: “Let’s just remember what a shock really means. It means pressure on 
the pound sterling. It means jobs being lost. It means mortgage rates might 
rise. It means businesses closing. It means hardworking people losing their 
livelihoods.”

He will add: “For those who advocate leaving, lost jobs and a dented economy 
might be collateral damage, or a price worth paying. For me, they’re not. They 
never are. Because there’s nothing more important than protecting people’s 
financial security. That’s why I believe we are better off in.”

David Cameron rules out resigning if EU referendum backs Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/09/david-cameron-rules-out-resigning-eu-referendum-brexit>
Cameron’s pitch to voters will come shortly after a speech by Chris Grayling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>, in which the anti-EU 
leader of the House of Commons will argue that the government’s renegotiation 
with Brussels has failed to bring significant legal powers back to Westminster.

“If we vote to stay in the EU, we are voting to be substantially and 
increasingly governed from Brussels. It would be a vote for an unreformed EU, 
which will hoover up more money and more power at every opportunity it gets,” 
he will say.

“The EU does not want to reform in the direction the UK needs. It does not 
want to change and become less centralised. Instead, it wants to move on to 
another stage in its development. To move closer and to resist giving back any 
powers to elected governments.”

Anti-EU campaigners believe that while the prime minister has played up the 
risks of leaving the EU – an approach they have derided as “Project Fear” – 
there are also risks attached to remaining in the EU, as Brussels takes on more 
powers.

The prime minister will spell out what he believes are the positive benefits 
of remaining in the EU single market of 500 million consumers, including 
tariff-free exports and the ability to take advantage of the EU’s negotiating 
power with other major economies.

However, Cameron faced renewed pressure over the tone and conduct of the 
campaign on Wednesday, when Bernard Jenkin, the senior Tory MP campaigning to 
leave the EU, claimed that one of the prime minister’s special advisers had 
broken the code of conduct.


In a letter to the prime minister, the chairman of the Commons public 
administration and constitutional affairs select committee said that Daniel 
Korski had been “clearly in breach” of the code of conduct for special advisers 
after “issuing a stream of Twitter messages”.

Palace complains to watchdog over Sun's 'Queen backs Brexit' claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/palace-sun-queen-backs-brexit-ipso>
Anti-EU Tories have been attempting to pile the pressure on Korski after it 
emerged that he spoke to John Longworth, the director general of the British 
Chambers of Commerce, after he made a speech in favour of a British exit at the 
BCC annual conference. Longworth resigned after the board of the BCC complained 
that he had called into question the organisation’s neutrality on the 
referendum.

In his letter to the prime minister, Jenkin highlighted Korski’s retweet of a 
link to a recent column by the Observer’s Andrew Rawnsley, which said of 
anti-EU campaigners: “If you’re whingeing, you’re losing.” Jenkin said of the 
Korski tweets: “While they may be in support of government policy they are 
clearly in breach of the code ofconduct for special advisers.”

The code says that special advisers “must not take part in in political 
controversy”, they must observe discretion and should avoid personal attacks.

A No 10 spokesman said: “We have received the letter and will respond
in due course.”

Sir Jeremy Heywood, the cabinet secretary, said in recent guidelines for the 
referendum campaign that special advisers must abide by the code. Jenkin said 
that his committee would summon Korski to give evidence unless the issue is 
resolved.
 