
In a new era of Republican-led governance, there is little Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> can do to prevent Donald 
Trump’s cabinet nominees from being confirmed. But that won’t stop them from 
trying.


Democratic senators are targeting eight of Trump’s cabinet nominees whom they 
view as particularly “troublesome” and are pushing for more time to hold 
hearings on each of them.

“We have asked for fair hearings on all of those nominees,” the minority 
leader, Chuck Schumer, told reporters on Wednesday. “There are a lot of 
questions about these nominees.”

The nominees flagged for extra scrutiny include Steven Mnuchin, a Goldman 
Sachs banker turned Hollywood movie financier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/steven-mnuchin-expected-to-be-named-us-treasury-secretary>
with no government experience, as Treasury secretary; Rex Tillerson, whoheaded 
the biggest oil company in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/rex-tillerson-exxon-mobil-retirement-package-secretary-state>
, as secretary of state, and the nominee for attorney general, Jeff Sessions, 
an Alabama senator who has beenaccused of making racially insensitive comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/jeff-sessions-racism-retaliation-donald-trump-douglas-wicks-thomas-figures>
, which derailed his nomination to be a federal judge under Ronald Reagan.

Democrats have little leverage to prevent Trump’s nominees from being 
confirmed but they can significantly delay the process. Trump’s cabinet 
nominees will need 51 votes in the Senate to be confirmed and Republicans hold 
52 seats.

On Wednesday, several Senate Democrats held private meetings with Trump 
nominees and later shared their initial reactions. Though all declined to say 
whether they would support the nominee, they signalled what the points of 
contention might be in the upcoming hearings.

After a private meeting with Sessions on Wednesday, Dick Durbin, the 
second-highest ranking Senate Democrat, signalled that race and civil rights 
would be a key topic in his confirmation hearing next week.

“Certainly there are elements in his background that raise questions,” Durbin 
said after their meeting, referring to allegations that Sessions was racially 
insensitive. “He said several times, point blank, that this was not an issue as 
far as he was concerned.”

Beyond his past comments, Durbin said he was concerned by Sessions’ views on 
voter ID laws and immigration. He also said he was dismayed that the Alabama 
Republican did not commit to following through on the recommendations outlined 
in a forthcoming report by the justice department’s civil rights division on 
the Chicago police department’s use of force.

Before the meeting ended, Durbin said he offered Sessions the book White Rage: 
The Unspoken Truth of Our Racial Divide by Carol Anderson. “I’m hoping he’ll 
take a look at it,” he said.

Meanwhile, Tillerson met members of the foreign relations committee on Capitol 
Hill on Wednesday, one week before he is scheduled to testify before them.

Senator Chris Coons, a Democrat from Delaware, said he was “generally 
encouraged” by his conversation with Tillerson, although he said he wanted to 
hear more before deciding whether to support his nomination.

Several senators, including Republicans Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and 
John McCain of Arizona, have raised concerns about Tillerson’s posture towards 
Russia and its president, Vladimir Putin.

Coons took issue with the confirmation schedule, saying next week seemed too 
soon for members to hold a hearing on Tillerson, given Republicans’ current 
plans to also vote on repealing Barack Obama’s healthcare law.

To rush the confirmation process “strikes me as trying to get too many things 
done at the same time”, he said, adding that he had been up all night preparing 
for his meeting with Tillerson.

The Democrats’ list also includes Scott Pruitt, a climate change denier and 
prospective head of the Environmental Protection Agency, Tom Price, a prominent 
opponent of the Affordable Care Act, for secretary of health and human 
services, Andy Puzder, a fast food executive and critic of raising the minimum 
wage, as labor secretary, Congressman Mick Mulvaney, a fiscal conservative, as 
director of the Office of Management and Budget, and Betsy DeVos, a staunch 
supporter of school choice, Trump’s education secretary nominee.

After a meeting with DeVos on Wednesday, Senator Patty Murray, a Democrat from 
Washington, said in a statement that she continued to have “serious concerns” 
about DeVos’s “long record of working to privatize and defund public education, 
expand taxpayer-funded private school vouchers, and block accountability for 
charter schools, including for-profit charter schools”.

Confirmation hearings are scheduled to begin for Trump’s cabinet picks next 
week, with several already slated for 11 January. But before they get under 
way, Democrats are demanding at least two days of hearings for each cabinet 
nominee and have requested that they do not overlap so that members can “spend 
a lot of time studying” for them.

“I would like to succeed in negotiating something where we get full and fair 
hearings – we’re not trying to be dilatory – and hear what these nominees have 
to say,” Schumer said. “There are so many issues about so many of them that to 
rush them through would be a disservice to the American people.”

In response, Republicans are now accusing Democrats of obstructionism, an echo 
of the charge levied by Democrats against Republicans during the Obama years.

The majority leader, Mitch McConnell, of Kentucky, said he expected the Senate 
to be ready to confirm a number of Trump’s cabinet nominees shortly after 
Inauguration Day, on 20 January, adding that in 2009 the Senate approved seven 
of Barack Obama’s nominees.

“I believe all the president-elect’s cabinet appointments will be confirmed,” 
McConnell told reporters on Wednesday, speaking before Schumer. “I think it 
would be great if the Democrats would understand that, particularly with regard 
to the national security team, the secretary of defense, CIA, homeland 
security, it would make a lot of sense to have those folks in place on day one 
and I hope we’re getting to the point where that will be possible.”

Schumer scoffed at the notion of a precedent. “Leader McConnell has talked 
about the fact that a lot of nominees were approved in President Obama’s first 
few days after he was inaugurated, but they all had their paperwork in early, 
their ethics reports, their 90-day plan to extricate themselves from conflicts, 
their FBI briefings,” he said.

Absent from the list of nominees Democrats are targeting is Marine General 
James Mattis, Trump’s pick for defense secretary, who will need a congressional 
waiver to be confirmed.

After meeting privately with Mattis on Capitol Hill on Wednesday, Democratic 
senator Kirsten Gillibrand, of New York, said she still opposed a waiver of the 
law that requires that defense secretaries be removed from the military for at 
least seven years.

“He has served our country admirably,” Gillibrand told reporters after their 
meeting. “He is well-regarded as an extraordinary general, and I am very 
grateful for that service, and I’m very grateful that he’s willing to continue 
his service for the president-elect. But I still believe that civilian control 
of our military is fundamental to the American democracy.”

The Senate is also preparing for a pitched battle over Trump’s future choice 
to replace Antonin Scalia on the supreme court, which will require 60 votes.

“Apparently, there’s yet a new standard which is to not confirm a supreme 
court nominee at all,” McConnell said on Wednesday, referring to a remark
Schumer made the previous evening on MSNBC 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/congress/trump-can-forget-about-filling-supreme-court-vacancy-sen-schumer-n702916>
 that Democrats would “absolutely” keep the vacancy open if the nominee were 
outside the mainstream. “I think that’s something the American people simply 
will not tolerate.”

On Wednesday, Schumer moderated his comments.

“Let’s see who they nominate,” Schumer told reporters. “If they’re in the 
mainstream, we’ll give them a very careful look. If they’re out of the 
mainstream, we’ll oppose them tooth and nail.”

Asked how he would define mainstream, Schumer replied: “You know it when you 
see it.”

Senate Republicans blocked Obama’s nomination of Merrick Garland to replace 
Scalia for more than nine months.
 