
Theresa May has been urged to clarify how the process of Britain’s Brexit 
negotiations will be managed, after a turf war between Whitehall departments 
burst into the open.

It has emerged that Oliver Robbins, the most senior official at the Department 
for Exiting theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> (DExEU), 
sought to have the post of Britain’s permanent representative in Brussels 
downgraded to ensure clear reporting lines once formal talks open in the spring.


Senior Whitehall sources denied reports in the Financial Times that Robbins 
attempted to block the appointment of Sir Tim Barrow to the post, when Sir Ivan 
Rogersresigned from the role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
 this week. Allies said the pair got on well.

But during the appointment process in recent days there was a discussion about 
whether Rogers’ successor should be employed at a lower grade than SMS4 – the 
highest ambassadorial level – which puts Barrow on a par with Robbins.

Martin Schulz: EU hamstrung by Brexit and rise of populist right
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/martin-schulz-eu-hamstrung-brexit-rise-populist-right>
Insiders said DExEU officials believed they should oversee the negotiations, 
with UKRep – the team of civil servants based in Brussels – ultimately working 
to them. In the event, the job retained the most senior grading.

Civil service <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/civil-service> roles are 
strictly graded by seniority, and a higher grade determines status and 
responsibilities, as well as pay. Sources said the UKRep role, previously held 
by other Whitehall heavy-hitters including former Treasury official Sir Jon 
Cunliffe, had long been a senior ambassadorial post.

Keir Starmer, the shadow Brexit secretary, said: “Brexit negotiations will be 
the most complex Britain has faced for generations and will require all the 
diplomatic skill and experience possible. The last thing we need is a turf war 
between DExEU and UKRep. It is vital the PM ensures there is a clear line of 
communication between Whitehall, Brussels and to our EU partners.”

Senior officials said it was an “open secret” that there had been “strained 
relations” between Robbins – a precocious high-flier – and Rogers, who 
announced his departure from the role earlier this week.

Just as Boris Johnson, David Davis and Liam Fox have sometimes jostled over 
their respective roles in the process of extricating Britain from the EU, 
senior civil servants have been keen to clear up the ambiguous relationship 
between negotiators in Brussels and officials in Whitehall.

The Foreign Office traditionally appoints ambassadors, and the permanent 
representative is a diplomatic role – but DExEU was set up to manage the task 
of implementing Brexit.

Robbins succeeded Rogers in the coveted post of principal private secretary to 
the prime minister. However, former colleagues who know both men said Rogers 
would have been frustrated by his much younger rival trying to seize control of 
the negotiating process. “He would have thought, ‘Olly Robbins is just out of 
short trousers’,” said one.

They suggested Rogers had also been frustrated that he no longer had a direct 
line to the prime minister, because his personal relationship with May was not 
as close as that with David Cameron.

Conservative backbenchers are keen that the prime minister reveals more 
details about how the complex negotiations will be managed, when she gives a 
much-trailed speech on Brexit later this month.

Nicky Morgan, the former education secretary, said: “What it would be helpful 
to hear is realisation of just how massive a task this is going to be, a clear 
timeline and reassurance that the right people are in place and their 
responsibilities are clear.”

Anand Menon, director of the UK in a Changing Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> thinktank, said he was not 
surprised to see power struggles developing between civil servants, because of 
the uncertainty about who was in charge since the new department had been set 
up.

“If Boris Johnson isn’t going to be in charge of the negotiations, why is it 
still his man in Brussels?” he said.

The government is awaiting a verdict in the supreme court appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/supreme-court-brexit-case-whose-prerogative-is-it-anyway>
 over whether it must pass legislation before triggering article 50, the formal 
process for leaving the EU. Judgment is expected this month.
 