
Brazil has been plunged into a fresh bout of political uncertainty after 
lawyers for former presidentDilma Rousseff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dilma-rousseff> presented evidence 
suggesting her successor, Michel Temer, accepted bribes from a construction 
company.

If accepted the documents filed with the supreme electoral court raise the 
possibility of the 2014 presidential election being declared invalid due to 
campaign funding violations, which could force Temer from office.

The two politicians were running mates in 2014 but have since become bitter 
enemies. Rousseff, of the Workers party, wasimpeached and removed from the 
presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/dilma-rousseff-impeached-president-brazilian-senate-michel-temer>
 in September on charges of window-dressing government accounts. She has 
levelled accusations of treachery at her replacement, Temer, of the 
centre-right Brazilian Democratic Movement party.

On Thursday her lawyers submitted bank statements and a copy of a cheque from 
10 July 2014 that showed construction company Andrade Gutierrez deposited 1m 
reais (£234,000) into the PMDB general campaign fund, which was then 
transferred the same day into the personal campaign fund of Temer.

Brazil's ex-president Lula charged with corruption in oil kickback scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/brazil-petrobras-oil-kickback-scandal-luiz-inacio-lula-da-silva>
They said this proved that Temer should be ejected from office for receiving 
illegal funds and that Rousseff – who had earlier been accused by construction 
company executive Octávio Azevedo of accepting the same amount on the same day 
– was the victim of perjury.

The PMDB insists the donation was given legally and does not constitute a 
bribe.

The supreme electoral court has yet to rule on the case but has already spent 
several months investigating allegations of financing irregularities by the 
2014 Rousseff-Temer campaign.

The Temer camp have argued that Rousseff – as the head of the ticket – should 
take responsibility for any rule breaking. But it has yet to be decided whether 
they should be judged separately or together.

Both politicians are unpopular, having jointly presided over the worst 
economic recession in decades and a massive corruption scandal centred on the 
state oil company Petrobras. Police and prosecutors in the Lava Jato (Car Wash) 
probe have implicated more than 50 senior politicians from almost all of the 
main parties, as well as corporate executives.

Among those accused are Eduardo Cunha – the former house speaker, who led the 
impeachment campaign but now languishes in prison – and three of the ministers 
in Temer’s first interim cabinet, all of whom have had to resign. The president 
has also been named in several plea bargains, though he has rejected claims 
that he was involved in wrongdoing.

The Workers party has also seen several of its leading figures jailed – 
including a former treasurer and government chief of staff – and its founder, 
the former president Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, called to face trial as the 
alleged head of the corruption scheme. He denies the charges.

Amid fears of fresh turmoil Brazil’s currency fell on Thursday by more than 5% 
to its lowest level since June.
 