
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> will cut 
£4.4bn from benefits for disabled people over the course of the parliament, 
sparking alarm and a possible rebellion among Conservative backbenchers.

In a move condemned by charities, the budget on Wednesday revealed that George 
Osborne’s biggest single revenue-raising measure over the next five years would 
be cutting personal independence payments (PIP) for people who need aids to 
help them dress and use the toilet.

Disability rights groups said the changes would be a devastating blow to 
disabled people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/15/disability-cuts-cutbacks-destroy-independent-living-budget>
 who rely on the benefit to help them live on their own, while Labour branded 
the changes “morally reprehensible”.


Benefit cuts threaten independent living for thousands of disabled people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/15/disability-cuts-cutbacks-destroy-independent-living-budget>
John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, said that about a “third of the 
cutbacks [Osborne] has been raising money from will fall on people with 
disabilities” by 2020-21.

After the cuts were trailed on Friday, a Labour analysis found it would deny 
200,000 claimants access to the benefit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/13/cuts-will-see-200000-disabled-people-lose-3000-a-year>
 worth almost £3,000 a year, with a further 400,000 seeing their entitlements 
reduced.

The scale of the changes affecting some of the most vulnerable people in 
society has already caused deep concern among some Conservative MPs, including 
some of those who forced the chancellor toreverse his planned cuts to tax 
credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/george-osborne-u-turn-scrap-tax-credit-cuts-autumn-statement>
.

One Tory MP said there was huge unease among his colleagues in the 
parliamentary party and a group of backbenchers was planning to put their 
concerns to the chancellor, calling for the PIP cuts to be softened during the 
consultation process.

There was particular disquiet that the cuts were being made in order to keep 
within the chancellor’s overarching welfare cap that he is already due to 
breach because of the cancelled tax credit cuts.

In a further sign of Tory disquiet, one thinktank on the liberal side of the 
Conservative party called on Osborne to rethink the changes.


“The cuts to the disability benefit, the personal independence payment, are a 
mistake,” said David Kirkby, a senior research fellow at Bright Blue.

“PIP covers the extra costs of disability and is received by those in work as 
well as those out of work. It is unclear what justifies these changes – worth 
over £1.2bn – and similarly unclear how they square with pre-election promises 
to protect the disabled from welfare cuts.”


It also emerged on Wednesday that the Conservative Disability Group posted a 
message <http://conservativedisabilitygroup.org.uk/> saying its website was 
“temporarily closed owing to Disability Cuts and the resignation because of 
these of Webmaster Graeme Ellis”.

Ellis said he was a lifelong Conservative supporter until Wednesday afternoon 
but the PIP cuts were the last straw. He said his message to Conservative MPs 
thinking about rebelling was: “Please do it, show that you care and you will 
end up saving lives.”

He told the Guardian: “I will never vote Conservative again and I’ve never 
voted for anyone else but today it has destroyed my faith in the party … My 
work is about advice and guidance on benefits and some of the phone calls I’ve 
had from some of my clients this afternoon after the budget have made me want 
to cry.

“It’s not been explained properly and vulnerable people are all thinking they 
are going to be affected immediately. I’ve had one person said he’s going to 
kill himself. My job is becoming more and more difficult because it’s soul 
destroying and not because of the clients. The proposed cuts in PIP and drop in 
taxation for those that are fortunate enough to be better off are just the 
straw that broke the camel’s back.

“I’ve been receiving lots of phone calls and texts [from the Conservative 
group] saying I should put the website back up but I don’t have a legal 
obligation to do that because it’s hosted by my own package. At this moment in 
time, I’m not putting the web page back or taking off what I put.”

An insider from the Department for Work and Pensions said there was awareness 
that the changes would cause angst among Tories as well as opposition MPs and 
campaigners.

But the source said the department was given a range of options through which 
to roll back the cost of disability benefits, with other possibilities offering 
an even worse situation for disabled people.

The economist Jonathan Portes, who used to work at the DWP, accused ministers 
of making “a mess of disability benefits”.

He argued that the shift from disability living allowance to personal 
independence payment was done to reduce costs, but the savings had not been 
realised.

“They didn’t listen to economists, bureaucrats or doctors, nor did they listen 
to disabled people,” he said, calling on ministers to stop cutting the current 
system and instead have a proper review.

Research by the charity Scope shows that disabled people face an average of 
£550 extra costs a month, compared with the able-bodied.

Mark Atkinson, chief executive of Scope, said disabled people, who were 
already struggling to pay bills, were very worried. The charity had received 
many anxious calls to its helpline as a result of the announced cuts. He urged 
the chancellor to think again.

Budget 2016 at a glance: the key points
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-at-a-glance-key-points>
He said: “Today the chancellor confirmed benefit changes that will make many 
disabled people’s lives harder. Half of disabled people say that they have 
struggled to pay the bills because of the extra costs of disability that they 
face.”

Phil Reynolds, policy and campaigns adviser at Parkinson’s UK, described the 
cuts to PIP as “devastating” and said they would have a profound effect on the 
lives of people with the disease.

He said the disability benefit system was no longer fit for purpose: 
“Thousands of people with Parkinson’s, who rely on aids and appliances for 
basic tasks like using the toilet or dressing themselves, will now find PIP 
even tougher to claim. Instead of being able to receive the support they so 
desperately need, they’re being penalised and shut out at every turn.”

Charities highlighted successive welfare changes that have hit disabled 
people, such as cuts to social care and the recently passed cuts to employment 
support allowance, which will reduce benefits by £30 a week for those in the 
work-related group.

Cuts to local business rates, also announced on Wednesday, would lead to 
further uncertainty for those relying on social care, they said.

The DWP said the changes were about ensuring PIP supported people with extra 
costs associated with their disability.

Separately, it emerged that the Office for Budget Responsibility had been 
critical of the DWP over universal credit – its flagship change to the welfare 
system that rolls six benefits into one. The independent watchdog’s report 
cited “significant concern with our UC marginal costs forecast”.

In a sign of trouble ahead for the programme, which has already seen delays 
and rising costs, the OBR said: “In particular, the model on which it is 
produced has not been able to keep pace with recent policy changes and has 
become even less transparent than was previously the case due to the increasing 
use of off-model adjustments.”
 