
Fourteen Australian recipients of the highest Commonwealth military honour, 
the Victoria Cross, are mounted on grey charges. They lead the carriage of the 
Irish-born Archbishop of Melbourne,Daniel Mannix 
<http://www.nma.gov.au/exhibitions/the_home_front/stories/daniel_mannix>, along 
Bourke Street in Melbourne.


Around 10,000 first world war veterans and throngs of Catholic schoolboys 
march behind the procession while tens of thousands of Melburnians line the 
streets and cheer them on.

After violent anti-British sentiment voiced at 1918 St Patrick’s Day march, 
Melbourne council banned the parade in 1919.

It is Saturday 20 March 1920. This special St Patrick’s Day parade (three days 
after the calendar marks the actual commemoration for Ireland’s patron saint) 
is being made into a silent film byBert Cross 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0189115/bio?ref_=nm_ql_dyk_3>, a cinematographer 
who’ll find fame in 1927 for adapting to film Marcus Clarke’s novel For the 
Term of his Natural Life.

But Cross is almost incidental to the film - Ireland Will be Free – he is 
shooting this day. Indeed, when you look at the film, which has been restored 
by the National Film and Sound Archivebefore its first full screening in almost 
a century this Friday 
<http://www.nfsa.gov.au/calendar/event/6138-ireland-will-be-free/>, it is 
obvious the true directors are before, not behind, the camera.

They are Mannix and his perhaps unlikely friend and confidant John Wren 
<http://adb.anu.edu.au/biography/wren-john-9198>, a man whose contradictions 
(shunned by the establishment while a puppeteer of politicians; illegal 
bookmaker-cum-millionaire who never lost touch with his Collingwood slum roots; 
a supporter of the church who only formally worshipped late in life, and a 
staunch Irish republican who unequivocally supported the Empire’s war from the 
outset) put him at odds with easy definition. The common, enduring epithet 
“colourful Melbourne identity” undermines Wren’s complexities.


Amid the fierce sectarianism that engulfed Australia during and just after the 
war, Mannix – archbishop from 1917 to 1963 – made the film as a testimony to 
his support for an Irish free state. Mannix, born in County Cork in 1864, a 
life-long republican and later confidant to the Irish Taoiseach (prime 
minister) Éamon de Valera, supported Britain’s declaration of war in late 1914. 
But in 1915, when sectarianism became a potent undercurrent of Australian 
society amid false suggestions that Irish Catholics were not volunteering to 
fight in sufficient numbers, Mannix’s opposition to war grew.


Colm Tóibín, Anne Enright, Roddy Doyle ... the Easter Rising 100 years on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/26/easter-rising-100-years-on-a-terrible-beauty-is-born>
“Apparently not enough nuns are joining,” he said.


The 1916 Easter Rising in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/25/the-guardian-view-on-the-easter-rising-centenary-irelands-history-lesson-for-britain>
 and Britain’s execution of rebel leaders (and, perhaps,the involvement of a 
few Australian troops in quashing the rebellion 
<https://www.awm.gov.au/journal/j39/kildea/>) hardened Mannix’s anti-British 
position and added ambiguity to his already heavily qualified war support.


He became a leading opponent of conscription, vociferously arguing against the 
proposition at two divisive, defeated plebiscites in 1917. He became the bête 
noir of fervently nationalistic, pro-conscription Australian prime minister
Billy Hughes <http://explore.moadoph.gov.au/people/william-morris-billy-hughes> 
at the 1917 federal election, arguing a vote for the “little digger” as Hughes 
was known, equalled a vote for conscription.


By 1920, when Ireland Will Be Free was filmed, Mannix was viewed as something 
of an enemy of Britain for his republican activism. In late 1920, while en 
route from America toIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, a 
British man o’ war intercepted his ship. Mannix was arrested and taken to 
England where he was freed providing he did not speak to Irish gatherings in 
Liverpool, Manchester or Glasgow.


Mannix sat for days with the republican leader and mayor of Cork, Terrence 
McSwiney <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terence_MacSwiney>, who died while on 
hunger strike in London’s Brixton jail. Mannix led his funeral cortege to 
Euston station, from where McSwiney’s body was dispatched to Ireland for burial.


Wren, the son of Irish immigrants, lived with his wife and seven children in 
Studley Hall, a mansion on expansive grounds at the Apex of Studley Park Road 
overlooking the Yarra and beyond to theCollingwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood> flat where he was born. 
Diagonally opposite his home was Raheen, the archbishop’s palatial residence.


Both men walked to their places of employment – respectively, an office in the 
city and St Patrick’s Cathedral in EastMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> – over the bridge across 
the Yarra and down into Collingwood, and along Johnston Street where Wren once 
had his illegal tote. Sometimes they made an odd sight walking together – the 
whippet-thin archbishop in his black robes made even taller than his 6ft-plus 
by his black silk top hat, and the suited-up Wren, barely 5ft 4in.


The Guardian view on the Easter Rising centenary: Ireland’s history lesson for 
Britain | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/25/the-guardian-view-on-the-easter-rising-centenary-irelands-history-lesson-for-britain>
Wren passionately supported independence for all of Ireland. But not only did 
he support Australia’s involvement in the first world war, he also volunteered 
to fight. As the most influential patron of Collingwood football club, he 
encouraged – with at best modest success – leading sportsmen to enlist.


Wren joined up at age 44. But he was medically discharged during basic 
training. Still he urged others to fight, and he pledged to give £500 and a 
gold watch to the first Australian to be awarded aVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> Cross (Albert Jacka, 
later to become a business associate of Wren, won, although his business soured 
and he died young).


By 1917, when the casualties of the Dardanelles and the European western front 
had taken a terrible toll on Australian forces, Wren was pro-conscription. 
Regardless, when Mannix was refused venues in which to promote his 
anti-conscription message, Wren offered the archbishop the use of his Richmond 
pony track.


Theirs was a complex, nuanced relationship that transcended Wren’s (often 
anonymous) support for church charities and the poverty stricken place he 
escaped.


Yes, they shared a fervent support for a free Ireland. But Mannix did so as an 
Irish nationalist first and an adoptive Australian second. Wren, it might be 
argued due to his support for the war and conscription, considered himself 
equally an Australian patriot and Irish republican.


The film, Ireland Will Be Free, is leaden with symbolism – the vast St 
Patrick’s Day march, the militarism of the lines of marching veterans, the VC 
winners on horses and their later informal, though staged and seemingly less 
than comfortable, meeting with Mannix at Raheen – that aims to serve their 
different interests.


The forgotten Irish soldiers who fought for Britain in the first world war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/05/irish-soldiers-who-fought-for-britain>
In her research notes for the film Rachel Naughton, archivist and museum 
manager of the Catholic Archdiocese of Melbourne’s Diocesan Historical 
Commission, writes: “The film … bears the entrepreneurial imprint of John Wren. 
John Wren certainly appears in the film, welcoming the VC winners upon their 
arrival in Melbourne and introducing them to the archbishop … However, there is 
no doubt that the vision the film represents is that of Daniel Mannix. Using 
the analogy of a book, possibly the scenario was that Mannix was the film’s 
author and Wren may have been its publisher.


“The intention was primarily to give voice and support for granting of 
self-government to Ireland at a time when such a demonstration was not possible 
in Ireland,” she says.


“It was also a demonstration to combat some official suggestions from the 
highest level that, because of Mannix’s stand against conscription, Catholics 
and Irish Australian Catholics in particular did not ‘do their bit’ for the war 
effort.”


The archdiocese holds copyright to the film.


Despite this, Mannix looks decidedly uncomfortable in the “meet and greet” 
with Wren and the VC winners at Raheen. At times, Ireland Will Be Free might 
well be called Citizen Wren for the spotlight the movie casts upon a man who 
was often publicly reticent.


Not least it illustrates just how respectful, even deferential, Wren is to 
Mannix.


There is little incidental about the movie, including the street shots – most 
of which were filmed from the steps of what was then Australia’s federal 
parliament in Spring Street. After violent anti-British sentiment was voiced at 
the 1918 St Patrick’s Day march, the Melbourne council banned the parade in 
1919.


The terrible beauty of the Easter Rising remains alive today | Fintan O’Toole
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/01/easter-rising-century-ireland-1916>
There was widespread debate in the federal and Victorian state parliaments 
about whether the 1920 parade should proceed, most vocally from anti-Irish 
republican voices. Winning the support of the 14 VC holders (only 10 of whom 
were Irish Catholics) was the masterstroke that convinced the Melbourne mayor, 
councilor Aikman, to give the parade the go ahead.


Sally Jackson, film curator at the film and sound archive, says: “The film is 
a unique perspective on that part of history – it brings in Wren’s part in the 
war and how he wanted to be part of it but couldn’t – about how he was 
pro-conscription and Mannix was anti. All of that is incapsulated in there, in 
the way Mannix behaves and in John Wren’s presence.


“Most of what you see on the screen is filmed from the top of parliament 
house, from the roof or the first balcony … to me that’s John Wren rubbing this 
in … to the people who said ‘you can’t do this’. Because even though it was the 
lord mayor’s decision as to whether this would go ahead, this was argued in the 
parliaments state and federal … the people who spoke the loudest were the 
anti-Catholics.”


There is little doubt the film was heavily censored before it was screened in 
May 1920.


According to Naughton’s research notes a significant early section of the 
“standard” version, featuring the martyrs of the Easter uprising, was censored.


The various fonts and ad-hoc use of intertitles also indicates censorship.


The intertitles include an extract from Mannix’s speech: “I welcome you and 
your gallant comrades to Melbourne’s Irish national celebrations of 1920. While 
Ireland is in bondage your fight for the small nations is unfinished.”


Contested legacy: echoes of the Easter Rising
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/21/contested-legacy-echoes-of-the-easter-rising-1916-centenary-ireland>
According to another intertitle, Wren said: “Gallant Australian soldiers: You 
have come 2,000 miles in the name of Ireland for whom, I am sure, you would lay 
down your noble lives. We grasp with hopefulness and pride your strong right 
hands which we trust will help to replace Ireland among the free nations of the 
world.”


An omniscient narrator – a hybrid voice of Mannix and Wren, perhaps, 
postulated, somewhat hyperbolically: “Fourteen Victoria cross winners escorted 
Archbishop Mannix in triumph through the main streets of the city amidst a 
scene of enthusiasm unequalled in the history of Australia. Ten thousand 
returned Australian soldiers and 30,000 young, resolute, Irish-Australians 
marched behind the archbishop’s gallant escort.”


Film and sound archive director, Michael Loebenstein, who has helped to 
arrange for the film to be screened on 3 May in Melbourne (at Cathedral Hall, 
almost at the location of its filming) says Ireland Will Be Free represents “a 
fascinating proposition to look at the decade of the great war as the cradle of 
cross-platform and converged media”.


“How a clergyman like Mannix cleverly used the media to ‘augment’ the most 
powerful public platform of his time – the streets, mass manifestations. Apart 
from the fascinating insight into the politics of the day and the Mannix-Wren 
alliance and friendship, the film reminds me of why I came to love early 
non-fiction cinema: the unstaged sights of early 20th century metropolitan 
life; the crowd’s and individuals’ enthusiastic and sometimes awkward 
interaction with the camera. The realisation that the true magic of the film 
medium is not in its ability to create illusionary fairy-tale worlds but to 
capture life, and immortalise the everyday.”


The parade and the film sparked fierce media and community debate. Loyalist 
groups protested against the march, while a planned screening of the film at 
Melbourne Town Hall was cancelled.


The Argus of 22 April 1920, observed wryly: “With the exception of one or two 
isolated individual cases, there was an absence of Sinn Fein colours or 
emblems, but many people were wondering when the Union Jack, ‘emblazoned on the 
leading banner’ – to quote from the letter of the secretary of the celebration 
committee to the Lord Mayor … was going to appear.”

Ireland Will Be Free will be shown on 3 May at Melbourne Cathedral Hall


















 