
What do Polish couples in their 70s do for fun when they come to visit their 
children living in London? Go dancing in the capital’s superclubs, of course.

At least that was the choice of one couple on Sunday night, who turned up to 
WetYourSelf!, Fabric’s weekly house and techno night, at 10pm and stayed 
dancing and drinking cups of tea until 5am the following morning.

Skream, DJ Premier and Maya Jane Coles to headline MoMA PS1 Warm Up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/17/moma-ps1-warm-up-2016-line-up-skream-dj-premier-maya-jane-coles>
The couple – whose names no one apparently managed to catch – caused a stir 
among the night’s regular clientele, according to the promoter and resident DJ 
Jacob Hansen, 35, who is known as DJ Jacob Husley and has run the event at the 
Farringdon nightclub for the past 10 years.

“They got a lot of attention from people in the club, who all really embraced 
them,” said Husley, who is originally from Denmark. “There was lots of smiles, 
the girls were dancing with the guy as well – the gentleman I should probably 
say.”

He added: “It’s an important story because that’s what clubbing should be 
about. It should be about music and the coming together between all phases of 
life, religion or sexuality.”

Husley said he first noticed the couple just after the doors opened, as they 
ambled down the long flights of stairs to the basement venue. “I stopped and 
said, ‘are you OK?’ And they just smile at me and nod and continue down. I’m 
thinking maybe they’re relatives of the owners or someone else so I run up and 
ask security on the door and they said ‘no, they had tickets so of course we 
let them in’.”

Husley gave each of them a drink ticket – which they swapped for tequila – 
then ran off to find a Polish speaker. In the meantime, the couple joined the 
other revellers. “They go on the dancefloor and are kind of doing this kind of 
ballroom-type dancing, but very slow because she can only really stand up when 
she’s holding on to him. She would also sit down and he’d go off by himself.”

As the club got busier, Husley said he arranged for them to have a cup of tea 
– at a table in the VIP area, which he opened specifically for their benefit.

“We don’t actually open the VIP balcony on Sundays, but the lighting guy is up 
there so I just took them round the back and gave them a table right at the end 
where you can see down to the dancefloor,” Husley said. “I gave them another 
round of tea and they were standing up there dancing. Then I left and I came 
back 20 minutes later and they were gone – they had just gone back downstairs 
again.”

Speaking to the couple with the help of an interpreter, Husley found out they 
had come to London to visit their daughter and had decided to experience the 
city’s nightlife during their stay.

“I asked them who came up with this idea and the guy was pointing at her, 
going like ‘she did it!’” Husley said. “They were laughing; they had loads of 
banter between them, they were really lovely. They read a review ofFabric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fabric> in a Polish newspaper and they just 
decided ‘when we go to London we are going to go there on the Sunday night’. 
And they bought the tickets [online] in Poland.”

Now Husley is trying to find out the names of the couple. He believes he has 
tracked down the email address they used to buy the tickets, and he has the 
address they returned to when he called them a cab. But he is also mindful that 
they may not want to be outed any more than they already have been.

“We want to keep their privacy until we find out whether they want to be 
public about it, because it’s also their right to just come and enjoy the club 
and be anonymous if they want,” he said. “That picture is out but we will just 
have to wait and see if they want to be in the press or not.”
 