
What the hell happened on Saturday night?

The umpteenth (or penultiumpteenth) Republican debate was an ecstasy of noise 
in which everything was indistinguishable. We are long past
you-can’t-do-that-on-television <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0078714/reference>
. We are long past manufactured controversy. We are fully into clown slapfight.

You should be forgiven if you can remember almost nothing of this evening, or 
if you do but cannot make heads or tails of your own memories.

If Jack Donaghy were real, he’d brand Saturday’s debate the Third Kind 
<http://30rock.wikia.com/wiki/Trivection_oven> of Noise: the first two kinds of 
noise are meant to turn your brain off, and the third is uncategorizable by a 
rational mind.

First, the white noise of coddling campaign nonsense would have slipped out of 
your mind as insubstantially as it entered, be it Ben Carson’s encomia about 
the constitution, or John Kasich’s performative appeals to political civility 
that were all about maintaining a brand. Eventhe Marco Machine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TzbUPfoveok> whirring up into speech at the 
speed of an auctioneer would not have made an impression, because there’s no 
longer any sense in pretending that he’s thinking on his feet with greater 
authenticity than a Xerox machine with legs.

Second, the repetitive (and often manufactured) controversies are also meant 
to denude your brain – to get you to a point where angry static is as soothing 
as the tide. And there were a lot of repetitive arguments that would’ve washed 
over viewers like so many peaceful waves, between Trump defending his use of 
eminent domain, Kasich defending Ohio’s Medicaid expansion and Cruz and Rubio 
battering each other on amnesty. The policies themselves don’t matter as much 
as theSturm und Drang: either you are finally convinced that the other guy is a 
cretin after your guy has yelled enough, or you just stop caring about all the 
loud men yelling and no longer run the risk of suspecting that your guy might 
be a cretin, too.

But this debate veered fully into absurdity somewhere around the third time 
thatDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> told the 
actual truth about things that actually happened in actual history and was 
booed by the audience for his trouble. After stating that the Bush 
administration lied to the American people in order to drum up support for the 
war in Iraq, failed to keep us safe on 9/11 and passed up opportunities to 
assassinate Osama bin Laden before the 9/11 attacks, the sheer mutual 
antagonism between the candidates and a furious audience caused something 
between Trump and Bush to come thoroughly unglued. Then, they simply began 
arguing like two people with mutual antipathy towards one another rather than 
politicians.

From there, the madness spread through the debate: a great circle of abuse 
spun around fast enough to fling all sense away. Rubio hates Cruz who hates 
Trump who hates Bush who hates Trump who hates Cruz who hates Rubio.

The crosstalk overwhelmed all comers and CBS moderator John Dickerson lost all 
control (apart from Carson and Kasich, whose brand-management plans forbade 
them from joining in). Eventually Dickerson asked Carson a question just to 
silence the bickering, forcing the candidates to stand there with the 
pained/patient expressions that adults have at weddings when the ring bearers 
give a reading as Carson slowly answered.

In any other circumstance outside of a reality TV show, this debate would be 
considered a catastrophe for all involved. It was stupid; every last one of 
those men should go home and be berated by someone they love.

That said, the most depressing of all possible acknowledgements is that it 
probably doesn’t matter what a mess this was.

Donald Trump has made his political bones so far by being a bully and a liar. 
Ted Cruz is a bully and a liar. Jeb Bush is petty and a liar, but he lies with 
establishment gentility, so we should say that he prevaricates.Marco Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio> is whatever punchcard of 
antagonistic hogwash was fed into his slot from his days as a Florida political 
protege. Ben Carson, well … Let’s not wake him. He looks so peaceful.

This fiasco of a debate won’t change a thing about how these candidates act, 
and deciding not to cast a vote for this behavior would mean resigning from the 
current Republican party, unless you want to vote for Kasich or feel like 
sendingBen Carson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ben-carson> to live in a 
city paved with constitutions.

It’s hard to tell which is sadder: that millions of people are stuck with 
these jerks; or that millions of people want to be. Even wrestling with the 
question for a few seconds makes you want to tune it all out – and, one 
assumes, plenty of voters already have.
 