
Two months on, leave campaigners now acknowledge that a key driver of their 
successful campaign was not to argue via fact and evidence, but rather to stir 
raw emotions – “psy ops” as Iain Duncan Smithhas called it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/23/euroscepticism-middle-aged-spread-uk-eu-referendum-europe>
. Fact-based criticism was dismissed as part of “Project Fear”, a way of 
monstering inconvenient challenges to the blithe it-will-all-be-fine claims of 
leave. It worked then, and to a saddening degree, it is still being deployed.

Brexit Armageddon was a terrifying vision – but it simply hasn’t happened | 
Larry Elliott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/20/brexit-eu-referendum-economy-project-fear>
There has been no Armageddon, the Brexiters say, but economies, like 
supertankers that respond slowly to changes of steering direction, exhibit slow 
responses – especially to an event that has yet to happen. Nobody economically 
literate thought that unemployment, always a lagging indicator, would 
immediately soar in the weeks after the vote. Nor would tumbleweed now be 
blowing through high streets.

Yes, George Osborne’s “punishment” budget  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/15/osborne-project-fear-budget-eu-refereundum-leave-scare>
– an attempt to dramatise the impact of weakening longterm economic growth on 
any chancellor’s options – was over the top. But in the context ofleave’s 
specious NHS claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/eu-referendum-brexit-vote-leave-iain-duncan-smith-nhs>
 it was no more than a misguided attempt to fight abusive statistical fire on 
the same terms.

Stock market buoyancy is a function of sterling’s weakness and of the Bank of 
England’s “sledgehammer” monetary response – itself born of the bank’s own deep 
apprehensions of a “material slowdown”. Thus, too, the current resilience of 
retail sales. But what matters is future intent. Here surveys of business and 
consumer confidence tell a more ominous story. The commercial property market 
and construction, where decision-makers are compelled to make longer-term 
assessments, are already experiencing sharply weakening conditions.

Prospects over the next five years are sobering – even alarming. The British 
and European economies are inextricably interconnected, as you would expect 
after more than 40 years of EU membership. Much of what remains of our 
manufacturing industry is dependent on free movement of goods and people, of 
which the newly successful motor and aerospace industries are typical 
exemplars. Industries as disparate as higher education, agriculture and 
financial services have prospered directly from EU programmes and the single 
market. Unscrambling all these hard-won and valuable relationships is bound to 
have a deleterious effect.

Further, the world’s companies come here to enjoy the UK “aircraft carrier” 
effect – exporting into the EU single market from an exceptionally 
business-friendly environment. Nearly 500 multinational companies have their 
European or global HQ in Britain – five times more than Germany – a major boost 
to our business services and commercial property industries alike.

Now the “aircraft carrier” is torpedoed – but until we know the details of 
Brexit nobody can tell whether it is badly crippled or sunk – along with the 
economic activity that derived from it. Is the end result likely to be 
Brexit-lite, with continued access to the single market and some compromise on 
free movement of people? The Tory right and their media allies will insist that 
is a sell-out, and will the Labour party want to be painted as a friend of 
immigration? In which case Britain will be compelled to negotiate trade deals 
with 27 EU countries, and another 52 deals with the countries with whom the EU 
has deals in turn. What will the resulting tariff – and indeed non-tariff – 
regime be? When will they be concluded, given they take on average seven years? 
Liam Fox trumpeting possible deals with Australia and Azerbaijan in a decade’s 
time is no substitute for knowing the answer, or better still having free and 
uninhibited access to the vast market in our own continent.

What will be the regime for agriculture, for science, for startups, for 
aerospace, for financial services?

This is the “dust cloud” of uncertainty of which the chief economist of the 
Bank of England, Andy Haldane,recently warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/14/monetary-policy-only-short-term-balm-for-uk-economy>
. It can be partly ameliorated, certainly, but it can’t be removed by an active 
fiscal policy and industrial policy. There will plainly be some increase in 
exports with a lower pound: but the response was desperately weak after 
sterling’s fall in 2008-9. More importantly, who is going to make a major 
investment in the UK in these circumstances, even with a weaker pound? Two 
economists(Nauro Campos and Fabrizio Coricelli 
<http://voxeu.org/article/britain-s-eu-membership-new-insight-economic-history> 
– yes, experts) calculate that foreign direct investment will fall by a 
quarter. And if or when the uncertainty lifts, will it be because we have a 
hard or soft Brexit? It was for these reasons that every reputable forecaster 
predicted Brexit would lead to output falling below what it would otherwise 
have been in the years ahead. Not lurid pictures of an Armageddon; rather a 
cool assessment of economic realities, casually dismissed as “Project Fear”.

It could even be worse. Economies can get trapped in vicious downward spirals. 
Falling investment begets falling investment. A weakening commercial property 
market spells weakened bank balance sheets, and potential credit constraints. 
What kind of recovery will happen after the inevitable slowdown or recession 
next year? What will be the regime for agriculture, for science, for start-ups, 
for aerospace, for financial services? Who has confidence in Messrs Johnson, 
Fox and Davis putting the interests of the economy and jobs before their 
ideological predilections?

We have been plunged into a mess. The EU never obstructed the vital structural 
changes to the British investment and innovation ecosystem that had to be made, 
in or out. Now we have to deliver those reforms beset by the disastrous 
uncertainty of leaving the world’s greatest trading bloc. For what? Not to 
co-operate with our European neighbours in what, in my view, is a noble cause? 
To unleash the most disturbing outburst of anti-foreigner sentiment I have 
witnessed in my adult life?

Of course opinions vary. As you may have seen last week, Larry Elliott, the 
Guardian’s current economic editor, isupbeat about Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/20/brexit-eu-referendum-economy-project-fear>
. I, a former one, am profoundly concerned. Readers in the years ahead will 
judge which of us was right.
 