
This is the game we play after every Republican debate: the mainstream press 
corps finds some tortured explanation for why Marco Rubio or Ted Cruz won, and 
then days later Donald Trump rises in the polls. In a night where CNN ran a 
headline reading “Donald Trump defends size of his penis 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/03/03/politics/donald-trump-small-hands-marco-rubio/index.html>
”, the man has probably won yet again.

Any doubt of Trump’s tenacity was dispelled by the live crowd at the 
Conservative Political Action Conference, a ballroom full of establishment
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> watching the 
combat on giant projection screens, and laughingwith He Of The Dyson Airbladed 
Hair in spite of themselves.

The media has only lately come round to the notion that perhaps its political 
Geiger counter is no longer detecting radiation but screaming a New York tune 
like Lou Reed’s Metal Machine Music. But the revolutionary act of admitting 
that you can be wrong does not get you all the way to being right. And it will 
be incredibly tempting for the same wisdom to hand this night to Cruz or Rubio.

Both candidates battered Trump repeatedly and well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/03/donald-trump-rubio-cruz-fox-news-republican-debate-detroit>
, according to the conventional political rules of debates. They even 
tag-teamed Trump on a couple lines. But the old logic has failed us. We are not 
the same political people anymore, no longer bounded to conventional 
metaphysics. Maybe it is no longer possible to die.

For every argument that should make sense, it is easy to proffer an immediate 
Trumpian counterpoint. Cruz and Rubio alley-ooped mockery of him? Under normal 
circumstances, that’s just the two responsible candidates beating down a punk. 
Now, every Trump voter sees two congenital wusses who can only win by teaming 
up, two loser would-be antagonists so weak that even their insults need a 
partnership.

Even Fox News itself appeared to drop a lead weight on the scale to give this 
one to Cruz, the only viable remaining Not Trump candidate. When the audience 
applauded Cruz, Fox cut to cheers. When Trump got booed, they cut to those as 
well.See, it seemed to say, you know which way this is going. 

Fox even demanded that Trump explain how his own absurd tax-cut giveaway to 
the wealthy is going to correct the federal debt, as well as account for how 
his prescription drug plan will save taxpayers money while covering all 
Americans who qualify.

That’s just how far these people have gone on beyond zebra. After a quarter 
century of allowingany Republican candidate to generate any trillion-dollar 
figure by throwing 13 dice in the air and counting whatever numbers appeared – 
after allowing eight years of “repeal and replace Obamacare” without giving a 
tinker’s damn about what the “replace” part looked like (if it even existed at 
all) – a conservative outlet demanded that a conservative explain how 
supply-side economicsworks, do something that looked like math and provide a 
plan that makes sense.

You know the instruments of the right are losing when they have to move left 
to correct themselves.

Again, it probably won’t work. For that, you just had to look at the audience 
at ground zero of the conservative movement.

People don’t attend CPAC on a lark. It costs $300 to register, and the 
expensive hotels near where the event is held usually run over $200 per night. 
That’s $700 just to walk around conference rooms with a lanyard, pressed khakis 
and a titanic sense of entitlement to American hegemony.

These people were not Trump fans. As the Fox moderators introduced each 
candidate, the cheers followed their status within acceptable conservatism.John 
Kasich <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kasich>, the candidate running 
on the Sensible Stepdad platform, complete with flagrant lack of intolerance 
for gays and their ilk, received scattered cheers. Trump garnered healthy 
applause and some boos. Cruz received an even larger cheer and some boos as 
well. The room erupted for Marco Rubio, the Ken doll avatar of CPAC crushes.

And yet Trump won them over, time and again. Rubio had made jokes about his 
penis over the last week, and Trump just said: “It’s never been a problem” – 
and the entire room nearly whooped like a daytime talkshow audience. Cruz 
burned him, and he burned back, and they cheered. Rubio came after him, and 
they cheered.

Not everyone applauded Trump, but the volume of the laughs and clapping and 
did he just do that?moments was enough to overcome even the most ingrained 
institutional dislike. Even in an audience pre-selected by cost and orthodoxy 
to oppose him.


If Trump could win points there, just imagine what happened among the people 
who have no fealty to movement conservatism,who have nurtured a sustained rage 
at being betrayed or ignored by its bromides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/24/donald-trump-victory-nevada-caucus-voter-anger>
, who have been told that conservatism is good for them even as they have seen 
the middle class begin to crater around them like a suburban Florida 
neighborhood pockmarking with sinkholes during a long drought.

If Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> can win in 
enemy territory, consider just how much he succeeded among the villagers living 
in the crumbling outposts that conservatism has long abandoned.
 