
For once it was not a bad idea for Brazil to reconvene away from home, despite 
the fact that Miami, where early on Saturday morning theSeleção play a friendly 
withColombia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colombia>, hosts a 
population of Brazilians estimated at more than 250,000 – more than enough to 
guarantee a heavy presence at the 20,000-seat FIU Stadium.

In their first game since their World Cup campaign ended with a 7-1 thrashing 
by Germany in the semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/08/germany-brazil-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 at Belo Horizonte on 8 July and a3-0 drubbing in the third-place play-off 
against Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/12/brazilholland-world-cup-2014-third-place-play-off-match-report>
 a few days later, theSeleção would certainly not be received with a party 
atmosphere, even if they wanted to play at home.

It is in the United States that the returning manager Dunga will try to 
organise an operation that this time involves more than the start of a World 
Cup cycle. By keeping 10 of the 23 players called up by Luiz Felipe Scolari for 
the recently ended tournament, the 1994 World Cup-winning captain is gambling 
on the possibility that those players will be able to shake off the 
psychological blow of Belo Horizonte.

Easier said than done, as Manchester City’s Fernandinho, one of the survivors, 
points out. “I don’t think people will ever stop asking us what happened in 
that game against Germany. Rest assured that none of us have forgotten it 
either.”

Nonetheless, Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> have to move 
on as quickly as possible and that means a convincing performance against 
pretty much the same Colombia side they struggled to beat 2-1 in the World Cup 
quarter-final. A friendly it might be, but only in name.

While the Colombia full-back Juan Zúñiga has not been called up by the 
manager, José Pékerman – which means the inevitable controversy surrounding a 
meeting with Neymar, after the challenge that tookthe Brazilian out of the 
World Cup with a fractured bone in his back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/05/brazil-neymar-break-back-world-cup>
, has been avoided – just about everyone else from their valiant campaign is 
back and that includes the Golden Boot winner James Rodríguez.

The Colombians will be interested in testing Brazil’s resolve and also scoring 
psychological points before the South American qualifiers for Russia 2018 begin 
next year. For neutrals the gruelling league-format system could not be more 
exciting after all the teams from the continent managed to clear the group 
stages at the 2014 World Cup.

Brazilians, however, fear their team’s perfect World Cup attendance record has 
never been more threatened. Many fans are still to be convinced that the 
appointment of Dunga is the way forward.

Despite the quirky match in Belo Horizonte, Brazil at no point showed tactical 
flexibility or even a plan that did not involve the hope that Neymar could bail 
them out. While polls still showed resistance towards an overseas manager, the 
Brazilian Football Confederation reportedly approached Alejandro Sabella, who 
took Argentina to the 2014 final, in an attempt to bring in fresh ideas at a 
time Brazilian managers have pretty much vanished from the international scene.

At the recent World Cup Scolari was the only representative from the country 
that in previous tournaments had boasted as many as five.

But Dunga, who departed the job in 2010 amid accusations of valuing discipline 
over skill, is back and coincidentally he is an expert in resurrections. 
Singled out after a horrendously pragmatic Brazil side crashed and burned in 
the round-of-16 at Italy 1990, he lifted the trophy four years later and helped 
theSeleção to the final at France 98.

His Brazil were not pretty to watch but they still won the 2007 Copa América 
and the 2009 Confederations Cup as well as topping the World Cup qualifying 
group before narrowly losing to Holland in the quarter-finals of South Africa 
2010.

A breath of fresh air he is not but Dunga still commands a lot of respect from 
a crop of players who have all seen him on TV doing what none of them managed 
so far – win a World Cup. His motivational skills might be as important as his 
tactics at the moment, to be honest.

Brazil v Colombia, kick-off, 1.30am SaturdayTwitter: Fernando Duarte 
<https://twitter.com/Fernando_Duarte> 

 