
The mother of one of the teenagers at the centre of abuse and mistreatment 
claims insideNorthern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> youth detention 
has said her son is too scared to give evidence to the royal commission.

Dylan Voller is among the current and former detainees who are expected to 
appear beforethe royal commission into the protection and detention of children 
in the NT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-northern-territory-juvenile-detention>
 over the next two weeks.

However his mother, Joanne Voller, has told Guardian Australia her son was 
considering not appearing as a witness unless he could do it in person at 
Darwin’s supreme court.

Dylan Voller, 19, is in the adult prison on Darwin’s outskirts and according 
to his mother is fearful of retribution from staff and other inmates if he 
gives evidence via video link with guards in attendance.

Voller has been serving his sentence for three years. He was eligible for 
parole in October last year but his applications haven’t been successful. His 
family is campaigning for his release.

“I think they’re punishing him for talking out, and he’s been told that by a 
few of the guards … that you were trouble-makers you deserved what you got, 
along those lines,” said Joanne Voller.

She said he was threatening to go on hunger strike, but she had sought to 
discourage him. “When I spoke to him I tried to tell him it wasn’t a good idea 
but he said: ‘Mum you don’t know how bad things are in here.’”

Joanne said she understood her son might be able to appear in person, but 
chaotic organisation of the royal commission had left her and other families 
feeling vulnerable and unsupported. “It’s so rushed, there’s no care or thought 
for anyone involved: family, the people involved in the abuse,” she said.

The witness list for this second public hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/royal-commission-told-new-detention-centres-no-solution-to-incarceration-crisis>
, scheduled to run for two weeks, has not been publicly released and legal 
teams for witnesses have expressed frustration that they are unable to 
adequately prepare or support clients because they don’t know who is appearing 
when.

Joanne Voller said she’d had a meeting with Dale Wakefield, the minister for 
Territory Families, which oversees youth justice. “I asked her to assure my son 
would come out of jail alive, and she said she didn’t want to make false 
promises,” said Joanne. “That just shattered me.”

Wakefield confirmed the meeting with Joanne, who is a constituent, but said 
she wasn’t officially able to guarantee safety in the adult corrections system.

Corrections commissioner Mark Payne had confirmed correct procedures were 
being followed and that prisoner safety was paramount, she said. However she 
had also encouraged Joanne and her family to talk to the independent ombudsman.

Dylan Voller is likely to give evidence on the alleged abuse he suffered while 
a juvenile detainee, including that which was broadcast on Four Corners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/four-corners-prompted-inspector-to-toughen-up-report-into-nt-justice-system>
 and in other media reports. His mother said she expected more incidents to be 
revealed.

She said he was likely to talk about programs and other aspects of detention 
which were positive, but inconsistent. “Every time they started stuff they 
finished too quick, there wasn’t funding or they were being punished and not 
allowed to do it,” she said.

“My son’s been in jail six years, he could be anything right now. He could 
have done a degree. But he’s done nothing, and I do realise he is a difficult 
child but if you look at the way he was treated it kind of explains why he was 
being so difficult.”

The royal commission’s public hearings are scheduled to run until the end of 
next week.

On Wednesday the commissioners, Mick Gooda and Margaret White, toured the 
current and former Don Dale juvenile detention centres, including a new 
recreation area which opened in June. They also toured the site ofthe 2014 
teargassing incident which sparked numerous inquiries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/22/young-indigenous-imprisonment-in-nt-you-wouldnt-believe-it-in-a-modern-day-society>
, including into the placing of Voller in a restraint chair – a restraint which 
has since been banned.

 