
This summer, 128 years after he was driven out of London in humiliation, 
Kingston upon Thames's most prodigal son and San Francisco's most extraordinary 
photographer gets his due with a big show of his photographs atTate Britain 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/britain/>. History has yet to settle the verdict on 
this brilliant photographer whose work laid the foundation for motion pictures. 
Even in this belated moment of triumph,Eadweard Muybridge 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eadweard_Muybridge>'s authorship is yet again 
being called into question for the third time since his series of landmark 
achievements.

Muybridge was born Edward James Muggeridge in Kingston, in 1830, the year the 
first passenger railway ran, at the start of the decade that ended with the 
introduction of photography, the medium in which he would achieve wonders. He 
told his grandmother as he prepared to emigrate to America and turned down her 
pile of sovereigns, "No, thank you Grandma, I'm going to make a name for 
myself. If I fail, you will never hear of me again."

He did make a name for himself, though perhaps too late for her – several 
names, in fact, since he changed his name to Muygridge about when he arrived in 
San Francisco in 1855 to begin a brief, successful career as a bookseller. Five 
years later, he was headed east when the horses pulling his stagecoach 
stampeded, resulting in a head injury so serious that it may have transformed 
his personality, and certainly required a long convalescence. That was his 
first return to his homeland, and he stayed until 1866 or 1867, skipping the 
American civil war and tinkering with various inventions. Somewhere along the 
way he learned photography, because in 1867 he returned to San Francisco as an 
accomplished photographer named Muybridge. (His other name change, of Edward to 
the Anglo-Saxon Eadweard, came later and may have been after the coronation 
stone 
<http://www.kingston.gov.uk/browse/leisure/museum/kingston_history/kingstons_royal_connections/coronation_stone_rc.htm>
 in his hometown that is inscribed with the names of two King Eadweards.)

The photographer Muybridge began with a series of images of Yosemite, the 
dramatic valley of waterfalls, sheer cliffs, and picturesque groves in the 
wilderness of the Sierra Nevada, and went on to photograph his city, the 
surrounding countryside, mansions and their occupants, lighthouses of the 
Pacific coast, military installations, theModoc Indian war 
<http://www.militarymuseum.org/Modoc1.html>, and more. He compiled a huge 
catalogue of images while roaming the west coast from Alaska to Panama and 
exploring the possibilities of photography.

He was restless with the medium's limitations, in 1869 patenting a camera sky 
shade so that he could expose his film separately for the sky and the subject 
below (film in that era was so sensitive to blue light it routinely overexposed 
skies into blank whiteness). He added clouds and even the moon to many early 
landscapes, using the darkroom equivalent of Photoshop to doctor them. His 
images were themselves restless, seeking the chaotic, the startling, the moody, 
and the unsettling in his most personal work, the landscapes.

And then, in 1872, his primarily scenic work took a detour, thanks to the 
curiosity of a railroad baron. The millionaireLeland Stanford 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leland_Stanford> took up racehorses as a pastime. 
He also took up the debate about whether all four feet of a trotting horse are 
ever off the ground at the same time and looked for a novel way to solve the 
question. He commissioned Muybridge to photograph Occident, one of his champion 
trotters, in motion.

Photography <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography> in that era 
was slow – slower than the world around it. It might be faster than drawing and 
painting, but it was hardly instantaneous: landscape photographers looked for 
still mornings in which no breeze disturbed trees and water; portrait 
photographers used iron neck braces to keep their subjects still, and the 
children often blurred anyway as they fidgeted during slow exposures. Muybridge 
had to try to make a photograph that captured not just motion but incredibly 
rapid motion, and though he succeeded well enough for Stanford's initial 
purposes (yes, the horse did have all four feet off the ground), his images 
were rough silhouettes. There was a little fanfare, and the project slipped 
into the background.

Muybridge was then one of the two great landscape photographers of the west 
coast, the other beingCarleton Watkins 
<http://www.carletonwatkins.org/about_watkins.htm>, and while Watkins was a 
classicist, making serene, stately pictures of a still, eternal world of 
beauty, Muybridge was a romantic who sought out the uncanny, the unsettling, 
the uncertain, notably in his mammoth-plate photographs of Yosemite in 1872, 
the same year he photographed Stanford's trotter.

In 1877, after Muybridge made some technological breakthroughs in photographic 
chemistry that still remain murky, his work with Stanford resumed. Stanford 
supplied the money and the horses; Muybridge supplied the direction and the 
technical skill, though he sought out the Central Pacific Railroad's engineers 
and technicians to help him develop new high-speed mechanical camera shutters. 
Cameras before then rarely had shutters. You just took the lens cap off by hand 
and put it back on after a few seconds or minutes. But Muybridge was heading 
toward the (pre-digital) modern camera, the one with sensitive film and some 
means of triggering the shutters to make exposures in hundredths of seconds. 
With these breakthroughs he began to photograph horses again.

The result was an extraordinary series of images. He made multiple exposures 
in quick succession and printed them together as grids. The real subject was 
not the object but the motion, not the noun but the verb: trotting, running, 
walking, leaping. He photographed men as well as horses, including himself 
nude, swinging a pick, a tall, morose man whose muscles made him look younger 
and hair made him look older than his age of half a century. The motion studies 
would eventually show men, women and children, along with animals ranging from 
elk to an ostrich and a lot more horses.

He created another strange device which, with his talent for naming things 
awkwardly (starting with himself), he called thezoopraxiscope 
<http://www.kingston.gov.uk/browse/leisure/museum/museum_exhibitions/muybridge/machinery_and_equipment/zoopraxiscope.htm>
. It was the ancestor of the motion-picture projector: it broadcast those 
images of creatures in motion as a fast-moving series that appeared to be, 
rather than many successive images, one image that moved. He began to show 
enthusiastic audiences these flickering short movies of actions, and some 
consider this to be the birth of cinema.

For Stanford, who had a stableful of spectacular racehorses, the project was 
always about horses – he saw it as useful for understanding their anatomy, 
movement, and plotting their training, and little more. For Muybridge it was 
about photography and more – about possibilities that had not been named. 
Physiologists, photographers, scientists of all sorts, and painters were 
excited by his breakthroughs. He took his zoopraxiscope and photographs abroad.

In Paris he was befriended by the great physiologist Etienne-Jules Marey 
<http://www.exeter.ac.uk/bdc/young_bdc/movingpics/movingpics6.htm>, who would 
abandon his other methods and focus on photography as the best means to 
investigate motion. Painters were both thrilled and dismayed that a horse in 
motion was so little like the images of rocking-horse gallopers they had been 
painting for ever, and the very idea of painterly accuracy began to 
disintegrate. Did you paint what the world looked like to the slow human eye or 
the high-speed camera? Paris was enthralled. Muybridge was at the height of his 
career.

And then came London. On 13 March 1882, the Prince and Princess of Wales 
attended his presentation at theRoyal Institution 
<http://www.rigb.org/registrationControl?action=home>, and London seemed 
prepared to embrace him as Paris had. The photographer, who was nearly 52, had 
the foamy beard and fierce eyebrows of an ayatollah, and cut a dashing figure 
in evening dress. But it was his pictures that astonished. The Photographic 
News exclaimed, "After Mr Muybridge had shown his audience the quaint and 
(apparently) impossible positions that the horse assumes in his different 
gaits, he then most ingeniously combined the pictures on the screen, showing 
them one after another so rapidly that the audience had before them the 
galloping horse, the trotting horse, &etc. A new world of sights and wonders 
was, indeed, opened by photography, which was not less astounding because it 
was truth itself."

Muybridge's own truth was called into question by the Royal Society a few days 
after his debut. Stanford and his doctor friend JDB Stillman 
<http://www.stillman.org/f264.htm> had published a book behind his back, titled 
The Horse in Motion as Shown By Instantaneous Photography in which they had 
denied Muybridge all credit. The Royal Society reproached him, invitations 
evaporated, his reputation was tarnished, and the humiliated Muybridge 
scrambled for money to return to the US.

He sued Stanford for injury to his reputation, but suing one of the richest 
men in the country and one of California's most conscienceless double-crossers 
was a losing game. Stanford's lawyers managed to shift the focus from the broad 
array of technical and conceptual achievements of the motion-study photographs 
to the electrical trigger for Muybridge's cameras made by one of the railroad 
engineers. They won. Muybridge resumed his experiments in high-speed sequential 
photography in Philadelphia and his career regained some of its momentum in the 
later 1880s, but he never reached the heights of attention he had before the 
defamation. He eventually retired to his birthplace, where he died in 1904.

In his lifetime motion pictures proper were invented, with contributions from 
Thomas Edison, the Lumière brothers, and others, and Muybridge was given a 
little credit for his founding role. But when one of the first histories of 
motion pictures was written, Muybridge was denied credit all over again.Terry 
Ramsaye <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terry_Ramsaye>'s book, A Million and One 
Nights, was influenced by one of those surviving engineers, an unscrupulous 
egomaniac named John D Isaacs. Isaacs had in fact worked on the camera 
shutters, but in the 1920s, when no one else was around to correct him, he 
began to exaggerate his role at Muybridge's expense, and Ramsaye took Isaacs at 
face value, filling his history with slights to Muybridge's contribution and 
detours into his domestic scandals. Muybridge's reputation remained eclipsed 
for decades.

History now remembers him in fragments, as a landscape photographer, as a 
technical innovator, as a key figure in the long march to motion pictures, as 
the maker of the motion studies whose grids of images and images themselves 
influenced everyone from the painterFrancis Bacon 
<http://www.francis-bacon.com/> to the conceptual artist Sol LeWitt 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sol_LeWitt>. His accomplishment is so broad and 
curious that few have assimilated it into what is, despite everything, a 
coherent achievement. And a new round of challenges to his originality and even 
his authorship have surfaced in the last few years.

In the course of making the case for Carleton Watkins's genius, the J Paul 
Getty Museum's just-retired photography curator, Weston J Naef, has been 
nibbling away at Muybridge's standing. Watkins was a gorgeously gifted 
landscape photographer whose standing doesn't need enhancement, but Naef in 
2008 mounted an exhibition at the Getty that attempted to attribute anonymous 
images to Watkins on sketchy evidence and suggested that Watkins influenced 
Muybridge's serial imagery for the motion studies. After the Muybridge show now 
opening at Tate Britain, opened at the Corcoran Gallery in Washington DC, Naef 
gave a long interview suggesting that Watkins, who was the same age but took up 
photography earlier, helped, taught, mentored and sometimes outright made 
Muybridge's photographs.

Naef even questioned how Muybridge could have become, in 1868, such a 
"world-class" photographer with so little background in the medium. The
three-part online interview 
<http://blogs.artinfo.com/modernartnotes/2010/06/a-man-qa-weston-naef-on-eadweard-muybridge-part-one/>
casts doubt on much of Muybridge's achievement 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/culturemonster/2010/06/muybridge-photos-getty-curator-questioned-by-.html>
, with little evidence other than Naef's standing in the photographic world. 
The curator even questions whether Muybridge actually went to Alaska in 1868 
and made the images published under his name, though they were commissioned by 
the government and circulated by the artist as his work at the time with no 
questions asked. The general who commissioned them wrote to Muybridge about 
them.

It's a campaign of innuendo: Muybridge's 1872 Yosemite photographs are 
unquestionably brilliant and unquestionably his, but Naef says: "The 
interesting question is whether Watkins could have been standing nearby 
coaching him." Given that Muybridge was sometimes standing atop a boulder in 
the middle of a stream or on a precipice and other places where, the newspaper 
noted, "his packers refused to follow him", as well as high-country places far 
above Yosemite Valley that Watkins never photographed and is not known to have 
gone to, this is unlikely. I asked my sometime collaborator Mark Klett – who 
worked with photographer Byron Wolfe and me to rephotograph those Yosemite 
photographs some years ago – an adventure that involved a lot of scrambling to 
cliff edges – for his opinion.

By rephotographing many of the great 19th-century western landscape 
photographers, Mark – an important western landscape photographer in his own 
right – has come to know their work with an intimacy only a fellow maker can 
achieve. He wrote to me, "I doubt Watkins was standing behind Muybridge 
coaching him – especially when Muybridge is standing in precarious places. And 
the compositions are just so different that it would reduce Watkins' role to 
that of a technical adviser in any case, which is a limited service I would be 
sceptical that he offered."

I spent some years on a biography of Muybridge, and though his life and work 
possess many mysteries, there's nothing unbelievable about the pretty-good 
images of 1868 that led to the spectacular images of 1872, or to the later 
experiments. One might as well question whetherJoseph Conrad 
<http://www.josephconradsociety.org/> wrote his own early work, given the lack 
of literary talent demonstrated before his first novel was published when he 
was 37 and the fact that he did not even learn the English language until he 
was in his 20s.

As Mark puts it, "Finally, regarding the time it took Muybridge to master the 
process I can only say that each photographer proceeds with technical 
proficiency at a different pace. He might have been a fast learner, he might 
have had some technical training, maybe both. We do know that Muybridge 
demonstrates amazing technical feats others had not been able to perform by the 
time he works on the motion studies. If he's that proficient later on I would 
argue he was probably a pretty fast starter to begin with." One hundred and 
eighty years after his birth, 128 years after his ruckus with the Royal 
Society, it would be pleasing if his career would settle down. But the pictures 
speak for themselves.

Eadweard Muybridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/eadweard-muybridge> is at Tate 
Britain from 8 September until 16 January 2011. For details go to 
tate.org.uk/britain
 