
Eighteen months after losing the Morley and Outwood constituency on a 1.6% 
swing from Labour to Conservative, Ed Balls has suffered another heavily 
televised defeat – going down 0-4 on the vote of theStrictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> judges in a 
dance-off with TV legal expert Judge Rinder.

On this occasion, as on that, Balls made a dignified speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/08/ed-balls-loses-morley-and-outwood-seat-shadow-chancellor-labour-general-election>
 in defeat. But, whereas the loss of the previous vote looked life-shattering 
and was met with delight in large sections of the media, this time the 
politician has a huge number of career possibilities and it will be generally 
felt that Strictly has now lost its most pleasurable 2016 element.

Ed Balls leaves Strictly Come Dancing after 'fabulous three months'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/27/ed-balls-voted-off-strictly-come-dancing>
Given events this year, terpsichorean TV triumph for the former education 
secretary had come to seem an almost inevitable conclusion to a period in which 
the odds-on has repeatedly been beaten by the oddest one: President-Elect 
Trump, Brexit, Leicester City, Chicago Cubs, Bob Dylan.

Balls’ unexpected survival until week ten was based in the defiance of experts 
and bookmakers that underlay the earlier surprises. He is not even the only 
example in talent television. Honey G, a wacky parody rapper, has dominated 
Strictly’s ratings rival, ITV’s The X Factor, despite being to the larynx what 
the former shadow chancellor is to the feet.

In this, the phone-in vote crosses lines with the ballot box. Although the 
potential consequences are far less, the people voting for Balls on Strictly 
Come Dancing and Honey G on The X Factor are challenging the system and 
ridiculing conventional wisdom in a way similar to backers of Farage and Trump. 
It amuses some viewers to threatenBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
bosses with a Balls-up on Strictly, or to secure Simon Cowell’s talent shows 
for acts from which his record company will struggle to make money.

There had been red-top talk last week of a so-called BBC plot to stop Balls 
winning, although, in reality, there was nothing the judges could do for as 
long as the public failed to include him in the bottom two dancers who go to 
the mercy of the judges. However, media interviews in which the most generally 
liked judge, Darcey Bussell, in effect said, “Ed’s been fun but now let a real 
dancer win”, may have had some effect.

The panel had also set a second bar for the politician to get over this 
weekend – an unrehearsed cha-cha challenge – in which they pointedly placed 
Balls and dance partner Katya last, as they had a few minutes earlier when he 
showed off his tango. Finally, the public seemed to get the hint. And so, 24 
hours after head judge Len Goodman had called Balls “the people’s champion”, he 
was gone. It is unclear if there will be pleas for recounts or appeals to the 
supreme court.

Goodbye, Ed Glitterballs – here are your Strictly best bits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/27/ed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-best-bits>
It will be intriguing now to see how Balls chooses to use his new fame with – 
and apparent fondness from – the UK population. The Apprentice has just become 
the first TV franchise to have one of its alumni elected US president, and 
there were a couple of days this summer when it seemed that Have I Got New For 
You?, crucial in moulding the persona of Boris Johnson as a classless charmer, 
would be the first British entertainment series to put a cast-member in No 10.

Balls is surely too much of a politician not to have wondered if Strictly can 
do for him something like The Apprentice has done for Trump, although, in any 
return to frontline politics, the advantage of warm recognisability would have 
to be balanced against the possibilities offered to opponents for metaphors 
about falling over, being held up by partners or being voted out.

Further broadcasting opportunities seem assured, although he will need to be 
very strict with suggested titles punning on the surname that caused him 
trouble both at school and in Westminster.

But, while Balls and Honey G have been publicity boons for producers, TV 
reality and talent franchises are going to have to look carefully at their 
rule-books to protect themselves against viewers who see fun in trying to Trump 
the production.
 