
Britain’s reputation for restraint is shot. The results that began rolling in 
from Scotland after 2am were not the least moderate. Commentators were left 
floundering for metaphors.Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond> in his trademark growl 
declared: “There is a lion roaring in Scotland tonight.”


The country has set new standards for political annihilation. Few countries 
have ever done it with such determination. The Scots chucked Labour out. And 
with almost equal determination, the Scots and English discarded theLiberal 
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats>. They were 
ruthless.


Where is the Britain of muddle and indecision? The BBC hardly needed those 
clever graphics – the piazza map and the Big Ben swingometer – to show what was 
going on. Swings of 30% don’t need much illustration.


But the numbers don’t explain themselves. There’s no war, no famine, no 
economic catastrophe in Britain to account for such electoral slaughter. What 
it’s all about will be argued for years. But it seems driven very little by 
policy and a lot by a visceral exasperation with old, failed parties.


Trail round with SNP canvassers up north, and it’s clear how incoherent are 
the hopes invested in that party. “Stand up for Scotland,” was about the best 
candidate Patrick Grady could manage on the doorsteps of Glasgow North. He took 
an oldLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> seat with a majority 
of 9,000 votes.


That political carnage on this scale is carried out with such dignity seems 
particularly British. There are the mayors in chains and behind them, like 
children at speech day, are the candidates waiting for their fate to be 
announced.


They know what’s coming. Nick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> approached the platform as 
though walking to the guillotine. He had survived but he owed the air of 
tragedy to his party. By that time the Lib Dems were losing hard and losing 
everywhere. He was heckled as he hinted at his resignation and swiftly 
disappeared.


The oddball parties know this is their only moment. Months of work have gone 
into these few seconds of fame. Names have been changed by deed poll. Deposits 
have been paid and lost. And as their risible vote count is announced, they 
pump the air. Mission accomplished.


But in seat after seat, the Lib Dems suffered the ultimate humiliation of 
losing their deposits too. The joke dies with them. What comfort can there be 
for the Lib Dems that in some seats they seemed almost to join the fancy-dress 
fringe, with pathetic vote counts in triple figures?


Could the universal catastrophe of the polling of the last weeks also be put 
down to pranksters? To the inner mischief of the British people? Did they 
become so tired of the phonecalls from Ipsos Mori and YouGov that they invented 
the logjam scenario of the last weeks just to amuse themselves?


The loss of face for the opinion polls is not the least dramatic outcome of 
the 2015 election. Perhaps there was a last-minute change of heart across the 
country that yielded such a strong result for theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>. Perhaps the polls were 
just wrong. They may never be trusted again, as they were until polling day.


Pundits are nervously checking their columns to make sure they left a little 
wiggle room in their predictions. The polls were saying the same thing for so 
many weeks even the most careful commentators began to drop the usual warnings 
that the figures may change before the contest was finished.


This time the whole story changed between morning and night. Over breakfast 
Miliband was in with a chance. But by the time the exit polls were published at 
10pm, it suddenly seemed possible forDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> to survive. By breakfast 
the next day, it was clear he would govern in his own right.


The business of prediction is itself now suspect but I’ll venture this: 
Australian tacticians Lynton Crosby and Mark Textor will be around in Britain 
for a long time. They did their work for their clients damn well, delivering 
what Britain hasn’t seen since 1992: a clear cut Conservative victory. They 
even took Nigel Farage with them.

After a campaign when so much was ventured, so much political blood spilled 
and history made, the outcome was so old fashioned, so comfortably British. The 
country is once more in Conservative hands but with the party beholden in 
government to no one but themselves, their backers and their people.


The bill will soon fall due for Cameron’s victory. He has made noises about 
addressing the fragile state of the union after a campaign that focused, more 
than anything, on the horrors Scotland might inflict on England. As he left for 
London, he said the sort of thing divisive leaders always say: “I want to bring 
our country together, our United Kingdom together.”

 