
The competition watchdog has overridden the concerns of one of its key experts 
by ditching plans for a temporary cap on how much energy firms can charge, 
opting instead for helping customers switch to cheaper deals.

A final report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/cma-publishes-final-energy-market-reforms> 
– two years in the making – on energy market reforms has also rowed back on its 
estimates for the scale of overcharging by the big six suppliers, but still 
believes it amounts to £1.4bn annually.


The Competition and Markets Authority report gives only a tiny footnote to the 
fact that the panel was divided over one of the most important issues, whether 
to impose a price cap on all energy bills. Instead, the ceiling will only be 
imposed for those on pre-payment meters.

The summary of the document says: “One panel member, Martin Cave, felt that 
the retail remedy package was unlikely to succeed in reducing, in a timely way, 
the significant level of detriment identified. In his current view, a 
short-term price cap, covering a substantially larger number of customers, is 
required to reset the market.”

A raft of independent suppliers and industry experts reacted with anger to the 
final review, saying the CMA had “completely missed the mark” and wasted a 
golden opportunity to properly restructure the industry.

But the CMA argued that 30 new measures, including a database to enable rival 
suppliers to contact customers, will help open up the market to more 
competition.

It promised to reform outdated systems for measuring and charging for energy 
that distort competition between suppliers, to cut the cost of transmitting 
electricity and use competition to help ensure financial support for low carbon 
generation is allocated at the lowest cost to customers.

The CMA argued that price comparison websites would also be enabled to play a 
more active role in helping customers find the best offers. But it has 
recommended the dismantling of a system under which suppliers could only offer 
four tariffs that was meant to stop confusion for customers.

“Competition is working well for some customers in this market – but nowhere 
near enough of them. Our measures will help more customers get a better deal 
and put in place a modernised energy market equipped for the future,” said 
Roger Witcomb, chairman of the energy market investigation.

“With far too many customers paying hundreds of pounds more than they need to, 
they will be alerted to the better value deals that are out there and it will 
be easier for them to identify a good deal and switch to it,” he said.

But Darren Braham, founder of First Utility, the largest of the new 
independent suppliers, expressed frustration.

“The CMA has completely missed the mark, having spent two years debating how 
to fix the industry,” he said.

“Rather than acting quickly to make the market simpler and fairer for 
customers, the opposite has happened. With the remedies proposed, we are in 
real danger of being back where we started 10 years ago. This means a baffling 
array of tariffs, even more exploitation by the big six [energy companies] and 
customers continuing to pay much more than they need to.”

“We urge Ofgem [the regulator] and DECC [the Department of Energy and Climate 
Change] to consider the timing and implementation of certain remedies to avoid 
a wild west, free-for-all energy market, which won’t operate in the best 
interests of the vast majority of consumers.”

Doug Stewart, chief executive of Green Energy UK, which has been operating in 
Britain for 15 years, said: “The CMA investigation has been a waste of 
taxpayers’ money and is unlikely to re-establish consumer trust in the energy 
industry.

“Instead the constant toing and froing of the CMA consultation and their 
suggestions have possibly led to more mistrust in the energy sector. Sharing 
customer information, bombarding potential customers with phone calls or direct 
mail will almost certainly switch them off the idea of changing energy company.”

Centrica, the owner of British Gas and the largest of the big six suppliers, 
welcomed the final CMA recommendations. It said: “We have reviewed the 
executive summary of the final report and believe many of the remedies will 
further enhance the market and benefit customers.”
 