
Given the weight of advice offered from home and abroad, English ears will 
have been burning at their headquarters in Surrey this week when their most 
significant critic for a decade and more conceded that Stuart Lancaster’s side 
should make it to the World Cup final.

As that judgment – “the semi-finals at least” – came from Eddie Jones, there 
were bound to be caveats. However, coming from the mouth that baited England 
all the way totheir 2003 title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/nov/23/rugbyworldcup2003.rugbyunion>, 
it came close to glowing testament.

After all, the pre-match and post‑match spats between Jones and Clive Woodward 
in the runup to that extra-time, wrong-footed drop goal in Sydney and the
celebratory parades through London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/nov/25/rugbyworldcup2003.rugbyunion> that 
followed were almost as brutal and cruel as the games themselves. Or so we 
thought.

Earlier this week, during a break from coaching his current side, Japan, 
before their campaign, Jones admitted he had more than a grudging regard for 
Woodward and that while their words made headlines, he and the England coach 
always had time to catch up later. He had even come close to joining England 
when,post 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/oct/21/rugbyunion.rugbyworldcup200710>, 
Twickenham was trying to get English rugby on track by appointing a director of 
rugby.

Woodward himself was interested, as was Rob Andrew. However, it now seems that 
Jones, fresh from being a technical adviser to the South Africa team that had 
beaten England to the 2007 World Cup, was given sufficient encouragement to do 
a little research into the chances of working at Twickenham only to get word 
from a friend sufficiently close to the RFU decision-makers that “they want an 
Englishman”.

So England got Andrew – a far less abrasive option than either of the former 
national coaches – and Jones moved on, first of all back to Saracens, then on 
to Japan, for three years coaching the club side Suntory Sungoliath and since 
2012 the national side, with whom he is currently based in Bristol preparing 
for their opening pool game, against South Africa in Brighton.

Rugby World Cup 2015 digital wallchart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2015/sep/07/rugby-world-cup-2015-digital-wallchart>
After the World Cup Jones is on the move again, probably to the Stormers in 
Cape Town and the prospect of another spell in Super Rugby, although he insists 
“nothing is signed as yet”.

He also insists that he is not walking out on Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/25/coach-eddie-jones-confirms-japan-departure-after-rugby-world-cup>
 in their hour of need, as some suggest. The vultureshave been gathering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/27/australia-may-bid-for-2019-rugby-world-cup-if-japan-lose-hosting-rights>
, sensing Japan might not be able to stage the 2019 World Cup it has been 
awarded – alarm bells went off when the governmentcancelled a new national 
stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/17/japan-scraps-zaha-hadids-tokyo-olympic-stadium-design>
 – and doubts are being raised about the practicability of a Super Rugby 
franchise desperately needed by a country which tends to tempt overseas players 
to play possibly only 15 games a season for financial rewards rather than the 
rigour of competition.

“I always thought I could do four years here. Give it a good four years,” says 
Jones. “I’m 55 now, I’ve may be got 10 years left and I want to do different 
things. Would have been easy for me to stay, but I want a new challenge, want 
to move on.”

You sense frustration at changing the culture of a game that not so long ago 
would have seemed perfect for England in the 1930s; a game played by 
“gentlemen” and still governed by the top universities or, as Jones puts it, 
“the Oxfords and Cambridges – they control everything.

“Japanese rugby is a bit like their society was; closed off from the rest of 
the world. Over the last three or four years we’ve shaken it up, got more 
international fixtures, taken the players on a lot more tours and because of 
that we’ve had reasonable results. But its very domestically based and the 
structure of the top league is 16 teams, so the competition is quite diluted. 
In reality our guys are only playing three or four top-level games a year. It’s 
not enough.”

And what of this World Cup? Jones has tried to change the culture of importing 
any talent that is going. “We still use foreign players but we try to keep 
Japanese players in the key positions, 2, 8, 9, 10, 15, so the team is run by 
Japanese players and those who qualify by residency bring power to the game. 
You need power.”

Japan have won only once in seven World Cups so would a victory against USA in 
their final game be a decent send‑off? “Possibly one more,” says Jones, before 
turning to England’s chances in the next two months, 2003 and those spats with 
Woodward. “It was fun and it was good for the sport … but we’d always catch up 
afterwards and have a beer or a cup of tea.

“Nobody has been able to do what Woodward did with that team. Lancaster has 
rebuilt the culture of the team, now its whether he can rebuild the rugby of 
the team. Selection has been a bit all over the shop and at the World Cup that 
will be tested – whether he gets his selection right and whether they can play 
a game which suits the English instincts but can put enough points on the 
board.”

And to sum up? “I think they will definitely make the quarter finals, and I 
will be surprised if they don’t make the semis – at least the semis,” says 
Jones before quickly adding: “But I don’t think they are good enough to win”.

... And what of England’s Pool A rivals?

Jones on Australia Michael Cheika’s got a good group of players with genuine 
talent, but the thing I worry about with Austria is the 9-10. Four years ago 
(Will) Genia was the best half back in the world and if he can find his mojo he 
will make a hell of a difference, but at the moment he’s off the pace. Bernard 
Foley to me is not a Test five eight. He’s a very handy Super rugby player. 
Personally I’d play Matt Giteau, he reads the game, he’s played a lot of high 
quality rugby , played a lot of European rugby.

Jones on Wales Leigh Halfpenny’s been been worth 12 points a game and gave 
them a bit of an X factor. (Warren) Gatland has done a fantastic job, but they 
are a bit of a robotic team, very gain line orientated and, if they want to 
move that on, they’ll miss (Rhys) Webb as well.
 