
Robert Kitson

Who will win? England

What will the scoreline be? England by three pts (28-25)

Why? As host nation England simply cannot contemplate defeat. Fear of failure 
can be the most powerful of stimulants – and the Wallabies’ first-choice XV 
have played just one game together since 8 August.

Key man Owen Farrell. Australia do not possess a goal-kicker of his calibre, 
range and consistency.

Graham Henry

Who will win? England

What will the scoreline be? England by two points

Why? Big World Cup contests are often decided by goal-kicking

Key man Owen Farrell. A freakishly accurate goal-kicker to kick those goals

Paul Rees

Who will win? England

What will the scoreline be? By six points

Why? Because they have to. The tournament likes the hosts in the knockout 
stages.

Key man? Brad Barritt. He is their defensive leader and the defence doesn’t 
function with him at 13. They have got to handle Pocock at the breakdown

Andy Bull

Who will win? England

Scoreline? By six points

Why? It’s hope more than expectation. But they are a better side than they’ve 
shown, will be driven by desperation, and Australia may find the intensity of 
the occasion a shock after their matches so far.

Key man Chris Robshaw needs to have a great game. He is a better player than 
he is often given credit for, and, on form, usually ends up topping England’s 
tackle count by a distance.

Mike Averis

Who will win? England

Scoreline? England by three points

Why? They’ve got to have one big game in them.

Key man Tom Youngs: So important at lineout and scrum. Without set-piece ball, 
england don’t have the ammunition.

Michael Aylwin

Who will win? England

What will the scoreline be? England by 13 points

Why? Australia’s first team have had one game in the last two months. England 
will be seething and are a much better team than people give them credit for.

Key man? Jonathan Joseph: has the loss of a single player ever so completely 
thrown the balance of a team as it did against Wales?

Rugby World Cup 2015 power rankings: England plummet, Australia climb | Gerard 
Meagher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/02/rugby-world-cup-2015-power-rankings-england-australia>
Eddie Butler

Who will win? England

Scoreline? England 23 Australia 22. The only bonus point is Australia’s losing 
one.

Why? Desperation is a fine motivational tool. England face the public flogging 
of all time if they lose; Australia may have it in the back of their minds that 
they have the Wales game as a fall-back plan.

Key man? Ben Morgan. Somebody has to prevent Michael Hooper and David Pocock 
(and Scott Fardy) from dictating where they may roam. Morgan must commit all 
three of the opposition back-row to bringing him down. An hour of Morgan at 
full tilt may reduce both him and his targets to premature exits from the meat 
factory.
 