
Boris Johnson has been accused by a senior Conservative of adopting a “busking 
and humoresque approach” to theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> after a series of his claims about the 
EU were challenged by MPs on a Commons select committee.

The London mayor said that many of his views on the EU had been traduced after 
MPs from the three main parties sitting on the Treasury select committee 
questioned his recent interventions on the EU.

In a series of spiky exchanges, the Tory chairman of the committee, Andrew 
Tyrie, told Johnson he should adopt a more balanced approach to the EU.

Tyrie turned on Johnson after the mayor quoted from a 1991 pamphlet in which 
the former Treasury special adviser reportedly wrote that a single market could 
not complete without a single currency.

The chairman of the committee said Johnson had misrepresented him “quite 
badly” because he had written that the single currency project was being formed 
at a dangerous moment.

Tyrie said to Johnson: “It is very kind of you Boris to read all my material. 
But you are illustrating ... a very partial, busking – really – humoresque 
approach to a very serious question for the UK. What we really need is a much 
more balanced approach in which people make an effort to qualify and represent 
the points that they make and represent each other’s views with some accuracy. 
You are at it again.”


Johnson replied: “I am glad you said that because I think some of my views 
have been traduced.”

The exchanges came after Tyrie had challenged a series of anti-EU claims by 
Johnson. Members of the committee pointed to aDaily Telegraph article by Johnson
 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/eureferendum/12167643/Boris-Johnson-there-is-only-one-way-to-get-the-change-we-want-vote-to-leave-the-EU.html>
 last month in which he highlighted a number of “ludicrous” EU rules.He wrote 
on 22 February: “Sometimes these EU rules sound simply ludicrous, like the rule 
that you can’t recycle a teabag, or that children under eight cannot blow up 
balloons, or the limits on the power of vacuum cleaners.”

Tyrie pointed out that the toy safety directive requirements had issued a 
warning that children under the age of eight could suffocate. It asked that the 
warning be placed on the packaging and did not prohibit children under the age 
of eight from blowing up balloons. Johnson said: “Even the EU would be very 
hard put to invigilate people’s households in such a way as to actually 
prohibit people under eight from blowing up balloons.”

Johnson admitted that his claim that the EU bans the recycling of teabags, 
which originates from the EU’s animal byproducts regulation of 2002, was a 
“classic example of gold plating”. This describes the way in which UK officials 
over-interpret EU rules. He said Cardiff council issued the warning on the 
basis of the regulations that stated that items that have come into contact 
with milk and meat cannot be recycled.

John Mann, the Labour MP for Bassetlaw, pointed out that UK government had 
pushed for the animal byproducts directive, prompting Johnson to say that had 
been done in light of the foot and mouth outbreak.

Helen Goodman, Labour MP for Bishop Auckland, highlighted Johnson’s remarks on 
11 March, when he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/11/boris-johnson-on-brexit-we-can-be-like-canada>
: “What I think we should do is strike a new free trade deal along the lines of 
what Canada has just achieved. They have taken out the vast majority of the 
tariffs and have virtually unencumbered trade. We want a relationship based on 
trade and cooperation. The idea of being subject to the single judicial system 
is the problem.”

Goodman pointed out that the Canadian deal did not include financial services. 
But the London mayor changed tack when he said: “I don’t want to imitate the 
Canadian deal. I want a British deal.”

Johnson also claimed that the UK’s EU membership hampered the fight against 
terrorism. He said: “We are thinking today particularly about how to combat 
terrorism and the threat that poses to to our societies. I have seen various 
people quoted as saying that remaining in the EU is essential for our security. 
I think it is important to put a counterveiling point, which is that there are 
some ways now in which the ECJ [European court of justice] is militating 
against our ability to control our borders in a way in that we would want to do 
and indeed to maintain proper surveillance.”

The mayor cited the example of the niece of Abu Hamza after she allegedly 
tried to smuggle a sim card to him in prison. Johnson said she could not be 
deported because the ECJ could adjudicate on the EU charter of fundamental 
human rights. He added that the ECJ also says the government cannot retain 
mobile phone data that could be used for monitoring terrorists.

Johnson said: “What has that got to do with completing the internal market? 
What has that got to do with free trade? The answer is absolutely nothing. The 
answer is it is morphing into a political union of a kind that I think is no 
longer, on balance, in our interests.”
 