
News publishers would have stronger rights to demand payment from digital 
giants such as Google andFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> in exchange for using their 
content, under proposed European rules that are designed to shore up the 
collapsing revenues of traditional media companies.

The measures are part of a series of reforms that the European commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> plans to put out to 
consultation in September. They are designed to strengthen the rights of those 
who create and invest in original content, from authors and musicians to record 
labels, broadcasters and publishers.

The commission has come under increasing pressure from publishers to level the 
playing field.Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> and 
Facebook have attracted a ballooning share of online advertising money, while 
revenues for news publishers have slumped despite their expanding online 
readerships.

In draft proposals setting out its preferred options, the commission says: 
“The sustainability of publishing industries in the EU may be at stake, with 
the risk of further negative consequences on media pluralism, democratic debate 
and quality of information.”

The digital groups have a “strong bargaining position”, which “makes it 
difficult for publishers to negotiate with them on an equal footing”, according 
to a version of the draft seen by the Guardian.

How technology disrupted the truth | Katharine Viner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth>
Brussels is looking at giving news publishers the exclusive right to make 
their content available to the public, and to reproduce it for digital purposes.

This would mean that Google’s parent company, Alphabet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/alphabet>, could face demands from 
publishers to pay to use extracts of their articles in services like Google 
News.

The protection, known as “neighbouring rights”, already exists for performers, 
record labels and broadcasters. The commission wants to extend it to the 
producers of news – publishers who produce largely text-based journalism.

According to the draft proposal, publishers would like the protection to last 
for 50 years. The commission is asking whether a shorter period of as little as 
between one and five years would be more appropriate, given the perishable 
nature of news.

A spokesman for the commission said: “Neighbouring rights are attributed to 
those that assist in making the original author’s work available to the public 
at large, for example performers, producers and broadcasters. The commission is 
considering whether to grant such rights to news publishers. It would recognise 
their role as investors in content and give them a stronger position when 
negotiating with other market players.”

However, there would be no obligation on publishers to make Google pay for 
using their content, and many may choose to continue making their journalism 
available at no cost in the hope of attracting more readers.

Previous attempts to force Google to pay for reproducing news stories have hit 
the buffers. When Spain introduced a mandatory levy, the search engine shut 
down its Spanish version of Google News. In Germany, after big drops in 
traffic, many publishers decided to stop charging the company.

The proposals are part of a drive to create a digital single market in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/06/eu-unveils-plans-digital-single-market-online-firms>
, first adopted in May 2015, which has the overall aim of reducing the 
differences between national copyright regimes and allowing for wider online 
access to films, television shows, sports broadcasts and music by users across 
the EU.

The working document also suggests imposing obligation on platforms like 
YouTube, Vimeo and Dailymotion, which host content uploaded by members of the 
public, to seek revenue-sharing agreements with rights holders.

These big brands have already negotiated multiple deals, but record labels in 
particular claim they are being short changed. Digital platforms say they are 
under no obligation to share revenues, and such deals are voluntary. And many 
lesser known distributors – including pirate sites – refuse to negotiate any 
compensation at all.
 