
Europe is an idea. It’s better than that – it’s a noble idea. The many 
countries of a small continent club together, sharing common values and common 
interests, to solve problems, break down barriers and live better than they 
would and could otherwise. The immediate impetus in the 1950s was the avoidance 
of European conflict; today, the EU’s anti-fascist, anti-war roots still count 
but more important is the European Union’s capacity to offer each country more 
heft in political, economic and social affairs that it would have by itself.

Thus, British workers have more rights than they otherwise would. There are 
more good jobs in our factories than there otherwise would be – and more in the 
City of London, too. New companies starting up have the whole of the European 
single market at their feet. Beaches are cleaner, tourist flights cheaper and 
mobile phone charges lower. Farmers’ incomes are higher and more predictable. 
Fish stocks in the North Sea are rising. Scientists drive forward frontier 
science more efficiently. We can monitor and catch potential terrorists more 
easily.

When multinationals abuse their power, they can be challenged more 
effectively. Europe can deal with the US and China on level terms and make a 
volatile, uncertain global political environment just that bit safer. But, best 
of all, we are part of a European club that is trying to make our world better.

Certainly, each country gives up some sovereignty, just as any members of any 
club agree to rules. Of course there is a secretariat – a small civil service 
on the same scale as Birmingham’s – to drive the club forward. But it is run by 
elected politicians from members of the club and held accountable to 
representatives elected to the European parliament. It is open to scrutiny by 
the media and judicial arrangements of each member country.

It is work in progress, but this is a well-intentioned, democratic, 
accountable structure dedicated to improving the lot of ordinary Europeans – 
and it does surprisingly well.

Yet millions of British, especially the less well-off left behind in cities 
and towns all round the country, are so unimpressed they want to leave. These 
are the arguments of the elite, they say. Too many English working-class lives 
in 2016 are tough, and if Europe is making things better it is hardly obvious 
to them. There are myriad bad jobs on poor wages that go nowhere. Housing is 
lousy in wasted urban spaces that nobody cares to make look pleasing. Public 
services are deteriorating, the roads are crowded and buses and trains so 
expensive they can hardly be afforded. The rich feather their nests, but nobody 
cares about the numbers of people, reeling from the impact of mass immigration 
that makes everything worse still. Remainers can all get lost.

Yoked in an uneasy coalition with communities that share these views are the 
greying Conservatives in the suburbs and shires, yearning for the lost 
certainties of the pre-EU Britain they grew up in 40 or 50 years ago. They 
inherit the mindset of empire and Britain in 1940: British identity is about 
the power to go it alone. The inconsistencies of Thatcherism – the apostle of 
surrender to the anonymity of market forces while projecting the power of the 
British state – are their inconsistencies too. They simultaneously want more 
market forces – and control. Give the country’s economic and political 
leadership a kick in the teeth. The bureaucratic, sinister, anti-democratic EU 
is part of the problem, not the solution.

It is breathtakingly wrong, fanned by a rightwing press whose fanatical 
anti-EU zealotry has climbed new heights of blind prejudice.

But the sentiments are very real, dividing the country into two mutually 
uncomprehending and very hostile camps. To be a Remain campaigner in Leave 
territory is to risk incurring stunning personal abuse and invective.

The referendum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> is a 
battle not just for an idea of Europe, but for an idea of Britain. It can 
hardly do other than inflame emotions. Add immigration, with all the 
complexities of disentangling justifiable concerns from the unjustifiable – not 
a task Ukip leader Nigel Farage wants to begin to undertake – and the climate 
becomes toxic.

Brexit would not herald a new dawn. As John Major has argued 
<http://www.ukpol.co.uk/2016/05/13/sir-john-major-2016-speech-at-oxford-union-on-the-eu/>
, we export six times as much to the EU as to Brazil, Russia, China and India 
added together. We export five times as much to the EU as to all the other 52 
members of the Commonwealth added together. We sell more services to tiny 
Luxembourg than to India. The “experts”, derided by Leave, when they warn of 
recession and years of lost opportunity as Britain tries to redirect its trade, 
are only stating the obvious.

The millions of working-class voters thinking of voting Brexit, beware. 
Immigrants, who boost our economy, are not the cause of our ills. The lack of 
cheap social housing, the underinvestment in public services, the non-building 
of roads, the inability of weakened trade unions to defend wages and the wider 
failure to develop vigorous local economies are not the EU’s fault. What is 
wrong is minted in Britain and must be put right here.

Moreover, the values that will make our lives better are mutuality and 
generosity – not telling others to go home and turning our backs on the noble 
if derided EU. To leave is to indulge the worst side of our natures, to believe 
fantasies about what constitutes democracy and to chase an economic chimera. To 
remain is a double win – to be part of something good and get richer in the 
process. Think before you vote.
 