
EU researchers who have come to Britain must be allowed to stay, according to 
a cross-party group MPs who are calling on the government to offer an immediate 
commitment to those who have already made Britain their home.

The MPs on the Commons science and technology committee want EU scientists and 
other researchers exempted from wider immigration controls that will be up for 
discussion in the UK’s negotiations with Europe over its departure from the 
union.


A clear signal on the future security of those now working in Britain would 
reduce the uncertainty for EU scientists and engineers who may be tempted to 
leave for more secure jobs in other countries, where international 
collaborations are not under threat, the MPs believe.


Brexit 'not good news for British science' warn new Nobel laureates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/06/brexit-not-good-news-for-british-science-warn-new-nobel-laureates>
“There are about 45,000 EU students and researchers in the UK. Not all will 
want to stay, but if we reassure them that their status will be maintained 
whatever happens, that may give them the security they need,” said Stephen 
Metcalfe, the committee chair.


“The government could reassure researchers right now and it would not 
undermine our negotiating position,” he added. “It doesn’t change the fact that 
we have some tough negotiations ahead, but it does help to protect something we 
are very good at, which is our science base.”


Sir Paul Nurse, director of the Francis Crick Institute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/17/francis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research>
 in London, supported the call for such a commitment as a “sensible and 
significant step.” He added: “There is a need for stability to stop people 
wondering whether they ought to look for posts elsewhere.”


Lord Rees, the astronomer royal, said that since the Brexit vote, skilled 
people from overseas feel less welcome in Britain, their families less secure. 
“Researchers and technologists are mobile, like those in finance, or sport. The 
chancellor has assured international bankers of special treatment, but there’s 
no comfort for other sectors,” he said. “Many already here will feel they’d be 
better off abroad. Ambitious young people will wonder whether science is a 
career where they can do the best work in this country.”

In a major report 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/science-and-technology-committee/>
 on the implications of Brexit on science, the MPs argue that government should 
boost its spending on research to 3% of GDP, a level that would bring the UK in 
line with other countries such as Germany and the US. But as Nurse points out, 
following withdrawal from the EU, British research may need an extra £500m a 
year just to make up for EU grants that now flow into the UK.


UK scientists dropped from EU projects because of post-Brexit funding fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/12/uk-scientists-dropped-from-eu-projects-because-of-post-brexit-funding-fears>
In evidence given to the MPs, the Royal Society of Biology said that work on 
cancer, mental health, imaging, neurodegenerative disease, tissue engineering, 
bioinformatics, and conservation would all be “heavily and negatively affected” 
if the UK was unable to maintain involvement in centralised EU-wide 
initiatives.”


The report goes on to criticise the Department for Exiting the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> (DExEU) for failing to appoint a chief 
scientific advisor to ensure science has a voice in the Brexit negotiations. In 
the course of the committee’s inquiry, DExEU minister Robin Walker said the 
post had already been advertised, but later withdrew the statement and said the 
department had not decided whether it would establish the role.


“Science is one of those things we’re very successful at and it will be at the 
heart of our industrial strategy for moving forward. And yet the department for 
negotiating our exit from the EU doesn’t have a chief Science Advisor,” 
Metcalfe said. “If they were to advertise the post and quickly appoint someone 
it would send the message that DExEU is serious about protecting the interests 
of science as we go into these negotiations.”


Nurse said that since science plays a crucial role in improving the quality of 
our lives and driving the UK economy, it must be included in Brexit 
discussions. “There are so many interlocking issues affecting many sectors that 
the scientific research community cannot fight or lobby on each point 
separately from outside. It needs scientists present – or some representation 
for science, research and innovation – who can contribute to wider discussions 
in a more complete way,” he said.
 