
The European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>
 will redouble its crackdown on multinational tax avoidance next week with the 
relaunch of proposals to create an overarching corporation tax regime across 
all member states.

The proposed legislation would subject companies to a single set of rules for 
calculating their taxable profits, according to drafts seen by the Guardian. It 
would be compulsory for corporations with annual turnover of more than €750m 
(£670m) and which are tax-resident in a European country.

Designed to curb the profit-shifting that has allowed multinationals such as 
Apple, Starbucks and Amazon to avoid corporation tax on substantial amounts of 
their income inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, the 
proposals were launched in 2011 but ran into opposition from Ireland and the 
UK, with the then British prime minister, David Cameron, saying he would 
“simply say no” to the plan.

The rules are designed to ensure “business profits are taxed in the 
jurisdiction where value is actually created”, according to the drafts, making 
it harder for multinationals to avoid tax by transferring intangibles such as 
brand or intellectual property to low-tax jurisdictions. European commissioners 
describe the proposed rules as “an extremely effective tool for meeting the 
objectives of fairer and more efficient taxation”.

All member states would have to sign up to the proposal for it to become law. 
While the UK may leave the EU before the legislation is passed, it retains a 
seat at the discussion table while it is still a member. If Britain remains in 
the single market, the new tax rules will apply to it too.

The commission plans to introduce two pieces of legislation. The first, known 
as the common corporate tax base, would introduce new ways of calculating where 
a company actually makes its money. The formula looks at where the value is 
created, based on three equally weighted factors: assets, labour and sales.

The second, the common consolidated corporate tax base, would put a single 
member state in charge of collecting all European taxes due from a particular 
company. Those revenues would then be shared among the other member states 
according to where the profits were made. This second piece of proposed 
legislation will be held back until the first has been agreed.

The rules are designed to target only the largest companies, and those with 
cross-border activities, accounting for 64% of business turnover generated 
within the EU. But smaller companies could elect to join the scheme, if they 
feel being taxed only in one country could cut red tape.

Large companies spend about 2% of taxes paid on doing the paperwork, according 
to the commission’s estimates, while for smaller firms the estimate is about 
30% of taxes paid. The more subsidiaries a company has, and the more it trades 
across borders, the higher itgo s administration costs. If all multinationals 
paid tax through one European country, the saving could be €800m a year.

The proposals are likely to be resisted by Ireland, which has a low 
corporation tax rate of 12.5% and relies on tax competition to attract 
multinationals to set up head offices on its shores. Dublin is still reeling 
from a European commission ruling in August that it had granted€13bn in illegal 
benefits to Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
.

In May 2011, the Irish parliament passed a motion denying the legality of the 
commission’s original proposals, with politicians branding them an assault on 
the country’s tax sovereignty. A similar parliamentary motion was backed by the 
UK government that year.

As a next step, the proposals are likely to go to the European parliament for 
discussion and amendment, before being put to the council of ministers for 
approval.

“Britain is at a crossroads,” said the Green MEP Molly Scott Cato. “Will we 
follow Europe in promoting action on tackling corporate tax avoidance, or 
follow the route being pushed by some hard-Brexit supporters and become one of 
the globe’s leading tax havens? It is clear that the public interest will be 
best served by remaining as close as possible to Europe on tackling the scourge 
of corporate tax dodging.”
 