
Europe’s tormentor in chief may well be afforded special salvation from the 
same continent. Patrick Reed’s leading role in the USA’s Ryder Cup success at 
Hazeltine has apparently enhanced the desire of Keith Pelley, the European 
Tour’s chief executive, to keep the 26-year-old as part of his business 
equation.

Reed’s late withdrawal from the Turkish Airlines Open means that unless the 
Texan makes a similarly belated call to play in the Nedbank Challenge at Sun 
City next week, he will not feature in the requisite fiveEuropean Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-tour> events to be eligible for 
2017 membership. Ordinarily players must sit out for a year before reapplying. 
The fact this tournament in Turkey is taking place, plus two of Reed’s counting 
competitions were the Olympics and Ryder Cup, would hardly seem to boost his 
case for special treatment.

Yet that is precisely what Pelley is of a mind to offer. Speaking as round one 
of the tournament got under way, the chief executive insisted Reed’s status is 
befitting an exceptional circumstance.

Patrick Reed and Rory McIlroy deliver exquisite theatre in heavyweight clash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/rory-mcilroy-patrick-reed-heavyweight-hazeltine-ryder-cup>
“Absolutely, as a chief executive’s exemption, yes,” Pelley said when asked if 
Reed could be permitted to rejoin the European Tour next year. “Patrick hasn’t 
emphatically decided if he is going to play in South Africa. He was planning to 
play in Turkey. He chose, and we respect that, not to play in Turkey. We still 
have a couple of invites for next week that we always hold back. He might 
decide to play in South Africa.

“The rules and regulations are pretty straightforward; it would be my decision 
to keep him as a full member of the European Tour. Obviously the justification 
would be based on his desire to have wanted to play in Turkey.”

Pelley was unable to clarify whether others had been handed the same exemption 
in the past. Quite logically, other professionals would be entitled to question 
the point of eligibility criteria if Reed does keep his place for next season.

“Patrick would like to play over here a little bit more,” Pelley said. “Being 
a top-10 player in the world, we would like him to play over here. We would 
like him to play in events in the spring and summer next year, we are talking 
to him about that. He has gone through new management so he has kind of had to 
figure this out on his own.

“It would not affect anybody other than it would strengthen fields and bring 
more world-ranking points. I think if you asked the members if they wanted 
Patrick Reed to play five, six, seven, eight events next year they would all 
agree based on the world-ranking points he would bring to the event.”

Pelley also floated the idea of floodlit golf as a professional option before 
too long. “I think you would get buy-in from 95% of the actual players,” he 
claimed. “It is different though, with the shadows, and if somebody’s eyesight 
is not 100% then they might push back, but we will definitely have a 
competition for money under the lights next year.”

Danny Willett <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/danny-willett> is clearly 
among the minority 5%. “That would be a useless idea,” the Masters champion 
said. “It would be OK for a giggle but not for a real tournament.”

In broad daylight near Antalya South Africa’s George Coetzee snatched the 
first‑round lead with a Thursday 64, seven-under par. This was a shot better 
than Thorbjorn Olesen’s early effort, and there were 12 more players within 
three of Coetzee.

“I’ve been feeling like I’ve been playing well for the last couple of weeks,” 
the leader said. “The game is finally starting to come together and it’s nice 
to see the scores starting to show.” Willett produced a welcome glimmer of form 
with a two‑under-par 69.

Lee Westwood’s outward nine of 30 was ruined by a back nine which was 10 shots 
worse. “It wasn’t really a tale of two halves,” Westwood said. “It was a tale 
of hit it awful on the range and hit it awful all 18 holes. It was an absolute 
embarrassment tee to green.”

Ewan Murray travelled courtesy of Turkish Airlines
 