
Sympathy for Keith Pelley was in short supply last week. No sooner had the 
European Tour’s chief executive praised strong communication with players with 
regards to safety at the Turkish Airlines Open than one of the group 
contradicted him.

“I wasn’t the only one who believed it was about to be struck off the schedule 
due to the security concerns there,” said Shane Lowry, in his routinely 
excellent column for the Irish Times. “I know everyone’s going to say how good 
it was in Turkey and how nice the place is but there were times last week we 
simply didn’t know what was going to happen and that is a situation that 
doesn’t suit me at all.

“I think the information we were getting, or probably more importantly weren’t 
getting, wasn’t good enough. Nobody sat us down and told us exactly what was 
going on.”

Jordan Spieth ‘slump’ says as much about rivals’ strength as his own woes | 
Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/02/jordan-spieth-slump-ewan-murray>
Lowry was far from the only one to be unconvinced by the relaying of 
information Pelley heralded. This struck a chord with members of the media who 
were accredited for the event. There was no message, detailed or otherwise, in 
the buildup with regards to precisely why Turkey was safe and the tournament 
could be attended without fear. Instead, there was disappointing silence.

The key thing is the competition passed without notable incident, aside from a 
highly encouraging Thorbjorn Olesen win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/06/thorbjorn-olesen-david-horsey-turkish-airlines-open>
. If raw talent alone counts, the Dane will be part of the Ryder Cup in 2018.

By that time, the European Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-tour> scene will look different. 
Next week in Dubai, Pelley will announce the schedule for next season, with a 
high number of changes expected. Among them, perhaps, will be the removal of a 
Final Series, which has thrown up more problems than answers despite the riches 
on offer. The Irish Open will immediately precede its Scottish equivalent, with 
Turkey potentially switched to another calendar slot entirely.

The simple element of Pelley’s job is also the most complex – coaxing the 
sponsors he so desires to drive up tournament purses to the point where the PGA 
Tour is even partly challenged. The situation in Europe will become even more 
acute, and difficult, if the PGA Tour ups its playing demands for full-time 
membership.

Blue chip companies will only invest with the knowledge top players will 
contest their events; those professionals have their own agendas, schedules and 
commitments to the point where guaranteed fields and purses is a seriously 
tricky business. In this game of cat and mouse, Pelley’s reputation is on the 
line, not least because he took office with grand promises of increasing the 
attractiveness of the European Tour.

It is with this spinning of plates in mind that Pelley’s potentially special 
treatment of Patrick Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/european-golf-tour-patrick-reed-turkish-airlines-open-george-coetzee>
should be viewed. Also speaking in Turkey, the chief executive all but admitted 
Reed will be permitted to rejoin the European Tour for the new season despite 
falling short of the requisite number of 2016 playing appearances. Reed’s 
scenario does not look entirely clever when the Ryder Cup and Olympic Games 
contributed to a total of three.

One rule for one? You bet it is. By the same principle, albeit not in exactly 
the same circumstances, Rory McIlroy was permitted to turn out in the Race to 
Dubai finale 12 months ago. Here is the rub; without marquee players, the 
European Tour product is vastly diminished. That, in turn, inevitably affects 
commercial opportunity and what monies are on offer at the lower end of the 
scale. In Turkey, even those sharing 31st place collected €45,000 each.

Top golfers are the European Tour’s selling point and, being blunt, their best 
negotiating tool. It would seem unfair to castigate Pelley on one hand for not 
delivering on his early plans before making the same criticism for trying to 
attract the biggest names. From Reed’s point of view, the willingness to be a 
European Tour member in itself highlights an endearing desire to be a global 
golfer rather than exist permanently within the confines of his home 
competitions.

The essential element here is in Reed committing to specific events in Europe, 
rather than paying lip service to the Tour and, therefore, undermining Pelley’s 
exemption. This is a golfer who starred in the Ryder Cup, who has the game 
components to be a multiple major champion and among the top bracket in the 
world. There is no logic attached to his playing in events from Abu Dhabi to 
Ayrshire not being appealing. Reed, unlike far too many within his sport, has 
character to dovetail with talent.

In Dubai, Pelley will inevitably continue with his bullish stance towards the 
future. It may be he has tried to immediately alter too much within his company 
than was feasible from the outset. Nonetheless, in the case of Reed there is 
obvious logic to a chief executive’s intervention.
 