
"When was the last time Holland played an international fixture without any 
players with 'van' in their name on the pitch or substitutes' bench?" wonders 
Johnny Worthington.

It's been quite a while considering the presence of such names as Edwin van 
der Sar, Hans van Breukelen, Marco van Basten, Giovanni van Bronckhorst, Mark 
van Bommel, Rafael van der Vaart, Ruud van Nistelrooy, Gregory van der Wiel and 
Robin van Persie on the Dutch team-sheet in recent decades … which was tough 
luck for the poor sod tasked with onerous job of delving into the archives to 
find out the answer to this question.

But first a brief history lesson: Holland played their first ever 
international against Belgium on 30 April 1905 and won 4-1 fielding a team 
bereft of anyone glorying in a surname featuring 'van'. Their line-up on that 
occasion was Reiner Beeuwkes, Dirk Lotsy, Bok de Korver, Willy de Vos, Ben 
Stom, Karel Gleenewinkel Kampard, Guus Lutjens, Eddy de Neve, Rein Boomsma, 
Peet Stol, Dolf Kessler and Peet Stol (what with this being long before the 
days of substitutes, there was nobody on the bench). In their next two 
internationals, also against Belgium, Holland continued to display an 
outrageous anti-van bias until finally succumbing to the inevitable and 
selecting the goalkeeper Ferry van der Vinne and the left-back Toine van 
Renterghem for their fourth, a 2-3 home reverse in Rotterdam at the hands of … 
you've guessed it, Belgium.

But back to the question posed? The most recent Holland team-sheet in which 
those with the name 'van' were conspicuous by their absence from the starting 
XI was handed to match referee ... wasthe 3-2 Euro 2000 Group D win against 
France <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hn7NWznv3PI>. However, the pesky Peter 
van Vossenpopped up as a late substitute 
<http://www.eu-football.info/_match.php?id=25230>, which means the last time 
Holland fielded a match-day squad without a 'van' was …the 2-0 international 
friendly win over China <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NebDC6Knx0A> in 
Tilburg, back in 1996, the line-up for which can be seenhere 
<http://eu-football.info/_match.php?id=10661>.

WAG BANS

"England's training base is a Wag-free zone in Poland," writes Ian Frampton. 
"Have any other countries previously banned other halves, and how did they do?"

"Sweden coach Olle Nordin put his players on a leash during Italia 90," writes 
Egil Olsen (not that one, presumably). "The Norwegian novelist Jon Michelet, 
who had the great misfortune of following the Swedish team, reported the sad 
fact thus (my translation):

"It is widely known that Sweden's crew may not have wives, concubines or 
girlfriends of any kind in their rooms for the duration of the group stage. 
Glenn Hysén has issued a sharp protest against this forced celibacy, but in 
vain. His madam, by Italian papers christened La Bella Helena, is suffering in 
a hotel, and that hotel is here in Santa Margherita, and one does get certain 
dirty thoughts from thinking about how lonely she must be there."

"The Swedes, suitably inspired, set a World Cup record by losing three 
consecutive games by the same score: 2-1 v Brazil, 2-1 v Scotland and 2-1 v 
Costa Rica, for whom the magnificent Hernan Medford scored the winning goal. 
Again according to Michelet, Brazil libero Mauro Galvao then opted to rub salt 
into Swedish wounds by declaring: "Sex is healthy and not dangerous, even 
during the group stage." However, Galvao may later have come to wish he'd 
conserved some of his energy, as he was humiliatingly outpaced by Claudio 
Canniggia who sent the Brazilians home and Argentina through from the round of 
16."

OPENING TIME

"England scored the opening goal against France on Monday," notes David Cooper.
"This seems to be a recurring theme in England's opening game at a major 
tournament. When was the last time they conceded before they scored at a
European Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> or World Cup?"

You have to go all the way back to 1988, and Ray Houghton's goal for the 
Republic of Ireland. Since then England have opened the scoring in their first 
game in 1990, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2010 and 2012. They also 
scored first in 1992: after two 0-0 draws, David Platt gave them the lead in 
the third match against Sweden.

KNOWLEDGE ARCHIVE

"With two pretty rubbish teams as host nations this year, which host country 
has fared worst in European Championship history?" wondered Rory Saunders in 
2008.

Belgium's 2000 benchmark of one win was, before the 2008 tournament, the least 
any host had achieved since the introduction of the group stages in 1980. After 
their defeat to Germany, however, Austria – as widely anticipated – are now 
officially the worst ever hosts of a European Championships, with just one 
point to their name. Switzerland, meanwhile, thanks to their 2-0 win over 
Portugal's reserves, actually leapt above Belgium's tally of eight years ago 
courtesy of a superior goal difference.

The Yugoslavia side of 1976 also deserve a mention, however, in the eyes of 
Jostein Nygård. As hosts of the semi-final stages Yugoslavia lost 4-2 to West 
Germany in their first game and 4-2 to the Netherlands in the third-place 
play-off. Since 1980, the record of host nations in the European Championships 
have been generally excellent. Belgium were, before this year, the only host 
country not to make at least the semi-finals (In 1980, with group winners 
contesting the final, Italy lost a third-place play-off to Czechoslovakia).

• For thousands more questions and answers take a trip through the Knowledge 
archive <https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/theknowledge>. 

CAN YOU HELP?

"How often, if ever, has a third-choice keeper been used in a major 
tournament?" asks Ross Knight.

"Former Yugoslav legend Dragan Stojkovic played in Euro 1984 when he was just 
19," begins Bogdan Kotarlic. "He never played again in the continent's most 
important competition for national teams until 2000 when he was experienced 
(aged 35) but still a useful member of the Yugoslavian team. I was wondering if 
this is the longest pause one player has made between participating again in 
the final phase of the same competition?"

"I'm sat here watching the Republic of Ireland opening their Euro campaign, 
and a question popped into my slightly tipsy mind," writes Rob Marriott. "When 
was the last time the Irish took a player from the League of Ireland with them 
to a major tournament? And the answer – which I looked up for myself – is: 
never. Is this unique? Has any other team gone to even one tournament, let 
alone every tournament in their history, without a solitary representative 
based in their own country?"

"Rio Mavuba, captain of Lille and French international, was born in 
international waters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/apr/12/theknowledge.sport>. Is he 
the only international footballer with this distinction?" wonders Jamal Adem.

"Why do players have numbers on the front of their shirts for international 
tournaments and when did this start?" tweets Thomas Carter.

• Send your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com 
<mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com>.
 