
Henrik Stenson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/henrik-stenson> clutched the 
Claret Jug but even then, bizarrely, it was Phil Mickelson, the old black-clad 
lefty, who dominated our attention.

Neither could the cameras bring themselves to leave him, for they love 
Mickelson as they once loved Humphrey Bogart – just don’t call him Bogey.

We love him for his expressions, of both joy and despair, his ambling gait, 
his courtesies and kindnesses. Most of all, we love his golf. And the glum 
suspicion that we may never see him again in such a circumstance made this a 
poignant as well as a thrilling occasion.

This was an epic, gladiatorial confrontation, and it felt like a matchplay 
monster more than a strokeplay tournament. The rest of the field struggled to 
keep up then, appropriately, left the stage clear for the main event.

Henrik Stenson holds off Phil Mickelson for brilliant triumph at the Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/henrik-stenson-phil-mickelson-open>
This was a face-off that will go down in Open history, golf folklore, and it 
was only at the 14th and 15th holes, as Stenson putted a straightforward one, 
right to left, and then a longer effort to move two shots ahead and within 
sight of his first major, that we started to perceive a winner.

Even then, at the 16th, Mickelson had the chance to make a 20-foot eagle, the 
sort he pulls off so often. But he failed by inches and both players made their 
birdies. There was no way back for Mickelson now against the nerveless Stenson. 
Two shots up, with two to play, it was finally all up for the older man.

Only in golf, surely, can you witness the climax of a great sporting event 
contested by a 46-year-old and a 40-year-old. No Rory or Dustin, Jordan or 
Jason, but two gnarled pros in a fierce argument for glory. But the great 
Arnold Palmer did not win a major after he was 34, and Tom Watson had his last 
great success at 33. Seve Ballesteros did not do it past 31. Tiger Woods, at 
40, is no longer competing at this rarified level.

Maybe it’s a mileage thing. Mickelson did not win his first major until he was 
almost 34. There were even people who questioned his temperamental ability to 
do it at this level until he sank a 12-footer under pressure to pick up the 
2004 Masters. This, however, was possibly the last chance he was going to get 
to win another one. Even the great Jack Nicklaus stopped winning the big ones 
at 46, after his victory in the 1986 Masters.

This is Mickelson’s 25th season of professional golf and even though he lost 
on Sunday we are entitled to call him a great player; with five majors, he is 
level with Ballesteros and one behind Nick Faldo and Lee Trevino. That’s not 
bad company.

His fitness is not in question. As he said here earlier in the tournament, he 
is in better shape now than when he was having his most successful period in 
the game, a decade ago, and hopes to play in his 11th Ryder Cup a little later 
in the year. But younger, bigger hitters have moved into the golf game.

The Open 2016: final round – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/17/the-open-2016-final-round-live>
So it is at the lower-yardage courses, such as Royal Troon, that he has his 
best chance, where he can parade his immense skills and not worry too much 
about the bludgeoning power of the young guns.

The only major he has not won is the US Open, and he missed the cut there this 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/rory-mcilroy-misses-us-open-cut-phil-mickelson-justin-rose-rickie-fowler>
. The chance may have gone. When he does retire he might contemplate becoming a 
salvage expert – not that he will need the money – for this is golf’s ultimate 
scrambler, a retriever of lost causes, a come-backer against heavy odds.

He often needs his irons and his excellent short game, for he can be 
unpredictable off the tee. The strength of his golf has always emerged as he 
has approached the green. We saw that as early as the second hole. It was only 
a par for Mickelson, but the way he chipped over the bunker towards a small 
patch of green and hit the pin was masterful. His drives, though, are a little 
more interesting.

No one does a better expression of impending doom than Mickelson when he has 
played an errant stroke. Some golfers manage to remain serene even when they 
have teed off in the direction of oblivion. But with Mickelson it’s a portrait 
of, “Oh my God, what have I done!” Think of the final shots of Bob Hoskins in 
The Long Good Friday. We saw that face on the 7th, when his tee shot appeared 
to be heading straight for a gorse bush, only to go into the crowd to give him 
an easier option.

He has been working for days such as these since he started swinging a club at 
a mirror when he was only 18 months old; he tried to run away from home at the 
age of three when he was told he was not old enough to join his father for a 
weekend golf game.

In the first six holes on Sunday we had six birdies and an eagle between the 
two. They both shot four-under 32s in the front nine and, remarkably, the 
standard did not drop as both players refused to blink. At the end he must have 
wondered how he had failed to win, how he had shot 63, 69, 70 and 65 for a 
17-under-par 267 and still not won. In his final round there were four birdies 
and an eagle and no dropped shots, just a dropped Claret Jug.

As he plucked his ball out of the final hole with a closed-mouth smile, he 
touched the peak of his cap once more to acknowledge the cheering crowd. Then 
he did so again. Then he removed it altogether and nodded in gratitude. Then he 
hugged and congratulated the remarkable Stenson.

As he left Royal Troon he took a long and lingering look. So did we.
 