
When I met Paul Cox in Sydney in late 2015, in the lead up to the release of 
his final film Force of Destiny, he was thin and wiry, picking at a muffin for 
the entirety of our hour-plus conversation.


Cox told me he no longer had an immune system. The cancer that corroded his 
first liver, leading to a last-minute transplant in 2009, had come back with a 
vengeance and hit its replacement. “That really hurt me,” he said in his 
distinct, clipped Dutch accent, quiet but fierce.


Every Australian film-maker owes something to the prolific and internationally 
renowned writer/director,who has passed away, aged 76 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/19/paul-cox-australian-film-maker-and-frequent-collaborator-with-david-wenham-dies-age-76>
. Beginning his feature film career in the mid-1970s, the Dutch-born, 
Melbourne-based artist made more than a dozen documentaries and more than 20 
features including Lonely Hearts, Innocence, Man of Flowers, Cactus, A Woman’s 
Tale, Salvation and The Nun and the Bandit.


Almost always working with very limited budgets, several financed by European 
investors, he was a huge force on the international festival circuit and 
accrued many champions at home and abroad. Among them was the American film 
critic Roger Ebert, who called Cox “one of the best directors of our time”.

Lonely Hearts rewatched – endearing misfits find love on their own terms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/07/lonely-hearts-rewatched-endearing-misfits-find-love-on-their-own-terms>
Born Paulus Henriqus Benedictus Cox in 1940 in Limburg, Holland, his first 
memories – of a Nazi invasion – stayed with him for life. One assumes they 
played a part, conscious or otherwise, in shaping his approach to telling 
stories and informing a long-running loathing of gratuitous violence. Cox’s 
films are deep, sensitively drawn and sometimes profoundly humane; clearly the 
work of a person who felt a lot and thought a lot.

The auteur was often described as the father of independent cinema in 
Australia. While such an honour is, in reality, almost always shared (George 
Miller and Byron Kennedy funded the first Mad Max completely independently, for 
example) there is no under-estimating the film-maker’s influence.

And there’s no doubt he was feisty until the end. Many people who collaborated 
with Cox speak about his big heart, his passion, his hatred of injustice. He 
certainly didn’t seem like the kind of bloke you’d want to get off-side. Cox 
never forgave, to put it lightly, the producers of 1999’s Molokai: The Story of 
Father Damien (one of several collaborations with actor David Wenham) after 
they fired him from his own film.

In post-production the producers hired Cox back after, according to him, the 
original print was tampered with beyond repair. For the record, I still think 
Molokai is a very fine film – moving and beautifully shot, with one of Wenham’s 
best performances. Perhaps the director was too close to it to recognise its 
virtues.

Cox wrote an as-yet unpublished book venting about his experiences. He even 
came close to outright blaming the producers for his death. “I think it really 
killed me on many levels,” he told me. “Suddenly I couldn’t get out of bed and 
my liver was fucked.”

The film-maker took the “write what you know about” mantra to extremes. Art 
imitates life, as they say, but in his case the causality was obvious and 
direct, closely wired to his own life and experiences.

In Force of Destiny, Wenham, like Cox, finds romance late in life after being 
diagnosed with liver cancer. After his transplant, the director met his partner 
Rosie Raka in hospital and they were together from then on. For his 2012 
documentaryThe Dinner Party <https://vimeo.com/49089259>, he invited a group of 
recipients of life-saving transplants to share a meal and reflect on their 
experiences.

Cox was inspired to make 2008’s Salvation after seeing an evangelist on TV. 
The 1984 film My First Wife (which stars John Hargreaves and Wendy Hughes and 
was co-written by Bob Ellis) is probably Australian cinema’s most powerful 
portrait of a marriage breakdown. It was based on his own.

Cactus (1986), one of Cox’s most elegant films, is about a French woman in 
Australia who becomes blind. It is dedicated to Cox’s mother, Else 
Cox-Kuminack, who also lost her sight.

In true art house/indie style, Cox’s films generally did not receive a wide 
release but mostare available on DVD 
<https://www.artfilms.com.au/item/paul-cox-film-collection>. Some are better 
than others – the director’s fondness for an improvisational style sometimes 
put slow-moving naturalism ahead of compelling writing – but when they were 
good, they were very good. His sheer output was inspiring; Cox just kept on 
pumping out quality films, putting aspects of his own life and personality on 
the line.

One of my favourites of his films is 1981’s Lonely Hearts, which stars Norman 
Kaye and Wendy Hughes as an oddball couple who meet through a dating agency. My 
experiencewriting about it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/07/lonely-hearts-rewatched-endearing-misfits-find-love-on-their-own-terms>
, for a column exploring classic Australian cinema (by complete coincidence, 
published one week before we met) will always be associated with my memories of 
Cox in person.

When I told him our interview was for The Guardian, his eyes lit up. Cox said 
that on the way to the café where we met, he got a phone call from the 
co-writer of Lonely Hearts, the veteran comedian and character actor John 
Clarke. Clarke, according to Cox, said to him “finally somebody cares”. Cox 
said his eyes immediately filled with tears.

When I told him I was the person who wrote the column, Cox went quiet for a 
moment. He placed one of his hands on mine. I don’t recall what he said. I 
don’t think he even said anything at all. The look on his face was warm and 
appreciative.

Soon after, we hugged and said goodbye. As I walked down the street, I 
remember thinking that moment marked a lovely synergy between art and the 
artist. Like his films, it was beautiful but not sentimental. It was soft but 
profound. Paul Cox will be missed.
 