
Given recent events it would not be a surprise to turn up at Wembley and see 
the Football Association chief executive, Martin Glenn, slumped at his desk 
with his head in his hands.Around the time Sam Allardyce was sealing his demise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
 over a pint of wine, Glenn had been preparing to unveil a new set of 
“strategic priorities”. Instead he found himself at the centre of another FA 
farce.

Yet beneath the fug of the latest tournament disappointment and the fallout 
from another bizarre managerial episode, the upbeat former United Biscuits 
chief executive, 18 months into his tenure, argues there are more than mere 
crumbs of comfort on offer.

This Wednesday he will be in Sheffield for the opening of the first Parklife 
hub – a plan to roll out 150 football centres across 30 cities by 2020 that it 
is hoped will catalyse a long overdue effort to upgrade woeful grassroots 
facilities in this country – and he is bubbling with enthusiasm about the 
women’s game, coach education and even the future of theEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> side.

Sam Allardyce leaves 'dream' England manager job after one game in charge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
“We know there are failings in the game, of course there are, but there are 
also a load of good things. We need to look at how we can channel the 
investment and the goodwill that is there,” he says.

But before we look to the future, Glenn knows he must deal with the recent 
past. He describes Allardyce’s departure as “very disappointing”. “He 
absolutely had the right criteria to be a successful England manager, to work 
on creating a team spirit and a team identity that I think has been lacking for 
a while,” says Glenn. “It is a tragedy that we have ended up having to part 
company with him over the, the – you know – entrapment.”

Mindful of last week’s criticism from a parliamentary committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/fa-sam-allardyce-appointment-parliamentary-committee>
, Glenn also insists the FA did the requisite due diligence on Allardyce: “What 
happened with Sam was not a skeleton leaping out of a closet. It was a 
catastrophic error of judgment.”

Allardyce’s arrival and exit followed a disastrous Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 on and off the pitch. “It’s the expectation that kills you,” says Glenn, 
smiling. “We went in with high expectations. There were no great teams, we had 
qualified really well, we had a young squad, we felt optimistic. I still think 
that with a different set of choices, with that squad we could have gone 
further.”

Although the number of Premier League players qualified to play for England 
remains stuck at around a third, here too he diverges from the pessimistic 
script of recent times.

FA accused of ‘institutional failure’ over Sam Allardyce England appointment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/fa-sam-allardyce-appointment-parliamentary-committee>
“Two generations ago we just weren’t producing technically gifted players. 
That’s different now. Doubling the player base would be great and I think that 
will happen in time because English clubs want English players to get through,” 
he says.

“But why does the shirt weigh so heavy? When was the last time we saw an 
England player play better for his country than his club? That is something 
we’ve really got to understand.”

Diagnosis is one thing but successive England managers have failed to find the 
cure.Gareth Southgate, halfway through a four-game audition, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/slovenia-england-world-cup-qualifying-match-report>
 is the latest to try.

The FA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa> will not make a decision 
until those four games are over. But whoever the new man is, the message from 
the top is clear.

“It’s always easier to blame someone else – it’s the system, it’s the clubs. 
No one’s perfect,” says Glenn. “But who is uniquely accountable for the 
preparation of players when they put the England shirt on? We are. When the 
players come to us it’s our job to figure out how to make them play better,” he 
says.

Away from the Barnum & Bailey routine of the national team, Glenn is right to 
argue that the FA is actually in better shape than it has been for some time. 
There is no looming economic crisis, for one thing.Wembley, which will welcome 
Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-monaco-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 next season, is finally becoming a contributor rather than drain on resources 
and St George’s Park is built and functioning. A new international TV rights 
deal for the FA Cup is about to be confirmed, worth more than £800m in total 
over six years – a sum that Glenn describes as “transformational” for the FA’s 
finances. There is also a sense of pragmatic cooperation with the professional 
game over issues such as a potential winter break that has long been lacking.

Sloppy England earn point in Slovenia thanks to Joe Hart’s stunning saves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/slovenia-england-world-cup-qualifying-match-report>
Glenn, a lifelong Wolves fan who spent four years on the Leicester City board 
between 2002 and 2006, can occasionally sound as if he has spent too long in 
the business books aisle. The man who killed off Captain Birdseye and signed 
Gary Lineker as the face of Walkers crisps wants the FA to feel more like John 
Lewis and less like “an average town council”.

But his instincts are the right ones. “There are a lot of good things the FA 
does that aren’t that well known. Money is important to keep driving that 
agenda – women’s football, investment in pitches, coach education work and so 
on,” he says, pointing to a painful restructuring programme designed to free up 
money to reinvest in “football heads” and a restructuring of the Wembley loans.

The flipside is that there are no excuses for Glenn either. There is a huge 
catch-up job to be done in those areas, not to mention the ongoing failure to 
drag the organisation into the 21st century and make the FA board and council 
more representative of those who play and watch the game.

In terms of grassroots investment, Glenn says the Parklife project represents 
a good start in trying to correct years of chronic under-investment. But, 
intriguingly, he says the ambition must be much bolder. “For everyone in 
England to be a 15-minute drive away from a high-quality pitch, it would be a 
big capital programme. It’s probably more than £1bn,” he says.

“Parklife will be part of that, the Football Foundation will be part of that 
but maybe we need to make a case for being a lot bolder with it. What if we 
could find a few hundred million? Could we even borrow money and accelerate 
that. You can’t just helicopter money down. You need clubs to be able to take 
advantage of it.”

He is ambitious for the women’s game, too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/25/manchester-city-v-chelsea-womens-super-league-one-live>
, promising to double the numbers playing and watching by the end of the decade 
and talking perceptively about shifting the cultural barriers that prevent 
girls from taking up football or their parents encouraging them to do so.

Manchester City Women 2-0 Chelsea Ladies: Women's Super League One - as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/25/manchester-city-v-chelsea-womens-super-league-one-live>
Yet at the same time as the government is investing alongside the FA in 
Parklife, it is also threatening to take away £30m in funding that comes 
through Sport England if it fails to overhaul the FA Council and its board to 
make it more diverse and representative.

The former chairman Greg Dyke was the latest to try to push through reforms 
that were unceremoniously rejected by the men in blazers.

But Glenn insists it would be “crazy” for the FA to push government to the 
point where the money was channelled elsewhere.

Glenn, who proudly displays his level one coaching qualification in his 
office, also accepts there is a big job to do in coach education. Here, too, he 
insists progress is being made – from the changes instituted from St George’s 
Park, which he wants to make “football’s Harvard”, to the culture in youth 
football.

It is clear that Glenn wants to deal in the art of the possible rather than 
getting bogged down in historical turf wars. He is “optimistic”, for example, 
that negotiations over a winter break will reach a conclusion – most likely 
involving the FA foregoing Cup replays in some rounds but retaining weekend 
slots.

As he prepares to depart for Germany for a meeting about video referees, Glenn 
picks up a programme for a 1963 match at Wembley between England and the Rest 
of the World. A lyrical introduction describes the culture shock when the 
magical Magyars destroyed the myth of England’s invincibility a decade earlier.

“Yet behind all this the Football Association have been true to one 
principle,” it goes on. “As the mother of all football parliaments their care 
has been for all who play football – from the merest tyro, the smallest 
schoolboy, the humblest amateur, to the lords of the art, watching over the 
rules and seeing to it that all play the game in its every sense. All these are 
tributaries that feed the broad flowing river.”

Nearly a quarter of a century since the dawn of the Premier League created 
another set of aftershocks Glenn is just the latest senior executive to wrestle 
with the fact that the FA now has plenty of responsibility but little power.

“What surprised me was how staccato the conversation was and how siloed we 
were. The FA did this, the Premier League did that and the Football League did 
that and they yelled at each other,” he says.

“The big strategic shift is seeing the FA as a not-for-profit organisation 
that can sit between highly successful commercial enterprises and try and 
harness the amount of money in the professional game to good effect. That’s a 
slightly different conception of ourselves to the past. Before the FA felt it 
had to do it all, which resulted in a lot of duplication.”

Some may see that as a retreat, others as impressively pragmatic. But Glenn 
stands a better chance than most of delivering on some of the long-term 
priorities that have consistently proved beyond an organisation that 
historically took such short-sighted decisions as banning women from playing 
and turning its back on the five-a-side game. Whether he can also find an 
England manager who can lift some of that weight from the shoulders of his 
players is another matter altogether.
 