
Taking on your own side is the hardest task in politics. We are a tribal 
species with inhibitions against giving comfort to supposed opponents. Partisan 
men and women don’t let the side down, not least because they do not want to 
find themselves on the receiving end of the special ignominy tribes reserve for 
traitors and apostates.

So deep does the desire to appear united run, social democrats pretend even 
now that “Labour is a family”, while all around themfar leftists spit abuse 
<https://medium.com/@ruthie_dee/no-longer-welcome-in-my-own-home-4672dc7a08a5#.3y5bty5as>
. As late as February David Cameron still believed Conservativescould treat 
each other with “mutual respect” 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-02-22/david-cameron-told-by-tory-mps-be-nice-to-boris/>
 , while all around him an alliance of opportunists and nationalists was 
preparing to wreck his premiership and what prosperity we have.

If historians want to understand the crisis that has dissolved the Labour 
party and our links to Europe, they should look first at the dogs that did not 
bark – the men and women who preferred to put tribal unity before the interests 
of their country, their party and their own integrity.

I first became aware of the dangers of conformity during the Iraq war. I 
supported it for what I assumed were leftish reasons. I felt honour-bound to 
show solidarity with the Kurds, who had been victims of genocidal attacks by 
Saddam Hussein. And with the Iraqi socialists and trade unionists, who suffered 
under a regime, which from its gassing of ethnic minorities, via its imposition 
of a terror state, to its cult of the supreme leader, was authentically fascist.

Everyone I knew disagreed, for the good reasons Sir John Chilcot reminded us 
of last week. That would have been that were it not for one problem. The great 
anti-war movement, so venerated by the modern left, was led by George Galloway,
a revoltingly sycophantic flatterer of Middle Eastern tyrants 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IIy_GmvUElE,>, and the Socialist Workers 
party, which had abandoned what beliefs in secularism and feminism it possessed 
andallied with the local branch of the Muslim Brotherhood 
<https://www.quilliamfoundation.org/wp/wp-content/uploads/publications/free/the-muslim-brotherhood-in-the-uk2.pdf>
.

So what, many said at the time. The monstrosity of invading a country without 
having a clue what to do next, the failure to find weapons of mass destruction, 
the toadying to a braggart of an American president and the willingness to send 
ill-equipped troops to their deaths, were provocations enough. More than enough.

Who cared about the strange alliances of the far left and far right? What did 
they matter?

They would not have mattered if the second Iraq war had been the end of it. 
But as the century progressed, everywhere you looked, you could see what we now 
call the regressive left growing. Its central tenet was that any religious 
doctrine, however reactionary, and any dictatorship, however fascistic, could 
be toleratedas long as it was anti-western.

When I and others argued against the flight from principle to double standards 
we were denounced, not just by our opponents but by the liberal-left mainstream 
we were trying to save from its own worst instincts. I am unlikely to forget 
the moment when, after I published a book on the subject, a BBC producer phoned 
to say that his idea of a balanced debate was to bring in six people to argue 
against me.

Nor can I erase from my mind learning at the New Statesman, then a wholly 
owned subsidiary of the Brownite faction, that its proprietor did not approve 
in the slightest of criticism of the regressive left. The result of the failure 
to confront the growing darkness on the left was that, whenJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> came for Labour, not one 
of his opponents had a coherent argument to oppose him with.

Where are Gordon Brown and all those other BBC-watching and New Statesman
-reading grandees of the last decade? Corbyn is destroying their party. It is 
so unable to oppose the Conservatives it cannot staff its own frontbench. While 
Labour is led by the most regressive of leftists, a supposedly “decent 
socialist” who nevertheless took money from, or provided fawning commentary 
for, thepropaganda channels of kleptomaniac, homophobic and imperialist Russia 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/jeremy-corbyn-putins-latest-useful-idiot-europe-1515028>
 andtheocratic, misogynist and homophobic Iran 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/jeremy-corbyn-paid-iran-press-tv-tortured-journalist-2016-6>
 , the Conservative right has taken the opportunity to run riot and run us out 
of the EU.

David Cameron is the Tory Brown. Like his predecessor as prime minister, he 
must look on the ruins of everything he once took for granted. He too backed 
away from a necessary confrontation when fighting might have made a difference 
– and left the rest of us to pay the price. In 2006, Cameron described Ukip 
members as “fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists”. In 2013, he retracted, 
after Boris Johnson, in one of his rare moment of honesty, pointed out that the
same words could be used 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/it-s-time-to-stop-insulting-ukip-says-david-cameron-8599079.html>
 to describe many Conservative voters and MPs. At first, Cameron could not make 
the argument for the EU because he was pretending that he was still willing to 
leave if he did not receive concessions from Brussels. Throughout the campaign 
proper, hebit his tongue for fear of provoking an irreparable split 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/05/how-remain-failed-inside-story-doomed-campaign>
 in his party.

Cameron is the Tory Brown. He must look on the ruins of everything he once 
took for granted

What did for both the European cause and the Labour party was a smug view of 
British or, more properly, English, history. We are a stable and safe society, 
it ran. We have not had a truly devastating invasion since 1066 or a civil war 
since 1660. Unlike virtually every country in Europe, we were not invaded by 
Hitler or Stalin and never had mass fascist and communist parties. This lucky 
history has been a curse as much as a blessing. It left us wholly unprepared 
for the fight against the extremists of the 21st century. We thought that they 
were just putting on an act. They could not mean what they said and, even if 
they did, they would never win.

Now they are winning and we can see the ruins of English complacency around 
us. In the Labour party at least, MPs are preparing to fight back and take the 
moral as well as the electoral case against the far left to the members. They 
suspect the Labour cause is doomed, but if they are going to go, they will go 
fighting.

I speak from experience when I say that they will be met with extraordinary 
venom. They should not worry about that. At first, you are shocked by the rage 
of your “comrades”. Then you expect it. And then you come to enjoy it. “On an 
occasion of this kind,” said Oscar Wilde, “it becomes more than a moral duty to 
speak one’s mind. It becomes a pleasure.”

Late in the day, perhaps too late, they may yet find the courage to enjoy the 
pleasure of speaking without inhibition.
 