
Whether Labor wins the electoral battle this time or not, their great victory 
of 2016 is over their old war within. For the same reason Malcolm Turnbull took 
to the stage with an election night tanty howling at the “mass ranks of the 
union movement”, Bill Shorten was right to praise“the mighty trade union 
movement” 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/workplace-relations/coalition-doubledissolution-campaign-against-unions-doomed-to-fail-20160703-gpxa7f.html>
 of Australia for what they had done for his party.

I spent election night in the “Bob Hawke Room” at the Australian Council of 
Trade Union building in Melbourne – there could be no more appropriate place to 
be reminded of the historical power of union campaigning. At a white board by 
the largest screen broadcasting the results, the ACTU’s head of campaigning, 
Sally McManus, placed ticks next to a list of seats as each fell away from the 
Coalition. The list comprised of those seats targeted by the ACTU in their 
largest ground campaign since Your Rights At Work unseated John Howard in 2007. 
The staff here have nicknamed her Field Marshal McManus.

Bill Shorten basks in the moment as Labor faithful roar his name
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/bill-shorten-basks-in-the-moment-as-labor-faithful-roar-his-name>
It’s not hard to understand their choice of language. Since the election of 
the Coalition in 2013, the conservatives’ engagement with the unions have been 
open acts of combat. There was persecution of the movement with theroyal 
commission into trade unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-trade-union-governance-and-corruption>
. Attempts to smash the CFMEU by reintroducing the union-busting star-chambers 
of theAustralian Building and Construction Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/18/australia-set-for-double-dissolution-poll-on-2-july-after-senate-rejects-abcc-bill>
. The “Registered Orgs” legislation that forces restrictions of activity on 
non-government organisations.

The response of the unions to these, however, was not to be drawn into brawls 
on Tory turf in the courts or to merely lobby Labor in pleas for their 
survival. In perhaps the most powerful realisation of this election cycle, the 
union leadership saw the Coalition assault on their ability to organise for 
what it was – an attempt to destroy their structural protection of wages and 
conditions for all workers, and to blunt the protection provided by powerful 
health, education, public sector, construction and electricity unions to the 
public systems both Abbott and Turnbull were visibly working to defund and 
dismantle.

Led by one-time lift mechanic, Dave Oliver and career nurse, Ged Kearney, the 
movement doubled down on its strongest resource – its active membership – to 
fight for the values of Australian egalitarianism understood within it. The 
Australian called the 16,000 union volunteers co-ordinated by McManus in a 
campaign that targeted 22 seats, the “ACTU secret army”, even though the 
door-knocks, street stalls, phone banks, sit-ins and street theatre it engaged 
in for an entire year before the election were anything but covert.

I myself marched with the army alongside hospitality workers demanding the 
right to penalty rates in Hobart, staked out the lawn of Parliament House in 
Canberra with seafarers demanding the protection of local jobs, sat down in the 
Sydney streets with truck drivers campaigning for the return of safe rates of 
pay, enjoyed a picnic for equal pay with early childhood educators in Melbourne 
and joined the sad May Day march in Toowoomba grieving the loss of an 
18-year-old kid killed in an industrial accident doing work-for-the-dole.

The ACTU and its affiliates hitting the streets for community values was the 
most effective reversal of electoral orthodoxy in a generation. This was no 
cheque drafted to theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> from the union 
movement to represent their interests; it was an investment made by the 
movement into a public conversation about fairness, opportunity and community 
that Labor – in an act of recognition that could yet rescue it from a 
brand-damaging two decades of post-Keating ideological fuzziness – realised it 
could, should, must embrace and would be politically crazy to not heed.

Because what has been exposed by every phenomenon of this particular election 
is that the neoliberal “economic rationalist” ideology that once romanced the 
Labor party and now holds the Liberal-National Coalition in its thrall, is a 
belief system the Australian electorate do not like.

Labor, at least, has realised that policies that hand money to big 
corporations in tax cuts, increase casualisation, offshore jobs, privatise 
public infrastructure and slash spending on welfare and services long alienated 
the party from its social base – and I know I’m not alone in believing it’s why 
Labor’s primary vote has taken such a kicking over these last years. Labor’s
Chris Bowen admitted as much himself on Q&A on Monday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/05/qa-recap-night-of-soul-searching-over-post-election-quest-for-stability>
.

“We’re seeing the rise of the disenfranchised and disillusioned, people who 
feel left out,” he said. “People feel they are not getting the benefits of 
economic growth because, in many instances, they are not.”

But these unpopular policies are the very definition of what Turnbull and the 
Liberals took to the election – and they’re impossible to spruik honestly to 
working class voters in any electoral ground game. It’s why disaffected social 
conservatives are easy pickings for Hanson, why the centre-right has drifted to 
the protectionist Xenophon, and why the Liberals desperately tried to summon 
distractions out of non-economic issues like terrorists and boat people 
throughout their long campaign.

Cory Bernardi and the Liberals are right to be scared of Labor's volunteer 
army | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/06/election-2016-cory-bernardi-liberals-labor-volunteer-army>
Yet it’s also how unions and Labor were able to bring a first-term government 
with rich corporate backers, millions to spend and a once-shining wonderboy 
leader to its electoral knees. In the 22 seats the unions campaigned in on the 
explicit issues of fairness, penalty rates, education, healthcare, public 
infrastructure the average swing away from the government was 5.5%. The gains 
were in younger, lower-income and working class electorates where voters 
finally heard someone they knew and recognised speaking to what was of value in 
their own lives.

As I write this, the whiteboard at the ACTU has 12 seat wins marked, and there 
remains confidence that more are still going to fall.

And the big revelation here is there’s a reason the right want to demonise and 
destroy the unions, and why right-leaning commentators in this country have 
spent so many years pooh-poohing union involvement in Labor.

It’s because those people don’t want Labor to win – and certainly not on the 
values of public ownership of infrastructure, equality of opportunity, economic 
fairness and equity in the workplace, that are a trade union movement’s 
demands. They want a cowed opponent. Instead, they’re facing a “war room”, 
field marshals and an union army with a new electoral energy, it seems, for the 
political battles ahead.
 