
Christian leaders met with the ABC managing director, Michelle Guthrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/michelle-guthrie>, on Wednesday to protest 
against the broadcaster’s decision to cut religious programming.

Guthrie is under pressure from staff and lobby groups as news leaks out about 
what television and radio shows are for the chopping block, a period of time 
referred to internally as “the killing season”.

The national director of the Uniting Church, the Reverend Elenie Poulos, the 
Baptist minister Tim Costello and the Catholic priest Father Frank Brennan were 
among the faith leaders who talked to Guthrie and the ABC’s director of radio, 
Michael Mason, about their concerns.

ABC boss Michelle Guthrie muddles her answers – then wields the axe | Amanda 
Meade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/04/abc-boss-michelle-guthrie-muddles-her-answers-then-wields-the-axe>
Guardian Australian understands the decision to end Sunday Nights with John 
Cleary <http://www.abc.net.au/radio/programs/sundaynights/>, a 15-year-old 
religion and ethics program broadcast nationally on local radio, has already 
been made.

Changes to ABC radio – which are likely to also include cuts to Radio 
National’s music programming – are to be announced next week.

The meeting coincides with the arrival this week of Judith Whelan, a former 
editor of the Sydney Morning Herald, to take up her new role as the head of 
spoken content at ABC Radio.

Whelan a print journalist who has no experience in radio, will oversee the 
capital city radio network, Radio National and the sports network Grandstand.

The axing of Sunday Night comes a week after another specialist program area – 
science – was gutted and17 positions were made redundant after the cancellation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/31/catalyst-staff-to-be-sacked-and-weekly-tv-show-format-scrapped>
 of the weekly magazine-style Catalyst program.

Poulos said the faith leaders had asked for the meeting with Guthrie because 
they were concerned about possible cuts to local radio and also about the 
possible decline in the quality of religious coverage, which they feared would 
deteriorate into “religious-light” programming.

“We had a meeting in May last year with Mark Scott and the chairman, Jim 
Spigelman, and we got assurances of their commitment to religion,” Poulos said 
after the meeting. “But we are seeing it play out in a different way.


Poulos said the group had been told there would be “no net cuts overall”.

“Now more than ever we need a well-informed and well-supported conversation 
about religion and society and we need spaces where those conversations are 
well informed and the analysis is deep,” Poulos said. “There is no other 
dedicated religious coverage and we really rely on the ABC for that.”

ABC head Michelle Guthrie plays curly questions with a straight bat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/18/abc-head-michelle-guthrie-plays-curly-questions-with-a-straight-bat>
Sunday Nights has been broadcast nationally since 2001 and provides a forum to 
discuss topical issues to do with religion, ethics, spirituality, values and 
social issues. It is understood that Cleary, a veteran ABC broadcaster, has 
been offered another position at Radio National. The half-hour Religious and 
Ethics program on the station is expected to return in 2017. The religious TV 
program Compass – now the ABC’s only in-house production – is also expected to 
survive next year.

Two years ago a $254m cut by the Coalition government to the ABC budget led to 
job losses in the religion and ethics department. At the time Cleary warned the 
religious programs were vulnerable because the bulk of the unit’s resources 
were gone.

Sources say Radio National is facing even bigger changes next year as it moves 
towards a digital-first strategy and away from a linear broadcasting model. 
More content is now being made with an online audience in mind.

“In 2017, RN will embody digital content creation from the beginning, through 
to the end, with all our content,” a confidential briefing document says.

“This will coexist with a high regard for our linear audience. An increased 
investment in digital will help us reach younger and more diverse Australian 
audiences.

“And we’ll do this by concentrating on the kind of distinctive content that, 
in the ecosystem of the ABC, RN can provide. We will be an ‘ideas network’ that 
produces world-class specialist and topical content that’s engaging and 
accessible, and ensure our genre experts appear across a wide range of 
platforms and channels.”

On Thursday an ABC spokeswoman said the broadcaster welcomed in the input from 
faith leaders: “Yesterday’s meeting was a frank and confidential discussion 
with religious leaders from a variety of faiths about ABC strategies and 
challenges.

“The ABC welcomed the dialogue and looks forward to extending it into next 
year and beyond. There are some changes planned.”

 