
Undocumented fishermen working on Irish trawlers and their boat owners have 
been given a final chance to regularise their position this month as the Irish 
government extended the deadline for them to apply for anew permit scheme 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/global-development/2015/nov/20/migrant-workers-irish-fishing-industry-to-get-permits-minimum-wage>
 amid fears that take-up has been too low.


An emergency taskforce 
<http://www.agriculture.gov.ie/media/migration/publications/2015/TaskForceReport141215.pdf>
 was set up by the cabinet last year to tackle the illegal use of Asian and 
African migrants in the Irish fleet, following a Guardian investigation. The 
Irish government said in February that it would issue up to 500 specially 
created work permits for fishermen from outside the European Economic Area 
(EEA) after allegations that they were being exploited as cheap labour.


Ireland’s Department of Justice said on Wednesday that only 107 applications 
had been granted. Meanwhile there were reports of migrant fishermen who had 
worked in the state illegally for years being dumped by boat owners. There was 
also confusion about how and when the authorities would enforce the new 
arrangements.


Senior figures in the industry had predicted that at least 1,000 work permits 
would be needed to ensure the protection of all non-EEA fishermen who were 
estimated to be working in the Irish fleet.

“Take-up has not been as strong as I would have thought,” said Francis 
O’Donnell, the chief executive of the Irish Fish Producers’ Organisation. “It 
should have been higher.” He added that there had been an increase in the 
numbers of eastern European fishermen, who do not need work permits, in Irish 
ports.


Fishermen who have a work permit will be guaranteed the national minimum wage 
of €9.15 (£7) an hour. Before applying, they must havea year-long contract 
certified by a solicitor 
<http://www.inis.gov.ie/en/INIS/Pages/atypical-scheme-fishing-crew> and agreed 
with the boat owner. They also need to have completed the mandatory Irish basic 
safety training. The taskforce initially said owners would have to pay full 
private health insurance; the Department of Jobs says it has now dropped this 
requirement and the Department of Health has confirmed that permit holders will 
be eligible for publicly funded healthcare.


Some workers who have applied for permits have welcomed the scheme because it 
will give them the freedom to travel. “I am very happy,” said one fisherman who 
asked to remain anonymous. The owner of the boat he is working on has agreed to 
pay all the costs of the application. “I have not been home for five years and 
I only see my family on Skype. My plan is to go home this Christmas.”


Eibhlin O’Sullivan, a solicitor in Cork who is processing work permits, said 
some of the non-EEA fishermen working off the southern coast of Ireland said 
they intend to return to their families for a holiday if their permits are 
issued. “I’ve seen a wide array of nationalities apply,” she added. “Egyptians, 
Indonesians, Filipinos, Ukrainians, Ghanaians, Sri Lankans – it’s been a 
geography lesson for me. It’s quite surprising.”


Another Cork-based solicitor, Dermot Conway, said he had dealt with more than 
100 applications from non-EEA fishermen, including Egyptians, Indonesians and 
Nigerians, and that the process had mostly been smooth. “There have been a 
couple of hiccups with crew members who had gone away, attempted to regularise 
their position through other ways, and in large part the Department of Justice 
is trying to deal with that.”


While welcoming the extension to the scheme, Migrant Rights Centre Ireland 
said some migrant fishermen seeking permits have been dumped by their 
employers. “Some boat owners are refusing to enter into the scheme,” said the 
centre’s rights co-ordinator, Gráinne O’Toole. “We have found some workers who 
have looked for their employers to help them apply for this scheme, and they 
were then let go.”


This view was echoed by the Cork migrant support centre Nasc. Its chief 
executive, Fiona Finn, said: “There has been poor uptake of the regularisation 
scheme for migrant fishermen who are undocumented in the state. Their employers 
were unwilling to cooperate. As a result a whole cohort of the most vulnerable 
and exploited migrant fishermen have been locked out of this scheme.”


The sailors’ union, the International Transport Workers’ Federation (ITF) 
<http://www.itfseafarers.org/about.cfm>, has visited five ports in recent weeks 
and said take-up was poor, with some boat owners refusing to pay the extra it 
would cost to employ non-EEA crew legally on the minimum wage. Several workers 
reported having been summarily dismissed by owners when they asked to apply for 
permits, according to ITF’s co-ordinator for Ireland, Ken Fleming.


In December, the government said state enforcement agencies would provide a 
“rigorous and effective inspection system” before the scheme commenced. But 
O’Toole expressed concerns that if the authorities uncover undocumented 
fishermen, it will be the workers who face penalties rather than the 
unscrupulous boat owners.

“Compliance is an issue. Our main concern is that workers are not penalised by 
the failure of their employers to apply,” she said. “We want them to be 
protected.”

One boat owner, who wished to remain anonymous, said that once the authorities 
begin to inspect the trawlers for permits it will become “too risky” for owners 
to employ undocumented fishermen. 


Responsibility for inspecting trawlers and enforcing Irish law falls between 
several bodies and the taskforce recommended they all sign a memorandum of 
understanding about how the scheme would be policed. 

Until last week the Department of Transport’s Marine Survey Office, which 
employs boat inspectors, had refused to sign it. They were strongly criticised 
by Labour Senator Ged Nash who was involved in the taskforce last November when 
he was a government minister. “The MSO were outrageously unhelpful and gave 
every reason as to why they could not enforce the new regime,” he said. 

The deadline for the scheme has been extended until the end of June, after 
which only fishermen living outside Ireland can apply.







 