
Australia’s chief scientist, Alan Finkel, has said investment in the 
electricity sector has stalled because of “policy instability and uncertainty” 
– and he’s warned that current federal climate policy settings will not allow 
Australia to meet its emissions reduction targets under the Paris agreement.

In a 58-page report that has been circulated before Friday’s Council of 
Australian Governments meeting between the prime minister and the premiers, 
Finkel has also given implicit endorsement to an emissions intensity trading 
scheme for the electricity industry to help manage the transition to 
lower-emissions energy sources.

While there is no concrete recommendation to that effect, the report, obtained 
by Guardian Australia, references the evidence from energy regulators that such 
a scheme would integrate best “with the electricity market’s pricing and risk 
management framework” and “had the lowest economic costs and the lowest impact 
on electricity prices”.

South Australia says states could go it alone after Turnbull rules out carbon 
tax
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/south-australia-says-states-could-go-it-alone-after-turnbull-rules-out-carbon-tax>
Finkel also notes advice from the Climate Change Authority which says market 
mechanisms have the lowest average cost of abatement, and of the options 
modelled, an emissions intensity scheme “had the lowest impact on average 
residential electricity prices”.

The positive commentary from the chief scientist cuts directly across 
political arguments the Turnbull government has made sincedumping its nascent 
attempt to use the review of the Direct Action policy to explore an intensity 
trading scheme for electricity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/josh-frydenberg-backtracks-on-emissions-trading-comments>
 – equating carbon pricing with higher power prices for consumers.

The Finkel report was commissioned by the energy and environment minister, 
Josh Frydenberg, at the last meeting of state and federal energy ministers, 
which followed the political controversy that erupted after South Australia
endured a statewide blackout in September. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/28/south-australia-braces-for-storm-that-could-be-most-severe-in-50-years>

The Turnbull government has wanted to use the much-anticipated report as a 
springboard to wind back state-based renewable energy targets, which it says 
are making the electricity market less secure.

But while noting renewables present ongoing challenges to network stability, 
challenges that have to be carefully managed, Finkel has pointedly warned the 
federal government its current climate policy is inadequate as it stands.

He also makes the point that a lack of clarity at a federal level about policy 
and regulatory settings can also affect network security and prices for 
consumers.

Finkel’s report says the relatively short horizon of federal climate policy, 
coupled with the Abbott government’s attack on the federal renewable energy 
target, has put investment in abeyance.

“There is evidence that investment in the electricity sector has stalled and 
investors have become less responsive to investment signals,” the report says. 
“This is due to policy instability and uncertainty driven by numerous reviews 
into the renewable energy target and a lack of clarity about the policies to 
reduce emissions after 2020.”

“Investment in renewable energy dropped by 52% between 2013 and 2014 and has 
not yet recovered to the level required to satisfy the RET [renewable energy 
target].”

Finkel says there is a pressing need for clarity in policy to unlock 
much-needed investment in the national electricity market, and he says if the 
clarity fails to materialise, electricity prices will rise for consumers, and 
energy security will become more of an issue.

“For businesses to take risks on the future and invest, they need to be 
confident that emissions reduction policies and the mechanisms to achieve them 
are consistent with Australia’s international commitments and will not change 
drastically in the future.”

“Because of the long-term nature of electricity sector investments, investment 
confidence depends strongly on long-term policy signals.”

“The lack of predictability in the electricity sector creates uncertainty 
around which generation and network assets investors should either invest in or 
divest from.”

“If businesses do not invest when needed, this will impact on the security and 
reliability of electricity supply.”

He also says explicitly the current climate policy, which includes Direct 
Action, the RET, and the national energy productivity plan, will not guarantee 
Australia meets its Paris commitments. “While the electricity sector must play 
an important role in reducing emissions, current policy settings do not provide 
a clear pathway to the level of reduction required to meet Australia’s Paris 
commitments,” the report says.

Finkel says the RET is designed to achieve an increase in large-scale 
renewable energy generation to 2020 “but not beyond”. “The policy also ends in 
2030, meaning that projects commencing in 2020 will need to recover their 
capital costs over only a 10-year period.”

He says the Direct Action policy has focused predominantly on land-sector 
abatement, with very few projects seeking to improve the efficiency of 
electricity consumption.

Finkel says the safeguard mechanism “is not calibrated to drive emissions 
reduction”.

The Turnbull government on Monday flagged an emissions intensity trading scheme
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/direct-action-review-coalition-leaves-carbon-trading-option-open>
 for the electricity sector as part of its scheduled review of its Direct 
Action climate policy.

But the overture was dumped when Frydenberg folded in the face of internal 
pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/malcolm-turnbull-direct-action-carbon-trading-climate-change>
 – a decision which has been widely criticised as short sighted and 
counterproductive by business, the energy industry and climate groups.

Friday’s Coag meeting will also hear a push from the South Australian 
government to revive emissions trading in the wake ofthe Turnbull government’s 
decision to preemptively rule it out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/josh-frydenberg-backtracks-on-emissions-trading-comments>
.

But the push from the premier, Jay Weatherill, appears unlikely to secure 
unanimous support from other state governments.

South Australia has been leading the charge on an emissions trading scheme for 
the electricity sector for some months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/03/south-australia-seeks-to-put-emissions-intensity-trading-scheme-in-play>
, but New South Wales rebuffed the push on Thursday. The Labor governments in 
Victoria and Queensland have also backed away from carbon pricing in favour of 
beefing up their state renewables policies.

What an extraordinary, gutless capitulation by Josh Frydenberg | Katharine 
Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/what-an-extraordinary-gutless-capitulation-by-josh-frydenberg>
Before Friday’s talks, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> continued efforts 
to equate carbon pricing with higher electricity prices, and he revived 
previous criticism of the South Australian government’s positive disposition to 
renewable energy.

“What South Australia is doing is putting at risk the jobs of South 
Australians, the prospects of South Australian business. Jay Weatherill’s 
approach to energy has been condemned by the business community in South 
Australia, they’re appalled,” Turnbull told 3AW on Thursday.

“Major industrial centres – Whyalla, mines, Nyrstar mine and so forth – have 
had to close down because they don’t get reliable power,” he said. “The South 
Australian Labor government has delivered an absolute double whammy of not 
being able to keep the lights on and having the most expensive electricity in 
Australia.”

But the Labor leader, Bill Shorten, blasted Turnbull for his conduct over the 
course of the week. “Malcolm Turnbull is demonstrating that he is under 
pressure, that he is lashing out, and that now he is making terrible decisions 
about the future of climate change and what governments can do about it,” 
Shorten said.

“Malcolm Turnbull has been muted on taking proper action on climate change. He 
has been gagged from talking about the solutions we need to tackle harmful 
carbon pollution.”

“This week has become the sickest joke of climate change policy since Malcolm 
Turnbull got elected.”
 