
The first British baby made with the DNA of three people could be born next 
year after the UK’s fertility regulator gave the green light for clinics to 
seek licences for the procedure.

The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) announced on Thursday 
that it would accept applications from clinics wanting to offer the 
controversial therapy after it met to consider the latest scientific evidence 
for the safety of the procedure.

. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=03ca412e-eb69-4be1-945b-b98568b9754f>
The regulator’s decision was described as “a momentous and historic step” by 
Adam Balen, chairman of the British Fertility Society, and comes nearly two 
years after parliament voted to legalise the procedure.

Doctors in Newcastle are ready to offer the experimental treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/30/uk-doctors-to-seek-permission-to-create-baby-with-dna-from-three-people-mitochondrial-replacement-therapy>
, called mitochondrial replacement therapy (MRT), to women whose faulty DNA 
puts them at risk of passing on devastating genetic diseases to their children. 
They intend to apply for a licence immediately and could begin treating 
patients as early as spring 2017.

Mary Herbert, professor of reproductive biology at the Newcastle Fertility 
Centre, said specialists at the clinic would apply for a licence to offer the 
treatment as soon as the HFEA made it possible for applications to be uploaded. 
“We’re delighted. This is a huge triumph for the research, for the regulatory 
process in the UK, and most importantly for all the families who are affected. 
We have everything ready to go,” she told the Guardian.

MRT was developed to help women with mutations in the DNA of their 
mitochondria to have healthy babies. Mitochondria are tiny battery-like 
structures that sit inside cells and provide energy for the tissues. Cells can 
have hundreds of mitochondria which are passed on solely from mother to child.


About one in 10,000 newborns are affected by mitochondrial disease. Many of 
these children die young, as the mutations cause the brain, heart, muscles and 
other energy-demanding tissues to fail.

“Today’s historic decision means that parents at very high risk of having a 
child with a life-threatening mitochondrial disease may soon have the chance of 
a healthy, genetically-related child. This is life-changing for those 
families,” said Sally Cheshire, chair of the HFEA. “We feel now is the right 
time to carefully introduce this new treatment in the limited circumstances 
recommended by the panel.”

MRT aims to prevent mitochondrial diseases from being passed on by replacing 
the defective mitochondria in a mother’s egg with healthy mitochondria from a 
donor. The resulting baby would inherit the full set of 46 chromosomes from its 
mother and father – it is this DNA that defines their appearance and other 
characteristics – but have the healthy donor’s mitochondria. The donor has no 
legal rights over the child.

The Newcastle team aims to apply for a licence in the next 24 hours that, if 
approved, would allow the clinic to offer the procedure. They must then submit 
a second licence application to perform the procedure on a particular patient 
who has decided to go ahead with the treatment. For each patient the doctors 
want to treat, a fresh licence is needed.

Women with faulty mitochondria already have a number of options if they want 
to have children. They can adopt, or have IVF with healthy donor eggs. If they 
wish to have genetically-related children, they can either take the risk of 
natural birth, or have IVF with a screening procedure called pre-implantation 
genetic diagnosis (PGD). This can help doctors to select embryos with the 
fewest mutations, but it cannot help when all of a woman’s embryos are affected.

While MRT could be a good alternative for some women, the treatment is not 
without its own risks. Studies suggest that small amounts of mutated DNA which 
remain in the treated embryo can sometimes bounce back and potentially scupper 
the therapy.
. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/3person_embryos-zip/giv-3902zp57IQYSPtET/>
The procedure also raises ethical concerns. Because the genetic manipulation 
affects all of the cells in the embryo, it will affect the eggs or sperm the 
child. This means that any harmful side-effects of the treatment could not only 
appear in the treated child, but in their children too.

Doug Turnbull, director of the Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research at 
Newcastle University, said his team aimed to treat 25 carefully-selected women 
a year to reduce their risk of passing on genetic diseases. The patients will 
all receive counselling and have other family planning options explained to 
them. Any children born from MRT will have full medical follow-up.

 “We are delighted by today’s decision as it paves the way to offering 
mitochondrial donation as part of an NHS-funded package of care for families 
affected by mitochondrial DNA disease,” Turnbull said.

Frances Flinter, professor in clinical genetics at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS 
Foundation Trust, said: “This is wonderful news for families who have, in some 
cases, waited years or even generations for the chance of having a healthy 
baby. Mitochondrial disorders can be very serious, progressive conditions and 
some couples know that they will never be able to have a healthy child of their 
own without trying this new therapeutic approach.”

The first patients to have MRT in Britain could have babies before the end of 
2017. They will not be the first three-person babies in the world. Earlier this 
year,a US team announced the birth of a baby boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/27/worlds-first-baby-born-using-dna-from-three-parents>
 after doctors performed the treatment at a clinic in Mexico. Tests on the 
child suggest that the treatment reduced the amount of mutated DNA he inherited 
to a level that should not cause disease. But doctors will not know for certain 
until he is much older. The same clinic is now planning to treat 20 more women 
in the first half of next year.

While the HFEA opted for a “cautious go-ahead”, some felt the regulator was 
not being cautious enough. Trevor Stammers, a bioethicist at the Catholic St 
Mary’s University in London, said a truly cautious approach would wait to see 
if the child born in Mexico developed normally. “Caution would surely warrant 
waiting to see if the boy stays free of disease,” he said.

But Robert Meadowcroft, CEO of Muscular Dystrophy UK, added: “Families have, 
understandably, had to wait through years of thorough ethical, safety and 
public reviews. We know of many women who have faced heartache and tragedy, and 
the sorrow of stillbirths, while trying to start their own family, and this 
decision gives them new hope and choice for the first time. We recognise this 
approach is not without some uncertainty, and, in any trial, success cannot be 
guaranteed. However, it is important that women are able to make informed 
choices by understanding the risks and the potential benefits.”

 