
A Republican presidential elector has become the first to announce that he 
intends to defect fromDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> when he casts his vote as 
part of the electoral college, vowing to try and block the president-elect from 
reaching the White House.

Writing in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/opinion/why-i-will-not-cast-my-electoral-vote-for-donald-trump.html?action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=opinion-c-col-left-region&region=opinion-c-col-left-region&WT.nav=opinion-c-col-left-region>
, Christopher Suprun has declared that he will break ranks with his fellow 
Republican electors in Texas and cast his vote for a GOP candidate whom he 
deems to be more fit for highest office. He argues that under the electoral 
college system he has the constitutional duty to vote according to his 
conscience, not just according to party loyalty – and his conscience tells him 
that Trump is unfit for the presidency.

Citing the Federalist Papers, the historic documents that laid out the 
principles behind the electoral college system, Surprun, who as a firefighter 
was one of the first responders to the Pentagon on 9/11, says that each elector 
must decide whether “candidates are qualified, not engaged in demagogy, and 
independent from foreign influence … Mr Trump urged violence against protesters 
at his rallies during the campaign. He speaks of retribution against his 
critics.”

He adds: “I owe no debt to a party. I owe a debt to my children to leave them 
a nation they can trust.”

Suprun’s declared defection from Trump marks the first time that a Republican 
has broken ranks in this election cycle to become what is known as a “faithless 
elector”. Up to now only Democratic electors within states won by Hillary 
Clinton have expressed the intention to vote against party affiliation as a 
form of protest against Trump’s imminent ascendancy to the White House.

Until Suprun’s defection, seven of the 538 electors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/faithless-electors-electoral-college-donald-trump>
 across the country had indicated that they intended to become faithless 
electors by breaking ranks with party affiliation. However, they were all 
Democrats within states won by Clinton.

Under the electoral system laid down by the founding fathers, US presidents 
are not chosen directly by the popular vote of the American people. Instead, 
they are elected indirectly by 538 electors who selected by the political 
parties within each state.

In contemporary America, it is widely assumed that the electors will simply 
vote according to their party affiliation in tune with which candidate won 
their state. Thus inTexas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>, which 
has been assigned 38 of the 538 electoral college votes, it was assumed that 
all 38 electors would vote for Trump who beat Clinton in the state by 52% to 
43%.

However, one of the Texan electors, Art Sisneros, has already resigned from 
the state’s electoral college delegation on grounds that Trump does not satisfy 
his religious and moral principles. Now Suprun says that he will go further – 
he will show up on 19 December when the electoral college assembles in each 
state and actually cast his ballot against Trump, by writing in an alternative 
Republican candidate of the likes of John Kasich, the governor of Ohio.

“I believe electors should unify behind a Republican alternative, an honorable 
and qualified man or woman such as Gov John Kasich of Ohio,” he writes.

The idea that several of the 538 electors might take it into their own hands 
to attempt to sway the outcome of an election that involved more than 127 
million voters has proven to be quite contentious. Some have taken the view 
that it is in itself a deeply retrograde and undemocratic step; others have 
lauded it as exposing the implicit undemocratic nature of the electoral college 
itself that imposes an indirect barrier between presidential candidate and 
people.

Either way, few expect that this year’s rebellion of electors will have any 
definitive impact on the outcome of the race. Though it looks like being 
historically large in number, it is most unlikely to tip the balance of 
electors from Trump to Clinton, who currently hold 306 to 232 electoral votes 
respectively.

Suprun’s breach with convention has been brewing for some time. In August, he 
told Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/08/donald-trump-electoral-college-texas-chris-suprun-227422>
 that he was so worried about Trump’s candidacy that he was contemplating the 
move.

His defection was welcomed by fellow faithless electors on the Democratic 
side. Bret Chiafolo, a cofounder of the group known as Hamilton electors who 
believe members of the electoral college must vote according to their 
conscience as set out by the founding fathers, said that Suprun was acting as a 
true patriot.

“He is showing that there are patriots of all stripes left in this country, 
that if all sorts of people can set aside their party divisions we still have 
hope of saving this country from a demagogue,” said Chiafolo. He is an elector 
in Washington state, which was won by Clinton, but he intends to vote against 
her in a protest move directed firmly against Trump.
 