
The future is here and it works. Importantly, it is not a conservative future. 
Boulder, Colorado, is not as famous as San Francisco or even Palo Alto – but 
this city of some 100,000, where the high plains end and the Rocky Mountains 
begin, is the leading American urban area of the 21st century. It is a 
bewildering alchemy of 1960s hippy culture, frontier technologies, thoughtful 
urban planning and burgeoning service jobs ranging from diet counselling to 
advanced road bike maintenance. Boulder has become the exemplar of how rich and 
satisfying urban life can be. It is also a Democrat stronghold.

It has been voted the US’s brainiest city, its happiest city, the country’s 
foodiest place and the number one city for health. It is a standing reproach to 
Donald Trump, and indeed Britain’s rightwing Brexiteers who ape his thinking. 
The place is booming around values and principles to which they are hostile – 
but attracting families, entrepreneurs and innovators from all round the US 
because it is such a delightful place in which to live and work.

Who wants to be in neighbourhoods that incorporate the values of Trump-style 
populists or their first cousins, the Brexiteers, where intolerance and 
hostility to others are the new normal? One Boulderite told me that after her 
five-year-old started using Trump’s turns of phrase she now turns off the TV 
when he appears – she wants her daughter to be no part of anything he 
represents. No presidential candidate should say of his woman rival “ if she 
can’t satisfy her husband, what makes her think she can satisfy America” or of 
a heckler: “I’d like to punch him in the face.” Five-year-olds pick up on such 
language fast.

For Boulder above all is tolerant, the precondition for embracing the new – 
the cultural legacy of the hippy colonies who came here in the 60s. It doesn’t 
regard climate change and concern for the environment as leftwing conspiracies, 
as Trump says “bullshit, tax and a canard”: it does all it can to make its city 
liveable – it was the first US city to levy a carbon tax in 2007. And while 
there is a vibrant entrepreneurial culture, nobody is so stupid as to think 
it’s the result of being freed from suffocating government and regulation, as 
the ultra right insist. Whether it’s the national agencies investigating 
quantum mechanics, the atmosphere, technology standards or astrophysics, 
Boulder is living proof of the thesis that wealth is co-created – between the 
public and private sectors.

There are objections aplenty. Even fully paid-up admirers acknowledge that the 
place is a bit too pleased with itself. Trump would doubtless dismiss Boulder 
as the people’s republic, scorning its efforts as political correctness gone 
mad: these are Bernie Sanders Democrats. Others would argue that too much from 
which Boulder benefits – its beauty, its access to one of the great open air 
wildernesses in the world, its plethora of high-tech public agencies that have 
attracted so many companies and its counter-cultural legacy – are all one-offs 
that can’t be generalised into wider economic and social policies. Boulder 
itself is worried it is becoming a prisoner of its own success: house prices 
are soaring, for instance, and how does it ensure that the wealth is shared 
around?

And yet. With so much pessimism that the west’s economic model is broken, with 
economies bifurcating into a superclass of highly qualified high-tech 
professionals presiding over the mass of the population whose jobs are being 
automated and whose real wages are falling, Boulder and many towns like it 
provide hope that it can be different.

The US’s future, no more than Britain’s, is not going to be relaunched on 
millions of blue-collar jobs in factories, even if Trump extends 500% tariffs 
to all Chinese manufacturing imports, renegotiates every US trade deal and 
forcibly repatriates 11 million illegal immigrants. The industrialised world is 
in the middle of an unprecedented digital revolution that is reinventing the 
way goods are made and services delivered: blaming the Chinese for “raping our 
country” is not to confront the reality that manufacturing in the future is 
becoming ever more robotised – machines making machines.

Moreover, as Martin Ford argues in The Rise of the Robots, robotisation is 
coming to white-collar work too: the thinking computer is in its infancy but 
already it can figure out standard legal agreements and even write articles in 
newspapers. Journalists and lawyers are as much at risk as truck drivers and 
factory workers. To compel Apple to make every iPhone in the US, Trump’s answer 
to the challenge, is to miss completely the scale and profundity of what is 
happening .

Which is why Sanders has done so well. You can either pull up the drawbridge, 
build 2,000- mile long walls and blame everything on foreigners – or try to 
shape the forces unleashed by digitalisation so they benefit everyone, which 
requires much more decisive and proactive public intervention than even Hillary 
Clinton contemplates. After all, there is plenty of wealth and infinite human 
need to be satisfied: what is required is to ensure the wealth is more evenly 
distributed. It’s not only the rich who want to eat great food, hike along 
trails, wear attractive clothes, stretch their minds, stop worrying, live 
sustainably and not be lonely: it is everyone – and the jobs of the future lie 
in meeting these myriad needs. Some will even be done by immigrants.

But this requires overhauling the way the US finances its infrastructure and 
nurtures its people. The country needs to repurpose its companies so they serve 
great needs rather than hoard $1.7tn in cash overseas. It can’t allow its 
bridges, damns, tunnels, roads and water systems to decay in front of its eyes 
for fear of levying the taxes to pay for better. It can’t permit its cities to 
become hazards to health and wellbeing. It must house its people. Public policy 
cannot be organised around looking after the interests of plutocrats: wealth 
creation requires well-funded public agencies alongside repurposed companies, 
together with consumers with the capacity to express their personal needs. It 
is time to tax – and time to spend.

Trump will address none of that: Barry Goldwater 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/obituary-barry-goldwater-1156920.html>
 began a rightwing insurgency 50 years ago. It will be Trump’s destiny to end 
it. He is opposed to all the good that a city like Boulder represents, and 
whose success – with the right national policies – could be reproduced more 
widely. In elections, the candidate who can own the future wins. Trump cannot 
own Boulder, or any of the culture or values that make it what it is. The US 
may flirt with Trump, but ultimately it will vote for more Boulders. It’s the 
only possible future.
 