
Cursed as they are with strikers currently struggling to hit a cow’s backside 
with a banjo, West Ham are in the market for some goal-getters, and the Daily 
Telegraph describes their plan to lure eitherAnthony Martial or Marcus Rashford 
to the London Stadium on loan from Manchester United as “ambitious”.

The fact that neither player regularly features in United’s starting 11 
appears to have tempted West Ham to chance their arm. The Chelsea strikerMichy 
Batshuayi, Sassuolo’s Grégoire Defrel and Porto’s Laurent Depoitre are also 
cited as being on the Hammers’ radar, in a state of affairs that suggests 
somebody in their scouting department is just throwing darts at Panini stickers 
on a wall in the office.

Manchester United consider offering Mourinho contract extension
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/manchester-united-jose-mourinho-contract-extension>
There aren’t too many strikers better than Antoine Griezmann and reports say 
Manchester United have opened talks with one agent in the hope of bringing the 
Atlético Madrid man to Old Trafford for £60m next summer. United are also ready 
to offer the manager José Mourinho a contract extension on the back of their 
recent run of decent form – you can read more about thatin this report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/manchester-united-jose-mourinho-contract-extension>
 from our man in the Reni hat on the Manchester beat. Benfica’s Swedish defender
Victor Lindelofis another target for United, who are prepared to shell out £50m 
to secure the 22-year-old’s signature, and are also being linked with his 
team-mate and fellow defenderNélson Semedo.

Arsenal are giving Valencia left-back José Gaya the glad eye. A native of 
Alicante, the 21-year-old graduate of the Spanish club’s academy made his 
senior debut in 2012 and is extremely diligent in defence but his electric pace 
means he enjoys a good bomb forward and is as at home in the opposition half as 
he is in his own. With Valencia currently fourth from bottom of the La Liga 
table, reports suggest he is disillusioned with life at the Mestalla and could 
be tempted by a move to the Emirates or anywhere else. Arsenal have also been 
keeping tabs on Standard Liege goalkeeperGuillaume Hubert, who shipped two 
goals when Arsène Wenger’s spies went to scout him in a recent match against 
Genk.

Wolfsburg midfielder Julian Draxler can regularly be found propping up the 
metaphorical bar at the Rumour Mill Arms, but he may have to find a new local 
if reports that he’s moving to Paris-Saint Germain for £34m prove to be true.

A host of Premier League clubs are interested in signing winger and fall-over 
merchantAshley Young from Manchester United: Watford, Everton, West Bromwich, 
Burnley, Swansea and Hull City are all interested in hooking up with the 
31-year-old. In other speedy winger news, Hull are considering bringing
Jefferson Monteronorth from Swansea City and seem resigned to losing Robert 
Snodgrass, who might be off to The Hawthorns. The Baggies are also interested 
in signing the Aston Villa and Benin strikerRudy Gestede in January. The fee 
being mentioned is £7m.
 