
"The recent rise of Paul Clement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/08/paul-clement-englishman-psg> 
from PE teacher to right-hand man for Carlo Ancelotti during title wins at 
Chelsea and PSG made me think of former teachers such as Gérard Houllier and 
José Mourinho, and made me wonder – who are the most successful former teachers 
in football?" muses Bill Maclachlan.

"Well, the name that immediately springs to mind is Louis van Gaal," says Bart 
van Hoof, and others. His achievements as a player might have been fairly 
modest, but he did have a sideline as a PE teacher. And as a manager, the 
Holland coach has won three different national leagues (with Ajax, Barcelona 
and Bayern Munich), the Champions League, the Uefa Cup and a smattering of 
other domestic trophies. "If you watch him training," says Raymond Starke, "he 
still acts like a PE teacher, with his whistle and loud voice."

Raymond has other suggestions, too: Rinus Michels and Guus Hiddink. The late, 
great Michels taught PE at a school for deaf children before becoming head 
coach at Ajax. As a player, he had won the Dutch league twice; in 27 years as a 
manager he notched up another four Eredivise titles, the European Cup, one La 
Liga title, the 1988 European Championship, and a World Cup final appearance.

Hiddink, meanwhile, spent much of the 1970s and early 80s teaching PE at a 
school for troubled children. "I've joked I still feel I'm working with 
hard-to-raise kids," he wrote in his autobiography. "I had to deal with kids 
from tough backgrounds, little criminals sometimes. It is possible to translate 
that kind of work in to coaching full-time footballers." It didn't take him 
long to win the first of six Eredivisie titles as PSV manager, along with the 
KNVB Cup (four times), the European Cup, the Intercontinental Cup (with Real 
Madrid in 1998) and the FA Cup with Chelsea a few years back.

It's not all about the Netherlands, though. "Roy Hodgson must come close," 
says James Straughan. "He was a PE teacher at Alleyn's School in south London 
and has 12 titles to his name – not to mention nearly winning the Europa League 
with Fulham … as well as making Switzerland look good." He also taught at Monks 
Hill in Croydon in the mid-1970s. "Even then everyone wanted to play for him. 
He was a really intelligent, charismatic guy," his former pupilRamzi Musallam 
told the Croydon Advertiser last year 
<http://www.thisiscroydontoday.co.uk/Roy-Hodgson-began-career-Croydon-secondary-school/story-16000695-detail/story.html>
. "A year after he left I was reading a copy of Shoot, which did regular 
profiles of foreign teams. This time it was a Swedish team called Halmstad. 
There was a picture of their manager and it looked just like Mr Hodgson. When I 
realised it was him, I couldn't believe it."

Udo Lattek, suggested by Mateen Siddiqui, also inspired a certain amount of 
disbelief, hopping almost directly from teaching to the 1966 World Cup as 
assistant to Helmut Schön. Come 1970 he was in charge of Bayern Munich, winning 
the German Cup in his first season and going on to win three consecutive 
titles, as well as the European Cup. At Borussia Mönchengladbach, meanwhile, he 
won another two league titles, plus the Uefa Cup. Later in his career he 
returned to Bayern and won another five trophies, making him the most 
successful Bundesliga coach ever. He also won the Cup Winners' Cup and Copa del 
Rey with Barcelona, no less – butwhen Barça thrashed Bayern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/apr/08/champions-league-quarter-final-barcelona-bayern-munich-lionel-messi>
 in the Champions League quarter-final in April 2009, he was spotted having a 
good old cry at half-time.

Mateen also mentioned Oscar Tabárez – El Maestro – the twice South American 
Coach of the Year who used to be a primary school teacher. Besides winning 
trophies at national and international level, he has published scholarly 
articles on Uruguay's decline as a footballing nation.

We propose that the Scotland and Celtic forward Julie Fleeting also be 
included here. It's sort of cheating, since most female footballers in the UK 
work a day job as well as playing, but that's not really a reason to diminish 
their achievements. Especially when you consider that Fleeting, who teaches PE 
in north Ayrshire, used to commute from Scotland to London once a week to play 
for Arsenal, where she won eight top-flight titles, five FA Cups and the 
Champions League (in Arsenal's stunning quadruple-winning 2006-07 season). 
During the week she trained a couple of times a week with some local Under-21s.

A final note: according to Stuart Brown, Reading's goalkeeping coach Sal Bibbo 
should also be on the list, having nurtured the talents of Alex McCarthy, Adam 
Federici and Mikkel Andersen, among others. But we've not been able to 
corroborate word that Bibbo taught at a girls' school after retiring from 
playing. "Reading are also one of the teams who were managed by taxi-driving 
Terry Bullivant," adds Stuart. "Which probably demands another discussion, 
around the careers managers had between jobs." Uh oh.

GIGS REJIGGED

"The Manic Street Preachers recently booked their tour dates around the Lions 
Tour in Australia," notes Mark Jones. "Are there any examples of 
bands/musicians who have planned tours/dates around football fixtures?"

Steve Doohan wasn't the only one to suggest Half Man Half Biscuit, who decided 
against appearing on The Tube one Friday night in the 1980s, on account of it 
clashing with a Tranmere Rovers game, but he was the only one to send us some 
quotes from Nigel Blackwell. Here they are: "We were happy to do the thing at 
first, naturally, but then I realised it would involve missing the match, which 
I didn't really feel comfortable about." He and bassist Neil Crossley were the 
ones who didn't want to miss the match ("the others weren't arsed about 
football much"). Channel 4 offered to fetch the band to Prenton Park in a 
helicopter, but they would still have to miss the first half. "We weren't 
particularly sold on the idea of what may have been perceived as the antics of 
big-time Charlies."

Sticking to the 80s, here's John Wray with a delightful story about John Peel. 
"In 1985, Peel booked a DJ gig in Southampton knowing that Saints only had to 
get past Barnsley in an FA Cup tie at the Dell to make it a Southampton v 
Liverpool game in the next round. Sadly for John, Barnsley beat Southampton 2-1 
and on the evening of John's gig in Southampton, his beloved Liverpool FC 
travelled to Oakwell instead. Happily for John it was on telly and Liverpool 
won 4-0."

Sticking to games on the box: "In 1998, James were second on the bill on the 
main stage at Glastonbury," recalls James Kirk. "They asked to cut short their 
set, in order that they (and the crowd, for whom it was on the big screens) 
could watch the second half of England v Colombia at the World Cup." And quite 
right, too – they'd have missed a couple of corking goals, otherwise.

Sticking to … nope, not going to work, this one – we're going back to the 
1980s. "Damian Lovelock, lead singer of Sydney band The Celibate Rifles, was a 
football tragic – very unusual for a 1980s Australian," begins Rob Moline. "I 
remember him on (Aussie) TV once telling of arranging an unlikely Sicilian or 
Sardinian tour date, in exchange for the promise of meeting Gianni Rivera. 
Probably Sardinia – can't find any back-up for this story, but the web says 
he's a Cagliari fan." Know the story?Email us please 
<mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com>!

RANDOM FOOTBALL COMPUTER GAMES (2)

Last week, we scoured through some of the most unlikely football computer 
games of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/07/the-knowledge-unlikely-computer-games>
. But there's more …

"I've turned to the excellent and extremely comprehensive World of Spectrum 
site <http://www.worldofspectrum.org/> and turned up a few more footballers 
appearing on old ZX Spectrum game covers," emails Rayner Simpson. "The players 
aren't particularly obscure, but the games certainly are.Rothmans Football 
Quick Quiz Vol.1 (1985) <http:>: a tie-in with Rothmans Football Yearbook, back 
in more innocent times when cigarette companies could do this sort of thing, 
has Peter Reid and Arsenal legend Tony Woodcock on the front;World Cup Soccer 
(1986) 
<ftp://ftp.worldofspectrum.org/pub/sinclair/games-inlays/w/WorldCupSoccer.jpg>: 
came with a 32-page book featuring an introduction from Ray Clemence (who's 
also on the cover). An odd choice … Clemence only ever went to one World Cup 
(1982) and, thanks to Peter Shilton, didn't get a game;MicroProse Soccer (1989) 
<http:>: the Spanish version has an artist's rendition of who I believe to be 
Steve McMahon and Stuart McCall (who had left Bradford the previous season); and
ZX Football Manager 2005 (2004) 
<ftp://ftp.worldofspectrum.org/pub/sinclair/games-inlays/Rereleases/z/ZXFootballManager2005%28Cronosoft%29.bmp>
 – yes, some people were still making Speccy games well in to the naughties. If 
I had to guess: Juninho (Middlesborough) and David Ginola (Spurs) but the dates 
don't add up." We particularly like the cover blurb:
 "The current manager of Tottenham Hotspur has been seriously injured 
following a freak lawnmower-related incident. As part of a government 
initiative that provides top positions for unemployed Spectrum owners with 
beards, you've now got the job. Are you up to the job? Or could Alan Sugar do 
better?" 
Meanwhile, Anthony Kyne got in touch regarding Alex Ferguson's Player Manager 
2001 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fwpi3WFlyN0>. "As one of the senior 
developers on the game, I'd like to point out that I also disagreed with the 
use of Alex Ferguson, but back in the days where the high street stores ruled 
the roost it was the only way of getting shelf space," he writes. "I wanted to 
call it Andy Gray's From the Dugout! I would like to address what you put at 
the end of your paragraph on the game – 'Championship Manager is wasn't'. 
Actually it was. Eidos bought the game and team from us and some of the code 
from this went into making the critically acclaimed Championship Manager 2010. 
It was also the closest you could get to Championship Manager on a console due 
to lack of memory on the PlayStation back in those days."

KNOWLEDGE ARCHIVE

"I recently noticed that Marseille's Josip Skoblar was the top scorer in the 
French league for three seasons in a row (1971-73). Is this a world record?" 
asked Claude Peterson in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/27/knowledge-won-country-nothing-club>
.

No, Claude, that is not even close to being a world record. In fact, it's not 
even a record at Marseille, for Jean-Pierre Papin was Ligue 1 top scorer in 
five consecutive seasons (1988-1992). An impressive feat – unless you're Imre 
Schlosser, the most prolific striker in the history of the Hungarian league and 
a man who can boast of having been top scorer six seasons in a row (1909-1914) 
when playing for Ferencvaros. Just for good measure, he then topped the charts 
once more when with MTK Hungaria in 1917.

But even that achievement can be beaten: Sotiris Kaiafas of Omonia Nicosia was 
top scorer in the Cypriot league eight times between 1972 and 1982 (the 39 
goals he struck in the 1975-76 season earned him the European Golden Boot). You 
will note, though, that there were a couple of seasons in that run in which 
Kaiafas was not No1, so if it's back-to-back chart-topping you're looking for, 
then you must turn to Atilio García. Born in Buenos Aires in 1914, this striker 
spent most of his career with the Montevideo club Nacional and was top scorer 
in the Uruguayan league for eight consecutive seasons, from 1938 to 1946. Now 
that's consistency.

• For thousands more questions and answers take a trip through the Knowledge 
archive <https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/theknowledge>.

CAN YOU HELP?

"I was watching Swansea start their European adventure and it got me thinking 
who has the best all-time record in Europe," muses Matt Farrell. "I can't find 
any team that can better Coventry's record of P4 W3 L1 – a 75% win rate."

"Has there ever been a match where both opposing managers were sacked before 
their next game (end of season excluding)?" asks James Hamilton.

"Last weekend in MLS, Salt Lake's Alvaro Saborío readied to take a penalty, 
only for the match to be delayed 62 minutes for a tornado warning in the 
vicinity of the Colorado stadium, before scoring," writes James Grossi. "Has 
there ever been a longer time between a penalty award and conversion?"

• Send your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com 
<mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com>.
 