
Thibaut Courtois is no stranger to Madrid, having spent his first three years 
at Chelsea on loan at Atlético and made considerably more appearances for them 
than he has for the Premier League leaders. The accomplished Belgian goalkeeper 
could be on his way back to the Spanish capital, if tabloid reports linking him 
with a big-money move to their city rivals are to be believed. Real Madrid are 
rumoured to be interested in offering him a whopping great contract and his 
ties to the city – his girlfriend hails from there, don’t you know – mean he’s 
open to offers.

Despite his habit of underwhelming from time to time in an Everton shirt, 
midfielderRoss Barkley is wanted by Tottenham, Arsenal and Chelsea, while West 
Ham are hoping to relegate Sunderland by bringingJermain Defoe back to London. 
Slaven Bilic has admitted that quite a few of his players have implored him to 
sign up the striker and bring him back to his former club. “He’s a very good 
player,” said Bilic. “Defoe is scoring goals and that is important. I have a 
few midfielders from different countries telling me his movement is the best of 
strikers they have played with. But he’s someone else’s player so I don’t want 
to talk about it.” We can only imagine what he’d say if he did want to talk 
about it.

Paul Clement and Gary Rowett left as Swansea City frontrunners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/chris-coleman-wife-rules-him-out-swansea-city-managerial-job>
Spanish sports daily AS reckons Antonio Conte wants Swansea striker Fernando 
Llorente at Chelsea, in news that may prompt Michy Batshuayi to wonder what 
exactly he has to do to get a game. Despite having signed for £33m from 
Marseille during the summer, Batshuayi has yet to start a Premier League game 
under Conte but has been told he won’t be going out on loan because his Italian 
manager thinks such a move would constitute “a defeat for Chelsea and me”.

Along with Manchester City, Chelsea are also believed to be waving fists of 
tenners Southampton’s way in the hope of securing the services of central 
defenderVirgil van Dijk, who seems a certainty to leave Southampton sooner 
rather than later. £55m is the fee being mentioned for a player who moved from 
Celtic to Saints for £13m or so in September 2015.

Claudio Ranieri says Kasper Schmeichel is going nowhere, despite speculation 
suggesting Liverpool are plotting to lure the Danish goalkeeper to Anfield from 
Leicester City. With Genk’s Nigerian midfielderWilfried Ndidi about to be 
pictured posing in a Leicester jersey and scarfany day now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/wilfred-ndidi-leicester-city-transfer>
, La Gazzetto dello Sport claim Ranieri is hoping that Sassuolo central defender
Francesco Acerbi is also on his way to the King Power Stadium to help halt the 
Premier League champions’ alarming slide down the table they topped last season.

Aston Villa striker Rudy Gestede is still wanted by Middlesbrough, who have 
offered £6.5m orJordan Rhodes for the 28-year-old from Benin in what sounds 
like a done(ish) deal, while the Stoke Sentinel say Mark Hughes has made 
enquiries about bringing strikersManolo Gabbiadini and Davie Selke in from 
Napoli and RB Leipzig, respectively. Meanwhile in Manchester, Pep Guardiola is 
hitching his skirt at young Atlético Madrid duoTheo Hernández and Lucas, while 
rumours linking Chelsea midfielderCesc Fàbregas with a move to Milan refuse to 
go away.

 * Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window withour Facebook Messenger alerts 
<https://www.messenger.com/login.php?next=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.messenger.com%2Ft%2Ftheguardian%2F%3Fref%3Dfootball_transfers>
. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at the bottom of the screen to receive the latest 
alerts.  