
Brazil: violence around games on the rise

Brazil ends 2013 with a record in football violence deaths. It was a miracle 
that nobody died in the festival of thuggery that took place on 8 December at 
theAtlético Paranaense v Vasco de Gama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/08/fans-injured-violence-brazilian-league-match>
 match in Joinville, during the last round of the Campeonato Brasileiro, whose 
shocking images were beamed all around the world. That, however, did not 
prevent Brazilian football finishing its 2013 season with the saddest of 
milestones: the 30 deaths in football-related incidents this year is the 
highest number in the history of the game in the country.

What's more worrying is that fatal cases have been rising steadily in the past 
few years. Between 1999 and 2008 there were 42 football-related deaths, but in 
2012 the number reached 29 for a single year. It is important to understand 
that the vast majority of those cases occurred outside stadiums and that the 
experience of watching a football match inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> has improved significantly in terms 
of safety in the past 20 years, but that should be no solace.

This is especially so given that similar scenes to the ones that marred the 
game in Joinville took place in September at Brasilia's Mané Garrincha stadium, 
in a match between Corinthians and Vasco. It is one of the new arenas built for 
theWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> and 
touted by authorities as a catalyst for a change in fan behaviour. The 
incident, however, showed that this transformation is a far more complex issue.

As in Argentina, organised groups of supporters in Brazil are notorious for 
their penchant for fighting fans of other teams as well as their unscrupulous 
subsidisation by clubs. They will often receive free tickets and financial help 
in exchange for favours, such as political support for club elections and even 
intimidation of opponents.

It's a relationship often denounced by the Brazilian media but that lingers on 
at every major club in the country, which limits the efficiency of an eventual 
heavier approach from the authorities. But the recent decision by the Japanese 
carmaker Nissan to end its sponsorship deal with Vasco because of the savagery 
in Joinville, which will add to the woes of a club relegated to the wilderness 
of the second division, could finally make directors feel the pinch and decide 
to act.

Only chance – or the work of divine forces by some – has prevented Brazil in 
the past few decades from experiencing its own version of the Heysel disaster. 
But it is unwise to tempt fate for so long.Fernando Duarte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/fernandoduarte>

Eastern Europe: Polish ultras remain a threat after Euro 2012 

The hope in Poland was that the improvement in stadiums brought by Euro 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro2012> – not just those grounds that 
hosted matches during the tournament but also those used as training venues – 
would inspire a change in attitude similar to the one that occurred in England 
with the wave of stadium construction in the 90s. The ultras, though, remain a 
dangerous and violent force.

Only last week, Zaglebie Lubin's Slovakian midfielder Robert Jez was beaten up 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/world-football/europe/13754-ultras-violence-forces-players-out-of-poland-s-zaglebie-lubin>
 outside his house by three ultras, while other fans threw bricks at a car 
driven by the goalkeeperMichal Gliwa 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Micha%C5%82_Gliwa>. The Latvian forward Deniss 
Rakels has also received threats as Zaglebie struggle against relegation. "If 
you don't play, you should be scared," ultras have taken to chanting at home 
matches.

Ultra groups remain a major issue in both Hungary and Romania, where hooligan 
groups often loosely espouse far-right politics, with antisemitism and 
anti-Roma racism rife. Others are just violent: one of the most notorious 
incidents came two years ago as a Petrolul Ploiesti fan ran on to the pitch 
during a game against Steaua Bucharest, ran up behind the defender George 
Galamaz and punched him in the side of the head, breaking his zygomatic bone 
and leaving him temporarily deaf in his right ear. The Steaua goalkeeper 
Ciprian Tatarusanu then suffered burns to his back after being hit by a flare 
thrown from the stand, and the game was abandoned.

So disillusioned have fans in Croatia become with their footballing 
establishment and, in particular, a voucher scheme that tries to regulate away 
supporters, that the two main ultra groups of Dinamo and Hajduk, the Bad Blue 
Boys and Torcida, have declared a truce for the first time since the end of the 
war. At the recent derby in Zagreb, members of both groups attended the game 
together as a strangely harmonious show of dissent that made a mockery of the 
voucher system.Jonathan Wilson  
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonathanwilson>

Russia: new law for 2018 World Cup buildup

Petty scuffles and small-scale brawls are still common at Russian league 
matches, and there is a strong link between fan club ultras and the nationalist 
far right. Ever since hundreds of fansfought pitched battles with police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/13/two-dead-football-racist-riot-moscow>
 in a central Moscow square in 2010 after the murder of Yegor Sviridov, a 
Spartak Moscow fan, by a group of Dagestanis, police have been keeping a closer 
eye on the potential for fan violence.

A new law will come into effect in January, promising much harsher penalties 
for fans who "disturb public order", with fines of up to £300, threats of 
community service and a ban on attending games for up to seven years. Police 
will draw up blacklists of fans who are banned and all stadiums must be fitted 
with closed-circuit television to keep an eye on incidents.

The law has been in discussion for months and is an attempt to tackle violence 
and racism in the runup to the 2018 World Cup.

As well as brawls, nationalist and racist chanting is a problem, especially 
when black players or teams from Russia's mainly Muslim south are playing. In 
September, Zenit fans burned a Chechen flag during a game with Terek Grozny.

In November, the Dynamo Moscow goalkeeper Anton Shunin was briefly 
hospitalised after an incident in which he was struck by a flare thrown by a 
fan during a game against Zenit St Petersburg and received burns to one of his 
eyes. The match was abandoned, Dynamo were given a 3-0 automatic victory and 
Zenit were ordered to play two matches behind closed doors.

Also in November, there were clashes as Spartak Moscow played away at 
second-tier Shinnik Yaroslavl. Police had to use water cannons to disperse 
fighting supporters, and the game also became notorious when photographs 
circulated online of Spartak fans unveiling a Nazi flag during the game.Shaun 
Walker <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/shaunlwalker>

Italy: players still in fear

Salernitana's game at home to Nocerina this November lasted just 20 minutes. 
That was all it took for the visitors to lose five players to "injury", leaving 
them with only six on the pitch. They had used up all three of their 
substitutions in the second minute.

Clearly, this was no accident. Nocerina's players had been reluctant to take 
the field in the first place after receiving death threats from their own 
supporters – 200 of whom had shown up at training a day earlier, warning them 
not to go ahead. The ultras were acting in protest after local authorities 
banned all away fans from attending this local derby.

Their actions were greeted with disgust in Italy, but all too little surprise. 
Fan violence had forced bigger games than this one to be halted before now. 
Salernitana and Nocerina play in the Lega Pro Prima Divisione – the third tier 
of Italian football – but as recently as April 2012 a top-flight match between 
Genoa and Siena had to be suspended for 45 minutes afterultras began demanding 
the shirts off their players' backs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/apr/23/genoa-ultras-match-suspension-serie-a>
.

These are extreme examples, but there have been many less high-profile 
instances of fan violence directed at both players and at rival supporters. 
Just this month, threeAjax fans were stabbed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/11/milan-ajax-champions-league-match-report>
 before their team's Champions League visit to Milan. More than once in the 
last year, team buses have been assaulted on their way to and from games.

Various measures have been taken in a bid to stem the tide, from the 
introduction of the much-malignedtessera del tifoso – a mandatory fan ID card – 
to the temporary closure of individual stands in some stadiums. And police 
statistics show that the number of fans injured at matches has dropped sharply 
since the beginning of 2006. But this problem is still a long way from being 
resolved.Paolo Bandini <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/paolobandini>

Africa: Hooliganism tends to be spontaneous, not planned

African football tends not to be afflicted by hooliganism in the same way that 
Europe and South America are. Which is not to say that violence is much rarer. 
Far from it. It is just that it tends not to be instigated by organised groups 
who go to matches with the intention of causing trouble. Rather the violence 
tends to be spontaneous, erupting in response to perceived refereeing 
injustices or disappointing results. Senegal, for instance, had to play the 
home leg of their World Cup play-off against Ivory Coast at a neutral venue 
because of therioting that broke out in Dakar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/oct/16/senegal-disqualified-africa-cup-nations>
 when the same opponents beat them in the previous year's Africa Cup of Nations 
play-off.

There are exceptions. In Nigeria, for example, there are organised groups who 
seek to exert influence through violence and intimidation, in some cases with 
clubs' tacit support or blatant complicity. In this season's Premier League two 
clubs were ordered to play matches behind closed doors after fan violence, 
while the critical title decider between Kano Pillars and Enyimba had to be 
replayed after a pitch invasion by home fans. Kano and Enyimba both have sets 
of battle-ready supporters who congregate in a particular section of their 
stadiums (Kano's volatile fringe dub their chosen hangout in the stands "Iraq", 
while Enyimba fans call their equivalent spot "Colombia"). Since there tend not 
to be many travelling fans, the targets of violence tend to be opposition 
players or, most commonly, referees. The Nigerian Premier League has vowed to 
increase ground suspensions and club fines after referees threatened to go on 
strike in protest at their regular persecution.

Elsewhere, orchestrated violence at football has been rooted in political 
upheaval or social unrest, as in the infamousPort Said massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middle-east-live/2012/feb/02/egypt-port-said-football-dsaster-live-updates>
 of February 2012, when 79 people were killed. Then clashes between fans of 
Al-Masry and Al-Ahly were fuelled and facilitated by police and military, 
seemingly as retribution for the involvement of Al-Ahly fans in the Tahrir 
Square uprising the previous year. When 21 supporters were sentenced to death 
for their role in that disaster, riots broke out in protest at the severity of 
the punishment and the perceived scapegoating of fans while agents provocateurs 
in authority escaped.

Mauritius made a radical attempt to eradicate politically motivated football 
violence over a decade ago when regular fighting eventually led to catastrophe. 
A title-decider between the mostly Muslim-supported Scouts Club and a Creole 
club, Fire Brigade, degenerated into rioting that spread far beyond the stadium 
and lasted for a week, causing seven fatalities. The national league was 
suspended for over eight months and a huge restructuring was launched, with 
several clubs disbanded and none allowed to reform along ethnic or religious 
lines, only regional ones. The measure worked in the most important sense – it 
has prevented repeats of such violence at football. But the league has yet to 
recover as, with their traditional clubs gone, fans tend to restrict their 
supporting to watching European leagues on TV.Paul Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pauldoyle>
 