
£35m. Yep, that’s the sum being mentioned in conjunction with Everton 
midfielderRoss Barkley, who seems a perfect match for Spurs in so far as he’s 
occasionally good but ultimately undependable. The Evening Standard say that 
they have made inquiries about bringing the 23-year-old down to that there 
London and are waiting to see what happens next. Tottenham’s interest in 
Crystal Palace wingerWilfried Zaha is well documented and ongoing, but 
apparently he’s worth £10m less than Barkley ... which seems to make very 
little sense to today’s Rumours.

Despite all that talk linking him with a £60m January move to Chinese club 
Shanghai SIPG,Oscar wants to stay at Chelsea, although the Daily Mirror say 
Antonio Conte is ready to hand his locker key, dressing room peg and car park 
space to 23-year-old Genoa midfielderDiego Laxalt.

The Manchester City jig is more or less up for Gaël Clichy, who is wanted by 
assorted Serie A clubs including Napoli, Internazionale and Roma. The 
full-back’s contract is due to expire next summer and he’s free to see other 
people in January.

Gianfranco Zola takes charge at Birmingham City after Rowett sacking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/birmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett>
Having apparently failed to convince Brazilian club Santos to part with 
26-year-old midfielderLucas Lima for £12m last August, Crystal Palace are going 
to bid considerably less for him this January, according to tabloid reports. 
Whispers from Paris say Mill regular, Wolfsburg midfielder and long-time 
Arsenal targetJulian Draxler, is wanted by PSG, who will outbid the Gunners in 
the race to secure the apparently unsettled 23-year-old.

West Ham whelp Reece Oxford turns 18 tomorrow and the London club are expected 
to mark the occasion by announcing that he’s signed a new five-year deal, 
despite reports of interest from Manchester United and Manchester City.Carlos 
Tévez, who lined up for both Manchester clubs and currently plies his trade 
with Boca Juniors in his native Argentina, has had his head turned by an offer 
of $25m from Shanghai Shenhua and reports in Argentina say he’s already agreed 
terms with the Chinese club. Elsewhere in the Chinese Super League, Tianjin 
Songjiang manager Fabio Cannavaro is preparing to hose down PSG strikerEdinson 
Cavani with fifties.

And finally, Everton appear to have got the upper hand over Arsenal and Celtic 
in the battle to sign highly regarded Charlton teenager and England Under-20 
internationalAdemola Lookman, while Liverpool are on the verge of signing 
Anderlecht wingerFrank Acheampong for £6m.
 