
Key matches

• Come tea-time on Good Friday, Reading could be sat atop the Championship: 
victory over Leeds would put them one point clear of Southampton and be a 
staggering 17th victory in 21 games. Saints' opportunity - if it doesn't 
already with West Ham's implosion heading north to Oakwell on Friday - will 
come on Saturday, with Portsmouth trekking 17 miles around the M27 for a 
sell-out clash at St Mary's. With six games remaining, Pompey lie five points 
adrift of safety after a morale-sapping 5-1 home defeat to Burnley in which the 
toils of the season appeared to be taking their toil, but manager Michael 
Appleton, as he has to, remains upbeat. "I can't think of a better game to go 
and play on Saturday after what happened," he said. "It's probably the most 
perfect game to play. There is more than three points riding on the result, 
there is personal pride, and with a lot of people in the area if there is one 
game they want to win it is Southampton." Nigel Adkins has again backed forward 
Rickie Lambert to be fit (although he spoke along similar lines before last 
weekend's 3-0 defeat at Blackpool, their first loss in 12 games) for a game in 
which stats (Saints: 48 points out of 60 at home; Pompey: 11 points from 60 on 
the road) so often can be cast aside. Surely, on this one occasion, they won't?

• A Yorkshire derby at the Galpharm on Saturday, where there will be far, far 
more than bragging rights at stake. Fourth-placed Huddersfield entertain 
Sheffield Wednesday, the team directly above them in League One, with automatic 
promotion still within reach. Victory for the Terriers (combined with a 
Charlton win at Oldham) would leave the Addicks a single victory from the 
Championship, but three points for Wednesday could move them into the hallowed 
second place above city rivals United, were the Blades to succumb at home to 
Bournemouth. "Don't write us off yet," said Huddersfield boss Simon Grayson 
after the 3-1 midweek win at Leyton Orient, where Jordan Rhodes' fifth 
hat-trick of the season took his League One tally to 37 goals. "We know we can 
play better but our confidence levels will have been boosted by another 
victory." Fingers crossed for a repeat ofthe last meeting between the teams 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/sheffield-wednesday-4-huddersfield-town-4-owls-and-terriers-in-hillsborough-cracker-1-4070410>
.

• League Two kicks off a busy long weekend with a full Good Friday programme 
and there is a crunch clash in store at Valley Parade, where the hosts 
desperately need a win to edge towards safety as they welcome the visit of 
promotion seekers Southend. By a full 2,000, no team hasa larger average 
attendance than the Bantams 
<http://soccernet.espn.go.com/stats/attendance/_/league/eng.4/english-league-two?cc=5739>
, but that offers little comfort with the very real threat of a first 
relegation into the non-league in the club's 109-year history on the horizon. 
"We've got to write off March and go into this month making sure that it 
becomes a good one for us," said boss Phil Parkinson after a miserable run of 
one win in nine games, capped by a 1-0 defeat at Plymouth last weekend. Ricky 
Ravenhill and Simon Ramsden are expected to be available again, but Parkinson 
is still without his banned trio from the dust-up against Crawley. For the 
Shrimpers, already with 12 wins away from home to their name, automatic 
promotion is still very much in their equation after last weekend's 4-0 
thumping of Cheltenham left them two points away from the top three. "We are 
going to give it every effort until the fat lady sings and we can't get the 
points," said boss Paul Sturrock, who hopes to have defender Mark Phillips 
available for selection after a concussion.

Quote of the week

"Things are where they are, but don't look at my regime and think my regime 
has created that. I'm saying that the dressing room has produced a level of 
togetherness and I've talked since I've been here about the level of 
togetherness that I've found around mediocrity. I think there is a unity, a 
unity around everything that's mediocre. I'm not happy with mediocrity, I'm 
never going to accept it and I don't think the club wants to accept mediocrity 
either. I think the club's had enough of mediocrity" - Preston boss Graham 
Westley lambasts the culture within his squad after claims last weekend that 
details about his team selection and tactics were leaked by his squad to 
opponents Sheffield Wednesday.

Goal of the week

Radoslaw Majewski: you could almost choose any from his hat-trick at Crystal 
Palace <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MQbn_T2Vod8>, but our choice is the 
Nottingham Forest man's opener.

'Best' bets

• Coventry to beat Peterborough at 11-10: The Sky Blues remain the 
Championship's bottom three, but a six-game unbeaten run has seen them move 
towards unlikely salvation. Last weekend's 2-0 win at Hull offered a form line 
that makes them value at odds-against for the visit of Posh, who have won just 
three of their away-days in 2011-12.

• Plymouth to beat Hereford (draw no bet) at 11-10: a crunch clash at the 
wrong end of League Two as the Pilgrims put a 17-game unbeaten run against 
bottom-half teams on the line at Edgar Street. Four consecutive defeats have 
left the Bulls bottom and a record of 15 home points out of 60 (and just 13 
goals) won't scare the Pilgrims.

We'll monitor the "best bets" progress through the season, with a set stake of 
£10 per bet. Current loss (ahem): -£74.95. Again, there's no tipping contest 
this season but that doesn't stop you posting your best bet suggestions below 
the line. And for those who would like to take part, we have set upa private 
Championship Fantasy League, the pin for which is: 12647 
<http://fantasy.football-league.co.uk/FriendsLeague.aspx?p=12647>. Phil Avery 
is in front with Numbers Game.

What you may have missed from the blogosphere

• No Nay Never on planning for life at Burnley after Jay Rodriguez 
<http://nonaynever.net/9287/jay-money-must-be-given-to-howe/>:

It's been fairly clear for a while now that Jay Rodriguez is not going to be a 
Burnley player for much longer. He's too good for us and with just a year left 
on his contract, we are not going to be able to hold on to him. Eddie Howe has 
admitted for the first time that it is going to be hard to keep Jay in the 
summer. That's no reason to panic. We scored five at Portsmouth without him and 
Danny Ings is showing a lot of promise with goals in his last two games. If we 
can get Pato fit and firing, Charlie Austin and Ings can form the start of a 
very potent attack in Rodriguez's absence. There's plenty of talent in the 
youth team to supplement that trio as well. Cameron Howieson made his debut 
against Birmingham this week – expect him to be in the first team squad next 
season.

• The Boys from Up the Hill on Oxford's chase for a League Two play-off spot 
<http://theboysfromupthehill.blogspot.co.uk/2012/04/race-for-playoffs.html>:

The good news is that, nestled nicely in the play-offs in sixth position, our 
destiny is in our own hands and with home ties against Torquay, Southend and 
Gillingham remaining, we also have the chance to dent our rivals' chances. 
Nevertheless, there is still that nagging doubt. The last time we faced a 
similarly difficult run of fixtures was back in November, when we managed to 
lose all five matches we played.

• You can read much more from our Football League blogosphere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/football-league-blog/blogosphere>, which 
should now have been updated to include more of your recently suggested blogs.
 