What was the name of this silver and black number so ugly it terrifies a young 
Michael Owen?  Bola  Roteiro This was the first ball to be personalised to each 
European Championship game. Another fun fact: each Roteiro used in a match had 
the latitude and longitude co-ordinates of the centre spot for that specific 
stadium inscribed upon it  Cinzento  Fantasma But why was it called that?  It 
means "navigation chart" and is in homage to the Portuguese explorers of the 
15th and 16th centuryIt was also the first European Championship ball not to be 
hand-stitched, with the panels joined by thermal bonding  It was the name of 
the ship in which Vasco de Gama sailed to India  It is a reference to the metal 
dish in which cozido, the traditional Portuguese stew, is served  It means 
"silvery grey" and is in homage to the fact that the ball is silvery grey What 
was the name of the ball used in 1992?  Ǻska  Gustav  Etrusco Unico This was 
the first tournament since 1976 that did not use a version of the Adidas Tango  
Hammare And what was the reason behind that?  It's literal translation is 
"worker's boots" and it is a a slightly obscure reference to the footwear worn 
by heroes in Swedish folk tales  It's a homage to a Swedish king of the 18th 
century  It literally translates as "thunder and lightning"  It was the same 
ball that had been used at the 1990 World Cup in ItalyYep, Adidas didn't 
produce a Sweden-specific edition of this successor to the great Tango – they 
simply added "official ball of the European Championship 1992" underneath 
"official ball of the Fifa World Cup 1990". The name is a reference to ancient 
Italian history For Euro 2012 Adidas returned to a more traditional design. 
What is the name of the ball that Nicklas Bendtner is getting to grips with 
here?  Mundial 20  Tango 12 Adidas categorise this as the fourth European 
Championship iteration of the Tango ball, after the 1980 Tango River Plate, the 
1984 Tango Mundial and the 1988 Tango Europa  Telstar 2  Teamgeist 7 The black 
panels on the ball featured three intricate designs paying homage to the art of 
papercutting that is popular in the rural regions of Poland and Ukraine. But 
they weren't just any old patterns – they each had a meaning. What were those 
meanings?  Rivalry, Unity, Passion None of which were particularly present in 
England's campaign  Speed, Strength, Skill  Earth, Wind, Fire  Hustle, Loyalty, 
Respect Euro 1996 and Gareth Southgate cuts a familiar figure of English 
disappointment. The Questra Europa, a bespoke version of the original Questra 
used at the 1994 World Cup, was the name of the ball that Andreas Köpke had 
just kept out. But why Questra?  It literally means "the quest for the stars" 
and 1994 marked the 25th anniversary of the Apollo 11 missionThe original 
detailing on the balls used in 1994 was a space scene of stars and planets  
It's a portmanteau of the Spanish words for "quest for the gold"  It's simply 
Spanish for "victory"  It is the name of the US city in which the first 
football on American soil is believed to have been played For Euro 1996 the 
detail in the Questra's black panels was updated. To what?  A St George's flag 
motif  Three lions surrounding a red rose The Euro 1996 design was the first 
Adidas tournament ball to feature colours in addition to the usual black and 
white  Stylised interpretations of Wembley's two towers  A lion, a unicorn and 
the phrase "dieu et mon droit" Another silvery number that seems to have caught 
Vedran Corluka by surprise. What was the moniker for this ball used at Euro 
2008?  Zielkugel  Punkte  GoalTicket  Europass According to Adidas's press 
release at the time: "The name 'EUROPASS' refers to the common 'EURO' pass 
between the two host countries of Austria and Switzerland. It also represents 
every pass the players will make on the pitch during Euro 2008. Last but not 
least, it signifies the co-operation among all the fans who will make their way 
to Austria and Switzerland for the final competition." And how much did it 
retail for when it went on sale in December 2007?  €119.95 You would have been 
better off getting a £3.99 windball from the petrol station forecourt if some 
of the goalkeepers at the tournament were to be believed  €39.95  €79.95  
€19.99 a month for the first three months, €9.95 thereafter What's the name of 
the Euro 2016 edition?  Belle Balle  Beau Jeu Ah, the beautiful game  Orbe de 
Vie  Bon Vivant But that has been replaced for the knockout stages. What's the 
name of this one?  Brouhaha  Fracas Which, of course, means "clamour" in French 
and, according to Adidas, "was chosen to encapsulate the drama and uncertainty 
associated with knockout games"  Rumble  Melee  You got…  Challenge your friends
Submit answers  