
The Paris Saint-Germain manager Unai Emery is feeling the heat following his 
team’s fourth league defeat of the season over the weekend. That’s twice the 
number of Ligue 1 losses the French champions suffered in total last season, 
when they won the title by 31 points, scoring 102 goals in the process. 
Guingamp was the scene of their latest humbling, with Yannis Salibur and Nill 
de Pauw inflicting the damage in a 2-1 defeat that leaves PSG third in the 
table, seven points behind surprise leaders Nice.

Oscar will get to count Chinese cash but he will pay a heavy price | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/oscar-china-chelsea> 
While midfielder Marco Verratti said “it’s not a problem with the coach” and 
blamed himself and his team-mates for what he labeled “a crisis”, French TV 
station TF1 claim Emery is about to be shown the door by PSG technical director 
Patrick Kluivert and replaced byLouis van Gaal. This news is unlikely to come 
as music to the ears of PSG’s Argentinian wingerAngel Di Maria, who the 
Dutchman bombed out of Old Trafford during his spell at Old Trafford. Italians
Roberto Mancini and Fabio Capello are also being linked with Emery’s Parian 
post.

Fresh from scoring his 15th and 16th goals for Manchester United over the 
weekend, former PSG linchpinZlatan Ibrahimovic is ready to turn down further 
overtures from China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/oscar-china-chelsea> to stay 
at Old Trafford. The Mail reports that the Chinese government were prepared to 
bankroll the move for the modest, mild-mannered Swede in the hope that his 
profile would help boost the profile of the country’s Super League and 
encourage other players to sign up. Ibra turned down a previous offer to go to 
China to sign for United after leaving PSG and is ready to extend his contract 
with the club after his successful introduction to life in the Premier League. 
On loan at Stoke from Manchester City,Wilfried Bony may not be so reluctant to 
head for China and is understood to be mulling over a January move worth £12m 
per year.

Hoffenheim defender Niklas Süle was believed to be on his way to Chelsea for 
£30m in one of the next two transfer windows despite turning down an offer from 
the Premier League leaders last summer, but now it seems Bayern Munich have 
turned the 21-year-old’s head and agreed an undisclosed fee with their 
Bundesliga rivals. A central defender who began life as a striker, Süle was 
part of the Germany team that won silver at the Olympics.

Marseille want Mathieu Flamini, who has failed to make much of an impression 
at Crystal Palace since moving there in the summer. The struggling south London 
side are also ready to dispense with the services of Malian midfielderBakary 
Sako, who is wanted back by his former club Wolves. 

Already disgruntled Hull City fans will be annoyed but unsurprised to learn 
that their star player,Robert Snodgrass, has turned down the offer of a 
contract that would extend his stay. The Scot is tied to the club until next 
June but looks certain to move on to pastures new, whether Hull stay in the 
Premier League or get relegated.

Highly regarded Ivorian 19-year-old Franck Kessié currently plays for Serie A 
side Atalanta, but is wanted by a host of other clubs including Chelsea, 
Manchester City and Tottenham. While Chelsea remain favourites to sign the 
midfielder, reports suggest Tottenham have made the Italian side a £19m offer.
 