
Despite having a forward line richer than four gold-plated deep fried Mars 
bars, Zinedine Zidane wants more! Ideally, someone who knows the city of 
Madrid, has recent experience of getting one over Barcelona and who has enough 
self-assuredness to share a pitch – and dressing room – with Cristiano 
Ronaldo’s underpants and ego. So, step forwardSergio Agüero, the Manchester 
City squad player who appears to be back in the good books with Pep Guardiola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/02/sergio-aguero-manchester-city-barcelona-champions-leagu>
. At 28,Real Madrid reckon he has one big move left in him and may offer him 
the moon on a stick and a shiny white kit to come and play for them. The snag 
is, that City’s obscenely wealthy owners could give him many more moons on 
sticks, a couple of planets and a galaxy or two to keep the potent little 
Argentinian at the Etihad. Real Madrid are also banned by Fifa from buying 
anyone for the next two transfer windows. But, as Barcelona have so adeptly 
shown in the past, if you just go about your business with two fingers in your 
ears shouting out “Na, na, na, na, na, we’re not listening!” you will get 
exactly what you want anyway.

Despite having a new manager with fresh ideas, Chelsea will continue with a 
trend popularised by José Mourinho – that of buying back players the club let 
leave for peanuts for the price of a small island. This time, they want Eden 
Hazard’s younger brother,Thorgan Hazard, to make his way back to Stamford 
Bridge from Borussia Mönchengladbach for the princely sum of £13m (his buyback 
fee, no less), despite the fact they let his contract run down and waved him 
off to Germany for nowt in 2014. It’s called doing ‘a Matic’ and helps ward off 
rival clubs who are certain they can’t compete with such madness.

Bastian Schweinsteiger back in training to prepare for exit, says José Mourinho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/bastian-schweinsteiger-jose-mourinho-training-manchester-united>
Elsewhere, Liverpool will go back to Schalke looking for another freebie 
defender to follow Joël Matip to Anfield. Jürgen Klopp has his beady eye 
trained onSead Kolasinac, a left-back who would probably stand a good chance of 
being first-choice because he isn’t Albert Moreno and isn’t a right-footed 
midfielder. He’s known as ‘The Tank’, which isn’t the best nickname for a 
player hoping to join the ranks of Klopp’s cultured young bucks, but at least 
it isn’t ‘Millie’ the nickname that makes James Milner sound like a pet rabbit.

Another club making a move for a full-back are West Ham United, who are 
weighing up the highly original idea of signing Jinkin’Carl Jenkinson on loan 
from Arsenal. It’s an annual tradition, and just because they’ve moved house, 
they’re not going to give it up. Slaven Bilic also wantsLamine Koné to join his 
defensive ranks, despite the Sunderland centre-back’s form – and enthusiasm – 
having fallen off a cliff somewhere on the north-east coast this season.

Manchester United scouts apparently watched Gonçalo Guedes scuttle around 
Benfica’s midfield during their 1-0 defeat of Dynamo Kyiv on Tuesday, the kind 
of laboured win that Mourinho would dearly love to oversee more regularly at 
Old Trafford. Guedes played a so-so role in orchestrating it so those scouts 
haven’t been entirely put off. But his £52m release clause may be even too much 
for a man as keen on making ridiculous decisions as Ed Woodward.

It’s getting cold isn’t it? So Tim Sherwood is ready to strap on his warmest 
gilet and come toQPR’s rescue when they show Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink the door. 

And finally, John Terry will be offered £8m a year to pull serious-looking 
faces and point a lot inGuangzhou Evergrande’s defence. He is already a club 
ambassador, which is a bit odd considering he is a Chelsea player. Well, for 
now anyway.
 