
Arsenal defender Mathieu Debuchy made his first competitive appearance in over 
a yearagainst Bournemouth on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/arsenal-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
, only to have it curtailed after 15 minutes when he pulled up lame with a 
hamstring problem. Apparently frustrated at the lack of opportunities coming 
his way at the Emirates Stadium, the 31-year-old has been mentioned in 
conjunction with a possible move back to his native France, where Marseille are 
in the market for a full-back.

In Spain, Real Madrid newsletter Marca say that Debuchy’s team-mate Mesut Özil 
and the Paris Saint-Germain wingerÁngel Di María both quite fancy a move back 
to the Spanish capital, having previously made a combined 229 appearances for 
the club which they both joined in 2010 before moving on elsewhere.

Ben Woodburn sets record as Liverpool break Leeds to reach EFL Cup last four
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/liverpool-leeds-united-efl-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
Serie A sides Juventus and Inter want to sign Matteo Darmian from Manchester 
United, although the full-back remains in José Mourinho’s plans as long as Luke 
Shaw remains out in the cold. Speaking of players consigned to Ice Station 
Zebra by their managers, Spurs midfielderMoussa Sissoko was the subject of a 
recent withering public critique by Mauricio Pochettino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/mauricio-pochettino-moussa-sissoko-tottenham>
, but is also believed to have Italian admirers at the aforementioned clubs. 
Inter are also believed to be keen on signingOscar from Chelsea, although his 
manager Antonio Conte last week rubbished suggestions that he might be moving 
the Brazilian on in January.

Previously a Manchester City target, Napoli’s Algerian international defender 
Faouzi Ghoulamis wanted by Chelsea, who, along with Bayern Munich, are also 
keeping tabs on Bundesliga side Hoffenheim’s centre-backNiklas Süle. With 
Branislav Ivanovic’stime at Stamford Bridge drawing to a close, Juventus are 
being touted as the 32-year-old’s next employers.

Despite failing in their attempts to lure Sporting Lisbon’s Adrien Silva to 
the King Power Stadium during the summer, Premier League champions and 
strugglers Leicester City will ramp up their efforts to bring the central 
midfielder to Blighty during the January transfer window.

Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp is ready to make overtures towards Borussia 
Dortmund midfielderChristian Pulisic. Liverpool are believed to have bid £11m 
for the 18-year-old from Hershey, Pennsylvania, during the summer, but will 
have to increase their offer now that the youngster has forced his way into the 
German side’s first team.

And finally, West Ham are ready to hose Dimitri Payet down with cash in a bid 
to stop Manchester United turning his head, while Chelsea are keeping tabs on 
Sampdoria’s £24m-rated Colombian strikerLuis Muriel.
 