
Alarms are ringing in the Emirates Stadium corridors after news emerged that 
Mauro Icardi might need to pack his bags and play football somewhere other than 
San Siro. You see, Inter’s captain has ruffled the feathers of a group of 
ultras – as well as Mr Inter, Javier Zanetti – by criticising the behaviour of 
fans in his recently published autobiography. It’s a book supporters believe 
belongs on the fiction shelves due to the disputed nature of some of Icardi’s 
claims against them. The upshot of all this is that he was given verbal pelters 
throughout Inter’s 2-1 defeat by Cagliari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/internazionale-mauro-icardi-cagliari-defeat-serie-a>
 and missed a penalty to boot. A stellar day all round then. Not that this 
would stop Arsène Wenger, a known admirer of the player, from making a bid in 
January. Reports in the summer suggestedArsenal were willing to offer €30m plus 
Olivier Giroud for Icardi. But given how the pound has swan-dived off a cliff 
in recent months, expect that figure to have crept up somewhat.

There may be a freshly emptied locker for Icardi to put his deodorant and 
giant headphones into if it all works out becauseAlex Oxlade-Chamberlain 
appears to be having an existential crisis and may have to discover himself 
again. “Me being myself, I’m not happy when I’m not playing,” he hummed. “There 
is going to come a time in my career, and I think I’m approaching that, when I 
do need to be getting more regular football.” It may be that he finds himself 
back where it all began, atSouthampton. 

Mauro Icardi and Internazionale go from bad to worse with Cagliari defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/internazionale-mauro-icardi-cagliari-defeat-serie-a>
Do you remember Memphis Depay? Ah. Well, mercifully for the player it appears 
thatMilan’s manager, Vincenzo Montella, does. He’s expected to fend off 
interest from Wolfsburg and airlift the player out of Old Trafford in January 
and then pick upCesc Fàbregas from Chelsea on his way back to Italy. Despite 
having last week been reported as being a little less enamoured about signing 
the Spaniard than many believed, it appears he now has the hots for him once 
again. Perhaps because he’s been told that he’ll have loads of dosh to spend 
when Chinese investors complete a takeover of Milan in the coming months. He 
may have to part with left-backMattia de Sciglio, mind, whom Antonio Conte 
would quite like to paint a go-faster stripe on before watching him tear up and 
down the Stamford Bridge turf in the left wing-back position.

And what’s this? Tottenham are set to make a move for Lukaku. Oh, but hang on, 
it’s notthat one. It’s Lazio’s 22-year-old left-back, Jordan Lukaku, that one’s 
younger brother.

Someone has told Jürgen Klopp that Andrea Belotti is acing the bleep test at 
Torino, so expect the young striker to make a £20m move to Liverpool in 
January. A move that will go down well with Daniel Sturridge, no doubt. Klopp 
also likes the cut ofRuben Neves’s jib, but the 19-year-old Porto midfielder is 
high up on the wishlist ofChelsea and Juventus too. Let battle commence. The 
Mill’s backing one of Conte and Klopp in that dust-up.

Steve Bruce wants to take Jordan Rhodes back to the level of football that he 
knows and loves by plucking him from Middlesbrough’s bench and dropping him into
Aston Villa’s attack alongside another Championship Pelé, Ross McCormack. 

Did Maarten Stekelenburg get even a pat on the back from Ronald Koeman for his 
human octopus heroics forEverton against Manchester City? Nope, just the news 
that his manager wants to buy a new goalkeeper: Sunderland’sJordan Pickford. 
And José Mourinho has been paying special attention to Everton’sSéamus Coleman 
recently. He believes the 28-year-old right-back may be able to cross a ball 
into the box forManchester United without slamming it straight into an opposing 
player’s midriff, something that’s been beyond Antonio Valencia for the past 
seven years.

And Newcastle United boss Rafa Benítez is making cooing sounds in the general 
direction of Partizan Belgrade’s 19-year-old defenderNikola Milenkovic. That’s 
your lot.
 