
Freewheeling Liverpool don’t need defenders any more, particularly a 
centre-back whose only headline contribution this season cameat 3am on Snapchat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/liverpool-mamadou-sakho-social-media-outburst-football>
. And so it is thatMamadou Sakho finds himself encased in ice and shunted to 
the sidelines looking in frustratedly at the steamy displays at Anfield with no 
way of getting involved. Which is why Tony Pulis fancies taking a pick-axe to 
the Frenchman’s ice-tomb and reanimating him again atWest Brom. Jürgen Klopp 
would wave the Frenchcontroversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/26/mamadou-sakho-liverpool-future-sent-home-us-tour>
-magnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/08/mamadou-sakho-liverpool-uefa-doping>
 a cheery farewell. But Pulis may have to do battle with Nice for the big man’s 
signature. Apparently, Mario Balotelli is making cooing noises down the phone 
at Sakho and knows from experience that a place in the Ligue 1 leaders’ 
starting XI has restorative powers – particularly for an Anfield outcast. So, 
the French Riviera or Pulisball, what’s it to be?

Henrikh Mkhitaryan not giving up on Manchester United ‘dream’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/manchester-united-henrikh-mkhitaryan-dream>
Barcelona are still having trouble filling that Dani Alves-shaped hole in 
their team. Having been sized-up for the job, Héctor Bellerín has turned his 
nose up at the chance of showing scant regard for defending at Camp Nou by 
signing a new Arsenal deal. So instead, Barça are going to do what any big club 
does these days when looking for a suitable player: sign one from Southampton. 
In this case it’sCédric Soares, the former Sporting player who can actually 
defend. He’ll cost them a fair bit more than the bargain price of £4m he that 
Saints paid for him, mind.

Marseille and Roma are the latest clubs who reckon they can jump-start the 
career of Manchester United misfitMemphis Depay. But hang on, who’s this with a 
set of leads and a look of wild enthusiasm on his face? It’s Ronald Koeman. So 
addEverton to that list. Meanwhile, the Dutchman has been busy pleasing 
Evertonians by flapping his gums freely aboutRomelu Lukaku’s prospects of 
hanging around at Goodison Park. “His potential is greater and higher than 
Everton as a final destination,” he said, prompting a moody stare from the 
Dixie Dean statue.

Despite having figured out a way for Chelsea to score bucketloads of goals and 
never concede any, Antonio Conte wants to add a little more oomph to his 
forward line just to ensure those games are put to bed nice and early. And his 
preference would be if said oomph came in the shape of 25-year-old Sampdoria 
strikerLuis Muriel. The Colombian is known for imitating some of the real 
Ronaldo’s moves, including scoring goals, which is handy. But he would set them 
back £30.9m, because that’s his release clause.Napoli are sniffing around too. 
Marco Verratti is also high up on Conte’s gift list. But the tricky PSG 
midfielder has popped up onManchester United’s radar too because, you know, 
Manchester United. One player who looks like he will escape Chelsea’s grasp is
Milan Badelj, the Croatia midfielder who is so enamoured by life at Fiorentina 
that he is willing to buy out his contract in order to find his way out of 
Florence. And where would he like to go?Colour his first name red and black. 
There you go.

And because Rafa Benítez loves a player with European pedigree so much he’s 
going to jump all over Aston Villa’s hopes of signing Dundalk’sDaryl Horgan and 
whisk him away toNewcastle instead. 
 