Which player finished the 1999-2000 Premier League season as top scorer with 30 
goals?  Alan Shearer (Newcastle)  Dwight Yorke (Manchester United)  Andy Cole 
(Manchester United)  Kevin Phillips (Sunderland) Australia broke the record for 
the largest win in a competitive international match when they beat American 
Samoa in a World Cup qualification match in April 2001. What was the score?  
22-0  31-0  33-0  38-0 "They can't be monks - we don't want them to be monks, 
we want them to be football players because a monk doesn't play football at 
this level." Which manager, in 2002, said this of his ill-disciplined team?  
Alex Ferguson (Manchester United)  Bobby Robson (Newcastle United)  Peter Reid 
(Sunderland)  Walter Smith (Everton) Chelsea made five signings each costing 
£15m or more in the summer of 2003. Hernán Crespo, Juan Sebastián Verón, Claude 
Makélélé and Damien Duff were four of them. Who was the fifth?  Joe Cole  Scott 
Parker  Didier Drogba  Adrian Mutu José Mourinho won the Champions League when 
his Porto side beat Monaco 3-0 in the 2004 final. Who was managing Monaco?  
Claude Puel  Didier Deschamps  Francesco Guidolin  Jean Tigana "Liverpool won't 
win. I said at the start of the season Liverpool couldn't win the Champions 
League and I still don't think they will. Milan will win." Which Milan player 
said this before the 2005 Champions League final?  Paolo Maldini  Kaká  Gennaro 
Gattuso  Andriy Shevchenko In 2006 Alan Shearer scored his final goal in 
professional football. Who was it against?  Liverpool  Sunderland  Chelsea  
Everton Who scored the only goal of the game as Spain beat Germany 1-0 to win 
the European Championship in 2008?  Andrés Iniesta  Xavi  Fernando Torres  
David Villa On 2 May 2009 Barcelona met Real Madrid in a clásico that could 
have turned the La Liga title race into an incredibly tight battle with just 
four games to go. Instead, Barça ran riot to go seven points clear. What was 
the final score?  Real Madrid 0-5 Barcelona  Real Madrid 2-6 Barcelona  Real 
Madrid 1-5 Barcelona  Real Madrid 3-6 Barcelona Who won the European Golden 
Shoe (formerly known as the European Golden Boot) for finishing as Europe's top 
league goalscorer in 2010?  Antonio Di Natale (Udinese)  Lionel Messi 
(Barcelona)  Diego Milito (Internazionale)  Gonzalo Higuaín (Real Madrid)  You 
got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  