
The Mill’s blood pressure is running high again this morning readers, and not 
because we’ve spent thepast 11 hours in a raging funk trying to make a cup of 
tea with a Wi-Fi kettle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/12/english-man-spends-11-hours-trying-to-make-cup-of-tea-with-wi-fi-kettle>
. No, it’s due to the fact that we’ve had to take our first item on the gossip 
menu with a pinch of salt large enough to preserve a full side of pork.

Because it says here that Matteo Darmian may well be leaving Manchester United 
forBarcelona, who are “weighing up” the Italian as an option to fill their 
“crisis position” due to Aleix Vidal being deemed not good enough and Sergi 
Roberto being deemed not defensive enough. But come on, who really defends in a 
Barcelona defence? Anyway, the upshot is that Darmian, who is peering out of 
the Manchester United wilderness at Antonio Valencia and Timothy Fosu-Mensah 
ahead of him, is being considered because the Bank of Barcelona is not a 
particularly healthy place these days. And although Darmian is most definitely 
not Hector Bellerín – Barça’s “if we won the lottery” target – he would at 
least be cheap.

Aston Villa appoint Steve Bruce as manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/aston-villa-appoint-steve-bruce>
Back at Old Trafford, Wayne Rooney’s exit strategy is being mapped out. It 
looks a little like this: 1) A load of money goes into the Manchester United 
and England substitute’s bank account; 2) He books himself on to a flight to 
either the USA or China; 3) A load of money goes into theMLS/Chinese Super 
League player’s bank account. 


Another thirtysomething who may join Rooney for a pre-flight coffee at 
Manchester airport isPablo Zabaleta. Pep Guardiola hasn’t liked the cut of the 
Argentinian’s jib and wouldn’t exactly put up a fight if theInternazionale 
manager Frank de Boer came knocking onManchester City’s front door. And in any 
case, Guardiola is making frantic cooing sounds in the direction of Celtic’s
Kieran Tierneyalthough he may have to coo loudly because Arsène Wenger is also 
puffing his feathers up and doing a little dance in front of the full-back who
Arsenal would very much like because they haven’t signed “one for the future” 
for a while.

Zlatan Ibrahimovic is a target for the Delhi Dynamoes. Well, of course he is. 

Cesc Fábregas is an odd player isn’t he? He’s constantly written off at 
Chelsea before returning with a bravura passing performance that gets everyone 
saying nice things again and then in the very next game he looks like an aged 
and lost dog trying to cross a very busy road unsuccessfully. It looked like he 
was going to be allowed to put his slippers on and let it flow every week at a 
more leisurely pace inMilan but now Vincenzo Montella has said he’s not 
interested. So expect Fábregas to continue toflit in and out of Chelsea’s team 
like a glimpsed memory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/23/cesc-fabregas-antonio-conte-chelsea>
 for the remainder of the season instead, unless Montella only catches clips of 
“good Cesc” in the lead-up to the January transfer window.

Werder Bremen have made a rotten start to their Bundesliga campaign and they 
need to shore things up in defence fast if they’re to avoid a relegation scrap. 
Anyway, they presumably haven’t seen much ofPer Mertesacker since he was 
jumping up and down in Rio holding the World Cup, because they believe he is 
their defensive saviour. If the 32-year-old Arsenal centre-back turns his 
attention to the matter of signing for Bremen in the New Year, he may just turn 
up on time.

Elsewhere, it seems Bournemouth have finally got to grips with the Premier 
League. They’re going to waste money like the big boys do by allowing £7m 
signingLewis Cook to go back to Leeds on loan. Yes, the very club they bought 
Cook from.
 