
Key matches

• "It's a fantastic club with a great tradition and loyal supporters." So said 
Sam Allardyce upon his appointment at West Ham last summer, as well as vowing 
to "play the West Ham way". Fast forward to the business end of the season and 
a different tune can be heard from the Hammers boss after being serenaded by 
fans frustrated at recent results - and performances - singing "We're West Ham 
United, we play on the floor" during the midweek win at Peterborough. "I'm sick 
of all that rubbish," fumed Allardyce. "Perhaps their expectations are too much 
and they're getting a bit carried away, I don't know." But with a squad 
inherited from the Premier League, plus a host of additions added during the 
transfer window, perhaps expectations of automatic promotion are fair, 
especially now the team lie third, six points adrift of leaders Southampton and 
one behind Saturday's visitors to Upton Park, Reading.

The Royals handed the nine-man Hammers a 3-0 beating in December (a game 
noticeable also for 'Sockgate 
<http://www.getreading.co.uk/sport/football/readingfc/s/2105052_sockgate_not_a_big_deal_says_reading_fc_captain>
' ) which coincided with the start of West Ham's comparative downturn: eight 
wins in their last 23 Championship games does not smack of a team bound for the 
top two, while only three teams in the top 15 have won fewer times on home 
turf, a fact Reading intend to try and exploit this weekend. "If the game 
progresses and West Ham aren't playing well, the crowd will get on their back 
because they expect the team to be top of the league," said Royals No2 Nigel 
Gibbs, while skipper Jobi McAnuff added: "If we start well, maybe get the 
frustration and nerves going a bit, then hopefully we can use that to our 
advantage." Abdoulaye Faye is a doubt for West Ham after going off with a head 
injury at Peterborough, while Reading's Jason Roberts expects to pass a fitness 
test in time for the trip east.

• A slightly less heated atmosphere will be expected at Brunton Park, but 
that's not to underplay the importance of Huddersfield's visit to Carlisle, who 
have moved quietly and efficiently into theLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> play-off spots. The 
Cumbrians have lost just three of their last 20 games and are expecting their 
biggest gate of the season on Saturday: 8,000 or more in what could be a 
preview of a play-off math-up. "It will be like a cup final," said boss Greg 
Abbott. "Huddersfield are coming up absolutely desperate for points and we have 
our own desperation for points. We probably don't have the same pressure they 
do – they have to go up because of the financial situation they have put 
themselves in – but we have our own ambition and dream." Under new boss Simon 
Grayson, the Terriers are unbeaten in eight, capped by last weekend's defeat of 
Charlton, but they still sit five points out of an automatic promotion place 
ahead of a key run of four games in 10 days. "At this stage of the season 
you're not doing too much training anyway - you're keeping the players ticking 
over," said Grayson, who has no new injury worries. "The games are coming thick 
and fast, so we're preparing properly. We're going down to Leyton Orient on 
Monday, staying over and coming back on Wednesday; we'll then prepare properly 
for the Sheffield Wednesday game before flying down to Bournemouth on the 
Sunday."

• League Two's stand-out fixtures are both on Friday night, starting at Roots 
Hall, where Southend host Cheltenham, but we're going to focus on the game at 
Underhill, where Barnet bid to pull clear of trouble at the wrong end of the 
table against surging Torquay, who could move within a point of leaders Swindon 
with victory. Admittedly, the Gulls will have played three more games, but 
their form has to be respected: just three defeats in 18, including the recent 
setback against the league leaders, while a win in north London would equal the 
club record for away wins in a season (11). Nevertheless, boss Martin Ling, who 
has a fully-fit squad to choose from at Barnet, has readjusted his points 
target for promotion. "Looking at it now, 82 points might not be enough," he 
said. "I've looked at the run-ins for Swindon, Crawley, Shrewsbury and us, and 
none are playing each other. Most have got what you would deem on a piece of 
paper as a nice run-in and I would say ours is probably the hardest. We may 
need 84 points, which would be four wins out of the seven games." The Bees, 
meanwhile, lie three points clear of the drop zone, but starting with Torquay, 
face the top three plus seventh-placed Cheltenham in their next four matches. 
On-loan defender Paul Downing misses out, but centre-back Darren Dennehy 
returns to the Barnet squad.

Quote of the week

"This is as low as I've felt in my whole career. It gives me a lot of 
problems, to put it mildly. We know what Crawley Town are all about and what 
they bring in terms of their intimidating type of play, and you've got to make 
sure you don't get involved in it because that's what they want. They provoked 
it, and now both clubs will pay a heavy price. You can moan about their antics, 
but you can only moan after beating them" - Bradford City boss Phil Parkinson 
rues thepost-match dust-up between his team and Crawley Town 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=382qiuNfQ2A&sns=em>, a mass brawl that ended 
with a British record-equalling five players (three from the Bantams) being 
sent off in the dressing room by referee Ian Williamson. An FA charge has 
followed for both clubs, while retrospective video punishment could yet 
increase the tally, although a more pressing concern is the immediate 
suspensions imposed on assorted players from both teams.

Goal of the week

Lomana LuaLua: another appearance for the Blackpool tumbler 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/football/17412322>, this time in the 3-1 defeat 
at Reading.

Best bets

• Brighton to beat Middlesbrough at 7-5: Boro may only be one place behind 
Saturday's opponents, but are winless in five and head south to take on a form 
team with just one defeat in 15Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> games. Gus Poyet will be 
without the banned Matt Sparrow, but can call upon Craig Mackail-Smith and Will 
Buckley again after a recent virus hit his squad. Boro have lost defender 
Matthew Bates to a cruciate ligament injury; the fith of the unlucky sod's 
career.

• Tranmere to beat Bury at 6-4: under Ronnie Moore, Tranmere's progression has 
been attention-grabbing: four wins from a six-match unbeaten run to all but end 
any fear of relegation. Bury are winless in 13 and now sit just three points 
above the trapdoor.

We'll monitor the "best bets" progress through the season, with a set stake of 
£10 per bet. Current loss (ahem): -£54.95. Again, there's no tipping contest 
this season but that doesn't stop you posting your best bet suggestions below 
the line. And for those who would like to take part, we have set up aprivate 
Championship Fantasy League 
<http://fantasy.football-league.co.uk/FriendsLeague.aspx?p=12647>, the pin for 
which is: 12647. Phil Avery is in front with Numbers Game.

What you may have missed from the blogosphere

• The Two Unfortunates on Notts County's unlikely promotion push 
<http://thetwounfortunates.com/notts-countys-not-so-mad-promotion-push/>

A little over four weeks has passed since the Notts County board dismissed 
Martin Allen from his post after a 3-0 defeat on the road at Hartlepool United. 
Amid fears of a further slump and potential capitulation towards the relegation 
zone, fans spoke out even louder than normal as Keith Curle stepped into the 
managerial hot seat with just sixteen games left of the 2011-2012 campaign - 
the jury seemingly unanimous in their anger at his predecessor's sacking. Yet 
now, with just seven games left in the fixtures booklet, Notts followers are 
comfortable with their very much changed outlook on both Curle and the possible 
fortunes of their club heading into April.

• Seat Pitch on 10 of the best Nottingham Forest book 
<http://seatpitch.co.uk/2012/03/22/10-of-the-best-nottingham-forest-books/> ():

It's hard to talk about Nottingham Forest without talking about Brian Clough, 
no more so when it comes to books. Inevitably, Clough dominates the past four 
decades of the club so, with a heavy slant towards 'the greatest manager who 
ever lived', Seat Pitch brings you another 10 of the best….

• You can read much more from our Football League blogosphere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/football-league-blog/blogosphere>, which 
should now have been updated to include more of your recently suggested blogs.
 