
Take back control, cried the Brexit campaigners, from the dark forces of the 
EU and open Britain up to a glorious future in which it can embrace the world. 
It was a seductive cry, but was a lie from top to bottom. The EU did not stop 
Britain’s embrace of the world; instead, it was and is a crucial bridge to it. 
While Brexit campaigners’ rhetoric may be of global openness, their actions 
betoken retreat. It is not from the left that we have to fear an Orwellian 
dystopia in which words are manipulated, never to mean what they purport to 
mean, but from rightwing Leavers.

This is nowhere clearer than in the intense threat now facing British 
universities, one of the UK’s great national and international assets. 
Universities, dedicated to learning, teaching and research, are indispensable 
building blocks of any civilisation. But they are also increasingly important 
economic institutions. A university in a 21st-century British city plays a 
similar role to a cathedral in a medieval city – as a magnet of economic and 
cultural activity. Universities are a source of employment, collaborators with 
companies and public agencies, and, by attracting so many young people, a 
mainspring of vitality and rich urban life. (Full declaration: I am principal 
of Hertford College, Oxford University.)

For Brexiters and Ukippers, however, universities have a dark side. They 
involve themselves with – dread word – foreigners. Universities, in the right’s 
universe, are anti-British fifth columnists. They will insist on welcoming 
students and researchers from the EU and the rest of the world, in part because 
they believe in the intellectual vitality that comes with having diverse 
student and research communities and in part because they need the cash. 
University tuition fees in 2013-14 totalled £13.7bn. Because foreign students 
pay fees two or three times higher than the £9,000 maximum set for English 
students, overseas students contribute more than a third of that total. On top, 
they spend on accommodation, leisure and sustenance. In every university town 
in Britain, they are a brilliant economic, social and cultural asset, 
indispensable to the viability and vitality of the university, while boosting 
local economies.

Britain has been good at attracting international students because we have two 
priceless advantages. We have great universities and we teach courses and award 
degrees in our native tongue – English – which is now the lingua franca. Tens 
of thousands of Chinese students come to Britain every year not to settle here 
and steal British jobs, but because they want to learn to speak English and 
obtain the vital credential of a degree won in England – and then go home.

However, the Home Office insists on counting foreign students as immigrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/students-could-be-left-out-of-immigration-figures-ministers-hint>
. Part of the wide perception that immigration is out of control, from which 
Nigel Farage built his anti-EU case, is because of this statistical quirk. 
Thus, last year net migration totalled 336,000. But 169,000 of those were 
students (netting out incoming students from British students leaving to study 
abroad). Exclude them and suddenly the net migration total looks back in 
control – 167,000. Toughen up the permit regime for non-EU migrants and David 
Cameron could have hit his target of net migration in the tens of thousands and 
Farage and co would have lost a crucial platform in their anti EU hyperbole.

Home Office resistance to this statistical redefinition, led by Theresa May as 
home secretary and continuing now as prime minister, is because some students 
do stay in Britain after winning their degrees; on this view, higher education 
has become a backdoor means of avoiding immigration controls. Too few incoming 
students seem to be leaving, although nobody can know for certain whether this 
is true. EU students have the right to stay but they only constitute a quarter 
of all foreign students. Because Britain invests scant resources in policing 
its student visa regime, the only evidence on students’ leaving is the 
hit-and-miss system of sampling travellers at British ports and airports. Of 
course there has been cheating and some bogus degree courses, but not an 
industrial scale and now largely closed down. I find it hard to believe that 
there is an army of up to half-a-million Asian ex-students in their mid to late 
20s whose student visas have expired now working in Britain’s black economy. 
But on that supposition the prime minister and Home Office refuse to budge. 
Students must count as immigrants and vital ammunition is given to xenophobes 
and Eurosceptics.

The chancellor, Philip Hammond, is concerned that for these dubious reasons 
universities are going to be required to cut their international student 
numbers dramatically with severe consequences for their viability, foreign 
exchange earnings and Britain’s reputation for openness. He observed mildly 10 
days ago that it would be good to test public opinion to see if public 
objections to foreign students were so ferocious as to justify the policy of 
counting them as immigrants.Number 10 slapped him down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/students-could-be-left-out-of-immigration-figures-ministers-hint>
. The foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, who, as London mayor, spoke out 
strongly in favour of international students, has gone mute as foreign 
secretary. He proclaims openness to the globe rather than Europe, but it is a 
conviction that does not involve risking his career and new reputation as 
Europhobe in chief. What he does is to enable closure.

Britain cannot escape its history, its language or the opportunities and 
challenges afforded by globalisation. In our globalising times,China sends 
approximately 90,000 students a year to Britain, India 18,500, Malaysia 17,000, 
Hong Kong 16,000 and Singapore, Thailand and Pakistan some 7,000 each. 
<http://institutions.ukcisa.org.uk//info-for-universities-colleges--schools/policy-research--statistics/research--statistics/international-students-in-uk-he/>
 We should be proud that such numbers of students from these seven countries 
alone want to study here. Australia, Canada and the US will jump at the chance 
to host them as we turn them away, terrified they are all wannabe immigrants. 
Really? It is a savage indictment of our new public culture. I have lost count 
of the number of international students worried if they are wanted, whether 
they should apply for graduate studies and scared of the way the atmosphere 
around them is becoming more hostile.

Not one single Leave minister in the government speaks out for them, their 
cause or the international role of our universities despite their protestations 
of embracing the globe – that falls to Remainers such as Hammond or the 
universities minister, Jo Johnson. The Leavers are charlatans. I, for one, want 
my country back.
 