
The former senior counsel on the national child abuse inquiry has been cleared 
of any wrongdoing in an independent investigation by his chambers. Ben Emmerson 
QC, who quit the independent inquiry into child sexual abuse (IICSA) in 
September, was named in a BBC Newsnight programme after an inquiry worker 
revealed details of an alleged sexual assault in a lift.

The abuse inquiry, under the chairmanship of Prof Alexis Jay, has repeatedly 
refused to release any further information about Emmerson’s departure. His law 
chambers, Matrix, set up an independent inquiry into the allegations of sexual 
assault and sexual harassment. It was led by the former director of public 
prosecutions, Sir David Calvert-Smith.

Matrix said on Wednesday: “After examining the evidence, Sir David submitted 
his final report to the management committee earlier this week. In his report, 
Sir David concluded ‘without hesitation’ that Mr Emmerson had not committed any 
act of sexual assault or sexual harassment.”

Welcoming the inquiry’s findings, Emmerson said: “This has been a difficult 
period and I am naturally very pleased that an independent senior judge has now 
confirmed that the allegations against me were always unfounded. I hope that 
the inquiry can now be left to get on with its important work, free from 
unnecessary distractions.”

Emmerson resigned after being suspended by the inquiry over concerns, it said, 
“about aspects of Mr Emmerson’s leadership of the counsel team”. The prime 
minister, Theresa May, was forced to step in to express her confidence in the 
inquiry, which is costing £100m over five years.

A review of the inquiry’s work, which has been carried out by Jay, is due to 
be published in the near future.

The allegation of sexual harassment was not put to Emmerson before he resigned 
from the inquiry. Panel members on the inquiry were made aware of the 
allegations. The highly experienced QC had already made his decision to leave 
the child abuse inquiry before he was told about the allegation.

In the meantime, IICSA has formally launched a separate, independent 
examination of the way Emmerson’s resignation was handled. It may now ask why 
Emmerson was not asked about the now discredited allegation at the time so that 
he could respond.

Emmerson is now back working on international cases, his previous area of 
legal specialisation.


The human rights campaigner Helena Kennedy, who has worked with Emmerson, 
welcomed the independent inquiry’s finding that dismissed the allegations of 
sexual misconduct.


“I have known Ben for many, many years,” Lady Kennedy said. “He’s a feminist. 
He lives as he speaks. He had discussed this matter with me. He’s not someone 
who takes liberties with people. I shared his shock when a public allegation 
was made. I’m satisfied that it was ill-founded.”
 