
Two men and two women have been found guilty of offences relating to the 
exploitation of migrant workers in the Fenland area of Cambridgeshire.

All four were convicted of conspiring to acquire money by laundering 
fraudulent bank and PayPal transfers through migrants’ hijacked bank accounts. 
Three of the four were also found guilty of arranging sham marriages between EU 
migrant women and Asian men to facilitate unlawful immigration to the UK.


 Juris Valujevs, 37, his wife Oksana Valujeva, 35, their friend Lauma Vankova, 
27, all of King’s Lynn, and Ivars Mezals, 30, of Wisbech and Reading, persuaded 
fellow migrants from Latvia and Lithuania to open numerous bank accounts which 
they then controlled and used to launder thousands of pounds’ worth of 
criminally-acquired payments.

 The gateway to their operations was an illegal gangmaster operation run by 
Valujevs and Mezals out of Wisbech. That provided them with a steady turnover 
of migrant workers whose identities they could hijack, the court heard.

They recruited people in eastern Europe, or locally, on the promise of work, 
and housed them in crowded gang houses in the Wisbech area. Rent was typically 
£50-60 a week even when sleeping three or four to a room, and transport to the 
fields and factories was charged at £7-8 a day, even when work did not 
materialise, so that workers ended up controlled by debt to the men. Valujevs 
and Mezals were convicted and jailed at Blackfriars crown court in 2014 for 
acting as gangmasters without a licence.

 The four were also charged and tried in 2014 with pressuring female workers 
who had built up debt to them into sham marriages to pay off what they owed. 
Mezals was acquitted of the charge, while the jury failed to reach a verdict on 
the other three in the earlier trial.

But in the nine-week retrial, concluding at Huntingdon crown court this week, 
Valujevs, Valujeva and Vankova were found guilty on the additional count, which 
can carry a sentence of up to 10 years in prison. A fourth defendant on the 
criminal property charge, Valujevs’ stepfather, Laimonas Belka, was acquitted.

 The trial was the result of Operation Endeavour, a joint police and 
Gangmasters Licensing Authority investigation launched to tackle concern about 
the widespread exploitation of migrant workers and growing associated organised 
crime in the Fens. With a large swing to Ukip in elections and surveys 
suggesting many residents in the area want to leave the European Union because 
of fears over immigration, the issue has become politically charged.

DI Jenny Bristow said: “I hope this court case and the previous one have shown 
how seriously we and the courts take this type of exploitation.

“The operation run by the defendants left many people in abject poverty and 
debt and all four defendants ruthlessly took advantage of the victims for their 
own gain.

“We know the exploitation of vulnerable people, many of whom simply want to 
make a better life for themselves in the United Kingdom, is still happening. 
However, we are committed to working with colleagues in partner agencies to 
protect vulnerable people and bring those who commit criminal offences against 
them to justice.”

 Valujevs and Mezals were supplying workers to a raft of other gangmaster 
firms which in turn supplied large numbers of casual workers to industrial 
farms and factories in the region. Typically they were recruited to pick, cut 
and pack leeks, potatoes, cabbages, broccoli and flowers for supermarket supply 
chains across East Anglia.
 