
Four out of five young carers who look after sick, disabled or addicted family 
members receive no support from local authorities, theChildren’s commissioner 
for England <http://www.childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/> has said.

Although children who care for a relative are entitled to help from their 
council, an estimated 130,000 youngsters aged five to 17 did not receive any, 
according to research published by Anne Longfield.

The commissioner’s survey of English local authorities found there were 160 
carers aged under five, some of whom had been formally assessed and supported 
as carers, though it was not clear what responsibilities they had.

Longfield said it was unacceptable that so many young carers were “invisible” 
and were under the radar of local authorities.

I’m a child carer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/03/im-a-child-carer> 
“Not all children with caring responsibilities need support from their council 
but it is vital that those who do are properly assessed and the right help put 
in place. This report poses significant questions for local authorities about 
how they identify, assess and support young carers.”

Local authority leaders said that cuts to council funding meant resources were 
increasingly focused on children at risk of neglect or abuse, and this affected 
how much support they could provide for other children, including young carers.

Two local authorities anonymously told the commissioner that they did not 
provide enough support for young carers in their areas, with one estimating it 
helped only a third. Just under half of councils surveyed admitted that local 
agencies from schools to health services were poor at identifying young carers.

Charities in the sector told the commissioner that some councils carried out 
assessments of young carers but skimped on support. One said: “We are 
essentially carrying out assessments as a tick-box exercise. We are 
prioritising bureaucracy and not actually considering what we need to best help 
young carers.”

Longfield said she was concerned that some young carers were apparently under 
the age of five. “I will be following this up with those local authorities to 
clarify exactly what it is that these children are doing,” she said.

The legal definition of a young carer is “a person under 18 who provides or 
intends to provide care to another person”. They have a right to a needs 
assessment, which will determine whether the care they provide is excessive or 
inappropriate, especially if it impacts on their health, wellbeing or education.


Young carers may miss out on typical childhood experiences and opportunities, 
the commissioner said. They often struggle to make and maintain friendships and 
are at risk of falling behind at school. Some find it difficult to ask for help 
because they fear being taken into care. A quarter have care needs of their own.

The commissioner cites Children’s Society research 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/news-and-blogs/press-release/report-reveals-impact-young-carers>
 that found one in 12 young carers spends more than 15 hours a week in a caring 
role. One in five miss school because of caring responsibilities, and many do 
poorly in exams as a result.

The study surveyed 152 English councils with responsibility for young carers. 
Based on the returns of the 130 which replied, it calculated that 33,500 young 
carers were being supported. It came to the 130,000 figure of those not getting 
support by comparing this to the 166,000 young carers in England aged five to 17
from the 2011 census 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105160709/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/census/2011-census-analysis/provision-of-unpaid-care-in-england-and-wales--2011/sty-unpaid-care.html>
.

Cllr Richard Watts, the chair of the Local Government Association’s children 
and young people board, said: “Every young carer has a right to an assessment 
to find out if they need additional support, and councils will do all they can 
to provide this support where needs are identified.

“However, this is proving increasingly difficult as councils are forced to 
balance ongoing funding cuts with significant increases in demand for immediate 
child protection support to keep children safe from harm.

 “With councils facing a £1.9bn funding gap for children’s services by 2020, 
the limited funding available has to be carefully targeted at those children 
and young people who are in the greatest need.

“Unfortunately, this means that councils are forced to make increasingly 
difficult decisions about the level of support they are able to provide to 
other children and young people in their area, including some young carers.”
 