
Alan Pardew will have to wait and see if Wilfried Zaha’s exhilarating 
attacking improvisation is sufficient to pacify Crystal Palace’s critical 
American investors after his side once again displayed extreme defensive 
vulnerability.

Fernando Llorente double steers Swansea to vital win over Sunderland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/swansea-city-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
With Tom Huddlestone back to something approaching his imperious best in 
central midfield, Hull would have won had Fraizer Campbell not rescued Palace 
courtesy of an 89th-minute equaliser as Pardew made his first return to this 
ground since he infamously butted David Meyler here in March 2014.

Reunited, he and Meyler, a home substitute, maintained a safe distance but 
their measured interaction proved just about the only restrained thing about a 
thrilling afternoon spiced by stellar goals and kamikaze defending.

“It was more open than I’d have liked,” said Pardew, who had Zaha to thank for 
scoring a goal-of-the-season contender and then creating Campbell’s late 
equaliser. “But it was a good point for us – we’re happy to take it.”

Hull remain second bottom, three points behind Palace, but their wonderfully 
spirited performance left the manager, Mike Phelan, torn between joy and 
sorrow. “I thought we were going to get a massive win,” Phelan said. “We played 
some excellent football but it’s ended with disappointment and a bit 
of negativity.”

Endeavouring to arrest a run of eight defeats in 10 Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> games, Phelan reverted to 
3-5-2 and relocated Robert Snodgrass from the right wing to an outright 
attacking role alongside Adama Diomandé.

It would prove an exciting blueprint but was almost ripped up within minutes. 
Palace threatened to assume an early lead when, cutting in from the right, Zaha 
sashayed his way beyond three markers before unleashing a low, angled shot, 
finger-tipped away for a corner by David Marshall.

Reprieved, Hull settled into a reasonably convincing passing rhythm and Wayne 
Hennessey could find no answer to Snodgrass’s impeccably executed left‑footed 
penalty.

It was awarded after he took a tumble in the face of Scott Dann. Mike Jones, 
the referee, bought it but there had been no contact and even Snodgrass’s 
biggest fans would acknowledge he was lucky not to be booked for diving. Indeed 
considering the Scotland creator had just been handed a yellow card for tugging 
at Christian Benteke’s shirt, Hull’s most gifted player was rather fortunate 
not to have been sent off.

With the hood of his club anorak pulled up in the face of driving rain, Pardew 
seemed a study in misery. He retains the support of Steve Parish, his chairman, 
but Josh Harris and David Blitzer, Palace’s two key American backers, were 
unimpressed to hear the manager talk about “investors who don’t know a lot 
about football” following the 3-0 win against Southampton last week.

That victory ended a run of six successive defeats and Pardew’s mission here 
was to provide further proof of revival; to emphasise why he should not be 
replaced by Sam Allardyce. The necessary evidence ultimately appeared 
contradictory and looked a little thin on the ground as Hull began the second 
half brightly but then divine retribution – or might it have been the referee’s 
guilty conscience? – intervened and Snodgrass conceded a soft penalty for 
tripping Zaha. Up stepped Benteke, his nonchalant side-foot sending Marshall 
the wrong way.

Pardew had switched to a back three and must have thought everything was going 
to plan when a partially cleared corner fell to Zaha. After delighting in 
changing pace, switching feet and bamboozling Sam Clucas, he lashed a sublime 
shot beyond Marshall.

Almost instantly, the Palace manager’s smile faded as Diomandé’s sharp, clever 
turn wrong-footed Damien Delaney before the striker nutmegged Dann and dinked 
the ball past Hennessey to claim his first goal in 13 games.

Not content with levelling matters, Hull regained the lead after Jake 
Livermore rounded off a one-two with the influential Snodgrass by squeezing a 
superlative shot partly facilitated by atrocious defending from Dann and Yohan 
Cabaye inside a post.

Shortly afterwards came a costly miss featuring Clucas heading marginally 
wide, which set the scene for Campbell’s connection with Zaha’s last-gasp 
cross. As the substitute’s looping header hit the net, Snodgrass immediately 
threw himself to the ground again – this time, in despair.
 