
Liberal Europe is fighting for its life. Across our continent, it is suffering 
reverse after reverse before the onslaught of violent jihadism, which in turn 
can provoke Islamophobia. In vain do European liberal leaders – politicians, 
philosophers, civic officials and even some journalists – counsel against 
stigmatising an entire religion for each successive crazed killing. The wider 
population is less willing to hear pleas to hold its nerve. Muslims should be 
confronted and stigmatised. Let there be a clash of civilisations.

I told a close friend I was planning to write about the several French seaside 
resorts that havebanned the burkini, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/nice-becomes-latest-french-city-to-impose-burkini-ban>
 backed by the prime minister, Manuel Valls, andGermany’s proposed partial ban 
on wearing the burqa in public places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/german-interior-minister-backs-burqa-bans-public-places>
. This comes with the gathering strength of mainstream feeling in both 
countries that they need to affirm their secular values and identity, not least 
to close down opportunities for the extreme right.

German minister to propose ban on full face veils in wake of attacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/german-minister-to-propose-ban-on-full-face-veils-in-wake-of-attacks>
I don’t get it, my friend said, anticipating my argument. Yes, many Muslims 
share our values. But liberals like you connive in not condemning a religion 
and culture, dimensions of which are offensive not just to what you believe in, 
but to any conception of universal human values.Islam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> – or versions of it – either indulges 
or actively supports misogyny, homophobia, medieval conceptions of justice, 
stoning, genital mutilation and oppression of women. Women covering their 
bodies in public is not even required by the Qur’an. It is rank oppression of 
women by men. Yet it is left to the populist right to acknowledge these truths. 
Liberals like you plead for tolerance of the intolerable.

We don’t. Of course those illiberal dimensions are damnable and offend not 
just the canons of a liberal society but of any statement of universal human 
rights and values. One might also agree with the German interior minister who 
argued that burqas undermine social cohesion and are intrinsically divisive. 
The same is true of covering up on the beach. But is the best way to respond by 
descending into bans? Is it right, desirable or likely to be effective? Who 
ever won or wants such a clash of civilisations?

It has become fashionable to lampoon multiculturalism and its respect for 
diversity as a source of our problems in Britain. But assimilationist, 
anti-multicultural France,which banned wearing the burqa six years ago 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/10611398>, finds itself as the epicentre of Islamic 
terrorist attacks in Europe. The first waves of Muslim immigrants into France 
(from North Africa), into Germany (from Turkey) and Britain (from Pakistan and 
Bangladesh) were broadly secular; mosque attendance was minimal. Today in all 
three countries it is rising, as is the wearing of symbols of religious and 
ethnic identity. That’s the case whether a country has championed 
multiculturalism, as in Germany or Britain, or assimilation, as in France. 
Identity, in 2016, has come to matter more, not less, for both Muslims and 
wider populations alike. Until that changes, the chances of an internal 
revolution in Islamic cultural attitudes – towards women, gays, justice and 
even tolerance to other religions – are minimal.

A teacher I know, in a Welsh town, said how shocked she was at the scale of 
the anti-Islam prejudice she encountered

The rise of identity politics is fundamental. Contemporary western societies 
have become very weak in offering their citizens meaning. The French writer
Michel Houellebecq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/06/michel-houellebecq-submission-am-i-islamophobic-probably-yes>
, whose bestselling book,Submission, in which an Islamicised France in 2022 
meekly accepts the veiling of women, sharia and the compulsory teaching of 
Islam in schools, says that Enlightenment man and woman live barren and empty 
lives.

The ease with which his imaginary Islamic president, Ben Abbes, elected by a 
coalition of left and centrist parties to block Marine Le Pen, is able to 
impose Islamicisation on France is down to the degenerate nature of French 
society itself. Or so runs the novel’s argument. The elite feather their nests 
in remote, amoral companies, while the rest are left to fend for themselves in 
a world of cold suburbs and weak civic and social institutions, consoled by 
shopping, drugs, casual sex and the silos of social media. Abbes has a purpose 
and mission before whichFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> is 
defenceless.

This is fiction – but illuminating. A teacher of my acquaintance, in a once 
thriving Welsh mining and steel town, said how shocked she was at the scale of 
the casual misogyny, homophobia and anti-immigrant/anti-Islam prejudice she 
encountered among parents, children and even some teachers. The strong trade 
unions and chapels that had sustained better values had almost disappeared. 
Inevitably, the town voted for Brexit, even though, as a major recipient of EU 
money, it would create recession and misery. What mattered was identity.

Successful liberal societies depend on multiple civic and social bodies, 
charged with purpose, that embody liberal values, from trade unions to sports 
clubs, employee-owned companies to libraries. Supporting them gives a meaning 
to lives and an inner self-confidence that lessens the imagined threat from 
diverse others and makes people readier to hear invocations to citizenship and 
universal values.

What went wrong with multiculturalism, as Kenan Malik argues in a fine article 
inForeign Affairs 
<https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/western-europe/failure-multiculturalism>
, is not its respect for diversity. Rather, as implemented, it created a 
network of competing monocultures fostering antagonistic separateness. Equally, 
what has gone wrong in France, with its belief in assimilation, is not the 
commitment to universal values. Rather, it is that such statements are cast as 
those of the majority “tribe” confronting a hostile other in a sort of war, the 
language too readily deployed in France. Muslims are not part of the tribe. 
Both mistakes should be avoided and the good components built on.

What is required is not burqa and burkini bans or, indeed, measures in Britain 
such asPrevent <http://www.ltai.info/what-is-prevent/>, which, for all its 
apparent rational intent to close down opportunities for hate speech, only 
stigmatises Muslims as “other”. Instead, we need continual clarion calls to 
uphold universal values and a characterisation of jihadism as conducted by the 
deranged who need medical treatment, rather than legitimisation as warlords.

We also need an insistence on mutual tolerance as the only long-term solution 
and a huge effort to create economic and social institutions that offer more 
meaning for the mass of our citizenry. If that is pie in the sky, the 
alternative is a war of civilisations and, with it, the collapse of liberal 
society. Nobody, I hope, wants that.
 