
The Brazilian president, Michel Temer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/michel-temer>, faced a crisis on Friday 
after a former cabinet colleague placed him directly in the line of fire of 
corruption allegations.

The scandal, which immediately forced the resignation of a key aide, looks set 
to pose the greatest challenge yet to a six-month-old administration that is 
also struggling with a dire recession and political turmoil which led earlier 
this year tothe impeachment of Dilma Rousseff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/dilma-rousseff-impeached-president-brazilian-senate-michel-temer>
.


The crisis exploded when the former culture minister Marcelo Calero alleged to 
federal investigators that Temer put pressure on him to sidestep a heritage 
preservation order that was holding up construction on a tower block in the 
north-eastern city of Salvador.


An apartment in the luxury residence had been bought by the president’s close 
ally Geddel Vieira Lima, who stepped down on Friday as minister in charge of 
relations with Brazil’s congress as a result of the revelations.

Temer has denied wrongdoing, but he is now in the sights of opposition 
politicians, who say they will use the case to open impeachment proceedings.


Although this is unlikely to pass a congress dominated by government 
supporters, it could antagonise the public and complicate Temer’s efforts to 
push through a package of austerity measures.


Much is likely to depend on secret recordings that Calero reportedly made of 
conversations with the president. The content has yet to be made public, but 
any suggestion of influence peddling could prompt the public prosecutor and 
supreme court to open an investigation.


The latest upheaval comes at a sensitive moment for the administration, which 
is planning to propose a pension reform bill as a step towards rebalancing 
state finances. The measure faces fierce opposition from unions.


Brazil’s political system is widely seen as discredited in the wake of the 
Lava Jato investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/brazil-government-crisis-briefing-dilma-rousseff-lula-petrobas>
, which has implicated more than 50 senators and deputies. Public fury has been 
further fuelled by recent congressional attempts to pass an amnesty bill for 
campaign finance violations.


Carlos Alberto de Melo of the São Paulo-based Institute of Research and 
Education said Temer is already hamstrung by unpopularity and the latest 
allegations are grave enough to make his situation worse.

“There is an agenda of unpopular reforms, and a situation of moral crisis 
doesn’t help,” he said.
 