
Many Australians are aghast at the confronting images of the abuse and torture 
of Aboriginal children in the Northern Territory that finally hit critical 
media and political mass this week.


It was mostly politicians (and not all of them non-Indigenous) who expressed 
“shock” that such abuse of young Aboriginal people could happen in a supposedly 
civilised place like Australia.


As the writer and Indigenous activist Tony Birch noted in a piece 
<https://medium.com/@tonybirch/human-rights-colonisation-and-destruction-of-country-a2c607ac3426#.a09w8fbhp>
 drawing the lines between colonialism, brutality and violence against ecology 
and country: “That it was a shock to many people is itself a stain on the 
nation.”


Quite.

It’s the stain that runs through the raw material of history – oral and 
written recollections of the violence enacted against Indigenous people that 
cannot be defined away merely as colonial transgression. It’s the bloodstain on 
the country in the continent that came to be known as Australia. And it’s the 
stain of Indigenous tears and sweat and blood in hundreds of stinking police 
cells and paddy wagons that was highlighted a quarter of a century ago and then 
promptly forgotten.

Children in solitary confinement: we must stop treating kids in the system 
like adults | Anna Copeland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/commentisfree/2016/jul/29/children-in-solitary-confinement-we-must-stop-treating-kids-in-the-system-like-adults>
It’s the stain of omission from too much of the non-Indigenous telling of this 
country’s past and present in the history books, in the media, in general 
cultural conversation.

From the earliest post-invasion times, Indigenous children were more than just 
the innocent bystanders to the violence afflicted upon their elders. At the 
massacre sites that dot the Australian landscape, where shattered bones are 
still, today, laid bare by the elements, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
children were rarely spared.

When they were, what came next was sometimes a living purgatory, a brief life 
as a chattel, a wild creature to be tamed, whitened on the inside and, if that 
proved too difficult, dispensed with or abandoned.

I’ve recounted how fortunate I felt to be wearing white cotton gloves when 
handling, a few years ago, the memoir written by Korah Halcomb Wills, an 
English “settler” on the Queensland frontier where perhaps the worst excesses 
of violence against Indigenous people happened in the 19th and 20th centuries.

Fortunate, because it meant I didn’t have to directly touch the pages that had 
been in contact with the skin of this man, a former mayor of Bowen, Queensland, 
who boasted of massacring Aboriginal people andin one case of chopping a male 
victim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/15/why-the-number-of-indigenous-deaths-in-the-frontier-wars-matters>
into pieces that he could trophy.

He stuffed the body parts into his saddle bags to take back to Bowen.

Of the aftermath of that massacre, he wrote, “ ... selected a little girl with 
the intention of civilising and one of my friends thought he would select a boy 
for the same purpose”.

Of the decapitated body of his adult victim, Wills wrote: “I packed them home 
to Bowen as well as my little protégée of a girl let me who rode on the front 
of my saddle and crying nearly all the way.

“I took compassion on her and decided to take her home and bring her up with 
my own children which I did, I even sent her to school with my own [in 
Melbourne].”

But it didn’t work out. The child became ill in the southern chill and died.

Wills seemed far more upset about the death of his favourite horse.

Wills (apparently bemused that an abducted Aboriginal child would cry while 
riding on a horse with the remnants of a relative, perhaps her father) was a 
monster, sure enough. But the frontier – and later the federation, from 1901 up 
and until today – is replete with monstrous acts committed against Indigenous 
children, from the Darling Downs to Don Dale, through the stolen generations 
and all the way back to Lachlan Macquarie’s “native institution” for children 
at Parramatta.

Macquarie ordered his troops steal children and take them to be “civilised” at 
Paramatta.

In his instructions for military operations against the tribes around Appin 
two centuries ago, in which many Aboriginal men, women and children were 
murdered, Macquarie ordered his troops: “Select and secure that number [12 
Aboriginal boys and six girls, aged between four and six] of fine healthy 
good-looking children from the whole of the Native Prisoners of war taken in 
the course of your operations and direct them to be delivered to ... the Native 
Institution at Parramatta.”

They were among the first of many stolen generations of Indigenous children to 
follow.

Macquarie has attracted too many hagiographers. They’ve portrayed him as a 
renaissance governor who began to “civilise” and internationalise the colony. 
But they’ve turned a blind eye to his acute personal failings and, most 
importantly, his brutality towards the local tribes, not least the children.

I’ve written before about his use of “terror” (his word) tactics against the 
local Indigenous people. Thefull sordid story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/apr/05/lachlan-macquarie-was-no-humanitarian-his-own-words-show-he-was-a-terrorist>
 of his treatment of Aboriginal children at Paramatta is now beginning to 
emerge.

The Australian archives are filled with stories of the brutal treatment of 
Indigenous children on the post-invasion frontier, not least in the church-run 
missions. Meanwhile, remarkable scholarly work has highlighted the widespread 
abuse of Indigenous children in colonial and post-federation Australian.

One of the most important works to date is Shirleene Robinson’s Something like 
Slavery? Queensland’s Aboriginal Child Workers, 1842-1945, which highlights the 
institutional use and abuse of Indigenous young people.

The stories are sickening. But they don’t shock those who’ve bothered to look 
for the truth about the way young Indigenous people, like their elders, have 
been treated since James Cook sailed into Botany Bay in 1770 and, at thefirst 
moment of east coast contact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/09/indigenous-australians-enduring-civilisation-british-museum-repatriation>
, shot a couple of blackfellas and stole their shield and spears.

And this, of course, brings us full circle to the Northern Territory (long a 
national frontrunner in the shameful human rights abuses of Indigenous people) 
and the notice Australia has now taken because of the Don Dale youth detention 
centre.

A royal commission in the territory might well go some way toward highlighting 
what we already know at the core of our dark national heart, but are loth to 
admit: a non-Indigenous assumption, seeded in the colonies, that black lives 
are of lesser value, still shamefully thrives in sections of our justice, law 
and order, and political systems.

Don't tell me to 'get over' a colonial past that is still being implemented 
today | Luke Pearson for IndigenousX
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/commentisfree/2016/apr/02/dont-tell-me-to-get-over-a-colonialism-that-is-still-being-implemented-today>
The commission may be a balm for the distress and shock purportedly 
experienced by non-Indigenous politicians. But it will not assuage the 
understandable cynicism and anger of many Indigenous people who rightly have 
little faith in the power of the royal commission to change black lives.

The commission into Aboriginal deaths in custody reported a quarter of a 
century ago. Indigenous incarceration rates have since gone off the chart while 
far too many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people still die behind bars.

Those who know this will be neither shocked nor surprised at any terrible 
thing about the abuse of Australian Indigenous human rights the commission 
might uncover.

Because they know that what we witnessed this week is part of a continuum that 
began with invasion, land theft and widespread murder. And it manifests today, 
through generations of reverberating trauma, in the profound social and 
economic disadvantage that gave us Don Dale.

And, yet, governments will still wonder why it is that perhaps as few as 25% of
eligible Indigenous Australians bother to vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/30/only-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why>
.
 