

Japan has lifted all tsunami warnings issued after a 7.4-magnitude earthquake 
hit off the country’s east coast, as the risk of major damage appeared to pass.

The quake, which struck east of Fukushima prefecture at about 6am on Tuesday, 
prompted urgent warnings for people to leave low-lying areas in Fukushima and 
Miyagi prefectures as a series of tsunami waves hit the shore.

The warnings allowed for the possibility of waves of up to 3m (10 feet) along 
the country’s north-east Pacific coast, but the highest recorded wave, of 1.4m 
(4.6 feet), was observed at Sendai port shortly after 8am.

The tsunami warnings in Fukushima and Miyagi were downgraded to the less 
severe status of advisories nearly four hours after the initial quake, although 
people were still urged to stay away from coastal areas. Similar tsunami 
advisories also remained in place in Iwate and Ibaraki prefectures, until all 
advisories were finally lifted nearly seven hours after the earthquake.

There were no reports of severe injuries from the quake, which struck at a 
depth of 30 km (18.6 miles), according to theJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> Meteorological Agency.

In a statement, the agency said the earthquake was thought to be an aftershock 
of the 9.0-magnitude event that devastated the same region in 2011. The region 
was also hit by a series of weaker quakes throughout Tuesday.

The Tokyo Electric Power Company said it had restored a cooling system at the 
Fukushima Daini nuclear power plant that briefly stopped after the quake, 
national broadcaster NHK reported.

The car maker Nissan suspended work at its Fukushima factory, which was badly 
damaged by the 2011 disaster known as the Great East Japan Earthquake. A 
spokesman for the company told the Guardian all employees had been evacuated 
from the plant, which is in the city of Iwaki, and the factory was unlikely to 
return to operation on Tuesday.

Meanwhile, firefighting officials in Iwaki in Fukushima said a fire broke out 
at a petrochemical complex and was later extinguished, NHK said.
japan earthquake map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/nov/2016-11-21T21:31:41.html> 
Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, who is overseas for meetings, said the 
government would work with local governments to help any affected areas.

“From my side, to the nation, we asked that proper and accurate information 
over the tsunami and the evacuation should be issued, and also to grasp and 
understand the condition of the damage as quickly as possible, and also to take 
proper emergency measures,” he said.

Twelve people have suffered injuries, NHK reported, including an elderly woman 
in Fukushima prefecture who was said to have been hurt when a cupboard toppled 
over. The quake also shook other parts of Japan, including Tokyo.

Earthquakes <https://www.theguardian.com/world/earthquakes> are common in 
Japan, one of the world’s most seismically active areas. Japan accounts for 
about 20% of the world’s earthquakes of magnitude 6 or greater.

The devastating 11 March 2011 quake was magnitude 9, the strongest quake in 
Japan on record. The massive tsunami it triggered caused world’s worst nuclear 
crisis since Chernobyl.

All nuclear plants on the coast threatened by the tsunami remain closed in the 
wake of the Fukushima disaster.

Only two reactors are operating in Japan, both in the south-west of the 
country.

Even when in shutdown nuclear plants need cooling systems operating to keep 
spent fuel cool.



Benjamin Haas and Reuters contributed to this report
 