
Jim Furyk was an unlikely challenger at the start of the week but he eased 
quietly, inconspicuously even, to his first major championship when he won the 
US Open in Chicago yesterday.

Throughout the day none of his pursuers succeeded in putting pressure on an 
imperturbable man who, because of his receding hairline and nondescript 
features, looks much older than his 33 years.

One of Furyk's sponsors is the ball manufacturer Strata, and he wears its logo 
of four playing cards on his cap. This is not to indicate that he is Ol' Poker 
Face, although that in itself would be suitable, rather that he was holding all 
four aces yesterday.

He began the day three strokes ahead of the Australian Stephen Leaney, built 
that up to five at the turn and, as the rest of the field blew up around him, 
strolled to victory. His final round of 72 gave him a total of 272, eight under 
par, three strokes ahead of Leaney, who in turn was four strokes ahead of Kenny 
Perry and Mike Weir.

Furyk knows he is not the most talented player on the US Tour and he also 
knows he has a swing that is so unconventional that only he, or his golf pro 
father who gave it to him, can put it right if it goes wrong.

So in order to make the most of what he has, he organises himself into a 
routine which not only never varies, it also gives him plenty of time for the 
hard maintenance work he has to put into his game.

On Saturday he said: "There's a method I've worked out in the 10 years I've 
been on tour that enables me to play my best and I go through that same routine 
every week." He also formulates a game plan for every course he plays and 
sticks with it rigidly.

That is precisely what he did at the start of yesterday's round. He has been 
taking a three-wood off the 1st tee all week, despite the fact that it leaves 
him some 280 yards from the green. His reasoning is that it also leaves him on 
the fairway with a good chance of a pitch-and-putt birdie, and although that 
failed to materialise on the 1st yesterday he got a settling par.

In fact he got five on the trot, while many of his challengers were 
self-destructing. Vijay Singh was seen by many as the man most likely to put 
pressure on Furyk but he double-bogeyed the 3rd, bogeyed the 5th and 8th and by 
the turn was only two under and a distant nine strokes behind.

Nick Price went from five under and five behind overnight to two under by the 
8th and only Leaney, completely unknown in America but four times a winner on 
the European tour, was keeping Furyk any kind of company. He never got close 
enough, however, to make Furyk think, or blink.

It was not a good week for the European contingent - it rarely is these days - 
but Justin Rose, with a splendid final round of 69 for a level par 280, crept 
into the top10. He had three birdies, two bogeys and his scores this week have 
been wonderfully consistent - 70, 71, 70, 69. Padraig Harrington, with a 68 for 
281, was also impressive but this obsessive practiser admitted that perhaps he 
had been over-working.

"I wasn't as sharp on the greens as I should have been," he said, "and that's 
because I was tired. I've been overdoing it a little bit."

Sergio Garcia felt that his swing changes were progressing and he played 
reasonably well for three rounds of 69, 71 and 71 but a second-round 74 
intruded. Darren Clarke's declared policy of all-out attack did not bring him 
the required results either. To succeed it needed him to play at his talented 
best, but aggressiveness on a US Open course is a high-risk strategy.

Yesterday the Ulsterman had a triple bogey at the par-four 12th and a six at 
the long sixth for a 75 and a 286 total. Colin Montgomerie and Bernhard Langer 
matched him on that mark, Niklas Fasth was one worse while Brian Davis and Alex 
Cejka were both 12-over, 292.

Tiger Woods is in a state of denial about his game. He keeps saying he is 
playing well when he quite obviously is not. The fact that he ended this 
championship without a major to his name and finished with a 72 yesterday for 
three over par is evidence of that.

One reporter dared to ask him a question on Saturday that contained the 's' 
word. "In a slump?" replied Woods. "I've played seven events this year and won 
three of them and you're trying to tell me I'm in a slump?"

But that response did not take account of the fact that the world No1 is not 
measured by how many ordinary tournaments he wins, but how many majors. He 
constantly tells the world he is motivated almost exclusively by majors and 
that his season revolves around them and if that is so he can expect more of 
the kind of questions he clearly does not like.

Since that magnificent run of his when he took the Tiger Slam - all four 
consecutively but three in 2000 and one in 2001 and therefore not a calendar 
slam - there have been nine majors and he has won "only" two.

By ordinary standards that is still a great achievement but not by the 
standards he has set for himself and there is a clear, statistical reason for 
it.

The evidence of the eye is supported by the facts; that Woods cannot drive the 
ball straight enough often enough. After four rounds at Olympia Fields - a very 
ordinary course for a US Open - he had hit only 34 out of a possible 54 
fairways.

Although the rough this week is not as penal as usual, it is still better 
avoided. Because he hasn't, Woods was a disappointing 24th-best in the most 
important statistic of all, the number of greens hit in regulation figures. He 
hit only 49 out of 72, which is not good enough for a world No1. His percentage 
of fairways hit was 60, of greens hit 68, which was the reason why he has once 
again finished down in the pack.

Afterwards, as has become usual, he said: "I was so close to putting it all 
together." Well yes, close, but once again, no cigar.
 