
Gareth Bale intends to see out his career with Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> after the Welshman signed a 
six-year contract at the Bernabéu that runs until 2022, when he will be 33. He 
insisted that he made the right decision when he signed from Tottenham Hotspur 
for £85m three years ago, and when it came to his future there was only one 
decision: to stay in Spain.

His official buy-out clause, more deterrent than price tag, is set at £900m 
(€1bn).

Asked if he saw his career ending in Spain, Bale replied: “Yeah, for sure. The 
reason that I have signed [this extension] is that I am very happy. I feel 
comfortable, my Spanish is improving, my family is more settled. I don’t know 
when I am going to retire [but] I fully intend to see out my contract here.”

Bale had appeared at the Bernabéu just after 1.30pm, joined by the club’s 
director of institutional affairs, the former striker Emilio Butragueño. 
“You’re a fundamental man for us and we’re satisfied that you will be with us 
at least until 2022,” Butragueño said before giving way to a video of the 
Welshman’s best moments at the club – two European Cups, a Copa del Rey and the 
World Club Cup among them. “Gracias,” Bale said, adding in Spanish: “Good 
afternoon. My Spanish is getting better but I prefer to speak in English.”

Just not to English clubs. “I couldn’t tell you if anyone was interested,” 
Bale insisted, when he was asked about reports of bids fromManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and other Premier 
League clubs. “Since I have been here I have been fully concentrated on Madrid. 
I am happy here which is why I signed a deal. We never speak about these things 
[interest from other clubs]. If they have [asked about me], they have; we never 
really speak about it.”

There have been occasional approaches from English clubs, including United, 
about bringing Bale back but they never went beyond informal enquiries and met 
with little encouragement.

The door is open, his camp were told, but Bale closed it. His mind has been 
made up and preliminary negotiations began last season, with him feeling more 
settled and better integrated than ever before after a second season which he 
admitted had been difficult. The conclusion was clear: no club could offer what 
Real Madrid can.

“It’s Real Madrid: it’s the biggest club in the world,” Bale said. “I grew up 
watching the Premier League and Real Madrid. When an opportunity comes up to 
pay for Real Madrid you don’t turn it down. I came here to learn a different 
type of football, to progress. I definitely made the right decision. I have won 
two Champions Leagues; that’s better than anyone in the last three years. I 
want to keep doing that. Real Madrid matches all my ambitions.”

The anticipation is for Bale to take on ever-increasing responsibilities, 
although conversations over the new contract did not include the manager, 
Zinédine Zidane. “I don’t really see myself as a speaking leader but I like to 
lead by example on the pitch,” he said. “The longer you stay at a club, the 
more integrated you become and the more leadership you get.

“It’s been a difficult journey,” he admitted. “It’s hard for British players 
to go abroad. I have had my difficult times. It’s all a learning curve and I 
have grown as a person.

“There are bad moments in football but I think the important thing is how you 
react. It is easy to pack up and leave but it takes more character to stay and 
fight. I have grown up believing that if things are not right you work hard to 
make it right. The most important thing for me is that I feel happy here. I 
feel loved here by the fans.”

And loved by the club’s president, Florentino Pérez, above all. Pérez has 
always considered him a future winner of the Ballon d’Or. Bale, though, 
insisted that he has never dreamed of winning the award. He has felt extremely 
well looked-after since he arrived and his camp found Madrid immediately 
receptive during the negotiations, quickly reaching the basis of an agreement 
even though the construction of the contract was complex. They see Bale as the 
successor to Cristiano Ronaldo – and sooner rather than later.

Gareth Bale becomes best-paid player with £150m Real Madrid contract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/30/gareth-bale-real-madrid-new-contract-2022> 