
Britain could be awarded medals eight years after the Beijing Olympics 
following revelations that 14 Russian Olympians are among the 31 retrospective 
dopers from 2008.

Goldie Sayers, who was fourth in the javelin, and Britain’s 4x400m men’s relay 
team – Martyn Rooney, Robert Tobin, Michael Bingham and Andrew Steele – who 
also finished fourth, could be bumped up to medal status after prohibited 
substances were allegedly found in samples from rivals who were placed above 
them.

Yelena Isinbayeva says Russia’s Olympic ban violates her human rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/yelena-isinbayeva-russia-olympic-ban-human-rights>
The Russian state news agency Tass said 11 of the 14 alleged positives – from 
a total of 31 across 12 countries – were by individuals competing in track and 
field events, casting further doubt over Russia’s participation in athletics at 
the Rio Olympics this summer. Details have emerged after retrospective testing 
by the International Olympic Committee, which examined 454 urine samples from 
Beijing using new techniques. Retrospective testing from London 2012 is set to 
be completed by the end of this month.

Steele, part of the relay team in China, admitted to mixed emotions at the 
news. He said: “I don’t want to get carried away until the news is officially 
confirmed but right now my emotions are a bizarre mixture of happiness and 
anger. It is very unusual to celebrate something as special as an Olympic medal 
eight years on and of course I’ve missed out on standing on the podium at the 
Olympic Stadium in Beijing.

“We were quite a young team in Beijing but we were frustrated to finish 
fourth, because I think we ran the fastest 4x400m time ever in an Olympics that 
didn’t earn a medal. To be honest, we didn’t expect Russia to be a threat. We 
thought if we ran 2:58 we’d get a medal but the guy who is alleged to have 
doped ran a 43.4 sec 400m, which was incredibly fast. After that we had our 
suspicions. I can’t help thinking how much an Olympic medal would have changed 
our lives.”

Former head of Russian anti-doping lab to be interviewed by Wada
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/20/russian-head-anti-doping-interviewed-wada>
Asked if those athletes bumped up to medal status should be able to stand on 
the podium in Rio, he said: “Definitely. Not only would it be a nice 
consolation prize for all us athletes who were deprived of a rightful medal but 
it would show that the IOC are acknowledging the issue.”

Match TV in Russia and Tass named the bronze medal-winning high-jumper Anna 
Chicherova, who won gold at London 2012, among those who tested positive from 
Beijing. Other names include Maria Abakumova, who won javelin silver, and Denis 
Alekseyev, a member of the Russian bronze-winning 4x400m relay team.

The 50km walk bronze medallist, Denis Nizhegorodov, was also named among the 
suspected dopers while the three positives outside track and field came from 
weightlifting and rowing.

While the IOC has yet to confirm the results Chicherova’s coach, Yevgeniy 
Zagorulko, told Tass: “Three days ago, Anna received a notice that her doping 
sample from the Beijing Olympic tested positive after a re-check and she called 
me. So far, this is at the development stage and this has not yet been finally 
confirmed. But all are aware of this and are dealing with the issue.”

The IOC will not formally name those guilty of doping until “B” samples have 
been examined at the start of June but the revelations put further pressure on 
the International Association ofAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Federations to uphold its current 
suspension of Russia until after the Rio Olympics this summer. A decision will 
be made on 17 June.

A statement from the Russian Ministry of Sport read: “The Ministry of Sport is 
extremely disappointed that Russian athletes are among those found to have 
violated anti-doping rules at the 2008 Beijing Olympics after retesting their 
samples. All the athletes found cheating should face corresponding sanctions. 
We have taken numerous steps to eradicate the issue of doping, and understand 
that the roots of the problem, particularly in athletics, go back to the past.”
 