
Last week, the Sierra Club left San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco>, its home since its 
founding 124 years ago. Like so many individuals and institutions, it was 
pushed out by high rent.

The Club, the US’s largest grassroots environmental organization, will be fine 
in its new home across the bay in Oakland; it’s San Francisco I worry about.

Contemporary gentrification is an often violent process by which a complex and 
diverse urban environment becomes more homogeneous and exclusionary. It does to 
neighborhoods and cities what climate change is doing to the earth: driving out 
fragile and deeply rooted species, and pushing the poor past the brink.

Think of climate change as a globalized form of gentrification, reducing 
complex environments, uprooting species and cultures, punishing the poor and 
rewarding the rich – or at least leaving them out of the purges. After all, the 
reason why climate change continues unabated long after most of the world has 
acknowledged its seriousness is that it’s profitable for some, notably fossil 
fuel companies, and not threatening enough to the people in power. You can buy 
your way out of a lot of trouble, if watching the suffering and annihilation of 
others doesn’t trouble you.

Death by gentrification: the killing that shamed San Francisco | Rebecca Solnit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/21/death-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco>
Thanks to climate change, there is already immense suffering and loss, of 
places, species, crops, homes. The poor are often the people deeply rooted in 
place, whether they’re fisherfolk in the Mekong Delta (due to go underwater 
from rising seas) or farmers in desertifying Africa or India, where a horrific 
heatwave and droughtkilled at least 300 last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/30/daytime-cooking-ban-in-india-as-heatwave-claims-300-lives>
 and left 330 million without enough water. The rich can always move on if 
their beachfront home floods or the weather in the Azores or Miami becomes 
unbearable, as it did last month in Cambodia during “the most intense heatwave 
ever observed in south-east Asia”, where the temperature reached 108.7F (42.6C) 
for the first time ever recorded.

Climate change produces famine, but the elite won’t starve. Billionaire 
investment leaderWarren Buffett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/warrenbuffett> wrote to his flock at 
Berkshire Hathaway that “as a homeowner in a low-lying area, you may wish to 
consider moving. But when you are thinking only as a shareholder of a major 
insurer, climate change should not be on your list of worries.”

This is what I thought about when I heard that the Sierra Club left San 
Francisco last week. I’m sure you’ve heard that the boom in Silicon Valley has 
brought in hordes of well-paid tech workers, creating wildly escalating housing 
costs and scarcity and pushing out many longtime residents. Silicon Valley’s 
well-paid workforce is disproportionately white, male and young. 
Schoolteachers, nurses, mechanics and other vital workers are being pushed out 
of an increasingly homogeneous central Bay Area, and homelessness is an 
escalating crisis.

Similar gentrification crises afflict cities around the world. For me, this 
matters because cities have been our brains trusts, our radical thinktanks, our 
revolutionary incubators. What will they be when no one can afford them unless 
they’re born rich or fall in line with the industries that provide sky-high 
salaries?

“It’s sad to be leaving a place that’s been so important to the Sierra Club 
for such a long time,” Michael Brune, the Sierra Club’s executive director 
since 2010, told me. “The revolutionary spirit, people who lead lives that are 
wild and free: some of that seems to be leaving. It would’ve cost us between 
half and three quarters of a million [dollars] more to stay. There’s no way to 
justify spending that when we have a planet to save.”

The club was founded with a mission to foster mountaineering expeditions and 
protect the Sierra Nevada mountains but morphed into a ferocious combatant over 
environmental issues around the country. Environmentalism itself has changed 
colossally in the past century, from putting fences around the nicest places to 
recognizing that you have to defend the whole system. Which the club does with 
vigor, playing a role at theParis climate conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
 last December and at the protests surrounding it.

The Paris conference made clear what the conflict over climate change is 
really about. The poor nations, from the Philippines to Bolivia to Bangladesh, 
are fighting to protect life, for human beings and for the ecosystems they 
depend upon. Many in the wealthy countries are fighting to protect wealth, for 
the fossil fuel companies, investors and elites. Distilled down, the message 
from the global north is often something like, “it’s you or our bottom line, 
and sorry, it’s not you”.

Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> will 
cost us all in the end, or at least will cost ordinary people in the wealthy 
countries. Trillions of dollars will be lost, but the burden will be borne – as 
with wars and other avoidable wastes – by ordinary people, the same people who 
will gain jobs and other benefits from a swift departure from fossil fuel.

My city is now an unbearable place. Most people who aren’t wealthy feel they 
have no future here, and those of us who are securely housed dread staying in 
place as the people we love get pushed out around us. The racial injustice that 
has includedpolice murders of young men of color 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/04/san-francisco-police-department-scandal-racist-texts>
, most recentlyan indigenous man who had become homeless in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/07/homeless-man-fatal-shooting-san-francisco-police>
. It also includes widespread evictions, the loss of cultural institutions, and 
a sense of being pushed out, devalued, criminalized and threatened. A place 
long considered a utopia of sorts has become a textbook dystopia.

The week the Sierra Club left San Francisco, five people entered the second 
week of a hunger strike outside a police station to protest against killings 
they linked to racism and gentrification. The police station was on Valencia 
Street in the Mission district, on the same block where upscale men could get a 
$50 shave, across the street from where you could still get a $3 taco at El 
Toro, the old taqueria owned by the same people who own Pancho Villa. That 
week, a 25-year-old who had just moved to the city wrote in USA Today about all 
the apps you could use to get everything delivered by faceless minions and 
never have to go out and meet the neighbors, which was OK because you could 
also organize to meet like-minded people online. She wrote, “I had burritos 
delivered from Pancho Villa twice before I ever stepped in the well-known 
staple in my Mexican-infused neighborhood.”

The week the Sierra Club left the city where it had been founded and based for 
124 years, the progressives on San Francisco’s board of supervisors proposed to 
fine unregistered Airbnb listings, noting that 6,000 former residences had been 
converted to illegal hotels, contributing to the city’s shrinking housing 
stock. That means that long-term residents, with histories, networks of 
relationships and commitments, are being replaced by transients who will never 
plant roots, know the neighbors or serve the community.

That week, the CEO of the Silicon Valley firm Invoca posted on Facebook to 
describe how he would punish the poor Latinos selling produce in his upscale 
neighborhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/02/mark-woodward-facebook-fruit-vendor-comments>
, “If that was my house, I would go out there and make their life miserable. I 
would do whatever it took to make them leave.” A lot of people were already 
miserable in this region afflicted by the runaway gentrification of a city in 
the grip of a boom.

The climate justice movement is a movement to keep the whole Earth for all of 
us. It’s a movement to recognize that we depend on the health of the non-human 
world, and that we are all in this together. The Sierra Club’s departure from 
San Francisco reminds us that loss of diversity impoverishes environments, and 
that what we too often call wealth enriches a few but impoverishes many when it 
drives out species, communities, cultural continuities, idealism and altruism.

 * The caption on the photo accompanying this article was amended on 4 May 
2016 to clarify that the mural was painted by theAnti-Eviction Mapping Project 
<http://www.antievictionmap.com/mural-in-clarion-alley/>.  