
Mission accomplished, after a fashion. Barring the biggest of rugby upsets in 
Newcastle on Friday Georgia go home, or more likely back to their clubs in 
France, with a free pass to the next World Cup in Japan. However, it was a long 
time coming and there were plenty who missed late buses to see it completed.

New Zealand centre Ma’a Nonu to win 100th cap against Tonga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/07/new-zealand-maa-nonu-100th-cap-tonga>
After a couple of sin-bins, interminable references to the TMO and George 
Clancy’s refusal to give a penalty try despite endless penalties, the first 
half dragged out to 64 minutes and the game to a toal of 110 minutes, 
stretching travel and television timetables.

Not that the Georgians cared too much when they were 11 points up and heading 
into the game’s last seven minutes. However, it was then that the Namibian 
fly-half Theuns Kotzé not only sneaked in at the corner but converted his own 
try from out on the touchline to take the game into a final nerve-jangling 
session.

From the day his side surprised Tonga on the opening weekend of the tournament 
to Wednesday night and their final pool match, the coach, Milton Haig, has been 
telling anyone prepared to listen that third place in Pool C and automatic 
qualification for 2019 has been four years in the planning, with the first and 
last games the focus. He said: “It has been a focus we’ve had in the last two 
years since we qualified and we knew if we were going to have a chance to 
create history for Georgian rugby, we had to win this game together.”

Now, assuming New Zealand do not do something stupid against Tonga, Haig has 
his slice of history. Namibia must wait a little longer – four days at least 
and probably more. Their search for a first World Cup win now stands at 16 
years and 17 matches and if Argentina succumb at Leicester it will be more than 
a surprise.

Namibia came close the last time they were at Sandy Park when their 
inspiration and captain, the Saracen Jacques Burger, scored twice in Yetthe 
defeat by Tonga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/29/tonga-namibia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, but last night, apart from making another batch of friends, their performance 
was remarkable for its resilience.

The writing seemed to be on the wall when the first scrum went to script. 
Georgia put the weight on, Namibia went backwards and the scrum-half Vasil 
Lobzhanidze, at 18 the youngest man ever to play in a World Cup, broke up the 
side and the Namibia defence was all at sea and lucky to survive.

Worse still, after only nine minutes Burger wobbled off. “It’s the first time 
ever that I have only played 10 minutes,” he said, “but I got a bang on the 
head and they said I should come off.” And Clancy kept awarding scrums. From 
the first it looked as though the wing Alexander Todua had flown in until the 
TMO said otherwise, but the Namibian front row was paying a terrible price no 
matter who got the put-in.

By way of variation Georgia tried a couple of rolling mauls, getting to the 
line but then being penalised for not releasing. They went up the left through 
Merab Sharikadze, the right with Davit Kacharava while the full-back Merab 
Kvirikashvili found space up the middle, but somehow Namibia kept the lead 
which a couple of penalties had given them and endless Georgian fumbles and 
errors – the worst of them an elbow which saw the hooker Jaba Bregvadze in the 
sin-bin– kept intact until the 10th minute of first-half overtime.

In fact, it was not until 10 minutes into the second half that the six-point 
lead was wiped out and the man who did it was their captain and totem and a man 
with a try-scoring record better than most backs, Mamuka Gorgodze. Not that it 
was a try of beauty, the Toulon No8 battering down a door that was already 
swinging on its hinges after yet more pressure from the Georgian big men.

Five minutes later a back finally got in on the act, fly-half Lasha 
Malaghuradze skipping through the flimsiest of Namibian tackles. With 
Kvirikashvili converting both and the score at 14 it looked as though the world 
was back in its proper order with the lowest-ranked country in the tournament 
finally looking second-best.

A Kvirikashvili penalty answered by a third from Kotzé, who ended with all his 
side’s points set things up nicely for the final, late curtain and Namibia’s 
first World Cup point.

Namibia Botha; Philander, D Van Wyk (Tsiklauri, 28), De La Harpe, R Van Wyk; 
Kotzé, Jantjies (Stevens, 66); Redelinghuys (Asieshvili, 59), Van Jaarsveld, 
Larson (Coetzee, 59), PJ van Lill, Uanivi, Burger (capt, Kitshoff, 9), Du 
Plessis, Bothma.

Tries Kotzé. Con Kotzé. Pens Kotzé 3. Sin-bin Larson and Coetzee 40

Georgia Kvirikashvili; Mchedlidze (Tsiklauri, 42), Kacharava, Sharikadze, 
Todua; Malaghuradze, Lobzhanidze (Begadze, 65); Nariashvili (Asieshvili, 3), 
Bregvadze, Zirakashvili, Nemsadze, Mikautadze, Tkhilaishvili, Kolelishvili, 
Gorgodze (capt).

Tries Gorgodze, Malaguradze. Cons Kvirikashvili 2. Pen Kvirikashvili. Sin-bin 
Bregvadze 34.

Referee G Clancy (Ire). Attendance 11,156.

• This article was amended on 9 October 2015. An earlier version misnamed 
Milton Haig as Milton Craig.
 