
Britain would be “permanently poorer” if voters choose to leave the EU, George 
Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has warned, as a 
Treasury study claimed the economy would shrink by 6% by 2030, costing every 
household the equivalent of £4,300 a year.

In the starkest warning so far by the government in the referendum campaign, 
the chancellor describes Brexit as the “most extraordinary self-inflicted 
wound”.

Osborne will embark on one of the government’s most significant moves in the 
referendum campaign on Monday when he publishes a 200-page Treasury report 
which sets out the costs and benefits of EU membership.

In a Times article the chancellor wrote: “The conclusion is clear for 
Britain’s economy and for families – leaving the EU would be the most 
extraordinary self-inflicted wound.”

Osborne warned that the option favoured by Boris Johnson – a deal along the 
lines of the EU-Canada arrangement – would lead to an economic contraction of 
6% by 2030. Supporters of Britain’s EU membership say the EU-Canadian deal 
would be a disaster for the UK because it excludes financial services, a 
crucial part of the British economy.

The chancellor asked whether this was a “price worth paying” as he said there 
was no other model for the UK that gave it access to the single market without 
quotas and tariffs while retaining a say over the rules.

Osborne continued: “Put simply‎: over many years, are you better off or worse 
off if we leave the EU? The answer is: Britain would be worse off, permanently 
so, and to the tune of £4,300 a year for every household.

“It is a well-established doctrine of economic thought that greater openness 
and interconnectedness boosts the productive potential of our economy. That’s 
because being an open economy increases competition between our companies, 
making them more efficient in the face of consumer choice, and creates 
incentives for business to innovate and to adopt new technologies.”

The Treasury report is understood to examine three options for a post Brexit 
deal, according to the BBC:

• A Norwegian-style deal in which the UK has access to the EU’s single market. 
The UK would still make contributions to the EU budget but has no say over the 
rules.

• A deal along the lines of the EU-Canada deal.

• The so-called “clean break” or World Trade Organisation option, in which the 
UK trades with the rest of the EU and other nations along the rules laid down 
by the WTO.

The three options all have downsides, according to the report. The prediction 
of a 6% drop in GDP is drawn from the middle option.

The chancellor wrote: “The Treasury analysis shows that under all plausible 
alternatives to British membership of the EU we would have a less open and 
interconnected economy – not just withEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> but, crucially, with the rest 
of the world. There would be less trade, less investment and less business. 
Leave the EU and the facts are: Britain would be permanently poorer. Britain’s 
families would be permanently poorer too.”

John Redwood, the former Tory cabinet minister campaigning for Brexit, 
dismissed the chancellor’s warnings. Redwood said: “The prime minister was one 
of the senior advisers working in the Treasury while John Major’s government 
tried to keep this country in the EU’s disastrous exchange rate mechanism. The 
ERM destroyed jobs and caused misery for families across the country. The 
remainers were wrong then, and they are wrong now – people should not trust 
their judgment on the EU.”

The attempt by the chancellor to paint an exit from the EU as a dangerous step 
was reinforced by the French economy minister, Emmanuel Macron, who said the UK 
would be “completely killed” in global trade negotiations if it voted to leave. 
Macron told the Andrew Marr Show on BBC1: “I think UK is not about becoming 
Jersey or Guernsey. Today, you are strong because you are part of the EU. When 
you discuss your steel industry with China you are credible because you are 
part of the EU, not because you are just UK. You will be completely killed 
otherwise.”

Britain ‘killed’ in trade talks if it left EU, says French minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/17/britain-killed-in-trade-talks-eu-french-minister-emmanuel-macron>
David Davis, the former Europe minister, said David Cameron could remain as 
prime minister after a vote to leave the EU but would have to hand the breakup 
negotiations with Brussels to a minister who had supported exit. Davis took 
issue with the former chancellor Kenneth Clarke, who saidCameron would be out 
of No 10 in 30 seconds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/16/cameron-wouldnt-last-30-seconds-if-he-lost-eu-vote-says-ken-clarke>
 if Britain left the EU.

Davis said: “If we vote for Brexit then it is clear that David Cameron can’t 
lead that bit of his government’s activities, the renegotiations. He would have 
to appoint somebody who the public had faith in, his party had faith in but, 
most importantly, who believed in the negotiation. If he did that I don’t see 
any reason why he shouldn’t go on.”

Downing Street is hoping the campaign to keep Britain in the EU will receive a 
boost this week when Barack Obama endorses Britain’s membership of the EU. 
Boris Johnson has accused the US president of hypocrisy because Washington 
would never agree to surrender sovereignty in the way EU member states do. 
Grayling said Obama did not understand the nature of the pooling of sovereignty 
among EU member states.





The head of BHP Billiton, one of the biggest mining companies listed on the 
London Stock Exchange,has also warned of the uncertainty an exit would provoke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/18/bhp-billiton-andrew-mackensie--britain-should-remain-in-the-eu-brexit>
. Andrew MacKenzie, the Scottish-born BHP chief executive, will say in a speech 
on Monday night that the “unknowns of Brexit are unwelcome at a time when 
Europe and the world economy need certainty and stability”.

Chris Grayling, the leader of the Commons and one of a handful of cabinet 
ministers backing Brexit, questioned the way in which Downing Street and the 
Treasury were using government resources to campaign for a pro-EU vote. He 
highlighted the recent £9.3m leaflet, due to be sent to all UK households 
before the referendum. “It is certainly not being treated by voters as an 
independent, authoritative document. Therefore it is right and proper they 
should be very sceptical about some of its contents.”




 