
George Christensen’s proposed ban on 457 visas in central and north Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/coalition-announces-cut-to-how-long-457-visa-holders-can-seek-work>
 would hit the region’s hospitals and healthcare providers hard, according to a 
Guardian analysis.

Detailed figures on the location of 457 visa holders as of June 2016, obtained 
by Guardian Australia, show that general practitioners, medical officers and 
registered nurses are one of the most common type of 457 position held in many 
regional areas.


Here, you can see different regions in Australia (the Australian Bureau of 
Statistics’ statistical division areas) coloured by the most common 457 job 
type (categorised by ANZSCO unit group*). Clicking on each region will show the 
top five positions in that area:

map of 457 visa holders 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/aus/2016/nov/visa-map2> 
In the Mackay region, which includes most of Christensen’s electorate of 
Dawson, figures show the healthcare and social assistance industry has 
sponsored the highest number of 457 visa workers, with 94 in total. 
Accommodation and food services was the second-highest.


Christensen says he favours other mechanisms to bring in health workers, such 
as theregional sponsored migration scheme 
<https://www.border.gov.au/Trav/Visa-1/187-> because it is a more difficult 
process than the 457 visa. It requires a nomination by an approved Australian 
employer followed by an application under the nominated stream.


“There are other avenues they can come through and I understand we have an 
influx of medical graduates coming into the market so the need for more 
[general practitioners] won’t be there,” Christensen said.


“In some cases, small to medium businesses chase 457 visas for someone they 
met overseas.


“Or maybe they were looking for an Australian worker and may not have found 
one suitable or they did have Australians applying but felt they didn’t work 
hard enough but that doesn’t mean you can get foreign worker.”


Christensen said there was a big difference between the 457 visa for temporary 
foreign workers and the 417 visa for backpackers, where the government is 
currently in the process of changing the tax rate.


“The big difference with the backpacker visa is that there is reciprocity, 
with say the UK and Europe. They come here but our young people go there so you 
might say they cancel each other out. There is a quid pro quo.”


Australian governments have traditionally filled shortages in doctors, nurses 
other health professionals in rural and regional areas with 457 visa holders or 
skilled migrants who remain bonded for a certain time.


Both the Australian Medical Association (AMA) and the Rural Doctors 
Association of Australia (RDAA) said that without 457 visas the regional health 
workforce would not be able to function.


And while there has been a doctor surplus projected 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/health/visa-plan-to-stop-foreign-doctor-influx/news-story/67a9915f4c258f360875785499d3975c>
 for the next 10-15 years, the regions would continue to need specialists, 
nurses and allied health professionals on 457 visas, the doctors’ organisations 
said.


The AMA president, Michael Gannon, said over the past 10 years, governments 
had invested heavily in training medical students.


“Without 457 visas, we wouldn’t be able to sustain the [health] workforce 
sadly,” Gannon said. “In the past 10 years, we have invested heavily in medical 
students. We are hopefully moving closer and closer to self sufficiency but the 
reality is we are not there yet.”

Gannon said the looming issue was not the doctor shortage but a significant 
maldistribution of health professionals.


“Unfortunately these are wealth producing areas of country but it can be hard 
to get doctors to move there.”


The RDAA president, Ewen McPhee, said parts of regional Australia would 
struggle without health professionals on 457 visas.


“We would be buggered without them, these are people who fill serious 
workforce shortages,” McPhee said.


Coalition announces cut to how long 457 visa holders can seek work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/coalition-announces-cut-to-how-long-457-visa-holders-can-seek-work>
McPhee said the problem in regional areas was a maldistribution, with doctors 
in the wrong place with the wrong skills.


“Originally we had a shortage of doctors, and we opened floodgates, 
particularly for doctors, we don’t have shortage, by 2030 surplus of 7000 
doctors and we have to find jobs for them.


“But shutting off 457 would be problematic from nursing and allied health so 
we need to be very careful about that.”


Mapping the figures show that many regional areas are in a similar situation 
to Mackay, with doctors or nurses the most common 457 category. Also common are 
jobs in the hospitality industry, such as cooks and chefs.


The assistant minister for rural health, David Gillespie, announced the 
government would provide a $25,000 rural loading incentive payment for doctors 
in Cloncurry, Queensland and Roebourne in Western Australia from 1 January.


“The additional loading will be up to $25,000 per annum through the general 
practice rural incentives program and will recognise exceptional circumstances 
faced in attracting and retaining a workforce in these locations.

 * Australia New Zealand Standard Classification of Occupations  