
Opponents of Britain’s membership of the EU are making an “economically 
illiterate” case that would harm poorer people and cost households the 
equivalent of £4,300 a year,George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has said.

In his strongest intervention yet in the EU referendum campaign, the 
chancellor said Brexit would be the “most extraordinary self-inflicted wound” 
as he hailed a Treasury study claiming the economy would shrink by 6% by 2030.

The chancellor mocked Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, who once famously said he was 
pro-cake and pro-eating cake. “If you want all those things [full access to the 
single market and a say over its rules] then you have to bear some of the 
obligations of EU membership,” he said.


“You can’t have your cake and eat it. These people who go round saying Britain 
would have all the benefits of the EU without any of the obligations – that is 
economically illiterate and it frankly totally misunderstands the nature of the 
relationship that Britain might be able to strike outside the EU.”

John Redwood, the former Tory cabinet minister who is campaigning to leave the 
EU, described the chancellor’s claim that the economy would shrink by 6% by 
2030 as worthless. “It is an absurd claim from the Treasury. I’m very sorry 
that they have degenerated to these levels. This is a Treasury which had to 
make huge changes to its forecast for the next two years just between November 
and March because it decided its November forecast was completely wrong.”

 The fresh war of words came as the chancellor embarked on one of the 
government’s most significant moves in the referendum campaign by publishing a 
200-page Treasury study, which is designed to provide a sober assessment of the 
dangers of leaving the EU. Osborne is aiming to repeat the tactics deployed by 
the UK government during the Scottish referendum, when the Treasury published a 
series of reports on the dangers of independence.

 The chancellor told the Today programme on BBC Radio 4 on Monday: “Today’s 
Treasury analysis steps away from the rhetoric and sets out the facts that 
people have asked for. The conclusions could not be clearer. Britain would be 
permanently poorer if we left the EU to the tune of £4,300 for every household 
in the country. That is a fact everyone should think about as they consider how 
to vote. As chancellor I am clear we are stronger, safer and better off in the 
EU.”

 “Take the free trade agreement that Canada has signed, by the way cited by 
the mayor of London as his preferred model,” the chancellor said. “The problem 
with the Canadian model is you don’t have access for your services industry, 
that is 80% of the British economy, 80% of the jobs in the British economy ... 
The £4,300 per [household], the 6% shock to GDP, is a central estimate based on 
one of the models.”

 The Treasury study has examined all the likely options Britain would face if 
voters decide to leave the EU in the referendum on 23 June. In addition to the 
EU-Canada deal it examines:

• A Norwegian-style deal in which the UK has access to the EU’s single market. 
The UK would still make contributions to the EU budget but has no say over the 
rules.

• The so-called “clean break” or World Trade Organisation option, in which the 
UK trades with the rest of the EU and other nations along the rules laid down 
by the WTO.

 The chancellor said that all the alternatives to UK membership of the EU 
would put Britain in a weaker position as he rejected the idea that Britain 
could secure a better deal from outside the EU.


Osborne told the Today programme: “Any of these arrangements lead to less 
access to the European single market unless you are prepared to pay into the EU 
budget and unless you are prepared to accept the free movement of people but 
have no say over how both those things operate ... What I would reject is the 
idea that Britain can sign up to some kind of deal where we get all the 
benefits of EU membership but none of the obligations or costs. The Germans or 
French wouldn’t give that to us because it is a better deal than Germany or 
France gets. It is not credible.”

Osborne also took a swipe at Iain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith>, the anti-EU former 
work and pensions secretary, who resigned from the cabinet after accusing the 
Tory leadership of neglecting the poor, by warning that less affluent voters 
would be hardest hit by a British exit from the EU. In his resignation 
statement Duncan Smith questioned whether the Treasury was living up to its 
commitment to ensure “we are all in it together”.

 The chancellor said: “Let me tell you we would not all be in this together if 
we left the EU. The richest in our country would go on being rich. It would be 
the poorest, the people whose jobs depend on the car plants, whose jobs depend 
on the steel-making plants who would be hit if we left the EU.”

 He said: “This is a massive decision for our generation, as big as anything 
we have been asked to address since the war.”

 The Vote Leave campaign rubbished the idea that the economy would shrink by 
6% by 2030 and said that Britain had nothing to fear from an exit because most 
of Britain’s arrangements with the EU would remain in place.

Redwood told Today: “It is not very easy to put precise numbers on it and we 
wouldn’t attempt to put precise numbers on the economy for 2030 because who 
knows what’s going to happen. Their 2030 forecast is completely worthless.

“It is a completely idiotic idea that we won’t trade with them after we’ve 
left the EU. But I’d go further than that. I would say I see no reason to 
change most of the arrangements currently in place. Unless and until the two 
sides negotiate change things would carry much as they do at the moment.”

 The former Tory leadership contender even claimed that a vote to leave would 
end economic austerity. “We are going to be better off, we are going to banish 
austerity, we are going to spend our own money, we are going to have the power 
to make our own laws, we are going to control our own borders. We have an 
extremely positive vision of a Britain renewed and invigorated by being a full 
member of the international community again with its own vote and voice.”
 