
Sam Schwarzkopf, a German neuroscientist living in the UK, contacted the 
Guardian after it published the story of Monique Hawkins.

He said he had a similar experience at the hands of the Home Office to 
Hawkins, a Dutch woman who was told to makepreparations to leave the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/dutch-woman-with-two-british-children-told-to-leave-uk-after-24-years>
 after sheapplied for British citizenship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/home-office-reform-permanent-residency-application-process-eu-nationals>
 following the EU referendum. This was despite her living in the UK for 24 
years and having two children with her British husband.

Home Office urged to fix 'absurd' permanent residency process
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/home-office-reform-permanent-residency-application-process-eu-nationals>
Schwarzkopf said: “I am a German citizen who moved to the UK in 1999 to study 
neuroscience at Cardiff University, both my undergraduate degree and my PhD. 
After I got my PhD in 2007, I decided to remain in the UK to work. I am now 
married to a British woman and am a faculty member at University College London.

“I originally applied for that permanent residence document in March 2016 
because it is necessary for a British citizenship application.

“In June, one week before the referendum, my application was rejected. The 
reason was that I hadn’t included my passport in the application, only a 
legally certified colour copy. This rejection letter contained the phrase that 
I ‘should now make preparations to leave’ the UK.

“I was pretty pissed off at that moment, so I wrote a couple of complaint 
letters including [one] to the then home secretary Theresa May (she never got 
back to me).

“Just to be clear, I don’t think that was anything more than a mistake on the 
part of the Home Office. They simply use these standard letters.


“But it is also quite outrageous. Under current rules, EU/EEA [European 
Economic Area] nationals automatically gain permanent residence after five 
years (provided certain criteria are met at least). The PR document I applied 
for doesn’t give me permanent residence rights, it simply confirms them. So it 
really should be a formality. But the Home Office seems to want to make it 
excessively difficult for people.

“The rejection letter actually acknowledged that I had a German passport. It 
said that they couldn’t verify my nationality from a photocopy because they can 
be fabricated. That’s fair enough, but you might think they practice some 
assumption of innocence until proven guilty of passport forgery.

“But I would also have fully accepted if they had simply told me to reapply 
and include the passport this time. However, telling me to leave the country 
even though it should be blatantly obvious that in all likelihood I actually am 
an EU citizen is just offensive, and more importantly it also directly violates 
free movement rights.

“My MP got involved in this, writing letters to the Home Office, and this was 
very helpful. At first they explained that this was simply the way they write 
their rejection letters, but eventually someone wrote back with an apology. 
More importantly, they said they would take this issue on board and consider 
changing the phrasing. From the story in the Guardian, it sounds that at least 
so far they haven’t changed it yet.”
 