
The government of Gibraltar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gibraltar> has 
dismissed as “frivolous and vexatious” allegations that members of a rightwing 
Spanish party were subjected to torture when they were arrested after unfurling 
a Spanish flag on the Rock.

Spain’s top criminal court announced on Wednesday that it was investigating 
claims of ill-treatment made by Nacho Mínguez, head of the Vox party in Madrid.

Mínguez, who was arrested in Gibraltar on 20 June, alleges police kept him for 
more than seven hours, frisked him “in a disproportionate manner”, prevented 
him from telling anyone where he was, and denied him a lawyer and food.


Mínguez and Pedro Fernández, a lawyer in charge of legal matters at the group, 
which was founded in 2013 by former members of Spain’s ruling conservative 
People’s party, have filed an official complaint for alleged “torture and 
crimes against moral integrity”.


Fernández alleges that when Mínguez was brought to trial several days after 
his arrest, “he had not been able to talk alone with his assigned lawyer”.


The complaint adds: “This forced the suspension of the trial for several 
minutes in order for him [Mínguez] to know what he was accused of.”

Fernández, who went to court to help Mínguez, claims he was also detained 
after he took photos of the courtroom, and was frisked twice and held 
incommunicado for nine hours.

The complaint alleges that the police holding him “recognised that the 
treatment he and Mr Mínguez were being subjected to was due to political 
reasons and by direct order of the chief minister [of Gibraltar]”.

Spain’s national court said it had accepted the complaint, which triggers an 
official investigation into the case.

The chief minister of Gibraltar, Fabian Picardo, swiftly denounced the 
allegations. “The legal proceedings against me alleging torture… are frivolous 
and vexatious and a clear abuse of process,” he said.

The claims were a slur on “the excellent reputation and work of Her Majesty’s 
Royal Gibraltar police, Her Majesty’s Prison Service and the Gibraltar 
magistrates court and legal system, all of which I have complete confidence 
in,” Picardo added.

He said he respected the Spanish courts and legal system “and will therefore 
not lose a moment’s sleep over this case”.

Vox has in the past accused the Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, of 
taking too soft a line on Eta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/20/basque-separatist-eta-historic-weapons-mariano-rajoy>
, the Basque separatist group, by obeying a European court of human rights 
order that led to 50 of the group’s most veteran prisoners being released from 
jail.

Gibraltar, a tiny territory on Spain’s southern tip that has been governed by 
Britain since the 18th century, is the subject of frequent squabbles between 
the two nations.


After the UK’s vote to leave the EU in June, Spain’s then acting foreign 
minister, José Manuel García-Margallo, said the referendum result had
significantly advanced the prospect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/24/britain-gibraltar-rejects-spains-talk-joint-sovereignty>
 of a Spanish flag flying on Gibraltar.

“It’s a complete change of outlook that opens up new possibilities on 
Gibraltar not seen for a very long time,” he told Onda Cero radio. “I hope the 
formula of co-sovereignty – to be clear, the Spanish flag on the Rock – is much 
closer than before.”
 