
Governments will address the law of unintended consequences when they meet 
this week to revise a global treaty and try to eliminate the use of a group of 
greenhouse gases used in fridges, inhalers and air conditioners.


Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) were hailed as the answer to the hole in the ozone 
layer which appeared over Antarctica in the 1980s because they replaced 
hundreds of chemical substances widely used in aerosols which depleted the thin 
layer of ozone which protects the Earth from harmful rays of the sun.

One hundred and ninety-seven countries signed the historic 1987 agreement 
which phased out chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and similar hydrochlorofluoro 
carbons (HCFCs) and has seen gradual closure of the two polar ozone holes.

But concern has been mounting at how their substitute is undermining the 
landmark Paris climate agreement and could hamper attempts to keep global 
warming below dangerous levels.


“The use of hydrofluorocarbons is growing. Already, the HFCs used in 
refrigerators, air conditioners, inhalers ... are emitting a gigaton of 
CO2-equivalent pollution into the atmosphere annually. If that sounds like a 
lot; it is. It’s equivalent to the emissions from nearly 300 coal-fired power 
plants every single year,” the US secretary of state, John Kerry, tolda UN 
meeting on the Montreal protocol 
<http://www.climatechangenews.com/2016/07/22/john-kerry-hfcs-are-a-critical-piece-of-the-climate-puzzle/>
 earlier this year.

“An HFC phasedown amendment is a critical piece of the climate puzzle,” he 
added.

HFC use is increasing rapidly, driven by sales of fridges and air conditioning 
especially in fast-growing developing countries.

Researchers at the US government’s Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory  
<http://eetd.lbl.gov/news/article/55587/berkeley-lab-study-shows-significant-potential-for-deployment-of-superefficient-a>
have calculated that 700m air-conditioning units, all using HFCs, are likely to 
be installed worldwide by 2030 and 1.6bn by 2050, it says.

The UN’s climate change body, the IPCC, has projected that global 
air-conditioning energy demand will grow 
<http://www.rehva.eu/publications-and-resources/rehva-journal/2015/042015/air-conditioning-environmental-challenges.html>
 33-fold from 300 terawatt-hours (TWh) in 2000 to more than 10,000TWh in 2100, 
with most of the growth coming in developing economies.

Countries meeting in Kigali, Rwanda, this week will be asked to approve an 
amendment to the Montreal protocol. This would cover HFCs and, over time, 
eliminate the manufacture of the chemicals and, potentially reduce global 
temperatures by an around 0.5C by 2100.

A fast phasedown of the factory-made HFCs could avoid the equivalent of as 
much as 200bn tonnes of CO2  by 2050, according to a study published in 
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 
<http://www.igsd.org/fast-hfc-phase-down-could-avoid-200-billion-tonnes-of-co2-eq-by-2050/>
.

But negotiations will be tough. Rich countries want the chemicals phased out 
within 5-10 years, but developing countries led by China and India have argued 
for a date closer to 2031 which, they say, will give their chemical industries 
time to adapt.

But because HFC alternatives, including natural refrigerants such as CO2, and 
hydrocarbons, already exist, there is no technical reason why HFC reductions 
cannot be achieved quickly and inexpensively, say scientists and 
environmentalists.

G7 countries have committed to provide additional funding to help developing 
countries implement an HFC amendment and last month a group of philanthropists
pledged $53m 
<http://oneworld.org/2016/09/22/philanthropists-53m-fund-aims-to-aid-fight-against-climate-change/>
 to help.

“It is in everyone’s interests to phase out HFCs as soon as possible,” said 
Gaby Drinkwater, Christian Aid’s policy officer. “As people in developing 
countries seek more air conditioners and refrigerators, a heavy expansion of 
HFCs could deal a significant blow to the ambition of the Paris agreement and 
set back any progress made on keeping global warming to 2C.”

However, environmentalists with a long memory say that governments could have 
easily avoided the release of tens of billions of tons of HFC chemicals if they 
had listened to scientists in the 1980s.

“HFCs were always known to have the potential to increase global warming. We 
solved the ozone problem of ozone but governments chose not to address the 
climate-changing potential of their substitutes even though they knew about 
it,” said Dr Robin Russell-Jones, former director of the skin tumour unit at 
the St John’s Institute of Dermatology in London.

“If it takes over a quarter of a century to fix a simple technological 
problem, then what chance is there for the world community to solve global 
warming?” he added.

In 1989, he wrote in one of Britain’s leading medical journals, the Lancet: 
“Most scientists want to see the Montreal protocol widened to include 
substitutes like HCFC22. If uncontrolled [they] will be adding 15% to the 
global warming effect of carbon dioxide by the year 2030.”
 