
I see electronic music as loads of monkeys pushing buttons and me being one of 
them. But I think my albumTimeless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/15/goldie-releases-timeless> stands 
the test of time. If in 1995, when it was released,Timeless was a blueprint 
written on a steel cylinder, now it’s a chrome ball reflecting what’s happened 
in the last 20 years of electronic music.

When I was growing up in the 1980s in the Midlands, I felt abandoned and 
misunderstood. Then I chose drum ’n’ bass and graffiti as my subcultures – 
which didn’t really help.

I was raised in the care system, but when I went to New York aged 18 to do 
graffiti in the Bronx, I thought “What the fuck am I moaning about?” This was 
before New York’s clean up and I saw real poverty. Those kids had nothing. When 
I see rioters here wearing £200 trainers in front of tenement buildings that 
have been recently cleaned, I think: “Are you kidding me?”

I’ve always felt mixed race. Or as my music teacher said during a lesson: “You 
are a mulatto.” I always felt there were white people, black, and then people 
like me in the middle.

Anyone who asks if graffiti is really art should be cast out into a field, 
because they’re Neanderthals.

Sometimes I look at life and it’s as cumbersome as a Motorola phone from the 
90s. You’re carrying round this massive box with a battery looking like an 
absolute dickhead. Only yoga makes me feel streamlined, like a modern phone.

With the drugs, I had to look at the ugly truth. I was horrible, man, I was 
disgusting. Yoga helped me change. The meditation, the breathing, the 
physicality is so powerful. It helped me get over 30 years of addiction. Yoga 
should be on the school curriculum, along with parkour.

The worst thing anyone’s ever said to me was when Mr Vallance, my maths 
teacher, told me: “You’ll never make it. You’ll wither away and you won’t 
become anything.” I hope he reads theObserver.

The question I am asked most is: “What’s it like being in a James Bond film?” 
People are still at the airport holding Bond pictures. All my friends took it 
out of me when I played Bullion inThe World is Not Enough. “Hey Gold,” they 
said. “There’s no mixed race people in Russia.”

I’m in my golden period right now. I wake up and see my daughter’s face and 
realise this moment is heaven. The badness has passed, the hell is not being 
able to remember anything.

Laurence Fishburne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/26/laurence-fishburne-this-much-i-know>
 gave me some good advice: “Don’t wish too hard because it might come true.” He 
told me that after he’d recited prison poetry to me for an hour at a Versace 
party. I also have a postcard I carry around with me that says: “I’ve learnt so 
much from my mistakes that I’m thinking about making a few more.”

The best thing about being Goldie is that when people ask “Why the fuck did 
you do that?” I say: “Because I can.”

Goldie performs his album Timeless live with the Heritage Orchestra, 22-23 
July, at the Royal Festival Hall (southbankcentre.co.uk 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/>). He is also performing in Bristol at the 
Harbourside Amphitheatre from 6pm on Saturday 25 July (
colstonhall.org/shows/goldie-and-the-heritage-orchestra/ 
<http://www.colstonhall.org/shows/goldie-and-the-heritage-orchestra/>)

The show is at the 
 