
Keith Pelley, the chief executive of the European Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-tour>, has stated that golf must 
embrace new formats and he plans to have six-hole events on the professional 
circuit as early as next year.

The Canadian, who succeeded George O’Grady last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/17/keith-pelley-george-ogrady-european-tour>
, has been keen to modernise the game and has already permitted players to wear 
shorts in pro-ams and introduced measures aimed at tackling slow play. However, 
Pelley’s announcement that six-hole sprint formats could be included on the 
European Tour schedule from 2017 is a significant leap.

Open TV viewing figures plunge by 75% in first year of Sky Sports coverage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/18/open-sky-sports-bbc-troon> 
“Golf and tennis has to be a little more open to letting the youth actually 
participate,” he told BBC Radio 5 Live. “There’s no question that is something 
we believe in as well. You look at some of the new formats that have been 
created – when you look at adventure golf, or the brand TopGolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf>, and there’s one 15 minutes from where 
I live in Virginia Water. It’s really geared towards millennials, so the way 
that people are participating in the game is completely different.

“Let’s be honest – and scientific data proves this - attention spans are 
decreasing as opposed to increasing, and it’s completely different when the 
choice people have to consume content now is so different than it was 35-40 
years ago. So you have to change, people’s time is so precious that golf – I 
think every golf course being built needs to be six holes, six holes, six holes 
– so that people can go at the beginning before they go to work.”

Pelley highlighted the success of Twenty20 cricket in boosting attendances as 
a reason for change.

“From our perspective, as the gatekeepers of the professional game, we are 
looking to create a format that would be six holes. That could be an hour, an 
hour-and-a-half content programme ... which would be very entertaining,” added 
Pelley, who said that if golf were invented today it would likely be a 12-hole 
rather than 18-hole sport.

“Yes there would be a shot clock, yes there would be music being played, and 
PA announcements, and players would be dressed a little differently, and maybe 
they would only play with five or seven clubs.

“Our leaderboard is always filled with a bunch of different flags and it would 
probably be a country competition, so you could probably see England playing 
Scotland in a six-hole matchplay with time clocks and music and so forth going 
on and it would be an aspirational goal to be even remotelyas successful as 
Twenty20 cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/11/jos-buttler-ipl-deal-cricket-england>
.

“If you’re not prepared to change, if you’re not prepared to be innovative, if 
you’re not prepared to take chances, then I do believe that the sports that 
aren’t will fall behind. We’d like to experiment ... in 2017 and maybe roll it 
out in 2018. It’s still in the infancy stages of being developed. The 
tradition, the integrity of the game, the 72-hole tournament will always be 
there in some form but if you catapult ahead 10 or 15 years the game of golf 
will be consumed completely differently and there will be different formats 
that will be successful as content entertainment makers.”

Pelley also refused to rule out changing the name of the European Tour to 
reflect its’ global nature in the future. A strategic partnership with the 
Asian Tour was announced earlier this week and with just 19 of the 50 European 
Tour events held in 2016 being staged on European soil, Pelley is open to 
rebranding in the future.

He added: “You can’t play 47 weeks in Europe, hence the reason that we started 
to move all around the world and since then we’ve expanded and as early as this 
week we’ve announced a strategic alliance with the Asian Tour, so our position 
in Asia is going to grow: we’ve opened an office recently in Korea. As the game 
expands, we’re expanding, so you’re correct assuming the brand might change 
going forward.”
 