
The following is an edited version of a speech made by Guardian writer Jessica 
Valenti toPlanned Parenthood of the Southern Finger Lakes 
<https://www.plannedparenthood.org/planned-parenthood-southern-finger-lakes> 
last week.

How is everyone doing? Ready for November 8 yet?


 Tonight, I was asked to speak about a vision for the next hundred years of 
reproductive choice and justice. It’s such a wonderful frame – to think about 
what a feminist future might look like. But I bet like a lot of you, it’s hard 
to imagine what the next hundred years will look like when so much of that, for 
women especially, will depend on what happens in just 18 days.


There is no overstating how important this election is. It’s not just about 
the next four or eight years. This decision is about sending a message about 
who we are as a country, and setting a very particular course for the women who 
live here. We’ll look back on this time as a watershed moment: a moment that 
could, in fact, shape the next hundred years of women’s rights.

But first I want to share a personal story. 

A little over six years ago, I was pregnant with my daughter, Layla. And when 
I was 28 weeks pregnant, I got incredibly ill. I developed pre-eclampsia, which 
some of you might know is dangerously high blood pressure during pregnancy.

I was admitted to the hospital and within just a few days, I developed another 
complication calledHELLP syndrome 
<http://www.preeclampsia.org/health-information/hellp-syndrome>, the short 
version being my liver was in danger of failing, and I was in danger of dying 
if my daughter was not born.

I had an emergency C-section and Layla was born 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/aug/18/baby-pregnancy-premature-birth>
 weighing 2lb 2oz. She stayed in the neonatal intensive care unit for the first 
two months of her life, undergoing medical interventions to save and protect 
her that to this day I try to avoid thinking about.

But I was lucky, and she was lucky, and today she’s a wonderful healthy 
six-year-old. And I feel grateful for that every day.

I share this story often, because this was something in my life that changed 
me forever, that shaped who I am today.

And when I think about this moment, what I think about most often is how 
fortunate I was that I got sick far enough along in my pregnancy that I wasn’t 
faced with the reality of needing an abortion to save my life.

And when I think about those days in the hospital – the fear, the urgency, the 
confusion, the stress – the idea that the government could ever become involved 
in my life’s most pivotal moment? It horrifies me.

So one thing I want for the next hundred years? I want for no person, ever, to 
fear that their most personal life choices will be made by someone else.

I want for no woman, ever, to be afraid that her scariest life moment will be 
made even more difficult and traumatic by government interference.

In the next hundred years, I want to see every woman be free from the fear 
that her body is not really her own.

And that’s why I want to talk about this election tonight. Because that’s 
what’s at stake.

Never before in American politics have women’s bodies been so front and center 
in the national conversation. And so at risk.

We are choosing between a candidate who has spent her political career 
fighting for reproductive rights, and a candidate who says thatwomen who have 
abortions need to be punished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/mar/30/donald-trump-punishment-abortion-hillary-clinton-bernie-sanders>
. A candidate who said this week in the final debate unequivocally that she 
will defend Planned Parenthood, and a candidate who promised to defund it.

A choice between a person who has spent her life in public service, and a 
braggadocious businessman whorips off his workers 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/elections/2016/06/09/donald-trump-unpaid-bills-republican-president-laswuits/85297274/>
.

And, perhaps most tellingly: we’re making a decision between a woman who has 
said that “women’s rights are human rights 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xXM4E23Efvk>” and a man who says if you want 
to, you can just grab women “by the pussy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
”.

There’s a feminist rallying cry online right now that I like a lot, and it 
says: November 8, pussy grabs back.

Now, I know that so much has been made of that comment, and the ensuing 
allegations against Trump bymultiple women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/20/donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-tenth-woman-accuser>
 that he did just what he bragged about doing on that tape.

And while some people may not see the link between sexual assault and 
reproductive rights, those of us here in this room know better.

We know that there is a direct connection between those who think they can 
touch women’s bodies without permission and those who think they can legislate 
our bodies.

Reproductive rights and justice has always been about a fundamental respect – 
or in this case, disrespect – of women’s bodily integrity and autonomy.


Either our bodies are our own, or they’re not.

And make no mistake, the conversation that we’re having right now about 
“groping” is not just salacious media fodder. The way we come out of this 
moment – the direction our culture shifts because of it – will absolutely 
determine women’s rights in the future.

We are witnessing a moment where our country could move backwards – back to a 
place where “boys will be boys” and men will make decisions for women. Or 
towards a future where our culture and politics understand and respect women as 
autonomous full human beings.


Those are the two paths.

Right now, I’m optimistic that we’re on the right one. The one that brings us 
to the feminist future all of us in this room have been waiting for.

When Trump said he wanted to punish women for having abortions, there was 
outrage and he had to walk back those comments. But more importantly, 
pro-choice activists and organizations like Planned Parenthood were there to 
point out that while other politicians may not say they want women to be 
punished, that’s exactly what would happen if abortion were made illegal.


And in fact, what has already happened to women like Purvi Patel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/02/it-isnt-justice-for-purvi-patel-to-serve-20-years-in-prison-for-an-abortion>
, who was put in prison for inducing her own abortion in Indiana.

Our feminist future has no place for criminalizing women who decide if and 
when to parent.

When Donald Trump claimed that what he said on that Access Hollywood tape was 
just “locker-room talk”, and later when former New York City mayor Rudy 
Giuliani said that all men talk like this,men across the country came out to say
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/donald-trump-sexism-misogyny-men>
: no.

This is not normal. This is not acceptable. Men are better than this. 

The feminist future that we’re fighting for has men fighting alongside of us, 
men who refuse to be insulted by antiquated and sexist ideals about what it 
means to be a “real man”.


When Trump claimed that the women who have accused him of sexual assault were 
not attractive enough to warrant his unwanted attention, when he called women 
disgusting, when he called women pigs, the media – who can so often get things 
wrong – took him to task.

Because our feminist future is not one where misogyny will go unchecked. Women 
have been disparaged and harassed for too many years, andwe’re not going to 
take one more minute of it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/25/sexual-assault-tipping-point-elizabeth-warren-trump>
. We’re done.

Of course this feminist future – the future that we’re so close to getting – 
it’s not just being hinted at by the reaction and opposition to Donald Trump.

We are getting a sense of what that future could look like when we see the 
incredible way feminists and women themselves have changed the conversation.

This week, for the first time ever, a presidential candidate offered a nuanced 
and empathetic defense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/19/abortion-trump-clinton-debate> 
of late-term abortions on a national debate stage. This is a third-rail issue 
that most politicians won’t touch, but Clinton talked about women’s lives and 
experiences in a way that reminded us that this issue isn’t just about policy – 
it’s about us.

We’re living in a moment when feminism is wielding more cultural power than it 
has in decades, maybe ever. People don’t shy away from the word feminism any 
more, they embrace it.

When I started speaking on college campuses 10 years ago, I would ask how many 
people in the room considered themselves feminists. Back then, just a few 
people would raise their hands. When I speak at colleges today, nearly everyone 
does.

Feminism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/feminism> has become so popular 
that the conservative right has tried to appropriate it – Sarah Palin calls 
herself a feminist, anti-choice organizations call themselves the “real” 
feminists. They recognize the power that the word and the movement have, and 
they want to use it toward their own, very anti-feminist, ends.

But our feminist future is a smart one, and it knows that anyone who would 
legislate women’s bodies, who would interfere in women’s and families’ private 
medical decisions have no place calling themselves feminists.

Of course, being in this incredible feminist moment – when the first female 
president is about to win by taking down a man who is as close to a caricature 
of misogyny as you can get – being in this moment doesn’t mean that our 
feminist future is guaranteed.

It’s not. Those of us who have been doing this work for years know that every 
time women make political and cultural strides, there is an intense backlash – 
we’re in the midst of it now, and it will only intensify ifHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> becomes president.

Making sure that this backlash doesn’t define us – that we are not put on the 
defensive by it – that is what will truly determine our feminist future.

Will we get pushed back on our heels or will we look straight ahead and move 
forward? Will we rest on our laurels because we have the first woman president 
or will we take our moment to celebrate and then move on to the hard work that 
still needs to be done?


If the people in this room, and the people at Planned Parenthood are any 
indication – we know the answer to those questions.

This is just the beginning

My daughter tells me that she wants children one day. (Though she says she 
doesn’t want to be pregnant – her wife will have the kids.) But when she talks 
about having children, when I think about being a grandmother or a even 
great-grandmother one day – that’s when I think about those hundred years that 
we’ve been talking about.

I think about what the world will be like for them. And I have faith, I really 
do, that it will be a world – that this will be a country – where people 
determine their own destiny.

A world where we understand that reproductive rights are not just an issue of 
women’s bodies – but an economic issue, a family issue, and a human rights 
issue.

And the reason I have faith that future generations will see this vision of 
feminism and justice unfold is because of activists like you all here. Because 
of Planned Parenthood. Every day they are ensuring that the next hundred years 
will be years where women’s words, lives, bodies and experiences matter. Years 
where we’re not defending ourselves from attack, but building something 
progressive and something real.


All of you in this room are doing what is necessary to ensure that feminist 
future. I could not be more grateful to you, and I could not be more honored to 
join that fight with you.
 