
People working in green buildings think better in the office and sleep better 
when they get home, a new study has revealed.


The research indicates that better ventilation, lighting and heat control 
improves workers’ performance and could boost their productivity by thousands 
of dollars a year. It also suggests that more subjective aspects, such as 
beautiful design, may make workers happier and more productive.

An increasing number of green buildings are being constructed by developers as 
the cost and health benefits become better known, but this the first study to 
show such buildings can make their occupants brainier.

The research analysed workers in certified green buildings in five US cities 
and compared them with other workers in the same cities employed in different 
offices owned by the same companies.

“We saw higher cognitive function scores for workers in green certified 
buildings, compared to their counterparts in buildings that were still high 
performing, but which had not achieved green certification,” said Joseph Allen, 
at the Harvard TH Chan School of PublicHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> in the US.

The workers in the green buildings scored over 25% higher in a standard test 
which uses a Sims-like computer game to assess the ability to think and plan. 
“The tool assesses complex decision-making performance, which mimics the 
real-world decision making that all of us encounter every day in our normal 
work routine,” said Allen.

The quality of sleep of the workers was also assessed using special watches 
with sensors that measured the length of sleep, tossing and turning and 
interruptions. Those in green offices had 6% higher sleep scores, said Allen: 
“I think this is one of the most provocative findings in the study - it 
suggests that buildings impact us after the eight hours we are in there for our 
work day.”

Furthermore, the green building workers reported 30% fewer “sick building 
syndrome” symptoms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/21/healthy-workplaces-produce-employees-who-work-smarter-and-longer>
, such as headaches and eye and respiratory irritation. Increased energy 
efficiency of buildings has raised concerns about the impact of poorer 
ventilation, although modern technology enables heat to be retained while air 
is kept fresh.

The green buildings had better ventilation and therefore lower levels of 
carbon dioxide and chemicals called volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that are 
emitted by furniture and carpets.Previous research by the Harvard group in 
controlled lab conditions <http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/15-10037/> showed this 
significantly boosts cognitive scores andcould increase the productivity 
<http://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/12/11/14709> of each worker by thousands of 
dollars a year for investments of just tens of dollars per worker.

The green buildings were also better lit, with more daylight, which research 
has shown can help strengthen people’s daily rhythms and promote better sleep.

The cognition and sleep benefits of the green buildings were clear in the 
research but statistical analysis showed that the physical ventilation, light 
and heat control factors did not explain all of the improvements.

“We see this additional, building-level effect,” said Allen. “There is 
absolutely a psychological as well as a physiological impact of being in better 
buildings and I think they are both critically important.”

Marcella Ucci, an expert at University College London in the UK and not 
involved in the new research, said: “It is very interesting and useful 
research. The causes [of the improvements] may need to be investigated further, 
as they may not be simply what they measured. There are perhaps softer things, 
like design and even beauty - the “delight factor” - which can’t be measured.”

Ucci noted that the research compared green certified buildings with others 
that were still of a good standard: “If they had compared with lower quality 
buildings, the differences might have been even bigger.”

Trillions of dollars have been spent on new buildings in the last five years, 
about a third of which was spent on green buildings. Allen said the adoption of 
green buildings was not higher because decisions were not being taken at a high 
enough level in organisations, meaning the costs to the facilities department 
were not compared to the economic and health benefits elsewhere in the company.

But he said attitudes were changing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/sep/18/green-building-leed-green-business-council-epa>
: “I am absolutely hopeful. I see a real estate community that is engaged on 
this topic and starting to understand that they can make decisions around 
health that are going the impact the bottom line.”

John Mandyck, chief sustainability officer at United Technologies 
<http://naturalleader.com/thecogfxstudy/>, one the world’s largest providers of 
building technologies, said: “People had surmised the benefits of green 
buildings but there hasn’t been good science behind it. Now there is science 
behind the intuition.” United Technologies helped fund the new study but had no 
involvement in the research, which is published in thepeer-reviewed journal 
Building and Environment 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132316304723>.

Mandyck said that, with the world population growing and urbanising quickly, 
more green buildings were needed to meet that challenge. Focusing on energy 
efficiency is important he said, but 90% of the costs associated with a 
building are people’s salaries, so improving their performance could be an 
important driver for the adoption of green buildings.

“Our goal is to grow the green building movement and we are a supplier to that 
market,” he said. “We believe we can do good for both our customers and our 
investors.”
 