
Further signs that the Brexit vote is depressing consumer confidence have 
arrived with a brake applied to previously booming car sales.

After a record 2015 and a strong first half of the year, new vehicle 
registrations rose by just 0.1% in July, according to figures fromthe Society 
of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT) <http://www.smmt.co.uk/>.

Industry analysts said uncertainty created by the referendum outcome was one 
of a number of factors behind a slowdown that will sendtremors through 
Britain’s large and growing car production sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/uk-car-manufacturing-hits-high-industry-warns-brexit-effect>
.

“After a healthy start to 2016 and record registrations in 2015, the market is 
showing signs of cooling,” said Mike Hawes, the SMMT’s chief executive.

“The automotive market is a vital part of the British economy and it’s 
important government delivers the economic conditions which instil business and 
consumer confidence.”

UK car sales fell ahead of EU vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/06/uk-car-sales-fell-ahead-of-eu-vote>
A total of 1,599,159 new cars have been registered so far this year, putting 
demand 2.8% higher than for the same period in 2015 following a strong first 
quarter.

A total of 178,523 cars were sold last month, evenly split between petrol and 
diesel models. The Ford Fiesta was the bestselling car, followed by the 
Vauxhall Corsa and Astra. More than 2.6m cars were sold last year.


Mark Fulthorpe, a car market analyst with IHS Markit, said consumers had been 
spending much more than normal over recent years fuelled in part by one-off 
factors such as PPI insurance payouts.

“There was an expectation that the pace established was likely to ease anyway, 
but has Brexit accelerated that process? That is how we interpret it,” he said.


Samuel Tombs, the chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, agreed: 
“Uncertainty about the economic outlook is making consumers cautious to 
purchase big-ticket discretionary items,” he said.

Hawes, however, said he was still confident that car buyers could be tempted: 
“With low interest rates, attractive finance options and exciting new models 
coming to the showrooms, the market still has lots to offer customers.”

In some respects the SMMT figures for July followed a 2016 trend with lower 
private registrations offset by fleet purchases, which rose by 5%.

Demand for alternatively fuelled vehicles remained strong, with a quarter more 
registrations compared with the same month in 2015.
 