
Within 36 hours of Hamid Kehazaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/hamid-kehazaei> presenting to the 
Manus Island detention centre medical clinic with an unrelenting fever, there 
was “general consensus” among medical staff that he was “very very sick”, 
suffering from sepsis and “needed to be treated quite urgently at a higher 
level”.

“We were trying to get him out,” Rafael Cruz, the paramedic who was treating 
Kehzaei, told a coronial inquiry into the asylum seeker’s death. “He was not 
improving, he was actually deteriorating. He was only getting worse.”

It was, however, a further 36 hours before Kehazaei was flown from Manus by 
air ambulance for advanced care – first to Port Moresby and finally to Brisbane.

Asylum seeker declared 'brain dead' after leaving Manus Island
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/03/asylum-seeker-declared-brain-dead-medical-evacuation-manus-island>
Kehazaei – a 24-year-old Iranian asylum seeker whose name is also spelled 
Khazaei – died in Brisbane’s Mater hospital on 5 September 2014.

A coronial inquest into his death began on Monday in Brisbane before the 
coroner, Terry Ryan.

Counsel assisting Emily Cooper told the inquest an auotpsy found Kehazaei’s 
death was caused by a lack of oxygen to his brain as a consequence of 
cardiorespiratory arrest, caused by sepsis which developed from an infection 
which began in a sore on his leg in the Manus Island detention centre.

 The inquest will address the “adequacy and appropriateness of medical care” 
provided to Kehazaei, Cooper said, including the “procedures and processes for 
the escalation of urgent medical treatment and to provide for urgent evacuation 
out of Manus Island”.

The inquest heard Kehazaei presented to the then-rudimentary medical clinic 
within the Manus Island detention centre at about 5.30pm on the evening of 23 
August.

At the time, the medical centre in the detention camp consisted of four 
converted shipping containers, with a roof covering the space in between them. 
The internal covered area, and the containers, were air-conditioned. The 
medical clinic has since been upgraded.

 Cruz was one of two paramedics rostered on on the night of 23 August. 
Kehazaei presented shivering, with his hands held inside his shirt, complaining 
of a fever, chills, body aches, a runny nose and sore throat. He had been 
unwell for two days, he said.

Kehazaei was prescribed intravenous paracetamol, saline solution and a broad 
spectrum antibiotic ceftriaxone. But his condition continued to deteriorate.

“The fever was not responding to anything we did,” Cruz said. “It just 
remained high throughout the whole night. Nothing touched the fever … He was 
very, very sick.”

Fevers were common inside the Manus detention centre, Cruz said, but 
Kehazaei’s case quickly emerged as unusual and “very concerning”. His 
temperature touched 40C and was resistant to all treatments.

“It [Manus] is a very remote location, we have very high humidity, [it is] 
very hot, it rains every day, infections are abundant,” Cruz said. “The risk 
for any type of infection is quite great.

“But even if antibiotics were not working, even giving him Panadol should 
relieve the fever for a few hours. But we didn’t see a change at all.”

Cruz treated Kehazaei again the following night – 24 August into 25 August – 
and said the patient had a temperature of 40C that could not be relieved. He 
was also suffering hypotension and a high heartbeat.

“It’s a good indication the patient is septic and that the patient needs to be 
treated quite urgently and at a higher level.”

By 7.30am on the morning of 25 August, Cruz said, medical staff on the island 
agreed they could not adequately treat him there.

“There was a general consensus on day two that he needed to be moved to a 
place of higher care,” Cruz said. “We were trying to get him out.”

However, Kehazaei was not flown out of Manus until lunchtime on 26 August, 36 
hours after doctors on the island requested his urgent transfer from the island 
and some 68 hours after he first presented unwell.

Asylum seeker's family mourn 'sensitive, lovable' son declared brain dead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/04/asylum-seekers-family-mourn-son-declared-brain-dead>
The inquest heard that the turnaround for an emergency medical evacuation was 
typically 12 hours. It also heard that the air ambulance could not fly to 
Momote airfield on Manus at night because the airport was not equipped for 
night landings.

The coronial inquiry, set down for two weeks, is expected to hear from more 
doctors and Manus Island staff on Kehazaei’s specific treatment and the general 
standard of care in detention, as well as procedures for acutely-ill patients.

The Pacific International Hospital in Port Moresby, where Kehazaei was 
initially taken before being moved to Brisbane, has refused to co-operate with 
the inquest and will not make any of its staff available to appear before it 
for questioning.
 