
A critically ill asylum seeker was left without proper care on Manus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> because Australian 
immigration officials failed to give permission for his transfer to a hospital, 
an inquest has been told.

Four doctors agreed that Hamid Kehazaei, who died in 2014 from a treatable 
bacterial infection, needed to be “urgently transferred” because facilities on 
Manus Island were inadequate, the third day of an inquest into his death in
Brisbane <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane> heard on 
Wednesday.

But Kehazaei was left stranded on the island another full day because of 
bureaucratic delays from Canberra, and because he didn’t have aPapua New Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea> visa, even though he was 
already in the country.

Delay to treatment of Hamid Kehazaei before he died revealed in leaked files
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/delay-to-treatment-of-hamid-kehazaei-before-he-died-revealed-in-leaked-files>
Doctors have told the inquest that the Manus Island detention centre clinic 
was, at that time of Kehazaei’s death, not sterile and stricken by regular 
power failures, that nurses were insufficiently trained and regularly failed to 
follow instructions, and that the limited numbers of diagnostic machines were 
broken.

The inquest also heard that critically ill asylum seekers could not be moved 
from the detention centre without express permission from the Department of 
Immigration and Border Protection inCanberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra>, or without a Papua New 
Guinean visa, which they needed even to travel to a hospital elsewhere in PNG.

Marten Muis, the senior medical officer on Manus Island on 25 August, said it 
was clear at 8am that morning that the 24-year-old Iranian man needed to be 
urgently moved to hospital.

Muis spoke to the emergency doctor on the island, Leslie King, and the area 
medical director for Manus, Anthony Renshaw, who both agreed that Kehazaei 
needed to be flown off the island to hospital on the commercial flight that was 
scheduled for that afternoon.

Muis also spoke with Sydney-based Yliana Dennett at International SOS – the 
company which organised medical transfers – who agreed that moving Kehazaei to 
hospital that day “was a very good idea ... he’s a chance to develop a much 
worse infection”.

A fifth doctor, Richard McGrath, who was also on Manus, had agreed to be 
Kehazaei’s medical escort on the flight.

The day my friend Hamid Kehazaei died | Behrouz Boochani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/the-day-my-friend-hamid-kehazaei-died>
However, Kehazaei was not moved from the island until lunchtime the next day, 
26 August. By that time his condition had deteriorated so badly he had to be 
flown by air ambulance to Port Moresby’s Pacific International hospital. His 
transfer to Port Moresby was in defiance of doctors’ recommendations, who had 
requested he be flown directly to Australia.

Once in Port Moresby, he suffered three heart attacks before being flown, 
again by air ambulance, and now unconscious, to Brisbane.

Kehazaei never regained consciousness and was declared braindead at Brisbane’s 
Mater hospital on 2 September. His life support machines were turned off, with 
his family’s permission, on 5 September.

On Manus Island, Muis said the medical facilities to care for sick asylum 
seekers were “extremely basic”.

“There was no x-ray machine or laboratory to carry out diagnostic facilities,” 
he said.

There was a machine for basic blood tests, but it was broken at the time. “The 
only test we could do at the time I was there was a malaria test,” Muis said.

A document showed to the inquest demonstrated a Piccolo blood-test machine did 
run tests on Kehazaei but was not seen by Muis until after he had been 
evacuated.

Muis told the inquest on Wednesday there was “no way in hell” he would send a 
patient to Lorengau hospital on Manus Island which “wasn’t ... what we would 
call a hospital”. It also suffered from staffing and equipment problems too.

“They had a nice x-ray machine, but the radiologist had gone back to Moresby 
because she hadn’t been paid for three months,” he said.

Muis said he spoke to International SOS on the morning of 25 August to arrange 
for Kehazaei’s transfer to Port Moresby on a commercial flight at 5pm that day. 
That flight was agreed to in a conversation played to the inquest on Wednesday.

But by 3pm, there had been no formal approval.

“I rang [International SOS] and said ‘I thought we had an agreement for an 
urgent transfer, we are under the impression that this patient is going with 
the outgoing senior medical officer at 5[pm]. We haven’t got much time left, 
can you tell me what’s happening?’

“I was told ‘it’s not happening, because we haven’t obtained a visa’. They 
then went into some kind of story about people in the detention centre, even 
though they were already on PNG soil ... needed a visa [to be transferred to a 
PNG hospital].”

Muis was told that if plans had been made earlier, an air ambulance could have 
been organised, but because the Momote airfield on Manus Island was “daytime 
only” it could not be arranged for that day.

“They said ‘we’re very sorry, but you’re on your own and you’re going to have 
to keep this man overnight’.”

Muis said the emergency doctor in the detention centre, Leslie King, was “very 
distressed and angry” about Kehazaei not being moved.

“At that stage, he certainly wasn’t well enough for any major interventions. I 
went to the little pharmacy, and I remember looking through what else we had in 
the way of intravenous antibiotics.”

By the next morning, Kehazaei’s condition had deteriorated further. The 
overnight nursing staff had not followed instructions and had failed to provide 
him with intravenous fluids.

In the morning, he had become confused and combative with staff. He had ripped 
the IV lines out of his arms, and was refusing to wear a facemask.

Hamid Kehazaei inquest: doctors faced 'political pressure' over patient 
transfers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-doctors-faced-political-pressure-over-patient-transfers>
“He was the most awful colour I’ve ever seen in a human being,” Muis, a doctor 
of 40 years’ experience, said.

“He had noticeably deteriorated, he was a sort of grey-purply colour. His 
breathing was over 30, he seemed confused. If you went anywhere near him to put 
a mask on him, he would put his arms up or strike out.

“It wasn’t an urgent case any more, it was an emergency and we needed to get 
him out.”

Manus Island health services manager Lyn Baczocha told the inquest she was 
told by immigration department officials on Manus that Kehazaei could not be 
moved because approval had not been granted by senior staff in Canberra.

“I had the ambulance drivers ready, the paperwork was ready, the security was 
ready, the medical escort was ready.”

Stephen Keim, acting for Kehazaei’s family, asked Baczocha: “The only thing 
that was missing was the go-ahead from Canberra?”

“Yes,” Baczocha replied.
 