
So Kim Kardashian has got this bum. That much I understand.

I have actually seen Kim Kardashian’s bum. I don’t think I’m alone in that. It 
was quite interesting to look at. All bums are quite interesting to look at, 
because, in the general run of things, people keep them hidden. It’s like 
seeing someone’s bank statement. (Especially mine, which is all papery and red.)

Beyond that, I’m baffled. I don’t understand. What? How? I don’t quite 
comprehend what Kim Kardashianis, where she came from or why we talk about her.

That’s not because I’m particularly highbrow; The X Factor and Downton Abbey 
are squarely on my radar, and most of my iPod is taken up with Dolly Parton.

I’ve just missed something with Kim Kardashian. What is the genesis of this 
famous bum? I feel like I’ve tuned in late, missed a central plank of the story 
and now can’t follow the plot at all. (I feel much the same way about Syria.)

It’s not that I haven’t picked up bits along the way. I know she was (is?) in 
a reality show. I know she once did a sex tape. I know she’s married to a 
rapper. Still, it doesn’t gel: the level of fame, the 45 million Twitter 
followers, the mainstream British newspaper coverage. I feel like I’m staring 
at a cup of flour, a cup of cocoa powder and a cup of sugar, and not 
understanding how it became a cake. Where is the egg? What bound this together? 
I’ve seen the butt, but I can’t see the butter.

Truth is, I haven’t felt any particular need to investigate Kim Kardashian 
further. There was no shame, for me, in my ignorance. (In that way, if in no 
other, she differs from Syria.)

I assumed it would be slightly ridiculous for someone like me – 
fashion-averse, middle-class and in all statistical likelihood middle-aged – to 
know much about Kim Kardashian anyway. I’m not meant to be interested. I’d look 
silly. You might just as well say thatHarriet Harman is interested in the 
Kardashians.

That was my position – until last Tuesday morning. Last Tuesday morning is when
Harriet Harman announced onGood Morning Britain 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/british-politician-harriet-harman-defends-kim-kardashians-nude-selfies-462944>
: “I am an expert on the Kardashians.”

Had I been holding a cartoon cup of coffee, I would have choked on it.

“I think, if you step back,” continued Harman, “the overall message that comes 
out of the Kardashian women is that they are kind of going to make their own 
decisions, make their own way in the world… There’s a kind of bravery and a 
pioneering – oh my God, what am I saying here? – a pioneering spirit to them.”

Oh my God, Harriet, what  are you saying here? It’s practically the punchline 
to a joke. “That’s likeHarriet Harman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/harrietharman> being a fan of Kim 
Kardashian!”

Here is an alternative point of view. Kim Kardashian leads a new cultural 
movement that tells young women their aspirations should be about money, 
jewels, furs and cars, and showing their arse to people is a good route to get 
there.

Right in the skeletal teeth of our historical sisters who were forced to sell 
their bodies from powerlessness, she demonstrates that even a powerful woman 
has not much else to sell. This she has in common with Rihanna and Nicki Minaj 
and all those singers who strip off and boast about how their booty brings 
booty. But Kim Kardashian is worse because, the daughter of a millionaire 
lawyer, she was born lucky, and – having been able to choose anything – she 
chose nudity, vanity, posing and a visible obsession with the trappings of 
wealth. Thus she dupes a generation of poorer, unluckier girls who do not have 
rich, entitled backgrounds and, having shown off their arses, will find that 
this does not lead to a nourishing career after all.

I’m not saying that’s what I think. I don’t know if that’s what I think. But 
God knows I need that to be whatHarriet Harman thinks.

Harriet Harman, scourge of Page 3, loves the Kardashian message? Christ alive! 
That’s like hearing Arthur Scargill say “Actually, you know what, on 
reflection: screw the miners. Live in the now!”

Quizzed on her apparently conflicting views, Harman said she preferred the 
Kardashian roadshow to Page 3 because “It’s an issue of control, actually… I 
get the sense of the Kardashians that they are in control of their own agenda.” 
But Linda Lusardi and Sam Fox and Maria Whittaker and all the other Page 3 
Stunnas would have said, at the time, that they were in control of theirs. And 
they probably were.

It isn’t about control. It’s about getting your bum out. And I’m not saying 
they shouldn’t; I don’t know if they shouldn’t. But God knows I needHarriet 
Harman to think they shouldn’t. She was the balance.

A handful of readers might remember that, back in the day, I directed a porn 
film and wrote a book about it. They might feel queasy at the whiff of high 
horse. But, as I said in that book, I see a healthy place for the old-fashioned 
“hardcore and adults-only”. It’s the new “soft-core and everywhere” which might 
diminish us all.

Or might not! I don’t know for certain that young women’s role models shouldn’t
 dance around with their bums out. I just know that I needHarriet Harman to 
know that they shouldn’t.

Whither consistency? Why change tack now? If Harman wants to come across as 
light-hearted, easy-going, fun-loving and lowbrow, I’m afraid that ship’s long 
sailed. What she did have was a clear character and a logical moral line: rare 
traits in modern politics.

Which adviser told her that, of all the attributes the public associate with 
Harriet Harman, the one she really needed to slough off was her credibility? 
WTF, Harriet?
 