
Henrik Stenson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/henrik-stenson> spoke of the 
inner belief that he would win the 145th Open Championship, with the Swede 
dedicating the Claret Jug to a late friend after claiming his first major in 
stunning fashion.

On an extraordinary Sunday, Stenson carded a record-equalling major round of 
63 to take the Open by three shots fromPhil Mickelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phil-mickelson>.

During his victory speech, Stenson paid tribute to Mike Gerbich, who passed 
away in Arizona. The pair had become friends when Stenson lived in Dubai.

Henrik Stenson holds off Phil Mickelson for brilliant triumph at the Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/henrik-stenson-phil-mickelson-open>
“I lost a dear friend on Wednesday and I feel like he has been with me all 
week,” Stenson said. “He had been battling cancer for many years. Mike, this 
one’s for you.”

Later, Stenson said: “He was one of the real good guys back in Dubai. I’d 
known him for many, many years, and he was a very keen golfer and a great man.

“I had news on Tuesday that the end was near and unfortunately he passed away 
on Wednesday morning over in the US. So he’s always been there as a big 
supporter of mine. In good days and bad days he always sent me messages and 
been out at some events. This one is dedicated to him, for sure.”

Stenson’s four-round aggregate of 264 is a major record in its own right. The 
40-year-old has thereby become Sweden’s first major championship winner.

“I felt like it was my time,” Stenson said. “You can’t guarantee it by any 
means and I had to play some great golf to get there but I believed in myself 
and did a great job out there.

“It’s not something that you run around and shout about but I felt this was my 
turn. I knew I was going to have to battle back if it wasn’t but I think the 
extra self-belief made me go all the way this week.

“It makes it even better that I beat a competitor like Phil. He is one of the 
best ever to play this game.

“I feel very privileged to be the one with this trophy. So many great Swedish 
players have tried and there have been so many close calls. This is going to be 
massive for golf in Sweden.”

Stenson will rise to No5 when the world rankings are published on Monday. 
“We’re only just getting started, aren’t we?” he said with a smile when asked 
as to what achievements may come next. “You never know once you open the 
floodgates what might happen. It’s going to be a while to have all of this sink 
in.

“We have a big schedule to get through this summer, with the US PGA 
Championship and the Olympics to come.”

Mickelson now has 11 runners-up placings in major tournaments, alongside five 
victories. His 17-under-par total would have been sufficient for at least a 
play-off spot in 141 of the 145 Opens played throughout history. After rounds 
of 63, 69, 70 and 65 the American admitted to having bittersweet emotions.

Even though Phil Mickelson came up short we couldn’t take our eyes off him | 
Paul Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/17/phil-mickelson-troon-open> 
“That is the best I have ever played and not won,” Mickelson said. “I don’t 
ever remember a match like that. Usually a bogey-free 65 in the final round is 
good enough to get the job done. I threw everything at him that I could.

“I was hoping for something in the mid-60s. I thought anything in the mid-60s 
would be a good round. In the end, I was having to make 30 and 40 foot putts 
just to keep pace with Henrik.

“I am happy for Henrik. He is a great champion. We’ve been friends for some 
time. I’ve always thought that he is one of the best ball-strikers in the game 
and that major championships are perfectly suited for him.

“I knew that he would ultimately come through and win. I’m happy that he did. 
I’m disappointed that it was at my expense.”
 