
The 145th Open Championship has become a private party. The duel in the 
drizzle, 39 years on from epic events down the coast at Turnberry.

Phil Mickelson and Henrik Stenson apparently have little intention of allowing 
anyone else to gatecrash their scene. For golferswith scores so close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/16/the-open-2016-day-three-live>
, their target could hardly be more contrasting: Mickelson seeking a sixth 
major title as Stenson chases a first.

Mickelson, amazingly, has not won anything at all since lifting the Claret Jug 
at Muirfield in 2013. Suggestions that his list of achievements render him the 
favourite with 18 holes to play are offset by the occasionally outrageous 
pieces of good fortune from which he has benefited during the previous 54.

The American and Stenson spent Saturday slugging away at each other. It was 
enthralling if not electrifying, the noticeable lack of a boisterous atmosphere 
at Royal Troon testimony to that. Maybe cold, damp weather doused spectator 
emotion.

Andrew Johnston taps into Beef mania to be England’s big hope at the Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/andrew-johnston-beef-england-the-open-golf>
By close of play, Stenson led by one at 12 under par. The fine margins of the 
Open mean this is not exactly his tournament to lose. That said, he may have 
cleared a significant psychological hurdle on Saturday. “I know what I would 
like to see tomorrow,” Stenson said.

“There’s no question about it. But I’ve got a second and two thirds at the 
Open, so it’s not like I’m looking to pick up anymore of those finishes. 
There’s only one thing that matters tomorrow. I know he’s not going to back 
down, and I’m certainly going to try to not back down either. So it should be 
an exciting afternoon.”

After Mickelson, the next name on the board, Bill Haas, is minus six. A player 
other than Mickelson or Stenson could of course still walk off with the Claret 
Jug, but it would require either a spectacular collapse from them both or an 
inspired charge from behind. The likelihood of gusting winds on Sunday 
afternoon diminishes prospects of the latter.

Mickelson, 46, started round three at 10 under, one clear of his Swedish 
playing partner. The advantage was nullified on the opening hole, with Stenson 
two‑putting for birdie at the 5th to take this Open’s lead for the first time.

Mickelson, so typical with some wayward tee shots but magical recovery work, 
was again in front by the turn.

A ridiculous par save at the 12th, followed by a converted birdie attempt a 
hole later, meant the American, at minus 12, was two ahead.

Stenson again fought back on 14, where a two‑shot swing returned the previous 
scenario of joint leaders. Mickelson’s birdie at the par‑five 16th, where 
Stenson found a greenside bunker, placed him one up again.

We weren’t done. Stenson produced a wonderful birdie two at the 17th as 
Mickelson failed to get up and down from short left of the green. Pars at the 
last were something of an anticlimax, a Mickelson fairway rant at a 
photographer aside. The key statistic is this: Stenson’s 68 compared favourably 
with Mickelson’s 70.

Frustration and form leave Rory McIlroy at breaking point at the Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/rory-mcilroy-the-open-snap-club> 
“I was off today,” Mickelson said. “I didn’t have my best stuff. My rhythm was 
a little quick from the top as we started downwind. I was a little bit jumpy 
and my rhythm wasn’t very good. Today could have been a day that got away from 
me; instead, I shot under par and kept myself right in heading into tomorrow’s 
final round – so I’m proud of that.”

Sunday could well play out in matchplay fashion. The fact the protagonists are 
from either side of the Atlantic adds to the sense of a Ryder Cup situation.

“I’m looking forward to the opportunity,” Stenson said. “I’ve worked hard 
these first three days to put myself in this situation and I’m going to try my 
hardest to finish the job.” Still, it would be unfair to divert our entire 
attention towards just two competitors.

Haas has played every Open since 2010, claiming a hitherto best finishing 
position of tied 19th. His third round of 69 suggested he is coming to terms 
with this links business.

The adopted home hero is an Englishman. Andrew Johnston is five under par and 
closing in on his finest achievement since winning the Spanish Open earlier 
this year. Even if the amiable 27-year-old stumbles on Sunday, he has afforded 
himself a considerable following.

Bearded or chubby golfers tend to raise smiles. Not only does Johnston have 
both of those characteristics, he can play a bit. JB Holmes is a shot adrift of 
Johnston.

Rory McIlroy’s frustrations boiled over to the extent that he snapped his own 
three wood in a fit of pique on the 16th. The Northern Irishman’s 73 pushed him 
back to even par. Jason Day is a shot worse off following a Saturday 71, which 
included a shank on the 13th.

The Open 2016: third round – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/16/the-open-2016-day-three-live>
“I haven’t had a birdie on the back nine this week,” Day said. “I don’t know 
how many over par I’ve played it in, but it’s been terrible. That’s why I’m not 
in the tournament right now.”

Neither is Colin Montgomerie, but the Scot will be allowed some Open symmetry. 
At the course he calls home, Montgomerie was handed what he termed the “honour” 
of hitting the opening tee shot on Thursday. Now, 12 over par, he will again 
lead the field – alone, at 7.40am – on day four. Montgomerie will take this in 
his standard, congenial spirit. Won’t he?

Jordan Spieth admits he is struggling with expectation to match stellar 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/jordan-spieth-the-open-royal-troon> 