
A press officer for South Yorkshire police who said she was pressured to spin 
positive coverage for the force at the Hillsborough inquests has lost her 
complaint with the police watchdog.

Hayley Court told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/south-yorkshire-police-tried-to-spin-evidence-at-hillsborough-inquests>
 earlier this year that she was instructed to emphasise evidence considered 
favourable to the force to journalists attending the hearings into the deaths 
of 96 people, including allegations of misbehaviour byLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> supporters.

She said she first raised concerns internally in September 2014, 19 months 
before the Hillsborough inquests finished.

But the Independent Police Complaints Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ipcc> (IPCC) found no case to answer for 
misconduct or unsatisfactory performance.

In a report published on Tuesday it said 
<https://www.ipcc.gov.uk/hillsborough/blog/monthly-update-november-2016>: “Four 
instances were examined where the superintendent allegedly told Miss Court to 
‘schmooze’ the media. Investigators concluded that Miss Court was encouraged to 
build a working relationship with journalists, however no corroborating 
evidence was found to support the allegations that this was a deliberate 
attempt to manipulate the media.

“Miss Court’s predecessor stated that the only brief she had when carrying out 
the role had been to ensure ‘balanced and fair reporting’ of the proceedings. 
If Miss Court was given the alleged instructions, it seems likely that similar 
instructions would have been given to anyone carrying out the communications 
specialist role.

“Investigators concluded that Miss Court may have misunderstood some of her 
directions and highlighted a lack of clear unambiguous written guidance on how 
the force’s staff should engage with the media during court proceedings.”

Court, an experienced journalist who worked from 2010-13 for Hampshire 
constabulary as a media relations officer, was the acting director of 
communications for the Association of ChiefPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Officers when she was headhunted by 
South Yorkshire police to work specifically on the Hillsborough inquests.

She said she believed it was an opportunity to help South Yorkshire police 
deal truthfully and face the failings that caused the disaster, and their 
conduct in the aftermath, when the force blamed innocent supporters who were 
the victims of the lethal crush at the 1989 FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool 
and Nottingham Forest.

Earlier this year the Guardian examined two South Yorkshire police internal 
reports relating to Court.

In a 20-week review of Court’s performance, in November 2014, when she was 
signed off sick with depression following her complaints of bullying, the South 
Yorkshire police head of communications, Carrie Goodwin, acknowledged: “Hayley 
disclosed that she felt she had been asked to act in an unethical manner in 
that she should coerce the media.”

Another internal report, on Court’s complaint that she was being bullied, made 
it clear that South Yorkshire police believed media coverage of the 
Hillsborough inquests was biased against them, and managers claimed Court had 
failed to redress it.

The internal investigation did not uphold that there had been “intentional 
bullying” of Court, but did find that “a number of process issues” in how she 
had been managed, including not having been set clear objectives for her role 
when she started at the Hillsborough inquests as well as negative feedback, had 
“caused Hayley to feel like she was the victim of bullying”.

In a statement on Tuesday, Court said she was disappointed with the IPCC 
ruling.

She said: “The public of South Yorkshire, police officers and staff deserve 
high-quality leaders within their police force who act with integrity and 
support the reporting of unethical behaviour. Sadly, this was not my experience 
when I first raised concerns in September 2014 – 19 months before the 
Hillsborough inquests concluded.

“I’m disappointed by the IPCC’s findings, as anyone who has made significant 
professional sacrifices to highlight concern of wrongdoing would be. 
Nevertheless, I am grateful to those who examined my claims and carried out as 
detailed an investigation as their narrow remit allowed.

“Any suggestion that I simply misunderstood my instructions is manifestly 
wrong. I am, as any experienced press officer should be, acutely aware of the 
value of strong working relationships with the media. My instructions went 
beyond that and, in my opinion, breached the code of ethics designed to make 
the police service more open, transparent and accountable.

“I stand by my claims and feel it was in the public interest to speak out. I 
only hope that anyone else who encounters unethical practices within the police 
or any public sector body is not dissuaded from whistleblowing after seeing the 
outcome of this particular investigation.”

Meanwhile, an independent external review released on Tuesday ruled that the 
IPCC was right not to investigate Hillsborough families’ complaint about former 
SYP chief constable David Crompton.

The complaint specifically alleged that Crompton instructed barristers 
representing the force at the inquests to “pour blame” on the Liverpool fans as 
part of a deliberate effort to deflect blame from SYP.

Rachel Cerfontyne, IPCC deputy chair, had previously found the available 
evidence did not indicate that a criminal or misconduct offence had occurred. 
She concluded that a “meaningful investigation” would not be possible as 
communications between Crompton and his inquest legal team were not accessible 
to the IPCC. These instructions are subject to legal professional privilege, 
which SYP refused to waive.

Cerfontyne’s decision was reviewed by independent external counsel Hugh 
Tomlinson QC, who had no previous involvement in Hillsborough matters.

 