
Sir Norman Bettison, the former chief constable of Merseyside police, has been 
criticised by families of people unlawfully killed at Hillsborough in 1989 for 
writing a book about the disaster in which he portrays himself as the victim of 
a witch-hunt.


In the book, Hillsborough Untold, Bettison acknowledges he is a suspect in the 
ongoing criminal investigation by the Independent Police Complaints Commission 
into an alleged cover-up by South Yorkshire police.


IPCC to review decision not to investigate police chief over Hillsborough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/21/ipcc-reconsiders-decision-not-to-investigate-hillsborough-police-chief-david-crompton>
The force is accused by families of having sought to evade culpability for 
failings that caused the deaths of 96 people at the FA Cup semi-final between
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> and Nottingham Forest, and 
instead blame alleged misbehaviour by people attending the match.

That police case was rejected by the jury in the new inquests that concluded 
on 26 April this year, which found that the96 people were unlawfully killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
 due to the gross negligence of the South Yorkshire police officer in command, 
Ch Supt David Duckenfield, and that no behaviour by supporters contributed to 
the dangerous crush that developed outside the football ground.

Families have criticised Bettison for the timing of his book because after the 
inquests verdicts the IPCC said it intended to send files for the Crown 
Prosecution Service to consider possible charges including perverting the 
course of justice at the end of this year.

In the book, Bettison suggests his account could stand as a presentation of 
his case if criminal charges are being considered against him. “This book might 
be the only way in which my own account of the Hillsborough aftermath will ever 
be heard. By the Crown Prosecution Service as well as by the public,” he has 
written.

A chief inspector in South Yorkshire police at the time of the disaster, 
Bettison was accused in parliament in 1998 by the Merseyside Labour MP Maria 
Eagle of being part of a “black propaganda unit” involved in changing officers’ 
statements to emphasise alleged misbehaviour and drunkenness by supporters.

Bettison claims in the book that there was never a conspiracy to blame 
supporters, and that this became “mythologised,” and he says Eagle never 
repeated her accusation outside parliament.


Eagle told the Guardian: “I stand by everything that I have ever said about 
the disaster, both inside and outside the House of Commons, including about Mr 
Bettison’s role in the aftermath, and the long fight of the families and 
survivors for truth and justice.”


Describing the timing of the book as “inappropriate and wrong”, Eagle said: 
“Far from being ‘untold’, the book is a rehash of the usual narcissistic and 
partial account from Mr Bettison.”

Margaret Aspinall, the chair of the Hillsborough Family Support Group, and 
whose 18-year-old son, James, died in the disaster, said: “I am not surprised 
that Bettison has written a book, because he is making it all about him again, 
painting himself as a victim.

David Conn wins football journalist of the year at MBNA Northwest Football 
Awards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/david-conn-wins-football-journalist-of-the-year-at-mbna-northwest-football-awards>
“Ninety-six people died that day, hundreds of survivors were injured and 
traumatised, we finally had a jury establish the truth this year, and we are 
still living with the torture of it. We do want Bettison to tell his story – 
the truth, to the IPCC.”

Bettison says in the book that he was the subject of a witch-hunt once his 
name became associated with the alleged cover-up.


One of the chapters is titled “In the shadow of Salem”, a reference to the 
small town in America that put several women on trial for alleged witchcraft in 
1692.

Referring to the Hillsborough independent panel report in 2012 which 
highlighted his role in the aftermath of the disaster, including how he took a 
video to parliament to show MPs, Bettison says he now regrets making a public 
statement in which he said “fans’ behaviour … made the job of the police in the 
crush outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles harder than it needed to be”.

That statement led to him stepping down from his then position as chief 
constable of West Yorkshire police. In the book, Bettison says he believes his 
career would have ended prematurely anyway, because “the hue and cry was out, 
the pitchforks and burning torches would still have turned up at my drawbridge 
even if I had remained firmly, and silently, locked inside my castle.”

Bettison has in recent years been revealed as the principal author of South 
Yorkshire police’s intended submission to the official Taylor inquiry, now 
known as the Wain report. In it, the force admitted no failures, omitted that 
Duckenfield was inexperienced at commanding matches at Hillsborough and had 
been appointed only 19 days before the semi-final, and emphasised allegations 
of misbehaviour by supporters.

In the book, Bettison describes the Wain report as an “internal briefing 
document” based on “the most objective evidence to capture the essence of what 
South Yorkshire police officers could say about the events”.

Hillsborough victims: the 96 people whose lives were cut short
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ng-interactive/2016/apr/06/hillsborough-victims-the-96-people-whose-lives-were-cut-short>
Louise Brookes, whose brother, Andrew, then 26, was another of the 96 people 
unlawfully killed, is particularly angry that Bettison included in the video he 
took to parliament an image of her brother lying motionless with a black bin 
bag over his head and in a state of partial undress.

Bettison devotes only a few short paragraphs to the video in his book, 
portraying it as an objective account of the disaster, with footage included of 
past football hooliganism because this was “useful and contextual”. Eagle and 
the families believe the video gave a partial account that sought to blame the 
disaster on supporters misbehaving.

Brookes said: “My father, who was devastated by Andrew’s death, died himself 
10 days before the new inquests started. Bettison never asked for our 
permission to use that picture of Andrew and show it to politicians in a black 
propaganda video for South Yorkshire police. Now he has produced this book to 
exonerate himself while criminal charges are being considered, painting himself 
as a victim. It is disgusting – beneath contempt.”

The publisher, Biteback, has said the book “seeks respectfully to explain why 
[Bettison] feels he has been unfairly scapegoated.” It has said any proceeds 
from sales will go to charity. Aspinall said no charity should accept the money.
 