
Britain’s most senior police officer is facing further criticism in relation 
to the 1989 Hillsborough disaster, afterhe stated last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/met-chief-hogan-howe-gave-misleading-account-about-hillsborough-ipcc-finds>
 that he has been found to have “done nothing wrong” on the day, in which 96 
people died.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> commissioner, made the 
comments when responding to a report from the Independent Police Complaints 
Commission, whose investigation remains ongoing into how 96 people were 
unlawfully killed.


The IPCC is expected to send files to the Crown Prosecution Service in the new 
year in relation to possible manslaughter and other offences for the 96 deaths, 
and potential perjury and perverting the course of justice by South Yorkshire 
police officers in the alleged cover-up that followed.

The IPCC last week cleared Hogan-Howe of misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/met-chief-hogan-howe-gave-misleading-account-about-hillsborough-ipcc-finds>
, but said he could have been “more diligent” when he gave a misleading account 
in 2012 and 2013 about the evidence he provided following the disaster. An 
inspector in the South Yorkshire police at the time, Hogan-Howe had said that 
he gave a full statement to the official Taylor inquiry in 1989, then declined 
to add to it when asked to by another officer, but that was untrue;he had never 
made a full statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/18/hillsborough-bernard-hogan-howe-ipcc>
.

Paul Spearritt, the brother of Adam, 14 at the time, one of the 96 people to 
die in the crush at the 1989 FA Cup semi-final, had made two complaints against 
Hogan-Howe.


He said: “I cannot understand how Mr Hogan-Howe can claim he has been found to 
have done nothing wrong on the day. The IPCC found he could have been more 
diligent about his statements – which in my opinion does amount to ‘doing 
something wrong’ anyway – but he seems to have completely exonerated himself 
over all his actions, even though the IPCC investigation is continuing.”

Hogan-Howe was on duty through the night of the disaster at the Hillsborough 
boys club, where police kept anxious friends and families waiting for news. 
Those whose loved ones had died were eventually taken from the boys club to the 
gymnasium at the Hillsborough football ground, where the dead bodies were kept 
and which the police had decided would be their CID investigation room.


Friends and family have complained they were treated there as culprits, rather 
than as bereaved people. After identifying a dead person, family members and 
friends were immediately questioned by South Yorkshire police CID officers 
about how much they and their loved ones had to drink.

The IPCC announced last week that Hogan-Howe was not the officer at the boys 
club who had read out a list of people found to be “alive and well” that 
incorrectly included Adam Spearritt, a cause of distress to the family. Paul 
Spearritt made a complaint that Hogan-Howe may have been the officer who read 
out the list, but says his family has accepted that the error was made due to 
flaws in the police system, and the officer who read out the list has not been 
identified.

Following these two specific findings announced by the IPCC, the Metropolitan 
police issued a statement for Hogan-Howe last week, in which he said: “I am 
pleased that this independent investigation has concluded that I did nothing 
wrong, in relation to both statements I gave to the media and my conduct on the 
day of the disaster.
“Importantly, I hope that this investigation provides some comfort to the 
family of Adam Spearritt, who died that tragic day.”

Paul Spearritt said the family drew no comfort at all from the investigation, 
and is still awaiting the results of the IPCC investigation into the boys club, 
gymnasium and identification process.

“The operation at the boys club was terrible for family and friends, and seems 
clearly to have been linked to what the police were doing and preparing to do 
at the gymnasium,” Paul Spearritt said. “We have been told this is all being 
thoroughly investigated, and nobody has been cleared yet.”

Asked for clarification, a spokeswoman for the Metropolitan police said: “The 
commissioner was talking in the context of the complaints made against him 
specifically.”
 