
A government spending watchdog  
<https://www.nao.org.uk/report/nuclear-power-in-the-uk/>has launched a 
devastating critique of Hinkley Point C, warning that the nuclear project could 
cost energy consumers £30bn in “top-up payments” due to falling wholesale power 
prices.

The National Audit Office (NAO) also expressed fears that taxpayers could end 
up with a range of other payments under debt guarantees agreed by the 
government with EDF, the French energy group wanting to develop Hinkley.

There could also be potential liabilities for disposing of spent fuel and 
meeting claims in the event of a nuclear accident, argues the NAO, which says 
renewables may be a cheaper option.

“Supporting early new nuclear projects could lead to higher costs in the short 
term than continuing to support wind and solar. The cost competitiveness of 
nuclear power is weakening as wind and solar become more established,” 
according to the report, titled Nuclear Power in the UK.

“The decision to proceed with support for nuclear power therefore relies more 
on strategic than financial grounds: nuclear power is needed in the supply mix 
to complement the intermittent nature of wind and solar,” it added.

The damaging review comes less than a week after an Infrastructure and 
Projects Authority (IPA) assessment published by the Department of Energy and 
Climate Change (Decc)put the potential cost of Hinkley at £37bn.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/07/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-plant-costs-up-to-37bn>

The proposed scheme in Somerset to build two reactors capable of providing 7% 
of Britain’s total electricity needs has also been hit by continual delays due 
to concerns inside EDF about the financial burden to an already heavily 
indebted energy company. The nominal cost of construction is £18bn, according 
to EDF.

John Sauven, director of Greenpeace UK, said Theresa May should kill off 
Hinkley as soon as possible.

“The government’s line that Hinkley is a good deal for billpayers is falling 
apart. Today’s damaging report from the NAO should kill this myth once and for 
all. It makes the government’s slash and burn approach towards help for 
homegrown renewable energy companies look completely out of step with reality. 
Unlike nuclear the cost of renewables is falling every year.

“EDF and the Chinese nuclear state owned companies will reap the rewards of 
the UK government’s generosity while renewable companies are going bust due to 
lack of government support. The new Prime Minister should put a stop to this 
disastrous Hinkley deal as one of her first acts as leader.

“In the UK, Brexit is throwing up endless questions over the future of the 
European energy market. It would be idiocy of the highest magnitude for the UK 
government to sign this disastrous deal.”

The most damaging assessment is the NAO analysis, using figures from the Decc, 
that shows top-up payments under a “contracts for difference” (CFD) subsidy 
scheme have quadrupled in three years since a deal was struck with EDF by the 
UK government.

“We estimate that the value of future top-up payments under the proposed HPC 
[Hinkley Point C] CFD have increased from £6.1bn in October 2013 when the 
strike price was agreed, to £29.7bn in March 2016,” says the report.

Under the terms of the subsidy scheme, the British consumer must compensate 
EDF for lower wholesale electricity prices, and that arrangement looks 
increasingly bad for the consumer as energy values have plummeted in recent 
years largely due to a fall in the cost of fossil fuels.

Decc argued that the £37bn figure from the IPA was provisional and insisted 
bill payers would not pay more. It said the latest figure of £30bn from the NAO 
is based on power prices continuing to fall for the full 35 years of the 
subsidy scheme which it believes is highly unlikely.

 “Nuclear is not just a nice-to-have. It is an essential part of our plan for 
a 21st century energy system that will power homes and businesses with 
reliable, low carbon electricity,” the Decc said. “Hinkley will generate enough 
low carbon electricity to power 6m homes and around £10 from consumer bills 
will pay for it once it is up and running.”

The potential costs of waste mentioned by the NAO should be balanced against 
the fact that this would be the first nuclear plant built in this country where 
the cost of the clean-up is essentially born by the developer.

EDF dismissed the NAO’s gloomy assessment on Hinkley. “Short-term changes in 
today’s wholesale energy prices do not change the long-term case forHinkley 
Point C <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c>,” it said.

“It will produce electricity in the 2020s and beyond, helping the UK replace 
older polluting plants with reliable low carbon electricity available even when 
the wind doesn’t blow or the sun doesn’t shine. Its cost will be competitive 
with other forms of low carbon generation and consumers won’t pay a penny until 
the plant begins operating.”

Meanwhile a French parliamentary report concluded that despite the risks of 
the project, Hinkley was a manageable risk and cost to EDF. The French company 
has promised to take a final investment decision in September.
 