
The Home Office is piloting a one-day only system for immigration applications 
that could eventually be rolled out for EU citizens living in the UK who could 
lose their right to residence in the country after Brexit.

It is trialling the scheme with a small number of corporate clients, according 
to City sources. PwC, which is taking part in the pilot, says it will allow 
applicants and their dependents to “check in” their passports and have them 
assessed and returned immediately.

Until recently, applicants had to physically hand over their passports for up 
to six months, curtailing their ability to travel for work or personal reasons.

During the summer a pilot scheme for an “online check-in” of passports was 
launched, but this was only for individuals. Monday’s pilot allows an 
individual to check in passports for their entire family.

The 3 Million, a grassroots group lobbying for the rights 
<http://www.the3million.org.uk/> of EU citizens, has criticised the cumbersome 
process for permanent residency, which involves an 85-page application form and 
complicated diary of movements in and out of the country.

It has also pointed out that residency systems in other EU countries are much 
more user-friendly and less designed to “catch out” illegal immigrants.

The 3 Million has estimated that at the current rate of processing it would 
take the Home Office 47 years to deal with applications for permanent residency 
from all EU citizens living in the UK.


Lawyer Julia Onslow-Cole, head of global immigration at PwC, confirmed the 
consultancy had a number of clients taking part in the trial.

She said that although the government had not yet indicated how it would treat 
the 3 million EU citizens living in the UK before the referendum, clients were 
getting “very worried” about their staff and future recruitment because of the 
uncertainty.

“As we are approaching the triggering of article 50, employers are very 
worried about their EU staff and people are making choices about not going to 
work in the UK,” said Onslow-Cole. She said at a previous Brexit briefing for 
the media that some senior executives were deciding “not to take that post in 
London but to take the one in New York” because of the uncertainty.

The Home Office said Monday’s pilot was “a small test” and was part of a 
modernisation programme launched before the referendum.

The government has been accused of planing to use EU citizens as “bargaining 
chips” in the Brexit negotiations.

The Joint Committee on Human Rights and a House of Lords select committee has 
urged Theresa May to secure the status of EU citizens living in the UK at the 
start of the article 50 negotiations.

Onslow-Cole said that although EU citizens did not legally have to make the 
application for permanent residency, it was “a wise precaution” as acquired 
rights, including the right to remain in the country, would “be in the ether” 
after Brexit.


 