
Hospitals <https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> in England have been 
advised to halt elective surgery over Christmas to ensure enough beds are free 
for patients who need emergency treatment at the end of the year.

In a sign of the intense pressures on NHS resources over the winter months, 
the regulatorNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Improvement said all 
hospitals should make more beds available between now and mid-January.

Jim Mackey, the chief executive of NHS Improvement, said the focus needed to 
be on emergency patients at what he called a critical time for the health 
service. Many hospitals take steps to wind down the number of operations they 
perform over the Christmas period, but a letter obtained by theHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Service Journal states that 
operations may need to be postponed “beyond any current plans”.

In the letter to NHS trusts, the regulator says: “Given the level of risk 
facing the system, it is clear that having sufficient bed capacity going into 
Christmas is critical, and we know most organisations will already have this in 
hand as part of local planning arrangements.

“In preparing for managing winter pressures, it is recommended that all 
providers pace their elective work by introducing elective breaks where trusts 
cease most in-patient elective activity and focus on treating emergence 
activity and non-admitted patients.”

Highlighting how much spare capacity is thought to be necessary, hospitals are 
being advised to reduce their bed occupancy to 85%. The rate currently stands 
at 95% across NHS England.

Jon Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, said: “This leaked memo represents 
a damning indictment of Theresa May’s mismanagement of the NHS. The Tory 
failure to provide the NHS with the funding it needs means that hospitals are 
having to close operating theatres over Christmas just to get through the 
winter.

“This short-term fix is only going to store up problems for next year and 
leave more and more people stuck on waiting lists when already almost 4 million 
people are waiting for an operation.”


Admissions to hospital emergency departments tend to spike over the winter 
because of the cold weather and a rise in respiratory infections.


The NHS Providers chief executive, Chris Hopson, told the Health Service 
Journal that the guidance was “another classic example of how trusts are now 
caught between a rock and a hard place” of meeting surgical targets while 
coping with ever-rising emergency demands. “Trust chiefs tell us it’s 
increasingly difficult to deliver both,” he said.


“This guidance does go further than before, for example in specifying a target 
bed occupancy level as the holiday period starts, but it is in line with the 
direction of travel over the last few years,” Hopson added.


The letter, dated 9 December, came to light as the Nuffield Trust said 
pressure on beds in NHS England hospitals had become so intense that on any 
given day last winter the equivalent of more than five extra hospitals’ worth 
of beds had to be brought into service.


On the busiest day last winter, 26 January, hospitals had to find a record 
4,390 extra beds, the equivalent to the capacity of seven hospitals. With the 
pressure on beds so acute, the Nuffield report said hospital managers would 
find it harder to deal with emergency patients within four hours of their 
arrival in A&E departments as targets required.


Beds have come under increasing pressure in the past few years as more people 
are referred to hospital and medically fit patients are not discharged on time. 
Delays in discharging patients stand at a record high, up 27% on last year, as 
do trolley waits, up 54% in the year to October. John Appleby, the Nuffield 
Trust’s chief economist, said: “It’s a big sign the system isn’t working that 
efficiently.”


He said the call on hospitals to free up more beds over Christmas showed a 
“tinge of anxiety” over the levels of bed occupancy in the NHS. “It’s a bit 
invidious,” he said. “But clearly emergencies must take priority.”

A spokesperson for NHS Improvement said: “NHS providers will be doing all they 
can to make sure their patients are able to receive quality care during the 
busy Christmas period. A reduction of elective hospital activity in the run-up 
to Christmas is standard practice, and well rehearsed by NHS providers.

“Many hospital trusts also routinely wind down elective activities in the 
run-up to the Christmas and new year period, as patients do not wish to be in 
hospital over the festive period and those who are medically fit for discharge 
want to return home. This also frees additional capacity.


“Cancellations should be kept to an absolute minimum and, in trusts where 
elective work does need restricting, then the decisions should always be taken 
using appropriate clinical reviews to ensure patient needs are met.”

 