
How do workers know if they have been employed in one of these schemes?

There will be indications, but they are unlikely to know what is actually 
going on.

Payslips will bear the branding of a scheme promoter, such as Premier Payco, 
and there should have been a contract issued to them by the tiny company that 
is actually employing them.

However, while the Premier Payco branding is recognised from payslips, the 
Guardian could find no workers who knew which company they had been employed by.

Revealed: temp agencies' avoidance scheme costs taxpayers 'hundreds of 
millions'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/revealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions>
Aren’t the companies registered at Companies House?

They are, but they are very difficult to find. The Guardian has unearthed 
hundreds of this type of company, all with almost identical names and 
distinguished only by a number at the end. But there are no details of what 
these companies are for in the public records.

Meanwhile, if you want to call the directors to ask them what their companies 
do, you will need a copy of the Filipino phone book.


So the workers might be unaware. What about the huge organisations where these 
people actually turn up for work?

Some large companies might know, and they may be suspicious how one agency can 
undercut another on price, but it will be up to the employment agency to tell 
them what is going on.

The agency might decide to keep the arrangements to themselves, for two 
reasons: firstly, because their ultimate client might disapprove; and secondly, 
if they don’t disapprove, they might want a slice of the savings.

Of the major companies using agencies implementing these schemes, and who have 
been contacted by the Guardian, Burberry said it “was not aware of the 
allegations” made against one of its recruitment providers. It added: “We take 
these allegations extremely seriously and will be conducting an immediate 
review.”

G4S said it is “not aware of any benefit to G4S” from the arrangements and 
that it pays employment agency rates “in line with those on offer elsewhere in 
the market”.
 