
If you worry you are not spending enough time with your children, you can 
relax. Get a babysitter and go out for the evening. Studies show that it is 
quality, not quantity, of time that makes children thrive. While research has 
usually focused on mothers,a study last week on BMJ Open 
<http://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/6/11/e012034> showed that the amount of time 
fathers spend with children is also less importantthan how much they enjoyed 
parenting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/22/mens-attitude-to-fatherhood-influences-child-behaviour-says-study>
. Fathers who took pleasure in caring for their young children were 28% less 
likely to have children with behavioural problems at both nine and 11 years old.

The solution


Questionnaires were sent out to more than 10,000 parents in south-west England 
when their children were eight weeks and then eight months old. Fathers were 
asked how they felt about parenthood – for example, did they enjoy watching 
their baby develop, how much did they play with their child and how confident 
were they? When their children were nine and then 11, the mothers were asked to 
score the children’s behaviour – on factors such as how considerate they were 
to others’ feelings and their kindness to younger children, as well as levels 
of restlessness and clinginess.

The researchers discovered that how secure the fathers felt about their role 
and their partner, and how emotionally connected they were with their children, 
were more important in reducing the likelihood of behavioural problems than the 
time they put in to childcare.

The final analysis was done on nearly 6,500 11-year-olds and also took into 
account the father’s level of education and income. Charles Opondo, of the
Nuffield Department of Population Health <https://www.ndph.ox.ac.uk> at the 
University of Oxford, was the lead author of the study. He says it shows that 
positive involvement means more than time spent on childcare duties. “Feeling 
good about being a dad, making an emotional connection with children and 
establishing a secure parenting relationship with mothers are perhaps even more 
important,” he says.

The observational design of the study means it can only show an association, 
rather than cause and effect. Previous research, however, says pretty much the 
same for mothers,other than those with teenagers, where quantity of time is 
also important, 
<http://www.prb.org/Publications/Articles/2015/parental-time.aspx> especially 
in reducing truancy.

The research suggests that parental guilt about how much time is spent with 
their children may be misplaced. It is the emotional connection that parents 
have with their children that counts. For babies and toddlers, playing, reading 
and bathing can be high-quality activities. With older children, parents often 
recognise quality time when it happens – a simple chat in the car, for example. 
No one says less time is better, but the research suggests that what matters 
most is making the time you do have really count.
 