
Robert Snodgrass has vehemently denied suggestions that he conned a referee 
into awarding Hull City a penalty and maintains his “dive” againstCrystal Palace
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> was an attempt to protect 
his reconstructed left knee.

The Scotland winger returned to action in February after spending 16 months 
sidelined by a career-threatening knee injury repaired by complex surgery which 
required two operations. It meant Snodgrass was not overly keen on being 
clattered by an anticipated penalty-area challenge from Palace’s Scott Dann in 
the 3-3 draw at the KCom Stadium on Saturday.

“When you’ve had an injury like I’ve had you’re not going to go in and try and 
get in the way,” he said. “I tried to get out of the way. I felt as if I needed 
to ride the tackle. I thought the defender was obviously going to come in and 
slide but he never slid, he never tackled.”

Fraizer Campbell’s late leveller rescues Crystal Palace after Hull heroics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/hull-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
Snodgrass, who converted a penalty he readily agrees Mike Jones should never 
have awarded to give Hull a 1-0 lead, has been heavily criticised with Palace’s 
manager, Alan Pardew, accusing him of simulation with Gary Lineker following 
suit on Match of the Day. The vast majority of his critics, though, will not 
have experienced such extensive surgery and lengthy rehabilitation.

If the furore undoubtedly offered Pardew a welcome chance to divert attention 
from his still fragile job security at Selhurst Park, where he remains under 
intense scrutiny from Palace’s American investors, Snodgrass acknowledges that 
the evidence against him looks compelling but is adamant he would not have 
risked a sending off.

“It looks bad because the defender never tackled,” said a player who, at the 
time, had just been booked for tugging Christian Benteke’s shirt. “But I’m not 
intentionally wanting to try and dive because I’m on a booking. You can get 
sent off if you’re trying to con them. But I’ve never been that type of player, 
never.

“It was never a penalty but that was the referee’s decision. I never thought I 
might be sent off, I was just trying to get away from what I thought would be 
an obvious tackle. I’ve always prided myself on being an honest player, that’s 
what my game’s all about. I’ve never been one for diving. I’m not that type of 
player, I was trying to get out of the way.”

Snodgrass has left himself open to accusations of blatant hypocrisy after he 
warnedSheffield Wednesday’s Fernando Forestieri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/27/hull-city-snodgrass-sheffield-wednesday-forestieri-championship-playoff>
 last season not to ruin the Championship play-off final against Hull by 
diving. “I wouldn’t want to win at Wembley by cheating,” he said at the time. 
“Diving’s terrible for the game. It’s cheating the referee.”
 