
Hundreds of Egyptians have been forcibly disappeared and tortured in a 
“sinister” campaign to wipe out peaceful dissent in the most populous country 
in the Arab world,Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> says in a new report.

Children as young as 14 as well as students, political activists and 
protesters have vanished without trace after security forces raided their 
homes. Many have been held for months at a time and kept blindfolded and 
handcuffed. At least 34,000 people are behind bars, the government admits.

Most of those who have “disappeared” are supporters of Mohamed Morsi, the 
democratically electedMuslim Brotherhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muslim-brotherhood> president who was 
deposed in July 2013 and eventually replaced by president Abdel-Fatah al-Sisi.

Amnesty’s report also mentions the case of the Italian Giulio Regeni, the 
Cambridge graduate student who was found dead, with his body bearing signs of 
torture, in Cairo in February.

“The terrible injuries sustained by Giulio Regeni are similar to those 
suffered by numerous people interrogated by the Egyptian security forces – his 
case is just the tip of the iceberg,” said Amnesty’s Felix Jakens.

Why was he killed? Brutal death of Italian student in Egypt confounds experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/24/why-was-he-killed-brutal-death-of-italian-student-in-egypt-confounds-experts>
“We fear Regeni was abducted by state agents and tortured to death, and until 
we get a thorough independent investigation into his death those suspicions are 
only going to grow.”

Hundreds of people are thought to be secretly held in the national security 
agency offices in Lazoghly Square, Cairo, inside the interior ministry 
building. The building is close to Tahrir Square, scene of the mass protests 
that led to the overthrow of president Hosni Mubarak in January 2011, the high 
point of the Arab spring.

Amnesty points to a spike in disappearances since Magdy Abd el-Ghaffar was 
appointed to head the ministry in March 2015. El-Ghaffar previously served in 
Egypt’s state security investigations, the secret police force notorious for 
abuses under Mubarak. Detainees said methods of torture were the same as those 
used in the Mubarak era.

“Enforced disappearance has become a key instrument of state policy in Egypt,” 
said Amnesty’sMiddle East and North Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast> director Philip Luther. “Anyone 
who dares to speak out is at risk, with counter-terrorism being used as an 
excuse to abduct, interrogate and torture people who challenge the authorities.


“The report exposes not only the brutality faced by those disappeared but also 
the collusion between national security forces and judicial authorities, who 
have been prepared to lie to cover their tracks or failed to investigate 
torture allegations, making them complicit in serious human rights violations.

The report says prosecutors have based charges on “confessions” extracted 
under duress and failed to investigate torture allegations by ordering medical 
examinations. On the rare occasions where detainees have been referred by 
prosecutors to an independent medical examination, their lawyers have not been 
permitted to see the results.


Amnesty catalogues the cases of 17 people who were held incommunicado for 
periods ranging between several days to seven months and denied access to their 
lawyers or families or any independent judicial oversight.

Victims and witnesses said a typical disappearance starts with security 
officers in plain clothes, supported by heavily-armed, black-clad special 
forces, arriving at a suspect’s home at night or in the early hours and forcing 
their way in at gunpoint. Once inside the officers detain, handcuff and 
blindfold the suspects, search for weapons and other incriminatory material and 
seize mobile phones and computers.

“Do you think that you have a price?” one security officer told a detainee. 
“We can kill you and put you in a blanket and throw you in any trash bin and no 
one will ask about you.”

The Egyptian authorities have repeatedly denied violations and accused Amnesty 
of “spreading false rumours” and supporting “terrorist” groups, including the 
now outlawed Muslim Brotherhood. But the authorities “did not provide factual 
evidence to corroborate their denials,” the report says.

 