
Open, enjoyable, imaginative, spectacular are not the normal words managers 
use the night before a match, but then this is not a normal match.

Not according to the men leading their teams into it. Where usually there is 
“fight”,Luis Enrique <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/luis-enrique> preferred 
to talk about “fun”.

Pep Guardiola denies trying to sign Lionel Messi – but would like to
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/lionel-messi-pep-guardiola-manchester-city-leave-barcelona-football>
Two managers who have shared much, from the dressing room to the dugout, and 
two teams who share an ideal make for the perfect match, he said. “I can’t 
think of anything better for football fans – and if you’re a Barcelona or
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> fan, then 
what more can I say?”

Quite a lot, as it turned out. Rather than rivalry, there was friendship on 
the eve of this game – even if the City manager did take the opportunity to 
settle one particular score, answering accusations that he had tried to sign
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> players and 
insisting that he had not.

There is no one better to describe Pep Guardiola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola> as a manager who will mark 
the modern game than Luis Enrique; there is no one better than Guardiola to 
celebrate Luis Enrique’s success. “It’s easy for me to rate my friends,” the 
Barça manager said. Especially when he actually does.

“I’m so, so pleased things are going well for him,” Guardiola said. “I had no 
doubt that things would go well for him. You could see that he was special 
right from the start. He is direct, honest, hard-working.”

Luis Enrique insisted: “We have shared a lot as players. It is privilege to 
share this game as managers now.”

They were team-mates for five years and their career paths have been similar: 
both have been captain at the Camp Nou; both have coached the B team; both have 
managed the first team, with whom they both won a treble in their first season.

The Barcelona manager was even asked if he, like Guardiola, would coach in the 
Premier League one day. “I don’t know. I really don’t know,” he said.

What he does know is that they have shared much. An idea, above all, even if 
there has been an evolution under Luis Enrique governed by the players he has: 
Luis Suárez and Neymar were not here then. So much so, in fact, that the debate 
continues – have they lost their religion? Perhaps their puritanical streak, at 
least. Yet Guardiola suggested that they now do “lots of things” better than 
they did under him and Luis Enrique responded swiftly when it was suggested 
that he does not care for possession like his predecessor.

Champions League roundup: Real Madrid cruise but Dortmund stay top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/champions-league-roundup-real-madrid-legia-warsaw-sporting-borussia-dortmund>
“Yes, I give importance to the ball too,” he shot back. “And if you look at 
our games, in 95% of them we have more possession, which we want to generate 
chances and to defend ourselves better.

“But there are moments when you use other ideas. Tomorrow won’t be one of them 
– possession is fundamental. If they have the ball, we’re weaker. If we have 
the ball, they’re weaker. That doesn’t necessarily mean, though, that the team 
who has more of the ball will win the game.”

What it does mean, the Barcelona manager believes, is that this should be a 
game to be enjoyed. “They will want the ball, like us. When they lose it, they 
will press to get it back, like us. There are two coaches with an attacking 
mindset. We will need a lot of imagination.

“Pep’s Barcelona was spectacular. They had a collective style based on players 
of talent, which sought control and sought to dominate all over the pitch. [My 
Barcelona] have that too but I have also tried to look for things based on my 
players’ individual talents to help us. I like both Barcelonas. We both wore 
the same shirt and I think fans are intelligent enough to enjoy them both,” he 
said.

And then came the line: “We want people to enjoy it – something that is too 
often forgotten.”

When it was suggested that it is easy to play good football when you have the 
players, Luis Enrique leapt to Guardiola’s defence. Not least, perhaps, because 
he may have felt like the allusion was as much to him as to his predecessor. 
Somehow, Guardiola’s success has been used against him, just as his has been 
used against Guardiola. If they both won it all, perhaps it wasn’t about them, 
some argue.

Champions League previews: where the week's big matches will be won and lost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/oct/18/champions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs>
It is a line that Guardiola has given certain credence, particularly when he 
talks about Leo Messi – asked here how he would stop the Argentinian, he 
laughed and replied “I don’t know” – but it is one that his opponent here 
rebels against.

“A coach’s life is that when you win, it is easy and when you lose, you’re no 
good, it’s all your fault. But Pep’s arrival was clearly a turning point. The 
team reached a much better level with him.

“And at City he has had a clear impact on the team already, a brutal impact. 
Even in pre-season you could see mechanisms with and without the ball that were 
clearly his. Pep is my friend and I think he is the best coach around now, 
without any doubt. I am sure that he will be one of those coaches that mark the 
modern era. I love offensive coaches. I love coaches that think more about 
attacking than defending. As a football fan, I think that’s wonderful.”
 