
Parliamentary committee hearings often get heated.

Politicians, from all parties, have made names for themselves with sharp and 
persistent questions that expose important information or embarrassing facts, 
or sometimes just provide a look-at-me shouty grab for the evening news.

In the 1990s, the then senator Bronwyn Bishop shot to public prominence with 
her combative questioning of the then tax commissioner Trevor Boucher in the 
joint committee on public accounts, accusing him – among other things – of 
bankrupting the tax office. Labor senators John Faulkner and Robert Ray were 
the bane of the public service with clinically calm forensic questioning that 
often lasted late into the night.

Sometimes the witnesses came off best – most famously when the late Kerry 
Packer fronted the print media inquiry. He introduced himself as “Kerry Francis 
Bullmore Packer. I appear here this afternoon reluctantly” and after much 
interrupting and table thumping left having stared down or batted back every 
question.

But the Queensland Liberal National party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-national-party> senator Ian 
Macdonald has perfected a whole new Senate committee style, sometimes in tandem 
with a couple of colleagues – highly disrespectful questioning that almost 
never elicits significant information.

Macdonald, you may recall, was the chair of the Senate estimates committee 
when it took evidence from the Human Rights Commission president, Gillian 
Triggs, last year at a time when the government was alleging she was biased and 
pressuring her to resign.

Former solicitor general criticises George Brandis' rules for the job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/12/former-solicitor-general-slams-george-brandis-rules-for-the-job>
Presumably his job back then – in the nine-hour grilling – was to force the 
leading international and human rights lawyer to provide some evidence to back 
the government’s claim that the HRC’s “Forgotten Children” report on children 
in immigration detention was biased.

Instead, the hearing is remembered for Macdonald’s admission that he had not 
even read the report because he did not want to “waste my time on a report 
which was clearly partisan”, which does seem to prejudge the question.

He also got to express his deep concern about the title. “With so much time 
and money being spent on children’s welfare, how can anyone call them forgotten 
children?” he complained, rhetorically.

Triggs kept her cool throughout the highly combative questioning and will see 
out her five-year term as HRC president next year.

Macdonald rejected the outcry about what was widely viewed as hectoring with a 
rambling statement insisting the report he had not read was inaccurate.

“Thanks to all of those who have kindly (and not so kindly – they are the 
majority and are all Labor/Greens staffers, union heavies and staff and good 
old GetUp and old leftie journalists) – made media and social media comment on 
recent media reports on the Senate estimate committee on Professor Triggs and 
the partisan-ly titled report on children in detention, Forgotten Children.

“If any of those who have abused me for not reading this partisan, inaccurate 
report had themselves bothered to read the facts on children in detention from 
any number of estimates on immigration – which sadly the Human Rights 
Commission [AHRC] itself didn’t bother to read – then they may have not been so 
quick to rush to social media,” he said.

Did George Brandis mislead parliament over solicitor general changes? | 
Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/did-george-brandis-mislead-parliament-over-solicitor-general-changes>
On Friday, Macdonald engaged in a similar performance with another highly 
respected lawyer and statutory office holder – the solicitor general, Justin 
Gleeson, who is locked in a very public argument with the attorney general,
George Brandis <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>.

The argument centres on a directive from Brandis to Gleeson that says no one 
in government, including the prime minister, can seek Gleeson’s advice without 
the attorney general’s permission. Gleeson says he considers the directive 
unlawful. His predecessor as solicitor general, Gavan Griffiths, says it is 
akin to treating the solicitor general as a “dog on a lead”. Brandis says it 
did not constrain Gleeson in any additional way.

There is also a related stoush over whether Brandis misled the parliament on 
the issue with a claim that he had consulted Gleeson over the directive, a 
disagreement which Brandis says rests entirely on the Oxford dictionary meaning 
of the word “consult” and Gleeson says hinges on the fact that the specific new 
directive was not discussed, something Brandis now concedes.

Despite their very public and vehement differences of opinion, Brandis and 
Gleeson got through their Senate committee appearances without making any nasty 
personal criticism of each other.

There was plenty of disagreement about the substantive matters – Gleeson 
regarding the directive, and Brandis of the fact that Gleeson had taken a phone 
call during the election campaign from the shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus 
where it was discussed.

And while the politeness was sometimes through gritted teeth, the first and 
second law offices of the land quite properly refrained from an all-in slanging 
match.

Not so Macdonald, who persistently interrupted Gleeson and at one point 
interjected: “If you want to get into the political game, join the parliament” 
– a statement he was quickly forced to retract.

First Dog on the Moon reads George Brandis's diaries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/07/first-dog-on-the-moon-reads-george-brandiss-diaries>
When the chair, Labor’s Louise Pratt, tried to call him into line, he again 
stunned those listening.

“Senator Macdonald. Pause for a moment. I need to remind you of privilege 
resolution one. Your dealings with witnesses need to be conducted with respect 
and courtesy, “ Pratt said.

“I always give witnesses the respect they deserve, madam chair,” Macdonald 
replied.

Quite apart from the fact that his treatment of Gleeson was highly 
inappropriate, if he paid any attention to the history of Senate committees, 
Macdonald would quickly learn that tough but respectful questioning usually 
gets better results.
 