
As someone who has covered the US presidential election’s unofficial 
pre-primary, money primary and primary process from anywhere between the last 
two and the last 1,000 years, I have an exquisite and rarified taste for 
futility and awfulness.

You can imagine, then, how excited I am for the Eurovision Song Contest to 
come to America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/02/eurovision-us-television-first-time>
. We can break anything.
Because this is America and the contest has something resembling European in 
the title, you might rightly think it is ipso facto a horror and menace, but 
here you would be wrong, and you have no choice anyway. It’s coming. You might 
as well know what you’re in for and why.

This year, Justin Timberlake is slated to appear as the “interval artist,” 
which you might be forgiven for assuming means he runs annoyingly fast on a 
treadmill intermittently to power the stage lights, but here you would also be 
wrong. It means he’s going to sing his new single in between the official acts, 
make about a jillion dollars, and within a year or two, America’s going to be 
in the thing.

Now, there are many reasons to dislike Eurovision. Artists offer a fusillade 
of ballad treacle that seems universal yet rootless, each nation vying for the 
distinction of creating this year’s preeminent Kelly Clarkson. Winners deliver
ear worms <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earworm> that seem instantly 
recognizable but unloved and unclaimed by posterity. It’s like listening to 
hours of theme songs from straight-to-video James Bond films from former Soviet 
Socialist Republics.

America can totally wreck this.

The thing is, America already does. Our of sheer stereotypical jingoistic 
arrogance, I’m not going to check global sales figures and will just assume 
that we are already the net global leader in surging-pop glurge export. (I will 
not find out if I am wrong about this, because I will refuse to learn anymore 
starting now.) Instead, America needs to copyEurovision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eurovision>, give it a startlingly 
unique name like Amerivision, and make it much, much louder and more awful 
until it tears itself apart.

Just going by social media, half of the audience joy of Eurovision seems to be 
just like the joy from the World Cup: leveraging deeply entrenched ethnic and 
historical resentments into pop critique. I don’t know how a bassline becomes 
Gallic, but if you’re a Catalan separatist, you have your reasons, you know?

But imagine the possibilities among 50 independent American state Amerivision 
contestants. Imagine the luxuries of completely insane regional hatred. We’re 
alreadyexceptional at this when it comes to college sports. There is something 
grand about someone from the collapsed iron industry of formerly sharecropping 
Alabama trash-talking a Pennsylvanian for living in an economically gutted 
wasteland, and that’s about a contest where the score is determined byactual 
physical acts. Picture the chaos inherent in a contest that’s totally arbitrary.

Better yet, imagine the intrastate outrage of the acts chosen. Imagine a 
Michigan represented not by a Motown heir but by a new avatar of Kid Rock, the 
product of a scientific experiment to combine a ferret, a 14-year-old’s goatee 
and an El Camino.

Florida would devolve into chaos, split by a cracker north that loves ballads 
about Jesus in boot-cut, a south that birthed the Miami Sound Machine, and a 
bizarre Gainesville outlier that somehow created both Tom Petty and Less Than 
Jake.

That’s even assuming it gets that far. Eurovision’s nomination process relies 
on the individual state broadcasters from each country culling a field of 
entrants and picking a song to nominate. Ain’t no way that’s working here. Even 
assuming someone put NPR in charge, they’d just pick 50 different bootlegs of 
shows from tours by The National.Robert Siegel, or Someone Like Him: We picked 
“Bloodbuzz Ohio” for Ohio because it had Ohio in the title. For the rest of the 
states, we chose the song with the least guitar or instrumentation because it 
got in the way of joyless moaning.

No, first we’d devolve nominations to the states, which would hand over the 
process to commercial broadcasters, who’d draw the nominee voting process out 
for months to maximize revenue.

Then the national contest would fall to bits. Eurovision’s policy of excluding 
votes for fans’ own home state nominees and diluting fan votes with the votes 
of an unaccountable board would provoke cries of elite capture of the 
democratic process for the vested interest of an establishment cabal.

Eventually you’d have the California Contestant from iHeartMedia vs the 
Georgia Yum Brands Singer of the Year vs 48 others, drawn out over a span of 
seemingly forever, all compromised by the votes of some electoral college.

It’d be hell on earth, fueled by the victimization of every imaginable 
balkanized identity group underserved and unrepresented by a featureless 
mass-appeal nominee, riven by the sense that every shred of recognizable 
authenticity has been sold out to a process beyond their control. The only 
thing that will save it is civil war.
It’ll be great. It’ll make billions of dollars. Let’s do this. Bring it on.
 