
How many non-Indigenous Australians know what a songline is?

Given this country’s pervasive general ignorance regarding Indigenous 
Australia, you’d have to bet not too many – despite the fact that songlines 
criss-cross not only the remotest parts of the continent as well as our seas, 
but also the cities and suburbs.

So precious, so enveloping of pre-colonial history dating at least 50,000 
years are the songlines, there are even suggestions that theyought to be Unesco 
world heritage-listed 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/spiritofthings/saving-stories-and-teaching-songs/6265578>
.

This year’s Naidoc (National Aboriginal and Islander Day Observance Committee) 
Week is aiming for a broader Australian engagement with these wondrous, magical 
and fascinating phenomena of Indigenous culture and history.

The theme is Songlines: the living narrative of our nation 
<http://www.indigenous.gov.au/news-and-media/event/naidoc-week-2016-songlines-living-narrative-our-nation>
. As someone who recently started to contemplate the wonders of the songline, 
I’d urge you to engage this week and take the journey too.

A little back story: two years ago I had the opportunity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/08/-sp-voyage-unknown-with-holyman-film-maker-street-artist-and-gotye>
 to trace some of the ancient songlines of the Yolngu of north-east Arnhem Land 
out into the Arafura Sea.

The Aborigines who've walked for 40,000 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2010/mar/07/david-vann-aborigines-songs-legends-past-future>
It was a wild and wonderful trip on a sturdy ex-pearling boat that began on a 
glassy green sea with several generations of famous Yolngu clans, and, 
naturally, some of their dogs.

It included a visit to Rargala, the distant island home of one of the elders, 
and ended safely a few days later back in port – but only after an impromptu 
prayer meeting in the boat’s hull as the vessel rocked and rolled in a vicious 
storm.

I’d had reasonable exposure to Indigenous peoples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indigenous-peoples> and their cultures 
before this voyage. But I’d never properly tried to understand or to explain 
exactly what a songline was. My aim was to be able to do both.

Before we set sail I prepared with Englishman Bruce Chatwin’s superb 1987 work 
of narrative nonfiction 
<https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/76844.The_Songlines>, The Songlines, about 
Indigenous northern Australia.

Chatwin, who died far too young soon after the book came out, wrote: “The 
melodic contour of the song describes the land over which the song passes ... 
certain phrases, certain combinations of musical notes, are thought to describe 
the actions of the ancestors’ feet. An expert song man … would count how many 
times he has crossed a river or scaled a ridge – and be able to calculate 
where, and how far along, the songline he was ... A musical phrase is a map 
reference. Music is a memory bank for finding one’s way about the world.”

Fixated as we are by the clock and the calendar, and trusting of historical – 
and spiritual – references that are written on parchment or paper, or 
digitised, rather than passed down the generations orally, the songline is not 
an easy concept for the non-Indigenous to grasp.

Anyway, after much exceedingly patient explanation on both the island and the 
boat by the Yolngu elder and academic Ms Gurruwiwi, who passed a few months 
back, I was able to write with some clarity: “At the most basic conceptual 
level, perhaps think of the songlines as the oral archives of Indigenous 
history that chart the very creation of the land and sea by the Dreaming totems 
(animals), and the various marks – trees, waterholes, rocky outcrops and 
creatures – along them. The songlines also hold the stories of the people and 
the eternal spirits who inhabit them. Because melodic variance is used to 
describe the land, the songlines – which also manifest in artworks, dance, the 
yirdaki and clapsticks – transcend language. The songlines or tracks transcend 
the language groups. If you know the song, you can navigate.”

For me that voyage was kind of like Songlines 101. Ms Gurruwiwi explained, 
from the deck of the pearler, by pointing her bony fingers at the land, which 
rocky outcrop or distant cave was made by which creationist animal, and where 
certain events – for example, the introduction of Islam through first Yolngu 
contact with the Macassan traders in the 16th century fitted in the song ahead 
of others, like the introduction of Christianity through the missionaries 
several hundred years later.

Now, you’ve got to love that: a song that can tell a story about the creation 
of the land you’re walking – or driving – over, or even the sea, and the people 
who’ve traversed it ahead of you,and bring you safely to a destination where 
you’ve never been before, without an atlas or Google Maps. All you’ve got to do 
is know the song.

Diana James, a senior researcher with the Australian National University’s 
Songlines of the Western Desert project, has spent decades in the continental 
centre talking to first peoples about their stories and songlines.

She was a critical force behind the Ngintaka project – an exhibition at the 
South Australian Museum and an associated book about a songline stretching 
across Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara (APY) Lands told by Anangu 
Traditional Owners. The exhibition and the book becamemired in controversy and 
legal action 
<http://news.aboriginalartdirectory.com/2014/04/tragic-confrontation-in-the-desert.php>
 after a small group of APY traditional owners, including the well-known blind 
Indigenous activist Yami Lester, claimed they were not properly consulted and 
that cultural confidences were breached.

However, an APY Council: Anangu Law and Culture Committee finding that no 
breach of traditional law was made in either the exhibition or the book was 
ultimately upheld by the supreme court of SA.

This was good news for those Indigenous and non-Indigenous people who wanted to
share (without breaching cultural sensitivities) the story of Ngintaka 
<https://blogs.crikey.com.au/northern/2014/03/31/why-nicolas-rothwell-should-be-ashamed/>
, the creationist perentie lizard who searched for the perfect stone to grind 
seed. It’s a story of deception, theft and revenge that follows Ngintaka’s 
500km journey (across the borders of three modern states - Western Australia, 
South Australia and the Northern Territory).

The South Australian Museum exhibition told the Ngintaka story through 
traditional dance, song and visual art produced by the arts centres situated 
along the songline.

The old man and the sea (and Gotye): the story of 'Australia's only guru'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/08/-sp-voyage-unknown-with-holyman-film-maker-street-artist-and-gotye>
James has written extensively about the importance to Indigenous and other 
Australians of songlines.

In explaining how songlines work, James wrote in her 2015 essay 
<http://press.anu.edu.au/publications/aboriginal-history-monographs/long-history-deep-time>
 Tjukurpa Time, of how Nganyinytja, a Pitjantjatjara woman of elder high 
degree, learned to read her people’s history written in the land.

Nganyinytja explained: “We have no books, our history was not written by 
people with pen and paper. It is in the land, the footprints of our Creation 
Ancestors are on the rocks. The hills and creek beds they created as they 
dwelled in this land surround us. We learned from our grandmothers and 
grandfathers as they showed us these sacred sites, told us the stories, sang 
and danced with us the Tjukurpa (the Dreaming Law). We remember it all; in our 
minds, our bodies and feet as we dance the stories. We continually recreate the 
Tjukurpa … ”

For the uninitiated, it’s a challenging but beautiful way to think about the 
confluence of story and time. Indigenous story starts in the distant past and 
lives today. Time in traditional Indigenous Australia, meanwhile, is not merely 
a collection of fragmentary moments connected by the calendar but the continuum 
of past and present.
 