
Ireland, a country yet to make a World Cup semi-final, will attempt to break 
their duck minus four key players and possibly a fifth after it was confirmed 
on Tuesday that Paul O’Connell’s tournament and Test career were over, that 
Sean O’Brien had been banned for a week and that a decision on Jonathan 
Sexton’s fitness could be delayed until just before kick-off against Argentina 
on Sunday.

Paul O’Connell injury ruins chance of fairy tale finale in Ireland shirt | 
Donald McRae
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/13/paul-oconnell-injury-ireland-world-cup>
Added to the injuries to Peter O’Mahony and Jared Payne, both of whom are 
already back in Ireland, it means they go into their quarter-final at Cardiff 
with two replacements in their squad, a third probably dependent on the Sexton 
prognosis, and close to disarray. The only relief on a day of emotion came when 
O’Brien’s ban was confirmed after an eight-hour hearing. It would have been 
worse had the flanker not admittedpunching Pascal Papé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/12/ireland-sean-obrien-cited-punch-pascal-pape>
.

A statement from World Rugby said: “The judicial officer took into account 
compelling mitigating factors including O’Brien’s conduct prior to and at the 
hearing, his remorse, good character and clean disciplinary record, and reduced 
the suspension to a period of one week.”

According to Les Kiss, the Irish defence coach, Sexton’s adductor strain is a 
recurrence of an injury the fly-half suffered during the World Cup warm-ups and 
his fitness depends on how he progresses over the next four days.

“Johnny has a slight adductor strain and there has been some improvement. 
Hopefully we will see a little bit more tomorrow when everything will be 
clearer,” said Kiss, who admitted the final decision might be coloured by the 
fact that failure on Sunday would mean the end of Ireland’s tournament at a 
stage where they have failed five times before.

“That the game is knockout might shape the thinking,” said Kiss. “We’ll be 
pragmatic about what works and it will probably be that we come down to the 
last minute to make that decision.”

The news of O’Brien’s suspension for punching Papé in the opening minute of 
Ireland’sfinal pool game against France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/11/france-ireland-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 came after confirmation that O’Connell needed an operation on his damaged 
hamstring and thathis international career was over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/13/rugby-world-cup-2015-ireland-lose-injured-paul-o-connell-rest-of-tournament>
 after 115 caps, four World Cups and three Lions tours. He is being replaced by 
Mike McCarthy of Leinster, while Rhys Ruddock comes in for O’Mahony and the 
Irish coaches wait on Sexton before deciding whom to send for to replace the 
centre Payne.

“In reality you can go into all the parts where he delivers but he’s probably 
one of the true warriors of the game in every aspect,” said Kiss of O’Connell. 
“It’s hard not to get emotional when you describe what he has delivered for us. 
Seeing the pain he had to go through wasn’t nice.

“True to the man he’s up there on his crutches at the moment waiting for his 
surgery offering what he can to the group,” said Kiss, who followed Devin 
Toner, Paul O’Connell’s second-row partner, in a long queue waiting to offer 
praise for the fallen captain. “He’ll be a massive loss, everyone knows that,” 
added Toner, who listed O’Connell as was one of the two great influences on his 
career.

“He was the leader of the team, the captain, the pack leader. He was the 
brains behind a lot of what the team does but, as has happened before when 
we’ve lost players, we’ll have to dig deep to counter that and we’re confident 
in our squad these days.

“We back ourselves, but everyone has to dig deep and do a bit more work,” said 
Toner. “Everyone knew these were his last couple of games and because he’s not 
there we’ll want to go out on a high for him.”
 