
The Irish authorities have conducted a series of raids on fishing vessels in 
ports around the country as part of an investigation into the use of 
undocumented migrant workers.

The Irish police, the Gardai, declined to comment on the operation, saying it 
was not yet complete. But it is understood from local sources that officers 
from its immigration unit, together with the Irish navy, the Workplace 
Relations Commission and the Office of the Revenue Commissioners targeted 
trawlers in Castletownbere, in County Cork, and Howth in Dublin on Wednesday. 
They moved on to other key fishing ports on Thursday.

The Guardian understands the operation was undertaken as part of the Santa 
Marta project – the initiative led by the pope to tackle human trafficking and 
modern-day slavery. The project has made the exploitation of migrants in the 
global fishing sector one of its priorities. Local media reported that the raid 
teams were focusing on the routes used by Asian and African migrant fishermen 
to enterIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

 An emergency taskforce 
<http://www.agriculture.gov.ie/media/migration/publications/2015/TaskForceReport141215.pdf>
 was set up by the Irish government last year to tackle the illegal employment 
of Asian and African migrants in its fleet. The government said in February it 
would issue up to 500 specially created work permits for fishermen from outside 
the European Economic Area (EEA) after allegations that they were being 
exploited as cheap labour.

Senior figures in the industry had predicted that at least 1,000 work permits 
would be needed to ensure the protection of all non-EEA fishermen working in 
the Irish fleet. Only some 160 permits had been applied for by the scheme’s 
deadline.

Sources said the operation this week was also aimed at checking whether the 
permit scheme was working. The fishermen’s union, the International Transport 
Workers’ Federation (ITF), welcomed the police checks, saying its own port 
visits in recent months suggested some boat owners were still using 
undocumented labour and refusing to apply for permits for their workers.

The permit scheme requires owners to register, provide a solicitor-backed 
contract to workers, and pay the legal minimum wage. ITF’s Ireland coordinator, 
Ken Fleming, said strong enforcement action was needed “to end the widespread 
abuse of vulnerable fishers by unscrupulous employers”.

Several Filipino workers have used the scheme to regularise their position 
after years of working in the state illegally. They told us how happy they were 
to be properly documented and free to visit their families back home and return 
to work.

However, migrant support groups expressed concern that the raids were focused 
on immigration breaches rather than labour exploitation. The Migrant Rights 
Centre Ireland said it has been contacted by several fishermen who had been put 
on notice to report to immigration authorities following the raids. “No one 
asked them about their employment conditions or checked for human trafficking. 
They are targeting those we most need to help rather than unscrupulous owners,” 
said Gráinne O’Toole, an MRCI coordinator.
 