
One doesn’t wish to imagine that Australia is a country with lower orders – 
let alone one where the labouring classes are expected to “know their place”. 
The “master-servant laws” the British brought with their colonisation may have 
conferred greater rights and legal status of one class over another by the 
random fortune of birth but Australia’s energetic egalitarianism of early last 
century eschewed the old world’s feudal hierarchies, and we dropped them.

Here began the myth of Australia’s classless society – and as that myth yet 
persists for some, let’s test it. In January, a Sydney cleaner arrived at his 
premises of work an admirable 45 minutes before his shift. With another worker, 
he used office facilities to prepare two hot drinks, as other staff had 
welcomed him to do.

Australian election 2016: Bill Shorten pressed on previous support for company 
tax cut – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/03/australian-election-2016-turnbull-visits-south-australia-as-coalition-faces-tough-fight-in-state-politics-live>
The cleaner believed he had “good rapport” with the office management and 
often talked to them. This was perhaps everyone’s mistake: back in 1865, Mrs 
Beeton herself recommended that “the mistress never converses with her servant, 
never speaks but to gently give an order, ask a question, or say good morning 
or good evening.”

One so inclined could argue that failure to police with rigidity the roles of 
master and servant explain the poor cleaner’s subsequent fate. On the way to 
the office lift, a manager stopped him. “You are not allowed to make coffee,” 
she said. The cleaner apologised.

Yet the manager remained affronted by the impertinence of his drink 
preparation, and considered it “serious misconduct”. She reported the incident, 
escalating her complaint through the chain of subcontractors that lay between 
her and him. Preparing a cup of coffee without her permission was deemed by his 
employers to be theft, so the cleaner was fired.

The happy news here is that the cleaner did take his unfair dismissal to the 
Fair Work Commission, the judge did rule that his act was not theft and this 
very week he has both been compensated $9187.20 and regained his job.

The sad news is that his story is not unusual in the workplace of modern 
Australia. Jo Schofield, the national secretary of the cleaner’s union, United 
Voice, sees master-servant underpinnings in how her members are treated.

“It’s about abuse of power by privileged people against others who are less 
fortunate,” says Schofield of an Australia where insecure conditions within a 
supply chain of subcontracting isolates low-wage, high-turnover workers from 
unions, workplace communities and even one another.

The employment structures in which low-paid workers engage emerge as powerful 
forms of broader social instruction: supply chain exploitation persuades its 
workers against belief in their own social equality. “People who don’t have 
agency expect to be disrespected,” Schofield explains. “They expect not to be 
spoken to. And when employees are disempowered, employers are emboldened. We 
dress it up in economic jargon about efficiency,” she says, “but it comes down 
to someone with power just deciding he should not drink a coffee.”

The coffee cup sacking is not even Australia’s most petty. United Voice told 
me about another cleaner fired for using a Post-it note taken from a desk to 
label a bin. A security guard was fired for smoking within possible eyeshot of 
clients while on a legal break. Another cleaner lost her job when a sudden 
onset of food poisoning obliged her to run to a reception area washroom to be 
sick in, rather than – somehow – make it all the way to the facilities provided 
for cleaners down the stairs.

The National Union of Workers has similar stories – like the worker fired for 
sucking a cough lozenge 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/ipad/cough-lolly-cost-me-my-job-says-packer/story-fn6bfm6w-1226038110827>
 and theworker from a discount retailer currently petitioning for his job 
<https://www.megaphone.org.au/petitions/give-me-my-job-back> after he was 
inexplicably offered no further shifts after taking an agreed-to, unpaid 
holiday.

As secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Dave Oliver may now be 
the most powerful trade unionist in the country, but the former lift mechanic 
well remembers what he’s seen of powerlessness. When he was at the Australian 
Manufacturing Workers’ Union, he told me,someone was fired for “smirking” 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2006-04-21/worker-sacked-for-smirking-amwu/1735798> 
in front of the boss. I had to ask him to repeat it, I thought he said 
“smoking”. No, he assured me. Smirking.

It’s time Australians looked more closely at our privileged ruling class | Van 
Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/25/its-time-australians-looked-more-closely-at-our-privileged-ruling-class>
And the figures for unfair dismissal are hardly limited to this scandalous 
handful; over 2012-2013, a shocking13,945 workers went to Fair Work 
<http://workinglife.org.au/2014/01/07/how-fair-are-our-unfair-dismissal-laws/> 
to contest their unfair dismissal – 81% reached conciliation with their former 
employer but only 152 people got their jobs back.

This week, workplace dismissal is not just in the news because of one 
cleaner’s cup of coffee, Oliver himself debated James Pearson, the new chief 
executive of the Australian Chamber of Commerce, at the National Press Club, 
where Pearson repeated the convenient employer mythology that what prevents 
business hiring more people is present restriction on firing more people, more 
easily.

Oliver agrees with Schofield that the attitude is not informed by economics as 
much as it is enduring perceptions of class entitlement. “There are still 
attitudes out there of the master/servant relationship when it comes to 
low-paid, casualised, minimum wage workers,” says Oliver.

 “They’re just considered disposable labour – and when you can consider 
someone disposable, managers can and will dispose of them just because they’re 
having a bad day.”
 