
For some time now, I have been receiving from five to 20 unwanted “adult” 
emails per day. I followed Yahoo’s advice on how to block these emails, but I 
still am receiving them. I contacted Yahoo again, but within the blink of an 
eye, I received a standard response email stating that my case was closed. I 
have also emailed the CEO of Yahoo UK, and I am angry with the complete 
indifference thatYahoo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/yahoo> has shown.

How can I stop these emails? I was thinking of sending them back to the 
sender, but I’m wondering if it will have any impact. Ruth

Adult emails are spam – and you can’t stop spam. Anybody who has your home or 
office address can send you letters and anybody who has your email address can 
send you spam. You don’t get much junk mail because it costs a lot to send. You 
will get lots of junk email because it costs nothing to send.

Email service providers such as Yahoo, Google and Microsoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> filter out billions of spam 
emails per day. Only a few get through, and five to 20 per day is not an 
unusual number.

However, the ones that get through should arrive in your spam folder. If you 
are seeing obvious adult spam emails in your inbox then either the filtering is 
turned off –which isn’t easy to do in Yahoo Mail 
<https://c-command.com/spamsieve/help/turning-off-the-yahoo-m> – or the filters 
are failing.

Unfortunately, spam filtering is a tricky business. If the filters are loose, 
you will see a few spam emails in your inbox. If the filters are too fierce, 
then legitimate emails will end up in your spam box.

A few services offer better control. Plus.net, for example, lets you select 
the aggressiveness of the spam filter 
<https://www.plus.net/help/email-guides/spam-protection-guide/> on a scale from 
1 to 5. I haven’t seen this option on free email services such as Google’s 
Gmail, Microsoft’s Outlook and Yahoo Mail.

In my experience, Yahoo’s filtering is a little loose, while Gmail is so 
fierce that it produces a lot of false positives. Which you prefer is a matter 
of taste, but if you want aggressive spam filtering, you could switch to Gmail. 
The drawback is that you may have to look in your spam folder every day or two 
or you could miss some important emails.

Switching to an alternative free email service such as Gmail or Outlook has an 
obvious disadvantage: you will have to tell all your contacts to use a 
different email address. However, both Gmail and Outlook will collect all your 
old emails from Yahoo, so switching is not as difficult as it sounds.

The main drawback with Gmail is the miserly amount of free storage space. I am 
using 98% of Gmail’s 15GB but only 1.6% of Yahoo Mail’s free 1TB (ie 16GB). 
Outlook free storage just expands as you use it.

Spam filtering

All email filters need some training, and it takes a while to build up a 
profile. This will be based, to some extent, on the emails you mark as spam. 
You should therefore keep reporting all the adult emails that reach your inbox.

However, never open these emails to see what’s in them. Spam emails may 
contain invisible “web beacons <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_beacon>” that 
tell the sender you have opened the email, so this is an active account. The 
result will be more spam. By contrast, the correct way to handle unwanted but 
legitimate emails – newsletters, marketing offers etc – is to open the email 
and click the “unsubscribe” or “change preferences” link. Don’t just put them 
in the spam folder.

You can also set up your own filters to block emails from particular senders 
or about specific topics. In Yahoo’s case, select an email in the inbox or spam 
folder then click on the down arrow next to the word “more”. The drop-down menu 
should – but does not always – include the option to “Filter emails like this 
... ” Selecting this option pops up a dialog box with entries such as From, 
Subject and Body. You could, for example, filter out all emails that include 
words such as Viagra, Cialis and porn in the body of the email.

Sadly, there’s no point in trying to block specific email senders. Spammers 
use millions of From addresses, which are ridiculously easy to fake.

Other matters

You may be inadvertently opening spam emails. If your email system has a 
“preview pane”, every email will be opened automatically when you select it or 
even scroll through it.

To turn off Yahoo Mail’s preview pane, click the cogwheel in the top right 
corner, and select Settings. When the page opens, select “viewing email” and 
look down the middle column for “preview pane”. Set the option to “none”.

Note also that spam blocking doesn’t actually delete spam emails. When the 
service filters spam emails, and when you report them as spam, they are moved 
to theSpam <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spam> or Junk mail folder. 
If you check that for legitimate emails, you will see them there.

If you go through the often-cumbersome process to auto-delete spam emails when 
they arrive, they’ll be diverted to the bin or trash folder. You’re unlikely to 
see them, but again, they’re still there. They will only be deleted when you 
empty the trash folder, which your email service provider will do on a regular 
basis.

Otherwise, don’t bother trying to send spam emails back to their source, or 
retaliate against the sender. As mentioned, the From addresses may well be 
spoofed, and it would take some effort reading the headers to work out their 
actual source. And if the spammers have used a real person’s email address, 
you’ll just be adding to the burden inflicted on some hapless bystander.

Support problems

There’s no point in getting upset about Yahoo’s perceived lack of support. 
First, the company is trying to stop spam. If it’s failing in one particular 
area, you can help by reporting the spam emails that get through. However, 
remember its spam filters have to work for hundreds of millions of people, not 
just for you.

Second, Yahoo Mail is a free service, and it’s uneconomic to provide human 
support to millions of people. This is also true for Google, Microsoft and 
other high-volume online service providers. The cost of an average “support 
incident” probably starts at around £25 for phone support and maybe £10 for 
email support. The only viable option is online help pages that you have to 
figure out for yourself.

If you want personal support, you should sign up for a paid service, such as 
FastMail <https://www.fastmail.com/>. This starts at $3 per month or $30 per 
year with only 2GB or storage. The mainstream service provides 25GB of storage 
for $5 per month or $50 per year, and is cheap at that price.

For other tips, see my earlier answer: How can I stop spam emails? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/feb/18/how-can-i-stop-spam-emails>

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 