
We have two types of user accounts: local and Microsoft accounts. Over the 
years from Windows XP through Vista, Windows 7 and up to 8.1, I have always 
used local accounts, where you could easily control the security of your 
operating system by using a password-protected standard user account. However, 
to get the real benefits ofWindows 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows-10> requires creating a 
Microsoft account. (Of course, one way to ensure privacy is to create a new 
outlook.com account and just use it for log in purposes.)

From what I understand, Windows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows> 10 automatically generates 
another super or elevated Administrator account during installation, and this 
account is hidden by default for security reasons. Unlike the normal 
Administrator account, this runs all programs with admin rights by default, 
without that annoying UAC box appearing when you attempt to run a program. What 
is to stop any malware installing itself on your PC?

Also, is it best to enable the hidden Administrator account should it become 
necessary to access it for any reason? Marcus

The appearance of every new version of Microsoft Windows usually creates panic 
in people who think they’ve found something new, when it’s actually something 
old. Windows 10’s privacy settings, for example, are more or less identical to 
the ones in Windows 8. The email-based Microsoft Account logon system was also 
introduced four years ago, in 2012.

The “Hidden Administrator Account” has been around even longer. It first 
appeared in its current form in Windows Vista a decade ago, and has been in 
every version of Windows since. It was even in Windows XP, but you had toboot 
Windows in Safe Mode 
<http://www.pcadvisor.co.uk/how-to/windows/how-gain-access-your-windows-account-if-you-lost-your-password-3433989/>
 – or edit the registry – to see it.

Windows XP was – and still is – famously insecure. One reason for its 
insecurity was that most people logged on using what Unix users would call a 
“root account” with the power to do anything. Unix, Linux and Unix-based Apple 
Mac OS X users generally used less powerful accounts, which meant any malware 
couldn’t cause as much damage.

Right from the beginning, Windows XP had exactly the same design, with an 
Admin (root) account and less powerful user accounts. Unfortunately, few people 
used them, partly because of badly-written third-party software that could only 
be installed from root accounts. Many programs had been converted from 
DOS-based Windows where that was the norm: in Windows 95, Windows 98/98SE and 
Windows ME, every user could modify everything.

Enter the UAC

Microsoft stopped this by introducing UAC (User Account Control) in Windows 
Vista. This made users run a safe user account by default. If something needed 
Admin privileges, UAC would grey the screen and pop up a box, asking you to 
escalate to Admin level. As a result, badly written third-party software popped 
up loads of UAC interruptions, which eventually pressurised suppliers to 
rewrite their software to avoid them.

Of course, Microsoft also provided a get-out so that impatient and arrogant 
users could turn down the level of UACs or turn them off, making their PCs less 
secure. But the UAC and other security improvements still led to a dramatic 
reduction in the number of Windows virus infections in Vista and Windows 7.

The “Hidden Administrator Account” has survived because it has a purpose. It 
allows you to upgrade Windows 7 to Windows 10 or whatever without running into 
a snowstorm of UAC pop-ups. Once the operating system is installed, the hidden 
account is disabled. You don’t need to know it’s there, and under normal 
circumstances, you should never need to use it.

However, you should never run a copy of Windows 7 to 10 with only one Admin 
account – which will usually be the first account you set up. If you use that 
Admin account all the time and it gets corrupted, you’re in trouble. You might 
be able to regain access by using the hidden admin account, but that’s turned 
off by default, and the process is obscure and prone to failure.

So, my advice is to forget all about the Hidden Administrator Account. 
Instead, create a second Admin account that you can use if your original 
account is corrupted, or you forget the password, or something bad happens.

User accounts

You already know the dangers of working with a full Admin or root account. For 
this reason, Microsoft has providedseveral alternatives 
<https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/help/17197/windows-10-set-up-accounts> 
with different levels of security and control.

All the adults that use a Windows 10 PC should have their own standard user 
account. As the sole administrator of one or more PCs, you can set these up by 
going to Start, running the Settings app and clicking Accounts. Select “Family 
& other users” from the left hand menu, and choose whether to “Add a family 
member” or “Add someone else to this PC”. If you choose “Add a family member”, 
you then get two options: Adult and Child.

When you add a non-family member, they should use their own MSA. That way they 
will have access to their own apps, but they won’t have access to family 
information. If you set up a child account, you can have it monitored: they can 
only access websites and apps that you have approved, and you can set time 
limits and curfews. You can also provide accounts with access to school or work 
networks, including device management networks (MDM 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mobile_device_management>).

Further, you can provide “assigned access” so that a user can use only one 
Windows Store app, such as Skype. You could use this to enable a child to play 
a single game, or for gathering information, etc. For example, a club could use 
it for a survey.

When you limit what people can do on a PC, you limit the amount of damage that 
they can do, and the amount of damage that malware can do.

Using a Microsoft Account

You are correct in saying that you need to log on to Windows 10 with a 
Microsoft Account <https://www.microsoft.com/en-gb/account/> (MSA) to make full 
use of its features. This applies whether the account is an Admin account, a 
standard account, or a child account, etc, and I don’t think it makes a 
significant difference to your security.

Windows 10 is a mobile operating system delivered and maintained from the 
cloud. Using an MSA enables Windows 10 to get your email automagically, and 
lets you save files to your OneDrive cloud. It means apps are securely 
installed and updated from the online Windows Store – exactly like Google 
Android and Apple iPhone and iPad apps.

It means you can “roam”, signing on with your MSA on different PCs, sync data, 
or get a whole new PC set up like an old one, with the same apps and settings. 
Indeed, a Microsoft Account also works across Xbox One games consoles, Windows 
smartphones, and dozens of apps on Apple iOS and Android devices.

You are correct in saying that you can open a new email account at outlook.com 
for your log-on to Windows 10, and this does not require any personal 
information. You don’t have to use it for email and, unlike Google, Microsoft 
does not data-mine your emails for advertising purposes.

Alternatively, you can use a non-Microsoft email address to set up your MSA, 
but this gives Microsoft more information than it would get from a token 
outlook.com address. If you use, say, a Gmail address, Windows 10 will still 
work with OneDrive, Microsoft’s free online Office suite and related programs. 
However, as soon as you click the email tab, Microsoft will create an 
outlook.com email service that can send emails “from” your Gmail address.

You can also use a purely local account, without an email link. However, you 
will eventually end up using one with the Microsoft Store. As with the Apple 
and Google stores, you have to log on, even if you never intend to buy anything.

At least the Microsoft ecosystem supports both local and cloud-based computing 
across all the leading platforms, stretching from USB compute sticks to giant 
server farms. Neither Apple nor Google does that.

Have you got a question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 