
Godwin’s Law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/29/mike-godwin-nazi-analogies-meme-update>
 does not apply in dangerous times. If you want to hear echoes of today’s 
threats against liberal democracy, turn to Nazi Germany. It denounced everyone, 
from Germans who sympathised with Jews to the “clique of criminals” in the army 
who failed to assassinate Hitler, asVolksverräter. In the Soviet Union, from 
Lenin via Stalin to the fall of communism, the same sentiment found a different 
expression. The millions who failed to please the glorious socialist motherland 
werevrag naroda, who deserved exile and death in Siberia for the sabotaging the 
workers’ paradise.

The English translation of Volksverräter and vrag naroda is “enemies of the 
people”, which was how theDaily Mail described three judges, who decided that 
the law required the prime minister to seek the approval of parliament before 
triggering Brexit. “The most fundamental rule of the UK constitution is that 
parliament is sovereign,” they said. It was hardly a controversial argument. 
Britain had fought civil wars in the 17th century to make the point clear, 
after all.

For this assertion of a fundamental conservative principle, the Mail said the 
judges were the enemies of the people, theTelegraph said they were frustrating 
the will of the people and theSun said they were a “loaded foreign elite” 
defying the will of “Brit voters”.

It is true but still not accurate enough to say the British right is on the 
rampage for the first time since Margaret Thatcher’s day. (Those too young to 
remember Thatcher will soon learn why you should must never allow the right out 
of its cage.) But the analogy does not hold. The Thatcher generation of 
conservatives subscribed to a comforting story about Britain that was not 
wholly a lie. Unlike the continentals, it ran, the sensible British did not 
have the guillotines of the French Revolution or the terrors of Nazi Germany 
and communist Russia. We believed in gradual change, the rule of law, the 
independence of the judiciary and the sovereignty of parliament, not 
totalitarian theories with genocidal consequences.

You cannot say the same about the new demagogic right now in power. When 
checks and balances stand in its way, it wants to smash them in the name of 
“the people”. To escape the Europe of the present, it is reviving the language 
of the Europe of the past.

Theresa May lied and lied again to become PM | Nick Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/30/theresa-may-lie-and-lied-to-become-prime-minister>
If the judges had tried to overturn the referendum result, or parliament was 
threatening to keep us in the EU, you could at least excuse them.

But the court merely said Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> had no power to implement one 
of the most complicated tasks modern Britain has attempted without the 
authority of the sovereign legislature.

You might object that I am building a grand theory on a few press cuttings. 
But the Tory leadership was as keen on denying the rule of law as the Tory 
tabloids. May and her justice secretary had to be forced to defend the judges 
even when the yobs of Ukip demanded their dismissal. Stephen Phillips, one of 
May’s own MPs, who supported Britain leaving the EU, incidentally, could 
nevertheless smell the faint but sharp stink of Putinism coming from Downing 
Street. He resigned, saying that May and her ministers think they“can do what 
the hell they like without asking parliament” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/stephen-phillips-resigns-over-undemocratic-brexit-process>
.

Look around the world and everywhere you see the name of the “people” being 
used to insulate over-mighty states from dissent. Putin’s mobbish henchman in 
Chechnya, Ramzan Kadyrov, has called for arevival of the communist-era 
denunciation ofvrag naroda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/chechen-leader-ramzan-kadyrov-threatens-whole-of-russia-opposition-warns>
. For him, the people’s enemies were Russia’s handful of independent 
politicians. He wanted them put on trial “with maximum severity, for sabotage”.

In Poland, the authoritarians in the Catholic nationalist Law and Justice 
governmentdismiss those who protest at their attacks on constitutional freedoms 
as traitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/25/poland-right-law-justice-party-europe>
, German stooges and “gorszy sort Polaka” – the worst type of Pole. Meanwhile, 
Donald Trump is so convinced the people will vote for him that he has said in 
advance that his defeat at the polls could only be the result of fraud by the 
people’s enemies.

You can now read thousands of analyses of how the new right is sweeping 
western democracies. Journalists, political scientists, sociologists and 
economists have written with care about the pessimism and xenophobia of the 
left behind and the power lusts of the leaders of the radical-right middle 
class. Welcome, though their thoughts are, they habitually fail to offer any 
idea of how to fight back. Like the analyses of the crisis of the left, or the 
crisis of social democracy that preceded them, discussions of the crisis of 
liberalism are long on description and short on prescription.

Extremism thrives because of cowardly collaborators | Nick Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/30/donlad-trump-republicans-us-elections-dictatorship>
I accept that in Britain, where the Labour party has perpetrated the most 
irresponsible act in its history by throwing itself into sectarian irrelevance, 
the task of organising resistance appears impossible. A start can be made, 
however, by twisting your knife into the cracks between the “elite” and “the 
people”.

By definition, the elite is composed of the men and women in power. May proves 
her elitism by thinking that she can govern like a monarch – Queen Theresa I. 
And yet she, her ministers and the Tory press think they can pose as the 
people’s friends. As with Putin, trying to squeeze funds for his wars from 
Russia’s arthritic economy, or Trump, preferring wild lies to the truth that he 
may be a loser, Tory authoritarianism conceals insecurity. Even a prime 
minister as unprepared as May knows Brexit will be horrendously difficult.

She and her supporters are turning on anyone who might point out the 
difficulties: the governor of the Bank of England, the chancellor, the judges 
and a phantom “liberal elite” that is so far from being an elite it is out of 
power. Their punishment beatings are warnings to MPs and peers of what will 
happen to them if they ask hard question. Their cries of victimhood are the 
beginnings of the new right’s stab-in-the-back myth that one day will blame all 
the problems of Brexit on everyone but them.

Tony Blair has not always had the closest of relations with the truth, but he 
was fair and accurate when he said of the right’s opponents,“we are the 
insurgents now” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/28/tony-blair-remain-voters-to-mobilise-against-brexit>
. At the referendum, the Brexiters were not the “voice of the people” but the 
voice of 52% of the people. As that small majority vanishes, as the costs mount 
and the complexities drag on year after year until the country becomes sick of 
hearing about them, be ready to ask the oldest question in politics: in whose 
name are you doing this to us? Not the people’s, surely?

• Comments will be opened later
 