
When I read that Boris Johnson wrote two different newspaper columns to help 
him decide whether he should back the remain campaign or Brexit, I was 
astonished. A journalist doing double the amount of required work for no extra 
pay? But looking at Johnson’s Teflon – no, let’s not sugar coat this, his 
cockroach-like survival skills – I’ve decided I could learn something.

As you might have heard, in three days’ time there will be this election 
thingummybob, somewhere. So this week I shall write two columns, one for each 
of the two possible outcomes (please, no one mention hanging chads) so that 
you, dear readers, can deploy the relevant one come Wednesday morning. Consider 
this my homage to the Johnsonian approach, without the risk of me then becoming 
foreign secretary. Because while America may be a divided country, nobody wants 
that.

***

Wow, welcome to the dawn of President Trump, folks. Who could have foreseen 
that 6 November bombshell in Hillary Clinton’s emails, that Anthony Weiner was 
in the pay of Vladimir Putin all along? This did at least explain his otherwise 
completely inexplicable behaviour, but the fact that Clinton’s closest aide was 
married to a Russian spy was too much for some, and so they handed the election 
to the guy who used to sell mail-order steaks.

The result was announced just a few hours ago, and already Trump has ordered 
that the White House be gold plated and renamed Trump Mansion. In its current 
state, he said, the presidential residence is “a disaster, a total disaster, a 
place for losers”, but he will soon make it “tremendous, the best, the most 
expensive building anyone’s ever seen, even better than theTrump Plaza and 
Casino <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trump_Plaza_Hotel_and_Casino> in New 
Jersey” (which closed two years ago and left thousands unemployed).

Meanwhile, the stock market has plunged but Trump says this is just because 
the markets are “stupid” and, anyway, Americans will soon be using rubles, 
which is “the best, the richest currency” according to Trump’s “smartest guys. 
I have the smartest guys”. Because no US politician wants to work with him, he 
has put his children into office – his son Donnie as secretary of defence, Eric 
as secretary of state, 10-year-old Barron as chief of staff, and Ivanka as 
attorney general because, her father explained, “she’ll look tremendous in a 
general’s uniform”.

If Paddington Bear pitched up today, would anyone give him a warm welcome?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/29/paddington-bear-today-anyone-give-warm-welcome>
No one has seen the Clintons since the vote was confirmed, though there is a 
rumour they were seen fleeing the country in Barbra Streisand’s private jet. In 
Hollywood, the studios say that all but one of their actors have vanished, so 
all movies will now star Hulk Hogan. Coca Cola says it has lost the recipe for 
all its drinks except New Coke.

The American experiment is over. Prince William has offered amnesty to any US 
citizens who wish to return to their colonial overlords, but Nigel Farage has 
dismissed this, because he is now America’s colonial overlord. Chaos reigns.

***

It’s President Clinton! Again! It certainly was a close-run race, especially 
with that whole email issue. Who could have foreseen that they would reveal he 
was swapping dick pics with one DonaldTrump@donaldtrump.com? “I saw your dick 
pic, and you have the dick of a loser. Mine is tremendous, incredible, doctors 
tell me I have the greatest dick of all time,” Trump wrote in the first email, 
with photographic evidence.

Reports say the two men sent one another more than 572,000 photos of their 
penises (the FBI has asked for a collective lobotomy after reviewing the 
evidence). Since the result was announced, Trump has been seen sitting in his 
penthouse suite inTrump Tower 
<http://www.trump.com/real-estate-portfolio/new-york-ny/trump-tower/>, 
repeatedly muttering, “Rosebud, rosebud.” (Rosebud, Melania has revealed, was 
her name for his penis. He thought it was because it smelled good.)

Meanwhile President Clinton the second has appealed for calm (and help with 
setting up her White House email). As promised to the gods in return for 
ensuring her victory, she passes legislation that no member of the Kardashian 
family will be on TV again, ever. But trouble lies ahead: Ivanka, her heart 
filled with fury, vows to avenge her father. She doubles the size of her 
lifestyle website, which features coded messages that subliminally sow unrest 
and revolution. Due to their unwavering inability to resist luxury jeans and 
“handbag organisers”, Americans are soon fully indoctrinated. Chaos reigns.
 