
Had the crowd at Belo Horizonte’s Estádio Mineirão, or the 40,000 people who 
crammed on to Copacabana Beach to watch the game, been a bit less shell-shocked 
they would have noticed a very peculiar moment beamed on to the giant screens. 
While waiting for the beginning of the penalty shootout that would decide 
Brazil’s fate at their home World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/28/brazil-chile-world-cup-2014-last-16-match-report>
, the QPR goalkeeper Júlio César began to cry.

He would credit the emotional outburst to his team-mates doing the rounds for 
quick pep talks but the fact was that his mind had travelled in time: four 
years ago in South Africa Júlio César had been singled out as one of the 
culprits forBrazil’s quarter-final defeat to Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/02/holland-brazil-world-cup-match-report>
.

Júlio César saved two penalties against Chile and Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> avoided a disastrous early 
departure from their own party. He wept openly while being interviewed 
pitch-side by the same TV Globo reporter (Tino Marcos) who in 2010 looked 
embarrassed when the keeper started choking on his own tears when prompted to 
discuss his fluffed attempt to punch a Wesley Sneijder cross which led to the 
winning goal. As narratives of redemption go, this was perfect.

No surprise then that Brazilian TV channels repeated endlessly the scenes on 
Saturday night. The front page of every major Brazilian newspaper on Sunday 
morning pictured Júlio César either saving a spot-kick or celebrating with his 
teammates. “Ave, César” – or Hail César, just as the Observer wrote – was the 
headline in seven publications while Brazil’s biggest and most prominent 
newspaper O Globo simply said: “Júlio César saves Brazil”.

The headlines served as a reminder the Seleção were still alive, no matter how 
much of a mess they made of their first knock-out game in this tournament. 
Jittery in their first two outings, which included a goalless draw against 
Mexico, Brazil found themselves feeling the heat against aChile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile> side who had become the darlings 
of the competition – including for many Brazilians – after dispatching world 
champions Spain. In theory, Brazil had escaped both the more fearsome sides 
coming from Group B, the Spaniards and the Dutch, and would face neighbours 
they are used to beating on the international stage.

That it took 120 minutes and 10 penalty kicks to finally overcome Chile left 
home supporters rattled. While Júlio César’s heroics were appropriately hailed, 
the general feeling was that Brazil were lucky not to be packing their bags. 
“Chile actually won the game, although Brazil went through. The have won a 
lifeline but they know another bad performance will kill them”, wrote Paulo 
Vinícius Coelho, an influential Brazilian TV pundit and writer.

A few hours later, among the rolling replays of the shootout came highlights 
of James Rodríguez’s wondrous shot in Columbia’s easy 2-0 win over Uruguay – 
which put him momentarily as the sole top scorer, ahead of Neymar’s four. 
Discussing the possible outcomes of the 4 July quarter-finals became a 
compulsory topic.

“The Colombians are certainly playing better football so far; we have to 
accept it,” says the veteran journalist Juca Kfouri. That’s an uncomfortable 
truth that will add to the previous feeling that a largely inexperienced Brazil 
side are struggling to settle at a tournament they are expected to win in order 
to exorcise the ghosts from their formidable final defeat in 1950.

Luiz Felipe Scolari <https://www.theguardian.com/football/luiz-felipe-scolari> 
is trying to steady his sides’ nerves but he failed to lead by example, when 
his berating of the referee Howard Webb became almost as constant as what the 
public perceived to be Webb’s hesitancy to call fouls for Brazil – hence the 
crowd’s chants peppered with swear words directed at the Yorkshireman.

For the first time in this tournament, the Brazilian crowd looked properly 
alive at moments other than the singing of the national anthem. They were also 
quite vocal in their criticism and boos towards striker Fred when he was being 
substituted midway the second half. Scolari tried to mend bridges by voicing a 
variation of the famous theory about narrower margins in football, but the 
50,000 fans at the stadium did see Scolari give his No9 a proper telling off.

Now Colombia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colombia> look like another 
South American minnow gagging to give Brazil a good run for their money. While 
Saturday’s thriller ended with players having a great time dancing and shouting 
with supporters, once everybody went home the feeling that something still 
needs to click for Brazil to look more convincing remained.

The solution tried more recently was Fernandinho to replace Paulinho, but the 
Manchester City player failed to have the same impact as in his 45 minutes 
against Cameroon in the group stages.

So Brazil survived to live another day and that was duly noted in the streets 
of Belo Horizonte. Next stop is Fortaleza, the seaside town where Brazil are 
received like the Beatles. That could do wonders to pump them up.
 