
Leicester have performed like a wan tribute act for most of the domestic 
season but here the champions showed the qualities of which they are really 
made, and it was ManchesterCity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> who looked bogus. Jamie 
Vardy scored a hat-trick and Andy King one goal as Claudio Ranieri’s men blew 
away a Pep Guardiola side who lacked the mettle to go with their frilly 
pretensions. Aleksandar Kolarov and Nolito’s late goals did not mask that.

Snow machines and reindeers gladdened the atmosphere outside the ground before 
the kick-off and by the end the home fans were singing with festive cheer, 
while Guardiola was facing questions about the need for new resolutions.

Riyad Mahrez finds perfect opportunity to show off all his creative beauty | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/10/riyad-mahrez-creative-beauty-leicester-city-manchester-city>
Leicester have struggled in the defence of their title, unable to recapture 
their verve or to prevent opponents from subduing their well-known strengths. 
But City appeared to make no allowance for the champions’ abilities and were 
found wanting physically and tactically. They were ideal opponents for a 
Leicester side in need of a confidence boost.

They came into the game hoping to begin jilting comparison with Manchester 
City’s class of 1938, the only English champions to be relegated the season 
after winning the title. Just as City were shorn of the suspended Fernandinho 
and Sergio Agüero, Leicester were deprived of Danny Drinkwater – andthe 
lifeless midweek performance by fringe players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/porto-leicester-city-champions-league-match-report>
 in Porto seemingly persuaded Ranieri he was also deprived of a plan B, as he 
redeployed the players who had started the2-1 defeat at Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/sunderland-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. They were too strong for City.

Ranieri has admitted “we are missing everything from last season”, but here 
his team recaptured their magic. It took only three minutes. Leicester opened 
the scoring after Robert Huth powered a header forward and Riyad Mahrez helped 
it on with a delicious flick to Islam Slimani, who threaded a pass through to 
Vardy. The striker, showing no evidence of a loss of confidence following 16 
club games without a goal, lashed a low drive across Claudio Bravo and into the 
bottom corner.

Two minutes later Leicester increased their lead. Again Huth and Slimani were 
instrumental, the former heading on a throw-in to the latter, who laid the ball 
back to Andy King at the edge of the area. The midfielder struck it first time 
into the top corner. Bravo’s effort to stop it was as unconvincing as the 
defence in front of him.

Leicester were playing with the vibrancy they have lacked while the visitors 
were defending feebly, as if surprised by the onslaught. They were especially 
discombobulated when Huth ventured into the box. In the 12th minute the German 
headed another long throw from Christian Fuchs on to Slimani, who volleyed wide 
from eight yards. City, intricately going nowhere, forced Ron-Robert Zieler to 
make his first save in the 19th minute.

Pep Guardiola may tweak tactics after Leicester beat Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/pep-guardiola-tactics-leicester-beat-manchester-city>
One minute later Leicester forced Bravo to pick the ball out of the net for 
the third time thanks to a move of simple brilliance. Fuchs found Mahrez with a 
long pass from the back and the Algerian put Vardy through with another 
exquisite first-time pass. “Unbelievable – only he can do this,” Ranieri said. 
“Another player would have stopped the ball and lost momentum.” Vardy applied 
the finish the pass deserved, racing around Bravo and scoring.

City could not cope with Leicester’s energy and directness and at times seemed 
confused by their own highfalutin scheming, with Pablo Zabaleta’s wandering 
role a particular puzzle. It is not anti-intellectual to suggest they were 
trying to recite poetry before showing they had learned their ABC.

City hogged possession for the remainder of the first half but failed to 
penetrate Leicester’s defence and remained naively exposed to counterattacks. 
Slimani should have made it 4-0 before the break but headed wide from eight 
yards as City’s defenders stood flummoxed.

Guardiola made no changes at half-time. Nor did Leicester, obviously. Within 
five minutes City mounted a bigger threat than they had managed in the first 
period but Kelechi Iheanacho failed to connect with a cross from Jesús Navas. 
The youngster was not making the most of his rare opportunity to start instead 
of Agüero.

Leicester City 4-2 Manchester City: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/10/leicester-city-v-manchester-city-premier-league-live>
Ranieri pumped his fists and hollered on the sidelines, exhorting his players 
to maintain their concentration and dynamism as City probed. Swift, imaginative 
interplay – yes, City did some of that – took them into Leicester’s penalty 
area just before the hour, before Iheanacho teed up Ilkay Gündogan, who shot 
wide from 18 yards. Guardiola then figured his team needed new impetus, so 
introduced Raheem Sterling and Yaya Touré.

Zabaleta popped up on the edge of the right-hand corner of Leicester’s area in 
the 62nd minute and curled a shot narrowly wide. Then, up at the other end, 
Slimani barged past two defenders and forced a save from Bravo.

City lurched further into farce in the 78th minute, as John Stones blithely 
played a back pass without looking. Vardy inflicted suitable punishment on his 
England colleague, intercepting and netting from an acute angle. Kolarov 
expertly converted a free-kick four minutes later, and crossed for Nolito to 
score from close range before the end, but those were footnotes in a story of 
renewed glory for Leicester and flawed plotting by City.
 