
There were enough reasons to doubt whether Jason Day could win back-to-back US 
PGA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/uspga> Championships – namely a 
pre-tournament rush to hospital with his wife, a mild bout of illness for Day 
himself, the failure to play a single practice hole at Baltusrol before 
Wednesday and, in round two, the playing of his first seven holes in two over 
par. Day was drifting.

What followed was almost like cruelty from Day towards Rory McIlroy, his 
playing partner who was enduring such a turbulent time on the greens that he 
must have felt like snapping his putter over one knee. The world No1 recorded 
seven birdies in eight holes, signed for a 65 and is two off the nine-under-par 
lead with half this tournament played.

Rory McIlroy laments ‘pathetic’ putting after early exit from US PGA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/rory-mcilroy-us-pga-phil-mickelson>
Putting was the key element; Day holed out from positions that barely seemed 
feasible, surely intensifying McIlroy’s despondency therein. Day even had the 
luxury of playing the closing two holes, both par-fives, in level.

For McIlroy the possibility of making the cut vanished on the 18th as he 
mis-hit a chip from rough to the right of the green. His major victory wait, 
dating back to this event in 2014, continues. He will now need to refocus for 
the FedEx Cup series, with the Ryder Cup to follow.

Jimmy Walker and Robert Streb are currently the men to catch. Walker had 
history in his grasp, with the lowest ever major 36-hole total of 129 available 
if he were to play the last three holes in one under par.

In the event he could fare no better than one over on that stretch for a 66 to 
sit alongside his 65 of the first day. Streb matched the lowest score of 63 in 
a major, which included the playing of the front nine in 30.

Consecutive 67s in this US PGA Championship mean Henrik Stenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/henrik-stenson> has had six sub-70 major 
rounds in a row. Since the start of 2013 the 40-year-old is an aggregate of 39 
under par in golf’s quartet of prime individual events. The most pertinent 
factor in respect of this tournament is surely psychological rather than 
statistical. Stenson’s breaking down of the major door, finally, in the Open at 
Royal Troon earlier this month has removed a mental barrier.

“You’re going to feel a bit more self-confident and trusting of yourself that 
you can do it again if you’ve done it once,” Stenson said. “I guess that’s 
natural and I do feel that.

“I can’t guarantee that it’s going to happen again if I’m in a similar 
situation. But at least you’ve got the belief that you can do it.”

Stenson’s continuing brilliance owes everything to accuracy. In his last seven 
major rounds he has averaged more than 80% of greens in regulation.

The three-wood he hit into the 18th at Baltusrol on Friday, from 259yds and 
leaving a tap-in eagle, was the shot of this tournament so far. It summed up 
Stenson’s current touch.

The obvious question surrounds whether fatigue will kick in or, as Stenson 
dreams, he can see this major through as well. “That [tiredness] is not 
something I’m concerned about,” said Stenson.

At three under Jordan Spieth <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jordan-spieth> 
is also a part of this US PGA narrative. Spieth even survived a rules scare at 
the 7th, where he was granted relief from casual water but appeared to have his 
foot in a puddle when playing his subsequent shot. Whereas it was suggested 
Spieth therefore had not taken full relief and could be punished, the 
23-year-old and tournament officials were content with what process had been 
followed. Briefly thoughts had turned towards the rules farce which 
overshadowed Dustin Johnson’s win at the US Open last month.

“I would have never hit if I was nottold it was OK by a rules official,” 
Spieth said. “He told me it was fine. I really don’t know why we are talking 
about it, to be honest.”

The PGA of America verified this. “Jordan was entitled to play the ball as it 
lay, even if his stance was still in the casual water,” said the tournament 
organisers.

Johnson’s run of 25 cuts made in a row came to an unceremonious end. A second 
round of 72 made a Friday starting point of seven over even worse.

US PGA Championship 2016: second round – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/29/us-pga-championship-2016-second-round-live>
Others to search for an early flight home included Sergio García, Shane Lowry 
and Graeme McDowell. Lowry cut an especially downbeat figure after his 73, with 
the Irishman hoping to make a run for a Ryder Cup place. Lowry has not seemed 
to recover from falling short at the US Open, where he held a four-shot lead 
with 18 holes to play.

“It just feels like I’m getting nothing out of my golf at the minute,” he said.

“I feel like I’m driving well, feel like my iron play is good, feel like my 
short game is good enough and I feel good on the greens. And I’m five over par.

“There’s not much more I can say. I’m not particularly enjoying my golf at the 
minute.”
 