
Allies of Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> 
are so nervous that he could face a leadership challenge by rebel Labour MPs 
that they are proposing a series of changes to party rules to ensure he is 
guaranteed a place on the ballot paper.

The rule changes have been tabled by the Campaign for Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> Party Democracy (CLPD) as rebels 
launch what is describe as an “Australian strategy” to mount a series of coups 
against the party leader in the way that the former Australian prime minister 
Julia Gillard was hounded from office.

There is concern among Corbyn supporters that a poor showing in elections in 
May could lead to attempts to unseat him. The leaders of the newly formed 
Labour movement Momentum have saidthey are ready to defend him against any 
challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/08/momentum-vows-to-protect-jeremy-corbyn-from-leadership-challenge>
 and plan to use their volunteer base to try to make a difference in marginal 
council seats.


Meanwhile, in a move to shore up Corbyn’s position, and to discourage the 
media from suggesting he could be “replaced in a coup”, the CLPD’s draft rules 
call for the leader to be placed on the ballot paper if he signals in writing 
his intention to stand in a fresh election.

'The sniping has to stop': Jeremy Corbyn calls for unity among Labour MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/07/jeremy-corbyn-unity-labour-mps-parliamentary-party>
Corbyn’s supporters in the CLPD also suggests that the rules should be changed 
to ensure that the left would effectively be guaranteed a place on the ballotif 
Corbyn stands down or is overthrown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/07/jeremy-corbyn-unity-labour-mps-parliamentary-party>
.

The draft rules propose a dramatic lowering of the nomination threshold in a 
leadership contest from 15% of Labour MPs and MEPs to 5%. Corbyn only just 
managed to meet the threshold last year – he secured the support of 36 out of 
the necessary 35 MPs – after a series of parliamentarians said they would 
“lend” him their vote to ensure that the left had a voice in the debate about 
the future of the Labour party.

The move to ensure Corbyn will be given a place on the ballot paper in the 
event of a leadership challenge comes as Labour MPs hoping to oust him sharpen 
their knives. One idea under consideration is being dubbed the “Australian 
strategy”, named after the relentless pushes (known as “spills”) against 
Gillard, who was eventually replaced by her predecessor, Kevin Rudd.

The draft rule changes, tabled by the veteran CLPD secretary and Labour 
national executive committee member Peter Willsman, highlight nerves among 
Corbyn supporters that the rebels could secure the numbers to mount a 
leadership challenge. There are concerns on the left that if 20% of Labour MPs 
– the required threshold – trigger a leadership ballot there is uncertainty in 
the current rules about whether Corbyn would be allowed to put his name on the 
ballot.

The two main changes proposed by Willsman would mean that if a leadership 
ballot is triggered, the leader (or deputy leader if a contest is held for that 
post) “will be automatically included on the ballot paper if they inform the 
general secretary in writing they wish to be a candidate in the election”.

In a note explaining the need for a change, Willsman wrote: “Unfortunately, 
the lack of precise clarity in the way the rule is written is exploited by 
hostile media speculation claiming that a challenge can be mounted against our 
current leader Jeremy Corbyn with him excluded from the ballot paper.

“Labour needs its rule book to be clear to ordinary people. Also, in the event 
of a leadership challenge, it would not help the party if it ends up in court 
having to argue over the meaning of our rules. Establishing clarity on this 
rule would discourage media stories that the leader can be replaced in a coup 
and assist the party in uniting to fight our political opponents. The purpose 
of this rule change is simply to tidy up the existing rule.”

Momentum vows to protect Jeremy Corbyn from leadership challenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/08/momentum-vows-to-protect-jeremy-corbyn-from-leadership-challenge>
If a vacancy arises for leader or deputy leader, any candidate hoping to stand 
for election “must be supported by 5% of the combined Commons members of the 
PLP and members of the EPLP [European parliamentary Labour party]. Nominations 
not attaining this threshold shall be null and void.” In his note, Willsman 
added that Corbyn only made the ballot in 2015, as Diane Abbott did in 2010, 
after Labour MPs lent them their vote. He writes that this is unlikely to 
happen again, which means that a candidate who could secure up to 60% of the 
membership vote (the size of Corbyn’s vote) could find it impossible to make 
the ballot.

Willsman wrote: “Since Jeremy’s election as leader, several MPs have indicated 
they will not again nominate to help widen the party’s choice. That potentially 
means, under the current rule, that a candidate who perhaps has the support of 
5% of MPs and MEPs, but also would be the choice of 60% of Labour party 
members, affiliated supporters and registered supporters, could be denied a 
place on the ballot paper. It is undemocratic for MPs and MEPs to have powers 
to so tightly restrict the range of candidates running in a leadership 
election.”

The proposed changes, published on the CLPD website, are being distributed to 
constituency Labour parties (CLPs) with a note from Willsman encouraging them 
to submit them as a rule change for this year’s annual Labour conference.

He also proposes changes to make it easier for the left to table motions at 
the Labour conference after Corbyn failed in a bid to table a contemporary 
motion on Trident. He also proposes giving affiliated organisations and party 
branches a greater say in the selection of Labour MPs.
 