
Shares in JJB Sports group surged 22% as the market welcomed overnight news of 
a£31.1m fundraising and boardroom shakeup 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/dec/23/jjb-appoints-mctighe-chair> 
from the ailing retailer.

At JJB's rock bottom share price, however, today's leap added less than a 
penny to its shares, which rose from 4.3p to 5.25p.

JJB has been struggling for some time and, as Nick Bubb at Arden Partners put 
it this morning, "The traditional prize for the Christmas Eve profit warning 
would go to JJB ... except that it doesn't make any profit."

Like-for-like sales at JJB have slumped by 16% over the past six weeks and 
Bubb believes a collapse in gross margins will push full-year losses at the 
group to well over £50m.
 "The scary thing is that even today's placing (which equates to an effective 
1 for 1 rights at 5p a share, to raise £30m net) will only tide JJB over for a 
few months … and we suspect that the key shareholders supporting JJB are simply 
throwing good money after bad.

"The big sports suppliers want to keep JJB alive to avoid Sports Direct from 
dominating the market, but customers are voting with their feet and in case you 
think that 'snow' is to blame for JJB's problems then please remember that 
Sports Direct said last week that the cold weather had been a net positive for 
them…" 
JJB issued a profits warning in November 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/nov/11/jjb-sports-shares-plunge>, and 
earlier this month warned that it was likely to breach the terms of a £25m 
loan. The group came close to bankruptcy last year but was saved by an 
emergency restructuring under former executive chairman David Jones. Now it has 
had to put out the begging bowl to investors once again.

The clearout at the top will see the departure of retail veteran John Clare, 
former boss of Dixons. Replacing him as chairman is Mike McTighe, a former 
chief of global operations at Cable & Wireless, who has a reputation as a 
turnaround specialist.

The group will raise just over £30m from shareholders including Harris 
Associates, Crystal Amber - the activist investor headed by Richard Bernstein - 
and the Bill & Melinda Gates foundation.

JJB has been hit hard by the freezing weather conditions and stiff competition 
from rival Sports Direct, run by Newcastle United owner Mike Ashley.
 