
Jordan Spieth <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jordan-spieth> won the 
Australian Open for the second time in a thrilling three-man playoff at Royal 
Sydney Golf Club. The American sank a three-metre putt for birdie on the 18th 
hole to scupper the dreams of local hopes Cameron Smith and Ashley Hall on 
Sunday.

The trio all finished the championship 72 holes at 12 under par, with Spieth 
draining a nerve-wracking two-metre putt on the last just to make the 
sudden-death playoff. Then, in a dramatic climax, Spieth put his approach to 
three metres on the first hole of the playoff – the 18th – before Hall knocked 
his to less than two metres.

Displaying all the cool and class that helped him land last year’s Masters and 
US Open crowns, 23-year-old Spieth again buried his clutch putt before Hall 
pushed his birdie attempt right of the cup.


Spieth’s victory follows his win at The Australian in 2014 and his runner-up 
showing last year at the same venue. His victory is also a big win for Open 
officials, with the world No5 almost certain to return to again defend the 
trophy next year when the tournament moves back to The Australian.

In a major consolation for the joint runners-up, Smith and Hall secured starts 
at next year’s British Open at Royal Birkdale, as did two-time champion Aaron 
Baddeley, who finished in a five-way tie for fourth at 10 under, two shots out 
of the playoff.


Baddeley closed with a one-under 71 and edged out Rod Pampling (70), Jason 
Scrivener (69), New Zealander Ryan Fox (71) and third-round leader Geoff Ogilvy 
(73) by virtue of his superior world ranking.


After starting the day with a two-stroke lead, Ogilvy looked the likely winner 
for much of the afternoon before unravelling with a bogey on the par-4 15th and 
a catastrophic double on the easy par-5 16th.


The former US Open champion struggled off the tee all day and his hopes of a 
second national title – to go with his 2010 triumph at The Lakes – evaporated 
after he drove into the trees and couldn’t get out on 16.


While he eventually signed for a disappointing 73, Hall and Smith both charged 
home with final-round six-under 66s to reel in Ogilvy, with Spieth closing with 
a 69.
 