
Success is relative. In the case of Jordan Spieth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jordan-spieth>, that presents a problem. The 
Texan’s epic 2015 – two major titles, the FedEx Cup, the legitimate placing of 
No1 in the world – fuelled the suggestion of Spieth as a dominant figure in 
golf. Tiger Woods was the instant comparison.

Just as the scale of Woods’s brilliance becomes more evident with each passing 
major, the notion that others could readily match his achievements takes on 
proper context. Spieth, who lacks nothing in the level of demand towards 
himself, is admitting to a struggle with outside perception.

The Open 2016: third round – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/16/the-open-2016-day-three-live>
“It’s been tough, given I think it’s been a solid year and I think had last 
year not happened I’d be having a lot of positive questions,” Spieth said on 
Saturday at Royal Troon. “Instead most of the questions I get are comparing to 
last year and, therefore, negative because it’s not to the same standard. So 
that’s almost tough to then convince myself that you’re having a good year when 
nobody else really thinks that. Even if you guys think it is, the questions I 
get make me feel like it’s not.

“So I think that’s a bit unfair to me but don’t feel sorry for me. I’ll still 
be OK. But I would appreciate if people would look at the positives over 
comparing to maybe hopefully what would happen to me a few times in my career a 
year like last year. Or I would say a few times it’s happened less than a dozen 
times to anybody in golf ever in a year. So it seems a bit unfair at 22 to be 
expecting something like that all the time.”

Spieth signed for a Saturday 72 in Ayrshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/16/the-open-2016-day-three-live>
, ensuring a 54-hole aggregate of plus five and that he has not broken par in 
his past 10 major championship rounds.

“I set the expectations high for myself but I feel like I’ve been getting a 
little more frustrated off the golf course than normal,” Spieth said. “My game 
feels like it’s rounding into shape though. Ball-striking has really let me 
down this year and I’ve been actually striking the ball better and better 
coming from the first round at [the last WGC event] Akron to the final round.

“This week I felt like I’ve hit the ball really, really well. And as good as 
my putting has been this year, which is pretty much the same standard as last 
year, it just wasn’t there this week. If it’s there this week and I’m on the 
right end of the draw, I’m hitting it well enough to be at or really near the 
lead.

“So although I’m so far behind, it’s very close, and I feel confident about 
getting back to kind of the basics at home and getting ready for the US PGA 
Championship. Obviously I’m trying to take momentum tomorrow but understanding 
that we’re going to be working towards PGA now.

“I’m very pleased with the way I’m striking the ball, especially in these 
conditions. I just can’t quite get it in the hole. I guess some weeks that 
happens.”
 