
Just in case Japan’s appetite for South African rugby players has not been 
sated, then Scotland will present two more in their match-day squad when the 
sides meet at Gloucester on Wednesday.

Josh Strauss, born at Belville, Western Cape, and a product of Stellenbosch 
University who only qualified as a Scot on Sunday, will get his first cap, 
coming off the bench some time at Kingsholm while Willem Nel, from 
Loeriesfontein, a veteran of three Tests after qualifying last month, will 
start as tighthead prop.

All three of Nel’s caps came during Scotland’s warm-up matches, games a 
frustrated Strauss had to sit out while he served the final days of his 
three-year residential qualification which ended the day afterJapan’s 
celebrated victory over South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/20/south-africa-japan-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
.

Strauss, who made it to the 31-strong World Cup squad after leading Glasgow to 
their first Pro12 title, is clearly happy under his new flag. “I recently 
bought a house in Glasgow, my daughter was born in Glasgow, so I’m pretty much 
as Scottish as I can be apart from my accent.”

World Rugby has already said it will examine residency rules but Strauss 
denied his move was specifically aimed at making him a Scotland player. “When I 
came I was aware of the law but it wasn’t at the front of my mind,” he said 
after the team was announced. “I’d seen other players do it before me. I’d seen 
it happen, but you never expect it.”

Strauss was one of nine changes to the squad which played France in Scotland’s 
final warm-up game. He replaces Alasdair Strokosch as back-row cover, while the 
head coach, Vern Cotter, makes only three alterations to the starting XV. 
Stuart Hogg replaces Sean Maitland at full-back, Grant Gilchrist edges out 
Richie Gray in the second-row, while Sean Lamont wins his battle with Tim 
Visser for the left wing spot and gets his 98th cap.

Strauss believes Scottish preparations are “spot-on” whereas he thinks South 
Africa probably saw Japan as easy pickings. “The country will have expected an 
easy one, but you can’t take anything for granted in a World Cup.

“I think our preparation has been right. We’ve done our preparation and 
nothing changes. They did what we thought they would and did it really well.

“Japan played the perfect game against South Africa. You look at every game as 
an individual, but if I’d been Japanese that’s exactly what I would have done. 
Probably South Africa didn’t expect them to do it that well, probably like the 
rest of the world. They did exactly what we thought, but they just did it 
brilliantly.”

Cotter was just as lavish with the praise of a side who jumped over Scotland 
in the world rankings courtesy of Saturday’s win. Ten minutes after Cotter 
announced his squad for their first game of the tournament, World Rugby 
revealed the biggest shock in World Cup history had lifted Japan two places to 
11th while Scotland drop from 10th to 12th.

Japan and Scotland have met four times – twice at World Cups – with the Scots 
winning every time. Eleven years ago they set a record, scoring 15 tries 
against the Brave Blossoms. That will not happen on Wednesday despite Japan 
having only four days to recover from Brighton, but Cotter refused to suggest 
South Africa underestimated their opponents. “I can’t answer for the South 
Africans. I’ve no idea, but what we saw was a committed and efficient Japanese 
team that made very few mistakes, applied pressure and as the game wore on 
became more and more confident,” said Cotter. “They do well at surprising teams 
and I’m sure they have a few things prepared for us.”
 