
There is enormous excitement about the World Cup here in Brazil already and 
Friday's draw was just the beginning of what should be an amazing seven months. 
Over the past few months several national teams – Germany included – have come 
to visit me and Ituano FC, the club that made me and where I am now on the 
board. That has made me proud not only for my club but also for what Brazil is 
doing. I have the feeling the 2014World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> will be a great 
opportunity for a lot of people to see beyond what is usually reported about my 
country.

The first question I normally get about the World Cup next summer is whether a 
European team can win it for the first time in South America. I can't see why 
not. There have been substantial changes in the style of play adopted by 
European teams, most notably by Germany and Spain, and that could be quite 
helpful for these teams inBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> 
next year. I also think that players will have enough time to adapt to the 
different weather conditions, to be honest.

Spain and Germany are the main obstacles for Brazil and I also think Italy 
could surprise a lot of people. TheAzzurri have improved a lot since 2010 and 
are used to big competitions. I was impressed by how they took Spain all the 
way in theConfederations Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/27/spain-italy-confederations-cup-live>
. Argentina have not impressed me, even with Lionel Messi. I'd put them in a 
second tier group, alongside England.

I have very fond memories of the time I spent in England and still follow the 
Premier League as much as I can but they have gone through a lot of changes 
recently and very important players, such as Gerrard and Lampard, are now a 
little bit older. But if they don't have to work too hard during the group 
stage or be under too much pressure, they could benefit from that.

But there is no doubt that Brazil will be the favourites. And though the 
players from Europe will adapt to the weather to a certain extent, they will 
still struggle with the heat and humidity in the northern parts. I also believe 
that Brazil's opponents will find our supporters hard to deal with at home. 
There's a much more vigorous atmosphere here and many teams are not really used 
to that.

I was fortunate enough to play one World Cup, in 2002, which Brazil ended up 
winning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2002/jun/30/minutebyminute.worldcupfootball2002>
. My memories of the tournament are still vivid. The sensation of being part of 
such a huge event is quite overwhelming, starting with the increase in the 
amount of attention given to the tournament from the press. But I don't think 
the current group of players will struggle because of the pressure they will be 
under during the tournament. No player would ever think twice before accepting 
the challenge of playing in a World Cup at home. I just wish I was bit younger 
so I could make a comeback!

Brazil have to be considered the favourites, partly because of the problems 
the visiting teams will face but also because of what they showedduring the 
Confederations Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/30/brazil-spain-live-confederations-cup-final>
. I enjoyed watching them. TheSelecao have a young group of players at the 
moment and they are full of energy. It was quite amazing to see Neymar and 
Oscar playing full of confidence. Big Phil Scolari's system has been so 
accepted by the players that even Fred, who is usually a more static No9, runs 
around a lot.

The Confederations Cup gave Brazil an immense boost and it was important for 
the lads to lose a bit of the anxiety surrounding the whole World Cup 
experience. It is quite important that the main players in the team play for 
big teams in Europe and are often testing themselves against tough opposition 
in their leagues and in the Champions League. It does make a difference when 
you have to step up to the plate and Oscar again is an example of how even 
younger players are able to handle expectations and the big change in 
perspective after a move to Europe.

Whatever happens the atmosphere is going to be fantastic and it will be quite 
a special treat for Brazil fans as many of the people going to the matches now 
were too young to have witnessed the last time Brazil hosted a World Cup, in 
1950.

I went to Confederations Cup games last summer as a supporter and found the 
experience absolutely amazing and a much improved one than a few years ago. The 
atmosphere was incredible and I am not too worried about the amount of 
travelling the teams will have to do. Most of the players are used to 
travelling week in and out for club and country.

Yes, there have been problems, the most recent the terrible accident that 
killed two workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/27/crane-collapse-corinthians-brazil-three-killed>
 at the São Paulo stadium. It has to be investigated and dealt with but I do 
think it's unfair to compare the Brazilian context to the English and German 
ones.

These countries are much older and more established in comparison to Brazil. 
And accidents can happen anywhere. It's unfair to immediately assume this is a 
sign of general negligence, especially when there's an investigation in place. 
But I do admit that Brazil is to blame for much of the bad publicity. We have a 
culture of leaving things to the last minute and often take too long to make 
decisions. That leads to things being done in a hurry.

There's huge debate on the money spent on the World Cup and I agree when 
people point out that more investment is needed in health and education. But 
the event can bring good things. Without the tournament perhaps we would not be 
seeing improvements in areas such as the airports, for example. And most of all 
it promises to be an amazing experience. I hope you come and visit us.

Juninho was talking to Fernando Duarte <https://twitter.com/Fernando_Duarte>. 
 