
Kadeena Cox was leaning on the British Cycling press officer as she walked 
around the velodrome after herworld-record ride in the C4-5 500m time trial on 
Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/kadeena-cox-sarah-storey-hannah-cockroft-rio-paralympics>
. Having just become the first British Paralympian since Isabel Newstead in 
1988 to win medals in two sports in the same Games, Cox was looking unsteady on 
her feet.

It was a striking sight, a reminder of how challenging life can be for 
Paralympic athletes away from the glare of competition. It is two years since 
Cox was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis after a stroke and her condition can 
leave her energy levels depleted, meaning she has to manage her training 
carefully.

Her coaches wondered if she should do two sports. Her mother was worried that 
such physical exertion would worsen her daughter’s condition. Many thought an 
athletics medal would be beyond Cox after the 25-year-old was moved from the 
T37 to T38 classification.

Kadeena Cox completes historic Paralympic double with time trial gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/kadeena-cox-sarah-storey-hannah-cockroft-rio-paralympics>
By now it is clear that she is an athlete who wants it all and Cox is back on 
the running track in Wednesday morning’s T38 400m final. Newstead won discus 
gold and shooting bronze in Seoul. Cox is going for her third medal in her 
first Paralympics.

“My message would be never give up,” she said. “I didn’t give up at any point 
even when my classification was changed. When people told me I couldn’t do it I 
never gave up at any point and I’m here proving if you work hard and you have a 
passion for something you can get there.

“I’ve been told I couldn’t do it a billion times in the past few weeks but I’m 
so happy I’ve done the two-sport thing and proved you can do amazing things. 
I’m glad I’m standing here as a role model showing people you can achieve these 
things if you put the hard work in.

“My mum was slightly stressed because she didn’t want it to make my condition 
worse and it is a big risk factor with the stress. Exercise kind of exacerbated 
the condition but as long as they knew it wasn’t going to make me worse they 
were happy.”

Cox, who has become an M62 motorway expert after splitting her training time 
between Manchester and Leeds, likes a little chaos in her life. Along with the 
400m, she will be back on her bike in the C4-5 road race on Saturday. It is 
thought she might not be selected for the 4x100m relay because of her 
understandable lack of practice.

“I’m staying with the cyclists but this has caused drama,” Cox said. “The 
athletes keep saying I’ve changed sides but it wasn’t like that. It just worked 
out this way.”

Cox joked she had proved her coaches wrong. “They were both behind me,” she 
said. “They knew I had the talent and the ability, it was just whether we could 
do it logistically. The teams wouldn’t necessarily want me to do both because 
there’s risk involved.

“But we looked at it and realised it could be achievable if we managed it 
right and I’ve got great support from the National Lottery, psychologists, 
physios and all the coaches.

“Initially it was a journey about one girl who wanted to go to the Paralympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics> but over the two years it has 
become something I was doing for everyone else. The reason I wanted to do it so 
badly was so I could stand here and show it can be done even if you have 
setbacks.”
 