
For some time now, pundits have speculated on the likely effect of the year’s 
cataclysmic political shifts upon the world of music. Would Brexit and the rise 
of Trump bring about a creative explosion to rival that of the early Thatcher 
years, when the privations wrought upon Britain by the Iron Lady led to a wave 
of angry, thrilling pop in opposition: the age of Two Tone and the Jam at their 
zenith, an era when music frequently appeared to be commenting on current 
events almost as they happened?

Friends, Lost in Showbiz feels impelled to report that the answer is a firm 
yes – and it has started already. This week, LiS alighted on the news that Katy 
Perry may berewriting her upcoming fifth album to include songs about the US 
election result 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3945104/Katy-Perry-writing-album-include-songs-Presidential-election.html>
. LiS can’t wait to hear what the author of Roar and Ur So Gay has to say about 
ongoing political events, its appetite sharpened further by the words of its 
old pal A Nameless Source: “Katy hopes her music can inspire healing, peace 
and unity”.

That’s America sorted, but what of Britain? Seeking reassurance, it finds them 
in the wise words of Sir Tim Rice, who has informed the Daily Mail that“the 
arts will thrive post-Brexit” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3962972/What-DID-Andy-Bojo-chat-Palace-Prince-summons-Foreign-Secretary-private-talks.html>
. “I’m always optimistic about creativity in Britain, but even more so now 
we’re leaving the EU … Leaving just gives us the freedom to do what we want.” 
He went on to lambast the world we have thankfully left behind, where talent 
was stifled by “financial and political restraint from other countries”.

Yes, for a mercy those days are over: you couldn’t move for Eurocrats 
restraining the arts, could you? If they weren’t telling Skepta what bars to 
spit, they were meddling in the arrangements of Radiohead’s material and 
telling Salman Rushdie what size his paperbacks had to be under EU legislation. 
Or they were exercising financial restraint with their grants for British 
creative and cultural institutions totalling €40m (£34m) during 2014 and 2015. 
Lost in Showbiz can only thank God those crippling shackles on creativity have 
been removed, and excitedly awaits the freedom to do what we want.
 