
Ken Wiwa, who has died aged 47 after a stroke, was a journalist and author, 
adviser to threeNigerian presidents  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/20/nigerian-president-leads-tributes-to-oil-activist-ken-wiwa>
and a campaigner for social and environmental justice. As the eldest son of the 
poet, human rights activist and authorKen Saro-Wiwa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/05/ken-saro-wiwa-memorial-art-bus-denied-entry-to-nigeria>
, he struggled as a young man to forge his own identity. But following his 
father’s detention on a trumped-up accusation of murder, “Ken Junior”, as he 
was widely known, became a powerful advocate for peace and reconciliation, 
keeping the territory ofOgoniland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/09/anger-environmental-in-oil-rich-polluted-niger-delta-ogoniland-ken-saro-wiwa>
 on the world stage as a symbol of the injustice of oil exploitation in 
developing countries.

Born in Lagos, Ken was sent from Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> to Britain, along with his mother, 
Maria, and four siblings, and studied at Tonbridge school in Kent. He had a 
complicated relationship with his wealthy anglophile father, a traditional 
Ogoni leader who had worked for both the Nigerian federal and state governments 
post-independence in 1960, but who devoted his later life to a struggle for 
Ogoni autonomy – and to fighting Shell’s presence in his homeland.

High quality crude oil had been discovered by Shell in the small, 404 square 
mile area of the Niger delta close to Port Harcourt in south Nigeria in 1958. 
The elder Saro-Wiwa saw clearly that, rather than bringing wealth and 
prosperity, it had led to war, devastation, social division and the degradation 
of farm and fishing grounds.

The flamboyant author, who expected his expensively educated son to return to 
Nigeria to continue his own political struggle for Ogoni autonomy, became 
increasingly a thorn in the side of Shell and the military government led by 
GeneralSani Abacha 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/obituary-general-sani-abacha-1163944.html>
. Matters came to a head in 1994 when Saro-Wiwa led a peaceful revolt against 
the oil group. Shell was humiliated, forced to withdraw from Ogoniland and stop 
production in one of the world’s most oil-rich regions.

The Ogonis had won a great victory in their fight for self-determination, but 
the price of their rebellion was the wrath of the military dictatorship. In 
1994, Saro-Wiwa and eight other Ogoni leaders were accused of complicity in the 
murders of four Ogoni chiefs. The nine were detained in a military camp outside 
Port Harcourt to be tried by a special military tribunal.

Their detention and subsequent torture posed a personal dilemma for the young 
Ken. Father and son had been close, but by his teens Ken felt intimidated and 
unable to develop his own identity. So great was his need for independence from 
his powerful and charismatic father that in 1992, at the age of 23, he changed 
his name in London to be rid of what he later called “the straitjacket of 
identity my father was trying to impose on me”.

Becoming “Ken Wiwa”, however, was not the liberating experience he had hoped 
for. “[It] seemed flat and rather unimpressive next to the more colourful Ken 
Saro-Wiwa,” he said. Tellingly, it took Wiwa two years to break the news to his 
father of the rejection of his name. When he did so, it was by letter to the 
military camp where he was being held. The elder man was furious, writing back: 
“There is no way in our culture that Ken Wiwa can be the son of Ken Saro-Wiwa”.

The dilemma was particularly acute because his father’s detention took place 
just as his own career was taking off in the UK. Wiwa had become the Guardian’s 
first online journalist, working with the New Media Laboratory, the 
groundbreaking forerunner of the paper’s full entry into the digital revolution 
that was soon to engulf the industry.

As the detention of the Ogoni nine became an international issue, with 
environmental and human rights activists, writers and politicians all appealing 
to Abacha for clemency, Wiwa found himself sucked ever deeper into his father’s 
world of politics. In 1995, he gave up his job in journalism to dedicate 
himself to saving his father’s life, travelling the world to lobby politicians 
and heads of state to intervene, and to mobilise public opinion. The result was 
that his father’s name, which he had rejected, became a symbol of the emerging 
worldwide struggle for environmental justice.

Abacha, however, was unmoved – and on 10 November 1995, Saro-Wiwa and the 
other Ogoni leaders were executed after the military tribunal found them guilty 
of murder. Their executions took place when Wiwa was in Auckland, New Zealand, 
to lobby the Commonwealth heads of state andNelson Mandela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/05/nelson-mandela-obituary>, and 
triggered a worldwide outcry. The British prime minister, John Major, described 
it as “judicial murder”, Mandela declared it a “heinous act” and world figures 
joined the condemnation of Abacha. Nigeria was suspended from the Commonwealth.

When the outrage subsided, many expected Wiwa to return to Nigeria to take up 
his father’s mantle and lead the Ogoni struggle. But although his father had 
effectively been canonised, he again chose his own path. He had married Olivia 
Burnett in London in 1996, and the couple and their two sons, Felix and Suanu, 
went to live in Canada, where Wiwa became a writer-in-residence and a fellow at 
several universities and foundations, as well as a successful feature writer 
and TV and radio producer. In 2001, he publishedIn the Shadow of a Saint: A 
Son’s Journey to Understand His Father’s Legacy, 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Shadow-Saint-Journey-Understand-Fathers/dp/1586420259>
 a moving memoir of a complex life lived between different cultures.

Having at times felt isolated from Africa, Wiwa returned to his Nigerian 
roots. In 2005 he became a World Economic Forum “young global leader” and a 
member of the Africa advisory council of the Prince of Wales’s rainforests 
project. The Nigerian president Olusegun Obasanjo appointed him as his special 
assistant on peace, conflict resolution and reconciliation in 2006, and Wiwa 
later worked as an aide in Abuja to presidentsUmaru Yar’Adua 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/may/06/nigeria-president-umara-yaradua-obituary>
 andGoodluck Jonathan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/goodluck-jonathan>.

In 2009, he and the families of the other executed Ogoni leaders sued Shell in 
New York, accusing its Nigerian subsidiary, the Shell Petroleum Development 
Company (SPDC), of having collaborated in their executions. The case never went 
to full trial, with Shell offering at the last minute to settle out of court 
for £9.6m. To this day, the company dismisses all claims made against it, 
saying it had attempted to persuade the Nigerian government to grant clemency.

The landmark case was one of the first to see a multinational corporation 
accused of human rights violations, and confirmed that western corporations 
working in Africa could no longer act with impunity. It also paved the way for 
Shell topay out over $50m in settlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/07/shell-announces-55m-payout-for-nigeria-oil-spills>
 to around 15,000 Ogoni people for pipeline pollution episodes in Ogoniland in 
2011.

Wiwa finally resolved his differences with his father, accepting his flaws and 
attributing to him his strong political conscience, and moral compass. “His 
influence remains in everything I do, especially in my relationships with my 
children,” he said in 2010. “I am much closer to him now, if that makes sense. 
In a way that’s how it should be with fathers and sons – I had to get away from 
him to become my own man, and once I had done that, it was easier to appreciate 
him as a man and a father.”

He is survived by his wife and sons, and by his mother.

• Ken Wiwa (Kenule Bornale Tsaro-Wiwa), writer and campaigner, born 28 
November 1968; died 18 October 2016

• This article was amended on 28 October 2016. Ken Wiwa went to Tonbridge 
school in Kent, not Malvern college in Worcestershire.
 