

Helmut Kohl promised Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> secret access to 
“matters which even his cabinet would not know” in an attempt to reassure her 
about the dynamics of German reunification, newly released files reveal.

The pledge was made during a private meeting between the two politicians at 
Downing Street in March 1990 as world leaders came to terms with the new 
European order after the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of communism.

British suspicion of a revitalised Germany ran deep in a Conservative 
government steeped in memories of two world wars, the files at theNational 
Archives <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nationalarchives> in Kew show.

Days before the Kohl-Thatcher summit, the prime minister had assembled 
prominent historians at Chequers for a confidential seminar onGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> which crudely characterised the 
country as exhibiting “angst, aggressiveness [and] bullying”.

The record of the private meeting between Kohl and Thatcher on 30 March 
contains a section labelled “Anglo-German contacts on unification”. It notes: 
“Chancellor Kohl said that he wanted to keep the prime minister personally 
informed of all his intentions about unification, so as to remove any possible 
source of misunderstanding or apprehension. He would pass on even matters which 
his cabinet would not know, subject always to the qualification there would 
inevitably be in unexpected developments.

“He would like to suggest that Charles Powell [Thatcher’s foreign affairs 
adviser] should meet with … members of the federal chancellery staff once a 
month in total discretion, with no announcement of such meetings. The prime 
minister said she was very grateful for this offer, which she would like to 
take up.”

Kohl’s determination to improve trust between London and Berlin came only a 
few days after the notorious Chequers seminar, the details of which were 
eventually leaked to the media, provoking political uproar, later that year.

A full text of the seminar is contained within the prime ministerial files, 
including a covering note from Powell warning that it would be “very 
embarrassing and gravely damaging to our interests if the contents of so frank 
a discussion of one of our closest allies were to become known”.

Those present along with Thatcher included the foreign secretary, Douglas 
Hurd, as well as the historians and commentators Gordon Craig, Fritz Stern, 
Norman Stone, Hugh Trevor-Roper, Timothy Garton-Ash and George Urban.

They began by talking about Germans and their characteristics, remarking that 
it was relevant to the “present discussion to think of the less happy ones”. 
Germans were said to be insensitive to the feelings of others, “most noticeable 
in their behaviour over the Polish border”, self-obsessed and “inclined to 
self-pity and a longing to be liked”.

The extraordinary accumulation of negative stereotypes continued: “Some even 
less flattering attributes were also mentioned as an abiding part of the German 
character: in alphabetical order, angst, aggressiveness, assertiveness, 
bullying, egotism, inferiority complex, sentimentality.” A capacity to “overdo 
things” and “over-estimate their own strengths and capabilities” was also added 
to the list.

Modern Germans “were very different from their predecessors”, it was 
acknowledged, but the fact that a “cultured and cultivated nation” had 
previously been “brainwashed into barbarism” meant it could happen again.

Powell’s conclusion at the end of the seminar note was that “we should be nice 
to the Germans [although] even the optimists had some unease, not for the 
present and the immediate future, but for what might lie further down the road 
than we can yet see”.

The fluid state of international affairs provided Thatcher with an opportunity 
to stamp her mark on history with a speech that would resonate around the world.

In February, Powell had sent a note marked “secret: personal and private” to 
her loquacious defence procurement minister, Alan Clark. It said she was 
thinking of delivering a “Bruges II” address in the summer and would welcome 
ideas and material.

Clark observed that the prime minister was not properly deploying “the 
priceless asset of her own reputation” and said she should draw together all 
the strands of recent events and indicate the shape of a “grand design”, like 
Winston Churchill’s coining of the “iron curtain” phrase.

Clark suggested it would be the occasion to which “future historians would 
look back as marking the recognition of the west that the Iron Curtain has 
lifted”. It should not contain “flimflam” with which commentators and 
politicians “conceal their own puzzlement”.

The new era of a Thatcher-Gorbachev axis would be as important for the 1990s 
as the Thatcher-Reagan axis was for the 1980s, he mused. “The friendship of a 
new Russia will be of immense value in offsetting German ascendancy, in 
controlling Muslim irredentism and in defending the west against the … prospect 
of Sino-Japanese aggression.”

A note from Powell records that in May Clark was coming to Downing Street to 
talk to the prime minister about what she might say in her forthcoming lecture, 
Shaping a New Global Community, to be given in Aspen, Colorado.

“You have read his note,” Powell said, “and are unlikely to agree with his 
advice that you should champion a single currency and an independent European 
central bank.”
 