
Chris Mullin <http://www.chrismullinexmp.com> was a fellow traveller of Jeremy 
Corbyn in the 1980s, back in the day when the two of them were helping Tony 
Benn in his ultimately unsuccessful bid to capture the commanding heights of 
the Labour party. He left parliament in 2010 and is about to publish amemoir 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B01I9Z3IPQ/ref=dp-kindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8&btkr=1>
 which, as readers of his excellent diaries will anticipate, is wryly 
thoughtful. Towards the conclusion, he reflects on the prolonged torture that 
his party is putting itself through and writes that elevating his old Bennite 
comrade to the leadership was “always going to be a high risk strategy”. He 
goes on to reveal: “Much as I respect Jeremy, I did not vote for him on the 
grounds that in a parliamentary democracy it is folly to elect a leader who 
enjoys the confidence of less than 10% of his parliamentary colleagues. And so 
it has proved. It has been an interesting experiment, but always destined to 
end badly.”

More pungent descriptions than “interesting experiment” are available. There 
are also more lurid predictions of how it will end than “badly”. What no one 
can say with any confidence is when that will happen. It certainly looks highly 
improbable thatLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> will get 
any relief from its agonies when the result of the leadership contest is 
announced next month. If anything, Labour’s pains are going to be compounded by 
an outcome which seems very likely to leave things exactly as they are, only 
worse.

Leadership battles do not have to be bad news for a political party. Even 
bitterly divisive contests can have a benefit if they allow the ventilation and 
thrashing out of differences as a step towards resolving them. There has been 
plenty of poison flowing through Labour during its long summer of unlove, but 
no sense that those toxins have been drained. Quite the reverse. The divisions 
have become more entrenched.

The threat that the Labour conference might have to be cancelled was lifted on 
Friday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/26/labour-security-deal-to-rescue-party-conference-ocs-group>
 when the party finally found a security firm prepared to work with them. The 
main challenge for the guards will not so much be shielding the conference from 
the outside world as protecting the party’s warring activists, officials and 
MPs from each other. We have got to an extraordinary situation when Labour 
suspends the party membership of the general secretary of an important trade 
union and the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, then accuses his own party of 
conducting a “rigged purge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/25/john-mcdonnell-accuses-labour-committee-of-rigged-purge-of-members>
”.

As the ballot papers start to come in, the expectation among both his devotees 
and his enemies is that the incumbent will win. The bookies’ odds imply that he 
has a better than 80% chance of still being leader when Labour meets in 
Liverpool at the end of September. Even the more optimistic of his internal 
opponents now think the best they can hope for is that his majority goes down, 
diminishing his mandate.

The strategy of his challenger, Owen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith>, has not been to make it a 
contest about ideology. “I am just as radical as Jeremy,” has been his 
refrain.” If Mr Smith were to win, it would be on a platform well to the left 
of Ed Miliband’s losing manifesto at the last general election. Mr Smith has 
instead sought to make the contest about effectiveness and electability. When 
this strategy was conceived it seemed to have a logic to it: the way to beat Mr 
Corbyn was to peel away some of his support. That argued for a challenger who 
would align with a lot of the incumbent’s positions. But the contest has 
revealed the flaws in that approach, as some of the Labour moderates who 
originally backed the strategy are now beginning to privately concede. It has 
meant a contest almost entirely devoid of the interplay of ideas.

Labour MPs are not going to clap their hands to their foreheads and cry: 'We 
were wrong about Jeremy!'

If you are a Corbynista, why would you not vote for the original rather than a 
copy who is being sold by MPs who clearly are not Corbynistas? As for 
effectiveness, many of St Jeremy’s supporters simply will not accept that he is 
a poor leader, while others dismiss “competence” as a false construct of the 
mainstream media, “Red Tories” and other running dogs of the neoliberal 
establishment. Among the devotees, the cult of his personality has, if 
anything, been inflated over the past few weeks. “The contest is all about 
Corbyn,” says one Smith-supporting MP with regret. “It is all about him. It 
doesn’t matter what Owen says really. No one is listening.”

So it looks highly probable that the crimson king will keep his throne, and 
that could be construed as a considerable triumph. This is certainly how it is 
going to be interpreted by his followers, whose ardour at rallies and hustings 
suggests that their devotion to him is undimmed by his appalling poll ratings. 
Against a hostile media, the open opposition of the vast majority of his 
parliamentary party and diabolical corporate conspiracies to make him sit on 
the floor of train carriages, he will be back. Mr Corbyn and those who support 
him will be able to say that he has become the only person in the postwar 
history of his party to have been twice elected to the job.

Yet that will simply leave Labour’s fundamental structural split as vast and 
unmaskable as ever. The party will be back to where it was at the beginning of 
the summer with a leader who is openly opposed by the vast majority of his 
parliamentary colleagues. This contest started rolling when172 of them declared 
that they had no confidence in him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/28/jeremy-corbyn-loses-labour-mps-confidence-vote>
. So then did every single living former leader of the party. During the 
contest, they have been joined by the mayor of London – the most powerful 
Labour politician in the land – and theleader of the party in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/22/scottish-labour-leader-kezia-dugdale-backs-owen-smith-against-jeremy-corbyn>
. It is the more remarkable that Sadiq Khan and Kezia Dugdale should both urge 
his removal as leader even when it was apparent that this is unlikely to 
happen. None of that can be unsaid or undone. Labour MPs are not going to clap 
their hands to their foreheads and cry: “We were wrong about Jeremy!”

As soon as parliament resumes, with it will return the question of how Labour 
can function as the opposition when a critical mass of its MPs have resigned 
from or refused to serve on the frontbench. Mr Corbyn has said that he will 
offer a “hand of friendship” to his parliamentary party but many think that it 
will be aimed at their throats. “They will threaten the PLP with unity,” 
predicts one former member of the shadow cabinet. “They will send McDonnell out 
to say, ‘The members have spoken, now fall into line or we’ll come and get 
you.’”

Some of the resignees may agree to return to the frontbench for fear of 
retribution in their constituencies or on the more noble grounds that the 
country needs Labour to do its constitutional duty of providing a parliamentary 
opposition. But whether they choose to return to the frontbench or continue to 
be refuseniks, all of the 172 are still going to struggle to answer the 
question “IsJeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> 
fit to be prime minister?” when they have declared him unfit to be leader of 
the opposition.

The likelier prospect is that the two sides settle in for more months of 
bitterly attritional warfare

On the part of the Corbynistas, the more zealously vengeful talk of using 
deselection to launch a purge of Labour MPs. The more sober people in the 
Corbyn camp are wary of the multiple risks of pursuing that course, at least in 
the near future. There would be nothing to stop a deselected MP from carrying 
on in parliament in the meantime. Nor could an MP be prevented from resigning 
his or her seat to trigger a byelection which they could then fight under the 
name of “True Labour” or “Save Labour” or something similar.

The superficially clean answer to the party’s predicament is for Corbyn Labour 
and anti-Corbyn Labour to concede that their differences are irreconcilable and 
go their separate ways. Two models of how that could happen are most commonly 
discussed. In the slightly less apocalyptic scenario, the parliamentary party 
announces that it is declaring its independence from Mr Corbyn and then elects 
its own chief to replace him as leader of the opposition. The fuller-blown 
version of divorce would see Labour MPs separating themselves into a wholly 
distinct party and inviting those of the membership who agree with them to 
follow. These ideas have some takers and promoters among commentators and there 
are Labour MPs who don’t rule it out, but they are very much a minority at the 
moment. “The people urging a split just do not understand the Labour party,” 
says one former shadow cabinet member who entirely shares the despair about the 
current state of the party but fears an MP-led breakaway would simply make 
things even darker and invite annihilation at the ballot box if Theresa May 
goes for a general election next spring.

So the likelier prospect is that the two sides settle in for more months of 
bitterly attritional warfare. The interim goal of the Corbyn team will be to 
try to exploit his re-election by pushing for rule changes that will strengthen 
their position and aiming to wrest control of the party machinery. Iain 
McNicol, the party’s general secretary, is quite clearly in their cross-hairs. 
Labour MPs will try to learn from this contest as they plan for another 
challenge next year. Of an end to the “interesting experiment”, there is no 
sight.
 