
Jermain Defoe and Victor Anichebe have done their bit but it is no coincidence 
that Sunderland’s run of three wins in four games has coincided with Lamine 
Koné’s return to central-defensive form.

Victor Anichebe scores two as Sunderland haul Hull City into trouble
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/sunderland-hull-city-premier-league-match-report>
In those three Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> victories – at 
Bournemouth, against Hull City at home, and the 2-1 defeat of Leicester City on 
Saturday – Koné has been paired with Papy Djilobodji, who has switched from 
being a big part of David Moyes’s problems to becoming a key element in the 
Sunderland manager’s prospective solution.

If relegation is to be avoided, he needs Anichebe and Defoe to keep creating 
and scoring goals, while Koné and Dilobodji – who have been subjected to 
frequent, private, afternoon tutorials on the art of defending from their 
tracksuited manager – stay defensively strong.

Against Leicester that pair set an encouraging template, with Koné reminding 
everyone why Everton were so keen to spend £18m on him during the summer and 
Djilobodji demonstrating the qualities which once made him a Chelsea player.

The 28-year-old Senegal international never actually threatened to establish 
himself in the first team at Stamford Bridge but Moyes invested £8m in the pacy 
left‑footer. The only drawback was that Djilobodji’s positioning, 
decision-making and concentration were somewhat wayward, while Koné seemed to 
have lost focus after signing a lucrative new contract to stay atSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland>.

The 27-year-old Ivory Coast international looked a shadow of the player signed 
for £5m from Lorient by Sam Allardyce last January and who played a key part in 
the successful avoidance of relegation last spring. It seems the security of 
that bumper new deal initially bred complacency.

“I think it was when he signed the new contract,” Moyes said.“I just don’t 
think his performances were up the same standard everybody told me they had 
been last season bBut now I think Lamine’s turned a corner. We’ve been putting 
an awful lot of work into Lamine and Papy and they will not thank me for having 
them out in the afternoon as much as I have done. But Lamine has a lot of 
quality and his positional play has got better. They’ve both improved but 
they’ve quite often been doing double training sessions because if we’re going 
to have any chance of staying up, we need our centre-halves to play well. We’ve 
always got a chance if we defend well.”
 