
A Brisbane <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane> lawyer has 
been charged with laundering drug money in an alleged scheme involving her 
former Hells Angels bikie ex-husband and the son of a former top Queensland 
anti-corruption official.

Police will allege solicitor Ana Brkan, 34, and former solicitor Paul John 
Crowley, 50, both received kickbacks for their roles in organising bogus loans 
– worth tens of thousands of dollars each – for indebted drug customers of 
Brkan’s then husband, Nuno Da Silva.

Brkan, 34, who allegedly drew up loan documents under the banner of her 
Brisbane firm Insight Law, and Crowley, 50, a finance broker who was disbarred 
from the legal profession more than a decade ago, were both charged with money 
laundering on Tuesday.

Crowley, the son of a former acting chairman of Queensland’s Criminal Justice 
Commission, is accused of arranging finance for people who owed money to Nuno 
Da Silva and his twin brother Bruno for methamphetamine, or ice, which they 
were sold on credit.

Police will allege that the loans Crowley arranged were in the names of the 
drug customers but were paid directly to the Da Silvas to recover their debts.

They will allege Brkan arranged legal documentation and the payment from an 
account of at least one of these loans.

That loan was allegedly for $50,000 to a low-level drug dealer. But police 
will claim that $26,000 of it was instead transferred to the Da Silvas, with 
Brkan and Crowley sharing the remaining $24,000 for setting the loan up.

Police seized documents from Brkan’s firm at the conclusion of an undercover 
drug sting in October 2013. But they were forced to wait more than three years 
to view them after Brkan fought their access by claiming legal professional 
privilege.

Brkan’s website <http://www.anabrkan.com.au/> describes her as a “talented 
lawyer and innovative thinker [with] a long history as part of the legal 
fraternity within Australia”. She was admitted as a solicitor to the Queensland 
supreme court in 2008.

Da Silva, 39, a former locksmith business owner now of Loganlea, was also 
charged with money laundering on Tuesday. The trio were given notices to appear 
in the Brisbane magistrates court on 31 January.

Mick Niland, superintendent of Queensland’s anti-gang squad Maxima, said 
police were committed to targeting “professional groups”.

Solicitor Andrew Bale, acting for Da Silva, said his client would defend the 
charges.

Bale said it would be “very difficult” for prosecutors to prove money was 
laundered when police were unable to “quantify the yield or even the turnover 
of the drug-trafficking”.
 