
My father was never much given to sentiment, nostalgia, spiritualism or 
superstition.

He was practical and prosaic in belief and taste. In his last years he 
continued to attend church mainly because he had always done so and, I suspect, 
to have done otherwise would’ve necessitated an explanation to my excessively 
churchy mother.

I’m not sure he believed in saints or even the Holy Spirit. He used to scoff 
at what he regarded the oddness of nuns, especially at the traffic lights if 
they were behind the wheel of the next car. He certainly never believed in 
ghosts.

Which is why I was flummoxed when he told me he’d once seen his mother 
wandering around his old family home. It might have been on the day she died 
or, perhaps, when he locked up the old place for the last time upon selling it 
years later. I can’t quite remember. And it’s too late to ask him now.

If you’re moving house, which plants will you take – and which leave behind?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/20/gardens-plants-to-take-or-leave-when-moving-house-helen-dillon>
Grief will do strange things to one’s imaginings, for sure. Perhaps he’d just 
dreamt his mother. I don’t know. But I do know that I dream of my parents 
often. I know they are dead. But in my dreams they are always alive and inside 
or around my home. My subconscious wants to keep them here, in my home.

It’s almost time to go now from this house that’s been my cocoon for almost 
two decades. An archive of elation and celebration, of sorrow and 
disappointment, too, it’s the place where I’ve written six books and a million 
other words, many of them terrible but all of them from the heart of home.

It’s where we brought our newborns. And it’s where we still, at certain times 
of the year, mourn one who never made it.

Our dead parents are here, too, and in more than just our dreams. Yes, their 
images are on the walls, just as they will be wherever we go next. But their 
time lived in this house, the days and weeks and months when they marvelled at 
the children mostly just for their plain ordinariness (everyone, especially on 
Facebook, boasts that their kids are exceptional, right?) can only remain here.

In some ways it’s my mother-in-law whose presence I still feel – and miss – 
most acutely around this place. She always managed to fill the joint, such was 
her capacity to simultaneously solve any maths problem, recite the words to an 
obscure hymn, oversee piano practice, sew a button, iron a shirt, change a 
nappy and feed the dogs, all while nuking my favourite Le Creuset, before 
settling in at the kitchen bench while we talked about anything and drank wine 
as I cooked for the adults and chiselled the charcoal from the pot.

The dead parents are fixed in my memories, in my experiences, only here, 
within these walls. Those who live here next, perhaps having abandoned their 
own ghosts, won’t know any of that of course.

And, so, I wonder: what happens to all of that life lived, ours and that of 
the departed, all of that human time expended here, when we move?

One of my Indigenous mates reckons you should have a modest smoking ceremony 
when you leave a house and another at the other end when you settle into a new 
place. That makes sense to me: a smoking ceremony (by which I mean some 
smouldering gum leaves and jasmine in a dish, with no deliberate inhalation) to 
signal to ancestors that you’re leaving and to please follow, and another in 
the new place to assure incumbent spirits you mean no harm.

We haven’t moved yet. But already I feel like I’m cheating with all of this 
eyeing off of pretty places by the water where I might squeeze my (by necessity 
new, smaller) writing desk, stow our books and hang our art, where the dogs 
(and kids; not quite a secondary consideration) might romp happily. A place in 
which to live new experiences, accrue more memories, raise people and dogs, 
grow vegetables and flowers and books.

There’s so much stuff we can’t take.

Like the majestic golden ash out the back, the possum ladder to our roof, 
whose leaves clog our gutters each autumn.

We carved our initials, the three of us, in the trunk when we moved in back in 
1997: our older daughter, “EM”, and us adults leaner, darker-haired, less 
battered by life’s vagaries and disappointments: “PD 4 LT”.

Soon came the “JD” of the boy, now almost 18. We didn’t – couldn’t – inscribe 
the initials of the baby who didn’t make it, into the golden ash. It was, 
perhaps, a year later when we noticed the boy had taken it upon himself to 
write of our loss by carving grief into the trunk for all of us: “4 JD 4 ED 
...”. Years later another living little girl, finally, at last, made the tree: 
“...4 CJ.”

When our son was born we embarked on what we called “the 21-year project”. The 
idea was that, like Michael Apted’s Up series, we would chronicle on film, 
through interviews and footage, his life to age 21. Life – constant travel, 
juggling similar, though often uncomplementary, careers, supporting ailing 
parents and other kids – got in the way. We gave up when he was about three. 
But we did mark his growth with lines of pen and dates on the side of a 
bookcase that is fixed to one of the walls. Over the years all sorts of random 
visitors – friends, rellos, tradies – were marked off on the side of that 
bookcase.

It was our visitor’s book. It has to stay, I suppose.

I’m not at all handy. But I wonder if a hammer and chisel would do the trick. 

I’m not much of a gardener, either. Our front is often the unruliest in what 
is, even by Canberra’s standards, a rather ruly street. But our magnolia, which 
briefly blooms in a flourish of aubergine and white annually, is the most 
magnificent in the suburb. Every year the kids – from when they first appeared 
as bumps in their mother’s belly – have been photographed beneath that blooming 
tree with their mum.

I've moved house more than 60 times. Here are six things I've learned | Brigid 
Delaney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/08/ive-moved-house-more-than-60-times-here-are-six-things-ive-learned>
For years I’ve waged war on the possums who sit in the tree from late winter 
and taunt the dogs while fattening on my magnolia buds. They’re protected, so 
you can’t kill them, but they’re terrified of bright light. By photo time in 
early September, only about half the tree blooms. But it’s enough for the 
annual photograph.

And as fate or life or circumstance or something would have it, the woman from 
the Australian Bureau of Statistics who’s been leaving little notes for me for 
weeks, urging me to complete the ill-fated census, just knocked on the door 
again to ask if I’d done it yet. No. Sorry. Not yet.

“I love your home,” she said.

“I always reckon it looks so messy from the street,” I replied.

“No. It looks interesting – and loved.”

It’s photo time – No 18 – this weekend. God, it comes around fast. It will be 
our last here. Soon we’ll leave.

And our house, our capsule of time, of memories and spirits, will become 
someone else’s.
 