
Lee Westwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lee-westwood> has reiterated 
his desire to captain Europe’s Ryder Cup team in 2020, with a stint as 
vice-captain in Paris in 2018 a likely stepping stone.

He has not given up hope of playing against the United States for an 11th 
time, equalling the record of his firstRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> partner Nick Faldo. The 
Englishman, 43, also still needs 2½ points to overtake Faldo as Europe’s 
all‑time record points scorer in the biennial contest after failing to win any 
of his three matches in the defeat at Hazeltine a fortnight ago.

Westwood admits he tried to “wipe the Ryder Cup” out of his mind at the Alfred 
Dunhill Links Championship last week, but the former world No1 could not avoid 
questions on the topic before the British Masters, which gets under way at The 
Grove on Thursday.

“I thought it was a good week. I thought both teams played well,” said 
Westwood, who was one of three wild cards selected byDarren Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darren-clarke>, the European team captain, 
at Hazeltine. “The Americans did to us what we’ve been doing to them for the 
last 20 years. They holed a lot of good putts and probably holed more than us. 
Not a lot in it tee-to-green. It was a good atmosphere to play in, as well, 
generally, and yeah, I thought it was a good week.”

Ryder Cup 2016: USA sweep to victory as Rory McIlroy and Europe taste defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/usa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe>
Asked if he still wanted to be European captain at Whistling Straits in 2020, 
Westwood said: “Yeah, I think so. I certainly wouldn’t want to be the captain 
next time around. That’s too soon for me, but I think 2020 is definitely on my 
radar. There are a lot of candidates for it but I’ll be putting my name in the 
ring for sure. It’s something I’d like to do.

“I’ve played on 10 and witnessed 10 different forms of captaincy so I’m pretty 
well qualified to be a captain, I would have thought. I’ve played a lot in it 
and I’d like to maybe play again, but if I can’t play again I’d like to do the 
assistant captain’s role, see what goes on behind the scenes, although I paid a 
lot of attention to what Darren and the assistant captains were doing this year.

“I don’t think necessarily you have to be an assistant captain [before being 
captain], but it probably helps. Another angle to see it from, more experience.”

England’s Andy Sullivan also failed to win a point at Hazeltine, the 
30-year-old losing in the opening foursomes session alongside Rory McIlroy 
against Phil Mickelson and Rickie Fowler, and then being beaten on the Sunday 
by Brandt Snedeker in the singles.

“I feel like it’s a lot of weight off my shoulders now with the Ryder Cup 
done, I can try to get back to winning ways,” Sullivan said. “It’s nice to get 
back and prepare and try to win tournaments and not be thinking about how many 
Order of Merit points I’m going to pick up and things likes that.”

Darren Clarke urges Europe to resist alarm over Ryder Cup defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/europe-ryder-cup-defeat-darren-clarke>
He said of his Ryder Cup experience: “I think it’s one of those things that 
everyone wants to play five games, which is not going to happen. It’s not 
plausible to do that. Obviously different situations come about and 
unfortunately it’s one of them situations where we were behind and Darren had 
to send the team out there that he thought was going to get us in front.

“It’s tough being a captain. You’ve got to make tough decisions and if it had 
come off we would all be standing here saying Darren is a genius, but it didn’t.

“And we were there as a team, regardless if we play one or two games; we’re 
there as a team to win as a team. Unfortunately we lost as a team, but we stand 
shoulder to shoulder as Darren said, and we stand by his decisions.”
 