
No sooner had Davis Love III <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/davis-love-iii>
 issued his strongest Ryder Cup war cry yet than Lee Westwood endorsed his 
status as Europe’s agent provocateur. If the event matches the preamble, there 
may be a need to stand back from the Hazeltine fireworks.

Love, the United States captain, took to an American radio station on Friday 
to speak effusively about the players under his command. “We don’t have to do 
anything superhuman. We’re a great golf team,” Love said. “This is the best 
golf team, maybe, ever assembled.”

Bubba Watson says Ryder Cup wild-card pick is out of his hands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/22/bubba-watson-influence-ryder-cup-wildcard-davis-love>
In one sentence and depending on perception Love has either left himself open 
to ridicule or afforded fresh confidence to an American set-up which has become 
painfully familiar withRyder Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> 
defeat.

Expanding on likely US strategy, Love added: “You need to stand up there, 
smash it down the middle and take off walking. Let the other team know we are 
going to dominate you. If we are putting any eight guys out at a time, they are 
going to be really good; it is more who to sit [out] that we are struggling 
with.”

As Love’s comments were posted online, Westwood immediately responded via 
social media <https://twitter.com/WestwoodLee/status/779385983485747200>. “No 
pressure there then lads!” said the Englishman towards the US team. Westwood, 
who will make a 10th playing appearance for Europe next week, had already 
stirred the Ryder Cup pot by claimingTiger Woods may have an “adverse effect” 
as a US vice-captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/21/ryder-cup-2016-tiger-woods-lee-westwood>
. Westwood seems to be enjoying himself.

Love’s already upbeat mood would be improved further by the touch of Dustin 
Johnson at the Tour Championship. Johnson, who has proved himself an excellent 
Ryder Cup player in the past, is the 36-hole leader after a second round of 67 
moved him to seven under par. He has both the Tour Championship and $10m FedEx 
Cup bounty in his grasp.

Johnson leads Kevin Chappell by one, with the latter seeking to muddy waters 
further with regards to whom Love turns for his fourth and final wild-card 
pick. So, too, is Kevin Kisner, who lies in a share of third here. Rory 
McIlroy’s 70, which leaves him five from the halfway lead, was notable for an 
inward half of 32. And yet, the Northern Irishman headed straight for the East 
Lake driving range on conclusion of his media duties as he sought to improve on 
inconsistent iron play.

“I feel like I’ve left a lot of shots out there this week,” McIlroy said. 
“I’ve sort of got it going both ways with the irons. It’s OK if you’ve got it 
going one way but if you’ve got it going both, there’s a few things in your 
head. So I just need to work on that.”

Paul Casey has matched McIlroy’s aggregate score but Jordan Spieth slipped 
back to even par after a Friday 72; Spieth found only five from a possible 14 
fairways.

Russell Knox produced the lowest round of day two, 66, after coming home in 
31. The Scotsman thereby propelled himself into the top 10. Phil Mickelson 
added a 72 to Thursday’s 74 but admitted to a bigger picture in mind. “I’ve won 
two Tour Championships and I’ve only been a part of two winning Ryder Cups,” 
Mickelson said. “I’d like to be a part of a third. Not to diminish this, but 
I’d rather win next week. For me, at this stage in my career, it means a little 
more to me.”

Jason Day’s dreams of claiming the FedEx Cup were shot down by injury, a 
recurrence of the back problem which meant the world No1 did not feature in the 
BMW Championship causing his withdrawal here after seven holes on Friday. 
Fitness issues continue to undermine Day’s quest for greatness.

“Jason has a strained ligament in his lower right back with muscle spasm,” 
said a statement from Day’s management company. “He withdrew as a precautionary 
measure. Jason should be fine with some rest.”
 