
Henri and Catherine are old friends of mine and, in between flats, they are 
staying with me for a month. They are also French. On Tuesday, after home 
secretaryAmber Rudd’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/04/conservative-conference-theresa-mays-morning-broadcast-interviews-politics-live>
 at the Conservative party conference, Henri was visibly shaken. “When we came 
here we felt welcome,” he said. “Part of an open society. Now we don’t. Not 
only are we now foreign – we are made tofeel foreign. Not wanted. Unwelcome. 
Alien.”

Rudd is not racist, but words matter – and she finds herself the home 
secretary in a Ukip-lite party whose overwhelming drive is to keep its promise 
to reduce immigration to the tens of thousands. She – and the prime minister – 
wanted the headlines last week about British jobs for British workers, 
signalling a willingness to clamp down on the foreign other in our midst.

Rudd was quick to qualify the part of her speech – that companies should be 
forced to disclose how many foreign workers they employ – as only an option as 
the hostile reaction mounted, especially from business. But her speech won the 
headlines. It also came with a string of measures that will turn us into a 
nation of mini-commissars, compelled to snoop on those who look and sound 
different.

Landlords who knowingly rent out property to people “who have no right to be 
in Britain” will be now committing a criminal offence, declared Rudd. Immigrant 
checks will be a mandatory requirement for those wanting to get a licence to 
drive a taxi. Banks will have regularly to check that they are not providing 
banking services to illegal migrants. EU nationals who commit minor crimes are 
to be deported immediately. Family members of foreign students will not be 
allowed to work. There will be new restrictions on entry for foreign students.

It was a broadside of initiatives that cumulatively created the impact that so 
disturbed Henri. Britain is to change from being a society tolerant of 
immigrants and accommodating – sometimes celebrating – the resulting diversity, 
even while it tries to manage the numbers, to a society vigilant and hostile to 
any sign of otherness.

Everyone knows why. Ukip won four million votes. The EU referendum was lost. 
The new conventional wisdom, driven home with demagogic genius byNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, is that an out-of-touch 
elite has indulged a transformational increase in immigration that has put 
untold pressure on public services, depressed wages, and denied jobs to the 
indigenous. It should not be racist to talk about this. Left-behind, fed-up 
Britain has sent an unmistakable message. It must be heard.

UK theatres call for urgent help for child refugees in Calais
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/06/uk-theatres-call-for-urgent-help-for-child-refugees-in-calais>
So it must – but quite like this? Ukip 10 years ago sought an apology from 
David Cameron, who described it as a“bunch of fruitcakes, loonies and closet 
racists” <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/apr/04/conservatives.uk>; 
campaigning for an EU referendum offered a veneer of respectability that 
disguised the mix of nativism and semi-racism that bound it together.

But Cameron was right. Now the referendum cause is removed, Ukip is 
disintegrating.Friday morning’s picture of Ukip’s Stephen Woolfe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/06/ukip-leadership-favourite-steven-woolfe-collapses-in-european-parliament>
 on the floor in the European parliament after an altercation with a fellow 
Ukip MEP told its own eloquent story.

The Tory party – and the wider political establishment – can and should be 
braver. May is right to champion worker rights, industrial policy and 
stakeholder capitalism. She can extend that to a more nuanced approach to 
immigration. What was unnerving about the conference was watching the 
near-delight with which a party – once the reliable friend of an open, tolerant 
, outward-looking Britain – embraced Ukip’s creed even as Ukip shows ultimately 
that it leads nowhere. Whether fervently applauding Rudd, or at fringe events 
eagerly deploring all things European, this felt like a party deserting what it 
had once been. Once, it could castigate Enoch Powell for his rivers of blood 
speech. That would not happen now.

One excuse is that Ruddism represents the new patriotism behind which a 
liberal elite refuses to rally, but that is gravely to traduce the multiplicity 
of strands that lie behind pride in Britain. The patriotism of many of us – at 
least the 16 million who voted to remain, and I believe many who voted to leave 
– is a pride in being the country of Shakespeare, Wilberforce and Darwin, a 
country that embraced religious tolerance and democracy before others, was open 
to great European scholars like Erasmus and has welcomed Huguenots and Jewish 
refugees alike. We do not want to unleash the darker side of a small minority, 
permitting bigotry and insults at anyone betraying a hint of foreignness. It’s 
not what Britain, or any society, should ever be.

If there are hard-pressed public services in areas of high immigration, invest 
more. Explain that immigration and openness enrich us. Train our people so that 
they are equipped to work wherever. Invest in social housing. Explain that the 
impact on wages, apart from a few towns and a few trades, is minimal. Celebrate 
the myriad ways that immigrants benefit us, from path-breaking research in our 
universities to toiling in night shifts in the NHS.

Certainly let’s have emergency triggers to create pauses in excessive 
immigrant inflows, and make benefits contingent on having made contributions. 
But stamp on racism and offer no means through which it can be expressed.

Let’s stand up for a vision of an open, tolerant, outward-looking country that 
is proud of all it has given the world. We are not a nation of wannabe Ukippers.

Henri, stick with us. There is a better Britain. A vast majority welcomes you 
being here.
 