
The culture secretary has dramatically reopened the issue of press regulation 
by questioning whether the second part of theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>, meant to investigate 
corrupt dealings between the press and police, was still in the public interest.

Karen Bradley confirmed a Guardian report that the government is to launch a 
consultation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/01/government-to-launch-new-press-regulation-consultation>
 on two remaining issues: costs provisions for victims of phone hacking and 
Leveson “part two” into police wrongdoing. The latter had been delayed by 
continuing criminal actions resulting from the phone-hacking scandal at News 
International, which prompted the Leveson inquiry in 2011.

Speaking in parliament, Bradley said the extent of those criminal 
investigations, and the implementation of recommendations in part one of the 
report, as well as the costs for both of nearly £50m, meant the government was 
reconsidering whether to undertake part two.

In a statement, the government said that the consultation would consider 
whether part two was “still appropriate, proportionate and in the public 
interest, and if so what it should cover and in what form”.

Accused by campaigners for press victims and some Labour MPs of pandering to 
newspaper press barons and ignoring their victims, Bradley said further 
consultation was the only way to ensure a balance was struck between the two 
sides.

“Those who are treated improperly must have redress,” she said. “Likewise, 
politicians must not seek to muffle the press or prevent it doing legitimate 
work, such as holding us to account. And the police must take seriously its 
role in protecting not only its own reputation, but also those people it is 
meant to serve.

“This is the balance that we wish to strike, and this consultation is the most 
appropriate and fairest way of doing so.”

In response, Tom Watson, the shadow culture secretary and deputy Labour 
leader, said it was a “sad day”, coming almost three years after cross-party 
agreement was reached on the Leveson recommendations.

“In effect, she is today announcing whether a cover-up should be covered up. 
Events in the last five years make Leveson part two more urgent, not less.”

Evan Harris, joint executive director of Hacked Off, which represents victims 
of press intrusion, accused the government of “caving in to Rupert Murdoch and 
his fellow proprietors” by launching an “unnecessary consultation”.

The postponement and potential cancellation of part two of the inquiry was “an 
outrageous betrayal of promises made to victims of press abuse and to the 
British people by the former prime ministers”, he said.

“This consultation will not change the fact that the government gives every 
impression of being in hock to powerful press interests and ignoring not just 
the victims of press abuse, but the fact that promises were made under oath at 
a public inquiry and to parliament.”

Bradley was asked in the House whether Theresa May had discussed the process 
at her private meeting with Murdoch last month. Watson also asked if Lord 
Justice Leveson had been consulted about the latest inquiry, and whether 
Bradley had talked to the victims of phone hacking, such as the parents of 
Milly Dowler.


Bradley said the first people she had met since starting as culture secretary 
this summer had been such victims.

The second remaining issue to be subject to the inquiry, often referred to as 
“costs provisions”, involves the implementation of section 40 of the Crime and 
Courts Act 2013, which though enacted by parliament, needs to be commenced by 
the culture secretary.

These provisions, bitterly opposed by the newspaper industry, would make 
members of a recognised self-regulator exempt from paying their opponents’ 
legal costs.

Impress is the only regulator to receive such recognition but it has just 50 
small media groups as members, while Ipso, the press regulator with more than 
2,500 members backed by most big newspaper groups with the exception of the 
Guardian and the Financial Times, will not seek recognition, citing fears over 
political interference.

If section 40 is commenced there is a presumption that newspapers outside a 
recognised self-regulator would pay their own and their opponents’ legal costs, 
even if they won a court case.

Bob Satchwell, executive director of the Society of Editors, welcomed the 
consultation exercise. “Over the past decade the economic and competitive 
background has also changed dramatically. It would be dangerous to open up 
local and regional papers particularly with threats of legal action to costs of 
which they would have to pay even if they won a case, and which could put them 
out of business.

“A detailed look by government at the realities of regulation is the best way 
to ensure that individuals are properly protected without losing valuable 
watchdogs that expose corruption, wrongdoing and hypocrisy in the public 
interest.”

There have been persistent rumours that the government had decided to shelve 
the second part of Leveson 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/medianews/article4642007.ece>, fuelled in 
recent weeks by reports inthe Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/medianews/article4642007.ece> and the Daily 
Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3360215/Stage-two-inquiry-Press-not-happen-no-political-appetite-hold-expensive-time-consuming-investigation.html>
. Downing Street has repeatedly denied that any decision had yet been taken 
about whether to continue with the inquiry.

Following the Bradley statement, a Lords amendment to the investigatory powers 
bill, which would have introduced section 40 for the victims of phone hacking 
was blocked by the government. The Commons rejected the Lords amendment by 298 
to 261, a majority of 37, following a debate. It is thought likely that the 
Lords will try again to get the powers onto the statute book, however.

The government’s consultation will last 10 weeks, closing on 10 January. 
 