
Liverpool continue to enjoy the view from the top of the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, but everything would have 
looked so much better for Jürgen Klopp and his players if they had shown the 
same ruthless touch in front of goal that had carried them to the summit. 
Instead Liverpool departed the south coast ruing the missed opportunities that 
checked their momentum and allowed Southampton to escape with a point.

Philippe Coutinho, Roberto Firmino and Sadio Mané, Liverpool’s exhilarating 
attacking trident, all found themselves in promising positions during a 
one-sided contest, but the combination of some excellent goalkeeping from 
Fraser Forster and wayward finishing prevented the visitors from capitalising 
on their dominance.

Seamus Coleman breaks Swansea hearts with late equaliser for Everton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/everton-swansea-premier-league>
It was certainly not for a lack of trying. Klopp was like a cheerleader at 
times as he danced around on the touchline, throwing his arms in the air and 
urging his players on as they poured forward in search of a breakthrough. The
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager’s 
desperation for the goal that would have extended their lead at the top of the 
table also shone through in the substitution that brought Daniel Sturridge on 
to replace Emre Can and that so nearly produced a reward.

Nine minutes from time, Sturridge wriggled clear on the left with a neat piece 
of footwork and floated a deep and inviting centre towards the back post. It 
was a formerSouthampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> 
player on the end of the cross, but probably not the one that Klopp would have 
chosen. Nathaniel Clyne, from about eight yards out, headed inches wide of 
Forster’s far upright.

“It was a brilliant situation. Unfortunately for Clyney he was the most 
surprised person maybe in the stadium,” Klopp said.

“This could have been a goal. Roberto could have scored, Phil could have 
scored, Sadio in the first half, so we had these moments, but that’s good.

“I am fine with the performance, absolutely. We could gave scored, maybe we 
should have scored, but that’s how football is and very often in my life my 
teams lost games like this when we were so much better and had much more 
chances. We didn’t lose today because we stayed concentrated, and that’s very 
important for us.

“Everybody could see this season that on a very good day we are able to score 
fantastic goals. But today was much more difficult. Then, staying in the game 
is the best news we can get. So I am not happy, but I’m fine.”

Klopp, however, ought to have been feeling much better than fine at the end of 
a damp and cold afternoon in Southampton. It was one-way traffic as Saints sat 
deep and Liverpool moved the ball with confidence.

Klopp’s team enjoyed 65% of possession, made 663 passes compared with 
Southampton’s 371, registered 15 shots on goal against Southampton’s three and 
were 8-1 winners on the corner count. Liverpool, in short, did everything but 
put the ball in the back of the net and only time will tell whether the two 
points that slipped through their fingers here prove costly.

Southampton were grimly holding on at times, aided by Forster’s goalkeeping 
and another impressive display from Virgil van Dijk. As an attacking force they 
offered little, with the isolated Charlie Austin’s second-half header a rare 
chance for the home team in what was essentially a backs-to-the-wall 
performance.

Liverpool’s first presentable opportunity arrived in the 28th minute, when 
Mané, returning to St Mary’s for the first time since his £34m move to Anfield 
in the summer, swept a curling, powerful shot that was arcing towards the top 
corner until Forster flicked it over the crossbar with his fingertips. Mané 
escaped again moments later, but Van Dijk got across superbly to block.

While Van Dijk was fortunate not to be punished for tugging Firmino’s shirt 
shortly after the interval, Liverpool only had themselves to blame for the 
profligacy that followed.

Coutinho, set free by Firmino after Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg had carelessly given 
away the ball, sliced wide with only Forster to beat. José Fonte had made up 
plenty of ground to put Coutinho under pressure, but it was still a position 
from which the Brazilian would have expected to score.

Yaya Touré makes spectacular return to clinch Manchester City victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/crystal-palace-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
The same was true for the golden opportunity that Firmino squandered in the 
66th minute, with Coutinho this time the provider. Darting runs from Mané and 
Georginio Wijnaldum opened up space for Firmino, who was beautifully found by 
Coutinho’s measured pass, yet the striker steered a low shot with the outside 
of his boot just wide of Forster’s far post.

Can later dragged a low shot wide, Clyne headed off target and Firmino’s 
effort was repelled by Forster as Southampton just about stood firm.

“We played a very good team,” Claude Puel, the Southampton manager, said. 
“When they lose the ball they recover it very well. It’s difficult to develop 
our game. Today, we have won one point.”
 