
 Thousands of consumers may be holding worthless car hire bookings for the 
Christmas period after the company they booked through, Atlaschoice, apparently 
failed to pay firms providing the actual cars.

Customers of the website have reported being told at car hire desks that their 
booking would not be honoured unless they paid again – in some cases many 
hundreds of pounds – because Atlas had not paid the car’s actual provider.

Frustrated customers of the west London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>
 car hire booking firm, which acted as booking agent for all the big car hire 
brands, have reported the problem on Twitter and other social media in recent 
days.

The 2016 awards for worst customer service, plus homes for Christmas walks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/22/worst-customer-service-homes-christmas-walks>
“Cancelling my rental car, keeping my money and providing no other option two 
days before I fly home for Christmas. Seriously?” wrote Tom Richards on Twitter.

Another customer, Chris Clifton-Brown, wrote online: “Booked through them 
recently and when I turned up to collect my car the hire firm made me aware 
that Atlaschoice are not paying the actual hire firms. I had to pay the hire 
firm for the car again even though Atlaschoice have already taken my money.”

The company, which has been in business since 1990, did not return calls or 
reply to emails. Thewebsite 
<http://www2.atlaschoice.com/news/more-information-on-your-booking/> was still 
operating, but not apparently taking new bookings.

Although Atlaschoice is not a household name many customers will have used the 
booking agent website via the popular TravelSupermarket comparison site – part 
of the MoneySupermarket group. It also partnered with a number of other big 
web-based travel businesses.


The Christmas period is traditionally one of the busiest for car hire 
operators, and many customers may be unable to pay for their car hire for a 
second time.


A TravelSupermarket spokeswoman told the Guardian that it pulled Atlaschoice 
from its listings three weeks ago. “They missed paying us at the end of 
November and we couldn’t reach them so took them immediately off our site as a 
precautionary measure. Until then, there was no sign of financial difficulty 
and payments were up to date. We’ve called, emailed and sent a letter and 
continue to try and reach them but have not heard anything.”

She advised anyone with a car hire booking made through Atlaschoice to 
approach the company supplying the car to establish whether the booking has 
been paid for and would be honoured.

Customers should also contact their bank card provider. Credit users will be 
protected bysection 75 rights 
<http://www.which.co.uk/consumer-rights/regulation/section-75-of-the-consumer-credit-act>
 that hold the card provider jointly liable provided the booking cost £100 or 
more. Debit card users may face a tougher battle to get their money back but 
could be refunded via a chargeback scheme, she said.

Atlaschoice failed to respond to the Guardian’s requests for comment. 
 