
And so it begins … again. A rolling, meandering soap opera that never really 
stops started in earnest on Sunday as the new year heralded the opening of the 
January transfer window. An often tedious month-long orgy of will-they 
won’t-they drama, whisper and counter-whisper, unhappy Arsenal fans and 
sightings of Robert Snodgrass, it slowly builds to a climactic all-singing, 
all-dancing Sky Sports show-stopper hosted by an enthusiastic Scotsman who 
wears a yellow tie.

We have been here before, many times. Fourteen, to be precise. Made compulsory 
by Fifa for the 2002-03 season, the January transfer window is one of two 
registration periods in which Premier League clubs are permitted to buy players 
they may or may not have been linked with by assorted TV and radio shows, 
newspaper gossip columns, football websites and social media accounts run by 
teenage schoolboys from football hotbeds such as Ludlow and Stow-on-the-Wold. 
Originally introduced as part of a compromise with the European Commission in 
order to preserve contractual stability for footballers and clubs while 
simultaneously allowing movement of the former at certain times of the year, 
the January window has since eclipsed the League Cup to become the third 
biggest competition in English football.

Premier League: fans from all 20 clubs make their transfer window selections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/transfer-window-premier-league-january-fans-shopping-list-selections>
The inaugural window was “won” by Birmingham City, who signed the World Cup 
and European Championship-winning striker Christophe Dugarry on loan from 
Bordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/jan/02/newsstory.sport3> 
and ensured their Premier League survival with the help of four goals from the 
Frenchman in their final five matches of that season. And two years ago Crystal 
Palace came up trumps bypaying just £6.8m to Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/02/manchester-united-sell-wilfried-zaha-crystal-palace>
 to re-sign Wilfried Zaha, a fine, if occasionally gravitationally challenged, 
winger who recently made headlines after becoming embroiled in a disagreement 
with a man dressed as a giant hornet.

When first mooted by Fifa in the early 1990s, the idea of introducing transfer 
windows received almost unanimous backing from English football’s overlords, 
who – rather naively, it turned out – hoped they might help reduce the often 
disruptive influence of nefarious agents around football clubs. In May 2002, 
however, the Premier League and Football League joined forces to fight against 
the imposition of domestic transfer windows due to the financial implications 
they might have in the wake of that year’s ITV Digital fiasco. “We have charged 
the FA with responsibility to use the position and influence they have on Fifa 
committees and as a national association, to mount a full-blooded lobbying 
campaign to get these rules changed,” thundered a Premier League spokesman at 
the time, before what is perhaps the only recorded historical example of his 
august employers failing to get their own way.

As well as Dugarry, the first January window marked the arrival of cult hero 
Yakubu Aiyegbeni in England following his move from Maccabi Haifa to 
Portsmouth. The departure of Jonathan Woodgate from Leeds to Newcastle also 
made headlines, as did Robbie Fowler’s move from Leeds United to Manchester 
City. In total, Premier League clubs spent £35m between them in that particular 
window, coincidentally the same amount Liverpoolwould pay Newcastle for Andy 
Carroll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/31/andy-carroll-liverpool-newcastle-transfer>
 in January 2011 and £95m less than the clubs of the top flight spent this time 
last year. Twelve months ago, some wildly excitable soothsayers predicted that 
Premier League clubs would spend more than £1bn in January, but they eventually 
coughed up a comparative pittance of £130m.

Premier League’s fear of the drop set to outbid race for top in January 
transfer window | Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/january-transfer-window-premier-league-football>
Despite the frenzied excitement it prompts among football fans, the January 
window is not without its critics. Arsène Wenger and Harry Redknapp are among 
them, the former known for his extreme frugality, while the latter has long 
been a reluctant poster-boy and punchline for the often ill-advised 
wheeler-dealing and horse-trading for which this time of year is increasingly 
renowned.

Famous for his out-of-the-car-window appraisals of assorted “triffic” targets 
on Sky Sports News, Redknapp was more enthusiastic than most when it came to 
January panic buys during his time as a manager, but claimed – in the face of 
all evidence to the contrary – not to enjoy the mayhem of the mid-season 
livestock mart. Three years ago, he likened that year’s January window to “gang 
warfare”, saying “every agent seems to be trying to screw each other” in the 
scramble for money. A few days later, Harry was involved in one of the great 
deadline day farces. Having driven down to London from the Midlands in what his 
then manager Steve Clarke described as “an act of total lunacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/01/peter-odemwingie-qpr-steve-clarke>
”, a forlorn and frustrated Peter Odemwingie was left sitting and seething 
outside Loftus Road in his parked car as West Brom and Redknapp’s QPR failed to 
agree terms on his transfer.

Despite the suspicions of some Arsenal fans who may not be aware of its 
existence, Wenger has long been critical of the January window, stating it is 
“unfair”, because championship rivals from the same league can move players 
between them in a premeditated bid to undermine his team. As conspiracy 
theories go it’s a mite tinpot and tenuous, but there can be no doubt the 
current system is far from perfect. With teams scrapping around the foot of the 
table, the January window breeds no end of panic and desperation while allowing 
big clubs to unsettle the better players at struggling sides before poaching 
them. Long may it continue; after 14 years we wouldn’t have it any other way.
 