
Rival supporters in Brazil enjoy teasing their São Paulo counterparts by 
saying their club claims to have formed every player that has ever entered 
their Morumbi stadium for a game. Undeniably, however, the club's youth academy 
does have a remarkable list of almuni, where one can find names such as the 
former Ballon d'Or winner Kaká and Brazil's 2002 World Cup-winning captain Cafu.

But it is the tale of two more recent São Paulo graduates that promises an 
interesting side story to Champions League quarter-final meeting betweenParis 
Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> and Chelsea 
in the French capital. Another chapter of a twisting plot involving Lucas Moura 
and Oscar: the boys who worked their way through the youth ranks together now 
find themselves locking horns again.

While the battle for a place in the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> semi-finals is equal, 
the Chelsea midfielder looks to have run away with the money on the 
international front: his irresistible rise for Brazil in 2012 helped push Moura 
to the fringes of the Brazilian squad, a position from which the PSG winger has 
never really escaped.

Moura is still considered to be out of Luiz Felipe Scolari's plans for the 
World Cup, while Oscar is one of the crown jewels in a Seleção who are expected 
to triumph on home soil.

But Moura has not thrown in the towel yet and our recent meeting in Paris was 
marked by his assurance that time could still be on his side. Deep down, 
however, the 21-year old knows his World Cup chances rest on him shining as PSG 
have a more than decent run in Europe, and that includes sending Oscar'sChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> packing.

"Oscar and I have known each other for a long time and I must say it's quite 
surreal to meet each other again in a Champions League quarter-final," says 
Moura. "We have texted each other trying to find time to hang around either in 
London or Paris. I'd love to have him here for a barbeque, especially now that 
the weather is getting better. On the pitch, however, I need to see the back of 
him."

Last time the two graduates met Moura didn't have the energy to even flex the 
supposed 26 muscles necessary to smile. It was in October last year, when both 
players took part in Brazil's Far East friendlies against South Korea, in 
Seoul, and Zambia in Beijing. At the time, Moura was living on borrowed time 
and 'Big Phil' Scolari dropped enough hints for the press to know that only 
convincing displays would grant further call-ups for the PSG winger. A less 
subtle sign was the fact that Moura's on-pitch minutes had diminished even 
further after the former Chelsea manager returned to the national team job in 
February 2013: he averages a meagre 33 minutes per game in his 27 appearances 
for Brazil.

"It certainly wasn't the best time of my career," says Moura. "I had only just 
started my first full season for PSG after struggling a bit to adapt to my move 
to Europe and to a club with such a great squad. That pretty much hurt my 
chances with the Seleção, but that risk comes with the job. I wanted to play at 
the top level in Europe and PSG offered me a precious opportunity I couldn't 
turn down."

The Qatari-owned club paid São Paulo £35 million for Moura's services in late 
2012. Ironically, that deal came after Chelsea had tabled a £32.5m bid. Moura 
might well have joined Chelsea's Brazilian contingent and its most flamboyant 
member, David Luiz, sang the club's praises to him during a Seleção gathering. 
"David was very enthusiastic about Chelsea and if you follow anything of 
football these days you have to know they are a force to be reckoned with'" 
adds Moura. "But PSG had a project that looked quite interesting because they 
wanted to do something similar to what happened at Chelsea. And they also have 
a lot of Brazilians there."

One of them was instrumental in his signing: the former Internazionale and 
Milan manager Leonardo, then working as the football director for the 
Parisians. Although a product of Rio side Flamengo's youth academy, the former 
Brazil left-back bloomed at São Paulo, a connection that had already proved 
invaluable when he lured Kaká to Milan in 2003.

While Moura has hardly hit the ground running in Europe, there are promising 
signs he is finally feeling more comfortable. After only 13 starts last season 
he has featured more prominently in the current campaign. It has done wonders 
for his confidence: his 14 assists, for example, are only bettered by Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic for PSG. "If there is anything I wanted to learn in Europe it was 
how I could be more of a team player," admits Moura. "I guess it is working. 
And when you see an unbelievable player like Zlatan smiling like a child after 
you set him up for a goal, it's such a buzz."

Never known as a great goalscorer (29 in 174 career games so far), Moura seems 
to be working on that too: videos of his daunting "Maradonesque" slaloming run 
against PSG's traditional rivals Marseille inLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football>, that only a goal-line 
clearance prevented from being a wondrous goal, were endlessly posted on 
Twitter and Facebook.

"There have been more starts for me this season and that can only boost a 
player's confidence. It's a shame that ball against Marseille didn't go in, 
though," he says. "The 'mister' [PSG's manager, the former Manchester United 
defender Laurent Blanc] told me later he would have laid off me for the rest of 
the season if it had!"

The man who slotted in after Carlo Ancelotti departed to Real Madrid at the 
end of last season, though, has only recently started unleashing Moura more 
often on European nights. He has started half of PSG's eight games so far, but 
played the full 90 minutes in two of their last three matches. "All I know is 
that I'm ready to help. The games against Chelsea will be tough, but I think 
PSG have already shown last season that they can upset teams with more European 
experience. We gave Barcelona a good run for their money[in last season's 
quarter-finals] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/10/barcelona-psg-match-report-champions-league>
 and only went out on away goals. It still bugs me that we left the Champions 
League without losing a game", says Moura.

Even before the draw he had been snooping on the Stamford Bridge club. Hardly 
a party boy, Moura lives with his mother and stepfather, alongside a posse of 
friends and relatives who drop in from Brazil to keep him company and be 
mercilessly thrashed by the winger in table tennis games. They also spend a lot 
of time watching football and Moura has seen enough of Chelsea this season to 
pinpoint some dangers.

"Their defence-attack transition is unbelievably fast and they can hit you 
hard if you snooze. Chelsea have also got amazing players. Oscar, for example, 
has become crucial for them this season", Moura adds. "But if people in England 
are thinking PSG are underdogs for this tie, they should think twice. We have 
already shown we can compete at this level and the supporters are expecting us 
to go beyond our quarter-final exit last season".

Claiming Chelsea's and Oscar's scalp in Europe, though, can have an added 
bonus to Moura. Last week, Carlos Alberto Parreira, the Seleção's technical 
director, announced that he and Big Phil would be attending the game at the 
Parc de Princes. It could as well be one of the winger's last shots at changing 
the Brazil manager's mind.

"I am not obsessed, but it is natural that doing well for PSG is the only way 
I can push back into the squad," says Moura. "Having said that, it will be nice 
to do well with Big Phil at the stadium." Chelsea have been warned.
 