
In the past few months Brazilians have been asking themselves how their team 
would fare on a day whenNeymar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/neymar> 
did not step up. The answer came in Fortaleza: they are much less lethal and 
much more jittery if their top scorer in the last four years does not escape 
his markers or produce moments of individual brilliance.

Before the tournament started the Seleção’s third group game against Samuel 
Eto’o and Cameroon on Monday was not given a lot of importance but after a 
failure to score for the second time in fiveWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> ties Brazilians will 
be excused for feeling a bit uneasy when assessing their chances at their 
second shot of home glory.

Against a team that was fortunate not to miss out completely on the tournament 
Brazil’s quest for a first World Cup title at home suffered a setback. It is 
hardly reason to despair andthe 0-0 result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/17/brazil-mexico-world-cup-2014-group-a-match-report>
 still keeps theSeleção top of Group A on goals scored, whatever the result 
between Croatia and Cameroon. But failure to score cannot be solely pinned on 
the Mexico goalkeeper Guillermo Ochoa’s man-of-the-match display. Brazil 
struggled, even though they played better than in last week’s 3-1 win over 
Croatia.

The fifth World Cup game between Brazil and Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mexico> showed how much things have 
changed in Latin American football since they first locked horns, curiously in 
Brazil 1950. Then a 4-0 drubbing opened a series of 11 goals scored and none 
conceded.

The goalless draw in Fortaleza caps a remarkable past couple of years for the 
Mexicans against the nation they learned to worship after they watched Pelé and 
co waltz round the pitch in 1970. Since the turn of the century Mexico have won 
six and drawn two out of 12 meetings with the Brazilians – and that does not 
include their triumph at the London Olympics, played mostly with under-23 
players.

It is true the Mexicans spent the first 30 minutes pretty much sitting back 
and expecting to catch Brazil on the break, unlike the much more determined 
start the Croatians had made in São Paulo last week – when they exhaustively 
exploited the spaces left by Dani Alves on the right. Instead the Mexicans 
relied on long shots and waited forBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> with two lines of four which the 
hosts struggled to get through.

But this is the scenario Brazil are likely to find almost every time they step 
on the pitch in this competition. Which is why Hulk’s troublesome left thigh, 
which forced him to sit out the Fortaleza game, could have become a 
blessing-in-disguise moment. Ramires’ arrival gave Brazil a bit more invention 
than the Zenit player could bring. While providing well-needed muscle in Luiz 
Felipe Scolari’s high-pressing system, Hulk lacks Ramires’ speed and touch, 
which are more useful for the situations Brazil will need to be more inventive 
than the opponents trying to mount walls in their way.

However, the yellow card picked up by the Chelsea player at the end of the 
first half for upending Paul Aguilar forced Scolari to change his plans. The 
possibility of a red card became real in a game of speed and stamina and his 
departure for the unleashing of Neymar perhaps had more weight than the need of 
spreading play a bit more. It could have been a precious chance for Ramires to 
make his case for a return to the starting XI but the afternoon ended with 
echoes of 2010, when a silly booking picked up against Chile in the round of 16 
took him out of Brazil’s quarter-final against the Dutch.

The match started interestingly for Premier League fans. Three out of the five 
England-based players were deployed only in the first half – it would have been 
four had notParis Saint-Germain paid a world-record fee to take David Luiz out 
of Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/13/paris-saint-germain-confirm-signing-of-david-luiz-from-chelsea>
.

His former team-mates Oscar and Ramires tried to spur Brazil on but the Seleção
 also improved from their nervy start last week, thanks to Paulinho snapping 
out of the apathy that marked his display in São Paulo. Ironically, though, it 
was the QPR outcast Júlio César who ended up getting more airtime thanks to the 
13 shots Mexico fired in his direction.

That shows Brazil were exposed, especially in the second half. But even José 
Juan Vázquez’s 41st-minute shot, which dipped dangerously to Júlio César’s 
left, was more speculative than the result of organised pressure. In Bernard 
Scolari had a delicious throwback to the days Brazil played with wingers. His 
presence, however, did leave Brazil more open and the Mexicans took advantage 
to dominate play and put theSeleção on the back foot for most of the second 
half.

It was Brazil who had the better chances but Ochoa frustrated them on a couple 
of occasions, including a Gordon Banks-type save from a Neymar first-half 
header.

Fred, as in the game against Croatia, produced little upfront, apart from a 
near miss in the first five minutes. Oscar, after a promising start, was 
silenced by severe vigilance from the Mexicans and Brazil were seen resorting 
to long balls for Neymar and Bernard in their pressing for a winner.
 