
Tonga’s dream (a slim one at best) of making their first World Cup 
quarter-final at the seventh attempt took a huge hit on Saturday when they 
stumbled at the first hurdle, tripped up by a combination of their own 
generosity and Georgian muscle ruthlessly applied by their mountain of a man 
captain, Mamuka Gorgodze.

To suggest the result might be a shock could be overstating the matter, but it 
is 1999 since Georgia last beat the islanders and the first time they have 
beaten someone above them in the rankings at a World Cup.

They also unveiled a front row England might envy and then replaced it with a 
trio of bulldozers who looked even stronger. Next up come Argentina, the 
bookies’ favourites to go through from Pool C with the All Blacks, something of 
a mouthwatering prospect for students of the dark arts.

However, it was Gorgodze, currently with the European champions, Toulon, after 
more than a decade lighting up the French league with Montpellier, who stood 
centre stage. Not only did he add to his 24 tries in 62 Tests – a record many 
international wings would envy – but was the rock on which too many Tongan 
attacks foundered.

When Tonga finally got their act together, Georgia’s 31 year-old No8, always 
in place to throw a huge arm at any attacker or to bounce the ball free. From 
there Georgia simply demolished the Tongan scrum, forcing a penalty as often as 
not, and then kicking long to relieve any siege. Not that there were many. When 
Tonga woke up to their plight, getting wing into space and over in the left 
corner they were 14 points behind with nine minutes to repair the damage.

Gorgodze – on the end of a move prompted by his 18-year-old scrum-half, Vasil 
Lobzhanidze, the youngest player to appear in a World Cup – had barged his way 
over in the 28th minute and then, early in the second half, Georgi 
Tkhilaishvili had scooped up a loose ball to bounce over for a second.

It was hard to believe so many Georgians were in Gloucester; the din was 
deafening, even for one of those grounds which prides itself on the passion of 
its support. Milton Craig, yet another peripatetic Kiwi coaching in Europe, 
wondered whether Tonga might have underestimated his side. “One of their 
players who I coached in New Zealand thought they might have done,” he said, 
before dismissing suggestions that Georgia might be more suited to a place 
other than as a Tier Two side. To do that they would need to beat sides such as 
Argentina, who they meet on Friday.

“This has taken four years of planning and four years of work,” he said. “It 
is what we have focused on since we qualified.”

Now he intends to finish at least third and that will mean that in four years 
time George will qualify for their first World Cup as of right.

As for Tonga they left with their captain becoming perhaps the first person at 
the world cup to ask for more TMO interventions after Nigel Owens refused to 
refer a training-ground move worked to perfection, but called a forward pass. 
“There are 32 cameras at these venues,” said Nili Latu. “I hope they are using 
them.”

Ireland v Canada: Rugby World Cup 2015 – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/sep/19/rugby-world-cup-ireland-v-canada-live> 