
The editor-in-chief of the Age, Mark Forbes, has been stood down and is being 
investigated by Fairfax Media after a young female reporter complained of 
sexual harassment.

The woman made a formal complaint to management after Forbes allegedly “groped 
her on the bottom” at theAge Music Victoria awards 
<http://www.musicvictoria.com.au/agemusicvictoriaawards> in November, sources 
told Guardian Australia.

After inquiries from Guardian Australia on Friday, Fairfax Media confirmed the 
investigation.

“Mark Forbes has been stood down pending the outcome of an investigation that 
is underway,” a spokesman said. “Fairfax is committed to a safe workplace and 
has zero tolerance for any behaviour that does not meet the highest standards.

“Alex Lavelle, editor of the Age, will oversee the newsroom.”

Forbes was stood down just hours before the Walkley awards celebrating 
excellence in journalism, being held in Brisbane. He was expected to attend.

The Age has been campaigning against sexual harassment in the workplace, 
publishing amajor investigation 
<http://www.smh.com.au/interactive/2016/not-asking-for-it/index.html> on Monday.

The Walkley Award and United Nations Media Peace award-winning journalist was 
appointed to the role in April after three years as The Age’s news director.

Fairfax Media is publisher of The Sydney Morning Herald, The Age, WAToday, 
Brisbane Times and The Canberra Times.

Forbes, who started his career at Fairfax in 1985, has been a foreign 
correspondent and editor of the Sunday Age.

Fairfax Media editorial director Sean Aylmer praised his talents when he was 
appointed earlier this year as a replacement to Andrew Holden, who stood down 
in February.

“As a political correspondent, investigative reporter and foreign 
correspondent, Mark won numerous awards, including several Quill Awards and a 
Walkley Award for an expose of Australia’s role in the international steroid 
trade,” Aylmer said.

“He has also won the United Nations Media Peace Prize for a ground-breaking 
journey into Indonesia’s Papua province.

“Mark is an outstanding journalist, with a keen news sense and belief in 
quality reporting. He is the ideal person to continue The Age’s transformation, 
providing quality journalism across print and digital.”
 