
The editor-in-chief of the Age, Mark Forbes, has resigned just days after he 
wasstood down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/mark-forbes-editor-in-chief-of-the-age-is-stood-down-over-sex-harassment-claim>
 while Fairfax Media investigated a complaint of sexual harassment by a young 
female reporter.

The woman made a formal complaint to management after Forbes allegedly “groped 
her on the bottom” at the AgeMusic Victoria awards 
<http://www.musicvictoria.com.au/agemusicvictoriaawards> in November.

Forbes was stood down on Friday hour before the Walkley awards.

In an email to staff on Monday Forbes apologised for his actions and said he 
accepted that his position was untenable.

“The Age demands the highest standards of behaviour from our leaders, in the 
community, business and politics,”Forbes wrote. “As EIC of The Age, I must 
uphold all the standards which we would expect in others.

“I acknowledge and accept that I have not done so. Whatever the circumstance, 
even a single lapse of judgement in upholding these standards should have 
serious consequences.

“Accordingly, I believe it is untenable to remain as EIC.

“I again apologise to the person concerned, and I apologise to all of you as, 
ultimately, I have let you down.

Forbes said he supported the right of any employee who felt they had been 
harassed to report it.

“This is, I hope, a reminder to all that our dealings with all women must be 
respectful and equitable at all times.”

On Saturday a second woman made a complaint about Forbes, alleging he had 
sexually harassed her at a social function in February when he was news editor.

In a complaint seen by Guardian Australia, she said Forbes stared at her 
breasts and said words to the effect of “You’re looking busty”, before adding: 
“Not that I’m complaining.”

Staff at the Age were addressed by Fairfax’s group director of news and 
business media, Sean Aylmer, on Monday morning.

Mark Forbes, editor-in-chief of the Age, is stood down over sex harassment 
claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/mark-forbes-editor-in-chief-of-the-age-is-stood-down-over-sex-harassment-claim>



In a short address to staff on the newsroom floor Aylmer said he was 
disappointed by the allegations, and harassment would not be tolerated at the 
Age. He also said Forbes would not be returning to the newsroom.

Aylmer said in a statement that Forbes had decided to “leave Fairfax Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/fairfax-media> and the company has accepted 
his decision”.

“Mark felt that in this instance he had fallen short of the behaviour that the 
Age stands for,” he said. “We acknowledge Mark’s extensive service to Fairfax 
spanning more than 30 years, in various roles including news director of the 
Age, editor of the Sunday Age, defence and foreign affairs correspondent in 
Canberra, as well as Indonesia correspondent.”

Forbes, a Walkley and United Nations media peace award-winning journalist, was 
appointed to the role in April after three years as news director of the Age.


Fairfax Media is publisher of the Sydney Morning Herald, the Age, WAToday, 
Brisbane Times and the Canberra Times.

Forbes, who started his career at Fairfax in 1985, has been a foreign 
correspondent and editor of the Sunday Age.

Aylmer praised his talents when he was appointed earlier this year as a 
replacement for Andrew Holden.

 