
It was one of those nights when everything went right for West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom>, so much so that the home 
supporters were singing Tony Pulis’ name as the Midlands club recorded an 
emphatic victory that reinforced the idea that Burnley do not take too kindly 
to being on the road.

On the basis of what we have seen so far this season, Burnley will be relying 
on their form at Turf Moor to extend their stay in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>. This was a fourth defeat 
in five away games for Sean Dyche’s team, leaving them with a solitary point 
and a single goal from their travels, and it was alarming to see the way in 
which they were so brutally exposed defensively.

Albion, in fairness, were excellent and on another evening they could have 
scored even more than four. James Morrison left the field to a standing ovation 
after an outstanding performance, Salomón Rondón led the line superbly and Matt 
Phillips showed some lovely touches. All three of those players were on the 
scoresheet, along with Darren Fletcher, as Albion ran riot.

On the back of their victory at the Premier League champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/leicester-city-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
 prior to the international break, which ended Leicester’s 14-month unbeaten 
home record, Albion are now up to ninth in the table and it is a measure of how 
much the mood has changed that long before half-time Pulis was responding to 
requests from the fans in the Smethwick End to “give us a wave”.

Three goals in the first 37 minutes certainly helped and effectively killed 
the game on a night when Dyche described his players as “weak-willed” and 
lamented the way in which his team “got drunk on keeping the ball”.

It was the first time this season that Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> have had more than 50% of 
possession in a match – Albion came into the game with the same record so 
something had to give – and Dyche’s players could be forgiven for thinking that 
they are better off without the ball after this chastening experience.

There were less than four minutes on the clock when the rout started and 
Burnley never recovered. “A real head scratcher for us,” Dyche said. “I was 
really surprised with the first half, we were miles off what we do, we got 
drunk on keeping the ball, tried to overplay with no tempo. They were miles 
stronger than us in all departments in the first half. They had a mini-break 
for the first goal, but beyond that we just looked weak-willed and happy to 
pass it around without ever affecting them.”

For Pulis, it was a hugely satisfactory evening and he looked almost a little 
embarrassed afterwards when he was asked about being serenaded by the Albion 
fans. “Obviously it’s enjoyable, but when you take the stick … you’ve got to 
have a strong character both ways,” the Albion manager said. “I’m very pleased 
for the supporters, they could easily have given it a miss and watched it on TV 
but they’ve come out.”

Phillips got Albion up and running after Dean Marney tried to intercept 
Morrison’s cross but succeeded only in diverting the ball into the path of the 
Albion winger. With his back to goal, Phillips turned Ben Mee far too easily 
and lifted the ball into the roof of the net past an exposed Tom Heaton after 
just four minutes.

As poor as Burnley were in the first half, they should have equalised in the 
14th minute when Jeff Hendrick latched onto Sam Vokes’ knock down only to lift 
his shot the wrong side of the far post. Albion were not so generous at the 
other end when Morrison ran clear moments later. Rondón expertly held off 
Michael Keane just inside the Burnley half and released Morrison, who accepted 
the invitation to carry the ball forward as Mee backed off and stroked a 
precise shot inside Heaton’s near post. It was a lovely finish.

Burnley looked shell-shocked and it seemed a matter of time before Albion 
added a third. Morrison curled wide after a mistake by Heaton, who atoned for 
that error when he brilliantly turned Rondón’s shot over the angle of crossbar 
and post. Yet there was nothing that the Burnley goalkeeper could do about 
Albion’s third as the unmarked Fletcher turned in Phillips’ superb cross. In 
doing so Fletcher became the third Scotland international to get on the 
scoresheet.

Dyche had seen enough and replaced Steven Defour with Ashley Barnes at the 
interval – “I could have taken at least nine of them off,” the Burnley manager 
later admitted – but the complexion of the game never changed and it was just a 
matter of how many Albion would score.

Rondón eventually got the goal his performance warranted in the 64th minute. 
Allan Nyom, set free by Morrison, cut the ball back for the Venezuelan striker, 
who turned sharply before drilling a low shot that beat Heaton via a deflection 
off Stephen Ward.

West Brom 4-0 Burnley: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/21/west-brom-v-burnley-premier-league-live> 