
The job title “head of the Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> 
Service of Northern Ireland” sounds a bit like a punchline. The joke would be 
about challenges or diplomacy. It might be an amusing example of a job that a 
klutzy or tactless sitcom character would be ill-suited to doing.

I’m not saying that Chief Constable George Hamilton QPM 
<https://www.psni.police.uk/inside-psni/our-leadership/chief-constable/> is a 
klutzy or tactless sitcom character. I mean, he’s the head of the Police 
Service of Northern Ireland. I wouldn’t be so rude. But there is something of 
sitcom about the week he’s just had: a scenario in which the chief constable 
was a little hapless, clumsy and unwise, but ultimately lovable.

The hot water started boiling when Mr Hamilton, in his role as the head of the 
Police Service of Northern Ireland,tweeted a 19th-century police recruitment 
poster from the Robert Peel era 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/northern-ireland/psni-chief-constable-sorry-for-offence-caused-after-telling-officer-to-stop-wallowing-in-self-pity-on-twitter-34982527.html>
. Above it, he wrote his own message calling for new recruits.

A junior officer replied: “Yes but police expected to do far more roles than 
ever anticipated by Sir Robert! Social worker, paramedic, child minder etc.”

The chief constable wrote back (all of this in the public Twittersphere): 
“I know – more complex & challenging but we are here to serve so let’s get on 
with it rather than wallowing in self-pity!”

The junior officer continued to argue the point and Mr Hamilton tweeted: 
“You’re allowed to leave & seek another job – nobody is asking you to stay. Dry 
your eyes, do the job or move on!”

Now, you are a well-informed person. You know about Twitter. I don’t need to 
spell out what happened between that and the chief constable’s abject apology 
video the next morning. These days, if anybody at all says anything about 
anything, they might as well tweet an abject apology video immediately, just to 
save time.

That’s not to say I disagree with the people who shouted at Mr Hamilton for 
insensitivity. You can’t be telling exhausted, depressed, put-upon police 
officers to dry their eyes or quit. Imagine if they quit! What kind of force do 
you think you’d be left with? It would be like 1960s Soho all over the country.

People join the police for two reasons: because they think they can do some 
good or because they relish the idea of bossing others about. (Often a 
combination of the two.) It is the former group who get tired and depressed by 
the Sisyphean task, the suspicion and cynicism they face, the violence and 
suffering they witness, the relatively little they can do about it. Those who 
don’t, who remain uncomplicatedly excited by the uniform and the authority… God 
save us from a force composed ofnobody but them. Those are the ones that enjoy 
ordering Muslim women to strip on public beaches. Those are the ones in whose 
custody we are not safe.

We must get away from this hackneyed old rubbish about police officers needing 
to man up, be tough, stop whining about hard work, scary gangs, sexism, racism 
etc. It’s not the army. The police are supposed to be just like us, members of 
the public, there to help and to keep the peace. Thereis a place for delicate 
flowers – or there should be.

This story makes for an interesting contrast with another from last week, in 
which the governors of Drake Hall prison and Hewell prison were criticised for 
allowing two female inmates from the former to visit a pair of transgender 
inmates at the latter and give them a makeover. The robbersBethany Steventon 
and Louise Footman 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1647125/two-female-prisoners-driven-50-miles-to-mens-jail-to-give-makeovers-to-pair-of-transgender-robbers/>
 were given haircuts and treatments by the unidentified women from Drake Hall, 
who are doing a beauty course. Onlookers and the press have been bitching about 
the use of public money on transport costs.

But that’s a wonderful decision by the governors: it shows such original 
thinking, confidence and respect for humanity. It’s a wave of kindly 
imagination and fellow-feeling, from people who could so easily be numbed and 
desensitised by years of exposure to the nasty end of human behaviour.

I would assume that the best of prison officers, like police officers, must be 
made sad and tired by experience; to push through into a stronger and more 
creative altruism is truly heroic.

The thing is, I think Chief Constable George Hamilton, head of the Police 
Service of Northern Ireland, is probably that type too. I think he’s on the 
side of the angels.

Tweeting the 19th-century recruitment advert was witty and interesting. It was 
also a reminder of the original altruistic principles of Robert Peel. Mr 
Hamilton called for recruits “from ALL backgrounds” and talked about service, 
not rule.

Unfortunately, as would happen in a sitcom, the chief constable allowed a 
moment’s impatience to get him into a total pickle. He started by going online 
to declare: policing is for everyone! Somehow, he got argued into declaring: 
it’s not for everyone!

I just don’t think he’s a person who would be unsympathetic to exhaustion or 
depression face to face. Have a look at his abject apology video. I’d be amazed 
if George Hamilton were not a kind and sympathetic man to deal with personally. 
At worst, he may be hamstrung by the idea that policemen or women have to be 
tougher than “normal” men and women.

If that’s the case, he just needs to remind himself of Robert Peel’s main 
message:“The police are the public and the public are the police.”

Mr Hamilton was true to that principle when he called for “citizens of ALL 
backgrounds” to apply. But this isn’t just about black and white, male and 
female. Perhaps it’s time that “tough and not tough” went on to the list.

What use is that in a riot? you may ask. It might be interesting to see. We 
are not all tough guys, so neither should our police force be.
 