How much did Richard Desmond trouser for selling Channel 5 to Viacom? (He 
bought it for just over £100m in 2010)  £1  £450m  £500m  £1bn What was the 
most watched programme of 2014? Not including Christmas and New Year, for 
obvious reasons.  Uruguay v England (World Cup)  Sherlock  Costa Rica v England 
(World Cup)  The Great British Bake Off Who was appointed the first chairman of 
new press regulator, the Independent Press Standards Organisation?  Evan Harris 
 Guy Black  Alan Moses  Stig Abell Who was ranked number 100 in the Media 
Guardian's 2014 media power list? No peaking! You’re only cheating yourself  
Piers Morgan  Jeremy Clarkson  You  Kim Kardashian What did Vice Media chief 
executive Shane Smith NOT say in a MediaGuardian interview in March?:  ‘I go to 
bed late and I get up early’  ‘I think I'll probably do this, because I'm 
weird, until we really are sort of the next MTV or CNN’  ‘Gawker is a bunch of 
bitches … they have a bone in their ass about Vice’  ‘We invited North Korea to 
DJ at our Christmas party but gave them the worst slot on purpose’ Forget about 
Monty the flippin' Penguin for a second. Sainsbury's Christmas advert bore a 
remarkable resemblance to a 1980s pop video. But which one?  Land of Confusion 
by Genesis  Pipes of Peace by Paul McCartney  Love in an Elevator by Aerosmith  
Hungry Like the Wolf by Duran Duran Which of these films has NOT been made into 
a TV series?  Fargo  About a Boy  Mulholland Drive  Psycho What was the most 
watched programme on Christmas Day 2013?  Mrs Brown's Boys  Downton Abbey  
Doctor Who  EastEnders Who said ‘Tom Jones must be a killer in the sack’?  
Kylie Minogue  Kirsty Young  Kirsty Wark  Katherine Jenkins What was the BBC's 
most downloaded single programme since podcasts began?  Mark Kermode and Simon 
Mayo's Film Review Show  Desert Island Discs  Chris Moyles  The Archers How did 
WPP boss Sir Martin Sorrell describe his rival Maurice Levy, in relation to 
talk of his retirement after the collapse of the Publicis/Omnicom merger?  The 
Freddy Krueger of advertising  The private Godfrey of advertising  The 
Cinderella of advertising  The Dorian Gray of advertising While between gigs at 
the Telegraph and Daily Mail, Tony Gallagher filled his time by chopping veg at 
his favourite London restaurant. Which is it?  Chiltern Firehouse  Alain 
Ducasse at the Dorchester  Moro  Nandos, High Street Kensington Who did NOT 
quit Twitter (at least for a bit) this year?  Stephen Fry  Jonathan Agnew  
Frankie Boyle  Lord Sugar How much did Daily Mail editor-in-chief Paul Dacre 
pocket in 2014?  £1.8m  £2m  £2.2m  £2.4m Which of the following was NOT a 
Twitter hashtag inspired by the notorious Great British Bake Off incident 
between these two contestants?  #bingate  #bincident  
#soggybottomedbinnedbakedalaska  #dirtydiana How many subscribers does Sky have 
following the acquisition of Sky Italia and a majority stake in Sky Deutchland? 
 12 million  15 million  20 million  35 million Orange is the new …  White  
Black  Red  All over What show proved an unlikely hit for UKTV’s Dave channel?  
Storage Hunters UK  Skip Addicts  Basement Invaders  Tip Advisers The follow up 
to Channel 4’s controversial “poverty porn” documentary Benefits Street is 
being filmed in?  Stockton-on-Tees  Grimsby  Southampton  Skid Row What is 
former Radio 5 Live controller Adrian van Klaveren's new job at the BBC?  Head 
of values, BBC  Controller digital strategy, future media, BBC  Director of 
strategic governance, BBC  Head of strategic change, BBC News What has Jeremy 
Paxman NOT signed up for following his departure from Newsnight?  Anchoring 
Channel 4’s general election night coverage  Delivering the Saturday Night Live 
opening monologue  Financial Times contributing editor  A Vice Media online 
article about first world war poet Wilfred Owen’s work being banned from the 
Guantánamo Bay prison library Which of these BBC programme launches did Tony 
Hall NOT go to?  Doctor Who  The Apprentice  Wolf Hall  Life Story Which 
magazine published those Kim Kardashian pictures which didn't quite break the 
internet?  Paper  Scissors  Stone  Caged and Aviary Birds How much was BuzzFeed 
valued at after raising $50m (£30m) in venture capital funding in August?  $9, 
$37, $291 … any odd number  $500m  $850m  $2.5bn The IPC name disappeared in 
2014, when the consumer magazine publisher was rebranded Time Inc UK by its US 
owner. There has been an IPC UK publishing company in various guises since  1921
 1963  1970  1992 Which magazine did Felix Dennis, the flamboyant publisher, 
poet and entrepreneur who died in June, NOT own at one time  Kung-Fu Monthly  
Jaws Souvenir Poster Magazine  New Music News  Loaded  You got…  You really 
have the power of the press – give yourself a plum duff  You're quite the media 
watchdog, but need to keep your finger on the pulse a bit more  More Media 
Muppet than Media Monkey  Challenge your friends Submit answers  