
“Democracy,” declares Jonathan Holloway, “is about doing something.” 

The artistic director of the Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> festival is discussing 
not just the substance of The Money – the show I have just seen – but my 
morning at an anti-racism demonstration in the rain, the Trump/Clinton 
political moment and his own attitude towards festival programming.

Holloway’s artistic mission is “to form communities, and understand how 
communities are formed.” Conceiving of a festival as a single work of art 
created in the medium of its host city, Holloway is not interested in merely 
affirming Melbourne’s local character. “I want to find work that breaks 
barriers and remaps the city,” he tells me.

He enthuses about Haircuts From Children, the show in which adults offer 
themselves to children for a cut and dye, as an example of redrawing social 
expectations around “truth, accountability, consensus and responsibility”. 
There’s democratic power in being present as a nine-year-old takes a pair of 
scissors to a 39-year-old’s hair and, in so doing, inverts all the usual power 
relationships: commercial, creative, educational.

“These things allow us to explore who we are as a civic society,” Holloway 
says.

Melbourne festival 2016: deeply personal melds with public spectacle in 
triumph for curator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/23/melbourne-festival-2016-deeply-personal-melds-with-public-spectacle-in-triumph-for-curator>
Such is the conceit of Exeter-based studio Kaleider’s The Money, the 
extraordinary experience of which delivers me to my interview with Holloway 
with $195 of other people’s money in my wallet and a signed contract in my bag. 
The concept of the show is that a group of people self-selected from the 
audience place $20 each in a kitty. They have an hour to decide how to spend 
it. There are three rules: if anyone watching the conversation wishes to speak, 
they must add $20 themselves and join the discussion at the table; the money 
cannot be spent on anything illegal nor on a charity; and the agreement must be 
unanimously agreed to, in writing, by the hour’s end, or the money will be 
passed to the next group of deliberators.

It’s an interesting show for me to experience in the context of my damp and 
freezing morning in the rain. I’ve been at the annual Walk Together march to 
celebrate Australian multiculturalism, and infusing the speeches and 
discussions under umbrellas is apprehension around the return of One Nation to 
national politics, the Islamophobic tenor of much public commentary, the new 
visibility of the old far right, such as Reclaim Australia. Confronted there 
with the questions “How do we change minds? And what investment do we need to 
resource that process?” I’m confronted with them again in the green chamber of 
Victoria’s Parliament House an hour later: the Legislative Assembly has been 
given over as a theatre venue for this show.

The Money demands that strangers reach consensus around the allocation of 
scarce resources. It functions as both a love letter to democracy and something 
of an explainer about the structural restrictions and frustrations of the 
democratic process. The show has been performed all around the world and 
visited the Melbourne suburbs of Footscray and Prahran before its CBD transfer.

The show changes, naturally, with every performance due to its participants 
and context. While the good news is that the participants consistently default 
to the altruistic, I’m able to last all of 10 minutes as a “silent witness” to 
the discussion before throwing my own money on the table.

I make my point that the current proposal of making tiny handouts to 
individual homeless people is paternalistic and obscures the need for 
structural solutions to poverty – but then I’m trapped there, suddenly obliged 
to offer not just criticism but concrete alternatives. We have less than $200 
to spend but my proposals to create cost-effective corflute billboards that 
demand we “tax the rich” are shot down by the group – as is my desperate 
suggestion of “some kind of artistic commission to create an awareness-raising 
anticapitalist statue out of butter”.

Backstage in Biscuit Land review – Tourette's makes for unpredictable, joyous, 
must-watch theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/18/backstage-in-biscuit-land-review-tourettes-makes-for-unpredictable-joyous-must-watch-theatre>
Holloway chuckles when I relate this to him; he lasted even less than 10 
minutes as a silent witness when he first saw the show, and his suggestion of 
donating a tree to a public school was smashed by no less than the founding 
artistic director ofKneehigh Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/kneehigh>, who dot-pointed why it was 
impractical before concluding it was “stupid”. The genius of the show’s format, 
Holloway explains, lies in “the moment you realise either you were wrong or you 
have to do some work”.

What The Money illustrates, explains Holloway, is that “it’s intimidating to 
do something – because as soon as you do, someone will have an opinion. To stay 
inactive is very safe.”

It’s a pointed thing to say to a theatre critic at an arts festival. Lesson 
learned, I’m now bound by a signed contract to The Money to begin preparations 
for a “street feast for tax fairness”. With seed funding of $195, myself and my 
fellow deliberators are hiring an ethical catering company to offer food with a 
tax-fairness message as a public spectacle in the city. If you’re sympathetic 
and would like to join our new community, please get in touch.
 