
Two brothers who acted as illegal gangmasters in Wisbech have been given 
two-year prison sentences suspended for two years at Cambridge crown court.

Stanislovas Dambrauskas, 38, and Andrius Dambrauskas, 34, pleaded guilty to 
operating as gangmasters to the food and agriculture sector without a licence. 
The pair, originally from Lithuania, were supplying up to 100 eastern European 
migrant workers at a time to other leading labour agencies, which in turn sent 
them to work on big farms and factories across East Anglia.

Their main source of profit was rent collected from the workers for 
overcrowded accommodation they illegally sublet in Wisbech, often placing nine 
workers in three-bedroomed houses. In some cases workers’ wages were paid 
direct into the brothers’ bank accounts and they deducted rent and fees for 
transport to work from them before passing what was left on to workers.

Sentencing, Judge Gareth Hawkesworth told the pair: “You ran a racket for 30 
months [which] exploited your own countrymen … by stuffing them into 
properties.” He said the two men had abused the hopes of other migrants 
travelling from Lithuania by promising pay far in excess of what they could 
expect to earn in the UK.

 The prosecution follows on from the conviction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/11/gangsters-on-our-doorstep> 
earlier this year of a Latvian organised crime group based in Wisbech that was 
found to be exploiting eastern European workers in another illegal gangmaster 
operation providing workers to the supply chains of major supermarkets. The 
group was also laundering money and arranging sham marriages between Asians and 
eastern Europeans to facilitate illegal immigration.

 The prosecution in the Dambrauskas brothers’ case on Tuesday told the court 
that workers were recruited via agents in Lithuania who charged fees for work, 
which is illegal in the UK. Those signing up were warned not to tell anyone 
what they were doing or they would be fined, the court heard. When they arrived 
in London, in some cases 40 at a time, they were collected and taken by minibus 
to Wisbech where they were placed in cramped houses and charged £60 a week to 
share a room.

They were sent to work, often at only a few hours’ notice in potato and carrot 
packing factories, and in the fields harvesting flowers, cabbages and sugar 
beet. Pay was often below the national minimum wage and was given without 
mandatory payslips, the court heard. Workers were charged for transport even if 
there was no work for them when they reached the farms or factories.

The Dambrauskas brothers provided vehicles to transport them to the sites but 
did not have public service licences to do so. They came to police notice in 
part as a result of complaints from neighbours.

 Hawkesworth said he was taking into account the fact that requests for 
workers were initiated by other licensed agencies, and that although some 
workers said they had been threatened there had been no violence or money 
laundering. The language barrier also made it harder for the Dambrauskas 
brothers to understand the legal arguments, he said.

 Andrius Dambrauskas was of previous good character. Stanislavos Dambrauskas 
had two previous UK convictions for shoplifting and handling stolen goods and 
five prison sentences from Lithuania relating to theft and possession of an 
offensive weapon.
 