
There was an interesting moment at the end of Arsenal’s defeat at Manchester 
City on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
, a match of shifting tides, foggy passages, moments of extreme skill and one 
decisive tactical switch by Pep Guardiola. Deep into stoppage time, as Petr 
Cech and the nearest team‑mate dithered over a free-kick by the halfway line 
Arsène Wenger could be seen leaping up and urging them to get the ball forward, 
waggling his arms about in that familiar, slightly alarming angry‑pterodactyl 
style.

Eventually the ball did go forward, just as the final whistle was blown. 
Wenger stormed back from the touchline, visibly frustrated, turning his back on 
the yellow shirts closest to him. It felt significant, intentionally or not, 
that the other player with Cech at the end was Mesut Özil.

Raheem Sterling completes Manchester City turnaround against Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
The German remains Wenger’s pet creative genius, a player in whom he has 
invested huge amounts of patience and reputational points, but Özil was once 
again an absence at the Etihad Stadium. Aged 28 and now foraging after a bumper 
new contract, Arsenal’s record signing is surely treading close to the point 
where even a fond and indulgent manager may start to feel thata beguiling, at 
times frustrating three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/02/mesut-ozil-arsenal-real-madrid>
 is reaching a point of crisis.

Yes: it’s that Özil conversation. Bring it on. Let’s do this here and now. 
Although hopefully without the associated mulch of cliché and received ideas, 
the identity politics of English football that seems to attach itself to any 
discussion of a genuinely interesting, genuinely alluring footballer.

It is surely obvious by now that nobody seriously expects Özil to “drive” a 
game on like some elfin Roy Keane or Bryan Robson reimagined as Victorian 
garden sprite. To criticise Özil for his lack of bite in the tackle, his 
absence of biceps, the failure to wear a white conical bandage around his head 
is simply to miss the best of him.

Against this there is a counter‑orthodoxy that suggests criticising Özil is to 
declare yourself unworthy of his minutely calibrated artisanal brilliance, eyes 
boggling as he gazes into the shadow world – the ghost passes, the invisible 
angles – like some frail alien princeling wheeled out to take us beyond our 
human plane into the footballing nether.

Wenger: Arsenal speculation will not affect Alexis Sánchez and Mesut Özil
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/arsenal-arsene-wenger-alexis-sanchez-mesut-ozil-chinese-super-league-speculation>
The fact remains he is a lovely footballer, and a committed one too who runs a 
great deal more than some seem to think (10km more than any otherArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> midfielder in the Champions 
League this season). His worth does not lie simply in assists and goals scored. 
Özil works the fringes, finds passes that make the passes, manages Arsenal’s 
transitions from defence and generally acts as a high-grade lubricant.

It is, though, still possible to put a measuring stick on all this, just as 
pretty soon Wenger himself will have to make a significant call on a player who 
has been a genuine treat even for the Premier League neutral. Özil, or rather 
the industrial-Özil complex around him, are currently forcing this. There is 
talk of £290,000-a-week salary demands in any new Arsenal deal, more than 
double his current contract. It would be a huge pay rise, elevating Özil to 
genuine A-list status. Two things occur instantly.

First, there is little in Özil’s recent club football that suggests he 
deserves it. And secondly, it is hard not to conclude such game-changing money 
would be better spent elsewhere. Arsenal could, for example, try to sign Riyad 
Mahrez, who is younger and more obviously effective and may just be gettable. 
Özil is fun, brilliant, maddening at times. But judged by any serious scale of 
actual impact on this, the earthly realm – where goals and wins and trophies 
really do exist – there is nothing to justify such extreme demands.

Three seasons and two FA Cup winner’s medals into his Arsenal career Özil 
isn’t showing any obvious signs of other gears, of a level still to come. He 
faded with the rest last season as the best chance in a decade to win the 
league title disappeared, and has been present through the galling Champions 
League defeats of the last few years.

Özil was supposed to define the endgame of the late Wenger years. And so he 
has, an emblem of room-temperature stasis, a certain debilitating cosiness. 
Wenger has been criticised since the defeat at the Etihad for failing to react 
in real-time, to shift his tactics to mirrorGuardiola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola>’s successful rejig into a 
system with two No10s and David Silva sniping behind. There is no shame in 
being out-tacticed now and then. But when all this was going on where was 
Wenger’s senior player, Arsenal’s only World Cup winner on the pitch?

Arsenal fans have become accustomed to shrugging a little at this point and 
saying, well, it just wasn’t Özil’s game, treating him with the special 
privileges reserved for some impossibly complex high-spec part in an 
over-engineered luxury car: the fine-tooth alternator-flange that makes the 
multi-jet trans-drive work, but which can quite easily be thrown by too much 
fluff in the rear transponders or, you know, a leaf on the windscreen.

But this isn’t really enough. When your good moments are as good as Özil’s it 
is easy to overlook the omissions. If we really are going to start talking 
Messi-level wages there are still quite a few things Özil doesn’t do. Such as 
kicking the ball with his right foot, always a baffling omission in a top 
footballer. His finishing can be ropey. In his entire Arsenal career Özil has 
one goal from outside the box. Being able to shoot seems the least you’d expect 
for £15m a year. Last season Özil won three headers in the Premier League. So 
far this time he’s made 11 tackles. Nobody hires Mesut Özil to do either of 
these things. But there is a kind of entry-level expectation.

Even more so as the game has changed recently. Kevin De Bruyne is an obvious 
point of comparison, another high-grade northern European No10, but a player 
who is relentlessly involved even on his off-days. Against Arsenal De Bruyne 
looked a little muddled in the first half. He kept on running and harrying. He 
ended up producing the pass of the game to help Raheem Sterling score the 
winner. The previous weekend against Manchester City Mahrez had even fewer 
touches than Özil but still decided the match. In the high-speed, high-turnover 
press of the current Premier League it’s not enough to have off and on games. 
The day is always there to be seized.

Similarly Arsenal’s switch to playing more without the ball hasn’t brought the 
best from Özil. Suddenly you notice how little he contributes out of 
possession, an ambling ghost while those around him press and fill. The days of 
possession football, where it is enough simply to link and prompt and feed 
endless high-grade passes the way of some elite centre-forward, are largely 
gone.

There have of course been some real highs, and hopefully there will be more. 
Özil was excellent inthe 3-0 defeat of Chelsea in the autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, a result that seems now to have catapulted one of those teams towards a 
league title. Although not perhaps the one you might have expected. He was 
there for both of the wins against the current champions last season. But on 
too many other occasions, and once again on Sunday, Arsenal have struggled 
against better opponents, not helped by the additional burden of ferrying Özil 
about the pitch in his imperial litter, waiting for him to do stuff.

Already any serious Arsenal title challenge looks to have faded. In each of 
the past three seasons opponents energised by some spurting, sparking piece of 
managerial chemistry have sprinted away around this time of year while Arsenal 
have still been making plans. Wenger was genuinely upset at the end of Sunday’s 
defeat, an encouraging sign in itself. At the very least Arsenal’s season might 
benefit from a little more in the way of tension between a sympathetic manager 
and a star player who, in every sense, too often seems to leave no shadow.
 