
The report clearing Britain’s most senior police officer of misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/met-chief-hogan-howe-gave-misleading-account-about-hillsborough-ipcc-finds>
 is the third decision in quick succession that has severely undermined 
bereaved Hillsborough families’ confidence in the Independent Police Complaints 
Commission.

The watchdog has for years been subject to criticism from complainants, 
lawyers and politicians that it lacks adequate independence and backbone to 
hold police to account for wrongdoing, and its credibility is seen by some to 
depend on the outcome of its Hillsborough investigations.

The IPCC, which the government has already committed to overhauling and 
renaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/07/police-complaints-watchdog-ipcc-renamed-office-for-police-conduct>
, has spent four years investigating the South Yorkshire police failures that 
caused the 96 deaths at Hillsborough in 1989, the failure of that force 
afterwards to take responsibility and its attempts instead to blame the 
victims, and the alleged collusion of West Midlands police, the force appointed 
in 1989 to investigate.

Rachel Cerfontyne, the deputy chair of the IPCC and commissioner with 
responsibility for the Hillsborough investigations, has said the total cost is 
likely to be about £80m. She and senior investigators hold regular meetings 
with the bereaved families and give public monthly updates. Cerfontyne has 
emphasised the seriousness and dedication with which the IPCC has approached 
its task.

Yet Pete Weatherby QC, the lead lawyer who represented 22 families at the new 
inquests thatfound the 96 people were unlawfully killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
 due to South Yorkshire police failures at Hillsborough, says confidence in the 
IPCC is now at zero.

Weatherby accuses the IPCC of repeatedly finding reasons not to pursue 
disciplinary cases against police officers, and says his experience and those 
of the families he represents have led them to conclude it is not fit for 
purpose.

The report clearing the Metropolitan police commissioner, Sir Bernard 
Hogan-Howe, follows therejection a fortnight ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/29/hillsborough-police-media-officer-loses-coercion-to-spin-case>
 of a complaint by Hayley Court, a former South Yorkshire police media officer. 
There had been claims she wasgiven unethical instructions to spin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/south-yorkshire-police-tried-to-spin-evidence-at-hillsborough-inquests>
 coverage of the new inquests.

That development came after the decision that has most damaged the faith of 
the families in the IPCC: the clearing of David Crompton, the South Yorkshire 
police chief constable during the new inquests, of seeking to improperly 
maintain the force’s original stance of blaming the victims for the disaster.

The families had complained to the IPCC that despite Crompton having issued a 
full apology in 2012, he did not maintain that stance at the inquests. Instead, 
the South Yorkshire police barrister, Fiona Barton QC, highlighted alleged 
misbehaviour by supporters, remained silent when other police lawyers and 
witnesses were making similar claims, and argued forcefully against the apology 
being made known to the inquests jury.

The coroner, Sir John Goldring, accepted her argument and did not require the 
force’s series of previous apologies and legal admissions for its failures to 
be put before the jury.

The families complained that this stance at the inquests, which began in 2014, 
subjected them to a traumatic re-run of the discredited police lies and 
lengthened the proceedings to two years, the longest case ever heard by a 
British jury.


However, the IPCC, with Cerfontyne herself as the commissioner, found there 
were no grounds for a misconduct charge against Crompton, concluding that the 
force did not advance “a particular scenario” at the inquests and that Barton’s 
questions alleging misbehaviour by supporters were “not part of a deliberate, 
predetermined strategy”. That decision was upheld last month in a review by 
Hugh Tomlinson QC.

The report on Hayley Court’s experience of working as South Yorkshire police’s 
media officer at the inquests failed to examine all the relevant evidence. It 
set itself terms of reference that excluded Court’s claim that she had been 
bullied in the job, which the force had not upheld.

Within Court’s personnel documents, as revealed by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/south-yorkshire-police-tried-to-spin-evidence-at-hillsborough-inquests>
 in May, was an official view that she had failed to “proactively redress” what 
the force considered to be “obvious imbalance in media reporting” of the 
inquests.

However, the IPCC report did not cite this document or investigate what 
“imbalance” the force believed had been portrayed in the media. Instead, the 
report listed a series of meetings in which other people disputed Court’s 
account, and it concluded that she had “misunderstood” her instructions.

The report also recited extensive alleged criticism of Court and her 
abilities, including from South Yorkshire police’s barrister, which could seem 
almost designed to deter future complainants and whistleblowers within the 
police from ever coming forward. Court, who now has a media relations role 
outside of the police service, issued a statement saying the report was 
“manifestly wrong” and that she was very disappointed in the IPCC.

Files are due to be sent to the Crown Prosecution Service imminently on the 
full criminal investigations into the deaths at Hillsborough and subsequent 
alleged perjury, perverting the course of justice and misconduct in a public 
office by police officers.

Along with all those terribly serious questions about the most devastating and 
far-reaching police failures is a very pressing one about the competence of the 
IPCC itself to do a proper job.
 