
Metropolitan police officers are investigating 106 separate allegations of 
historical sexual abuse at football clubs in London.

Britain’s biggest police force said the allegations were linked to individuals 
at 32 named clubs or teams in London, including four in the Premier League.

Two allegations have been made against Championship clubs, three against clubs 
in Leagues One and Two and 21 other clubs including non-league or 
non-professional or amateur teams were involved, the Met said.

The update from Scotland Yard comes nearly four weeks after the former Crewe 
defender Andy Woodward waived his right to anonymity to tell the Guardian that 
he had been a victim of sexual abuse.

DCS Ivan Balhatchet, of the Met’s sexual offence, exploitation and child abuse 
command, said: “The Met take all allegations seriously, and specialist officers 
will work through the information passed to them.

“The number of referrals, pieces of information and allegations will change. 
Officers will continue to work through the information that has been reported.”

The Met refused to name the clubs involved or the number of allegations 
against each club.

Last week, police chiefs confirmed 83 potential suspects had been identified 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/police-confirm-83-potential-suspects-identified-in-child-sex-abuse-scandal>
 in connection with allegations of historical child sexual abuse in football.

After Woodward spoke out, former Crewe player Steve Walters alleged he was 
abused, also in an interview with the Guardian. Other players, including Paul 
Stewart and David White, then came forward to the Guardian and other media.

The Guardian subsequently reported that an unnamed former Newcastle United 
player had contacted police with allegations against coach George Ormond, who 
was jailed for six years in 2002 for numerous assaults over 24 years.

The Football Association appointed Kate Gallafent QC at the end of November to 
help with its internal review of historical child sexual abuse allegations. 
Twenty-one police forces have launched investigations into the claims.


Meanwhile, the Scottish Football Association has announced an independent 
review into allegations of child sex abuse within the sport.

In a statement released late on Tuesday afternoon, the SFA said Scottish 
football was “a safe and enjoyable environment for children”, but added that it 
was taking “initial steps towards establishing an appropriate scope and terms 
of reference for an independent review”.

“It is imperative that we take the necessary time and guidance to ensure this 
review complements the work of Police Scotland and focuses on processes and 
procedures in place both currently and historically in Scottish football,” the 
SFA said.

Police Scotland is currently investigating a series of allegations of 
historical sexual abuse at football clubs in Scotland.

Partick Thistle admitted firing one of their employees in 1992 over abuse 
claims. That employee also worked for Motherwell, who are holding their own 
investigation.

A former youth coach for Celtic, Hibernian and Falkirk was charged last 
Wednesday with a child sex offence in Northern Ireland and has been remanded in 
custody.
SFA chief executive Stewart Regan said: “Police Scotland has reaffirmed that 
it is the investigatory authority regarding reports of child sexual abuse in 
football and it is therefore crucial to draw the distinction between their 
ongoing investigation and what lessons football can learn from historic 
allegations.”

 