
Documentary film-maker Michael Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michaelmoore> has said he knows “for a fact” 
that Donald Trump does not want to be president of the United States and claims 
the Republican nominee is now sabotaging his own campaign in order to avoid the 
Oval Office.

Moore, writing on The Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/michael-moore/trump-self-sabotage_b_11545026.html>
, says that Trump ran for president as a negotiating tactic, hoping to leverage 
a higher pay packet from NBC. The broadcaster had formerly employed Trump as 
the star of the reality TV show The Apprentice, but fired him after he called 
Mexican immigrants “drug dealers” and “rapists” at his campaign launch.

According to Moore, who does not name his source, Trump continued his campaign 
only to increase his stock with other television networks.

“And then something happened,” Moore writes. “And to be honest, if it happened 
to you, you might have reacted the same way. Trump, to his own surprise, 
ignited the country, especially among people who were the opposite of 
billionaires.”

Moore says Trump found the attention his campaign attracted intoxicating.

“Trump fell in love with himself all over again, and he soon forgot his 
mission to get a good deal for a TV show,” Moore writes. “He was no longer king 
of the deal-makers — he was King of the World!”

Moore then catalogues a series of incidents from the past few weeks that have 
seenTrump’s approval ratings plummet 
<http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/donald-trump-favorable-rating>. 
Citing the nominee’s attacks on the family of Humayun Khan, a Muslim American 
who was killed while serving in Iraq, and his implication that “second 
amendment people” could use gun violence against Hillary Clinton, Moore 
suggests that Trump’s outlandish behaviour was an attempt to “self-sacrifice” 
his campaign.

“Maybe the meltdown of the past three weeks was no accident,” writes Moore. 
“Maybe it’s all part of his new strategy to get the hell out of a race he never 
intended to see through to its end anyway.”

Moore finally suggests that Trump would give up the Republican nomination 
rather than lose on election night.

“Trust me, I’ve met the guy. Spent an afternoon with him,” he writes. “He 
would rather invite the Clintons AND the Obamas to his next wedding than have 
that scarlet letter (“L”) branded on his forehead seconds after the last polls 
have closed on that night.”
 