
Gastón Ramírez harbours unhappy memories of Hull and will doubtless have 
enjoyed taking his frustrations out on Mike Phelan’s spirited but under-powered 
team. Dispatched to Humberside on loan by Southampton two years ago, the 
Uruguayan struggled with injuries and poor form, and it took a transfer to 
Teesside to help restore him to former glories.

And Ramírez, once again emphasising his importance to Aitor Karanka’s 
gameplan, headed in a winner to liftMiddlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> four points clear of the 
relegation zone and towards mid-table security.

Middlesbrough v Hull City: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/05/middlesbrough-v-hull-city-premier-league-live>
It left an unambitious Hull, who restricted a dominant Boro to few clear-cut 
chances but created next to none of their own, second from bottom and heading 
into a bitter night with their future as unclear as the fog-shrouded roads 
leading south to Humberside. “We controlled the game,” said Karanka, for whom 
it was only a third victory of the season. “It was a really good win, beating 
Hull was massive. They’re really well organised but we showed we were better 
than them.”

Phelan did not entirely disagree. “We were under severe pressure but I thought 
we defended well,” the Hull manager said. “With better decision-making we could 
possibly have got a point.”

As the mist began rolling in from the Tees, a cagey opening filled with 
backwards and sideways passes was briefly enlivened when Álvaro Negredo met 
Marten de Roon’s lay-off. Twelve yards out, the striker was slackly marked but, 
perhaps unwisely, he elected to shoot with the outside of his left foot when he 
seemed to have time to shift it on to the right. Unsurprisingly, the shot arced 
high over the bar.

David Marshall, Hull’s keeper, has one of Víctor Valdés’s old Barcelona 
jerseys hidden away in his garage. It is a souvenir from the night in 2004 the 
then youthful Celtic keeper was part of the team who won a Uefa Cup match 
against Barça, and he seemed minded to perform a few more heroics here. Having 
reacted well to save Ramírez’s low 25-yard shot and then divert a similar 
effort from Adam Forshaw, he initially proved adept at it.

Boro’s improvement in recent weeks has been largely attributable to Karanka’s 
installation of his other Barcelona old boy, Adama Traoré, wide on the right, 
and the winger’s demotion to the bench raised eyebrows. His place was taken by 
Viktor Fischer, who thought he had scored after turning the ball home following 
Ramírez’s cross and Negredo’s headed flick only to see the effort rightly 
disallowed for a combination of offside and handball.

No matter; Karanka’s players were very much in control. They appeared almost 
affronted when Hull finally escaped their half and looked unprepared for Adama 
Diomandé’s acceleration on to Markus Henriksen’s pass. Then, just as Diomandé, 
shaped to shoot, Ben Gibson slid in to retrieve the situation with a perfectly 
timed, brilliantly executed tackle. “Ben Gibson, he’s one of our own,” chorused 
the Teesside crowd as Steve Gibson, the club’s owner and the centre-half’s 
uncle, looked on approvingly.

Behind the smiles, Gibson Sr might have been a little concerned by Boro’s 
failure to translate superiority into goals, the moment when Fischer’s inviting 
delivery struck a startled Negredo on the side of the head seeming symbolic of 
their attacking travails. Significantly, that was a rare cross from a home 
player and maybe a few more would not have gone amiss.

Possibly this dearth of centres was down to Ramírez being used as much more of 
a playmaking No10 than a winger. It also had something to do with Fischer’s 
struggles to get beyond Ahmed Elmohamady but philosophy comes into it too; 
Karanka wants to play in a more between-the-lines way.

On Monday, though, Hull’s five-man midfield made fluency difficult in the 
freezing air, though the game finally defrosted 15 minutes into a second half 
full of home dominance when a set piece rescued Boro. Fischer’s corner found 
Ramírez totally unmarked at the far post and his glancing header defied 
Marshall. Industry personified, the Uruguayan deserved his moment.

Phelan’s side immediately became more expansive after Ryan Mason and Jake 
Livermore were withdrawn and Tom Huddlestone and the young Jarrod Bowen were 
introduced. And after Ramírez hobbled off with a minor injury, Hull suddenly 
prompted panic for Boro.

Their new-found sense of adventure resulted in Valdés saving brilliantly from 
Diomandé in stoppage time. Connecting with Robert Snodgrass’s ensuing corner, 
the lone striker then poked the ball narrowly wide. Next Valdés directed a 
clearance straight at Snodgrass but he could not quite take advantage. “We 
don’t have great resources,” Phelan said. “We know it’s going to be difficult – 
but this will not kill our sense of belief.”
 