
Parallel lives <http://dera.ioe.ac.uk/14146/1/communitycohesionreport.pdf> was 
the term used to describe communities in the north of England that were 
segregated by race and religion. It followed a number of riots in towns and 
cities in 2001 involving large numbers of people from different cultural 
backgrounds. Surrey’s stockbroker belt couldn’t be further from Oldham and 
Burnley, but in the land of gated mansions a new report finds that residents 
are just as divided, though here it is by income rather than colour or creed.

Inequality in Elmbridge 
<http://www.neweconomics.org/publications/entry/inequality-in-elmbridge>, 
researched and written by the New Economics Foundation, uncovers hidden pockets 
of deprivation and wider gaps in wealth between the haves and have-nots than in 
the rest of the UK. The borough of Elmbridge, which includes affluent 
Weybridge, Cobham and Walton-on-Thames, is home to 130,875 people. Among its 
residents are tennis player Andy Murray, BT boss, Gavin Patterson, and a high 
proportion of professionals and company directors. Analysis by accountancy firm 
UHY Hacker Young notes that Elmbridge’s residents paid the highest amount of 
income tax in the UK in 2012, at £1.18bn. While fewer middle and low earners 
live in the area, the pay gap between the highest and lowest earners is much 
more pronounced than the UK average.

Official figures show that 2,300 children – 8.7% of those under 16 – in 
Elmbridge live in poverty (where household income is below 60% of national 
median earnings). NEF’s report states that poverty is a function not only of 
earnings but of living costs and household needs. Childcare and housing all 
cost more in the borough than in many other places in the UK, and transport 
costs are prohibitive for many people who can’t afford a car, all of which 
makes it harder for those on medium and low incomes to meet everyday needs. A 
single adult would have to be earning £21,089 a year before tax (£4,000 more 
than nationally); a single parent with one child £32,414 (£6,000 more); and for 
two parents with two children, the main breadwinner would have to bring home 
£30,129 (£11,000 more).

‘We must use the living wage to slay the ogre of income inequality’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/31/living-wage-income-inequality-john-sentamu>
In 2013-14, Citizens Advice Elmbridge prevented 180 families from losing their 
homes. Last year, 153 local households received grants from the local Walton 
Charity, to help with debt or rent arrears.

Eleven residents were interviewed in depth from across the income spectrum 
about inequality for the report early last year. Those on benefits or low 
earnings described either being looked down on or ignored. Loss of skilled 
manual labour had contributed to this. “David” remembers both his dad and 
grandfather worked in a factory. Now he says, “if you don’t work in McDonald’s 
and you’re not a policeman, then you’ve got to be an estate agent”.

Residents on low incomes also expressed how they felt they had no influence or 
say over decisions affecting them such as the provision of, or lack of, social 
care. Middle earners appear to be overstretching themselves financially as they 
struggle to keep up with the Joneses, while high earners like “Gareth”’ who 
commute to work at 6am each day reported feeling disconnected from the area. 
When driving through the high street for the first time in two years, he said: 
“I hardly knew where I was and it was only five miles from my front door, 
perhaps less.” He was even more startled by what happened in his local Tesco at 
8pm. “I couldn’t believe what I saw. A large group of people were hovering 
around the vegetable section. A man came along and reduced all of the food. 
Then it was a free-for-all and I have never seen anything like it in my life. A 
cabbage which was probably £1.50 was reduced to 20p and it was a fight to get 
the food,” he recalls. “I guess these people live in Elmbridge, I don’t know.”

He wouldn’t know them, because according to the study, people from different 
income groups don’t mix. One low-income resident said it was difficult when you 
feel you are bottom of the pile. High earners said there was little time to 
mingle.

The report was commissioned by the Walton Charity 
<http://www.waltoncharity.org.uk/Walton/Pages/History.asp>, founded 800 years 
ago to give assistance to the poor of the parish. It’s an admirable response to 
the changing nature of poverty at a timewhen the government is redefining it so 
to be poor no longer means to lack money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/02/david-cameron-abolishes-poverty-poor>
. Yet the structural nature of rising inequality means that the community 
activities the charity is supporting as a result of the report’s finding, from 
strengthening the local foodbank to purchasing a house for homeless people and 
funding arts projects for older residents, will do little more than scratch the 
surface of the problem.


 