
The government should leave open the possibility of imposing further welfare 
cuts during the current parliament if it is to tackle the fiscal deficit, Ken 
Clarke has said.

The former chancellor said that the government had protected too many areas of 
public spending after the new work and pensions secretary,Stephen Crabb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/stephen-crabb>, appeared to indicate that 
ministers would rule out cuts to the welfare budget for the rest of the 
parliament.

 “We have no further plans to make welfare savings beyond the very substantial 
savings legislated for by parliament two weeks ago,” Crabb said in a statement 
to MPs confirming that the government would drop controversial reforms to 
personal independence payments (PIP). The government clarified the remarks by 
stressing that there were no plans to fill the £4.4bn gap caused by dropping 
PIP reforms with further cuts in welfare spending.

Clarke said the government would be wise to give itself room for manoeuvre on 
welfare cuts after “ringfencing”, or protecting spending, on international aid 
and the NHS. The former chancellor told the Today programme on BBC Radio 4: 
“The usual form of words is we have no present plans to make any further cuts 
in welfare. As a former chancellor I would be startled if you were ruling out 
ever again reducing any aspect of the welfare benefit. I would advise against 
that. I think we have ringfenced rather too much. We have ruled out too many 
taxes from any increase.

“Fortunately George [Osborne] has been brilliantly successful in the last five 
or six years. Despite all these constraints of modern politics, if I may talk 
as an old-fashioned chancellor, he has managed to get on top of a financial 
crisis, produced at the moment the fastest-growing economy in the western 
world. He’s got a lot of tough decisions over the course of this parliament to 
keep us on course because the economic outlook isn’t great. We are still 
running a deficit despite the fact that the economy is growing. You can’t just 
pile up debt for future generations.”

Clarke defended the PIP reforms. “The reason it was all agreed by the 
Department [for Work and Pensions] was no one expected this particular bit of 
PIPs to soar away. They have been paying for extra costs to people who are not 
incurring extra costs ... When they announced it even the Labour party didn’t 
create much stir. But then came all the politics of the budget. It actually 
eases fiscal policy. It has reduced taxes and put off spending cuts, which is 
very unusual for the first budget after an election.”

In his statement to MPs, Crabb revealed that the government would review the 
level of its welfare cap in the autumn statement. But he added that “it is 
right that we monitor welfare spending carefully”, arguing that the principle 
of having “discipline” through a cap was right.

A beleaguered Osborne is due to appear in parliament on Tuesday to defend his 
work by taking the unusual step of speaking in the debate following last week’s 
controversial budget, which caused anger on his own backbenches and culminated 
in the resignation ofIain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith>.

 The former work and pensions secretary had accused Osborne and David Cameron 
of protecting wealthy Tory-voting pensioners at the expense of the working 
poor, while a number of backbench MPs were openly attacking his chancellorship.

 Adding to the pressure on Osborne, Boris Johnson, now the frontrunner to 
become the next Conservative leader, told ITV’s Agenda he believed that the 
cuts to PIP were a mistake. He added: “I think I have already said very clearly 
that the government has decided collectively and quite rightly to take the PIP 
aspect of it [the budget] and try to sort it out.”

 Osborne will hit back, and is due to tell MPs: “It is a budget of a 
compassionate, one-nation Conservative government determined to deliver both 
social justice and economic security. It’s a budget that puts the next 
generation first.”

 He will also address Duncan Smith directly, claiming that he is sorry he 
chose to leave government. “[I] want to recognise his achievements in helping 
to make sure work pays, breaking the old cycles of welfare dependency and 
ensuring the most vulnerable in our society are protected,” he will say.
 