
Momentum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/momentum>, the grassroots 
pro-Jeremy Corbyn campaign group, has agreed a new constitution that will 
require its members to join the Labour party, in an attempt to resolve a bitter 
fight about its future.

After Corbyn emailed Momentum’s 20,000 members in December to ask them to 
respond to a survey about how it should be organised and run, its founder Jon 
Lansman drew up a new structure and rules, which he then persuaded members of 
its steering committee to sign up to.

Labour members urged to reject plan for lower leadership threshold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/01/labour-members-urged-to-reject-plan-for-lower-leadership-threshold>
In an email message to the committee, seen by the Guardian, Lansman said: “We 
must put behind us the paralysis that has for months bedevilled all our 
national structures and focus on our most urgent task – winning the general 
election that could come within months.”

Lansman claims to have drawn up the proposals “in consultation with a number 
of others in Momentum, the leader’s office and trade unions that have supported 
Jeremy Corbyn”.

The group had been riven by factional disputes since Corbyn’s re-election in 
September, amid reports that it had beeninfiltrated by Trotskyists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/trotskyist-factions-seeking-to-take-over-momentum-member-claims>
. Corbyn had urged its members to resolve their differences, telling the 
Guardian in December that he would like to see them join Labour.

Momentum issued a public statement on Tuesday night that said elections would 
now be held to a new ruling body and its existing governing structures 
dissolved. It will then seek to become an affiliate of theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party.

“Momentum is moving forwards as the outward-looking, campaigning movement that 
our members want it to be. Over the coming months, Momentum will continue to 
grow, building our movement to encourage more people to participate in politics 
and help Labour harness its new mass membership to win power and rebuild and 
transform Britain,” the statement said.

Under the new constitution, decision-making will be thrown open to votes by 
members. In the survey, 80% of members favoured decision-making by one member 
one vote, rather than a delegate structure.

Members will also have to join Labour – a new rule that could force out 
figures including Jill Mountford, of the Alliance for Workers’ Liberty, and 
former Militant member Nick Wrack, because they are excluded from the party. 
Fellow Momentum activist Jackie Walker is suspended over antisemitism claims, 
which she denies.

Mountford accused Lansman of staging a coup that she and other Momentum 
activists plan to fight. “This is a coup. We are not splitting and we are not 
going to be provoked by this,” she said. “We are going to call a conference for 
grassroots activists and we will to seek to reverse these changes. The 
constitution has been imposed, we are going to continue to fight for a 
democratic organisation.

Come on, Labour. Let’s see the alternative Britain desperately needs | Owen 
Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/labour-alternative-britain-party-left-crisis-europe>
“We still have local organisations to attend and I don’t think activists are 
going to accept this lying down. We will campaign to reverse this,” she said.

“I am in shock. Jon called tonight for an impromptu, unplanned steering 
committee meeting which was conducted online between 7.40pm and 8.30pm. The 
upshot is that Momentum’s steering committee, the national committee and the 
conference arrangements committee, have all been dissolved.”

Mountford and Wrack have been among those fighting against Lansman’s plans to 
throw open decision-making to one-member-one-vote by the membership. At a 
fractious meeting of the national committee last month, they narrowly won a 
battle to make February’s planned Momentum conference into what Mountford 
called “a national delegate based conference with decision-making powers” which 
would debate the details of a policy platform.

But to Lansman and his allies, that strayed too close to replicating the 
structures of a traditional political party. Momentum sources said the 
conference would now be “an exciting day of activist training, workshops and 
networking”.

According to Mountford, Lansman has not been in touch with her since the 
national committee meeting on 3 December. She said the steering committee had 
sent out plans to hold a meeting on Wednesday at Tessa headquarters in London, 
an event she believes prompted Lansman’s actions on Tuesday night.

The relationship between the steering committee, which has agreed the new 
constitution, and the national committee, where some of the most contentious 
debates have been held, is disputed.
 