
When Tony Pulis signed a one-year contract extension at West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> in October, he spoke of how he 
intended to move the club forward but warned against the scourge he has devoted 
his career to trying to eradicate: wishful thinking. “There’s a star in the sky 
and everyone is pointing at that star,” he tut-tutted. “They’re not looking at 
other things left, right and centre.”

Pulis is not a manager who spends time gazing at stars but that is not to say 
he eschews high aims. And look,West Bromwich are suddenly seventh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/west-bromwich-albions-ascent-offers-tony-pulis-chance-for-added-value>
 in the Premier League, having been one place above the relegation zone a month 
ago. As things stand, Pulis is on course to achieve his target of a top-half 
finish, which, admirable as his record is, would be a first for him in a career 
spanning nearly three decades. The West Brom winger James McClean suggested 
this week that with a bit of luck, European qualification could be within reach.

Tony Pulis ordered to pay Crystal Palace £3.77m after ‘deceiving tribunal’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/tony-pulis-crystal-palace-appeal>
The calm and considered response to that is: “Woah there.” The surge up the 
table has come from wins over Leicester, Burnley and Watford and a draw at 
Hull. Good results but not sensational. Before that Albion had won only one of 
nine league matches and been knocked out of the EFL Cup by Northampton Town. 
However, even with those caveats noted, there have been enough encouraging 
signs in the past four performances to indicate there is sustainable change 
afoot and they really could stay in the top half of the table and possibly pour 
cold water on Chelsea’s hot streak on Sunday.

The most striking thing has been how well and enthusiastically West Bromwich 
have attacked. They have scored as many goals in the past four matches as they 
did in the previous 10. Before the splurge they looked a lot like the team of 
last season, who averaged less than a goal a game and did not record a shot on 
target in nearly a quarter of their matches.

Last season’s side steered clear of relegation but were despairingly far from 
entertaining. The best advertisement for Pulis’s management was the floundering 
of neighbours such as Aston Villa and Wolves. So there was something of a 
schism in The Hawthorns congregation when Pulis signed his new contract – 
between pragmatist fans who drew comfort from the certainty he would never get 
them relegated, and fun-loving supporters who thought boredom was too high a 
price to pay for survival.

But all West Bromwich fans have enjoyed the past four matches. Their team have 
played not like last season but more in a manner approaching Pulis’s 
surprisingly adventurous and triumphant Crystal Palace team of two years ago. 
Several factors are at play. First, the returns to fitness of James Morrison 
and Chris Brunt have been major pluses. Morrison missed the second half of last 
season through injury and has regained enough sharpness to have contributed 
thrust and creativity from midfield in recent weeks. Brunt was absent for 
longer but you would not guess from his performances over the same period. He, 
too, enhances Albion’s creativity from open play and thanks to his impeccable 
set-piece deliveries, which are a valuable resource for a team armed with 
powerful headers of the ball such as Jonny Evans and Gareth McAuley.

Brunt, endowed with a left foot so learned it could conjugate Latin verbs, has 
been operating on the right in recent weeks so he can cut infield and shoot 
while allowing Matt Phillips to revel down the left. Phillips, a £5.5m summer 
recruit from Queen Park Rangers, has been in wonderful recent form, scoring 
three goals in his past four matches and dribbling and crossing in a way that 
suggests Pulis has helped him overcome confidence problems.

It is not just about individual contributions. There has been a collective 
change of mood. That was particularly evident at Leicester, when West Bromwich 
outplayed the champions from the start and became the first league visitors in 
more than a year to leave the King Power with a victory. That was a notable 
performance for a team whose default away-setting used to be to go for a 
goalless draw. “We’re getting the ball in the box, getting more people in the 
box and attacking more and better,” said the captain, Darren Fletcher, of the 
recent upswingafter Saturday’s win over Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/west-bromwich-albion-watford-premier-league-match-report>
, which, as it turned out, was harder fought than the one at Leicester.

West Bromwich have not transformed into buccaneers but their increased 
attacking has, at least, meant Salomón Rondón, a terrific centre-forward who 
can do a fair Diego Costa impression on a good day, has not always been as 
isolated as in the past. They even have useful attacking options on the bench 
despite the continued absence of Saido Berahino. McClean and the summer recruit 
Nacer Chadli tend to make strong impacts. Pulis plans to enhance his squad in 
January, too.

They still have a reliable goalkeeper and defence, to which Allan Nyom has 
been good summer addition, but they have not placed quite so much pressure on 
the back four in recent weeks because they have been minded to go forward more. 
It will be interesting to see whether they are able to continue that at 
Stamford Bridge , and against Manchester United and Arsenal in the following 
weeks.
 