

More than 250,000 people in England are homeless or lack a permanent place to 
live, according to Shelter.

Releasing figures to mark its 50th anniversary on Thursday, the charity 
estimated that there were almost 255,000 people living in hostels and other 
types of temporary accommodation, or sleeping rough on the streets.

London is the centre of homelessness, according to the research, with the 
capital’s boroughs occupying 18 of the top 20 positions in Shelter’s list of 
the 50 places where people are most at risk of finding themselves without a 
home.

Child homelessness this Christmas will hit eight-year high, says Shelter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/03/child-homelessness-christmas-eight-year-high-shelter-12000-children-temporary-accommodation>
The analysis also identified homelessness “hotspots” in Brighton, Birmingham, 
Slough, Bristol, Coventry, Reading, Manchester, Luton and Chelmsford.

Shelter’s chief executive, Campbell Robb, said: “Shelter’s founding shone a 
light on hidden homelessness in the 60s’ slums. But while those troubled times 
have faded into memory, 50 years on, a modern-day housing crisis is tightening 
its grip on our country.

“We all face the consequences when so many in our country grow up without a 
place to call home. It breaks up communities and wreaks havoc on family life. 
For the sake of future generations, we must pull together to end this crisis 
and refuse to rest until every child has a place to call home.”

Shelter was launched half a century ago after Ken Loach’s seminal 1966 
television filmCathy Come Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/31/cathy-come-home-50-years-homelessness-mental-health-problems>
, which dramatised the descent of a young couple into poverty and homelessness.

The founders of Shelter envisaged the charity, which lobbied for improved 
housing conditions, would be needed for only a few years.

Shelter says rising homelessness in recent years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/09/britain-rough-sleepers-homelessness-housing-crisis>
 is caused byhigh rents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/16/tenants-in-england-spend-half-their-pay-on-rent>
, a shortage of housing,cuts to housing benefit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/10/low-income-families-private-housing-rent-benefit-freeze>
 and insecure tenancies.

Evictions from private rented homes are the biggest single cause of recorded 
homelessness.

Shelter says its figures are a conservative estimate. It does not include the 
“hidden homeless” – those who have have nowhere to live but do not qualify for, 
or are refused, formal housing assistance and end up “sofa surfing” in friend’s 
homes.

The findings were calculated by Shelter after analysing figures obtained from 
government data and information from social services after a freedom of 
information request.


However, the Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) said it 
did not recognise the figures and argued that official homelessness was half 
the 2003 peak, though it recognised that “one person without a home is one too 
many”.


A DCLG spokesman said: “That is why the government is investing over £500m 
during the course of this parliament to tackle homelessness. This includes 
protecting £315m for local authority homelessness prevention funding, and £149m 
of central government funding.”

Shelter found that in Birmingham, one in 119 people have no permanent home; 
9,524 people were living in temporary accommodation and another 36 were rough 
sleeping, taking the number of people it categorised as homeless to 9,560.

Meanwhile, Westminster in central London was identified as England’s top 
homelessness hotspot, with one in 25 without a permanent home. Approximately 
7,794 people were living in temporary accommodation and a further 265 were 
sleeping rough, meaning a total of 8,059 people were without a permanent home.

Cllr Martin Tett, housing spokesperson for the Local Government Association, 
said: “Funding pressures are combining with housing and rents continuing to 
rise above household incomes to leave many councils struggling to cope with 
rising homelessness across all areas of the country.

Cathy Come Home at 50: thousands of children still face a homeless Christmas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/16/children-homeless-christmas-50-years-cathy-come-home>
 “Finding emergency housing for homeless people, particularly young or 
vulnerable people or those with families, is increasingly difficult for 
councils. There is no silver bullet and councils alone cannot tackle rising 
homelessness.

“It is crucial that the government recognises and addresses the wider factors 
that are increasing homelessness, such as the lack of affordable housing and 
welfare reforms.”

Shelter highlighted the case of a woman named Mandie, who was renting a flat 
in Luton with her two daughters. After being made redundant, she fell behind on 
the rent and was evicted.

She said: “We stayed in a hotel for months and now we’re in temporary 
accommodation. I don’t know where we’ll end up next, or when we’ll be able to 
have a home to call our own.

“This year, my daughters agreed to cancel Christmas. They’re normally hyped 
about it, but I think they’re trying to take the pressure off me. The only 
thing they asked for was whether we could still have a turkey dinner.”
 