
The 1987 Montreal Protocol <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montreal_Protocol>, 
considered the most successful environmental treaty in history, turns 20 on 
September 16, and its achievements will be duly celebrated by over 190 nations 
at a conference of parties in Montreal. In 1988, President Reagan hailed the 
protocol as "a monumental achievement of science and diplomacy" and the US 
senate ratified it unanimously. Later, the heads of theWorld Meteorological 
Organisation <http://www.wmo.ch/> (WMO) and the United Nations Environment 
Programme <http://www.unep.org/> declared that "the action to defend the ozone 
layer will rank as one of the great international achievements of the century." 
Given the implications of ozone layer destruction for health, environment and 
the economy, few would challenge their assessment as hyperbole.

And the treaty has more than lived up to its promise. The protocol has done a 
remarkable job in protecting the fragile stratospheric ozone layer from manmade 
chemicals and thereby preventing harmful solar radiation from reaching planet 
Earth. Millions of deaths from skin cancer will be averted and billions of 
dollars in health benefits will be secured. Because of the treaty, production 
and consumption ofchlorofluorocarbons 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haloalkane#Chlorofluoro_compounds_.28CFC.2C_HCFC.29>
 (CFCs) and other ozone-depleting substances have dramatically declined, and 
the ozone layer is well on the road to recovery.

A little-known element of this success story is that the ozone treaty also 
played an unanticipated crucial role in mitigating climate change, because the 
ozone-depleting chemicals are also potent global warming gases. Research 
reveals that if CFCs had continued to grow at rates prevailing prior to the 
Montreal Protocol, they would by 1990 have surpassed carbon dioxide in global 
warming impact. By phasing out these substances, the ozone treaty actually 
generated five to six times more climate mitigation than the 1997Kyoto Protocol 
<http://unfccc.int/kyoto_protocol/items/2830.php> on climate change. This 
unexpected bonus delayed prospective climate forcing by approximately 12 years, 
thereby postponing the feared "tipping point" in the climate system for rapid 
and irreversible climate change.

Before the negotiators enjoy their birthday cake in Montreal, however, they 
need to confront another unexpected, and considerably less benevolent, 
consequence of the ozone treaty. CFCs were an extremely important family of 
chemicals, finding uses in hundreds of industries and thousands of products. 
They could not simply be eliminated; they had to be replaced. And it turns out 
that some of the substitutes, includinghydrochlorofluorocarbons 
<http://www.ace.mmu.ac.uk/eae/Global_Warming/Older/HCFCs.html> (HCFCs), 
themselves have enormous global warming potential.

Under the Montreal Protocol, HCFCs were intended as transitional chemicals. 
For many - but not all - uses, effective substitutes have been found, and the 
industrialized countries have by now substantially replaced HCFCs with less 
threatening chemicals and processes. But in many developing countries, in 
particular such rapidly industrialising giants as China and India, HCFC use is 
rising to such an extent that it begins to threaten both the ozone layer and 
the revived global efforts to address climate change.

This problem has been recognised by numerous governments, including the Group 
of Eight (G8) - Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, United Kingdom, 
and United States - in its 2007 summit declaration. Resuming its traditional 
leadership role, the US, along with such nations as Argentina, Brazil, Iceland, 
Norway, Switzerland and several low-lying island and coastal states, have 
submitted proposals to the September meeting to accelerate HCFC phase-out. The 
27-nation European Union will likely also support these efforts.

Strengthening the Montreal Protocol offers one of the most efficient 
short-term opportunities to address climate change. Success at Montreal-plus-20 
would demonstrate that the parties can also work together to address climate 
change. For industrialised nations, it represents a chance to relieve their 
other industries of at least some of the burden of mitigating climate change. 
For developing countries, it is an opportunity to speed transition into new, 
more energy efficient technologies.

However, the United Nations operates on consensus, and ways must be found to 
bring hesitant new HCFC producers into the fold - much as we did in 1987, when 
few gamblers would have wagered that a strong ozone treaty could be achieved. 
Major efforts by the US delegation now, as then, could make a real difference. 
Success on this issue could also bring new significance for US leadership on 
climate change when President Bush convenes nations representing the world's 
largest emitters of greenhouse gases in Washington less than a week after the 
Montreal birthday party. That would be worth a celebration.
 