
Muirfield is in danger of losing its Open status with members close to 
blocking the admission of women. An announcement on that vote could arrive as 
early as Thursday.

Muirfield, as controlled by the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers, has 
presided over an historically male-only membership policy. That bias has come 
into intense focus around recent Opens,most recently in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/18/open-2013-muirfield-men-only> 
when the R&A, which controls the third major of the year, was vehemently 
criticised for utilising the East Lothian venue.

Royal Troon will host 2016 Open Championship as a men-only golf club
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/26/royal-troon-host-2016-open-championship-men-only-golf-club>
Since 1892, 16 Opens have been held at Muirfield. Should current membership 
rules be endorsed by a 2016 vote, two-thirds is needed to allow female members, 
scope for a 17th in the near future would be removed. A consultation exercise 
with members opened after the events of three years ago, but it was never a 
given that Muirfield’s policy would change. It has now emerged that a group of 
30 members, fronting a “no” campaign against the admission of women, has had a 
strong influence. In their letter to them, as obtained by The Scotsman, they 
state: “It is recognised that it is a very sensitive matter and the club is in 
a difficult position, but associations like ours with a very long and venerable 
history have strengths which are derived from that history.

“Change must come slowly and for choice should be evolutionary. A traditional 
resistance to change is one of the foundations of our unique position in golf 
and our reputation.”

The letter continues: “It is accepted that we may have to change, but we 
should not do so now on the basis suggested. We have had a lengthy process, but 
it is felt that there is time to pause and consider further options to develop 
the club and it is hoped retain the Open.

“It is recommended that members vote against the resolution to change our 
rules to include the admission of lady members.”

Royal Troon, which hosts this year’s Open, announced on Tuesday that it has 
written to its 800 members regarding the possible including of female members.
 