
Rupert Murdoch is planning a form of takeover for Sky that would make it 
easier for his21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox> group to squeeze out 
shareholders opposed to the £11.2bn deal.

Advisers on the transaction between Sky and Fox, which is expected to lodge an 
official bid later this week, are pursuing a so-called “scheme of arrangement”. 
This tactic, which requires Sky to gain approval from investors representing 
75% of the voting rights, will ensure that all shareholders against the deal 
are forced to sell once the threshold is reached.

Fox owns 39.14% of Sky and has 37.19% of voteable shares, but under a scheme 
of arrangement it is not allowed to cast its votes. The 75% approval threshold 
must be met by votes from non-Fox shareholders.

Does Rupert Murdoch's Sky takeover bid pass the public interest test?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/rupert-murdochs-sky-takeover-pass-public-interest-test>
Sky has a significant shareholder base that is disgruntled with elements of 
Fox’s management of the business. In October, more than 50% of Sky’s 
independent shareholdersvoted against James Murdoch’s reappointment as chairman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/sky-shareholders-revolt-against-james-murdoch-appointment-chairman-agm>
. Murdoch was approved by 71.55% of total shareholders when Fox’s voting power 
was included.

Under a straightforward takeover bid for Sky, Fox could be left with an 
activist minority shareholder base in the pay-TV broadcaster if less than 90% 
of Sky’s investors accepted its bid.

A conventional bid would require backing from 50% of the shareholder base for 
Fox to take legal control, but in order to take full control of the shares and 
force all investors to sell would require 90% backing – much higher than the 
scheme of arrangement’s 75%.

Legal experts say getting stuck below the 90% threshold with a conventional 
offer could leave Fox with numerous problems, including potentially preventing 
Sky from taking its shares off the London Stock Exchange and becoming a fully 
private business.

Rupert Murdoch is also facing calls to increase his £11.2bn offer for Sky from 
investors, who are also raising questions about the boardroom structure of the 
broadcaster. Murdoch’s21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox> film and television group 
stunned the City on Friday by announcing it had clinched the agreement of Sky 
for the bid of £10.75 cash per share 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/rupert-murdochs-fox-agrees-deal-to-buy-sky>
.

Fox is also reportedly looking to include a guarantee on protecting staff 
numbers and investment in the UK to help sweeten its controversial move to take 
full control of Sky. The legally binding guarantees, which would be enacted if 
Fox’s takeover bid successfully navigates competition and media plurality 
probes, are likely to include protections for Sky’s 23,000 UK staff and a 
guarantee of investment in Sky.

Some investors said over the weekend the price – at a 40% premium to the level 
the shares were trading before the offer was announced – was too low.

Thomas Moore, investment director of UK equities at Standard Life Investments, 
added to the concerns on Monday. He said: “We’ve got to represent the interests 
of our clients and our view would be no, this isn’t a good deal.”

He pointed out that the Sky share price was at a level it had been trading at 
only a few months ago, since when the the largest pay-TV broadcaster in Britain 
has been setting out ways to bolster returns to shareholders.

Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Monday, Moore added: “The share 
price clearly was at a low ebb on Friday when the bid was rumoured and, of 
course, we would be expecting a full value and the question is whether the 
board is independent enough to represent the interest of all shareholders, not 
just the 40% that is owned by 21st Century Fox.”

The boardroom composition of Sky was also raised by other investors. Sky has 
attempted to address this by setting up an independent committee of the board 
to review the offer from 21st Century Fox. The committee is being chaired by an 
existing board member, Martin Gilbert, who is chief executive of Aberdeen Asset 
Management, which owns a stake in Sky. Moore said he hoped Gilbert would step 
up and put forward a strong case” that the bid undervalued the true value of 
the company.

 Piers Hillier, chief investment officer at Royal London Asset Management, 
another Sky shareholder, said: “It would have been preferable to have an 
independent chairman. The creation of an independent committee of the board 
(excluding James Murdoch) to consider the bid addresses some of the conflicts 
of interest, however it doesn’t go far enough.”

Murdoch has had hopes of unifying the two business empires for years. In 2011, 
he abandoned his News Corporation’s £8bn bid for BSkyB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/13/rupert-murdoch-gives-up-bskyb-bid>
 after public outcry over phone hacking. Since then, the businesses have been 
restructured. News Corp houses the newspapers, such as the Sun and the Times, 
and 21st Century Fox businesses such Fox News. Sky owns TV and film assets as 
well as pay-TV operations in Italy and Germany.

Roddy Davidson of stockbroker Shore Capital said the price was credible. But, 
he added, this still might not stop “pushback” from shareholders.

Analysts at global equity research firm Jefferies said the deal may be able to 
overcome any concerns from Britain’s media regulator. “Ofcom’s historical 
reservations about media plurality seem less credible now with more fragmented 
landscapes of news distribution and TV, also the split of legacy News Corp TV 
and press interests,” they said.


The culture secretary, Karen Bradley, has 10 working days from being notified 
of a formal bid to notify the regulator that an investigation should be 
launched.

“The [culture] department is putting in place procedures to ensure that her 
decision making process is scrupulously fair and impartial should a decision be 
necessary,” Matt Hancock, minister for digital and culture, told the Commons on 
Monday. “The role of the secretary of state here is a quasi-judicial one and it 
is important that she acts independently and is not subject to improper 
influence.”

Hancock added that guidance is being drawn up for ministers and officials for 
dealing with interested parties in the bid.

Sky said in a statement: “The company recently launched its mobile offering 
and less than two months ago held an investor day that gave investors a 
comprehensive insight in to the company and its growth plans – the market took 
a view and fully priced in these opportunities prior to the possible offer.

“The independent directors are highly experienced and respected individuals 
who know their fiduciary responsibilities.

“If a bid at this level is forthcoming, shareholders themselves will have the 
opportunity to accept a price which reflects a 40% premium or they can chose to 
continue to hold their stock.”
 