
What does my bog snorkel say about me?

“It says I’ll give anything a try. What’s the worst that can happen? You just 
get a bit brown and sludgy.”

And what it really says

The other week I went swimming in a tidal river that gets very muddy when the 
water is low. Even at high tide, the water was a gloopy prospect. God, I hated 
it: the slime as you walked in, sole-sucking sludge. Swimming became a 
desperately horizontal exercise, an attempt to keep feet away from the murk and 
mud beneath.

So I doff my swimming cap to Jan and her bog-snorkelling antics. Her choice of 
activity shows her positive attitude to life, that sod-it, 
I’ll-try-anything-once approach that becomes an attribute of many women in 
their middle age. Jen changed her life by moving to Wales six years ago and 
she’s clearly still up for adventure – even if that adventure involves becoming 
a Swamp Thing for a while.

What I love about women like Jen is how free they are from inhibitions. Youth 
can be a restrained age, every action restricted by how you will look, what 
others will think, the impression you might make on someone you fancy. Middle 
age brings more excitement than you can ever imagine, simply because you stop 
acting according to other people’s taste or opinion and start doing what you 
like. Suddenly, everything is an option.

And nature has a stronger pull as we get older. The exhilaration of urban 
nightlife is replaced by the rush of the outdoors, energy surging into our 
bodies and souls from cold water, bleak winds, stormy scenes, bright sun. The 
spirit of the wild. After my sludge-river swim, I don’t fancy joining Jen, but 
it’s fun to think of her, paddling along in a filthy river, looking for 
something interesting to emerge from the mire. A frog? An otter? The Loch Ness 
monster on a spa break? I hope she has windscreen wipers for her goggles.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
 