
What does my uniform say about me?

“It says I’m a bit leftfield. I’ve always tried to combine education with 
entertainment, and I hope I’m a good leader.”

And what it really says

This is not a picture of Thomas, retired teacher. It is a picture of Thomas, 
loyal supporter of King Charles I, officer inSir William Pennyman 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sir_William_Pennyman,_1st_Baronet>’s regiment 
and proud Cavalier. And he looks great. Curly helmet feathers, white lacy boot 
turner-overers (I don’t know the technical terms), scary gun, excellent leather 
man-bags and a bloody marvellous suede coat. There are elements of his outfit – 
the coat and bags, specifically – that could be worn with ease around the 
hipster hostelries of 2016.

Yet it is not 2016 for Thomas. Not while wearing this outfit. I am interested 
in the transformative effect of clothes (wearing a white doctor’s coat has been 
proven to make people perform better in tests), and Thomas’s Civil War outfit 
is utterly transformative. It might not be for those who view him, who could 
point to his contemporary-looking beard and say, “Not very (Laughing) 
Cavalier”. But that’s not the point. This outfit is transformative for Thomas. 
It changes him.

It’s customary to be a bit sneery about people who dress up like Thomas. But 
nothing happens – in life, in work, in love – unless you take it seriously, and 
Thomas’s long years in Civil War re-enactment shows he does exactly this. He 
has knowledge. He knows what he’s doing.

We celebrate OTT computer games and Imax films, but actually, the best events 
are often sparked by a combination of the real world and our imaginations. At a 
festival, you imagine you can feel the love when you dance with a group of 
strangers. At a re-enactment, you imagine the fear when you recreate a battle. 
And so, for that time, it is real. Virtual reality. Like real life, only more 
involving.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
 