
What does my Coke collection say about me?


“It says I have no self-control. I love stuff from the 90s – I was a child 
then, but now no one is saying: ‘You can’t have that…’”

And what it really says

Ladi has an awful lot of Coke merch, and when you see it all together, the 
brand repetition turns each piece into a part of a whole. We can pick out 
individual items – the big Coke can seat, the special yellow T-shirt – but 
there is so much stuff that it merges into one. Ladi is living in aCoca-Cola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/cocacola> world.

He is cool with this on a couple of levels. As a buyer and seller, he knows 
how much his collection is worth; plus it makes him happy, which is trickier to 
price. Coca-Cola reminds him of being a kid in the 90s, he says. The 90s were a 
strange combination of dully neutral (CK1, cargo trousers, beige computers) and 
maddeningly bright (rave, enormo-logos, that awful purple dinosaur). As a kid 
Ladi would naturally have been drawn to the bright, modern side. But Coke is 
also wrapped in nostalgia: a yearning for a happier, simpler, more “real” time, 
which chimes with present-day Ladi and his childhood memories.

Coke is wrapped in nostalgia, which chimes with Ladi and his childhood memories

Coke also represents somewhere Other. Coca-Cola is not a Mancunian brand. Coke 
is USA, more USA than pumpkin pie with a Stars-and-Stripes flag stuck in the 
top. As an all-American brand, only McDonald’s comes close, and as Ronald is a 
clown, the creepy factor is always close with McDonald’s. Coke doesn’t have a 
creepy factor. It’s an upbeat, fizzy tonic; a sugar-fuelled dream that brings 
together childish hope and American achievement. It’s designed to make you 
happy, and a bit fired up. Collecting Coke souvenirs is different from 
collecting china frogs. Or Second World War memorabilia.

I like this collection. I like its spirit: the time spent, the hard search, 
the delight in the find, the lining up for display. Collecting things you like 
is a hunt for happiness and order. In an unhappy, disordered world, we all want 
a bit of that.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
 