
Prince William <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-william> is a very 
successful royal. Like Elton John as a songwriter or Gyles Brandreth in 
Dictionary Corner, he’s just good at it. He has a knack.

He is not “good at it” in the old-fashioned way. An old-school successful 
royal exudes strangeness and decadence, entitlement and pomp. For this, you 
must look no further than Prince Andrew. (I don’t know where he currently is, 
but we can only assume he’s in a hot tub in the Middle East, unwinding after a 
strenuous day’s work at a topless golf tournament to boost UK trade, angrily 
reflecting on how little we appreciate him. If you can hear me, Andrew:I 
appreciate you.)

Prince Andrew’s personality is so enormous that we can, like Armando Iannucci 
and Steve Coogan could while writing Alan Partridge, imagine what he would do 
and say in pretty much any situation at all. Prince William is the opposite. We 
simply don’t know him, not even in the one-dimensional way that so adds to the 
gaiety of nations. We can’t caricature him. We wouldn’t know what to exaggerate.

If we try to imagine what Prince William thinks about things, we never get 
beyond whatwe think about things. He wants a job but enjoys his time off. He’s 
fond of his children. He likes a laugh.

The way in which we meaninglessly project our own opinions on to this 
uncontroversial, undislikable prince was perfectly illustrated by his speech 
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/16/prince-william-appears-to-signal-support-for-remaining-in-eu>
 to Foreign Office diplomats. A few bland remarks about “our ability to unite 
in common action with other nations” were hailed by the pro-EU lobby as a sign 
of his royal highness’s support for a federal Europe. But Eurosceptic MP Peter 
Bone said: “It sounds to me much more like a pro-Nato speech… more global in 
nature than pro-European.”

The Britain Stronger in Europe group said the prince was clearly “getting 
behind the campaign for Britain to stay in the EU”. But the anti-EUDaily Mail 
said “the speech could easily be interpreted as being sympathetic to the case 
for Brexit”.

Well done that prince! It is absolutely to his credit that onlookers project 
their opinions on to him as though they were renting banner space on his newly 
gleaming head. His remarks are as featureless as a top-quality Imax screen – 
they allow our own views to be presented in razor-sharp HD. So, after searching 
around in my own brain, here are a few things that it is very clear that the 
prince has been thinking.

• Prince William finds it very annoying when the people on the cash register 
at Tesco put a receipt into his hand with change on top of it. Prince William 
is already juggling the shopping, his purse and his handbag. He can do without 
extra bits of crap.

• Prince William was horrified by that story about an airline pilot being 
dazzled by a shop-bought laser pointer. Bloody hell, Prince William thought. 
Planes are terrifying enough already, what with mechanical failure and 
terrorist bombs and anti-aircraft guns and suicidal alpine copilots and geese 
flying into engines. Now they can be brought down with something you buy in a 
toyshop? That’s it, Prince William has resolved: from now on, he’s having all 
his holidays in Dorset.

• Prince William is amused to read that Marmite has become popular in Spain, 
the land of tapas. Prince William thinks this neatly disproves the stupid 
cliche that Marmite is something you love or hate, when in fact everyone is 
happy to have a small amount of it but nobody wants much.

• Prince William wishes that shorts didn’t exist. He can see them trickling 
into the shops again. They are so unflattering and yet, on a hot day, so comfy 
and convenient. If they didn’t exist, Prince William reflects gloomily every 
summer, then he wouldn’t have to face that quandary.

• Prince William is happy for Roman Abramovich that plans have been approved 
for a £28m subterranean leisure complex beneath the oligarch’s London home. The 
sinister football magnate wants to update what he describes as his current 
“miserable” swimming pool. But Prince William can’t help asking himself whether 
a swimming pool jemmied into a London basement will ever be anything else. He 
wonders if the plutocrat might not consider building it in, for example, Corfu.

• Prince William is struggling with the idea that Stephen Fry was called 
sexist for joking at an awards ceremony that a costume designer was dressed 
like a bag lady. The Duke of Cambridge agrees with the legendaryQI funnyman 
that “joshing is legitimate”. If one only joshes men about their appearance, 
and never women, surely that would be sexist? Sexist means discriminatory, no? 
It might have been anungallant remark, and Prince William has always thought 
that gallantry is rather lovely, but only in a sexist sort of way. Prince 
William secretly feels quite warm and charmed when he locks eyes with a twinkly 
old duffer who’s held open a door. Can one be gallant without being sexist? The 
prince isn’t sure where he stands on this, despite having been a woman for 
40-odd years.

• Prince William doesn’t like it when film trailers include too many jokes and 
plot points. It makes Prince William suspect that they’ve put every good thing 
about the film into the trailer and the rest is just waffle. Prince William 
thinks that film trailers should be teasers, not digests. Now he comes to think 
of it, Prince William wonders whether there might actually be something he can 
do about this, in his role as the honorary president of Bafta. Prince William 
is now a bit confused about the format of this column.
 