
You might think that having chopped up and cooked up as much meat as I have in 
my life that I would take a slaughterhouse in my stride. The truth is that 
despite being a toughie in the kitchen, I’m really the kind of chef who would 
always rather someone else lowered the lobster into the pot of boiling water. 
I’m fine with dead animals, but the point at which animals cross from living to 
lunch is one that makes me wobble a bit.
 Allegra cuddles a piglet. But soon it was time to see where the meat is 
slaughtered. Photograph: E. Black 
But last year, as part of the pre-launch research for my new restaurant 
Blackfoot, I visited the abattoir where our meat would be coming from, and this 
week I went back.

The sole purpose of Blackfoot is to venerate the pig in all its manifold 
glory. We opened last December, and so my business partner Tom Ward and I spent 
most of last summer very happily trudging around fields of pigs and cuddling 
day-old piglets all over the country. We knew what was important to us and kept 
going until we found farms that fitted with our welfare standards and integrity 
values, as well as simply producing consistently great tasting meat. When we 
met Mark Heywood ofDingley Dell Farm in Suffolk <http://www.dingleydell.com/>, 
we instantly knew we had our man, and our pigs.

 Happy wallowing at Dingley Dell Farm in Suffolk. Photograph: E. Black 
Heywood and his brother Paul run a very progressive outfit now, but the family 
business they inherited from their dad was a traditional, intensive pig farm. I 
ask Mark where his dad used to send his pigs for slaughter: “In the old days 
the farmer had choices: livestock markets, abattoirs or direct to butchers. 
These days with the huge rise of the supermarkets, most meat in this country 
will end up on their shelves via one of a handful of abattoirs. For most of 
them, there’s no choice.”

Due to the nature of Dingley Dell’s specialised outdoor farming – supplying 
some of the best restaurateurs in London such as Galvin, Jason Atherton and 
Ramsey – they do have a choice, and they use a local, mid-size abattoir, run by 
another two brothers – Chris and Kevin Burrows. As part of the pre-Blackfoot 
pig research, I felt that I really needed to see how our pigs met their maker, 
and so we drove the 40-minute journey to the Burrows abattoir with a growing 
knot in my tum; despite being in the food business for 20-odd years, this was 
to be my first slaughterhouse.
 Mark Heywood with a prize pig at Dingley Dell Farm in Suffolk. Photograph: E. 
Black 
Although I really did want to see this missing piece between farm and 
restaurant back door, I wasn’t exactly rushing out of the car when we pulled up 
outside a completely normal looking, if rather large, unit on an industrial 
estate. I took a deep breath, expecting it to smell like death, exhaled 
gratefully when it just smelt like Suffolk, and in we went.

Walk rounds have to start at the end of the process and finish with the “high 
care” area, which is where the pigs are still alive. For this most recent visit 
the business development manager, Graham Pentelow, shows us round, waiting 
patiently while we get suited, booted and sanitised to within an inch of our 
lives.


We go round the corner and see eight eviscerated pigs split in half from the 
rear to the nape of their necks, hanging on hooks from their heels moving fast 
towards us on the overhead haulage system, with steam rolling off them in huge 
clouds like they’ve just got out of a sauna. It is jaw-droppingly weird but 
even more surprisingly my feelings are not of nausea as I had feared, but of 
wonder. I can feel my eyes widening and over the next hour I am aware they’ve 
taken on a look somewhere between intently engaged and slightly demonic.
 Allegra is suited and booted near pig carcasses. Photograph: E. Black 
Before we follow the line back to where the pigs are processed we go into one 
of two enormous fridges, where I guess about 200 pigs are cooling down – the 
rule is 16 hours from kill to chill for transportation. Again, I do a little 
soul-searching to see how I was feeling and so far feel is it more awesome than 
gruesome. But really, so far this is nothing more than a big walk-in fridge 
like you see at the back of your butchers. The tour we are about to start is 
the heart of the matter.

We turn the corner and I’m instantly alive to the situation: the noise of 
machinery (thankfully none of animals), the 30 or so men busily working on 
platforms on the pig line (as opposed to the beef line, which runs down the 
other side of the room), and above all the constant passing of split pigs at 
head height. We’ve hit the nerve centre of the operation.

The order of service, as it were, is that the pigs are gassed in a rotating 
chamber that holds 10 animals, then they slide down a chute, hooked up by the 
heel and attached to an overhead pulley system that will ultimately deliver 
them into refrigerated trucks for transport. They are then bled over a large 
concrete drainage area, deposited into a bloody great machine that tumbles them 
for a good few minutes to get their hair off and then rehooked up. And this is 
where the serious work starts: first off a worker with a gas-gun gives the 
cadavers a once-over to burn off any hair. “That bit always reminds me of The 
Deer Hunter,” Pentelow says cheerfully, pulling out his regulation earplugs. 
Next up they go through a Mr Ben-type curtain and come out the other side as 
clean, pink pigs. Less than 10 minutes ago they were alive, five minutes ago 
they looked like dead animals, now they look like meat.
 The animals are killed by being gassed with concentrated CO2. After they are 
bled, a worker cleans up the the cadavers with a gas gun to burn off any hairs. 
Photograph: E. Black 
As the pigs pass down the line, the first guy makes a perfect cut from the 
base of their throat to near their genitalia. The next deftly lifts out a 
tumbling mess of grey-with-a-hint-of-mauve intestines and drops them down a 
chute onto a conveyor belt. The next couple of lads remove the offal – liver, 
heart, lungs, kidneys – as carefully as they are quick. These dark, bloody 
pieces are then hung by hand onto a bit of kit that I can only describe as the 
most macabre looking set of hooks you’ve ever seen. They’re checked by the meat 
inspector before being separated into different plastic containers. The 
carcasses are now cleaned out and good to go; they get a final looking-over and 
sign-off by another meat inspector before leaving for the chillers.

Still working towards life we reach the Rubicon – the enormous bloodletting 
area behind the gassing machine. We walk across it, dodging the pigs overhead 
that have just plonked down the chute which leads out of the back of it. And 
now for the first time I can hear squeals. Quite a lot of them to be honest, 
but I know enough about pigs to know they are always chatty, vociferous animals 
and although I am listening for distressed pig noises I can’t in truth make any 
out. But here they are; a hundred or so pigs in what is called “lairage”, or 
holding pens, where they spend a maximum of 60-90 minutes. From there the 
animals are trotted along in single file up a ramp and into a stall that is one 
of 10 that continually rotate. As the stalls go round they enter into an area 
of highly concentrated CO2, which being denser than air sinks to the bottom. So 
90 seconds later they’re dead and they leave via the helter-skelter chute to be 
hung up and bled.

 Sorting out the offal. Photograph: E. Black 
“We do 4,000-4,500 pigs a week, whereas the super-abattoirs can do 6,000 a 
day. One of the biggest now is Cranswick, not far from us in Norwich. They’re a 
limited company listed on the stock exchange with an annual turnover of £740m,” 
says Pentelow. We all know how much meat we eat in this country, so clearly 
there’s money to be made on that journey.

But the reason Heywood’s farm chose to work with the Burrows abattoir, and one 
of the reasons we went with Dingley, was not because they’re a mid-size 
independent, but because of how they kill their pigs. “We gas-stun in a high 
concentration of CO2 as opposed to the traditional method of pronging, which 
serves two purposes: firstly it’s considerably more humane as the pigs don’t 
get as stressed as when they are pronged. And secondly, because of this, 
there’s a lot less damage to the carcass: with stun-pronging you can expect 10% 
carcass damage, with gas stunning it’s less than 1%.”

Gas stunning costs on average £1 a pig more than pronging, and when you 
consider the price for processing a pig at their abattoir is £18.50, it is a 
sizeable fraction of the cost. With that in mind, that reasons why Heywood and 
the Burrows brothers are convinced and committed to their process are a 
combination of humanity and quality. As Heywood says: “You want to be doing the 
right thing by them at the time of slaughter.” This is from the man I’ve never 
seen approach one of his 7,000 pigs without an almost affectionate “Hello, 
girl!”

All of which is almost laudable, as it’s the economics of abattoirs that have 
seen mass-consolidation of the industry over the last 20 years. After the BSE 
and foot-and-mouth epidemics, the rules around slaughter got understandably 
much more stringent. British Retail Consortium (BRC) accreditation got tougher 
with ever-higher standards and tougher auditing (for which the abattoir pays 
£1,500). According to Pentelow, the retailers (ie supermarkets) also come in 
and demand their own set of regulations too, audits for which also come at a 
premium. “Having a full-time vet and a full time meat inspector is now a legal 
requirement,” says Pentelow, “even if you were only going to run 100 animals a 
week. We run through roughly 6,000 per week, and we are legally required to 
have three meat inspectors and a vet here at all times.” Even though each 
slaughterhouse is only responsible for 50% of their wages, the economies of 
scale are really against the little guys.
 Slicing the pig meat parts. Photograph: E. Black 
Because of the possible contamination of the food chain, getting rid of the 
bits that there isn’t a market for is an expensive business. Pig’s blood (and 
each pig has approximately six litres) is taken away from CK at the rate of 
£100p/tonne, and is then dried by a company in Doncaster, made into pellets and 
used to fuel power stations. Another big cost is keeping the operation clean, 
which takes 100 tonnes of water a day alone. He estimates that it costs them 
£3m a year to just run CK meats.


“It’s only going one way for sure,” says Heywood, “which is to bigger and 
fewer abattoirs. The only thing that could ever change that is if the consumer 
demanded it.” Sounds like the beginning of a campaign, I think, but then much 
as I like the idea of a small independent killing my meat as opposed to a huge 
corporate slaughterhouse, on reflection there are two things I care more about: 
animal welfare and food safety. And so if there are to be any changes in the 
evolution of abattoirs in this country I’d like to see more going towards gas 
stunning and less use of barbaric-looking and unreliable pronging. And I wonder 
what the food-labelling sticker would look like for that?

Interested in finding out more about how you can live better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live-better>? Take a look at this 
month’s Live Better challengehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/02/welcome-to-live-better>.

The Live Better Challenge is funded by Unilever; its focus is sustainable 
living. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 