
A new lab procedure that could allow fertility clinics to make sperm and eggs 
from people’s skin may lead to “embryo farming” on a massive scale and drive 
parents to have only “ideal” future children, researchers warn.

Legal and medical specialists in the US say that while the procedure – known 
as in vitro gametogenesis (IVG) – has only been demonstrated in mice so far, 
the field is progressing so fast that the dramatic impact it could have on 
society must be planned for now.

“We try not to take a position on these issues except to point out that before 
too long we may well be facing them, and we might do well to start the 
conversation now,” said Eli Adashi, professor of medical science at Brown 
University in Rhode Island.

The creation of sperm and eggs from other tissues has become possible through 
a flurry of recent advances in which scientists have learned first to reprogram 
adult cells into a younger, more versatile state, and then to grow them into 
functioning sex cells. In October, scientists in Japanannounced for the first 
time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/17/healthy-mice-born-from-lab-grown-eggs-spark-calls-for-debate-on-future-use>
 the birth of baby mice from eggs made with theirparent’s skin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/13/skin-cells-instead-of-eggs-make-embryos-scientists-say>
.

The technology is still in its infancy and illegal to attempt in humans in the 
UK and the US. But, writing in the journalScience Translational Medicine 
<http://stm.sciencemag.org/lookup/doi/10.1126/scitranslmed.aag2959>, Adashi, 
along with Glenn Cohen, a professor of law at Harvard Law School, and George 
Daley, dean of Harvard Medical School, argue that it may be possible to make 
human eggs and sperm from skin “in the not too distant future”.

IVG could offer fresh hope for infertile people, including those who are 
unable to have children after cancer treatment. Because chemotherapy can 
destroy reproductive cells, patients sometimes store their sperm or ovarian 
tissue to use once they have recovered. With IVG, it may be possible to collect 
skin cells from a patient and turn them into healthy sperm or eggs for use inIVF
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/ivf> later on. The procedure could 
transform IVF in other ways too, the researchers say, by making egg donors 
obsolete and replacing the standard hormonal stimulation that is used to make 
women produce eggs.

But alongside its potential benefits, IVG throws up a host of situations that 
pose fresh legal and ethical questions. If the procedure ever became simple and 
inexpensive, clinics could manufacture almost limitless supplies of sperm, eggs 
and embryos. “IVG might raise the specter of ‘embryo farming’ on a scale 
currently unimagined, which might exacerbate concerns about the devaluation of 
human life,” the researchers write.


For a couple having fertility treatment, IVG could mean that instead of 
doctors choosing the best from half a dozen or so embryos, they could select 
from a pool of hundreds. And while that may be a benefit, it could intensify 
“concerns about parents selecting for their ‘ideal’ future child”, the authors 
write.

Cohen said he and his colleagues were not expressing their personal views on 
how IVG might be used. Instead, they wanted to start a debate about the 
potential ramifications of using the procedure in humans. Offering up one 
example, Cohen said: “For those who oppose embryo destruction, creating, say 
100 embryos when you are only going to use five for implantation may seem 
problematic.”

What were previously no more than science fiction scenarios may become more 
realistic with IVG, the researchers suggest. In one extreme example described 
by Cohen, skin cells might be collected from Brad Pitt’s hotel bathtub and used 
to make sperm for insemination. “Should the law criminalise such an action? If 
it takes place, should the law consider the source of the skin cells to be a 
legal parent to the child, or should it distinguish between an individual’s 
genetic and legal parentage?” the researchers ask in the article.

In another hypothetical situation, IVG could be used to make sperm and eggs 
from more than two people. These could then be combined to make children with 
three or more genetic parents. The case raises serious questions about the 
rights and responsibilities of each contributing parent, the authors write.

It will take many more studies, including experiments in monkeys and other 
animals, before scientists know whether IVG is effective and safe enough to 
attempt in people. The first steps in humans will be to make sperm from a man’s 
skin cells and eggs from a woman’s skin. In principle, it would be possible to 
make sperm from a woman’s skin cells, and use them to fertilise her own eggs.

“When new technologies come out, the law is often accused of playing 
catch-up,” Cohen said. “Far better to think and discuss on the front end, even 
if some of this never comes to pass, than scramble on the back end to gap-fill, 
in my humble opinion.”

 “With science and medicine hurtling forward at breakneck speed, the rapid 
transformation of reproductive and regenerative medicine may surprise us,” the 
authors conclude. “Before the inevitable, society will be well advised to 
strike and maintain a vigorous public conversation on the ethical challenges of 
IVG.”
 