
An NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> ambulance service has been 
accused of endangering patients’ lives by scrapping a system under which 
specialist paramedics responded to the most urgent 999 calls, such as strokes, 
heart attacks and car crashes.

A leaked memo from the South East Coast ambulance service (Secamb) shows its 
most highly trained paramedics will have to deal with minor ailments because it 
cannot cope with soaring demand for care and ambulances are taking too long to 
reach patients.

The move has angered Secamb’s 60 critical care paramedics (CCPs), who warn 
that lives could be lost because they are busy dealing with non-urgent 
callouts, such as back pain, instead of life or death emergencies.

The paramedics, who have all gained a postgraduate certificate in critical 
care after a year’s extra study, specialise in administering drugs and 
performing procedures that standard ambulance crews are not trained to do, 
including advanced resuscitation techniques. They have saved countless lives 
during the 10 years the CCP system has existed.

Secamb, which provides NHS ambulance services in Surrey, Sussex, Kent and 
north-east Hampshire, has 725 general paramedics and 90 paramedic 
practitioners. The latter specialise in treating patients at home so they do 
not have to go to A&E.

In the memo sent last week, which the Guardian has obtained, Geraint Davies, 
the service’s acting chief executive, admitted the move “will cause some 
anxiety and uncertainty”. Unions representing Secamb ambulance crews have 
voiced deep unease and one CCP, who did not want to be named, criticised the 
change as “shortsighted, risky and not right”.

“People will suffer because of it,” he said. “The risk is of death among 
patients who could have been saved, maybe because we were tied up dealing with 
a minor ailment such as a cold, toothache, period pain or any of the other 
rubbish that people dial 999 with [which obliges Secamb to respond].

“It could be that we’re with Mrs Jones who, after having back pain for four 
years, suddenly decides to call an ambulance about it. Secamb have kept us away 
from stuff like that for years; that system has worked, we have saved a lot of 
people as a result of that, including resuscitating people who were in effect 
dead, and now this.”

Nigel Sweet, a Unison steward for Secamb, said: “There is always a possibility 
that in the case of a very serious incident such as a road traffic collision or 
cardiac arrest, where CCPs are crucial, they won’t be available. Instead they 
will be responding to a standard callout. That could threaten that patient in 
that situation. That’s the concern.”

In his email, sent on 20 December, Davies defended the change, saying: “It is 
essential that we utilise all of our resources to the maximum benefit of all of 
our patients.

“It has been agreed to remove the critical care paramedic regional cover plan 
and place CCPs back into the trust system status plan [general workforce]. This 
will mean that CCPs will now be available to respond to all categories of call.”

Then, in a passage that critics say shows Davies is ignoring the evidence for 
continuing to let CCPs concentrate only on life or death cases, he said: “While 
the quality impact assessment rightly recognises the valuable clinical 
contribution that CCPs make to seriously ill and injured patients, the [Secamb] 
executive [team] felt that, while demand is high and while our response 
performance is poor, we could not continue with the current CCP model that, in 
essence, ‘holds back’ CCPs from responding to some categories of patient.”

The change came into effect on Wednesday 21 December and will continue until 
the end of March, at which point it will be “reviewed”, he said. It is part of 
Secamb’s “trust recovery plan” after it was put into special measures in 
September. In July, the Care Quality Commissiondescribed it as inadequate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/south-east-coast-ambulance-service-told-to-fix-safety-issues>
 and said the service’s urgent and emergency care was “unsafe”.

A Secamb spokeswoman said: “We have little evidence at this stage to know 
whether CCPs being in the plan or out of the plan will be more or less 
beneficial to our patients, which is why it was felt prudent, given the 
challenges the trust is facing and our shortage of paramedics, to look at this.”

No final decision on the role of CCPs would be taken until March, she said.

On Monday, Richard Webber, Secamb’s on-call strategic incident commander, said 
it is “struggling” to cope with a 10% year-on-year rise in the number of 999 
calls. The situation is exacerbated by the service having 138 vacancies for 
paramedics, up from 105 last year.

Secamb was revealed in February to have secretly brought in a pilot system for 
three months in 2014-15, under which it delayed sending an ambulance to some 
999 calls transferred from the NHS 111 telephone service so it could assess 
their condition. The patients involved were at the level below those deemed to 
be in a life-threatening condition.

Jon Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, said: “In recent days I’ve been 
warning of the extent of the national paramedic shortage. And now we learn of 
the drastic action this trust is taking in order to cope.

“The redirection of critical care paramedics will raise fears for patients in 
need of the most urgent, emergency attention and the trust must urgently 
explain its rationale for this decision.”

A Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
spokesperson said: “No patient should have to wait longer than necessary for an 
ambulance and NHS England is working closely with the services to improve 
response times. We’ve recruited 2,200 more paramedics since 2010 to reduce 
pressure on services and have increased the number of training places this year 
by 60%.”

Meanwhile, the British Medical Association has warned that the NHS will 
struggle to cope if the government fails totackle the social care crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/21/theresa-may-recognises-social-care-crisis-but-solution-seems-far-off>
.

Health and social care services are “desperately trying to prop up” one 
another, but are “cracking under the weight”, said the BMA chair, Dr Mark 
Porter, in his new year message.

The warning comes as analysis by the doctors’ trade union showed there will 
need to be £26bn of cuts from health and social care costs by 2020-21 to 
balance spending.

Health managers in 44 areas of England have been ordered to draw up 
strategies, setting out how they will cut costs, change services and reduce 
care after the NHSran up a record £2.45bn deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/20/nhs-in-england-reveals-245bn-record-deficit>
 in the past financial year.
 