
Doctors, nurses and NHS managers have condemned government plans to make 
hospital patients produce their passport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/21/hospitals-may-require-patients-to-show-passports-for-nhs-treatment?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
 before being treated as unworkable and a burden on overworked staff that will 
not raise the £500m a year ministers hope.


There are also fears that marginalised groups – such as people who are 
homeless and the 13% of the population who do not have a passport – will find 
it harder to access care if the policy, currently operating only at the 
Peterborough and Stamford hospitalsNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>
 foundation trust, becomes commonplace.


Despite growing anxiety among NHS staff, the Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> said the policy – which its top 
mandarin admits is “controversial” – might still be rolled out nationally. It 
is keen for the NHS to increase dramatically the amount of money it recovers 
from people who are ineligible for free care from £73m in 2012-13 to its target 
of £500m a year.


Doctors threaten to boycott plan for patients to show ID at hospitals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/doctors-threaten-to-boycott-plan-for-patients-to-show-id-for-nhs-care>
Jon Restell, chief executive of Managers in Partnership, the union which 
represents health service managers, said: “Managers are worried about the 
unintended consequences for health inequalities, as marginalised groups may 
find it harder to access healthcare; for public health, where there are 
currently exemptions, for example around crisis mental health, TB and HIV. Will 
these continue?


“They are also worried about reciprocal arrangements with other countries. Is 
now the right time, at the start of Brexit negotiations, to be making these 
policy changes? What may be the impact on British citizens overseas?”


The likelihood that some patients would not have the two forms of identity 
envisaged by the Department of Health would create problems, Restell added.


“Who is accountable for the care of a patient who can’t show ID? What happens 
if their condition subsequently worsens, possibly foreseeably, as a result of 
being turned away?” he asked, adding: “ID checks are likely to create delays in 
clinics and elsewhere as ID is checked and queries resolved.”


Restell also said the scheme was overly bureaucratic: “Most elective work 
[non-urgent care in hospitals] comes via referral from general practice, where 
registration requires eligibility checks. Why create a second check?”


NHS managers doubt ID checks would generate any extra money beyond what is 
already received from overseas visitors and governments under existing 
arrangements.

“The system may well cost more to administer than the extra income it 
generates. Managers believe government underestimates how complicated this 
would be administratively. While we do not think it would necessarily burden 
clinical staff in practice, it would lead to delays and costs,” said Restell.


“The whole issue raises unresolved ethical questions about eligibility for 
healthcare and about compatibility with the values of the NHS and its staff.”


Passports for NHS access plan: what are the implications?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/passports-for-nhs-access-what-are-the-implications>
The annual income that Peterborough and Stamford trust received from 
chargeable patients rose from £92,500 to £250,000 after it introduced identity 
checks in May 2013. Its total budget is £261m. The trust says 95% of invoices 
were recouped last year, compared with 37% in 2012. NHS bosses told MPs this 
week that the scheme “had made a big difference”.


But the trust admitted that no formal evaluation of the scheme had been 
carried out, saying four staff awere employed on it, though they only spent a 
quarter of their time processing fees and pursuing unpaid bills. But the trust 
would not say how much the scheme costs, other than to say it did not outweigh 
the total income raised through charges.


Although some reports  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/pa/article-3959152/UK-patients-ID-access-NHS-services.html>
suggested passports would have to be shown to guarantee entitlement to free NHS 
treatment, they are not required in every case. Residents and EEA visitors who 
have lived in the UK for the past 12 months must provide two forms of ID such 
as a utility bill or payslip. If patients have not lived in the UK for the past 
12 months, a passport or ID card is required.


Although the regulations enable an NHS trust to refuse treatment on the 
grounds that a patient requiring a non-urgent clinical intervention did not 
qualify for free treatment, Peterborough said it had never turned away a 
patient who said they were unable to pay.


Non-qualifying patients who do not pay invoices of more than £500 are reported 
to immigration and debt collectors are sometimes used.


Nurses said they were already too busy to help administer such a scheme and do 
not want to be distracted from looking after patients. Stephanie Aiken, the 
Royal College of Nursing’s deputy director of nursing, said: “Nurses and other 
staff on the frontline go to work to care for patients. While we recognise that 
the NHS is under extraordinary financial pressure, taking clinical staff away 
from the core job of treating patients is not the solution and must not be 
allowed to happen. Patient care must always be prioritised ahead of any 
administrative procedures.”

NHS passport-checking might save a few pence – at the cost of our humanity | 
Diane Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/nhs-passport-checking-patient-id-checks-chris-wormald-health-tourists>
Sources at the NHS Confederation, which represents the NHS trusts who may have 
to implement the policy, said hospital bosses were “conscious of the practical 
and administrative burdens it would put on the NHS”.


A National Audit Office report last month estimated that hospitals are failing 
to collect about £200m from patients who should have paid for their treatment. 
But the chair of the British Medical Association, Dr Mark Porter, said: “We 
have got an NHS with a deficit approaching 100 times that amount opening up 
over the course of this parliament. This is little other than a pinprick on top 
of the actual problems facing the NHS.”


Charges only apply to non-urgent, planned care, not treatment in A&E. Dr Taj 
Hassan, president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine, which represents 
A&E doctors, warned against changing that demarcation.


He said: “We do not believe the proposed plans to require patients to show 
identification before receiving treatment could extend to the emergency 
department, due to their sheer impracticality. However, if the plans include 
the ED, then we would be failing our patients on an ethical level. The 
patient’s health is – and must always be – the most important thing, not where 
they are from.”

The Department of Health said: “The NHS is a national – not an international 
–health service and we are determined to stamp out abuse of the system to 
ensure it remains free at the point of need in this country.

“We consulted earlier this year on extending the charging of migrants and 
visitors using the NHS. We will set out further steps in due course to ensure 
we deliver on our objective to recover up to £500 million a year by the middle 
of this parliament.”
 