
The Turnbull government appears close to securing the passage of its 
double-dissolution election trigger, the restoration of the building industry 
watchdog, after coming to terms withNick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> on water allocations 
in the Murray-Darling Basin.

Xenophon told reporters on Tuesday afternoon he had secured two accountability 
measures to oversee the basin plan – a twice-yearly discussion between the 
prime minister and premiers at Coag and a Senate estimates process to oversee 
implementation.

Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong, and the Greens senator for South Australia, 
Sarah Hanson-Young, blasted the deal, saying Xenophon had secured no more water 
for South Australia as a consequence of his haggle with the government.

“South Australians needed more water and they got more talk,” Wong said on 
Tuesday evening. “We’ve got more talk, rather than more water.”

Heading into the final parliamentary sitting week for 2016, Xenophon had 
declared he would not deal with any government legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/nick-xenophon-wont-deal-with-any-legislation-until-murray-darling-issues-resolved>
 until a dispute over water allocations in the Murray-Darling Basin plan was 
resolved.

The dispute centred on an extra 450 gigalitres of extra water promised to 
South Australia as part of a 2013 intergovernmental agreement between the 
commonwealth and the states.

Mike Baird breaks with federal Liberals over negative gearing changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/mike-baird-breaks-with-federal-liberals-over-negative-gearing-changes>
The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, had signalled to the SA government 
during a combative meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/government-agenda-in-doubt-as-barnaby-joyce-rejects-south-australia-water-deal>
 the state would not get the additional water because the allocation could harm 
upstream communities.

Xenophon objected and launched a go-slow on the Australian Building and 
Construction Commission legislation while negotiating with the prime minister 
and the South Australian premier, Jay Weatherill.

Squaring away Xenophon on water has been a prerequisite to the NXT bloc 
agreeing to deal with the government’s legislation restoring the ABCC – 
legislation the Turnbull government wants passed before parliament rises for 
the year.

While the water undertakings from the government look thin, Xenophon claimed 
they were significant. He told reporters he believed the critical ABCC vote 
could now be dealt with either on Wednesday night or Thursday night, presuming 
progress on amendments he is seeking to the government’s proposal.

“Elevating the implementation of the plan to first minister’s level at Coag 
twice a year and ensuring, for the first time, a separate and comprehensive 
cross-portfolio Senate estimates process twice a year, are two significant 
accountability measures,” Xenophon said after drawing a line under the water 
dispute.

“Obviously, given the nature of the plan, its longitudinal scope, the funds 
and projects involved, there is a need for ongoing vigilance and commitment to 
its implementation.”

Pressed to explain whether or not there was more water for South Australia as 
a consequence of the government’s undertakings, Xenophon said: “The water will 
be coming as a result of efficiency measures which must be driven in relation 
to this.”

Asked whether, he had, in essence, been fobbed off by the government, Xenophon 
said he and his parliamentary team could not be fobbed off because they weren’t 
going anywhere.

“We are going to be here for a while in this parliament,” he said. “We will be 
voting on legislation. There is a process.

“If we do not get those efficiency measures ... then there will be 
consequences for that.”
 