
The recipe

Put a pan of water on to boil. Scrub a couple of large potatoes (about 450g 
total weight) and cut them into large pieces, drop them into the boiling water 
and cook them for 10 minutes, then drain.

Roughly crush 6 juniper berries. Cut 2 large apples into quarters and remove 
the cores.

Warm a thick slice, about 30g, of butter in shallow pan with 2 tbsp of olive 
oil, then add the crushed juniper, apples and drained potatoes. Keep the heat 
low to moderate and the pan partially covered with a lid. Baste from time to 
time.

As the apples and potatoes edge towards tenderness, add 6 rashers of back 
bacon to the pan, cut into short strips, and let them cook in the appley butter.

Chop a couple of handfuls of parsley. Season with salt and coarse black pepper 
and half of the chopped parsley.

When the potatoes are golden and the apples are soft, remove everything from 
the pan on to warm plates. Tip away any fat, but not any of the delicious 
crusty bits stuck to the pan, then spoon in 150ml of crème fraîche.

Bring gently to the boil, stirring constantly, then spoon over the bacon and 
apples, and add the remaining parsley. Serves 2.

The trick

Keep the heat quite moderate when sautéeing the potatoes. If you overheat it 
the butter will burn. As you add the crème fraîche to the pan, scrape at the 
crusty bits of potato and apple that are stuck to it. There’s too much flavour 
there to waste.

The twist

Mustard, either smooth or grainy, goes well with both apples and bacon. Stir 
some into the crème fraîche as it heats. I would probably add some chopped 
tarragon to this if there was some around. The aniseed notes are good with 
apple. You can omit the crème fraîche if you like, in which case you might like 
to deglaze the pan with a little cider.

Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater 
<https://twitter.com/NigelSlater?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 