
The recipe

Place a large sheet of clingfilm on the work surface. Then lay a large, plump 
chicken breast in the middle, fold the film over to cover the breast then bat 
out to a thickness of about ½cm. Do this with a cutlet bat if you have one, or 
a rolling pin if not. Repeat with a second chicken breast and season them with 
salt and pepper. Remove the leaves from three bushy sprigs of thyme and chop 
them finely.

Melt 30g of butter in a wide, shallow pan, then add 180g of smoked streaky 
bacon that you’ve cut into small dice. Let the bacon cook for a few minutes 
until its fat turns golden and starts to crisp, then remove it to a piece of 
kitchen paper. Lower the batted-out chicken into the pan then sprinkle in the 
thyme. Let the meat colour nicely on the underside then turn over and cook the 
other. The entire cooking time should be no more than about 5-6 minutes. Return 
the bacon to the pan for the last minute or two, and add 100g of sweet black 
grapes.

Remove the chicken, bacon and grapes to a couple of warm plates, add 3 tbsp of 
white wine vinegar to the pan, let it sizzle briefly then whisk in a small lump 
of butter, about the size of a walnut in its shell. Spoon the vinegar and 
butter juices over the chicken and serve. Enough for 2.

The trick

A good-sized, free-range chicken breast, complete with its fillet, is enough 
for one. Bat it out gently, taking care not reduce the texture to a pulp. I 
prefer to leave the skin intact, but you could remove it before batting out if 
you wish. A brief cooking time is what keeps the meat juicy. Any longer then 5 
or 6 minutes and it will start to dry out. If your grapes have seeds, then it 
is worth halving and seeding them before you add them.

The twist

A slice of pork fillet can be used in the same way, in which case I might 
introduce a sage leaf or two in addition to the thyme. Small, muscat-flavoured 
grapes would be my first choice with chicken; their honeyed sweetness is good 
with the bacon. But I might be tempted to use finely cubed apple if I were 
substituting pork for the chicken.

Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater 
<https://twitter.com/NigelSlater?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 