
One of the few advantages of Brexit is that the unfolding debacle may be the 
trigger for the deep economic, political and constitutional reform that Britain 
so badly needs. It will only be by living through the searing events ahead that 
people will become convinced that the indulgent Eurosceptic untruths they have 
been fed are not only economically disastrous but open the way to forms of 
racism that most Britons, Leave voters included, instinctively find repellent. 
Brexit will force home some brutal realities.

Leave voters in Sunderland – 61% in favour – will have woken up on Friday to 
the news that Renault Nissan, the largest car plant in Europe and a crucial 
pillar of the local economy, employing 7,000 people, hasdeferred all new 
investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/jaguar-land-rover-brexit-ralf-speth-eu-british-cars>
 until the details of Brexit are clear. The chief executive, Carlos Ghosn, 
explained that it was not because the company did not value its Sunderland 
plant, its most efficient. Rather, as a major exporter to the EU, its 
profitability depends on the prevailing tariff regime, which promises to change 
sharply for the worse. “Important investment decisions,” he said, “would not be 
made in the dark.”

It is hard to fault Ghosn’s reasoning. Gaining control of EU immigration is 
both a matter of personal conviction and a political necessity for Theresa May. 
But how can that be squared with ongoing membership of the customs union that 
defines the single market and which requires acceptance of free movement? 
Concessions can only be minimal without wrecking the EU’s core structures. 
Moreover, the Tory hard Brexiters, wedded to the notion of a clean break from 
an EU they detest, are in the political ascendancy.

One senior official tells me that a hard Brexit is inevitable: the best that 
can be hoped for is perhaps some agreement on the movement of skilled people, 
but beyond that the future is trading on the terms organised by the World Trade 
Organisation.

If so, Renault Nissan will face up to 10% tariffs on the cars it ships to the 
EU. Unless the UK government is prepared to compensate it, a bill that could 
top £350m a year, it cannot make new investments. The Sunderland economy will 
be devastated. The same is true for the entire UK car industry. Last Wednesday,
Jaguar Land Rover 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-autoshow-paris-jaguarlandrover-idUKKCN1201FK> 
made similar remarks: if the position had been more explicit and fairly 
reported rather than airily dismissed as Project Fear, the wafer-thin 3,800 
majority for Leave in Birmingham might have switched their vote.

Every part of our economy involved in selling into Europe will be affected 
both by the rise in tariffs and by the new necessity to guarantee that our 
products and services meet EU regulatory standards, the so-called passport. 
This doesn’t only apply to the City where 5,500 UK registered firms turn out to 
hold the invaluable passport, but to tens of thousand of companies across the 
economy.

Britain is now one of the most unequal countries in Europe, with immigration 
the tinder for enmity and hate

The Brexiters insist the losses will be more than compensated for by the wave 
of trade deals now open to be signed, but trade deals take many years to 
negotiate. More crucially, there is no free-trade world out there; rather, 
there is a series of painstakingly constructed, reciprocal entries to markets, 
the biggest of which we are now abandoning.Liam Fox is delusional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/30/anna-soubry-brands-liam-foxs-free-trade-speech-delusional>
, as former business minister, Anna Soubry, declares, to pretend otherwise.

Nor do hard Brexiters confront the fact that alongside China and the US, 
Britain has accumulated a stunning $1tn-plus stock of foreign direct 
investment. Nearly 500 multinationals have regional or global headquarters 
here, more than twice the rest of Europe combined. They are here to take 
advantage of our ultra pro-business environment – so much for the Eurosceptic 
babble about being stifled by Brussels – and trade freely with the EU. Britain 
was becoming a combination of New York and California, with a whole continental 
hinterland in which to trade. Hard Brexit kills all that stone dead and puts 
phantoms in its place.

The years ahead will be ones of economic dislocation and stagnation. But the 
impact goes well beyond the economic. Hard Brexit legitimises anti-foreigner 
and anti-immigrant sentiment. When Britain’s flag outside the EU institutions 
is brought down and Messrs Farage, Davis, Johnson, Redwood, Fox et al 
delightedly hail the sovereignty and supremacy of Britishness, it could signal 
a new round of street-baiting of anybody who does not look and sound British: 
expect more attacks on Poles and Czechs from Essex to Yorkshire.

Politicians of right and left are fighting shy of delivering the condemnation 
this deserves.Rachel Reeves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/27/jeremy-corbyn-rules-out-pledge-cut-immigration>
’s remarks at the Labour fringe, warning of a social explosion if immigration 
were not immediately curbed, show how far the permissible discourse on 
immigration and race has changed. Britain has moved over the past 50 years from 
being one of the most equal countries in Europe to the most unequal. The result 
is rising social tension, with immigration the tinder for enmity and hate. The 
hard-working immigrants who add so much vitality and energy to our society are 
blamed for ills that have deeper roots. Brexit has made this harder to say.

This conjunction of the economically and socially noxious horrifies not only 
me but also many Tories. Scotland’s Ruth Davidson, a bevy of ex-ministers, some 
in the cabinet and a large number of backbenchers are keenly aware of the 
slippery racist, culturally regressive and economically calamitous course their 
Brexiter colleagues are set on and are ready to fight for the soul of their 
party. George Osborne is positioning himself as their leader. It is an 
impending civil war, mirroring parallel feelings in the country at large.

Beyond that, the referendum raised profound constitutional questions. In other 
democracies, treaty and constitutional changes require at least 60% majorities 
in either the legislature or in a referendum. Britain’s unwritten constitution 
offers no such rules: a parliamentary majority confers monarchial power so a 
referendum can be called without any such framing. Article 50 is to be invoked 
without a parliamentary vote: a change of government in effect without a 
general election.

In good times, the constitution interests only obsessives. Suddenly, Britain’s 
constitutional vacuity is part of a deep national crisis. The economic and 
political structures, along with the biased media, that delivered this are 
rotten. The question is whether the will – and political coalitions – can be 
built to reform them. If not, Britain is sliding towards nasty, sectarian 
decline.
 