
Jenni Murray, redoubtable host of Woman’s Hour, has a revolutionary idea for 
education 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3833454/Show-porn-boys-girls-says-Jenni-Murray-Woman-s-Hour-host-suggests-pupils-analyse-films-ways-novels.html>
: porn classes, where children watch X-rated films together and discuss them 
with the teacher. As if the return of grammar schools weren’t exciting enough!

“We give our kids Jane Austen to read and we say ‘OK let’s analyse it’”, 
Murray pointed out to an audience at the Cheltenham Literature Festival last 
week. “Why not show them pornography and teach them how to analyse it?”

Some people would say this is a dangerous idea, because there are still a few 
children who haven’t seen pornography and this would force it on them.

Some would say it’s an immoral idea, because it implicitly condones an 
exploitative trade.

Some would say it’s an unworkable idea, as teachers would fear they were 
breaking the law and parents would picket the school.

Some would say it’s a cruel idea, because porn has an effect on the human body 
that Jane Austen (as a rule) does not, and boys might feel publicly shamed.

But not me! I think it’s an excellent idea, and that’s because I reckon I’m 
the only person in the UK who’s qualified to teach the class. Having both a 
degree in English literary analysisand a history of reviewing and making 
pornography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/24/sam-taylor-wood-pornography-fifty-shades-of-blue-victoria-coren-mitchell>
, I am clearly ideal for the role. The only other person I know who ticks both 
boxes is Martin Amis and he’s too successful to do it.

I have started preparing a few lessons already. For the full experience, do 
acquire the films below (they are real) and read my analyses to your children. 
It’s never too soon for intellectual rigour.

Dirty Dreamers 3: Head Rush

Porn = A + B, where A is the camera and B is the sexual act. However, the 
eroticin porn = (A + B) x C, where C is character, motivation and psychological 
depth.

Here, producers Dazed Entertainment say: “Let C be a cranial injury!” The 
equation does not hold up.

In Dirty Dreamers 3, a postman bangs his head on a step, passes out and 
hallucinates a group of nude, eager householders.

Why employ a dream device? The genre simply does not require it. The average 
viewer might only experience an orgy in his dreams, often compromised by the 
sudden arrival of Princess Anne singing show tunes, but this is pornography. 
It’s a fantasy genre already. Orgies are its reality.

Note the “magical realism” of porn: any postman can make a special delivery, 
and he doesn’t have to bang his head on a step to do it.

The Crush

As in Greek tragedy, a porn film’s outcome is prescribed from the start. Porn 
has lessstichomythia than classical drama, and more plastic tits, but the 
genres share a reluctance to rely on suspense.

Thus, when the opening credits of The Crush show rugged Colby Taylor gazing 
wistfully at his muscly old college buddy Travis, this acts by way of a Chorus, 
presaging the action to come.

Colby explains to Travis that he once tonked 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=tonk&page=3> gleefully for 10 
full minutes while watching two studs pleasure each other on the bonnet of a 
Mustang. All this is played out in oily flashback; when Colby finally returns 
from his reverie, Travis asks: “What are you trying to say?”

Thus the porn auteur’s dilemma. The artistic vision demands a lingering 
uncertainty, but the form demands an immediate and mind-boggling frot.

In response, previously-straight Travis whips off his trousers. His 
self-realisation oranagnorisis is one that might take a man years to embrace. 
But the Aristotelian unities of porn must be obeyed: Travis and Colby have got 
to go at it before the sun sets.

The Devil In Miss Jones 6

There’s a lot of girl-on-girl action in hell. According to this film, Satan is 
female; you can tell she’s Satan because she’s smoking a cigarette. And you can 
tell it’s hell because she’s playing golf.

Satan’s duties consist of presiding over lesbian writhings and practising her 
putting. She has to drop putter and dildo, however, when two minions disappear 
up to Earth – summoned by papyrologist Arthur (beautifully played by Randy 
Spears, the blue Alec Guinness), who has accidentally read out a sex 
incantation from an ancient gospel.

What blessed text is this? The Gospel According to Ron Jeremy? The big 
question is why the sacred scripture has never been turned into a porn film in 
its own right.

In The Can With OJ

Just as Oliver Stone’s JFK gave the world a fresh perspective on the Kennedy 
assassination, so writer-director Gregory Black’s X-rated re-telling of the OJ 
Simpson story challenges the viewer to rethink all her assumptions about this 
notorious murder case.

In calling his characters “OJ Sampson and wife Natalie”, Black implicitly 
asks: “Have these people been fictionalised, somehow, in the public 
consciousness?”

Black demolishes the argument that this was a sexually motivated crime, by 
offering us the dullest humping ever screened. It takes a master director to 
give us this much sex and none of it interesting.

Some people believe that OJ was set up and had been watched for months before 
the murder; Black hints cleverly at these theories by allowing us, throughout 
the film, to spot visible wires, tripods and occasionally the foot of a 
cameraman.

In another skilful twist, Black renders the sound almost inaudible, as if to 
ask: “Can we ever really understand the whole truth?” We certainly can’t 
understand a word spoken by “Hal Cadillac” (otherwise delightfully played by 
Big Herc).

We don’t see the actual killing – although a couple of brutal murders could 
hardly have made the film any less sexy than it already is. Neither is there 
any depiction of the court case, which is a shame, as there could have been a 
lot of potential in Judge Ito’s gavel.
 