
A law that allows police to pre-emptively lock up a drunk person who may cause 
harm or annoyance to others will be challenged in the high court on Tuesday.

The Human Rights Law Centre and the North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency 
(Naaja) are taking the case to the country’s highest court to challenge the 
Northern Territory’s “broad” protective custody orders.

The laws allow NT police to detain a person for up to 10 hours if that person 
is drunk and unable to adequately care for themselves, and if police have a 
reasonable belief that they are likely to commit an offence or may harm, 
intimidate, alarm or cause substantial annoyance to others because they are 
drunk.

The legal groups argue the laws are too broad and are disproportionately used 
against Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.

“The Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> has some of the 
most punitive and overused protective custody laws in Australia,” said Naaja’s 
principal lawyer, David Woodroffe. “This case is about setting limits to make 
sure that the powers are more fairly and appropriately used.”

NT admits paperless arrest laws misused in Aboriginal death in custody case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/12/nt-admits-paperless-arrest-laws-misused-in-aboriginal-death-in-custody-case>
Last year the high court upheld the NT’s similarly controversial paperless 
arrest laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/11/high-court-upholds-northern-territory-paperless-arrest-laws>
, which allow police to detain a person without charge for up to four hours.

According to police data the protective custody law was used more than 20,700 
times between August 2014 and July 2016, among a population of about 245,000 
people.

The law centre points to the rate of similar laws in Victoria (used about 
8,000 times a year among a population of 6m) and says the NT’s powers are too 
broad.

Between 2007 and 2015, 92% of people taken into protective custody were 
Indigenous.

“There’s no other jurisdiction where someone can be taken into protective 
custody based on a reasonable assumption they might commit an offence,” 
Adrianne Walters, senior lawyer at the Human Rights Law Centre, told Guardian 
Australia.

Walters said the case sought to test the legal threshold that needed to be 
satisfied before a police officer could detain a drunk person.

“It’s looking at the extent to which a police officer’s general prior 
experience and assumptions are relevant ... in contrast to their actual 
knowledge and observations of the person they want to detain.”

Tuesday’s case – an appeal from the NT court of appeal – is on behalf of 
Anthony Prior, an Indigenous man who was taken into protective custody in 
Darwin on New Year’s Eve in 2013 after being found drinking in a public place 
and who allegedly became abusive.

“In Mr Prior’s case the police didn’t know him at all before they approached 
him, they weren’t aware of any prior offending ... or incidents,” Walters said.

“Our argument is they relied too much on general policing experience and what 
one officer described as an educated assumption.”

Walters said this assessment process, rather than focusing on the 
circumstances, could lead officers to stereotype people. The NT court of appeal 
noted officers acted on stereotyping to a certain degree in Prior’s arrest but 
their actions were lawful.

“It is a concern because it’s a power to deprive people of their liberty and 
Aboriginal people do die in custody,” she said. “Properly resourced 
alternatives, like sobering up shelters, are a far better and safer option. 
Problem drinking is best tackled through the health system, not the criminal 
justice system.”
 