
The Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> announced on 
Thursday new rules to cut methane emissions from the oil and gas industry 
almost in half – tackling a powerful climate pollutant in the president’s final 
months in the White House.

The rules, stronger than earlier proposals, are aimed at reducing methane 
emissions from the US by 40% to 45% over 2012 levels by 2025 by requiring 
companies to capture gas from oil wells, and find and plug pipeline leaks. 
America is currently the world’s largest oil and gas producer.

“We are really getting at a strong contributor to climate change. We are 
really getting at a source of toxic emissions that affect public health,” Gina 
McCarthy, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, told 
reporters.


However, McCarthy indicated it was now unlikely the administration would have 
time to put in place rules on nearly 1m existing oil and gas wells and other 
facilities before Obama leaves office.

The regulations apply only to new and modified oil and gas infrastructures. 

US and Canada continue climate alliance with move to curb methane emissions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/06/us-canada-obama-trudeau-climate-change-methane-emissions>
Even so, administration officials cast the new rules – which had been in the 
works for over a year – as a sign of Obama’s comprehensive plan to fight 
climate change. Those efforts include the first rules cutting carbon emissions 
from power plants as well as measures reducing tailpipe emissions from cars and 
trucks.

“We think these are tremendous steps forward to reduce methane emissions. We 
are going to keep moving forward as this president wants us to do,” McCarthy 
said.

Mark Brownstein, who heads the climate and energy program at the Environmental 
Defense Fund, said curbing methane emissions was an important part of that 
effort.

The climate pollutant is more than 80 times as warming as carbon dioxide over 
20 years, and on its own responsible for about a quarter of global warming to 
date. “It means the United States is really doing this,” he said. “It’s an 
important first step in addressing global emissions.”


The US and Canada agreed to act jointly to cut methane emissions at a White 
House meeting in March. “With the US and Canada you have got the world’s first 
and fourth producers now committed to addressing this issue,” Brownstein said.

The new rules require companies to put more efforts in detecting and repairing 
leaks in oil and gas wells, pipeline and other infrastructure – with quarterly 
inspection reports. Companies will also have to carry out such inspections at 
low-producing sites – a provision that was not in earlier drafts, and was 
hailed by some campaigners.

“The Obama administration improved the methane rule after facing intense 
pressure over the weak initial proposal,” Anna Moritz of the Center for 
Biological Diversity said. “But there are still some missed opportunities for 
reducing the oil and gas industry’s massive pollution problem.”

The 350.org campaign group welcomed the rules but added: “One thing remains 
clear: no amount of regulation can make fracking safe.”

The American Petroleum Institute, the main oil and gas lobby, maintained that 
the industry was plugging leaking wells and pipelines anyway – and that the new 
rules would stifle innovation. “Imposing a one-size-fits-all scheme on the 
industry could actually stifle innovation and discourage investment,” the lobby 
group said in a statement.

The White House admitted the administration had at first underestimated the 
scale of methane emissions from the thousands of new wells put into production 
during the fracking boom – which transformed the US into an energy superpower.

The US has also experienced devastating methane leaks from ageing oil and gas 
infrastructure – such as the Aliso Canyon storage site in California. The leak 
was thesingle largest source of climate pollution  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/05/aliso-canyon-leak-california-climate-change>
in California last year.
 