
Where do you stand in the great Mumsnet leg-shaving  
<http://www.mumsnet.com/Talk/am_i_being_unreasonable/2654507-To-not-want-Office-to-tell-me-I-need-to-shave-my-legs>
debate?

You can’t have missed it. It is quite the talk of all Tilling. Never mind 
Brexit, Bremain or Brugger Off The Lot Of You – the major question of the last 
week, in most households, has been whether or not it is acceptable for a shoe 
chain to pass comment on leg hair.

It all began when the high street footwear retailer Office sent out 
promotional emails with the subject line: “Show a little leg.”

The attendant email, showcasing Office’s summer collection of sandals, 
slip-ons and those weird, cloggy platform soles that seem somehow orthopaedic 
and slutty at the same time, advised readers: “Just don’t forget to shave them.”

This led to a heated debate on Mumsnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mumsnet>, kicked off by women who had read 
the email as an instruction to shave their legs (rather than, as it should 
grammatically mean, the shoes.)

Terms like “body-shaming” and “sexism” and “boycott” were bandied about, as 
they now are in all debates about anything. Battle raged, between those who 
were incensed to have a shoe company pass negative judgment on hairy women and 
those who were irritated to see a lighthearted message taken so seriously.

Gun to my head, I’m in the former camp. The “don’t forget to shave them” 
message is clearly a joke, but it’s a weak and uninteresting joke. It swims 
blandly along with the culture’s boring consensus on female appearance; it is a 
reinforcing rather than a revolutionary joke – and its failure to go against 
the joyless, stressful idea that girls must concentrate on keeping themselves 
spindly and bald is not mitigated by any chance you’d actuallylaugh at it. It’s 
not that kind of joke. It’s not the makes you laugh kind of joke. It’s the 
“Hey, calm down, I was only joking!” kind of joke.

However, I don’t think that makes Office a sexist company. Office doesn’t have 
an opinion either way. What Office has is a PR or marketing department that has 
worked out that more shoes will be sold by the concept of shaving your legs 
than not shaving them.

If they thought people would be quicker to buy their pastel mules and 
mary-janes with a “Let it grow!” message, that’s what they would have used. But 
their focus groups and cash registers told them that a dippy, 
all-girls-together, post-feminist grooming tip would spin them up more money 
than a challenging, punky, fist-clench.

They’re probably right. I mean, their shoes are incredibly boring. This is not 
footwear for punks and rebels. They sell “taupe ballet pumps”, for God’s sake. 
Nobody in those shoes would have the imagination to pair them with stubble.

And so it’s not the shaving message, I realise, that really annoys me. It’s 
the concept of “promotional emails” at all. It’s the whole stupid world we find 
ourselves in, whereby we can’t seem to stop our personal contact details 
falling into the hands of departments with no other purpose than to fill the 
air with this kind of wittering crap about shoes and bags and holidays and 
“product lines”: advertising disguised as cheery personal messages, inviting us 
to “join the conversation”. Ugh. That is what has got to stop. But never will, 
now.

As far as whether or not to shave your legs goes, the best tip I ever had on 
that was from an elderly lady who worked at Frank’s underwear shop in Golders 
Green. I popped in there, many years ago, for some fishnet tights.

“Take my advice,” breathed the ancient sales assistant, through coral lips 
rendered tubular from voracious cigarette consumption, “and get a pair of nice, 
thick, beige tights to wear underneath. Gives a smooth look – and no need to 
shave!”

Inspired by that memorable style icon, I shall finish this week with a few 
beauty tips of my own. You’re welcome.

■ Moisturise, moisturise, moisturise… is the motto of people who are in the 
business of selling moisturisers. Your body is already 60% water. If that’s not 
moist enough for you, sit in a puddle.

■ Never take your makeup off before bed. Sleep in it. That way, you’re all 
ready to go if a hot postman rings the doorbell early.

■ Nature made your eyebrows like that for a reason. I don’t know the reason. 
Some people say it’s to do with keeping rain out of monkeys’ eyes. Whatever. 
The point is, if you try to redesign your eyebrows with tweezers and pens it 
will look terrible. I know everybody does it these days. They all look terrible.

■ Emulate French women and always carry a small dog. It distracts massively 
from your face.

■ Blotchy complexion just before a big party? The failsafe solution is to use 
a mud pack. And then just don’t wash it off again.

■ A huge zit has developed on date night? Simply glue a chocolate button over 
it. Hey presto! A sexy giant mole.

■ If you find it difficult to draw a neat line with an eyeliner pencil, start 
with a big thick wonky line and then reduce it with eye makeup remover. This is 
serious advice. I do this every single time I put makeup on.

■ Heard about expensive seaweed wrap treatments you can’t afford? Why not take 
a dip in Britain’s beautiful Atlantic Ocean for free? I recommend the English 
Channel at Holes Bay in Dorset or the North Sea off Aberdeen City Beach. 
Seaweed is not guaranteed in either, but it’s pretty definite you’ll get 
wrapped in something.
 