
Hundreds of thousands of people may have missed out on their chance to 
experience the Olympics first hand, but one man has won £11,000 worth of 
tickets after bidding on a total of £36,000 worth.

Stephen Hunt, an insolvency practitioner, said he had surpassed his credit 
limit and did not have the available funds to pay for the tickets. "My 
assumption was, based on the rules, that I would get nothing," he told the 
Today programme.

He received an email telling him the payment of £11,000 had been rejected but 
he would be given a "second chance" if he could have funds available in a 
couple of days. Otherwise he would lose all of the tickets. "I had this 
horrible choice on Monday, either I had none or I [spent] £11,000," he said.

The amount was about double the figure he wanted to spend but after talking to 
his wife they decided to increase their credit limit. According to Olympic 
ticketing rules ticketholders can sell tickets to family and friends but have 
to be present as the lead booker. Hunt suggested that as an insolvency 
practitioner it was likely to be the first time in his career that he was 
popular.

"I'd rather scrimp and save for a bit extra rather than be disappointed and 
I've seen so many people who have bid a relatively normal amount of money and 
not been successful."

Speaking to the programme after bidding £36,000, he told presenter John 
Humphrys that he thought he chances of getting even one ticket were small. 
"Really?" asked Humphys.

"I think so, I hope so," replied Hunt.

Organisers have confirmed that unlike Hunt, at least 250,000 people have been 
left without tickets and will have to scramble on a first-come, first-served 
basis for seats at less popular events such as handball and basketball in a 
"second chance" sale. People are still in the dark about which tickets they 
have bought and will only hear which events they have qualified for by 24 June. 
Those left ticketless will be contacted by email and offered an "exclusive 
window" later this month to buy tickets for events where demand was relatively 
low.

The demand for Olympics tickets was overwhelming, with 20m applications from 
1.8 million people for the 6.6m tickets available to the public via the 
controversial ballot. More than 1m bids alone poured in for tickets to the 
opening ceremony and the men's 100m final. A typical applicant received fewer 
than a third of the tickets requested – they have now had the money debited 
from their accounts.

The remaining tickets will mostly be for ball games in big stadiums, such as 
football, volleyball, handball, basketball and hockey. Sessions in smaller 
arenas, such as the popular 6,000-seat velodrome, have almost sold out.

It is expected that some people who were successful in the ballot will have 
had their payments rejected over the past week. More than 100 applicants had 
their purchases declined after a mistake by Barclaycard in which the 
transactions were flagged as suspicious.

There will be frustration and anger from some who failed to get tickets after 
it emerged that at some events 50% of the tickets will go to sponsors and 
officials. Organisers say in total only 8% of the 8.8m tickets have been set 
aside for sponsors. Officials refuse to say how many of the tickets for the 
opening ceremony have been reserved for VIPs. "All we are able to say at this 
stage is that there are as many tickets at £20.12 as there are at £2,012," said 
a spokeswoman.

Two million tickets to the Paralympics will go on sale from 9 to 30 September. 
Only after that process has been completed will any unsold tickets to the 
Olympics go on general sale to the public, probably in early December.
 