
Time was when the radical left was the force attacking the Enlightenment basis 
of western civilisation and challenging the mores and landmarks of day-to-day 
life. Today, that mantle has passed to the radical right. The most visible 
expression of this will be the US Republican party’sconvention in Cleveland 
<http://2016.republican-convention.org/> this July, riven by hatred between the 
Donald Trump and Ted Cruz camps as they struggle to win a contest in which no 
one candidate has won a clear majority in the primaries.

Who can best express the cocktail of nativism, hatred of foreigners in general 
and immigrants in particular, fetishisation of the absence of government and 
its handmaiden, the ultra-free market, all wrapped up in profoundly reactionary 
views of women, religion and punishment, that constitutes the ideology of 
today’s US right? It will be hand-to-hand political in-fighting, plumbing new 
depths of viciousness and possible physical violence. Thus will America be 
great again.

The scale of the Anglo-Saxon ultra-right’s distance from the interests of real 
people is disturbing

Neither candidate should be remotely electable in this still great republic 
and while some of what is being said is commonplace in parts of the deep south, 
derelict industrial areas, rundown suburbs, rightwing thinktanks and 
billionaire political backers and media outriders, it is far from the 
mainstream, where common decencies still rule. But this is not an argument 
unique to what seems an increasingly foreign country across the Atlantic: the 
same very rightwing forces are at work in Britain.

A similar ideological cocktail animates the Leave EU campaign in the struggle 
against mainstream liberal Britain. Trump and Cruz have their counterparts in 
Farage’s splenetic anti-immigrant nativism, Johnson’s de haut en bas populism, 
Redwood’s intellectual anti-statism etc. Just as many Americans fear a 
President Cruz or Trump decisively re-engineering their country and its 
leadership of the west, so there is a growing apprehension that similar 
rightwing forces are about to re-engineer Britain and its place in the world 
for the worse. The scale of the Anglo-Saxon ultra-right’s ambition – and its 
distance from the interests of real people, real lives, real business, real 
science and real international interdependencies – is disturbing.

Getting here has been a 30-year journey. You may disagree with mainstream 
Conservatism, but it has a respectable pedigree. Democracies should have 
parties of the right that are distrustful of government, pro-enterprise, 
sceptical of the value of organised labour, anxious to minimise taxation, wary 
of social experimentation and ethnic diversity. A lot of people think that way 
and their views must be represented. But for the radical right in the US, that 
portfolio of views is part of the middle-of-the-road establishment: devotees 
can even, horror of horrors, cut deals with Democrats in Congress. Reaganite 
championing of the market and small government has morphed into a 
libertarianism that is against government in principle.

Europe has been a proxy for a fight between mainstream liberal Tories and the 
libertarian anti-state outriders for years

Thus Cruz wants to abolish the Departments of Education, Energy and Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/23/donald-trump-wins-nevada-caucuses-results>
 along with the Inland Revenue Service and the Environmental Protection Agency. 
Progressive taxation is anathema. The dollar should be backed by gold, making 
the Federal Reserve redundant. One close adviser to Obama told me last week 
that the government starts with the assumption that any legislative initiative 
will be vetoed by Republicans whatever its intrinsic merits. Acts of 
government, or what Cruz calls the Washington cartel, are by definition bad.

Meanwhile, both he and Trump rail against immigration, which they elide with 
terrorism. Trump wants to round up 11 million illegal immigrants and deport 
them, along with banning every Muslim from entering the US. Cruz wants to 
complete the 700-mile fence along the Mexico border: Trump wants to replace it 
with a wall.

What feeds all this is the belief that America has fallen from greatness 
abroad, cannot offer rising living standards at home and must guard against a 
tidal wave of Islamic terrorism. America’s identity is at stake. But there are 
different answers to building walls and trying to abolish the state and 
taxation – and which have broader appeal. It is more obvious that a rogue 
capitalism is the source of America’s ills, not the poor old state, for most 
people even in the US their lifeline and shaper of opportunities. The idea of 
checked and balanced democratic government as the expression of the commonweal 
is the great Enlightenment gift, well expressed in the US constitution, and 
which mainstream America understands. In this sense, Cruz and Trump set 
themselves against the founding fathers of their country and its culture.

Labour needs Jeremy Corbyn to do the same job as Bernie Sanders

Thus it should be no surprise that the self-styled democratic socialist Bernie 
Sanders is challenging Hillary Clinton for the Democratic presidential 
nomination more effectively than even he could have supposed 12 months ago. He 
is less a socialist, more an exponent of using smart government actively to 
serve the common interest, redistribute income and reshape the increasingly 
dysfunctional institutions of the US economy. He won’t win the nomination, but 
he is pushing Clinton into much more proactive left positions than she would 
have otherwise have taken. And she is much more likely to be president than 
Cruz or Trump. The right, notwithstanding its amazing financial resources, is 
in the depths of a deep crisis. As it becomes a prisoner of its worst instincts 
taken to their ideological extreme, it becomes unelectable.

In Britain, David Cameron’s travails have come from wrongly believing that the 
right is in the political and intellectual ascendancy. The country won’t let 
its steel industry disappear to “market forces” that are so transparently 
rigged; does not believe that trusts in Panama can ever be private matters; 
will not connive in lowering the living standards of the disabled to drive up 
those of the upper-middle-class. The mass of the electorate are not converts to 
zero government and libertarianism.

How the referendum will go is more uncertain; a lot will depend on whether 
Labour and the trade unions can energise their support, and whether business 
will have the chutzpah to speak out. On balance, Remain will probably win. But 
win or lose, the result will prompt a crisis in British Conservatism analogous 
to that in US Republicanism. Europe has been a proxy for a fight between 
mainstream liberal Tories and the libertarian anti-state outriders for 20 
years. Once the result is known, the battle will be on in earnest, with the 
mutual name-calling already opening up unbridgeable divisions. Labour needs 
Jeremy Corbyn to do the same job as Sanders: move his party to the left but 
leave a mainstream variant of Clinton with broad appeal to win in 2020 – and 
keep on winning. The 30-year rise of the right is over.
 