
Lots of people eagerly study all the polls and reports on how many people 
believe that climate change is real and urgent. They seem to think there is 
some critical mass that, through the weight of belief alone, will get us where 
we want to go. As if when the numbers aren’t high enough, we can’t achieve 
anything. As if when the numbers are high enough, beautiful transformation will 
magically happen all by itself or people will vote for wonderful politicians 
who do the right thing.

But it’s not the belief of the majority or the work of elected officials that 
will change the world. It will be action, most likely the actions of a 
minority, as it usually has been. This week’s appalling Obama administration 
decision to let Shell commence drilling in the Arctic sea says less about that 
administration, which swings whichever way it’s pushed, than that we didn’t 
push harder than the oil industry. Which is hard work, but sometimes even a 
tiny group can do it.

Take San Francisco, population 850,00, which is near the very top for percent 
of people who believe in climate change, according to a pollster I spoke to 
recently. I wish that meant that there were 850,000 climate activists in my 
town, or even 425,000. But I’ve watched for two years (and sometimes joined) 
the group of people pushing the San Francisco Retirement Board to divest its 
half billion dollars or so in fossil fuel investments. In April of 2013, the 
San Francisco Board of Supervisors passed an exhilarating unanimous (but 
nonbinding) resolution asking the Employee Retirement Board to divest.

Out of the 850,000 San Franciscans, seven or eight dedicated people have kept 
the divestment initiative alive, while the retirement board balks, stalls and 
grumbles about how straightforward changes in a modest portion of their 
portfolio are difficult, impossible, dangerous (even as they lost tens of 
millions when petroleum and coal stocks crashed). The activists pushing this 
forward are not one percent of San Franciscans, which would be 8500 people, or 
.1%, 850, but about .001% of people in the city.

They’ve come this far by being dedicated, tenacious, deeply informed on the 
issue and on board policy, and by regularly meeting among themselves and 
attending most of the meetings. Occasionally they get more people to show up, 
but they’ve carried the weight for two years. Recently they had a substantial 
victory, and they may yet win. For all of us. Otherwise divestment might have 
slipped away in San Francisco. It’s been the same at schools from Rutgers to 
Stanford: small groups of students and allies have pushed divestment and, 
sometimes, won. This is the kind of race that tortoises, and not hares, tend to 
win.

Sometimes small groups matter. Larger groups often do. People have the power, 
when we choose to use it, to act on it, to dedicate ourselves to change. We 
have so many stories about how power is elsewhere. As the Obama Administration 
nears its end, I keep hearing from the bitterly disappointed and the generally 
bitter, who seem to believe that one man should have reversed the status quo 
more or less singlehandedly. They blame, credit, and obsess about the 
53-year-old in the White House. But Obama is just the weathervane, and he knew 
it when he was elected.

Then, he implored the great wind that lifted him up and carried him along to 
keep going. Instead, people believed the job was done when it had just started 
and went home. Had the exhilarating coalition of the young, the nonwhite, the 
progressive, the poor who are usually excluded from political power kept it up, 
had they believed the power was ours, not his, we could have had an 
extraordinary eight years. The failures are not his alone – we can’t expect 
more of politicians than of the civil society that could push them. We can 
expect more of ourselves.

The climate movement is picking up steam – or rather wind. This January you 
could even see Mitt I-Will-Build-the-KXL-Pipeline-Myself Romney start to waver 
on the reality of climate change and its causes. Yes, that’s the same Mitt “I’m 
not in this race to slow the rise of the oceans or to heal the planet” Romney 
we heard from in 2012. In 2004 Senator John McCain actually said, while pushing 
emissions-control legislation: “There is strong scientific consensus about the 
fact that global climate change is occurring, and occurring as a result of 
human activity.” By 2008, he was picking a climate denier as his running mate. 
Corporate wind machines make them spin and spin, these ambitious men. “Marco 
Rubio Used to Believe in Climate Science. Now He’s Running for President”, ran 
a Mother Jones headline. He knows, as my mother would’ve said, on which side 
his bread is buttered.

We complain about politicians spinning, rather than recognizing that this is 
exactly what we want a weathervane — or hey, a wind turbine — to do, or 
recognizing that it’s up to us to be that wind. That’s why the ordinary people 
of Richmond, California, managed to beat the candidates mighty Chevron 
Corporation backed to elect a full sweep of green populists to city government 
last November. It’s also popular to say that we need to get money out of 
politics, but the people in that Chevron-refinery-dominated town proved that 
even money can’t buy everything if people are passionately engaged. As my 
friend Jamie Henn of350.org <http://350.org/> said, we don’t need to get money 
out so much as we need to get people in (and by that I don’t think he means 
obediently voting at the end of the process, but transforming the process, 
inside and outside electoral politics).

Too many of us seem far too fond of narratives of our powerlessness, maybe 
because powerlessness lets us off the hook. As we head into that most dismal of 
situations, another unbearably long electoral cycle, many who care about 
climate change will say that we need an elected official who will represent us 
or a great majority who agree with us. But we don’t need everyone on board; we 
don’t need one magic person in office; we need ourselves. To act. It’s the 
wind, not the weathervanes.
 