
When underdogs become overdogs, everything changes. They are the masters now, 
however much they try to pretend otherwise. Their power to change and ruin 
lives demands relentless and unforgiving scrutiny.

The hangover from the long age of globalisation has hidden the existence of a 
new elite, let alone the need to hold it to account. The neoliberal order began 
from the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, perhaps earlier with the elections of 
Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan in 1979/1980. You have to be in your 50s to 
remember another time. It ended with the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008. 
Its death was disguised because no new system stepped forward to replace it.

Now its successor is shambling into view, like a figure from a bad dream you 
hoped you had forgotten. It is nationalism. The often demagogic and always 
deceitful nationalism you saw in the Brexit campaign and see now in the actions 
and policies of Donald Trump, Marine Le Pen and Vladimir Putin. Even the Syriza 
movement, held up by many as a respectable alternative to the old status quo, 
was powered as much by agrotesque but authentically nationalist Germanophobia 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/business/jim-armitage-now-greece-pays-the-price-for-its-anti-german-rhetoric-a2488661.html>
 as a socialist programme.

Demagogic nationalism has to be fought. Not only because the promises it makes 
to its gullible supporters are plainly false, but for a reason many are still 
struggling to comprehend. Just because the old order left whole classes behind, 
and promoted inequalities of wealth that offended every moral person, does not 
mean the alternative will be better. Indeed, we already have evidence enough 
that the alternative will be worse.

Extremism thrives because of cowardly collaborators | Nick Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/30/donlad-trump-republicans-us-elections-dictatorship>
Try arguing that and you are hit with insults that have been repeated so often 
they have become cliches. Don’t be elitist. Don’t patronise. Don’t punch down. 
At best, they reflect a worthy desire to listen to and sympathise with those 
globalisation left behind. As before in history, however, the long period of 
stasis also brought a gormless ennui. The desire to welcome challenges to “the 
establishment”, however repellent, led the BBC to build up George Galloway and 
Nigel Farage and US cable television to give Trump tens of millions of dollars 
worth of free publicity. Both thought anything was better than the same old
“boring snoring” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/sep/14/rachel-reeves-boring-newsnight> 
politicians. Both thought wrong.

You see the result when you make the argument that Brexit was an act of gross 
folly that it will take Britain and Europe years to recover from. You are at 
once denounced as a metropolitan liberal elitist who treats ordinary people as 
fools. I agree one must accept that the collapse of European social democracy 
was caused in part by the failure of narrow, middle-class liberals to 
understand their fellow citizens. Technocrats thought the fact there was no 
evidence worth mentioning that immigrants steal jobs or depress wages meant 
opposition to immigration could be dismissed as irrational prejudice. They did 
not grasp that most of us, maybe all of us at some point in our lives, value 
the familiar and the local. New cultures that native Europeans did not 
understand, and new people whose mannerisms and expressions they could not 
read, unnerved them.

Meanwhile, the authoritarianism, which has turned left-liberalism into a 
movement for sneaks and prudes, was always going to play into the hands of the 
right. Free citizens have stopped listening to those who respond to the 
challenge of argument byscreaming for the police to arrest the politically 
incorrect 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/prosecuting-paul-gascoigne-racist-comment-8900383>
 or for universities to ban speakers who depart from leftish orthodoxy.

There are good reasons for liberal guilt. There is much to be guilty about, 
after all. But guilt about “liberal” elitism make no sense. We do not have a 
liberal elite now. We have a bragging, nationalist and proudly ignorant elite. 
The “hard Brexit” they are driving us towards will hurt the very workers who 
voted Leave. With Labour in the hands of the far left, it has, shamefully, 
fallen to the lone voice of George Osborne to warn that the nationalist eliteis 
about to threaten the jobs and living standards 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37452356> of the very “hard-working” 
people who so naively believed its promises.

What applies at home applies abroad. The collapse of communism left America as 
the world’s sole superpower. Even if its foreign policy was consistently 
benign, resentment of its dominance would have been inevitable. As it was, 
American power was far from being consistently benign and in the decades since 
1989 anyone who questioned it was treated with the indulgence we always grant 
to Davids who take on a Goliath.

Why would the EU appease the deluded Brexiters? | Nick Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/10/why-would-eu-appease-deluded-brexiters>
But see where American power stands today. Russia, Assad, Iran and Hezbollah 
break the Syrian ceasefire. Theybomb aid convoys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/20/un-aid-convoy-attack-syria-us-russia>
 and turn Aleppo into a 21th-century Dresden. Barack Obama and John Kerry do 
not look like imperious masters of a unipolar world now. They look like what 
they are: impotent and humiliated has-beens. Russia can do what it wishes in 
the Middle East. However loudly America complains it has no option but to tag 
along. For years, some of us have been writing against the immorality of 
politicians and intellectuals who excused Slobodan Milošević, Islamo-fascism, 
Saddam Hussein, the Iranian theocracy and the Russian kleptocracy. You get a 
measure of how deep the rot has spread when you notice that Trump, and the 
leaders of Ukip and the Front National are Putin admirers. You realise the 
scale of the corruption on the left when you find the leader of the British 
Labour party has worked as apaid propagandist for Iranian state television 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/james-bloodworth-left-wing-case-against-comrade-jeremy-corbyn-1513969>
, defended Milošević, Hamas and Hezbollah – and, not to be left out,Putin too 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/media/2015/10/i-wanted-believe-jeremy-corbyn-i-cant-believe-seumas-milne>
. The moral disgust at their collaborations should never fade. But in our new 
age, moral arguments have a practical urgency. The destruction of Syria is 
pushing refugees into Europe, whose presence fuels support for the far-right 
parties Putin sponsors.

Denunciations of American power, like denunciations of “neoliberalism” and 
“liberal elite”, are worse than simplistic now. Like the twitching of a corpse, 
they are exhausted responses from a world that has gone. They still have 
propaganda value, no doubt about it. But in the world as it is rather than was, 
it is Brexiters who are pushing with a doctrinaire determination to leave 
Britain poorer and meaner than they found it; the extreme left and right that 
support the regimes that threaten us; and Russian rather than American 
imperialism that is throwing Europe into chaos.

Liberal technocrats who “treat ordinary people as fools” neither receive nor 
deserve a hearing. But show “ordinary people” that their supposed champions 
have taken them for fools and you have a chance of breaking through. Then, 
maybe, they will listen.
 