
We live with an epidemic of anxiety. In 1980, 4% of Americans suffered a 
mental disorder associated with anxiety. Today half do. The trends in Britain 
are similar.A third of Britons will experience anxiety disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/sep/15/anxiety-epidemic-gripping-britain>
 at some stage in their life, with an explosion of reported anxiety among 
teenagers and young adults. Anxiety, depression, self-harm, attention deficit 
disorder and profound eating problems afflict our young as never before.

Anxiety has always been part of the human condition – as has depression and 
tendencies to self-harm – but never, it seems, on this scale. A number of 
trends appear to be colliding. This is an era when everyone is expected to find 
their personal route to happiness at the same time as the bonds of society, 
faith and community – tried and tested mechanisms to support wellbeing – are 
fraying. Teenagers in particular – fearful of missing out – are beset by a 
myriad of agonising choices about how to achieve the good life with fewer 
social and psychological anchors to help them navigate their way. Who can blame 
them if they respond with an ever rising sense of anxiety, if not panic?

At the same time there has been a transformation in individuals’ willingness 
and society’s readiness to accept that the resulting anguish is not something 
inherent in the human condition – but often a form of malady that should be 
recognised and treated. In Jean Paul Sartre’sNausea, the (anti-) hero, Antoine 
Roquentin, is so plagued by wondering if existence has any purpose that he 
becomes intensely depressed and listless.Nausea was celebrated as breaking new 
literary ground in the 1930s, illuminating the essence of the human condition. 
Today Roquentin would be diagnosed with general anxiety disorder, and 
prescribed an antidepressant or invited to undergo a course of cognitive 
behavioural therapy.

Is there, however, too great a readiness to pathologise the anxiety of being 
alive? Almost certainly. There is great and growing unease in parts of the 
psychology and psychiatry professions that too many practitioners have become 
trigger happy – too quick to prescribe mood-altering drugs to patients only 
going though life events, ranging from bereavement to divorce, which are 
naturally anxiety inducing.

Life never was and never can be an uninterrupted progress towards utopian 
bliss. Grief following the loss of someone beloved, a great ambition thwarted 
or simply witnessing one’s body age or wither through illness are all 
concomitants of being alive – pains alongside life’s many wonderful pleasures 
On the other hand, there is no doubt that the patients complaining of acute 
mental anxiety feel intensely disturbed beyond some normal level of anxiousness 
– and that teenagers can feel this more acutely still.

You cannot listen to mental health campaigner Natasha Devon – sacked last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/04/mental-health-champion-uk-schools-axed-after-criticising-government-natasha-devon>
 from her role as a mental health champion for being too vocal, articulate and 
daring to criticise government policy on testing in schools – without 
recognising that she is addressing a social reality. Young women in particular 
are ever more transfixed with how they look to the point that, for a growing 
proportion, it is translating into mental health disorders with physical 
side-effects – bulimia, anorexia and self-harm. Asking them to snap out of it 
is not going to work. And while there probably is too great a readiness to 
pathologise anxiety, doctors and counsellors, faced with a growing epidemic, 
are only responding as best they can. To ignore what is going on would be 
equally damnable.

What to do? Devon’s campaign is part of the answer. Critics of the 30-year 
rise in the belief system that holds that economic and social wellbeing 
originates in as much individualism and free market as possible (along with 
diminished social, public and state institutions) usually focus on the exterior 
consequences, ranging from heightened inequality to weakening rates of 
innovation, investment and productivity. They are right, but there is another 
less frequently made criticism – what this worldview is doing to our mental 
lives.

Happiness – when individual liberty is seen as all-important – lies in 
exercising choice and taking responsibility for our own lives. Get the choices 
right, and self-realisation, self-fulfillment and happiness will follow. Get 
them wrong and you risk mockery and marginalisation. Teenagers know as never 
before that they must get their choices right, pass their exams – and many will 
have 24/7 parents “helping” them in their quest. However, the act of making 
many choices with necessarily imperfect information perforce induces anxiety 
and stress – and once they are made, happiness does not automatically follow. 
Small wonder that teenagers in general, and teenage girls in particular, find 
the whole experience traumatising – as do their elders, even if they have 
better-developed emotional and psychological resource to deal with it.

Which is why Devon’s efforts to create a social movement to open up body image 
issues are so important. It is good that there is less stigma associated with 
mental health disorders: in January the prime minister endorsed such 
destigmatisation whileannouncing an extra £1bn 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/prime-minister-pledges-a-revolution-in-mental-health-treatment>
 to address mental health issues.

But there must also be an effort to get at the roots of what is happening – 
and that lies in more social interaction, and stronger social and public 
institutions that don’t make individual choice the alpha and omega of 
everything. The government could never go that far – which is ultimately why 
Devon was sacked. The governing party will never feel at ease with social 
movements.

Happiness can never result from the exercise of choice alone: we are social 
beings

For happiness can never result from the exercise of choice alone: we are 
social beings, and the building blocks of happiness lie in looking out for each 
other, acting together, being in teams and pursuing common goals for the common 
good. Families, schools, colleges, unions, newspapers, sports clubs and even 
firms should all understand that such commonality should be part of their core 
DNA.

Teenagers, for instance, need parents who understand that parenting is less 
about being friends with their children – partners in their kids’ exercise of 
choice. Rather, parenting is about creating strong families in which parents 
have to lead and exercise authority – havens from the 24/7 intrusiveness of 
social media.

For a generation the doctrine has been that the quest for a common good – in 
schools, in unions, in the delivery of public services – should be trumped by 
the expression of choice. The result is the anxiety epidemic. It can’t and 
won’t go on. Expect more Natasha Devons – and ultimately, one hopes, change.
 