
The world can be a joyless place. And as we approach the end of yet another 
tumultuous year, 355mass shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/oct/02/mass-shootings-america-gun-violence>
,265 deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
 of unarmed black women and men by police, continuous loops of video detailing 
some of their deaths, extremist bombings and attacks, it would seem indulgent 
to wax philosophically about the need for joy in our modern life.

But indulge we must, because if we forget what joy looks, tastes, feels and 
sounds like, we will have succumbed to darkness. We must instead give thanks.

To find joy in the hour of violence and chaos is part discipline and 
receptivity. I am never without my headphones – and if by some wild chance I 
forget them on my bedroom dresser, I run back up four flights of stairs to 
retrieve them. I can’t go a day without music. Music is critical; it brings me 
joy.

The fourth movement of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony has been on a continuous 
loop for me for several days now. It has supplanted my continuous rotation of 
the musical Hamilton and of Drake and Future’s What a Time to Be Alive. Yes, 
these are wildly different and divergent soundscapes: some days require the
glittery reminder 
<http://genius.com/Lin-manuel-miranda-the-schuyler-sisters-lyrics> of Renee 
Elise Goldsberry and Phillipa Soo’s voices, “Look around, look around, how 
lucky we are to be alive right now”; other days even Kanye slips through – or, 
at least Rihanna’svisceral declaration <http://genius.com/57464> on his song: 
“Turn up the lights in here baby. Extra bright, I want y’all to see this.”

Sometimes joy indeed requires the extra step of seeing. I attended a public 
performance in June of of African American men and women that blended 
traditions of the black church with dance, poetry and hip-hop under a parachute 
at the Great Hill in New York’s Central Park.

It had been a hard week; it was the week of the mass murder of nine people in 
a church. And this performance fell on Juneteenth, a day that marked the 
liberation of slaves in 1865 when word finally reached them that Abraham 
Lincoln had freed them by executive order two years prior. The performance, 
featuring a mix of dancers and musicians, announced an hour of black joy.

I watched a dark-skinned man stretch his arms wide, the word “love” tattooed 
on his forearm. I watched them, dazzled by the performance that blend 
traditions part hip hop and theater, black church and Shakespeare. I didn’t 
know until I witnessed this performance how much I needed tosee it. 

It wasn’t too much longer after seeing the performance that I picked up 
National Book Award finalist Ross Gay’s collection, Catalog of Unabashed 
Gratitude. The title poem itself a kind of prayer, celebrating living without 
sugarcoating the ugly parts. For weeks I carried the book in my backpack. And 
during especially tough weeks, I would find moments to read it. It was for a 
time a ritualistic discipline to carry and read the poem, to connect 
immediately to a world of joy and gratitude when surrounded by such pain and 
despair.


Art brings me joy. And the small bits of joy I risk amid quotidian 
responsibilities and news of horrendous tragedies are equal parts pleasure and 
solace. They keep me sane, keep me present, keep me human. And that commitment 
to seeking joy great and small is what keeps me centered and empathetic. It is 
how I take my little light and make it shine.

The news is terrible every day. There is a great paradox in seeking joy in our 
modern lives, and too often it seems we yield to the deluge of tragedies beyond 
our control. In his poem A Brief for The Defense, Jack Gilbert reminds us: “We 
must have the stubbornness to accept our gladness in the ruthless furnace of 
this world.” If we aren’t reminded of our humanity, we succumb to the darkness, 
we succumb to the terrors foreign, domestic and internal: we lose our capacity 
for empathy.

My grandparents played LPs of Bach’s Hallelujah and Beethoven’s Ode to Joy 
during the holiday season, on Sundays after church. I had learned to bang out 
on the piano – clumsily, with flights of grace – Ode to Joy for our small 
church congregation decades ago when we had no heat in the sanctuary. We were a 
very poor church in a very poor community in Milwaukee. I say this not for 
sympathy or pity, but to note that people with nothing can possess joy, never 
naive enough to believe that future sorrows would not befall them, but ever 
hopeful for a more generous future.
 