
The vast hole in the ozone layer above Antarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica> appears to be healing, 
scientists say, putting the world on track to eventually remedy one of the 
biggest environmental concerns of the 1980s and 90s.


Research by US and UK scientists shows that the size of the ozone void has 
shrunk, on average, by around 4m sq km since 2000. The measurements were taken 
from the month of September in each year, when the ozone hole starts to open up 
each year.

The study, published in Science 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/lookup/doi/10.1126/science.aae0061>, states that 
the phase-out of chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) chemicals means that the ozone layer 
is “expected to recover in response, albeit very slowly.” CFCs, once commonly 
found in aerosols and refrigeration, can linger in the atmosphere for more than 
50 years, meaning that the ozone hole will not be considered healed until 2050 
or 2060.

The Montreal protocol, a 1987 international treaty ratified by all UN members, 
successfully spurred nations to eradicate the use of CFCs in products.

The agreement followed fears that ozone depletion could cause serious health 
and environmental harm through the ultraviolet light that would reach the 
surface of the Earth through the ozone barrier. The UN estimates that2m cases 
of skin cancer a year have been avoided through the phase-out of CFCs.

The ozone hole opened up over the Antarctic due to the vast amounts of cloud 
that forms over the coldest continent on Earth. This cloud helps the CFC 
chemicals linger, causing the ozone layer to be eaten away. The void is at its 
greatest during the southern hemisphere’s spring.

Volcanic activity can also spur greater ozone depletion. Last year, scientists 
discovered to their alarm that the largest ever ozone hole, measuring more than 
20m sq km, had opened up in October.

This is thought to be a blip, however, caused by volcanic activity in Chile. 
When scientists looked at data from September, compared to the same month over 
the past decade, they found a consistent shrinkage, with the opening up of the 
ozone hole occurring later each year.

“When volcanoes team up with man-made chlorine, it’s a toxic mix and 
Antarctica is particularly vulnerable,” said study co-author Susan Solomon, of 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

“But when we looked at September we saw it was getting smaller. It was pretty 
cool to see it closing. The chemicals will slowly decay over time.”

The extreme cold of Antarctica is thought to create a “feedback” effect that 
amplifies ozone depletion, by creating clouds that cause more ozone to be eaten 
up. The extra ultraviolet light is believed to have caused changes to plankton, 
but the sparse wildlife in Antarctica, such as penguins, have not been severely 
affected by the ozone hole.

“If you had to have an ozone hole anywhere in the world, it would be 
Antarctica because it’s not teeming with life,” said Solomon. “It was the 
canary in the coalmine that showed us that if we didn’t back off with these 
chemicals, we’d have a crisis.

“Britain, for example, has around 5% less ozone than it did 30 years ago but 
it would’ve been twice as bad as that if we didn’t phase out CFCs. There would 
be problems with skin cancer, eye damage and damage to crops. We made a 
decision to avert a problem and we ought to congratulate ourselves on that.”

Solomon said she was hopeful the successful eradication of harmful CFCs would 
be followed by strong international action to avert the worst consequences of 
climate change.

“Obviously the economics of global warming are different because the fossil 
fuel industry is worth a lot more in dollars than the companies making these 
chemicals,” she said.

“But there are important parallels. It was amazing to see how quickly 
innovation solved the problem with CFCs so we got rid of them yet still have 
hair spray and air conditioning. We’re starting to see the same thing with 
global warming. We should look at the ozone problem and realize that nations 
can get together and come up with solutions.”

• This article was amended on 1 July 2016 to clarify that it was known before 
last year that volcanic activity can spur greater ozone depletion.
 