
Good morning: I hope it's been a more comfortable experience for you than me. 
There are at least two inches of snow on the London pavements and an army of 
stranded night owls trudging around Kings Cross, some wrapped in silver foil 
blankets having gone out for the night in T-shirts and trying to flag down 
cars, not specifically taxis, to try and cadge a lift home. So, forgive me if I 
look at the temperatures on offer in Dubai with a touch of the gren eye.

As for the match itself, I haven't got the time to give you much of a 
preamble, save to say how impressive Younus Khan and Azhar Ali were yesterday 
and particularly the way they got the spinners to shift their line of attack 
and then milked them in the last session. Barring a storming day from England, 
Pakistan's first ever 3-0 series victory looks on. Given the looks on their 
faces when deciding to go for a review yesterday, they seem bemused by their 
fate and almost resigned to it.

83rd over: Pakistan 226-2 (Azhar Ali 79 Younus 115) Jimmy Anderson begins with 
a loosener, arcing away outside off stump as Jerusalem is sung with a rocking 
drum accompaniment from the Pakistan fans. Pakistan are 180 ahead at the start 
of play. After two moving away his third and fourth jag back in and Azhar goes 
on to his toes and plays the shorter fourth ball to midwicket for two. He takes 
two more off the last ball, punching it through mid on. It's been a calm, 
confident start from Azhar.

84th over: Pakistan 226-2 (Azhar Ali 79 Younus 115) Broad's first ball is a 
mirror of Anderson's but his second starts closer to off stump and Younus 
leaves it well alone. There's definitely some movement in the air – his first 
four balls are genuine outswingers, modifying his length to test Younus who is 
being very watchful, putting bat to ball only for the fifth and six balls, 
dabbing them towards point. Maiden.

85th over: Pakistan 227-2 (Azhar Ali 80 Younus 115) I, as Michael Jackson had 
it, am not alone. Good morning, Sara Torvalds: "Hundreds of emails coming in 
from people saying that they really believe a) that England will bowl Pakistan 
out in the first hour, and b) that the England batsmen are going to score runs 
like it's the Ashes again. No?" A little short on the ground, Sara. "Ah, well. 
Better stick to commenting on the weather, then. Here in Karis, Finland it's 
-22 - which naturally won't keep anyone from voting in today's presidential 
elections." That's tennis racket on shoe weather, Sara. Anderson is striving 
for the trick of tempting Azhar with balls moving away then trapping him with 
one that cuts back in but the batsman is not falling for it. He takes a 
solitary single by piercing the off-side ring.

86th over: Pakistan 227-2 (Azhar Ali 80 Younus 115) "Good morning, Rob. Yes, 
snow just about everywhere but the roads are clear round our way so no 
excuses," writes John Starbuck. "Even so, it's a good job it's not a working 
day for most of us, as I understand it is over there. Will England turn up to 
put a proper shift in?" They got a tremendous boll…, er rollicking from Andy 
Flower this morning according to Sky so one senses they will not chuck the 
towel in. They look more upbeat, their smiles not so rueful this morning, and 
Broad has been very tight with his line, bowling his second successive maiden.

87th over: Pakistan 231-2 (Azhar Ali 81 Younus 118) Shot! from Younus Khan, to 
post the double century partnership, leaning into a cover drive that is just 
clawed back before it hits the rope. Anderson keeps to his fourth stump line 
until the last ball which Azhar tucks off his pads for a single.

88th over: Pakistan 235-2 (Azhar Ali 82 Younus 121) Jaffa from Broad to Azhar 
almost catches him having a nibble outside off-stump but it juts eludes the 
edge. Dave Todd, from Sydney (not inconsequentially), says: "Given the hefty 
sentences handed down for bowling a few no balls and my ignorance of the law, I 
was just wondering what sort of sentence a person might get in England for 
impersonating a batsman? With transportation no longer possible (nor desirable 
on our part), and custodial rather harsh, do you think it will be simple 
deportation?" The same fate as Philip Hughes, one suspects. It's a batsman's 
world, Broad making a marginal error by trying to push one back on to the 
stumps is clipped through midwicket for three then almost gets Azhar having a 
slashing square cut at the filthiest ball he's bowled all morning but the 
batsman misses it.

89th over: Pakistan 239-2 (Azhar Ali 82 Younus 125) Younus creams Anderson's 
first ball through the covers for four. He's scored a triple century, two 
doubles and two 190s in the past so has the virtue of patience and 
stickability. Anderson tries to counter by going a little bit wider on the 
crease. Younus watches it and pats the ball towards point. "We're not that big 
on snow shoes here, actually, but prefer to plough the snow off streets etc.'" 
writes Sara Torvalds. Of course, there are days when things go badly in 
Finland, too. Only the other day we had lots of accidents because of the 
unusual combination of very cold weather and heavy snowfall (usually it will be 
one or the other, but the Gulf of Finland hasn't frozen over yet this year)." 
Snow-ploughing the streets? It'll never catch on. Here'sSara's clip 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qnNcVEEEIR0&feature=youtube_gdata_player> of 
the Finland blizzards.

90th over: Pakistan 242-2 (Azhar Ali 84 Younus 126) Broad raps Younus on the 
pad but it was too high to get a leg-before decision. Later he gets more bounce 
still, catching Azhar unawares with a leaper but the batsman compensates, 
possibly by loosening his grip, and fends it away safely. It's been an 
excellent opening spell from Broad.

91st over: Pakistan 244-2 (Azhar Ali 85 Younus 127) Azhar has a reprieve on 
the first ball of Anderson's over, nicking low to second slip where Swann dives 
forward and gets two fingers of his left hand underneath the ball but cannot 
hang on. Sir Ian Botham says he went up too soon and then had to quickly get 
back down again, his trigger movement making it more difficult and his handling 
not being able to compensate for being off-balance and too high in his crouch. 
Dear, oh dear.

Pakistan REVIEW!! Younus lbw Broad

Wicket!! Younus lbw Broad 127 Broad keeps pegging away, looking for the swing 
and getting it but unthreateningly because it's moving most the further it is 
pitched outside off-stump. Then he traps him with one that doesn't move away. 
It looks a little bit high to me but the umpire correctly judged it was in line 
and going to clip the off-bail. Umpire's call has worked in England's favour.

92nd over: Pakistan 244-3 (Azhar Ali 85 Misbah 0) "Yes we're going to lose 
3-0. But contrary to expectation both sides are going to finish the series on 
good terms for the first time in living memory," writes Ian Forth. "England can 
lick their wounds and pretend it never happened – like Australia have just done 
after being 21-9 against South Africa and beaten by New Zealand at home. 
Pakistan have regained much pride and restored their integrity. Everyone's a 
winner, apart from Eoin Morgan."

93rd over: Pakistan 247-3 (Azhar Ali 88 Misbah 0) Azhar goes down on one knee 
to smack the ball through the covers and move on to 88. He needs a bat with 
more meat in it because his timing was perfect but still it didn't make the 
rope. Nasser Hussain reckons Anderson is floating the ball in where Broad is 
bowling it. He's right, until the fifth and sixth balls where he really bends 
his back and tries to catch Misbah on the crease, looking for the lbw.

94th over: Pakistan 247-3 (Azhar Ali 88 Misbah 0) "Surely of all gigs doing 
the Guardian's OBO is tailor-made for working from home? By which I mean, from 
under the duvet on the bed near the heater within sight of the telly?," writes 
Jonathan Wallis. "What happens if you just don't, er, arrive? Here in Melbourne 
I was off to register at a conference, but it started to rain lightly so I 
turned around and went home." Jammy bleeder. It would be good to do it from 
home, with the one problem being the five-year-old wanting to play Junior 
Scrabble and the two-year-old interrupting to tell me Percy has pushed Thomas 
off the track. Broad is bowling wonderfully, moving it through the air and off 
the deck.

95th over: Pakistan 247-3 (Azhar Ali 88 Misbah 0) They're sticking to the plan 
for Misbah, cramping his ability to move forward and trying to pin him in 
front. Anderson has certainly got his dander up bowling at the captain. Here's 
Gary Naylor, on that dropped catch. Have your recovered, Gary? "Swanny has not 
been as good since he started 'writing' that book. They should only write them 
once they're done with their central contracts. The Video Diaries can stay 
though." I enjoyed the book, Gary. Didn't think his candour was particularly 
wise, though. It wouldn't have sold without it but I think, too, that they're 
better kept for international retirement. Another maiden, Anderson alternating 
his length to put doubts in Misbah's mind and keep his feet static.

96th over: Pakistan 249-3 (Azhar Ali 90 Misbah 0) Big grunt from Broad when he 
gets one to cut awat from Azhar. He's deserved more this morning. Is Madiha 
Sheikh thinking of Stuart when she writes: "
I am a Pakistani cricket fan but never have the patience for the Test matches. 
Have to say England have made Test cricket worth watching. It helps that they 
are also quiet the lookers!" And the OBO team, Madiha. Not quite the lookers. 
That'll be drinks, then. "I wouldn't mind a Variability of Bounce Factor for 
the pitch and a Ball Heaviness Index for each bowler," writes Joe Healey. 
Sounds like one for the analyst. Or his near homonym.

97th over: Pakistan 251-3 (Azhar Ali 91 Misbah 1) Anderson continues but may 
be suffering lower back pain as he stops after the second ball to lie on the 
ground and do some stretches. Misbah gets off the mark off the 12th ball he's 
faced. Here's Gary Naylor: "Not long ago, Stuart Broad was being monstered for 
six sixes in an over by Yuvraj Singh. Since then, Broad has cemented his place 
in all formats and Yuvi has had health problems and I understand that he is 
undergoing chemo in Boston. OBOers wish him well." We do, indeed.

98th over: Pakistan 252-3 (Azhar Ali 92 Misbah 1) Monty Panesar comes into the 
attack. Sky has just done a stats package on Younus, noting his lack of runs 
(and Tests) in 2008. Aamer Sohail said ruefully, "he was unfortunate to have a 
dispute with the board chairman … not the only one". What a waste. Monty gets 
some slowish turn from a couple of balls but seems to be dragging it down more 
than he was in Abu Dhabi. A shortish one outside off stump is bludgeoned into 
the ground for a single.

99th over: Pakistan 254-3 (Azhar Ali 93 Misbah 2) And it's spin from both 
ends. Swann has a slip, wholly redundant short leg and a shortish midwicket. 
He's coming around the wicket to Azhar, you would think to look for the rough 
but a couple of balls drift on to middle stump and Azhar gets off strike with a 
push to cover and back on again when Misbah plays tip and run. The last ball of 
the over is again on middle but full-pitched and Azhar, a nervous 90s-man, 
palys a weird French cricket block that gets the field ooohing.

100th over: Pakistan 254-3 (Azhar Ali 93 Misbah 2) Pakistan are 212 ahead. 
Already enough I would think but I suppose if England could get through to the 
tail and keep the target below 300 they will feel they've recovered well. 
Maiden from Monty, his one short ball finding the fielder when cut by Misbah.

101st over: Pakistan 256-3 (Azhar Ali 94 Misbah 3) "There's an interesting 
stat: Swann and Panesar have never played together in a winning Test side," 
writes John Starbuck. Swann is bowling quickly to Azhar, trying to give him the 
hurry up by pushing the ball through. More flight for Misbah, who covers any 
potential spin with a quick bat.

102nd over: Pakistan 259-3 (Azhar Ali 94 Misbah 6) Monty is copying Swann, in 
that he isn't looking for flight and drift. Both are spearing them in a bit. 
When he overpitches, Misbah turns it off his toes to square leg and runs three.

103rd over: Pakistan 259-3 (Azhar Ali 94 Misbah 6) Matthew Prior keeps 
chirping awaty with praise for "Chef" and "Belly". Seems abit nonsensical to 
me. Swann is keeping Misbah on his toes, having to back his ability to kill the 
ball with his bat because he can't get sufficiently forward to play it with his 
pad.

104th over: Pakistan 263-3 (Azhar Ali 98 Misbah 6) Azhar comes down the wicket 
and is rapped on the pad by Panesar who utters a strangulated appeal. Azhar is 
very cautious until he sweeps a straight ball down to fine leg for four. 
They're grinding this out.

105th over: Pakistan 265-3 (Azhar Ali 98 Misbah 8) It has been a mix of 
enthralling defensive play and sheer tedium at times since Younus's dismissal. 
Misbah's determination to play himself in and Azhar's desire to make his second 
Test ton have led to some understandable conservatism. "I'm all for measured 
doses of optimism to lift English snow-bound spirits up, but to be 
contemplating plans for running through Pakistan's tail when they're only three 
down and batting the DRS into oblivion might be a tad premature, don't you 
think?" writes Jamil Masud. I think I'd momentarily succumbed to Bothamania.

106th over: Pakistan 269-3 (Azhar Ali 102 Misbah 8) Azhar comes down the track 
and takes it on the pad, off the inside edge. He looks desperate to get to 
three figures and is prepared to btake a risk now. It was a dress rehearsal for 
the next ball when he rocks and larrups a short ball through point to get to 
102. It took him 320 balls to get there, a monument to his dedication and 
patience.

107th over: Pakistan 271-3 (Azhar Ali 103 Misbah 9) Our Lord Selvey and master 
writes in: "Im not too optimistic about England's chances here. There is a 
whole heap of rough outside the lefthanders' off stump and England have six of 
them." Yes. When Swann's bowling round the wicket to Azhar, he has occasionally 
found it and it would make any left-hander jumpy, I would think. Two off the 
over, Misbah pushing the ball to leg off a full face, with a flick of the 
writs. Makes him a candidate for short-leg catch, says Nasser Hussain.

108th over: Pakistan 277-3 (Azhar Ali 109 Misbah 9) Gray Naylor sums up what I 
feel about Azhar's innings far better than my sleep-deprived brain can mangae 
this morning: "Perfect innings for the situation by Azhar. Batting isn't all 
about flashing drives and getting on top of the bowling. England's middle order 
should take note." And just as I pasted that Azhar does unleash a sumptuous 
cover drive off Panesar, making the silly point bounce up to spare his ankles.

109th over: Pakistan 280-3 (Azhar Ali 110 Misbah 10) Misbah takes a pair of 
singles and Azhar one. They don't look in any discomfort out there. Only Broad 
has given them a harsh examination.

110th over: Pakistan 277-3 (Azhar Ali 111 Misbah 12) It's KP into the attack. 
I'm lomghing for him to have an lbw appeal to review. He's turning it straight 
away, a good few inches but the one that moved the most was too short. It's 
certainly added some element of danger – that the batsmen don't want to get out 
to Pietersen – to the end of the session. "These 6am starts are perfectly timed 
for fathers of young children getting up at the weekend," writes Matt Fordham. 
"And when England are batting, my sons asking 'is he out yet?' After every ball 
is not far from the truth. Azhar is clearly not listening though." He's got 
cloth ears, Matt.

111th over: Pakistan 284-3 (Azhar Ali 111 Misbah 12) A brute of a ball from 
Swann, turns from outside off and jumps up to hit Misbah around the hip. He 
gets his hands out of the way very adeptly but it looks ominous for England if 
it's turning and bouncing so much for the right-hander.

112th over: Pakistan 288-3 (Azhar Ali 113 Misbah 15) Pietersen pitches off and 
middle annd Prior takes it inches outside leg stump. My, he gives it a rip and 
from his height he gets good bounce. Why he doesn't bowl more I'm not sure. "So 
I'm living in Indiana at the moment, where the day's play begins at midnight," 
writes Stephen Todd. "When I woke up this morning, some 18 hours ago, (after 
going to bed at the cricket's lunch time yesterday), I half expected the match 
to be over. Yet, today, returning home from a drunken 'lets remember our early 
20s with some excessive inebriation' evening, I find that in those 18 hours, 
ONE wicket has fallen. As a retort to this state of affairs, all I can say is 
…" snip, snip, even our Stars on Sunday policy wouldn't let that through.

113th over: Pakistan 292-3 (Azhar Ali 113 Misbah 15) Swann comes around the 
wicket again to Azhar. Prior keeps offering praise of the "beautiful, buddy" 
variety. A vicious ripper beats Azhar, and Prior, going for four byes. Pakistan 
are 250 ahead aith eight full sessions to go.

114th over: Pakistan 295-3 (Azhar Ali 115 Misbah 16) Big shout from Prior for 
lbw when Piteresen hits Misbah's pad, Misbah retreating on to the back foot. KP 
didn't appeal, though, and it was too high and turned too much. Misbah sweeps 
for a single to rotate the strike and Azhar uses Pietersen's bounce to stand up 
and ride the soin around the corner for two.

Lunch:  There's only me here and Robbie Smyth is delayed by snow, so please 
excuse me if I don't keep you entertained through the first part of lunch break 
but I need caffeine urgently. I'll be back in 25 minutes or so. My word, it's 
cold out there, not as parky as Finland, though, where Sara Toravalds has been 
exercising her legs and the franchise: "There, I survived a three-kilometre 
walk to the train station (and I stopped on the way to vote, so I've done my 
democratic duty as well) in -22 degrees and am now seated on the train to 
Helsinki. The roads were clear, skies blue and the only thing I had to worry 
about was frost on my glasses (key is wrapping the scarf around your face in a 
way that keeps your breath away from your eyes). Now, when do you think 
Pakistan will declare? They could safely have done so yesterday, of course, but 
do you think they want to beat England by more or less than 300 runs?" I think 
they'll declare midway through the evening session, take the sap out of the 
batsmen's legs and then add fatigue to all the other problems they'll have to 
wrestle with. Rameez's lunch-time attire has brightened the mood, wearing a red 
tartan shirt with dark tie. Obviously a Big Country fan.

115th over: Pakistan 297-3 (Azhar Ali 115 Misbah 18) Here we go with Jimmy 
Anderson back into the attack. Patrick Over has run up the white flag: "Can 
England forfeit? With a change of innings the tedium and brilliance of 
Pakistani accumulation will give way to a very British rout: short periods of 
resistance mixed with folly and confusion. The benign pitch will be unplayable. 
And, of course, the DRS will hone all balls on the stumps." Misbah punches the 
ball through the covers for two but the next ball dies a bit on him, cuts back 
in and he plays and misses unconvincingly. They're aiming for his pads, to trap 
him leg-before for the fifth time in the series.

116th over: Pakistan 298-3 (Azhar Ali 116 Misbah 18) Monty begins his 40th 
over, replacing KP. He stations a silly mid-off for Azhar. Brian Rafferty has a 
confession: "As if The Killing and Borgen were not enough, I am now in love 
with Sara Torvalds." And speaking of the object of his affection, here she is: 
"So, basically the bowlers must feel they are bowling for their averages by 
now. Regardless of the boll.. er, rollicking by Flower, surely nobody in the 
England team is so delusional as to think the batsmen will suddenly carry their 
weight in this series?" I don't hold out much hope, Sara. Azhar takes a single 
off the over and Monty takes out the silly mid-off for Misbah and bowls flatter 
at him.

117th over: Pakistan 298-3 (Azhar Ali 116 Misbah 18) Anderson gets his bouncer 
out for the first time today, the ball sailing over Azhar's head. He tries it 
again the second time, closer to Azhar's head who has to duck under it as it 
passes a foot or so over the stumps. Another short one, oustide off stump, 
tucks Azhar up and he fends it away with a cross bat. Maiden over. "The Beard 
Liberation Front has taken the unusual step of authorising the emergency use of 
false beards for theEngland cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team> if Pakistan are not 
bowled out by tea. BLF Organiser Keith Flett says anything to add gravitas to 
England's performance, and false beards may help. Matt Prior may wish to wear 
dark glasses instead." How does the BLF stand on Richard Branson? A valued 
member or one that is tolerated rather than embraced?

118th over: Pakistan 298-3 (Azhar Ali 116 Misbah 18) Misbah's lack of footwork 
has him rocking back and getting a thick edge on to his pads. Muted appeal from 
Matt Prior, who has taken to calling Monty "Panny".

119th over: Pakistan 301-3 (Azhar Ali 117 Misbah 20) Jimmy's continuing with 
his short-pitch attack. "Re Smyth," writes Gary Naylor. "Snow stops play?" He's 
strapped up the huskies, Gary, and on his way. Striving for pace Anderson gets 
a warning when his momentum leads him to lose his balance in his follow through 
and whack two size 10s on a good length. The skipper isn't too impressed, so 
Anderson goes around the wicket. Eoin Morgan makes a super diving stop at point 
when Misbah clips it firmly square. Last ball of the over and Misbah hooks 
while ducking his head. The ball's on him quicker than he thought and catches 
the top edge, just clearing the leaping Swann at midwicket.

120th over: Pakistan 303-3 (Azhar Ali 118 Misbah 21) "C'mon Panny boy," yelps 
Prior as Monty comes over the wicket into the rough. Azhar sweeps him to fine 
leg for a single, a prejudged shot that comes off, and Misbah kicks the next 
balls away. Prior calls for a helmet. "Standing on Richard Branson?" posits 
Colum Farrelly. "What a good idea!" Arf. He's "also in love with Ms Torvalds".

121st over: Pakistan 305-3 (Azhar Ali 119 Misbah 22) Another over from 
Anderson with his short-of-a-length attack. Two off it. Sanjeev in Lubbock, 
Buddy Holly country, writes: "Chris Tavare and Geoff Boycott (till his mom 
started beating the crap out of anyone with a stick of rhubarb all of a sudden) 
batting together for England (1981-82 in Delhi) and Gaekwad and Shastri for 
India (1983-84 in Jallandhar) are the two times that I ever remember batting 
this slow. With such batting, you begin to wonder why attendances at test 
matches are low." It is a bit of a grind, Sanjeev.

122nd over: Pakistan 306-3 (Azhar Ali 120 Misbah 22) That over simply flew by. 
"Stalemate," says Athers. Too right. Rob Smyth might be stranded but he's still 
at the coalface. "Pakistan really should be39-6 on the first morning 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/match/234783.html> more often," he 
writes.

123rd over: Pakistan 309-3 (Azhar Ali 122 Misbah 23) Swann's back and gets 
Misbah inside edging towards short leg, bouncing short of Alastair Cook. This 
is getting to be quite hypnotic, the majesty of the stonewalling from Azhar, is 
sending me into a trance.

Review!! Misbah lbw Panesar – England appeal Turned down, Misbah inside-edged 
it on to his pads.

124th over: Pakistan 310-3 (Azhar Ali 122 Misbah 23) Monty continues over the 
wicket, Misbah padding everything away. So he goes back round at last and has 
his leg-before appeal, missing the thickish edge and losing England's last 
review. The last ball of the over is a peach, Monty's quicker one darting 
towards off-stump then spinning viciously and bouncing towards slip.

125th over: Pakistan 320-3 (Azhar Ali 128 Misbah 28) Azhar gets his sweep out 
and belts it off the toe of his bat, turning his wrists to smack it behind 
squer for four. Next up Swann gives him the one that goes straight and it 
misses the edge by milimetres. He's not had much luck but he hasn't stopped 
trying to refain the flight and drift that took him up to No2 in the world. 
From the fifth ball Misbah smashes his sweep for four and Swann shouts 
something akin to "Clucking bell", disgusted at bowling a full toss.

126th over: Pakistan 322-3 (Azhar Ali 129 Misbah 29) Signs that Pakistan are 
beginning to take the attack to England now, the batsmen deciding to sweep 
balls that are outside off stump, or standing up to paddle anything remotely 
short through the leg side. "Here in the States we have the concept of 
'seasons', which takes into account, when scheduling outdoor activities, the 
varying weather throughout the year," writes Paul Taylor. "Is it so also in 
England, or are the 'T-shirt and short pants' sports and the 'bounce the little 
white ball on the ground' sports so far advanced as to be not mindful of such 
trivialities?" That's too difficult a question for this time of morning, Paul. 
I'm not sure I even understand it. Monty ends his over with another quicker 
ball but Misbah has it covered, smothering the spin with an angled, dead bat.

127th over: Pakistan 324-3 (Azhar Ali 131 Misbah 29) Azhar has decided to get 
a zip on and unleashes the Dilshan scoop, running the ball over the head of 
where leg slip would be off Swann and running two.

128th over: Pakistan 326-3 (Azhar Ali 132 Misbah 30) At last Stuart Broad 
returns. Smyth has uncovered this gem: "I was wondering whether Pakistan might 
be on the way to a record for the biggest difference between second innings and 
first innings, but they've afair way to go 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/match/62835.html>." Bloody hell – 970 
minutes for Hanif's 337 and even Clyde Walcott bolwed five maidens. I 
prematurely posted this segment, sorry. I'm so excited. Broad sticks to his 
plan for Azhar, trying to cut off his ability to frree his arms and square him 
up but the last ball drifts towarsd his stumps and Azhar flicks it away for a 
single.

129th over: Pakistan 330-3 (Azhar Ali 136 Misbah 30) Answer came from the BLF 
on the query regarding the Virgin operator: "Since you ask while the Beard 
Liberation Front welcomes supporters 'unlimited' Richard Branson is in fact 
excluded for various offences against the hirsute. The matter will be reviewed 
at Easter …" Glorious shot from Azhar to finish the over, gliding down the 
pitch to smack Swann for four to the long-off boundary. He's coming out of his 
shell, slowly, as is his wont, but surely.

130th over: Pakistan 331-3 (Azhar Ali 136 Misbah 31) Isolated shouts of "Yes, 
Broady" from the crowd as the bowler gets another to swing away from the bat. 
He's bowling with real skill, intelligence and effort but the batsmen have 
their eyes in now and it will take something special, or silly, to dislodge 
them.

Pakistan review!! Misbah lbw b Panesar OUT!

Wicket!! Misbah lbw Panesar 31 The captain thought he'd hit it first but it 
was pad before bat and though Simon Taufel's decision was not straightforward 
but of the umpire's call variety, it would have shaved the bails so the 
original decision was upheld.

131st over: Pakistan 331-4 (Azhar Ali 136 Asad Shafiq 0) After a short break 
for drinks, we have this from Sunil, in response to an earlier post: "Paul 
Taylor seems to think the US is monolithic. Some parts have only vestigial 
seasons. Desert South West switches from hot to hotter and back. Maine has some 
variety in its two seasons of permafrost and mud." Bumble's back in the box. 
Hurrah. I may have dredged this from a fantasy past but I'm sure when he was 
capatin of Lancashire he once said after a Sunday League match ina bout 1978 
that one of the secrets to the team's success was their special cocktail that 
mixed Coke and milk, like a wholly liquid Wimpy float. I decided to try it for 
myself with projectile vomit consequences. Monty gets his man with a ball that 
arrows in to Misbah's pads and though the captain reviewed it, believeing he 
had hit it first, it looked on replay as though it just, just, hit the pad 
first. Asad Shafiq comes out to bat in a cap.

132nd over: Pakistan 332-4 (Azhar Ali 137 Asad Shafiq 0) The lead is 289 at 
the start of Broad's over, following what Sunil calls "The Monterminator" 
effect. He's continuing to attempt to make Azhar feather a catch to slips with 
his outswingers but a couple don't swing and Azhar fends one into the leg-side 
and the last ball into the covers to take a single off the over.

133rd over: Pakistan 335-4 (Azhar Ali 138 Asad Shafiq 2) They offer Azhar a 
single by setting the field deep and he takes it off the first ball. They bring 
in the field for the new batsman and Asad misreads his first ball, playing 
outside the line but gets two when it squirms off the inside edge to fine leg. 
If my ears do not deceive me, Matt Prior has just shouted "Great work, the 
Shark". Who is the Shark?

134th over: Pakistan 336-4 (Azhar Ali 139 Asad Shafiq 2) This has been a 
magnificent innings from Azhar but I'm starting to wonder whether it's an age 
thing with me. In my youth I used to cherish obduracy, wanting the match to 
last as long as possible and get a genuine thrill from the temperament shown to 
bat and bat. Towards the end of his life, my father, who was a great fan of the 
game, grew impatient with batsmen fannying about and used to get irked by a 
lack of attacking intent. I wonder if the older you get, the more you want the 
scoreboard to rattle along. Good over from Broad, in similar vein to his 
bowling in the match.

135th over: Pakistan 336-4 (Azhar Ali 139 Asad Shafiq 2) Big appeal from Monty 
for lbw when Azhar goes for his scoop and misses. It hit him outside the line 
of off-stump, but would have hit the timbers. Good call from Simon Taufel. 
Monty then sees Azhar coming down the track so cleverly bowls a quicker one to 
keep him in his crease.

136th over: Pakistan 339-4 (Azhar Ali 139 Asad Shafiq 5) "Coke and milk was 
called a brown cow I seem to remember," writes Selve. It went in brown but came 
out technicolor, Mike. England station a ring to keep Asad on strike for 
Broad's over. The ball is getting softer and though Broad was still getting 
orthodox swing a few overs ago, it has been missing for the past few 
deliveries. No sign of reverse yet. Broad pitches one up that Asad flicks 
uppishly to square leg with a roll of the wrist. He was never in control of 
that shot. Broad deserves a couple more overs at the new batsman.

WICKET!! Asad Shafiq lbw Panesar 5 He fell over, playing the sweep and was 
given out with the ball striking his back leg. Neither side has any reviews 
left so even though he wanted to DRS it he couldn't. It looked tight but I 
think trapped him in front of leg stump.

137th over: Pakistan 339-5 (Azhar Ali 139, Adnan Akmal 0) "Presumably Prior is 
referring to Monty as they play for Sussex Sharks," writes Ken Danbury. Thanks 
Ken. "Odd though. Much as I admire the Pakistan stoic defence I have to agree 
with your father. The forward defensive loses its allure when it is the only 
shot on display." They've scored only forty-odd runs so far this session for 
the loss of two wickets. And that was a superb over from Monty and his nagging 
line.

138th over: Pakistan 344-5 (Azhar Ali 144, Adnan Akmal 0) Swann takes over 
from Broad and Azhar has a dart at his third ball, which is wide of odd-stump. 
He doesn't middle it but spoons it past where a straight mid-off would have 
been.

Wicket!! Akmal b Panesar 0 A fourth wicket for Monty, drifts in from around 
the wicket towards off and middle, bounces, spins and clips the top of off, 
missing Akmal's bat by a good three inches.

139th over: Pakistan 345-6 (Azhar Ali 145, Rehman 1) With Rehman coming in we 
have a chance to see what's in store for the left-handers later. Monty can't 
find the rough so far but Rehman takes a single off the last ball so Swann will 
have a chance.

WICKET!! Rehman c Anderson b Swann 1 Well, it's going to be pretty tough for 
the left-handers on that showing. Swann finds the devil in the pitch, the ball 
leaps and turns and Rehman glances it to first slip.

140th over: Pakistan 345-7 (Azhar Ali 145, Saeed Ajmal 0) There was a big puff 
of dust when the ball pitched for Rehman's dismissal. Swann gives Ajmal the 
slider first up and the batsman squeezes it into the ground. He then follows it 
up with two lovely floated off-spinners that Ajmal prods back. "Brown Cow was 
Coke and ice cream," writes JohN Wilson. "Forward defensives probably more 
attractive if England can play them successfully. Could watch 'em for two days."

141st over: Pakistan 348-7 (Azhar Ali 146, Saeed Ajmal 0) "C'mon Panny. Big 
energy, bud." Prior's encouragement gets stranger. He then shouts: "On the 
rocks, as you like it." Ajmal tries a massive slog sweep, just misses it and 
they run a bye when the ball canons off Prior's gloves. "NOW do you see the 
value of sticking around and accumulating seeing as we're we're barely over 
half way through allotted time? It's by no means certain that Pak will win. 
Seems to me that people who watch too much short form cricket have forgotten 
what Tests are all about." Sunil is sticking to his line. But what if they'd 
looked to score more heavily earlier. And I think it is certain that Paksitan 
will win. I'd even put Geoffrey Boycott's three houses on it.

WICKET!! Saeed Ajmal c Anderson b Swann 1 Brilliant catch as Ajmal was trying 
to steer it wide of first slip and Anderson moved very quickly in anticipation 
of where the ball was going and sanffled it.

142nd over: Pakistan 350-8 (Azhar Ali 146) Re Brown Cows, Selve writes: "Not 
in our house it wasn't." Take that John Wilson and your ice cream. That's tea, 
then with Ajmal's dismissal. No, Smyth, so I'm going to leave you for a break. 
You'll get a substitute OBOer for a short spell.

In lieu of us not having a substituteoboer@theguardian.com email address, 
you'll have to make do with James Dart Morning.

Snow cricket definitely is the future 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-iq5ZE9Htpg>.

"Good morning, James. Care to give us your tip for England's highest scorer in 
the last innings?" asks John Starbuck. Given what the pitch looked to be doing 
in the final throes of that afternoon session, I like extras.

144th over: Pakistan 352-8 (trailed by 42 on first innings; Azhar 149, Gul 0) 
Monty Panesar gets us under way after tea and concedes two runs cut down behind 
square to Azhar, who closes in on his 150. A big shout for lbw follows, but the 
appeals are waved away.

145th over: Pakistan 354-8 (trailed by 42 on first innings; Azhar 149, Gul 2) 
DRS, reviews, etc: the best new rule for Test cricket should be limiting the 
number of overs two spinners can bowl together, for the sake of OBO writers' 
sanity. Say, 20 per innings? Umar Gul picks up two off Graeme Swann's over.

146th over: Pakistan 355-8 (trailed by 42 on first innings; Azhar 150, Gul 2) 
And that's the 150 for Azhar, coming off 431 deliveries and 519 minutes at the 
crease, running an easy single off Panesar. Hello Test cricket. It's still 38 
minutes shy of the slowestcentury ever, mind, Mudassar Nazar racking up 557 
minutes in Lahore <http://stats.espncricinfo.com/ci/content/records/283006.html>
.

147th over: Pakistan 356-8 (trailed by 42 on first innings; Azhar 151, Gul 2) 
Get well soon, Yuvraj Singh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/feb/05/yuvraj-singh-receiving-cancer-treatment?intcmp=239>
. The India batsman is undergoing treatment for cancer in the United States. 
"It is a rare tumour and is cancerous but it has been detected in stage one 
itself," said Jatin Chaudhary, Yuvraj's physiotherapist. "Doctors had to decide 
whether to continue medication or go for chemotherapy but since parts of the 
tumour are just above the artery of his heart, there was a danger that while 
running it could burst. But it is 100% curable." Azhar loses the strike with a 
single off Swann's opening delivery, giving England the best part of the over 
at Gul, but he capably sees it off.

148th over: Pakistan 361-8 (trailed by 42 on first innings; Azhar 156, Gul 2) 
Panesar tosses one up with some air, tempting Azhar into a heave, which is 
exactly what he does, slogging one through the on-side for four. That's Azhar's 
highest ever score in first-class cricket. Panesar finishes the over with a big 
shout for lbw against Gul, but it may have just been drifting down leg.

WICKET! Azhar c Cook b Swann 157 (Pakistan 363-9) Azhar's mightily impressive 
knock comes to an end, Cook taking a tidy grab close to the bat as the batsman 
prodded one towards leg off Swann.

149th over: Pakistan 363-8 (trailed by 42 on first innings; Azhar 157, Gul 3) 
Two singles off a forgettable over. "One slight problem – the scoreboard shows 
356 for nine," writes Peter Kunzli. "You say 356 for eight. I am sure you are 
correct, so how did that mystery wicket happen?" The scoreboard has outed 
itself as a wishful England fan there, I'm afraid Peter.

150th over: Pakistan 363-9 (trailed by 42 on first innings; Gul 3, Cheema 0) 
Aizaz Cheema arrives at the crease, Pakistan now leading by 321.

151st over: Pakistan 364-9 (trailed by 42 on first innings; Gul 3, Cheema 0) 
England's highest ever fourth-innings run chase in Test cricket? 332 to beat 
Australia in 1928, apparently. Just the one extra off Panesar's over.

152nd over: Pakistan 365-9 (trailed by 42 on first innings; Gul 4, Cheema 0) 
Well, England will have plenty of time to chase down their target, one that 
grows by one runs with a single for Gul.

WICKET! Gul lbw Panesar 4 (Pakistan 365 all out) Panesar and team-mates go up 
in unison to appeal a leg-before against Gul, but it was going down leg. "He 
should give it some air," opines Nasser Hussain on commentary. Which is exactly 
what he does on the following delivery, beating the sweep-slog attempt of Gul 
and catching him plum in front. Panesar finishes with figures of 5-124.

England need 324 to win. Pakistan's batsmen - Azhar Ali, Younus Khan and 
extras aside - contributed 69 runs off the bat in that second innings. England 
are 7-2 to win. I don't like those odds.

Even though he's been defeated by the snow, Rob Smyth won't be defeated on 
stats: here's the list of most lbws in a Test series. This one, even as a 
three-matcher,is closing in on the record fast 
<http://stats.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/stats/index.html?class=1;dismissal=3;filter=advanced;groupby=series;orderby=innings;template=results;type=batting>
 with Panesar's wicket there being the 41st [forty-first - OBO vidiprinter].

1st over: England 0-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 0 Cook 0) A quick word on 
Monty Panesar: that's 14 wickets in the Two Tests since his recall, and he's 
England's leading wicket-taker in the series at 21.57. Gul opens the bowling, 
with England facing a minimum of 197 overs to win the Test, and Strauss safely 
sees out the tidy maiden.

2nd over: England 4-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 0 Cook 4) A two-seamer start 
from Pakistan, Cheema handed the new ball after some movement of interest in 
Gul's opening over. He offers Cook some width which the left-hander cuts past 
through square for a boundary. Meanwhile, Muttiah Muralitharan has been on Five 
Live this morning, talking about England's troubles. "I was not surprised 
because England always struggle coming to the subcontinent," he told 
Sportsweek. "On the subcontinent you have to learn to play spin very well and 
in that department they are lacking so you can see the results now. Pakistan 
are dominating with spin … [England] are not used to the conditions. The 
conditions are always very important in cricket. They need to play here more 
often, and get used to the conditions better."

3rd over: England 11-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 5 Cook 4) Gul continues to 
test and probe along a good line around off stump. Strauss gets off strike and 
off the mark with a thick edge into the leg side. Cook is then put down in the 
slips, fending and fishing nervously with poor footwork. It flies towards 
Taufeeq at third slip but, diving forward with two hands, he drops one that he 
really shouldn't have. Ahuge let-off for Cook there. It's an excellent over 
from Gul, barring a no-ball at the end, which is followed up by one a little 
too wide to Strauss, which he drills behind square to the ropes.

4th over: England 12-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 5 Cook 5) Anyone out there? 
Too busymaking snow cricketers 
<http://i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01554/snowman27_1554858i.jpg>? Big 
shout from Cheema as Cook almost brushes one down leg side to the 
wicket-keeper. Cook responds, angling a single away in front of point.

5th over: England 14-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 6 Cook 6) "Cheema is a bit of 
a low-rent Ryan Harris," reckons Gary Naylor. "Harsh, but true." Ouch. Cook 
works Gul away through the on side for a single, looking alittle more 
comfortable in the face of the bowling than he did in the last over, before 
Strauss replicates the stroke for a run of his own.

6th over: England 14-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 6 Cook 6) Off goes Cheema, on 
comes the spin of Mohammad Hafeez, for his first deliveries of the match. The 
rough outside Strauss's off-stump is the obvious, immediate target for Hafeez, 
who gives the batsman plenty to think about with some nice variations in an 
opening maiden.

7th over: England 16-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 6 Cook 8) "I walked from one 
end of the Ibn Battuta mall (the self styled 'longest mall in the world' in 
Dubai - where else) to what I thought was the other end, all the while 
following your OBO," writes Risha Mohyeddi. "Except I contrived to end up at 
the same end I started out. What do you have to say about that?" I'm intrigued 
bythe mall's variety of courts 
<http://www.ibnbattutamall.com/aroundthemall.html>. Navigating your mail took 
me somewhat off course in the over, Risha: two runs come from Gul's final 
delivery as Cook nips one through midwicket.

8th over: England 17-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 7 Cook 8) After a solitary 
over from Hafeez, Abdur Rehman comes into the attack against Strauss, which the 
England captain navigates pretty safely, picking up a single off the final 
delivery with a comfortable drive down the ground. "Reasons for England to be 
cheerful?" straw-clutches Ken Danbury. "At least they have proved to themselves 
that they can take 20 wickets in a match in these conditions. Er, that's it." 
And all inside three days too, Ken.

9th over: England 19-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 9 Cook 8) Ah, here's Hafeez, 
back after a change of ends to give Gul a break. Strauss picks up two from it, 
clipping Hafeez through midwicket off the sixth delivery.

10th over: England 21-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 10 Cook 9) Strauss is 
looking comfortable thus far, as England continue to make steady progress. He 
rolls his hands over to tuck Rehman away for a single down the leg side, 
following up a similar single from Cook.

11th over: England 22-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 11 Cook 9) Safe, steady 
batting from the England openers, with Strauss nudging away the only run of 
Hafeez's over. "If Risha Mohyeddi's mall (7th over), as it appears, is simply a 
circle, can it not still be accurate calling itself the longest mall in the 
world inasmuch as it doesn't actually have an end?" ponders Michael Hunt. Time 
to dig outsome more of the world's longest malls 
<http://www.forbes.com/2007/01/09/malls-worlds-largest-biz-cx_tvr_0109malls_slide.html>
.

12th over: England 25-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 14 Cook 9) A real change-up 
of speed in this Rehman over gives Strauss his first nervy moments of the 
innings. He edges on thickly past the slips, which runs away for three and 
England need less than 300.

13th over: England 25-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 14 Cook 9) A review as 
Pakistan go up for a big appeal against Strauss off Hafeez. A good stride down 
the pitch was taken by the batsman and it hit him outside the line.Not out is 
umpire Simon Taufel's decision. Maiden.

14th over: England 26-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 14 Cook 10) "If this match 
were being played at Durham and not Dubai, England would be forward to 95 balls 
out of 100," notes Gary Naylor. "Why they are still hanging back, I do not 
know. Getting forward just saved Strauss in that last over." Just the single, 
prodded away towards square by Cook off the final delivery, from Rehman's 
latest.

15th over: England 29-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 16 Cook 11) That's England's 
biggest opening stand of the series so far.Seriously 
<http://stats.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/stats/index.html?class=1;filter=advanced;orderby=start;partnership_wicketmax1=1;partnership_wicketval1=partnership_wicket;series=6859;team=1;template=results;type=fow;view=innings>
. Better from Cook, in terms of getting forward, and he takes a single off 
Hafeez, before Strauss works the bowler neatly through the on side for two.

16th over: England 31-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 16 Cook 13) Two cheap runs 
for Cook kick off this Rehman over, tucked down behind leg. And that's all 
there is to report.

17th over: England 31-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 16 Cook 13) Saeed Ajmal is 
introduced into the attack, replacing Hafeez (0-6 off five overs). Other than 
the threat he's brought to England so far in this series, Ajmal's over is 
relatively tame. A maiden, nonetheless.

18th over: England 33-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 17 Cook 14) "So it appears 
our strategy is to nervously hang back before prodding forward, with the ball 
occasionally squirting past the infield for one or two runs an over," mails 
Neil Thompson. "Roll on the end of the day I say, can't take this much longer." 
Well, nearly 20 overs into the innings, the biggest let-off and moment of 
danger for England thus far came with Cook being dropped off Gul. Still, to 
summarise this Rehman over: Cook and Strauss hang back, prod forward at a 
couple, and both manage to squirt a single past the infield.

19th over: England 35-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 19 Cook 14) Here's a blog 
from Vic Marks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/feb/05/azhar-ali-pakistan-england?intcmp=239>
, paying tribute to Azhar's marathon knock today. An excerpt:

Azhar demonstrated that it is possible to bat on these surfaces without being 
overcome by DRS paranoia, a nasty affliction, which is showing signs of 
becoming infectious in these parts. Old-fashioned virtues would not be 
undermined by modern-day technology.

Azhar has a forward defensive stroke to satisfy Geoffrey Boycott and he used 
it frequently. Having assessed the line and length of the ball he takes a 
decisive, positive step down the wicket. Against the spinners his pad is an 
unnecessary adornment.

He has some other shots but he hid them from view for much of the day. It was 
more important for his team to grind England down. Moreover, it is difficult 
for any batsman to change tempo in mid-innings. Younus Khan, a special player, 
managed that on Saturday. But Azhar just kept going, which meant that until the 
flurry of wickets, we admired him but our pulses were rarely racing.

Back to England's innings: Strauss v Ajmal. Two runs for the batsman, worked 
away crisply into the leg-side.

20th over: England 36-0 (need 324 to win; Strauss 19 Cook 15) That's England 
safely through the first 20 overs after Cook faces off an over from Rehman, 
cutting away a single from the fifth delivery. And after some very, very, ve-ry 
slow preparation from the batsmen, it's also the close of play for the day. 
"Risha Mohyeddi must have got himself almightily lost if he ended up where he 
began at Ibn Battuta," suggests Eirik Hooper. "It is, in fact, a long straight 
line of a mall, so unless he walked to one end, turned around and walked back 
again, there must have been some quantum shenanigans at play. Just for 
completeness sake, I should point out that Ibn Battuta was a famous Moroccan 
explorer who travelled all around the Islamic world (quite extensive even then) 
in the 14th century and the 'courts' of the mall celebrate each major Islamic 
centre he visited and his travel writings, 'The Travels of Ibn Battuta', are 
surprisingly readable."

England close day three on 36-0, still needing 288 more to win the third Test. 
"I am shocked - shocked - by Neil Thompson's 18th over claim that he can't take 
much more of this," writes a stunned Rob Marriot. "36-0 off 20 overs is exactly 
how the game should be: proper, subtle, rich, enchanting Test cricket. If he 
wants whackamole runfests then he can go elsewhere, the heretic." That's 
arguably the most comfortable a period that England's batsmen have enjoyed 
during this series, with Strauss looking particularly content and Cook growing 
slowly into the innings after a nervy start and that let-off. It didn't look 
like there would be a fourth day yesterday afternoon, but there's still 
(hopefully) plenty of cricket left in this match. Andy Bull will (I'm sure 
delightedly) be braving the icy roads of London to join you first thing on 
Monday for the fourth day. Do join him. Thanks for the company, enjoy the rest 
of your Sundays. Cheers, James.
 