
What is the point of Fred? It wasn’t a proud moment at all and Brazilians 
themselves were embarrassed, hence the plethora of memes doing the rounds on 
social networks.

But in a strange way Fred’s tumble that led to the award of a controversial 
penalty for Brazil in theirWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> opener against 
Croatia vindicated Luiz Felipe Scolari’s decision to stick with his paradox of 
a centre-forward. His pratfall was basically the only moment where the 
Fluminense striker came out of the shadows in a game where Neymar and Oscar had 
to bail out theSeleção.

Fred’s stats, provided by Fifa, show no shots, no assists and a single run 
into the attacking third during the entire game. If it wasn’t for his reaction 
to the slightest of tugs by Dejan Lovren and the fact he actually lined up for 
the national anthem, one would be excused for doubting Fred had been on the 
Arena Corinthians pitch at all.

Still, barring injury, the former Lyon man will once again start for Brazil on 
Tuesday in a potential Group A decider againstMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mexico> in Fortaleza. Never mind that 
Fred has struggled with injuries and his club form is nowhere near that of the 
glorious 2012, when he topped the Brazilian league scoring charts and was 
properly recalled when Scolari returned to the hot seat.

Under the previous manager, Mano Menezes, Fred had been blatantly ignored 
thanks to Menezes’s belief he was a creature of the past – a poacher who did 
not fit his rebuilding plans after the 2010 World Cup, which were based upon 
faster players and interchangeable positions up front. In fact, Menezes had 
even toyed with an emulation of Pep Guardiola’s “nineless” scheme at Barcelona. 
It looked interesting but, just as the team began to getting used to it, 
Menezes was fired by José Marin, the incoming president of the Brazilian 
Football Confederation (CBF), in November 2012.

Scolari buried the Catalan experiment the minute he was announced as Menezes’s 
replacement. Historically a man who liked to play with somebody more present in 
the box, Scolari, for the second time in his history with the national team, 
had to gamble.

In the buildup to the 2002 World Cup campaign, he was probably the only person 
in the world who believed that Ronaldo could pull off the mother of all 
comebacks after two years without playing. Now he wants to resuscitate Fred.

From being Ronaldo’s understudy at Germany 2006, when he scored against Japan 
in the group stages, Fred never really followed up. His four-year spell at Lyon 
ended up with a lot of toys being flung from the pram and he was massively 
upstaged by the emergence of a youngster called Karim Benzema. Fred found 
refuge in Rio, where Fluminense, loaded with cash from their health insurance 
sponsor, were happy to sign him.

He repaid their faith with 62 goals in 96 games, being instrumental in their 
2010 and 2012 Brazilian League titles. He also loved Rio’s nightlife and Flu 
supporters would patrol hangouts in an attempt to bust him.

Fred also was a one-eyed king in the land of blind, as the saying goes. At a 
time when Brazilian strikers had pretty much vanished from European club 
lineups – the last No9 to top the scoring in one of the big leagues was Grafite 
for Wolfsburg in 2008 – the Fluminense man stood out over younger competitors 
such as Alexandre Pato, he of the eternal unfulfilled promise. Back in the
Seleção, Fred looked transformed, scoring against England, Italy and Russia 
before finishing the 2012-13 season as Brazil’s top scorer in the 
Confederations Cup.

Many of those goals came in games in which Fred otherwise went missing for 90 
minutes, so Scolari can be forgiven for trusting a knack of being in the right 
place at the right time.

At 30, Fred is also one of the six players in the Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> squad who have actually played in 
a World Cup and experience is something highly valued in Scolari’s 2014 plans. 
Fred is one of his vice-captains as well. “I have to do my work and not worry 
about what people are saying,” he says.

“The press can be funny. If you score they will moan you spent too much time 
in the box. If I leave the box to search for the ball I also get stick. The 
important thing is that the manager and my teammates have given me amazing 
support. That’s everything that I want.”

They were also very supportive of him last Thursday, when even Brazilian 
supporters criticised the awarding ofthat penalty. Fred left the stadium 
without stopping in the mixed zone, where journalists have the chance to talk 
to players – officially the CBF blamed the long waiting time on a mandatory 
dope test – and Fred spoke about the incident only a day later in a 
cringeworthy video released by the federation’s press office.

“It was a clear penalty,” he explained. “Fifa warned teams to avoid pulling 
and pushing in the box and my opponent took me out of balance when I was ready 
to turn and shoot.”

The incident, however, dominated a lot of the post-game talk in Brazil and was 
used to exemplify how theSeleção’s comeback was aided by decision of the 
Japanese referee, Yuichi Nishimura.

“Arigato [Thank you in Japanese]‚” wrote the Brazilian newspaper O Globo‚ and 
the media invariably mentioned that Nishimura had been the guy who officiated 
in Brazil’s quarter-final departure at South Africa 2010 at the hands of 
Holland, when he was perceived to have allowed Mark van Bommel to kick his 
opponents a tad too often.

There may have been more sympathy had Fred’s goals not dried up for club and 
country. Fluminense were relegated on the pitch last season before bouncing 
back after their fellow strugglers Portuguesa were docked points for fielding a 
ineligible player.

Fred has scored once in 12 months for the Seleção, although he also missed 
most of friendlies since Brazil’s defeat of Spain last June.

Still, it will take a lot more for Scolari even to think of dropping his 
poacher.
 