
Patients could be told to bring two forms of identification including a 
passport to get treatment at hospital, according to the most senior civil 
servant in the Department ofHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>.

Chris Wormald told MPs on Monday night: “On the general question of, are we 
looking at whether trusts should proactively ask people to prove their identity 
– yes we are looking at that.

“Individual trusts like Peterborough are doing that and it is making a big 
difference. They are saying, ‘Please come with two forms of identity, your 
passport and your address,’ and they use that to check whether people are 
eligible. It is quite a controversial thing to do, to say to the entire 
population you’ve got to prove your identity.”

If that happens, what are the implications?


Why are NHS hospitals seeking to charge some patients?

Ministers are concerned that Britain pays out much more to EEA (European 
Economic Area) countries for the treatment of British nationals under 
reciprocal health arrangements, than the NHS recoups for treating patients from 
those countries. TheNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> has a target 
to recover £500m a year in charges by the middle of this parliament.

Could British nationals be denied access to treatment if they fail to produce 
a passport?

The latest figures show that 13% of British citizens do not have a passport so 
it could be a very serious problem if they were denied NHS treatment for 
failing to produce a passport. The current NHS Choices advice to overseas 
visitors says that “if you do not have valid documentation, you may be charged 
for treatment”.

Hospitals may require patients to show passports for NHS treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/21/hospitals-may-require-patients-to-show-passports-for-nhs-treatment>
So a British citizen who cannot provide a passport to prove their nationality 
or country of residence will be treated but may later face a hospital inquiry 
about the possibility of being charged. This could be dealt with by providing a 
birth certificate or other proof of British citizenship or residence short of a 
passport. The NHS describes itself as a “residence-based system, unlike many 
other countries, which have insurance-based healthcare systems”.

What happens to people from outside the EEA who want NHS treatment at present?

The rules changed in April last year as part of the Immigration Act 2016 which 
was designed to ensure Britain had “a national health service, not an 
international health service”.

Non-European migrants who have permanent residence in Britain, ie indefinite 
leave to enter or remain, continue to be eligible for the same NHS care as a 
resident British citizen.

But those who are temporary migrants or students and intend to stay more than 
six months are now required to pay a health surcharge when they apply for their 
visa. This is £200 a year or £1,000 for a five-year visa. In the past year 
£164m has been raised from the immigration health surcharge.

What happens to people from inside the EU or elsewhere in the EEA who want NHS 
treatment?

EUcitizens who are resident in Britain can access the NHS on exactly the same 
basis as British citizens. The difference is that as a result of an EU 
directive the NHS can claim back the cost of treating EU visitors, students or 
temporary migrants to Britain from their home governments.

 MPs are concerned that while the UK paid out £650m last year to cover the 
treatment of British citizens in other EU countries, it only managed to recoup 
£49m for the NHS treatment of EU citizens here. The government thinks that an 
annual target of £300m is possible if hospitals do more to identify EU citizens 
being treated in British hospitals.

The NHS is thinking of asking everyone to prove their identity so they can 
identify EU citizens so their governments can be charged. EU citizens without 
European health insurance cards (EHIC) may be asked to pay the charges upfront 
and then to recover them from their own government. The NHS might do better to 
ask EU citizens to produce their EHIC card rather than ask the whole population 
to provide a passport or other form of identity.

Is this a national ID scheme by the back door?

A national identity scheme is about having a single government searchable 
database on which the whole UK population is listed. Asking for a passport or 
other form of ID card, such as a driving licence, to prove British residence 
does not mean the proposal is introducing an ID card by the back door.

How does the policy work?

NHS hospitals are expected to ensure they do not pick up the bill for patients 
from EEA countries and Switzerland who do not qualify for free NHS treatment. 
NHS trusts are legally obliged to identify such patients and recoup the cost. A 
separate charging system exists for non-EEA nationals.

Has it been successful?

The Peterborough and Stamford hospitals trust has been operating a pilot study 
since 2013. It estimates the charging system raises £250,000 a year. It says 
95% of invoices were recouped last year, compared to 37% in 2012. NHS bosses 
told MPs that the scheme “had made a big difference”. However, the trust admits 
no formal evaluation of the scheme has been carried out. It employs four staff 
to operate the scheme, but would not say how much the scheme costs.

Who is not entitled to free NHS treatment?

NHS trusts are expected to charge anyone receiving hospital care who is not 
“ordinarily resident” in the UK. This is broadly defined as anyone not living 
in the UK on a “lawful, voluntary and settled basis for the time being”.

Does this mean all EEA visitors are affected?

No. Residency is the prime factor, not nationality or race. So NHS hospital 
care is free for ordinarily resident EEA/Swiss nationals with indefinite leave 
to remain in the UK, or who have paid a £200 annual health surcharge as a 
condition of obtaining a visa.

What if you are a British citizen living abroad who needs NHS hospital care 
while visiting the UK?

The regulations state you may be a UK citizen and passport holder and have 
paid UK national insurance, but if you are not “ordinarily resident” in the UK 
you would be liable for charging, and would be expected to either pay or offer 
health insurance to enable the hospital to recoup charges for your treatment.

Is there a danger that patients may be discriminated against on racial grounds?

The regulations state that when patients are assessed for charging, NHS staff 
must “avoid discriminatory measures or practise racial profiling ... or 
cherrypick which patients to question”.

Can a hospital refuse treatment?

Under the Human Rights Act it is unlawful for an NHS hospital to refuse urgent 
(defined as “immediately necessary”) treatment, regardless of whether payment 
has been secured in advance or the patients has indicated they cannot pay. A 
hospital has the right to refuse treatment if the intervention is deemed to be 
non-urgent. Peterborough says it has never refused a patient on these grounds.

What constitutes urgent or non-urgent treatment, and who decides?

Only a doctor or clinician is allowed to judge whether a condition is urgent. 
This may involve an assessment of whether it is life-threatening, or whether a 
more expensive intervention may be required if treatment is delayed. Non-urgent 
is defined as “routine elective treatment that could wait until the patient can 
return home”.

Are all NHS services covered by the charging regime?

Emergency services at the hospital are free at the point of use to all, as are 
all health services provided outside hospitals, including GP services. All 
maternity services are chargeable for non-UK residents, although no pregnant 
patient would ever be refused care. Other exemptions include treatment for some 
infectious diseases, such as cholera and rabies, sexually transmitted diseases, 
and clinical interventions for victims of torture or domestic violence.

What happens if patients receive treatment and then refuse – or are unable – 
to pay?

If an invoice is unpaid then the trust will pursue payment via debt 
collectors. Patients with an unpaid invoice over £500 are reported to 
immigration officials.

Are the rules likely to change?

The Department of Health has suggested the current regulations will be 
reviewed, saying: “We consulted earlier this year on extending the charging of 
migrants and visitors using the NHS. We will set out further steps in due 
course to ensure we deliver on our objective to recover up to £500m a year by 
the middle of this parliament.”
 