
Paul was my Europhile sous-chef at Rubicon, a restaurant owned by Robin 
Williams, among others. I was working there the morning after he won his Oscar 
for Best Supporting Actor in Good Will Hunting - he came down into the kitchen 
and gave us all a bottle of champagne. Unexpected and very appreciated by his 
hard-working team. In California in the '90s I feel certain they would have 
served this with a squiggle of balsamic reduction on the plate ... thank God 
that trend seems to have bitten the dust.

Starter <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/starter> for 4 (12 little 
pancakes) and takes 10 minutes to get it ready then a 30-minute cook.

For the ragu:
20g / 3/4oz butter
150g / 5oz shallots, sliced
2–3 cloves of garlic, thinly sliced
220ml / 71/2fl oz tomato juice or passata
200g / 7oz vine-ripened cherry tomatoes
1 teaspoon balsamic vinegar
a touch of sugar (optional)

For the pancakes:
75g / 3oz brioche (slightly stale works just fine)
125ml / 4fl oz double cream
2 eggs, beaten
20g / 3/4oz basil leaves, washed
a handful of spinach leaves (about 40g/11/2oz), washed
40g / 11/2oz plain flour
1 tablespoon butter
a few splashes of extra virgin olive oil
salt and pepper

To serve:
a ball of buffalo mozzarella (about 200g/7oz), sliced

Melt the butter in a pan over a medium heat and cook the shallots with the 
garlic for a few minutes. When they start to sizzle but before they begin to 
brown, turn the heat down to minimum and put on a lid. Stir from time to time 
for about 8–10 minutes until they are well and truly softened, then set the lid 
aside and pour in the tomato juice. Simmer slowly for 12–15 minutes to a fairly 
thick sauce, seasoning along the way.

Lob in the cherry tomatoes and cook for 5-ish minutes, until their skins have 
split and they are just cooked, not collapsed. Turn the heat off, stir in the 
balsamic vinegar, and taste: you may want to add a touch of sugar, depending on 
the tomatoes.

While all that is going on, mush the brioche into the cream using the back of 
a spoon, then gradually stir in the eggs. In a blender, whiz together the 
basil, spinach and the soaked brioche until pale green and very smooth. Scrape 
it into a bowl, sift then fold in the flour and give it a decent shot of both 
salt and pepper.

Only start cooking the pancakes when the ragu is ready. In a large heavy-based 
frying pan over a medium heat, melt a teaspoon of the butter into a splash of 
olive oil. When the butter starts to sizzle, gently dollop in a desert spoon of 
the mix per pancake – you should be able to get at least 4 in the pan. Turn 
them over after 1–2 minutes and fry the other side until very lightly golden – 
it's good to have a bit of goo left in the middle, so they should be in and out 
of the pan in 3 minutes. Drain quickly on kitchen paper and cover with foil to 
keep warm as you get on with the rest. Serve with the ragoût and a couple of 
slices of mozzarella.

• This recipe is taken from Bought, Borrowed & Stolen: Recipes and Knives from 
a Travelling Chef by Allegra McEvedy (Conran Octopus, £25).Order a copy for 
£18.75 from the Guardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781840915778>
 