
Paulinho had heard about "rotation" before he moved to England last summer but 
he had never experienced it. Now he has, and he does not like it. At all. The 
Brazil international, who joined Spursfor a then record £17m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/05/paulinho-tottenham-medical-transfer-corinthians>
, wants to play every possible game, every possible minute – and it has not 
happened this season.

But setbacks of this sort do not faze the 25-year-old, who looks certain to be 
included in Brazil's World Cup squad despite his lack of playing time at Spurs. 
He has already had his sliding-door moment, six years ago, when he decided to 
fight on rather than to quit football altogether. At that time he had already 
been to Europe once, playing for Vilnius in Lithuania and Lodz in Poland, and 
did not get a contract with a top-flight club inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> when he returned.

Any thoughts of giving up, however, were ended by his wife, Barbara. "She 
basically told me I would be letting down my family and everybody who had 
sacrificed something to support my dream of being a professional footballer. 
She was quite tough on me," he says. "I keep her words and the memories of the 
difficulties I have had in my career as a way to keep things in perspective 
when things don't go my way. In the meantime, I have to keep my head down and 
work hard."

And an improvement is needed, both for Paulinho and Spurs. It has been a 
tumultuous season at White Hart Lane and this weekTim Sherwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tim-sherwood> challenged Paulinho to 
"prove himself" in training in order to cement his place in the starting XI. "I 
pick players on what they are doing in training, not on reputations and price 
tags," the Tottenham manager said. "I can't be worrying if the Brazil national 
manager wants him to play every week. I am going to do what is best for 
Tottenham, not any national manager."

Paulinho is happy to work hard in training – and that is exactly what he is 
doing, but he does admit that it hurts not to be playing. "You are told before 
coming to Europe that big teams here quite often rotate players," he says. "I 
respect this culture but it is instinctive for me to get annoyed if I don't 
play every game. I always want to be on the pitch, much as I know it is my 
first season here and how difficult it is for a South American player to adapt 
to the demands of the Premier League."

Spurs' woes this season are well known in England but were only recently 
picked up by the Brazilian press. Headlines in the country spoke of Paulinho 
being relegated to the bench and although that sounds harsh considering he has 
been given an average 76 minutes per game for the club this season, the news 
reached theseleção command, already scarred by the goalkeeper Júlio César's 
descent into oblivion at Queens Park Rangers. Brazil's technical director, 
Carlos Alberto Parreira, duly met Paulinho last week to discuss the situation. 
"We obviously take into account what happens to a player at his club, but the 
most important is how they have behaved while at national team duty. Paulinho 
has been instrumental for us and we fully trust him to keep doing his job for 
Brazil," said Parreira.

Paulinho seems to have been singled out by Sherwood as part of his 
frustrations with the team's form. A point duly noted by the midfielder, who is 
clearly not comfortable to talk about the situation, although by no means does 
he back down from defending himself. "Sherwood is in charge and every manager 
has a style. It's his call if he wants to publicly criticise the players. It's 
up to each one of us to have a clean conscience about what they are doing for 
the team. I am very comfortable in saying that I have been working hard and 
trying to do what the club signed me for," explains the Brazilian, speaking at 
a Gatorade event aimed at showcasing the energy drink's collaboration with the
seleção. "They have done a lot of tests with us in training sessions and 
matches, as well as the lab ahead of the World Cup to ensure we last the full 
90 minutes."

Paulinho didn't imagine his first season at Spurs would be this testing. He 
walked into a club then managed by a fellow Portuguese speaker, André 
Villas-Boas, somebody who could certainly help his second shot at making his 
name in Europe, especially after guiding Spurs to a respectable fifth-place 
finish in the previous season. Villas-Boas, however, left Tottenham only four 
months after Paulinho's arrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/16/tottenham-sack-andre-villas-boas>
 and the Brazilian admits it wasn't the happiest of times. "It was hard to see 
André go. He was the guy who asked the club to sign me, so you have to be 
disappointed when that happens," he says. "Having said that, this is not a new 
situation in my life. It happened to me in Brazil at Corinthians, when the 
manager who had got me in the first team [Mano Menezes] left in 2010. The 
manager changes and you just have to make sure you show the [new] guy you mean 
business."

Tottenham are far from glory days with a top-four finish now unlikely 
following drubbings at the hands of Chelsea, Manchester City and Liverpool. 
"The manager and the fans have the right to be upset at the team," says 
Paulinho. "A team like ours should not have been routed in those games. But the 
players know it. It's just important we stand together at the bad times too. I 
can assure you nobody at the club will be happy if we fail to qualify for the 
Champions League. One of the reasons I came to this club was to help them play 
at the top level."

The Spurs man is all but guaranteed in Scolari's squad for the World Cup, 
although lately the fight for places in the group more interesting after 
Fernandinho received a well deserved call-up and thanked Scolari with an 
impressive display for Brazil against South Africa a month ago, when he tested 
by Scolari both in place of both Luiz Gustavo and Paulinho, the midfield 
stalwarts Scolari has been using for a while now. "Fernandinho is having a 
wonderful season at City and he has rightfully received a chance in the team. 
But his good form is not a problem for me – Big Phil is the one who has to be 
worried about having so many midfielders to choose from," Paulinho explains.

It looks like this one knows how to stand his ground.
 