
Jubilant conservative donors gathered in celebration in Washington DC have 
been promised a sweeping set of early reforms under the Trump presidency, from 
tax cuts across the board, to a “lock, stock and barrel” repeal of Barack 
Obama’s health care law.

Vice-president elect Mike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence>, whose ideological 
conservatism is as sharply drawn as Donald Trump’s is vague, told an audience 
gathered to support a leading rightwing thinktank to expect tax cuts by spring, 
the strengthening of the US’s military might, and the appointment of a new 
conservative justice to the supreme court.

In the presidential ballroom of Donald Trump’s new Washington DC hotel, his 
vice-president elect tantalized a room full of wealthy conservative patrons on 
Tuesday night with the prospect of what could be achieved under Trump’s 
administration.

During a reception for the Heritage Foundation, held under the sweep of 
chandeliers and amid gilded decor, Pence declared a “mandate” to lead the 
country as he sketched in broad strokes the administration’s vision for its 
first few months in power.

First Republican 'faithless elector' announces intent to vote against Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/faithless-electors-republican-electoral-college-trump>
“We are just 44 days away from when Donald Trump 
<http://www.nytimes.com/topic/person/donald-trump?inline=nyt-per> will be 
inaugurated as the 45th president of the United States of America,” Pence said 
before the meal was served at the Heritage Foundation’s President’s Club, an 
annual affair to honor the “nation’s most committed conservatives 
<http://www.heritage.org/about/heritage-membership/presidents-club>” – top-tier 
donors who give at least $1,000 annually to the foundation. “He did it.”

Pence did not address the deep divisions roiling the country in the wake of 
Trump’s surprising electoral win. Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential 
nominee, is currently leading the popular vote by more than 2.6m votes.

Her lead has raised questions about whether the president-elect truly has a 
“mandate” to lead the country as his supporters have said.

But on Tuesday night, the presidential ballroom was reserved for celebrating 
conservative gains.

Before Pence spoke, John Fogarty, the foundation’s vice-president for 
development, greeted the crowd of “deplorables”, drawing raucous cheering and 
applause.

The organization’s president Jim DeMint, a former-senator and Tea Party 
favorite, took the stage, marveling at the symbolism of the evening.

“I’m trying not to be too giddy,” DeMint said. “There’s something really sweet 
about standing in a Trump hotel just a few blocks from the White House 
introducing a great friend of mine and his wonderful wife Karen who are going 
to be the next vice-president couple of the United States.”

Trump’s DC hotel, a century-old Post Office pavilion that opened this year, 
has been singled out as one example of a possible ethical quandary for the 
incoming president, withreports 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/donald-trump-administration/2016/12/embassy-of-azerbaijan-to-co-host-event-at-trumps-dc-hotel-232214>
 of at least two foreign nations hosting parties at the hotel.

Experts have said Trump’s tangle of businesses and properties poses an 
unprecedented financial conflict. Trump has said he would soon take himself 
“completely out of business operations”, without giving further details, and 
would elaborate on those plans in a speech next week.

Since its founding in 1973, the Heritage Foundation has minted policy 
prescriptions for the Republican party. During the election campaign, Trump 
relied on their guidance to draw a list  
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/donald-j.-trump-releases-list-of-names-of-potential-united-states-supreme-c>
of potential supreme court nominees. He also drew on the organization’s reports 
and resources to help form his tax and defense policies.

Pence, who said he spoke regularly with DeMint, pledged that the Trump 
administration would continue to source conservative ideas from the foundation.

Self-defense in Trumpland: how women protect themselves in a climate of hate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/06/women-abuse-self-defense-conflict-resolution-donald-trump>
Earlier on Tuesday, Pence met with congressional leadership at the Capitol. 
After the meeting, Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell told reporters that 
repealing Obama’s signature healthcare law would be “the first item up in the 
new year”. Pence affirmed that view on Tuesday night, saying Republicans would 
begin immediately the process of replacing it with “free-market solutions”.

Trump ran on a campaign promise to repeal Obamacare but has said in interviews 
since the election that he would prefer to replace the law. The incoming Senate 
minority leader Chuck Schumer scoffed at the suggestion, challenging 
Republicans to try to repeal Obamacare without a replacement.

“Bring it on,” Schumer said on Tuesday afternoon. 

As was often his role on the campaign trail, Pence sought to reassure 
Republicans who are still jittery about Trump’s commitment to a conservative 
agenda.

“Both of us were raised to believe that to whom much is given much will be 
required,” Pence said, adding with a touch of humor: “For him, that meant that 
the kid from Queens went to Manhattan island and built tall buildings.”

Pence, who said again of himself that he is “a Christian, a conservative and a 
Republican – in that order”, reminded the crowd that the work begins the moment 
Trump’s hands touch the bible on 20 January.

“We’ve got work to do,” Pence said. “Enjoy your dinner. Then roll your sleeves 
up.”
 