
There was no sign of Lionel Messi’s mate. The first time he met Sergio Agüero, 
they were teenagers, brought together in the Netherlands more than a decade 
ago. Sitting at a table in a dining room, Agüero looked at the kid opposite 
him, no idea who he was. “What’s your name?” he asked. The reply was delivered 
quietly: “Lionel.” Lionel would become his room-mate and soon best friend; 
unknown he might have been but he would also become the best player in the 
world. Theirs was another of the many relationships renewed here: Claudio Bravo 
and Marc-André ter Stegen, Nolito and Luis Enrique, Pep Guardiola and all of 
them.Sergio Agüero <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sergio-aguero> and 
Lionel Messi.

Yet when Messi strolled out, he saw only one member of that Argentina Under-20 
team: Pablo Zabaleta. Agüero had been left out. His absence defined the way the 
game would be played; Messi’s presence decided it. Tactically this was 
fascinating, contrasting styles within broadly shared philosophies, but talent 
transcended all – talent and mistakes: a slip, a red card, a ball given away. 
After this 4-0 defeat Guardiola’s decisions will be debated fiercely.

Messi hat-trick sends Barcelona waltzing past Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/barcelona-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report-messi>
The first time he came home, with Bayern Munich, Messi scored twice. This time 
it was three. He had got them all before Agüero even appeared, with 11 minutes 
left, the game over. Soon afterwards a wonderful run drew the penalty which 
Neymar had saved by Willy Caballero. Neymar made up for it a moment later. 
Guardiola stood and watched, with much to chew over.

The news had filtered through an hour or so before kick-off. Agüero had been 
left out – the question was why. Was he injured? The Catalans had a different 
view: this was a very Pep thing to do. This, after all, is the manager who said 
his dream was to have 100% of the possession, a team made up entirely of 
midfielders. One of his most tactically emblematic games was the World Club Cup 
final in 2011: that dayBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> hammered Santos 4-0 with a 
formation that was essentially 4-6-0 but no less attacking for it. Control was 
everything.

“Midfielders are intelligent players who have to think about the team as a 
whole: they’re selfless players who understand the game better than anyone,” 
Guardiola once said. Eventually it was confirmed. Talking to the television 
just before the game, he admitted the decision was tactical. Guardiola wanted 
as many men in the midfield as possible; a midfield that would be pushed high, 
seeking where possible to asphyxiate their opponents. That meant a front line 
of three with Nolito and Raheem Sterling on the wings, and Kevin De Bruyne in 
the middle.

Nor was it just the striker, or lack thereof. When City had the ball, which 
was often, Zabaleta became a midfielder too – not pushed up, as full-backs 
regularly are, but pushed in, more Philipp Lahm than Dani Alves, positioning 
himself alongside Fernandinho so that the fluid formation looked, at times, 
like a 3-2-3-2 or even a 3-3-4. Together City pressed high. Maybe they had been 
encouraged by the way that Ter Stegen had given away two goals against Celta 
Vigo recently.

That is another thing the clubs share: a debate around the goalkeeper playing 
the ball out but a determination for him to keep doing so. That argument will 
not subside, in Manchester at least, after Bravo was sent off, yet there was a 
message too in the way the Camp Nou chanted his name and applauded him from the 
field, grateful – and not just for the error. Barcelona were rewarded for 
pressuring there. City’s plan involved pressing too, forcing Barcelona to play 
from deep, sometimes even to go longer.

Forcing? Encouraging, perhaps? And that is the risk against this Barcelona, 
the tactical tweak that some believe makes them an even better side than they 
were before, Luis Enrique giving them a variety that Guardiola did not, winning 
a treble in his first season, like Pep, and a double in his second.

Pep Guardiola defends Bravo after red card leads to heavy Barcelona defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/manchester-city-pep-guardiola-barcelona-champions-league>
His is a team adept at riding the first wave of pressure, playing short 
through it or long beyond it; it is also one that has embraced the 
counter-attack as never before. Neymar and Luis Suárez allow them to do so to 
great effect and even Messi was turning the ball forward swiftly, and first 
time early on. More importantly, of course, he did what he does: he got his 
14th, 15th and 16th goals in 15 games against English clubs, all three 
impeccably taken.

Luis Enrique and Guardiola have shared a lot, the Barcelona manager said. Most 
of all they share an ideal. That, at least, was the message before this game. 
“I can’t imagine anything better,” Luis Enrique had said. The suggestion was 
they would play in similar ways but they did not, not exactly. The suspicion 
was that Guardiola was more of a purist. Luis Enrique insisted possession would 
be fundamental but in its relative absence there might be incision. And there 
was.

City had their share of the ball and their chances too – they had more shots 
than the home side until near the end, Ter Stegen making a couple of sharp 
saves – but they did not have Agüero and Barcelona did have his mate.

“The big difference between Barcelona and Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> has a name and a surname: 
Leo Messi,” former Barça defender Ronald Koeman had warned. Asked what the plan 
was to stop him, Guardiola had laughed. “I don’t know,” he said.
 