
If you know any planners, go out and hug them. At one time or another, most 
people will have reason to be grateful to their profession – for mitigating the 
expansion of a neighbour’s house, for example, or stopping an open-all-hours 
club opening in their street. We take it for granted that noxious industries 
can’t pop up in residential areas and that historic buildings and green spaces 
have some protection. This is due to planning, an area of government that is 
nonetheless showered with exceptional levels of derision.

Planners are faceless bureaucrats. Grey. So grey that they feel the need to 
brighten up their world and ours with colourful swaths of red tape. Or, worse, 
power-crazed social engineers who tell us how to live. They put brakes on 
prosperity, growth and freedom of choice. “There are countless jobs tied up in 
the filing cabinets of the planning regime,” said Michael Heseltine in 1979 and 
he thought the line so good and true that he said it again in 2012.

Actions follow these words. The planning system is endlessly being reformed, 
to speed it up, improve “delivery”, to save the £3bn a year that its delays are 
alleged to cost the economy. At the same time, planning departments are hit 
particularly hard by cuts in local government spending. Once councils have paid 
for their statutory and essential obligations, they find it easiest to squeeze 
apparently optional activities such as planning.

So it’s not surprising that the overwhelming majority of planners, according 
to a report to be published this week, believe that they cannot provide the 
benefits of planning due to the constraints and changes in their jobs. The 
report argues that reforms of the planning system often don’t work. It 
challenges the fantasy that, if only the bolts on the planning machine could be 
loosened enough, private enterprise would achieve the abundant flow of new 
housing that the country desires. It argues that there are economic costs to 
inadequate planning, such as uncertainty and the cost of poor decisions.

More than this, the report says that current demands for housing mean that 
planning should be strengthened, so that it can go beyond its usual role of 
reacting to developers’ and private citizens’ proposals. It can help remove 
obstacles to development such as contamination and poor infrastructure. It can 
assemble pieces of land to make a viable site. It can help remove risks and 
address the long-term quality of a place in ways that private companies often 
cannot. The report cites examples of cohesive and successful developments, such 
as the seven-hectareBrindleyplace <http://www.brindleyplace.com> in Birmingham, 
where 12,000 jobs are now based, or the new community ofCranbrook 
<http://www.cranbrook-devon.com> in Devon, which may provide 7,500 homes. In 
these places, it says, planning played a crucial role in making private 
development possible.

The report is commissioned by the Royal Town Planning Institute 
<http://www.rtpi.org.uk/>, the professional body of planners, which will prompt 
the nation’s Heseltines to snort that they would say that, wouldn’t they? 
Certainly, it describes a world where planners are more influential and 
respected and better funded than they are now. Its plonky title, Delivering the 
Value of Planning, smells of those filing cabinets. Then again theMandy 
Rice-Davies riposte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/19/mandy-rice-davies>could 
equally be applied to those housebuilders who argue for ever less planning. And 
rather than denigrate planners, it’s worth looking at the strengths of their 
arguments.

When making things that are expensive, immobile and long lived, such as 
construction projects, it’s common sense to consider the sum of actions in 
advance. When building a kitchen, you don’t just plonk down a cooker, sink and 
fridge and hope that they will end up in the right relationship to each other. 
You plan them. This gets more true as projects get larger and as space for 
building gets more scarce and precious, as is happening in Britain now.

Inadequate planning leads to places such as Ebbsfleet in north Kent, where 
huge investment has gone into its 19-minute rail connection to London, but it 
takes half an hour to walk from the station to the nearest house, and where 
some of the lakes formed by former quarry workings, potentially an asset, will 
be filled in. Good planning gives you places where people actually want to 
live, where value increases such that it can pay for more public benefits, 
where land is used well and homes are built at a reasonable speed. The choice 
is not that difficult.
 