
Police in Yorkshire have set up a special unit to deal with a spate of 
carjackings in Bradford after 26 incidents in the past 10 weeks, including one 
involving a mother and baby.

The latest victim was a 72-year-old man who was shot with an airgun in a pub 
car park in Heaton in north-west Bradford on Tuesday evening. A masked gang 
then tried to steal his black Jaguar XJ.

A 23-year-old man was arrested and then bailed pending further inquiries, a 
West Yorkshire police spokesman said on Thursday. The victim was released from 
hospital after undergoing surgery to remove the pellets in his hand and neck, 
the spokesman added.

The spokesman confirmed that a dedicated team of detectives had been set up to 
investigate 26 carjackings or attempted carjackings since 1 October.

In one of the other attacks, on 26 November, a woman was in her silver 
Volkswagen Polo GTI outside Shezzaan’s restaurant in Halifax Road, when two men 
wearing face coverings approached the vehicle and demanded she get out.

The woman, who was in the car with an 11-month-old child, was able to remove 
the child before the men drove off towards Odsal Top. Neither the woman nor the 
child were hurt.

One of the men appeared to have a metal object in his hand. One of the 
suspects was believed to be wearing a hooded top with a grey body, back and 
hood and darker grey or black sleeves.

DCI Ian Bryar, of Bradford district CID, told the Bradford Telegraph and Argus 
<http://www.thetelegraphandargus.co.uk/news/14966668.Police_set_up_specialist_squad_after_surge_in_car_jackings/?ref=mr&lp=3>
 that the police were greatly concerned by the wave of similar crimes.

“I’ve brought a team together from the Bradford organised crime unit to tackle 
this specific type of crime because we have seen a noticeable spike.

“It is of great concern to us. We do not yet know the motives, such as whether 
the cars are destined for overseas, for selling on or simply for joy-riding but 
they all appear to be German models or high-performance cars.

“We have recovered some of the vehicles, though not all of the 26 were stolen; 
some were attempts but we are still regarding all incidents as very serious,” 
he told the paper.

He added: “The shooting on Tuesday evening was the first to have a firearm 
involved. I don’t want people to stop enjoying their cars, but to be vigilant. 
If they see something suspicious they should contact us on 101. We also suggest 
locking the car doors when they are in the vehicle for additional safety.

“These sort of crimes, however distressing, are relatively low in number but 
we are determined to address them which is why we’ve brought on a dedicated 
team of detectives.”

The latest crime statistics 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/policeforceareadatatables>
 show that victim-based crime involving vehicles is up 16% year on year in West 
Yorkshire, compared with a national average increase of 4%. Some 23,285 such 
offences were recorded in the year up to June 2016.
 