
The energy regulator, Ofgem, <https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/> has promised to 
introduce price controls for customers on pre-payment meters next spring – the 
first since the domestic power sector was privatised more than 15 years ago.

It described the move as a watershed moment. A database allowing rival 
suppliers to offer better deals to those on standard variable rates will also 
be introduced.

But opposition MPs, independent providers and others said Ofgem’s initiatives, 
which follow uprecommendations from the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/cma-publishes-final-energy-market-reforms>, 
were far too little too late.

Ofgem’s chief executive, Dermot Nolan said the shakeup would loosen the grip 
of the big six suppliers, which control more than 85% of the market.

Nolan said: “The CMA’s final report is a watershed moment for industry and 
consumers and points the way to a fairer and more competitive future. I call on 
energy companies and consumer groups to seize this opportunity.”

The price cap will help the “most vulnerable and least likely to switch” and 
will save them around £75 a year from next April, he added.

The controls will last until at least 2020 when the introduction of smart 
meters could eradicate overcharging in that part of the market. The CMA 
investigated the wider energy market after an outcry over soaring power bills.

The Labour party had threatened to freeze all bills if elected in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/24/ed-miliband-labour-freeze-prices-2017>
 and the shadow energy secretary, Barry Gardiner, was scathing about Ofgem’s 
proposals and apparent government inaction.

“The Tories have sat back and done nothing while Ofgem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ofgem> is failing in its duty as the 
regulator,” Gardiner said. “I challenge Ofgem’s chief exec, Dermot Nolan, to 
name any other purchase where consumers are being swindled out of £1.9m a day 
and the regulator turns round and says: ‘It’s the customers’ fault. They should 
switch to another supplier!’ This is not regulation, it is aiding and abetting 
the offender.”

Ed Kamm, the UK managing director for First Utility, one of the largest 
independent suppliers, criticised the plans. He said the CMA’s report rightly 
identified the problem that 70% of UK households were overpaying for their 
energy.

He added: “But the [Ofgem] proposals put too much onus on the customer, don’t 
go far enough and the timing of their implementation is baffling. Ofgem itself 
admits that consumers who are already engaged in the market will see the first 
benefits.

“We are in real danger of continuing to fuel a ‘tale of two markets’ – helping 
those who already shop around and doing little to properly help those who are 
continuing to pay much more than they need to or should.”

Mark Todd, the co-founder of the switching service energyhelpline.com said 
customers on standard metre tariffs would remain “on square one”.

He added: “As is Ofgem’s way, the onus still lies with the customer to be 
proactive and shop around to avoid being ripped off. Unfortunately, the average 
household only switches once every nine years, costing themselves roughly £300 
a year or £3,000 over a decade.”

Byron Orme, a research fellow at the Institute for Public Policy Research 
(IPPR), said Ofgem’s move should be the beginning and not the end of a reform 
process, given that those on lower incomes and the over-65s were likely to 
remain disengaged and overcharged.

Orme added: “The government has a continuing role to play in protecting the 
most vulnerable customers. Action must continue beyond these reforms to include 
measures that materially reduce people’s bills. By far the best way to achieve 
this is through investment in energy efficiency improvements to ensure that 
costs are brought down and kept down.”


Meanwhile, the green energy company Ecotricity pledged to resist Ofgem’s 
efforts to force suppliers to share customer data with the entire energy market.

Dale Vince, Ecotricity’s founder, said: “After two years of deliberations the 
proposals from CMA are a massive disappointment.

“They ducked the one big issue before them: cracking down on the abuse of the 
70% of households who have never switched supplier and are subject to price 
gouging, where energy companies offer loss-leading tariffs to attract new 
customers and use longstanding customers to pay for them.

“Instead they have opted to create a new abuse: sharing of everyone’s personal 
data with every energy company in the land, which is likely to create a 
blizzard of junk mail.”
 