
People with fragile bones could have their skeletons beefed up with infusions 
of stem cells harvested from pregnant women, researchers say.

Scientists proposed the unusual therapy after studies showed that the 
treatment led to 78% fewer fractures in animals that were bred to have a 
brittle bone disorder.


The finding has raised hopes for treating rare bone conditions that affect 
some babies from birth, but the same procedure has the potential to help older 
people with osteoporosis, and even astronauts who lose bone mass in orbit, the 
researchers said.


“The stem cells we’ve used are excellent at protecting bones,” said Pascale 
Guillot, who led the study at University College London. “The bones become much 
stronger and the way the bone is organised internally is of much higher 
quality.”


Osteoporosis <https://www.theguardian.com/society/osteoporosis> affects more 
than three million people in Britain alone, and the estimated costs of 
fractures reaches billions of pounds a year. Brittle bone disease is rare in 
newborns, but the 70 UK babies born with the condition each year can suffer 
fractures even before they leave the womb.


In a series of experiments, Guillot set out to investigate whether stem cells 
collected from human amniotic fluid could help strengthen weak bones in mice. 
She found that infusions of the cells did just that, but not by forming fresh 
bone themselves. Instead, the stem cells released growth factors that made 
existing bone cells in the mice multiply and mature more effectively.


Genes can increase risk of osteoporosis by a third
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2008/apr/30/osteoporosis.genes> 
“The discovery could have a profound effect on the lives of patients who have 
fragile bones and could stop a large number of their painful fractures,” 
Guillot said.


The stem cells used in the study had been shed by babies into the amniotic 
fluid. These very young stem cells are thought to be more potent that stem 
cells collected from adults. Guillot said that the cells could be collected for 
future treatments when pregnant women have tests on their amniotic fluid, and 
even when doctors induce water breaking prior to childbirth. “You can collect 
the fluid and isolate the cells from it,” Guillot said.


The researchers hope to start a clinical trial in humans in the next two 
years. If the treatment is found to be effective, it could be given to affected 
babies at birth, or even while they are still in the womb, to help them develop 
healthier skeletons. Unlike other tissues, the stem cells used in the study can 
be transplanted from one person to another without having to match the 
recipient and donor.


The UCL scientists are not the first to show how stem cells can strengthen 
ailing bones.Earlier this year 
<http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/content/5/5/683>, researchers in Toronto 
infused stem cells from healthy mice into others with osteoporosis. Not only 
did the recipient animals grow stronger skeletons, but their bones regained the 
healthy coral-like appearance that osteoporosis destroys.


In the longer term, scientists aim to identify the crucial chemicals that stem 
cells release to beef up bone formation. “We could inject these factors into 
older people, or into astronauts, to give bone forming cells a boost,” Guillot 
added. The research is published in the journal,Scientific Reports 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep39656>.

 