
December is upon us, one third of the Premier League season has been completed 
and a definite hierarchy has been established. You could throw a blanket over 
the top four of Chelsea, Liverpool,Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> and Arsenal, who are 
separated by only three points after 13 matches. With the gap from the 
fourth-placed Arsenal to the best of the rest a more emphatic four points, the 
smart money suggests that barring an unlikely surge from Tottenham Hotspur or 
Manchester United, this season’s Premier League title will almost certainly go 
to one of those four.

With a busy period of festive football looming, now seems as good a time as 
any to take stock and see which of the four look freshest and perhaps best 
equipped to pull away from their rivals. Each of them will have to play seven 
league games by the end of the first week of January, whenPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> teams will contest the 
third round of the FA Cup.

Chelsea

Pep Guardiola v Antonio Conte: a tactical showdown of brooder against 
extrovert | Jonathan Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/01/pep-guardiola-antonio-conte-manchester-city-chelsea-tactics>
Unlike Tottenham with Moussa Sissoko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/mauricio-pochettino-moussa-sissoko-tottenham>
, Chelsea certainly got what they paid for in N’Golo Kanté, who has clocked up 
153km in the 1,170 minutes of Premier League football he has played this season 
– almost 20 more than his team-mate César Azpilicueta has run in the exact same 
time. An otherwise fairly straightforward schedule is bookended by tricky away 
trips to Manchester City and Tottenham and it is now Chelsea could further reap 
the benefits of not having to worry about Europe.

It seems fairly obvious that keeping their tireless wing-backs, Victor Moses 
and Marcus Alonso, as fit and fresh as possible may prove key to their title 
chances. The energetic duo have not played even 700 minutes apiece this season 
but have become a pivotal part of Antonio Conte’s plan since his switch to a 
back three, but they could conceivably run out of steam at such a busy time.

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> have used the fewest 
players of the four and do not appear to have the strength or quality of their 
rivals in reserve. Cesc Fàbregas is available for selection but despite his 
obvious class does not appear to have a fan in Conte, while Oscar, Willian and 
Michy Batshuayi have also found their opportunities limited. News from the 
treatment room suggests John Terry is due to return from a muscle injury this 
month, while Mikel John Obi should also be back shortly but seems totally 
surplus to requirements and may leave in January.

Players on the bench in last league game Begovic, Fàbregas, Batshuayi, 
Chalobah, Ivanovic, Willian, Oscar.League matches in next four weeks Manchester 
City (a), West Bromwich Albion (h), Sunderland (a), Crystal Palace (a), 
Bournemouth (h), Stoke City (h), Tottenham Hotspur (a).

Liverpool

With their incessant pressing , Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> are the other top-four side 
for whom an absence from European competition can be considered a blessing. 
With the exception of games against Manchester City and Everton, their other 
opponents can all be found in the bottom half of the table, a state of affairs 
which should give Jürgen Klopp and his merry men an excellent chance of pulling 
clear.

Jordan Henderson has been crucial to the Liverpool cause, running his legs 
into stumps more than 155km in 1,154 minutes, while Nathaniel Clyne (137.3km), 
Roberto Firmino (136.5km) and Sadio Mané (126.5km) can hardly be accused of 
idling. Liverpool’s options from the bench look limited compared with those of
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> and Manchester City, 
although Daniel Sturridge has been a brooding but reassuring presence in 
reserve and should get plenty of game‑time during a period when Philippe 
Coutinho is sidelined with an ankle injury and not expected to return until 
mid-January.

There are minor fitness concerns over Sturridge but Jürgen Klopp also has 
Divock Origi available. The manager has not been particularly lucky with 
injuries and has lost Danny Ings for the season. Firmino and Adam Lallana are 
also numbered among Liverpool’s lame but both are expected to return to full 
fitness soon.

Players on the bench in last league game Mignolet, Moreno, Klavan, Ejaria, 
Woodburn, Origi, Lucas.League matches in next four weeks Bournemouth (a), West 
Ham United (h), Middlesbrough (a), Everton (a), Stoke City (h), Manchester City 
(h), Sunderland (a).

Manchester City

Joe Hart expects Manchester City exit when Torino loan move ends next year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/joe-hart-manchester-city-exit-transfer-torino-loan>
Manchester City, along with Arsenal, are the sides facing the added 
distraction of the Champions League and City have an appointment with Celtic to 
contend with along with their seven league matches. It is a period that could 
make or break their season, as they will face each of their three main title 
rivals. Home matches against Chelsea and Arsenal and a visit to Liverpool give 
them a gilt-edged chance to put a significant distance between themselves and 
their rivals.

Fernandinho has been City’s unsung hero, galloping 143.1km in the 1,170 
minutes he has clocked up, compared with Kevin De Bruyne (111.9km in 862), 
Sergio Agüero (100.1km in 919) and Raheem Sterling (117.6 in 1,001). With the 
exception of the luckless Vincent Kompany, Pep Guardiola has been fortunate 
with injuries and the manager will be able to call on the completely fresh 
midfielder Fabian Delph, sidelined since August, any day now. The presence of 
De Bruyne, David Silva, Kelechi Iheanacho and Jesús Navas on the bench last 
weekend suggests strength in depth is unlikely to be a concern. Guardiola has 
also got the wonderfully talented Gabriel Jesus joining in January (albeit 
after a tiring year in Brazil).

Players on the bench in last league game Caballero, Iheanacho, Silva, 
Zabaleta, De Bruyne, Sané, Navas.League matches in next four weeks Chelsea (h), 
Leicester City (a), Watford (h), Arsenal (h), Hull City (a), Liverpool (a), 
Burnley (h).

Arsenal

Arsène Wenger has already voiced his concerns over the fact Alexis Sánchez is 
going about his business held together with sticky-backed plastic and 
paperclips and the manager has every right to be worried about the Chilean’s 
workload. The 27-year-old has already made 23 appearances for club and country 
this season, playing 1,089 minutes of Premier League football along with the 10 
matches he has more or less completed in the Champions League and with Chile. 
Sánchez has run 114.5km in the Premier League, two fewer than the equally 
indispensable Mesut Özil, who has almost 1,000 Premier League minutes behind 
him. Should injury befall either player it could serve as a hammer blow. The 
thought of losing them simultaneously is probably enough to prompt most Gooners 
to reach for the gin.

Arsenal’s Santi Cazorla to miss three months after surgery on ankle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/santi-cazorla-arsenal-three-months-out>
Despite lying second in the Premier League injuries table, Arsenal do have 
plenty of strength in depth. Olivier Giroud’s sterling contributions from the 
bench have been well documented, with the Frenchman having scored three goals 
in the miserly 123 Premier League minutes afforded to him. Francis Coquelin, 
Kieran Gibbs, Aaron Ramsey, and Gabriel Paulista were among the talents 
alongside him on the bench last weekend. Wenger’s hand will be further 
strengthened by the return of Héctor Bellerín (18 December), while the club 
captain, Per Mertesacker, and Danny Welbeck are expected to return to full 
fitness in January. Santi Cazorla has had surgery on the achilles injury he 
sustainied in the 6-0 Champions League win against Ludogorets and is out for at 
least three months.

While Arsenal’s schedule over the next four weeks is not particularly 
punishing, they face a trip to Manchester City and have the added irritation of 
a Champions League match at Basel next week that is must‑win if they are to 
have any chance of overtaking Paris Saint-Germain and finish top of their group.

Players on the bench in last league game Ospina, Iwobi, Coquelin, Gibbs, 
Gabriel, Ramsey, Giroud.League matches in next four weeks West Ham (a), Stoke 
City (h), Everton (a), Manchester City (a), West Bromwich Albion (h), Crystal 
Palace (h), Bournemouth (a).
 