
The second time I lived in New York I rented an apartment in a big tenement 
block on the Lower East Side, in the old Jewish neighbourhood. It always smelt 
of chicken soup, which I find a comforting smell and was the reason I took the 
flat, but the minute you stepped outside the air was filled with a different 
kind of yum. Just round the corner was the fantastic Donut Factory, and as 
Halloween is a very big deal over there they did these as a special.

Makes about 20 and takes 1 hour 30 minutes (including a 30 minute break for 
rising time)

150ml / ¼ pint whole milk
5 teaspoons (15g / ½oz) fast-acting dried yeast
100g / 3½oz sugar, plus 1 teaspoon extra
1kg / 2lb plain flour, plus extra for kneading and rolling
1 tin (460g / 14¾oz or thereabouts) of mashed pumpkin (or make your own by
roasting 650g (1¼ lb) peeled pumpkin or squash, foiled, in a medium oven for 
40 minutes, then mashing it)
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
½ teaspoon salt
1 egg, beaten
4 tablespoons melted butter
2 tablespoons plain oil (groundnut, veg, sunflower)
1-1.5 litres (1¾ – 2½ pints) oil, for frying

For the glaze:
a knob (around 1 teaspoon) butter
75ml / 3fl oz milk
175g / 6oz icing sugar
1½ teaspoons ground ginger
75g / 3oz ginger, washed and unpeeled
½ teaspoon vanilla extract

Heat the milk gently until it's just warm to the touch, then whisk in the 
yeast and the 1 teaspoon of sugar and leave to stand for 20 minutes, until 
frothy.

In a large bowl mix the flour, pumpkin (or squash), cinnamon, salt and sugar, 
then pour in the yeast mixture, beaten egg, melted butter and the oil then 
bring it all together to make a soft dough. Turn out on to a well-floured 
surface and knead with floured hands for about 5 minutes, adding more flour as 
necessary so that it doesn't stick to you or the surface.

Roll out the dough to a thickness of about 2cm / ¾ inch and use two circular 
cutters, one with a diameter of 8cm / 3½ inches and one with a diameter of 4cm 
/ 1¾ inches, to make your rings. Use the trimmings to re-roll, then leave them 
to rise for 30 minutes.

Knock up the glaze by melting the butter in the milk and whisking in the icing 
sugar, ground ginger and vanilla extract. Coarsely grate the ginger root and 
squeeze the juice into it too – you can re-use the fibres for tea / hot toddies.

Pour the oil into a wide, thick-bottomed pan to a depth of about 2.5-3cm / 
1–1¼ inches. Heat it up until hot but not nearly smoking, then turn the heat 
down to medium. Slide one of the doughnuts in first, just to check the 
temperature is right: it should fizzle and float up to the surface, very gently 
bubbling away. Cook them in batches for 5-7 minutes total, turning halfway 
through so they are evenly golden brown all over, then take them out with tongs 
or a slotted spoon and put them on a wire rack.

When they're cool enough to pick up, dip them into the glaze on both sides and 
tuck in not long after: there's not many ills in the world that can't be cured 
with a warm doughnut.

• This recipe is taken from Bought, Borrowed & Stolen: Recipes and Knives from 
a Travelling Chef by Allegra McEvedy (Conran Octopus, £25).Order a copy for 
£18.75 from the Guardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781840915778>
 