Queensland state politician Peter Dowling stood aside as chair of the 
parliamentary ethics committee after a scandal in which he earned the nickname 
“the plonker”. What did he do to earn the moniker?  Paid a professional 
basketball player to let him score in a charity game  Took a photo of his penis 
in a wine glass and sent them to his former mistress  Fell into the ocean while 
touring the Great Barrier Reef  Asked a Chinese donor to cover his bill for a 
case of red wine Jamie Briggs was the first minister in the Malcolm Turnbull 
government to resign because of a scandal. He tendered it after doing what?  
Breaking a table in the prime minister’s office while dancing on it the night 
Tony Abbott was despatched by Malcolm Turnbull  Trying to trip over fellow 
South Australian Nick Xenophon when they passed each other at a function  
Saying submarines should be built in Melbourne  Behaving inappropriately 
towards a young department of foreign affairs employee in a Hong Kong bar 
Western Australia MP Troy Buswell sniffed chairs after a meeting trying to 
guess which one a female staffer had been sitting in. According to the woman, 
while he sniffed them he:  Groaned and made sexually satisfying noises  Said he 
could smell cinnamon and fish  Said he was looking for his wallet  Said he was 
looking for his political career Tony Abbott’s predecessor in the seat of 
Warringah, Michael Mackellar, held the immigration and health portfolios before 
resigning from the Liberal frontbench after a staffer incorrectly filled out 
the customs declaration for what?  Ten cartons of Winfield Blue cigarettes  A 
diamond necklace for his wife  A colour television  A black and white television
Then minister for business and consumer affairs, John Moore, also took a fall 
with Mackellar over the customs furore. What did he do?  He didn't act 
"adequately" when he found out  He tried to buy the goods from Mackellar  He 
tried to set up a smuggling ring in parliament to import the same thing  He 
didn’t declare a bottle of Jack Daniels The former Northern Territory sports 
minister Nathan Barrett resigned after filming himself masturbating in his 
office and sending it unsolicited to a woman who was not his wife. When a 
constituent complained about his behaviour on Facebook, he said:  “I apologise 
unreservedly to you, my other constituents, and of course my wife”  “It was a 
Sunday”  “Stop shaming me”  “I don’t know what I was thinking” NSW politician 
Reba Meagher was not sacked but announced she was not seeking a cabinet 
position after a series of controversies which included:  Leaving her 
parliamentary driver waiting all night after she went to a bar and left in a 
taxi  Falsely accusing the Chinese of hacking her Twitter account  Failing to 
return books to the parliamentary library on time  Secretly lobbying against a 
Family First bill which her party was supposed to be lobbying for Bronwyn 
Bishop resigned as the speaker over what became known as ‘choppergate’. What 
did she do with a helicopter to lose her job?  Flew to Tony Abbott’s house for 
a dinner party  Flew her hairdresser to Canberra  Charged the taxpayers for it  
Flew to an official government function The former federal industry minister 
Alan Griffiths resigned after he was accused of funnelling Labor party funds 
into a mate’s failed business. He was later cleared of any wrongdoing but what 
was the business?  A kebab shop  A fish and chip shop  A piggery  A sandwich 
shop The former Labor powerbroker Graham Richardson resigned after he tried to 
help a cousin-by-marriage, Greg Symons, who was:  In the Liberal party  Accused 
of fraud in the Marshall Islands  Actually a pretty young woman and not his 
cousin  A business partner of Eddie Obeid’s The former Labor party leader Mark 
Latham lost his job in politics for leading the party to an electoral drubbing 
in 2004, but he also resigned as a columnist for the Australian Financial 
Review after he did what?  Put John Howard in a headlock  Broke a taxi driver’s 
arm outside his home after an argument over a fare  Called the Liberal party a 
“conga line of suck holes”  Allegedly abused several high profile women with a 
fake Twitter account @RealMarkLatham The former NSW premier Barry O’Farrell 
resigned after not declaring a gift from lobbyist Nick Di Girolamo in what he 
described to the corruption watchdog as a “massive memory fail”. What was the 
gift?  Grange 1969  Grange 1959  Complimentary chips for Barangaroo’s high 
roller casino  A stubbie holder commemorating Queensland's state of origin win 
that year  You got…  This is a humiliating result, but not as humiliating as 
some of our politicians' tendencies  This result is almost as tragic as 
Harambe's death  This is a humiliating result, but not as humiliating as some 
of our politicians' tendencies  This is a humiliating result, but not as 
humiliating as some of our politicians' tendencies  You fit comfortably into 
"mediocre" when it comes to knowledge of our politicians' scandals  Your 
knowledge of political scandals is solid, but not comprehensive enough to be 
suspicious  Excellent. Your knowledge could be applied to crisis management, 
have you considered a job in Sam Dastyari's office?  Excellent. So excellent 
that maybe you are taking too much interest in the scandalous lives of our 
politicians?  Challenge your friends Submit answers  