
After days of speculation, Rachel Dolezal appeared on the Today show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/rachel-dolezal-today-show-interview>
 and declared herself transracial – and blamed other people’s misunderstanding 
of the term on why she came to be identified as black. “I was actually 
identified when I was doing human rights work in north Idaho as first 
transracial”, she said – in a construction that conveniently negated her agency 
in that decision – and explained that she never corrected subsequent media 
reports that she was biracial or black.

“I identify as black”, she said during the interview, though she admits to 
having identified as white at other points – including whenshe sued Howard 
University for racial discrimination because she was white 
<http://www.thesmokinggun.com/documents/bizarre/rachel-dolezal-discrimination-lawsuit-786451>
. (She lost.)

But transracial does not mean what some white Americans like Dolezal 
apparently wish it to mean. The term originates from adoptive and academic 
circles to describe the very lived experience of children raised in homes that 
are phenotypically and culturally different from their birth – people likemy 
colleague Rebecca Carroll 
<http://www.damemagazine.com/2015/06/15/i-am-black-rachel-dolezal-not>, who is 
black. She was raised in a white household and her white birth mother attempted 
to define her as “culturally white, and cosmetically black”.

Writer Ellie Freeman clarified the distinction 
<http://mediadiversified.org/2015/06/15/transracial-doesnt-mean-what-rachel-dolezal-thinks-it-means/>
 between actual transracial people and those like Dolezal:

Being transracial is hardly similar to ‘feeling black’ … It’s not like gender 
dysphoria either – the politics of race and gender are not interchangeable in 
this context. Unlike many black Americans, Rachel’s family background does not 
carry the trauma of slavery and institutionalised racism. Unlike people who 
really are transracial, Rachel has not been physically torn between two 
cultures and denied intimate knowledge of her birth culture. Unlike people who 
are blackand transracial adoptees, Rachel has not had to deal with both of 
these life-affecting experiences at the same time.

In other words, Dolezal’s black adopted brothers could be considered 
transracial, if they chose to define themselves that way – which does not 
negate their blackness – but Dolezal herself is not. AndDolezal’s insistence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/rachel-dolezal-today-show-interview>
 that, for it to be “plausible” to be seen as the mother of her adopted 
brother, Izaiah, of whom she gained custody in 2010, “I certainly can’t be seen 
as white”, doesn’t make her transracial as that term has always been understood.

Perhaps it feels convenient to white people who desire to unravel systemic 
effects of a hyperracialized society (especially those effects that they feel 
affect white people negatively) to embrace the notion of a transracial 
identity, as if such a thing exists. But to argue that real parity between race 
and ethnic groups in the United States exists – and can be exchanged one-on-one 
– is to deny protections for those groups marginalized by institutional power.

Black America is quite familiar with the complex fluidity of racial and ethnic 
identity within our families, because we live most directly with the legacy of 
four centuries of intergenerational chattel slavery in the United States. But 
while that history of slavery is often positioned by white people and American 
society as my history, not our history, that is a stupid delineation: the 
evidence of black or white blood, relationships and rape, flow fairly 
seamlessly in my bloodline and in white Americans’.


My maternal great-grandfather had green eyes, was very fair skinned and had 
the very prominent nose and lips – the phenotypical features – that one 
associates with people of African descent. The 1940 census, which I was able to 
unearth some time ago via a leaf on theancestry.com <http://ancestry.com/> 
database, showed me that, fair skin and green eyes aside, he was designated 
“Negro”. My maternal great-grandmother, his wife, was dark skinned, but her 
sister could (and often did) pass for white. I’m told that her ability to pass 
afforded my great aunt some measure of mobility and safety on the white side of 
the city of Jackson, Tennessee in the 1950s – safety and mobility that her 
sister and nieces would never experience.

In her 2010 book, The History of White People, historian Nell Irwin Painter 
chronicled the merging of European ethnic groups from ancient Western 
civilization through immigration to America and into the binary of black and 
white existence here – and how 19th century racial science fomented these 
beliefs. Painter notes that criteria for “race” constantly “shift according to 
individual taste and political need” and “the fundamental black/white binary 
endures even though the category of whiteness – or we might say more precisely, 
a category of nonblackness – effectively expands.” The opposite of whiteness is 
presumed “alien” or “degenerate”; the opposite of blackness is the presumed 
moral majority. It is a thinking that denies the value of black people, and 
limits our acceptance. Crossing over, as Dolezal apparently wanted to do, 
doesn’t subvert the structure; it reinforces it.

Dolezal’s messy theft and fiction of a black American identity uses the 
currency of a subculture of privilege that is rooted in white supremacy too. If 
anything, to believe that one can transfer one’s identity in this way is a 
privilege – maybe even the highest manifestation of white privilege. The 
ability to accept marginalization, to take on the identity of blackness without 
living the burdens of it and always knowing you could, on a whim, escape it, is 
not a transition to blackness; to use it to further your career or social 
aspirations is not to become black. To have whiteness in American society is to 
have more freedom; blackness operates as tension between restriction and 
transcendence. Black people are required by whiteness to transcend our race to 
succeed; performing blackness in order to succeed as a black person is to use 
existing hierarchies to your advantage.

To deny ethnic and cultural differences – to say not only “I don’t see race” 
but that race is a choose-your-own adventure – is to erase the identities of 
those who cannot choose. Dolezal’s actions are the acceptance of a hierarchy of 
identities that are more deserving of merit, love, the visible acknowledgment 
of pain, validity, the pursuit of happiness and access to wealth and 
opportunity. The story of America that we like to repeat is that everyone is 
equal, that every individual has the opportunity to manifest the good life – 
although our history and cultural idiosyncrasies do not align consistently with 
that notion. To say: “I am colorblind”, is an attempt to inoculate oneself from 
accountability for individual behavior that reinforces systemic inequalities 
and divides.

To deny the complexities of racial identity is to plead ignorance. To demand 
that your racial identity be seen as fluid because you are inconvenienced by 
whiteness and your ambitions are thwarted by other people’s blackness is just a 
new reason for a very old kind of erasure.

 