
Impressed doesn't even touch the sides of what I felt while looking over and 
then cooking up your autumn salad recipes. In fact it was more like: "Dammit 
Allegra, time to retrain and get another string to your bow – the pack ain't 
that far behind at all!" Seriously good job guys, and I don't mind fessing up 
I've already pocketed the simple, but somewhat ethereal, dressing for the 
honeyed figs. But in the end, the winner was clear. And my only comment would 
be that the name doesn't quite do justice to Natalie and Valerie Wong's 
gorgeous, moreish seasonal autumn salad.

The winning recipe: mushroom and lentils with feta

I love lentils in a salad during early autumn, when you're craving something 
hearty, wholesome, and satisfying. This salad just hits the spot. Use red or 
yellow lentils to brighten up the dish.
Natalie and Valerie Wong, twinnydip.blogspot.co.uk 
<http://www.twinnydip.blogspot.co.uk>

Serves 2
For the mushrooms
2 tbsp olive oil
1 large onion, chopped
2-3 garlic cloves, minced
A large sprig of rosemary, leaves only, chopped
½ tsp paprika
A small pinch of chilli flakes (optional)
1 tbsp balsamic vinegar
300g brown mushrooms, thickly sliced
150-200ml cider
3 tsp honey mustard (or 2 tsp English mustard and 1 tsp honey)
Salt and black pepper

For the dressing
2 tbsp olive oil
1 tbsp balsamic vinegar
1 tsp honey mustard
Salt and black pepper
 2 large handfuls of spinach, chopped
80g lentils
60g feta cheese, crumbled
30g pine nuts, toasted
A handful of parsley, roughly chopped

1 Heat 1 tbsp oil in a frying pan over a medium heat. Add the onion, garlic, 
rosemary, paprika and chilli flakes, if using. Cook for 3 minutes. Add the 
vinegar and stir until reduced. Add the mushrooms, cook for 5 minutes, then add 
the cider and fry for 2–3 minutes. Stir in the mustard and season to taste. 
Cook for a further 3–5 minutes, or until the juice is reduced. Set aside.

2 Meanwhile, prepare the lentils according to package instructions.

3 Combine all the dressing ingredients. Toss the spinach in the dressing, then 
layer on the lentils, mushrooms, feta, pine nuts and parsley in that order.

Roasted squash salad with spiced plums, hazelnuts and blue cheese
 Roasted squash salad with spiced plums, hazelnuts and blue cheese. 
Photograph: MarmadukeScarlet via/GuardianWitness 

I make an autumn soup from these ingredients, but deconstructed it to see if 
it would work as a salad. Oh yes! We had the salad with grilled pork chops and 
the combination was perfect.
MarmadukeScarlet, via GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5239954ce4b03a8dd1de7492>

Serves 4-6
500g butternut squash, diced
1 garlic clove, finely chopped
3 tbsp olive oil
1 fresh thyme sprig
1 tsp ground cumin
½ tsp Aleppo pepper or chilli flakes


½ tsp ground ginger
½ tsp ground nutmeg
½ tsp smoked paprika
3 plums, halved and pitted
A handful of green leaves (such as baby rainbow chard)
40g toasted hazelnuts, roughly chopped
50g blue cheese, coarsely crumbled
Salt and black pepper

For the dressing
Olive oil, reserved from cooking
1 tsp hazelnut or walnut oil
1 tbsp sherry vinegar
Salt and black pepper

1 Preheat the oven to 150C/300F/gas mark 2. Combine the squash, garlic, oil, 
thyme and spices in a bowl. Season to taste and tip into a roasting tin. Bake 
for 30-40 minutes until the squash has caramelised and softened. Set aside to 
cool, reserving the oil.

2 Drizzle the plums with the reserved oil. Grill for 5 minutes, until lightly 
golden. Quarter and set aside.

3 Make the dressing by scraping up the remaining spiced cooking oil. Make up 
to about 2 tbsp with extra olive oil if necessary. Whisk in the nut oil and 
sherry vinegar. Check the seasoning.

4 To serve, divide the green leaves between four plates. Toss the roasted 
squash with the dressing and divide up. Arrange a few chopped plums on top and 
scatter with hazelnuts and diced blue cheese.

Sweet and sour marrow, mackerel and beetroot salad

pilgrimskitchentales via GuardianWitness

Serves 2
1 medium large mackerel, cleaned
400g marrow, peeled, deseeded and cut into 2cm chunks
80g spinach
1 raw beetroot, grated
1 garlic clove, finely chopped
40g sultanas
40g walnuts, toasted
100ml cider vinegar
1/4 tsp chilli flakes
1 tsp fennel seeds, lightly crushed
2 tbsp honey
2 tbsp olive oil
Salt and black pepper

1 Preheat the ovven 220C/425F/gas mark 7. Place the mackerel on an oiled and 
heated baking tray and bake for 12 minutes. Leave to cool, then peel off the 
skin and flake, removing the bones. Set aside.

2 Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the marrow and garlic for 5 minutes. 
Stir in the chilli flakes and fennel seeds, then add the vinegar, honey, 
sultanas and season. Bring to the boil, reduce the heat, cover and simmer for 5 
minutes. Remove the marrow and sultanas, reserve the remaining cooking liquid 
and leave to cool.

3 To assemble the salad, divide the spinach between two plates, top with the 
pickled marrow and sultanas, then some beetroot, top with the flaked mackerel. 
Sprinkle over the walnuts and drizzle with some of the reserved liquid.

Tamarind lamb cutlets with spicy chickpea chaat salad
 Tamarind lamb cutlets with spicy chickpea Chaat salad. Photograph: Sumayya 
Jamil, via /GuardianWitness 
This salad combines many attributes of my homeland – barbecued lamb is 
quintessentially Pakistani. I have combined it with an easy chickpea salad 
based onchaat, a popular Pakistani street food.

Sumayya Jamil, via GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5239954ce4b03a8dd1de7492>

Serves 2
For the lamb
4 lamb cutlets
2 tbsp tamarind paste
1 tsp chaat masala or ½ tsp each of dry-roasted ground cumin, coriander, brown 
sugar, salt and lemon juice
¼ tsp garlic puree
2-3 slices of paneer cheese
Flavourless oil, for cooking

For the salad
1 tsp each of dry-roasted and ground cumin and coriander seeds
1 dried red chilli
1 x 410g tin of chickpeas
Juice of half a lemon
2 tsp chaat masala or ½ tsp each of dry-roasted ground cumin, coriander, brown 
sugar, salt and lemon juice
1 tbsp each of chopped mint and coriander leaves
A handful each of pomodoro baby tomatoes, spinach, chopped cooked beetroot
Salt, for seasoning
Thinly sliced pieces oflemon with its zest, to toss in salad, for garnishing

1 To make the chickpea chaat salad, heat a dry frying pan and toast the 
red chilli, coriander and cumin seeds until light brown, then bash in a mortar 
and pestle. Combine with the remaining salad ingredients and set to one side.

2 Marinate the lamb in the tamarind paste, chaat masala and garlic for a 
couple of minutes. Brush some oil on a frying pan and fry the paneer, followed 
by the lamb, until cooked.

3 Divide the chickpea salad between two plates, top with the lamb and paneer, 
as well as a sprinkling of any remaining chaat masala.

Roasted cauliflower and pomegranate salad with a lemon anchovy dressing
 Roasted cauliflower and pomegranate salad. Photograph: Laura Scott 
via/GuardianWitness 
This salad is a revelation. Roasting gives the cauliflower a perfectly nutty 
flavour that will have you asking for more. And more.
Laura Scott, Surrey

Serves 2-4
1 whole cauliflower, cut into small florets
2 red onions, thickly sliced
1 tsp cumin seeds
A big handful of pomegranate seeds
60g feta cheese
Olive oil, for roasting
Salt and black pepper

For the dressing
2-3 anchovies, finely sliced 
Zest and juice of ½ lemon
4-5 tbsp olive oil
Salt and black pepper

1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 6. Mix the florets with the red 
onions, cumin seeds and a splash of oil and seasoning. Roast on a lined baking 
tray for 20-25 minutes. Set aside.

2 Meanwhile, make the dressing. Mash the anchovies with the lemon zest in a 
pestle and mortar. Season, then stir in a splash of lemon juice and olive oil.

3 To assemble the salad, combine the roasted cauliflower and red onion in a 
shallow salad bowl. Add a generous amount of pomegranate seeds and feta cheese. 
Pour the dressing on top and serve at room temperature.

Grilled honeyed figs and labneh salad
 Grilled honeyed figs and labneh salad. Photograph: Rachel 
Kelly/GuardianWitness 
When I think of autumn, I think of warm muted colours. 
The colour of seasonal figs seem to perfectly reflect autumn in every way – 
they're such a beautiful colour, both inside and out. To make labneh, place 
500g natural yoghurt with ½ tsp salt in a sieve lined with 3 layers of muslin, 
cheesecloth or J-cloths, suspended over a bowl. Leave the yoghurt for at least 
4 hours (or overnight in the fridge) to drain. Eventually the whey will drain 
off and you will be left with a soft creamy cheese.

Rachel Kelly, London; marmadukescarlet.blogspot.com 
<http://marmadukescarlet.blogspot.com>

Serves 2
4 figs, halved lengthways
A couple of handfuls baby greens
Labneh, feta or ricotta, to serve
40g cured meat (such as saucisson sec), diced

 For the dressing
3 tbsp olive oil
1 tbsp honey
1 tbsp sherry vinegar
1 tsp orange blossom water
½ tsp Worcestershire sauce
A pinch of fennel seeds or anise, ground and toasted
Salt and black pepper

1 Make the dressing by vigorously shaking all the ingredients together until 
they have emulsified.

2 Preheat the grill to medium. Coat the figs in the dressing, then gently 
grill them, cut-side down, for 2 minutes, or until they have caramelised on 
both sides.

3 Scatter two plates with baby greens and top each plate with four fig 
halves. Add dollops of the cheese. Scatter with cured meat. Drizzle with 
dressing and serve.

Felicity Cloake is away <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/travel> this week
 