
Geoff Ogilvy will carry a two-stroke lead heading into Sunday’s final round of 
the Australian Open, but he has a raft of big names includingAmerican superstar 
Jordan Spieth on his tail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/spieth-schooled-by-luck-as-amateur-leads-australian-open-after-round-one>
.


Ogilvy expressed surprise after firing the low round of the tournament, a 
brilliant, unblemished eight-under-par 64 at Royal Sydney on Saturday.


The former US Open champion is 11-under, with Spieth lurking ominously two 
shots back after grinding out a third-round 68 despite a shaky start.


Two-time champion Aaron Baddeley is also at nine-under after carding a 67, as 
is Ryan Fox (70) in his bid to become the first New Zealander in more than a 
century to lift the Stonehaven Cup.


Spieth schooled by Luck as amateur leads Australian Open after round one
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/spieth-schooled-by-luck-as-amateur-leads-australian-open-after-round-one>
In-form veteran Rod Pampling is three off the pace after a rollercoaster round 
of 70 vaulted the 47-year-old into contention for his maiden national 
championship. Adam Scott is a further shot back at seven under after salvaging 
a 71 with two late birdies.

Ogilvy made the most of the favourable early morning conditions to go out in a 
red-hot six-under 30 courtesy of birdies at the first, second, sixth, seventh, 
eighth and ninth holes. He did not grab another birdie until the par-five 16th, 
where he moved into the outright lead.

The 2010 Open champion iced his round with a stunning approach on the 18th for 
a tap-in birdie three. “To be honest, I didn’t really see 64 on the first tee,” 
Ogilvy said.

“But after going out so well on the front nine I kind of started seeing a 
score like that. It’s always a nice feeling. I’m back in the mix.”


This morning’s big mover was unheralded Australian Jake Higginbottom who 
capitalised on a morning tee time, shooting six-under-par 66 to be seven-under 
for the tournament.


The 23-year-old from Charlestown opened his account with a birdie on the first 
hole, before mixing five birdies and an eagle with two bogeys to sign for a 66.


“It was actually pretty breezy this morning,” said Higginbottom, who won the 
2012 New Zealand Open as an amateur.


“I played well. They call it moving day for a reason and it’s always nice 
being in contention.”


Halfway leader James Nitties (74), along with Higginbottom (66), Jason 
Scrivener (69) and 20-year-old Lucas Herbert (71) all share sixth place with 
Scott.


Two-time former champion Robert Allenby (68), teenage amateur Min Woo Lee (71) 
and fellow young gun Cameron Smith (68) are not out of it at six-under and five 
in arrears of Ogilvy.
 