
If Tony Blair and David Cameron ever bump into each other, they can compare 
notes on the thanklessness of political parties. I wouldn’t be surprised if the 
words “ungrateful bastards” passed their lips. Mr Blair won his lot three 
consecutive elections, a feat never before achieved byLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and a record that does not look 
likely to be repeated. Yet denouncing him is today the most reliable way to 
rouse a cheer from many leftwing audiences. Mr Cameron took the Tories back to 
power after a 13-year absence from office and then, at the last election, 
increased their seats and share of vote. Yet his successor in No 10 thinks her 
quickest route to popularity is to dump on him. I can see why he has decided 
not to hang around in parliament to be a spectator while Mrs May buries him 
alive.

The experience of these two ex-leaders tells the story of the rise and fall of 
a political era. Call it, if you like, the Age of Centrism. Or, if you prefer, 
the Liberal Ascendancy. It began in 1990 when John Major replaced Margaret 
Thatcher on a mission to revive the Tories’ popularity by softening her harsher 
ideological edges. Liberal centrism peaked under Tony Blair, endured through 
Gordon Brown and had a further lease of life during the coalition when Nick 
Clegg, and others who actually called themselves Liberal, joined the 
government. Many of its adherents think its last rites were read when Britain 
voted for Brexit.

I am, I know, painting with an extremely broad brush. There were serious 
differences between these men and their governments, but on the big issues 
there was common ground. All of them presided over a mixed economy of state and 
private provision of goods and services. All were committed to free trade; all 
were permissive on social issues. All subscribed to membership of the European 
Union. John Major and Tony Blair had a lot more in common with each other than 
either did with Nigel Farage or Jeremy Corbyn. Ditto Gordon Brown and David 
Cameron. New Labour accepted much of the Thatcherite economic settlement 
inherited from theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>, which is precisely what 
was wrong with it for opponents from the left. Cameroonians embraced the social 
liberalism of the Blair era, much to the discontent of many on the traditional 
right.

Is centrism now discredited and defeated? To many observers, it looks that 
way. A recent collaboration between the Social Market Foundation and the 
pollsters Opinium is entitled“Dead Centre” <> and remarks “after a long 
referendum campaign focused on sovereignty and immigration, the Leave vote, the 
demise of Cameron’s political project, the failure of the Liberal Democrats to 
mount much of a comeback and the resilience of Corbynism and Scottish 
nationalism, the centre looks barren”.

Whatever anyone thinks of Jeremy Corbyn, no one would ever call him centrist. 
On Saturday, he will be re-elected as Labour leader. His team radiate 
confidence that he will win and win well. Supporters of his challenger, Owen 
Smith, sound resigned to defeat. That result will not be reflective of the 
wishes of Labour MPs who triggered the challenge when 172 of them declared they 
had no confidence in his leadership. Nor will it be a result that pays heed to 
the party’s dire poll ratings.

Jeremy Corbyn makes conditional peace offer to hostile Labour MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/corbyn-makes-conditional-peace-offer-to-hostile-labour-mps>
What it will show is how the Labour party has been transformed. There are all 
sorts of complicated reasons why Mr Corbyn will win. Then there is the 
straightforward explanation: the Labour electorate has become a lot more 
leftwing. Its membership began to shift left under Ed Miliband, moved further 
that way after the 2015 defeat and this process hasaccelerated over the past 12 
months <http://www.qmul.ac.uk/media/news/items/178403.html>. There is evidence 
that Mr Smith has done well among people who were party members before 2015, 
but the gains he has made among that group have been matched – more than 
matched, most likely – by the support for Mr Corbyn from those who joined the 
party since he became leader. The chasm between a broadly centrist 
parliamentary party and a much more leftwing membership has grown even wider.

Over on the Conservative side of the ledger, people are still trying to get a 
precise ideological fix on Mrs May. She has revived the cabinet career of Liam 
Fox, a hardline Brexiter, but she has also promoted One Nation Tories such as 
Damian Green and David Lidington. She has made noises aboutcorporate governance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/theresa-mays-plans-curb-boardroom-excess-receive-mixed-reaction>
 which sound leftwing coming from a Tory prime minister while indicating right 
in other policy areas. The ingredient that is bound to be the strongest flavour 
in the character of her government is withdrawal from the EU, bringing to 
fruition the dream of the Tory right.

Between a Brexiteering Conservative government and Corbynista Labour, there 
are acres of unoccupied political real estate. This looks like an opportunity 
for the Lib Dems, who have historically prospered when the two major parties 
have moved off the centre. The Lib Dems have begun theirconference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/17/farron-invites-labour-and-tory-members-to-join-lib-dems>
 in Brighton by boasting that they’ve been putting on members, but their poll 
rating is stuck at a level no better than their vote share at the last 
election. Memories of the coalition are too fresh for them to revive their 
pre-2010 role as a vehicle for protest. Their leader, Tim Farron, occasionally 
casts come-hither glances at Labour MPs, but they don’t see the Lib Dems as a 
place of refuge. Mr Farron and his small parliamentary band are struggling to 
make themselves heard. “You can only do so much with eight MPs,” laments one of 
them.

Centrists blithely assumed their internationalist, tolerant instincts were so 
obviously correct, they had to prevail

Their former leader, Nick Clegg, gamely speculates that politics has become so 
volatile and Brexit will be such a horrendous mess that the Lib Dems could be 
back in office sooner than anyone thinks as part of a “Government of National 
Unity”. His optimism is endearing but not widely shared. Most think that the 
road back for the Lib Dems will be the slow and hard one of gradually 
rebuilding their base in local government while hoping for a parliamentary 
byelection sensation here or there. One senior figure in the party describes it 
as “the work of a generation”.Paddy Ashdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/paddy-ashdown-i-turned-to-my-wife-and-said-its-not-our-country-any-more>
 has concluded that the party he used to lead isn’t capable of resurrecting 
liberal centrism by itself. So he has founded a campaign group called More 
United which hopes to recruit support from across parties.

Before there can be a revival, advocates of liberal centrism first have to 
work out why and where it went wrong. One way of thinking is that it was undone 
by the mistakes of individuals. Tony Blair’s reputation never recovered from 
the Iraq war. David Cameron blundered into Brexit. Nick Clegg failed to tell a 
persuasive story about the coalition government and his role in it.

A less comfortable explanation for liberal centrists is that there were some 
fundamental flaws in their creed and how they applied it in power. They won 
elections by promising to be best at delivering prosperity combined with social 
justice, a formula which broke down when economic times got rough and nasty 
choices had to be made.

Liberal centrists have been guilty of hubris. One of their shared assumptions 
was that free trade was always a good thing, which meant that globalisation 
would be wonderful for everyone and, even if it wasn’t, it was too powerful to 
be resisted. Tony Blair didn’t forsee the blowback against a permissive 
immigration policy and nor did his counterparts across the EU. David Cameron 
tried to exploit discontent about immigration but only made it worse by making 
promises to curb labour flows that he couldn’t keep.

They blithely assumed that their cosmopolitan, internationalist, tolerant 
instincts were so obviously correct, so patently rational, that they had to 
prevail. They couldn’t believe Britain would vote to leave the EU – and are 
still struggling to come to terms with a referendum result that rejected their 
entire world view. They largely became defenders of the status quo – and that 
status quo was widely held to favour elites – in a period of rising rage 
against anything that could be construed as the “establishment”. That created a 
fertile climate for insurgents preaching left, right and nationalist populisms. 
The centrists were slow to spot and respond to the rise of identity politics, 
whether it came in the guise of Ukip or the form of the Scottish nationalists. 
These insurgent forces sounded authentic and passionate where centrists too 
often came over as bloodless and manageralist. It may be of some consolation, 
but that is all it is, that this has happened to the traditional governing 
parties of the centre-right and centre-left across the developed democracies.

Centrist leaders were adept at winning elections in their era of dominance but 
never so good at enthusing supporters who chafed at the compromises involved. 
One of the things Mr Corbyn indisputably represents is a backlash against 
Blairism. Mrs May is probably right to calculate that her party never felt all 
that warm towards Mr Cameron.

And yet. Liberal centrism prospered because it was attractive to a critical 
mass of voters. They liked governments that sounded moderate, acted 
pragmatically and weren’t too heavy with ideology. Many voters still want that. 
Whenasked to place themselves on the political spectrum, nearly half of the 
electorate still self-identifies with the centre 
<http://opinium.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Dead-Centre-British-politics4_lr.pdf>
.

The centre is not dead. It is dazed and confused. It needs fresh ideas and 
more engaging ways of expressing itself. It will get its voice back one day.
 