
On face value, the reversing of outward and inward stretches on a golf course 
makes no difference. Players still have to complete 18, with the holes 
themselves subject to no alteration. Closer inspection, though, reveals a 
change for the better at East Lake.

One of the most symbolic venues in the United States and the vehicle for 
positive change in an area which for so long took dangerous towards extreme 
levels, has clearly benefited from the 1st becoming the 10th, 9th turning into 
18th and so on. That alteration has been evident to the watching world during 
this week’s Tour Championship. What a simple but effective ploy.

There was a practical motivation in part for this switch. Far more tournament 
infrastructure can be placed around the back nine as it exists now than was 
previously the case. That aside, though, increased excitement has been provided 
for the event. The closing stretch includes the par-three 15th, which mirrors 
the famous 17th at Sawgrass in part.

The 18th is a par five which is reachable in two from forward tees, offering 
scope for eagles which did not exist when the last hole was a 230-yard par 
three. “You know you’re never really out of it with that par-five last hole to 
play,” Adam Scott said. “You can be a couple of shots back and still feel like 
you’re in it.”

That former closing stretch regularly witnessed competitors hanging on for 
dear life rather than providing the birdie blitz that spectators want to see 
for the conclusion of a marquee competition.

“We wanted to create more interest and volatility over the closing stretch,” 
Rees Jones, the course architect, said. “Players will be challenged by the 
difficult 14th and a demanding tee shot at the 15th. The final three holes 
should not be viewed as an easier finish.

‘Revolutionary’ European Tour proposals risk turning golf into a gimmick | 
Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/22/european-tour-world-super-6-perth-golf-gimmick>
“With some of the tweaks that we have made, it is a stretch where par is not 
necessarily the standard and expected score. There will be birdies, bogeys on 
all three holes and potentially eagles on the final hole, which will ultimately 
result in more lead changes and excitement for all involved. Many of the 
world’s historic courses go through transitions as the game of golf changes 
with time.”

East Lake’s members have endorsed Jones’s work to the extent that they play 
the course in the same order as professionals at the FedEx Cup finale. All the 
initial signs are that the overhaul has been welcomed and is here to stay.

“I think it’s a good move,” Paul Casey said. “Before, 16, 17, 18 were just 
tough to make birdies, tough to make something happen. Now we have three holes 
where we can be very aggressive. Hopefully the tees are moved up on the 18th on 
Sunday and they make that par five reachable. That would be very cool.

“The possibility of an eagle, somebody else could make a double bogey, I just 
like that. I like the fact there could be a lot of movement.

“Visually, it changes a lot. So holes like the old 16, number seven now. At 
least with grandstands and hospitality units, you never saw the lake behind. So 
the shot actually becomes tougher now because you lose your depth perception, a 
little bit of infinity effect down towards the lake.

“You might see guys hit better shots than you’ve seen on certain holes in the 
past. You might see guys really struggle to get it close on certain holes 
because infrastructure has a lot to do with it. Grandstands and hospitality 
units can help or hurt depending on the hole.”

Over the opening rounds of the Tour Championship, the 1st played as the 
toughest hole on the course, thereby triggering another mindset alteration for 
players. There, as at several spots on East Lake, the absolute necessity to 
avoid dense rough is demonstrated by the difference in hole proximity 
statistics between there and fairways.

“This course is already tough,” the world No1, Jason Day, said. “They have 
Bermuda rough. The fairways are in pristine condition and the greens are 
unbelievable.”
 