
Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> groups have 
condemned a UN decision to remove Saudi Arabia from a blacklist of countries 
and groups accused of violating children’s rights, after the Saudis’ campaign 
against Houthi rebels in Yemen was blamed for causing 60% of child deaths in 
the conflict.

Human Rights Watch accused Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general, of giving in 
to “political manipulation” in the wake of furious protests from Riyadh. It 
said the UN had executed a “shocking flip-flop”.


Amnesty International decried “blatant pandering”, which it said “damages the 
credibility of the UN as a whole”. Oxfam said the world body’s decision to 
retract its findings was “a moral failure.”

But the Saudi government said it was “wildly exaggerated” to claim that the 
coalition it leads was responsible for 60% of the child deaths and injuries in 
Yemen last year.A UN report 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-rights-un-saudi-yemen-idUSKCN0YO2RK> 
released last week attacked both coalition and rebel forces for a “very large 
number of violations” including attacks on schools and hospitals.


It attributed 510 child deaths and 667 injuries to the coalition and 142 child 
deaths and 247 injuries to the Houthis. In 324 incidents, the responsible party 
could not be identified.


The UN said on Monday that it would now carry out a joint review with the 
coalition of the cases listed in the report. But the Saudi ambassador to the 
UN, Abdallah al-Mouallimi, insisted that the removal of the coalition from the 
blacklist was “irreversible and unconditional”.

The Saudi-led coalition launched a campaign in support of Yemen’s president, 
Abd Rabbu Mansour Hadi, in March 2015 to push back the Houthis after they 
seized the capital, Sana’a, and many parts of the country. The war has left 
6,400 people dead and more than 80% of the population in desperate need of 
humanitarian aid.

International human rights groups have raised concerns about Saudi airstrikes 
and accused the coalition of deliberately targeting civilians with cluster 
bombs, which would constitute a war crime. The British governmenthas said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/mod-to-investigate-claims-saudis-used-uk-cluster-bombs-in-yemen>
 it is urgently investigating allegations that UK-manufactured cluster bombs 
have been used.


Oxfam said the UN report on children and conflict was yet more evidence that 
countries such as Britain and the US should halt “reckless” arms sales to all 
participants in the conflict.


Sajjad Mohamed Sajid, Oxfam’s country director in Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>, said: “Political power and 
diplomatic clout have been allowed to trump the UN’s duty to expose those 
responsible for the killing and maiming of more than 1,000 of Yemen’s children.


“The killing of children in their homes, at schools and in hospitals should 
not be swept under the carpet. When the UN identifies crimes such as these it 
needs to act, regardless of who the perpetrators are.”

HRW’s deputy director for global advocacy, Philippe Bolopion, said: “After 
giving a similar pass to Israel last year, the UN secretary general’s office 
has hit a new low by capitulating to Saudi Arabia’s brazen pressure and taking 
the country off its just published list of shame. Yemen’s children deserve 
better.”


The UN left Israel and the Palestinian group Hamas off the blacklist in its 
2014 report, after they had been included in an earlier draft.

Richard Bennett, the head of Amnesty’s UN office, said: “This is a stark 
example of why the UN needs to stand up for human rights and its own principles 
– otherwise it will rapidly become part of the problem rather than the 
solution.”

Why is Britain still selling Saudi Arabia arms to use in Yemen? | David Wearing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/20/britain-selling-saudi-arabia-arms-yemen-corbyn>
The UN report, published annually, blacklists groups that “engage in the 
recruitment and use of children, sexual violence against children, the killing 
and maiming of children, attacks on schools and/or hospitals and attacks or 
threats of attacks against protected personnel, and the abduction of children.”

Ban expressed concern about violations in Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, South 
Sudan and Syria.

Saudi officials said the report would not help peace talks under way in 
Kuwait, and would “complicate the mission” of the UN’s envoy to Yemen, Ismail 
Ould Cheikh Ahmed. Riyadh often portrays the Houthis as a proxy of its regional 
rival Iran.

Abdulaziz Bin Saqr, president of the Gulf Research Centre, a Saudi thinktank, 
said the killing of Yemeni civilians was the result of arbitrary shelling by 
rebel forces. He cited the crimes committed by “Iran’s puppet forces” in other 
areas of conflict in Syria and Iraq, and questioned whether the UN was aware of 
this.
 