
Rory McIlroy presented such dogged optimism after firing four bogeys in five 
holes here on Friday that one was reminded of theBlack Knight in Monty Python 
and the Holy Grail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/15/monty-python-and-the-holy-grail-review-rerelease>
.

Phil Mickelson marches on with Henrik Stenson hot on his heels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/15/the-open-2016-day-two-report-phil-mickelson>
It is true that, despite his sequence of high numbers, he still played well 
enough to salvage a par round of 71 in the awful conditions in the afternoon 
and early evening. But the bad luck of the draw, in which the leaders had the 
chance benefit of going out before the weather worsened, means that at two 
under he is eight shots behindthe leader, Phil Mickelson, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/15/the-open-2016-day-two-report-phil-mickelson>
 and has only an outside chance of Open glory on Sunday.

Three birdies in the opening seven holes enabled him to claw his way up the 
leaderboard at five under par. But then came the slump and, crucially, his 
first two bogeys before the weather turned evil. They looked more like 
aberrations.

But McIlroy maintained his Panglossian view of matters at the end of a 
difficult day. “I’m honestly quite happy with my two rounds of golf,” he said.

“On the back nine I had a bit of a bad run around the turn and missed two 
short putts in a row on nine and 10. But I held it together nicely coming in 
and played the last five holes at one under par. And anything around even par 
this afternoon was a decent score.”

That is true enough but it still leaves the men who went out in the morning 
holding all the aces. McIlroy refused the opportunity to whinge about his 
situation. “It’s the Open Championship. Some draws go your way and some draws 
don’t. The last Open I played, I got the good end of the draw and good things 
happened that week. I’m not going to let being on the wrong side ruin my mood 
or ruin my week. I think everyone had that spell of maybe half an hour where it 
was just brutal.”

He added: “The way I played gives me optimism going into the weekend. And I 
played the front nine well, especially. So if I can get off to a similar start 
tomorrow and get a little closer to the leaders, play the back nine a little 
better, you never know.” McIlroy pointed to the promise of improved conditions 
for Saturday and the importance of making a strong start. “The back nine, no 
matter what wind you get, is going to be very difficult.

“But I feel like it’s possible. There are 36 holes to go. I’ve given people 
head starts before and been able to win and I’m just going to try to draw on 
those memories.”

It had all started so well for McIlroy, even though he missed a birdie chance 
on the 1st after a strong approach shot. At the 2nd, though, he sank a 
25-footer to go three under. He made pars on the next three holes – although he 
needed an excellent chip on the 4th to set him up for a straightforward 
four-footer.

At the 6th, though, he managed something better, starting with a long drive 
and finishing with a 15ft putt to move to four under par. He followed that up 
with a birdie three on the 7th after chipping to within six feet and then 
putting out solidly.

Jason Day: Open conditions were atrocious but I want more of the same
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/15/jason-day-open-conditions-atrocious-royal-troon>
It was then that things began to get a bit ragged. At the Postage Stamp 8th he 
drove into the Coffin bunker, though he managed to disinter himself with a nice 
sand shot to go within three feet of the flag for a simple par.

At the 9th, though, he began his remarkable descent, dropping down the 
leaderboard like a dead weight. He looked well placed in the plump of the green 
after two shots. His third took him to a couple of feet from the hole. But he 
missed it to go back to four under.

That became three under on the first hole of his return journey, even though 
he had a 25-footer for a birdie. His effort went three feet past and then he 
missed the return par putt. He could be seen chuntering to himself as he left 
the scene of the crime.

On the 11th a strong second shot put him in with a chance of a birdie from 
just under 20ft. He missed it but was probably happy to settle his jangling 
nerves with a calming par.

It was only a brief respite. At the 12th he found the rough and then went into 
a bunker. He got out of it but the ball looked like a wasp crawling out of a 
puddle of water. He used his club to strike the sand in frustration. He could 
not make up the distance to the hole and dropped another shot. He was now two 
under, the score he had at the start of he day.

It got worse. He could not make par at the long par-four 13th and had now made 
four bogeys in five holes. At this point he had even given up chuntering, as if 
no longer on speaking terms with himself.

It was now damage limitation. He did manage to cling on to par at the 14th and 
15th and even pulled one back at the 16th with a putt from 20ft. The awful 
weather had now relented.

McIlroy went within a couple of inches of another birdie at the 17th and 
finished off with another par. “I played really well out there today,” he said, 
and in the distressing circumstances no one was prepared to put up an argument.
 