
Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> seems to abide 
by the adage of the best lesson in life being that it is never too late to 
learn. As he reflected on a season that will end on Sunday, he admitted being 
“too proud” and “too stubborn” has been costly.

McIlroy has won three titles this year and, owing to course specialism, is the 
favourite to prevail again at the DP World Tour Championship. Still, by his own 
standards, the failure to win a major – compounded by missing the cut in two – 
has been a lingering disappointment.Putting troubles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/rory-mcilroy-us-pga-phil-mickelson>
 played the key role, with McIlroy eventually turning for help to Phil Kenyon.

Rory McIlroy laments ‘pathetic’ putting after early exit from US PGA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/rory-mcilroy-us-pga-phil-mickelson>
“I have learned sometimes to not be too proud,” McIlroy said. “I felt like I 
went long enough without asking advice on putting when that was the thing 
letting me down. I really needed a second opinion.

“I was too stubborn, I wanted to figure it out on my own because I always feel 
if you do that, you take own take ownership of it and it’s yours. Sometimes you 
need a second opinion. I got that in August and it really turned the season 
round for me.

“I’ve won a couple of things I hadn’t won before. I won the Irish Open, which 
was a huge thing personally. It might not be the biggest tournament in the 
world but in my mind it is one of the biggest I play all year. That was nice, 
to be able to knock that off, and to win the FedEx Cup as well was big.

“My play in majors was disappointing. I had a top-five at The Open but that 
was soon forgotten because of what Henrik Stenson and Phil Mickelson did. 
Majors aside, I feel like it’s been a pretty good, consistent year but going 
into next year, I’d like to think that my performances in the majors are going 
to be better.”

McIlroy will not be undercooked in the first of them, the Masters. He revealed 
an early 2017 schedule that will include appearances in South Africa, Abu 
Dhabi, Dubai, Los Angeles, Florida, Mexico City, as well as at Bay Hill and 
possibly in Texas before Augusta National.

He will spend time pre-Christmas testing new equipment after Nike’s decision 
to withdraw from club and ball manufacturing left the 27-year-old a free agent.

One place McIlroy is unlikely to appear is Turkey. His absence from the 
Turkish Airlines Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/matsuyama-makes-history-shanghai-mcilroy-turkey-pullout>
 earlier this month because of security fears prompted criticism from the 
president of the country’s golf federation.

McIlroy was asked whether his Turkey decision, combined with non-participation 
at the Olympic Games in Rio, may have affected his reputation. “I think I do 
enough good things on and off course charity-wise and with the way I carry 
myself that pulling out of two events is not going to change that,” he said.

“I’d rather go to Turkey wanting to win the tournament than go there not 
wanting to win it and finish 40th. What good does that do the tournament? It 
does nothing for them.

“The biggest way to promote golf in Turkey is not my face on posters but 
winning the tournament and that won’t happen if I don’t feel comfortable being 
there. Will I play there next year? I don’t know; after what I read this year, 
probably not.”

Turkey’s European Tour event was named as one of an initial seven to make up 
the new Rolex Series from 2017.
 