
Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> delivered the 
most powerful Ryder Cup message to the United States yet with a dramatic 
success at the Tour Championship which also ensured the Northern Irishman 
claimed the $10m FedEx Cup prize. At the start of Ryder Cup week Europe are the 
side with momentum. With the purses added together, McIlroy departed Georgia 
$11.5m richer than when he arrived.

After a final round of 64 at East Lake McIlroy prevailed over Ryan Moore in 
what was the fourth sudden-death play-off hole. As McIlroy converted from 15ft 
for a birdie, days before taking his place in the European team at Hazeltine, 
their captain Darren Clarke surely joined with the celebrations. Clarke will 
inherit a McIlroy brimming with confidence and, once more, holing putts which 
count.

Ian Poulter: ‘I’m not giving up the ghost – I still have a couple of Ryder 
Cups in me’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/ian-poulter-ryder-cup-darren-clarke>
For McIlroy this means a second success on the PGA Tour within a month and 
taking delivery of the FedEx Cup for the first time. The latter had been a 
stated ambition of his at the beginning of 2016. Had Moore emerged victorious 
from the play-off – which had also included Kevin Chappell for one hole – then 
Dustin Johnson would have won that aggregate prize. The bigger picture related 
to Hazeltine, as McIlroy would have been perfectly well aware.

McIlroy’s day had rather trundled along before an epic moment on the 16th 
during regulation play. There the 27-year-old holed out from 137 yards for 
eagle. The demonstrated euphoria was as turbo-charged as McIlroy has ever 
produced. This served as a reminder that, when in his finest touch, McIlroy is 
the best entertainer in the sport.

Yet he still had work to do, with Chappell holding a two-shot lead with only 
two holes to play. Chappell was to bogey the 17th, with McIlroy erasing the 
remaining shortfall courtesy of a birdie on the 72nd green which concluded a 
back nine of 30. On the last McIlroy played a sumptuous greenside bunker shot 
to tap-in range.

Moore, who had matched McIlroy’s Sunday score of six under par, displayed 
tenacity during the play-off but had no answer to McIlroy’s three on the 16th. 
The duo had traded both birdies and pars during the earlier holes. For a spell 
there was a genuine concern as to whether this contest would conclude during 
daylight hours. Whereas McIlroy was regarded as the favourite, he also carried 
a record of four defeats in four earlier play-off appearances on the European 
and PGA Tours. The sense that another such scenario might fall against him had 
been endorsed by missed opportunities to win in the first two knockout holes. 
He was ultimately not to be denied, though; for all McIlroy’s widespread 
popularity there had been a feeling that the East Lake crowd were seeking an 
American champion.

Johnson had started day four when tied for the lead with Chappell. The US Open 
champion was to slip surprisingly to a 73, leaving his FedEx dreams in the 
hands of others. “Obviously Rory played really great,” said Johnson. “So 
obviously hats off to him. He earned it and he deserves it.

“If Ryan would have beat Rory in the play-off, I would have had a chance to 
win the FedEx Cup, which obviously would have been really cool. But it didn’t 
feel right because I didn’t win the Tour Championship. That’s why I was here – 
to win. I knew I controlled my own destiny.”

Chappell, who was seeking his maiden PGA tour victory, had seen McIlroy 
close-up during a practice match on Wednesday. He admitted to nerves in the 
sudden-death format but reflected on a “life-changing” season with positivity. 
It seems inevitable he will sample victory of his own soon.

“Finishing with a five, I’m not going to win any golf tournaments,” said 
Chappell. “I have to learn from it. I will be better next time. I am proud of 
the way I fought. It just wasn’t enough today. I woke up this morning pretty 
nauseous but I got myself in a good place before I teed off. I realised how 
hard it is to win out here but also how good my game is. I gave guys who have 
been at the top of leaderboards all year all I had.”

Phil Mickelson headed for Hazeltine in fine fettle after an inward nine of 29 
on Sunday . Mickelson’s 66 was semi-remarkable given the appearance of a 
triple-bogey seven at the 7th. Mickelson criticised the “disconnect” between 
the PGA Tour and the Ryder Cup during post-match media duties. It is the PGA of 
America which controlsRyder Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> 
matters.

“Why the Tour set it [the course] up so differently from what we’re going to 
have next week is a lack of communication and working together,” he said. “The 
Tour doesn’t own the Ryder Cup, let’s say, or doesn’t work in conjunction with 
the PGA of America.

“ The European Tour would never have the set-up be so different the week 
before the Ryder Cup. We’re not going to have rough like that; this is the 
worst rough I’ve seen in years. We’re not going to have that rough next week.”

Kevin Na, who has something of a reputation for playing at snail’s pace, 
showed it is not always thus by completing 18 holes in two hours as a single at 
the front of the field. Na subsequently denied he was seeking to change 
perception.

“It wasn’t about that,” said Na. “It was really just about having fun. I 
wanted to break par and play well.” By close of play this background chatter 
was immaterial. The United States cannot say they have not been warned. McIlroy 
has returned to the form of his life at the perfect moment.
 