
With four matches of this Ryder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> complete Europe’s obituary was 
half-written. The USA, inspired by the legend of Arnold Palmer, claimed the 
first session of the event with a whitewash not seen since The King was captain 
in 1975.

The outcome seemed written in the stars, amid a sense there was barely any 
merit in playing for the remaining 24 points. Further bad news for the holders, 
as if it was necessary, derived from the format of that morning spell: 
foursomes are historically an American weakness. In 2014 the USA lost the two 
foursomes segments 7-1. The point arrived from two halved matches. A European 
recovery from this position seemed as likely as PJ Willett being afforded a VIP 
ticket to Sunday’s closing ceremony. More of his unfortunate and recurring 
influence later.

Rory McIlroy acclaims ‘buoyant’ Ryder Cup team after fightback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/rory-mcilroy-acclaims-buoyant-european-team-ryder-cup>
It transpires, wonderfully so for the dynamic of the 41st joust for the Ryder 
Cup, that tales ofEurope’s demise were grossly exaggerated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/30/ryder-cup-2016-usa-v-europe-day-one-foursomes-live>
. The Mauling of Minnesota was no more; as illustrated by the removal of roars 
which had reverberated around Hazeltine National for four hours.

In an afternoon session of fourballs Darren Clarke’s men staged a stirring 
comeback to leave the aggregate score at 5-3. Europe may be behind but they 
have unquestionably been afforded fresh hope just when, even so formatively, 
all seemed lost. Europe trail but have the momentum so absent during a wounding 
first few hours. In another pertinent nod to history, which Clarke would be 
foolish not to draw upon, the overnight scoreline is precisely the same as from 
Friday into Saturday at Medinah in 2012. No one will need reminding as to what 
happened next.

In the foursomes wave mist gave way to blue skies and a red scoreboard. Henrik 
Stenson and Justin Rose, such a formidable combination at Gleneagles two years 
ago, were toppled 3&2 by Patrick Reed and Jordan Spieth.Rory McIlroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> and Andy Sullivan had been two 
up on Phil Mickelson and Rickie Fowler after six holes but succumbed to defeat 
by a hole. As the atmosphere intensified, so too did USA belief.

Sergio García and Martin Kaymer, which always looked the most questionable of 
Clarke’s pairings, lost out 4&2 to Jimmy Walker and Zach Johnson. Europe had 
been one up in that match when taking to the 12th tee before capitulation 
ensued.

Clarke will never admit that Thomas Pieters was named as a foursomes partner 
to Lee Westwood because of the furore surrounding Danny Willett. One should not 
expect him to. And yet it is difficult not to infer precisely that that is what 
occurred. Pieters was pretty much blameless in the 5&4 victory of Dustin 
Johnson and Matt Kuchar, such was the remarkably inadequate level of Westwood’s 
play. Perhaps the 43-year-old felt intense pressure, amid the sceptical notion 
that his closeness to Clarke was the only reason for a wildcard pick.

Ryder Cup 2016: USA 5-3 Europe after day one – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/30/ryder-cup-2016-usa-v-europe-day-one-foursomes-live>
“I’ll take responsibility for that,” said Westwood, to his credit. “I played 
poorly today and Thomas played well. He’s got into the Ryder Cup really well. 
He showed some balls out there and made some putts when we needed to.”

Westwood spent the afternoon on the practice range. That was after issuing a 
warning: “This is only the first morning. Anything can happen in The Ryder Cup. 
It’s freaky like that.” In context of what had transpired, Westwood may as well 
have delivered the comment while wearing nothing but a water-shooting bow tie 
and a pair of clown’s shoes. He might just have the last laugh.

After a brief lunch break Europe were transformed. Rose and Stenson, facing 
the same opposition in game one, had a better-ball score of nine under par 
through 14 holes in recording a 5&4 win. Stenson came within a whisker of a 
sensational hole in one at the 8th, which even the wildly partisan – to the 
point of unsportsmanlike – home crowd had to acknowledge. Spieth and Reed 
thereby sampled defeat for the first time in four Ryder Cup matches together.

“It’s one thing if you’re losing and you’re playing badly but we were both 
pretty happy with our performance in the morning,” said Stenson. “We missed a 
couple of putts and that’s why we lost. We tried to get even better, we did 
that and made a few putts and got the point back. It makes it sweeter when you 
beat the guys you lost to in the morning, that’s for sure.”

García, now in alliance with his compatriot and the debutant Rafa Cabrera 
Bello, saw off JB Holmes and Ryan Moore by 3&2, though not without a late scare.

McIlroy, who seemed routinely irritated by gallery shouts, but to the point 
where inspiration rather than distraction was forthcoming, teamed up 
brilliantly with Pieters in thereby justifying Clarke’s decision to leave the 
young Belgian on the course for consecutive rounds. Europe hauled down Dustin 
Johnson and Kuchar, 3&2, in that final fourball match. McIlroy’s demonstrative 
passion this week has been quite a sight, almost as if he has been freed from 
the shackles of standard tournament play. He sealed the match with a 
magnificent eagle at the 16th.

Ryder Cup diary: Michael Jordan makes entrance while putting punter cashes in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/ryder-cup-2016-diary-michael-jordan-prince>
The afternoon negative for Clarke resonated in heavy defeat for Willett and 
Kaymer. Brandt Snedeker and Brooks Koepka were a seven-under better ball for 
the 14 holes of their 5&4 success but the week is not getting any easier for 
Willett after his brother’s needless and earlier interventions. The Masters 
champion appeared in relaxed enough touch despite regular cat-calling from 
outside the ropes but the situation could not have been particularly easy for 
other members of the Willett family, who had come here to celebrate a special 
career moment. Neither they, nor the player himself, have actually done 
anything wrong.

Late intrigue surrounded whether or not García and Cabrera Bello could cling 
on after the USA won holes 14 and 15 from a position of four down. They duly 
did, in what may prove a key reference point for this clash.

As shadows lengthened, so did Clarke’s stride. There is a contest still that 
looked implausible for a spell on Friday.
 