
If Rory McIlroy’s significance to Europe was obvious in advance of this Ryder 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup>, few could have envisaged his 
rising status as battle fever gripped Hazeltine. McIlroy might be the most 
unlikely of pantomime villains given his routine popularity both on and off the 
course but that is precisely his role as cast by the galleries here.

The key point that cannot be ignored is thus: Darren Clarke, Europe’s captain, 
desperately needs other players to summon both the spirit and style of McIlroy 
when taking to the course on Sunday. The USA hold a lead of 9½ to 6½ 
pre-singles which, while not insurmountable, looks strong enough to provide the 
platform from which to reclaim the Ryder Cup. It would prove one of the great, 
comedy American collapses should they toss this one away.

Rory McIlroy v Patrick Reed to lead off Ryder Cup singles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/ryder-cup-singles-pairings> 
As the Northern Irishman battled desperately and brilliantly to keep Europe 
alive in this magnificent contest, the flow of abuse towards him grew. That 
crossed the line on occasion, to the point where McIlroy would logically have 
been involved in a psychological battle to retain composure. It only briefly 
wobbled during an afternoon period where adrenaline prevailed.

McIlroy should not be portrayed as a shrinking violet. He seemed to revel in 
elements of the attention bestowed upon him from a chunk of a lively, 
50,000-strong Minnesota crowd. McIlroy looked close to self-combusting on 
occasion, his fist pumps and shouts of joy alone quite the force of energy. The 
man who once dubbed the Ryder Cup an exhibition was right at the centre of that 
very thing. Whatever one’s view of the nature of that show, it was compelling 
viewing.

The 27-year-old was also a recurring bright spot for Europe on this second 
day, which closed with the USA holding a commanding advantage. In doing so, 
McIlroy conjured memories of Ian Poulter; so recently the man American golf 
fans loved to hate. With McIlroy, as was the case with Poulter, so much of this 
scenario resonated in brilliant on-course performance. “It fuelled me a lot,” 
said McIlroy. “The more they shouted, the better we played. I hope they shout 
at us all day tomorrow.”

McIlroy and Thomas Pieters, the rookie who excelled to the point where he was 
trusted for every session of this event, returned back-to-back Saturday wins. 
It was Pieters who holed out superbly on the 17th green, shortly after 5pm, for 
a 3&1 success over Brooks Koepka and Dustin Johnson. Earlier, McIlroy, in 
partnership with Pieters, had seen off Rickie Fowler and Phil Mickelson.

Ryder Cup: Moronic screams for a player to miss a putt have no place in golf | 
Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/01/ryder-cup-empty-heads-lager-atmosphere-fans-behaviour>
The trouble for Clarke, McIlroy et al is that the USA have a rocket-fuelled 
lead actor of their own. Patrick Reed was once derided for claims of upcoming 
greatness when the reality is he has the game to walk the walk. Reed has easily 
outplayed his only partner, Jordan Spieth, while absolutely revelling in the 
emotion of the occasion. Reed hooped, hollered, downed putts and landed iron 
shots like darts. How he has enjoyed the last laugh upon those who thought his 
insistence of being one of the world’s top five players was formed in cloud 
cuckoo land.

Reed provided Saturday’s marquee moment when he holed out for an eagle from 
the 6th fairway in an afternoon clash with Justin Rose and Henrik Stenson. The 
Americans later won that match by 2&1, Reed’s birdie putt at the 14th another 
key point just as Europe harboured hopes of a comeback.

An American repeat of the 4-0 foursomes whitewash of Friday was always 
unlikely and did not transpire. This time Europe prevailed in the format they 
have relished down the years, the late half won by Sergio García and Rafa 
Cabrera Bello against Reed and Spieth capping off the best match of this 
competition so far. The Spanish duo had been three down with four to play. Rose 
and Chris Wood defeated Zach Johnson and Jimmy Walker, with the sole American 
foursome success being delivered by Koepka and Brandt Snedeker.

At this lunchtime juncture, Clarke’s men had clawed their way back to the 
position of just one point behind. Following the debacle of Friday morning and 
scar tissue naturally prevalent in USA minds, this was a strong European 
position.

By close of play, the hosts had regained all momentum. McIlroy and Pieters 
were to prove the only winning European fourball pair. Given their foursome 
efforts, it seemed logical for Clarke to retain García and Cabrera Bello as a 
partnership. Instead, Martin Kaymer stepped in to pair with Garcia; Mickelson 
and Matt Kuchar swatted them aside, 2&1. Europe did not lead at any point in 
that game.

Danny Willett, once the recipient of the kind of treatment subsequently 
claimed by McIlroy, returned to the fray to play alongsideLee Westwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lee-westwood>. Whereas Clarke’s selection of 
Pieters as a wildcard has been fully backed up by the Belgian’s nerveless 
displays, Westwood’s involvement has not yet paid off.

Ryder Cup 2016: USA lead Europe 9½-6½ after day two fourballs – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/01/ryder-cup-2016-usa-lead-5-3-going-into-day-two-foursomes-live>
Westwood had missed three putts from kick-in range, the most costly of which 
arrived when the match was all square at the 17th. He took to the last green 
having played a sublime approach to 3ft, needing to covert for a half against 
JB Holmes and Ryan Moore. What happened next was as painful to watch as it was 
inevitable. As Westwood suffered, a penny for the thoughts of Russell Knox, 
overlooked by Clarke when the captain’s picks were announced. Westwood was 
taunted as he headed for the relative solace of the locker room, this surely 
one of his most wounding professional experiences.

When assessing this aggregate position, Clarke can, of course, draw upon 
Medinah. Four years ago, Europe proved their ability to laugh in the face of a 
supposed American procession. The vibe this time somehow feels different, as if 
Europe have been clinging on while searching desperately for the direction of 
travel as started in the late throes of Saturday, four years ago. McIlroy was 
pivotal to that; he is the name on everyone’s lips once more, even if his 
approach may be in vain.
 