
The law of life, death, taxes and Rory McIlroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> at the Earth course is no 
more. His consistency at the Dubai venue is such he held a scoring average of 
68 and had never carded over par until Thursday, when a 75 raised eyebrows. 
This was not supposed to happen.

There is an explanation for the 27-year-old’s start to the DP World Tour 
Championship. McIlroy, by his own admission, needed snookers to retain his 
European Tour order of merit title and there may have been a problem with 
mental focus.

McIlroy could have scrambled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/rory-mcilroy-too-proud-stubborn-putting-problem>
 closer to level par after lying four over but for missed opportunities on a 
three-hole stretch from the 11th tee. He is now afforded the rarity of an early 
tee time for day two. In the second match of Friday, McIlroy will be 
reacquainted with Andy Sullivan, which will evoke some memories of the joust 
between the pair at this tournament 12 months ago.

Rory McIlroy admits he was ‘too proud and too stubborn’ over putting problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/rory-mcilroy-too-proud-stubborn-putting-problem>
McIlroy was at least spared questioning as to where precisely the first 18 
holes had gone astray, instead having to fulfil the demands of anti-doping 
control. There can be no complaint about the European Tour’s drug testers 
focusing only on those who laugh in the face of scorecards.

Lee Westwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lee-westwood> summoned an 
element of annoyance from his late World Cup rejection to produce a first round 
of 66, which placed him a shot clear of Nicolas Colsaerts and Julien Quesne at 
the top of the leaderboard.

The peculiar nuances of the World Cup meant that when Danny Willett announced 
his withdrawal last week, the top-ranked English player willing to participate 
could pick his partner. Chris Wood was left to make the call, with which he 
turned to Sullivan and scuppered Westwood’s plans for the tournament in 
Melbourne from 24 to 27 November.

“I have never played in the World Cup so I was really looking forward to it,” 
Westwood said. “Danny asked me in August. I’m a little bit disappointed but 
everybody has to do certain things for reasons and normally their own in this 
game. I understand.”

Only half a smile followed as he added: “I needed to be higher in the world 
rankings to pick my partner. Chris probably shouldn’t be expecting a pick if I 
am playing in the World Cup. It’s up to him to pick whoever he wants. He gets 
on with Sully and Sully is a good player. They will have a chance.

“I can understand him picking a mate and he’s picked a very good player. I 
think it’s probably more to do with the rules than anything. I think the week 
before somebody is meant to go down there is a little late to say: ‘No, you’re 
not playing.’”

Westwood’s aspirations for the task in hand are boosted by his win here in 
2009. The 43-year-old’s first-round efforts were even more praise worthy given 
the absence of his long-time caddie, Billy Foster, who has been consigned to 
home because of a knee injury. Ken Herring, normally the bag man for Marc 
Warren, has stepped in.

“I probably have to do more, think a little bit more,” Westwood said. “Billy 
normally thinks for me, which is probably a good thing. A different caddie 
doesn’t know my game. He’s only had one round on the bag in the pro-am on 
Tuesday and I wasn’t particularly sharp then. He’s sort of making it up as he 
goes along but I have full confidence in him.”

Henrik Stenson, the leader of the order of merit going into this final 
tournament of the season, signed for a level-par 72. “I played very average,” 
the Open champion said.

Willett, the player in closest pursuit of Stenson, fared a stroke better. 
Sergio García was six under par after 14 holes but a double-bogey on the 16th 
meant the Spaniard had to settle for a 68 along with Francesco Molinari and 
Joost Luiten.
 