
Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> is experienced 
enough to recognise the territory. He has also developed a useful capacity to 
ignore what he regards as unnecessary, if incessant, commentary.

The worst-case scenario is: a slow start to 2017 that leaves McIlroy out of 
sorts before his quest for the holy grail at the Masters in April. The 
explanation for this scene can be predicted, that an equipment switch – as 
triggered by Nike’s withdrawal from the market – will set back McIlroy. Just do 
not expect the man himself to pay much attention.

“People have even said once I changed from a Nike putter to a Scotty Cameron 
in September: ‘That’s why he is putting better again,’” McIlroy says. “That 
obviously wasn’t the case. I could have been putting with whatever; I’d done 
really good work with [putting coach] Phil Kenyon on my stroke and that’s what 
turned me into at least abetter putter than I was in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/rory-mcilroy-us-pga-phil-mickelson>
. So it is all just noise that’s around you. I don’t plan on playing badly 
going into next year so hopefully none of that [comment] happens anyway.”

Rory McIlroy laments ‘pathetic’ putting after early exit from US PGA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/rory-mcilroy-us-pga-phil-mickelson>
Georgia will inevitably already be on McIlroy’s mind. He will arrive at the 
Masters having played in at least seven tournaments in what represents an 
interesting alteration to the buildup for the first major of the year. McIlroy 
is surely destined to don at least one Green Jacket but the maiden success has 
naturally been the toughest to claim.

For those who read plenty into body language and golfing trends, the odds 
should be in favour of McIlroy re-establishing himself as the best player in 
the world next year. Injury, the Ryder Cup and the saga relating to the Olympic 
Games are pertinent factors in his 2016. But another difficult year, 2013, 
offered McIlroy useful experience, given the switch to Nike that prompted a 
longer transition than the outside world was willing to accept.

“Definitely,” says the world No2 in response to whether 2013 was a useful 
learning curve. “I was prepared to say: ‘OK I will take the first three or six 
months of the year and if I struggle, I struggle.’ I just needed to find what 
was right for me.

“One of the great things I’ve learned over the years is I can take a bigger 
picture of things. Say I’m on tour for the next 15-20 years, three to six 
months isn’t really that much time when you can reap the benefits. As I alluded 
to over the past few weeks everyone wants everything now but if you can afford 
yourself the chance to look into the future and say: ‘What will benefit me down 
the line?’ then there is value in doing it that way.”

McIlroy will spend a week in Dubai next month testing equipment. He has 
already started using TaylorMade woods and it would not be the end of the world 
if Nike irons remain in his bag for the new season.

The four-times major winner says: “That could happen. I have two more sets of 
these irons so they will last me for at least five years. I go through about a 
set every year and a half. I really like this ball but I will test what’s out 
there. Nike’s chief golf ball engineer has gone to Callaway so I will test a 
few of those because I know how good he is. The ball he made for me now is 
really good.

“The other stuff? A putter is a putter, I have switched them throughout a 
season. Wedges are something you have to get a bit used to but for me it is 
just a matter of not going into 2017 confused. I don’t want that. I just want 
to get what I don’t like out of the way, have sets of things I like and go from 
there.

“Basically my plan for the week in December is more to eliminate the stuff 
that I don’t like. There is actually no reason for me to change at the minute. 
I am happy with everything in my bag, so it is just a case of looking at stuff 
and maybe saying: ‘This set of irons is better than what I’m using.’ If I don’t 
find anything that is then I’ll keep what I have. The same applies to the ball, 
the wedges, the putter. It is really just for me to get a feel for what is out 
there.”

McIlroy’s relaxed frame of mind is telling. It may serve as notice of what is 
to come.
 