
Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> insisted the 
European team mood is “buoyant” after an afternoon Ryder Cup recovery took 
Darren Clarke’s men from a morning deficit of 4-0 to 5-3 by close of play on 
day one at Hazeltine. McIlroy, who celebrated in emphatic style after 
converting an eagle putt on the 16th green to seal a third point for Europe, 
admitted to being inspired in part by a “hostile” home crowd.

A clean sweep of the morning foursomes meant Europe needed something special 
in the second session and they duly delivered it. McIlroy and Thomas Pieters 
defeated Dustin Johnson and Matt Kuchar, Sergio García and Rafa Cabrera Bello 
saw off JB Holmes and Ryan Moore after Justin Rose and Henrik Stenson had 
atoned for an earlier defeat by Jordan Spieth and Patrick Reed. It was McIlroy 
who seemed to capture reinvigorated European sentiment.

Rory McIlroy brings Europe’s stirring Ryder Cup comeback against USA to life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/ryder-cup-europe-usa-5-3-rory-mcilroy>
“As you could probably imagine, the mood in the team room just there was quite 
buoyant and we definitely feel like there was a shift in momentum this 
afternoon,” said McIlroy. “Hopefully we can carry that into tomorrow morning.”

McIlroy’s celebration – he bowed to the notably partisan home crowd – was 
pre-meditated. “I bowed to them, said, ‘You’re welcome for the show’ and we 
move on,” added the four-times major winner.

“Look, it’s a hostile environment out there and I just want everyone that’s 
watching out there to know how much this means to us, how much it means to me 
personally and obviously us as a team.

“We’re not going down without a fight. It was four-zip after the morning. 
We’ve pulled it back a good bit and we plan to pull it back even further going 
into tomorrow.

“It’s a hostile environment that the people out there don’t want you to hole a 
putt. They don’t want you to hit a good shot. I think when you do hole a putt 
or hit a good shot, it just makes it that much more satisfying.

Danny Willett gets what he expected on Ryder Cup debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/danny-willett-gets-what-expected-ryder-cup>
“We’re obviously not fazed by anything that is said by the crowd and not fazed 
by anything that the US team throws at us. We were four-nil down going into 
this afternoon and I thought the whole team showed a lot of heart out there.

“We played for each other. We went out there with the mind-set of, if we could 
just win this session somehow, we would be right back in it. I wanted to put an 
exclamation point on the end of that session and thankfully I was able to do 
that for my team-mates.”

Darren Clarke said he was “extremely proud” of his team’s fourball display. 
Europe’s captain added: “They showed tremendous bravery and heart and desire to 
go out and play the way they have done this afternoon.”

Davis Love III, Clarke’s opposite number, conceded different emotion. “It was 
a long day, frustrating a little bit to not come out a little bit further 
ahead. I know Darren is happy with the momentum.”
 