
Robert Kitson

Who will win? New Zealand by five points

Why? The lessons of the 2011 final will do the All Blacks no harm. They have 
been beaten only three times in the intervening four years and have conceded 
only four tries at this tournament. Australia are a credit to their coaching 
team but they have had to expend a lot of energy to get this far.

Key player? Bernard Foley. The breakdown battle is clearly crucial but so is 
Dan Carter’s opposite number. If his goal-kicking wobbles, so will the 
Wallabies.

New Zealand’s Dan Carter plans triumphant World Cup sign-off for stellar career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/30/dan-carter-new-zealand-rugby-world-cup>
Paul Rees

Who will win? Australia by enough.

Why? Someone has to go for them. They have never lost a World Cup match on 
British and Irish soil, they know they can beat the All Blacks, they have been 
the most effective team at the breakdown this tournament and Michael Cheika 
keeps them ravenous.

Key player? All of them but especially Bernard Foley, a perceived weakness six 
weeks ago who has been their strength.

Mike Averis

Who will win? New Zealand by five

Why? Only one defeat in their past 12 games against Australia says it all. The 
All Blacks have been the best for a decade and more; and choking is a thing of 
their past. Then there is the occasion with Richie McCaw, Dan Carter et al 
heading off to Test retirement.

Key player Scott Sio. He plays but is he fit? Ditto Israel Folau

Michael Aylwin

Who will win? New Zealand by 13

Why? They have played a blinder so far. They were calm in beating a superb 
Argentina, then managed expectations with a series of ho-hum outings against 
lesser sides. They smashed France and saw off the Springboks in the rain. The 
weather is set fair for Saturday, and there is no prospect of complacency 
against a side who have beaten them already this year. As long as they do not 
choke …

Key player Dan Carter. The greatest player never to have won a World Cup 
final. He will want to change that. Now is his time.
 