
Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> swooped in 
with an £11.2bn offer to take full control of the satellite broadcaster Sky, 
five years after he was forced to abandon a similar deal amid public revulsion 
over the phone-hacking scandal.


The media mogul’s 21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox> film and television group 
said it had reached an agreement in principle to buy Sky, which would bring 
together the company behind Fox News with the largest pay-TV broadcaster in 
Britain to create the most powerful media group in the UK.

Labour and Liberal Democrat politicians said the government had to intervene 
and demanded an inquiry on the grounds of public interest. Fox owns the 
controversial rightwing Fox News network in the US, while Sky News is a 
politically neutral service in competition with the BBC and ITV news.


The Sky takeover deal – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/the-sky-takeover-deal-all-you-need-to-know>
Completing the deal, which values all of Sky at £18.5bn, would represent a 
long-held ambition for Murdoch and his son James, the chief executive of 21st 
Century Fox. Murdoch already owns 39% of Sky but was forced to abandon an 
attempt to take full control in 2011 after it emerged that journalists at the 
News of the World had hacked the phone of the murdered teenager Milly Dowler.

If the negotiations between the two companies lead to a definitive takeover 
offer being accepted, competition authorities must be notified and the 
secretary of state for culture, media and sport, Karen Bradley, will have to 
decide whether to ask the media regulator, Ofcom, to carry out a public 
interest test.

Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader and shadow culture secretary, warned of the 
“likely concentration of further media power in the hands of a single company” 
and said it would be incumbent on Ofcom and other competition authorities to 
ensure media plurality was upheld in the UK if the takeover proceeded.

“The bid must also be judged on its likely impact on the UK news market and 
the provision of robust and independent journalism,” he said.

Vince Cable, the former Lib Dem business secretary, said the proposed takeover 
was a test of the government’s independence from large media owners. When Cable 
was in government he referred Murdoch’s previous bid to a public interest test 
in 2010. He said on Friday that the market situation had not changed since.


“The level of plurality in UK media has remained comparable since I referred a 
similar takeover bid to the competitions authorities in 2010. Nothing seems to 
have materially changed and if this takeover was to go ahead then there would 
be similar concerns raised about media plurality in the UK,” he said.


“The way Theresa May’s government deals with this is a test of their 
independence from the influence of large proprietors. The consultation that has 
been launched on the implementation of Leveson would suggest there is a 
tendency for some to bow to the power of media giants – this must not be the 
case.”

If the government does refer the deal to Ofcom, company insiders say 21st 
Century Fox believes it is in a better position to clear any regulatory hurdles 
than Murdoch’s previous bid. This, they say, is because the mogul’s newspapers, 
including the Sun and the Times, have been spun off into a separate company, 
News Corp, since the hacking scandal. They also argue that the UK media 
landscape has become more fragmented.

Rupert Murdoch founded Sky in 1989 but after an initial financial crisis, the 
company was merged with rival satellite broadcaster BSB a year later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/from-launch-to-takeover-rupert-murdoch-and-sky>
. Since then the media mogul has retained a substantial stake, but never 
controlled a majority of its shares.

When Cable announced the public interest test for their 2011 bid, the Murdochs 
had agreed to spin off Sky News into a company with an independent editorial 
board. But after it emerged that News of the World journalists had hacked into 
Dowler’s phone, Conservative, Labour and Lib Dem politicians agreed that a 
takeover could not proceed and the Murdochs withdrew.


Claire Enders, a media analyst, said a takeover bid had been inevitable since 
Brexit, because the falling pound meant Sky was far cheaper to a US company 
paying in dollars.


Why is Murdoch taking over Sky now? Blame Brexit and Netflix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/dec/09/murdoch-taking-over-sky-blame-brexit-and-netflix-sterling-21st-century-fox>
She said she did not believe Bradley would refer the bid to Ofcom on public 
interest grounds because the market and company structure had changed. “The 
circulation of the newspapers – now part of an entirely separate company – have 
dropped drastically since 2011.”

The European commission, which cleared the previous bids, is also likely to 
look at the new deal. In 2014, Sky took full control of Sky-branded services in 
Germany, Austria and Italy, meaning any UK takeover has a European dimension 
that did not exist before.

The offer proposed by Fox is priced at £10.75 of cash per share, representing 
a premium of 40% to Sky’s closing price on 6 December, the last business day 
before the initial proposal had been received from the US company. Immediately 
after the news of the proposed deal was announced on the London Stock Exchange, 
shares in Sky soared nearly 30% to £10.26.

Justifying the planned takeover, 21st Century Fox said: “In the past several 
years, 21st Century Fox has consistently stated that its existing 39.1% stake 
in Sky is not a natural end position.

“A proposed transaction between 21st Century Fox and Sky would bring together 
21st Century Fox’s global content business with Sky’s world-class 
direct-to-consumer capabilities, which have made it the number one premium 
pay-TV provider in all its markets.

“It would also enhance Sky’s leading position in entertainment and sport, and 
reinforce the UK’s standing as a top global hub for content generation and 
technological innovation.”
 