
Scotland’s Russell Knox vowed to take an aggressive approach as he tries to 
overhaul Japan’s Hideki Matsuyama and make a successful title defence in the 
HSBC Champions in Shanghai.

Knox trails the in-form Matsuyama by three shots heading into the final round, 
aiming to become only the second player after Tiger Woods toretain a World Golf 
Championships title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/08/russell-knox-wins-wgc-hsbc-champions-shanghai-golf>
.

Matsuyama, who is a career-high No10 in the world after winning the Japan Open 
a fortnight ago and finishing second in Malaysia last week, made a bogey-free 
68 to finish 17 under par, with Knox recording five birdies and one bogey in 
his 68. The American Daniel Berger is a shot behind Knox after a third round of 
67, with Italy’s Francesco Molinari and the American Bill Haas another stroke 
adrift on 12 under.

“I’m not going to give up my title without a big fight,” Knox said. “I look 
forward to every minute tomorrow and see what happens. The way Hideki played 
today, he’s probably going to play similar tomorrow. I’m going to have to be 
foot down, be aggressive and try and catch him. I’m thrilled to be in this 
position.

“I’ll probably have to play close to the round of my life. I’m going to have 
to play excellent golf, be patient and hole some putts. It’s going to be 
difficult but I can’t wait for it.”

Knox, who was inches away from a hole-in-one on the 4th, was two behind 
Matsuyama when he picked up another shot on the 13th, only to find water with 
his approach to the par-five 14th as Matsuyama hit the green in two. A two- or 
three-shot swing looked certain and Matsuyama duly two-putted from long range 
for birdie, but Knox holed from 25ft for an unlikely par and birdied the next 
for good measure.

“After hitting it in the water on 14, to make a massive putt for par was 
huge,” the 31-year-old from Inverness said. “And then of course I birdied the 
next, which was a massive momentum change. Those little moments are what add up 
in a tournament.”

Knox was unable to find any more birdies on the closing stretch and Matsuyama 
two-putted the 18th for a closing birdie to extend his lead as he looks to 
become the first Japanese player to win a WGC event.

“The first two days, making lots of birdies, it’s a lot of fun,” the 
24-year-old said. “But today, when you’re in a position to win, playing smart 
and making no bogeys was very satisfying to me.

“Everyone is so good. I know I’m going to have to make some birdies. But I 
think the key for tomorrow’s round will be not making any bogeys.”

Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> was within four 
shots of the lead when he produced a brilliant recovery shot on the par-five 
8th to set up his third birdie of the day, but the world No3 made bogeys on the 
11th, 12th and 15th to slip down the leaderboard.

Birdies on the 16th and 18th repaired some of the damage and gave McIlroy a 
round of 70, but that left the Northern Irishman eight shots off the lead.

Thomas Pieters, Shane Lowry, Xinjun Zhang, Henrik Stenson and Matt Kuchar were 
alongside McIlroy on nine under, with Kuchar’s 68 including a hole-in-one on 
the 17th. A car had been on offer for an ace if the hole measured more than 200 
yards, but the tee had been moved forward to make it 193.

“My caddie alerted me so I literally found out a minute before my shot,” 
Kuchar said. “I guess the way to describe it is the saddest hole-in-one ever, 
in that I knew I just made a hole-in-one and I was teased by this beautiful car 
sitting there that is not to be mine.

“We all had a good laugh about it so it wasn’t too bad. Henrik came up and 
said, ‘It’s my fault, the back tee box was not in very good shape.’ He was the 
one that asked for the tees to be moved forward and I guess that made the hole 
far too easy. So yeah, he owes me something.” 
 