
It would represent exaggeration to suggest comments emanating from the USA 
relating to both the ability of their team and weakness of Europe have stirred 
the visitors into a frenzy. Rather, Rory McIlroy and Sergio García have 
endorsed the sense that their team are rather enjoying the rhetoric ofDavis 
Love III <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/davis-love-iii> and others. Darren 
Clarke issued a more pointed reply to American bullishness on Tuesday.

Love, the USA captain, caused a stir by suggesting he will preside this week 
over “the best golf team maybe ever assembled”. Johnny Miller, now a respected 
analyst and a two-time major champion as well as aRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> player, used even stronger 
language to analyse Europe. “I do believe the Euros have got, at least on 
paper, the worst team they’ve had in many years,” he said. “I think this is the 
year not only could the US win, they could win by like five points.”

Ryder Cup 2016: Tiger Woods forgets he is not in the team at USA photocall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/tiger-woods-ryder-cup-hazeltine> 
This sentiment has not gone unnoticed. “Yeah, they are pretty much motivating 
factors,” García said. “You know what they say opinions are like, we all have 
one. So everybody’s allowed to have their own opinion, and that’s what they 
think, and that’s great for them. But we know what we have and that’s the most 
important thing for us. You don’t win Ryder Cups with your mouth. You win them 
out there on the golf course. So that’s what we’ll see, which team is better.”

Clarke wore a smile when pressed on the combined thoughts of Love and Miller. 
Still, his message was clear when asked whether he would use the words as 
motivation. “I don’t need to,” the Northern Irishman said. “The guys have all 
seen everything that’s been said. But in terms of that, we have the Masters 
champion, we have the Open champion, we have the Olympic champion and we have 
the FedEx Cup champion.

“You combine that with all the experience and with all of the rest of the team 
and the way those guys have played, I don’t really need to respond to that. I 
think I’ve got full confidence in our team.”

McIlroy took a more subtle but similarly effective approach when providing an 
assessment of what lies ahead. “I don’t think it’s hard for us to find 
motivation because anywhere you look, whether it be the sea of red you see on 
the golf course or the comments that are made in the media by the US team or by 
the captain, that gives us so much motivation already,” he said.

“Whenever we are going up against one of the greatest teams ever assembled, 
that’s motivation enough, just to say, how good a victory would this be if we 
go out and beat these guys on their home soil?

“Look, they are a very, very strong team. But at the same time, we have so 
many strong players. And if you look at worldwide wins this year, Europe have 
12, America have 10. So our team is good. Our team is more than ready to handle 
the occasion, to handle what we need to do.

“If you look at us as a whole, Ryder Cup appearances, we’ve got just as much 
experience on our team as they do. I think the big thing for us is we are 
playing away from home, and it’s just a matter of battling that 13th man and 
trying to keep the crowd as quiet as we possibly can.”

McIlroy knows only Ryder Cup good times. His three appearances have all 
coincided with European victories. “We want it so badly but I think there comes 
a point where you maybe try a little too hard,” the four-time major champion 
said.

“As much as we talk about our blueprint in Europe, it’s not rocket science. 
We’re not thinking about it too much. All the guys get on pretty well together. 
Obviously you’ve got to match game styles for the team format and you have to 
match personalities as well. I think that’s the big thing and we’ve been able 
to do that.

“I think, as well, the culture of the European Tour; we’ve got rookies on the 
team that play primarily in Europe. The culture of the European Tour is just a 
little bit different in terms of guys socialise a little bit more with each 
other.

“I know the American team have started to do that. Obviously you see Rickie 
[Fowler], Jordan [Spieth], and Phil [Mickelson] and these guys playing. Brooks 
Koepka, Dustin Johnson, they have all spent quite a lot of time together, 
obviously for this reason. And you’ve got Jack Nicklaus inviting them all over 
to his house for dinner and trying to sort of really bond the team together, 
which I think is a great thing for them.

“But we’ve never really needed to do that. That’s always just been a natural 
fit for us and a natural thing to do. So I think sometimes you can ‘over-team’ 
it a little bit and try too hard instead of it just happening naturally.”
 