
Jordan shows colours again 

Michael Jordan’s place as a Ryder Cup vice-captain was one of the more 
bizarre, and unsuccessful, attempts by the USA in recent times to reverse 
fortunes. Jordan no longer occupies such a berth but remains a golf fanatic who 
is regularly seen playing at the Bears Club in Florida. Jordan also remains 
captivated by theRyder Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup>, it 
seems. He was back on property at Hazeltine on Friday, bedecked in American 
colours and a bucket hat but in the relatively cheap seats of a corporate area. 
Passers-by could not exactly miss him.

Ryder Cup 2016: USA 5-1 Europe, day one fourballs – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/30/ryder-cup-2016-usa-v-europe-day-one-foursomes-live>
García appears to go it alone 

Europe were facing a tough enough challenge in on Friday afternoon’s fourball 
session without the unwitting intervention of the official Ryder Cup app. 
There, timings were initially posted when showingSergio García 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sergio-garcia> playing on his own against JB 
Holmes and Ryan Moore at 12.45. The matter was thankfully resolved before his 
Spanish compatriot Rafa Cabrera Bello had time to take offence.

Irishman Elliott in USA ranks 

There is a little-known European participant in this week’s USA team. Ricky 
Elliott, the caddie for Brooks Koepka, hails from Northern Ireland and is a 
lifelong friend of Graeme McDowell. Elliott has forged a successful partnership 
with Koepka, whose road to the Ryder Cup is worthy of immense credit given a 
season hampered by injury. “I’ve spent half my life over here,” Elliott 
explains. “You’re still always from where you’re from but I’m pleased as punch 
to be an American citizen.”

Prince popular on playlist 

The music of local hero Prince has been omnipresent at this Ryder Cup: 
overheard in the merchandise tent, performed by the Minnesota National Guard 
34th Infantry Division Red Devils Band at Thursday’s opening ceremony and even 
deployed on television as the bumper music for Sky Sports’ coverage. But the 
ongoing tribute reached a high note early on Friday morning when Let’s Go Crazy 
blared from the loudspeakers by the opening tee as the first playing group went 
through their final preparations, whipping the thousands of fans that packed 
the grandstands into a frenzy amid chants of “U-S-A! U-S-A!” and “I believe 
that we will win!” that could probably be heard from Paisley Park, the late 
musician’s estate and studio located only minutes away and open for tours as of 
next week.

Mickelson hits right note 

“Lefty” went off-brand early on Friday morning when Phil Mickelson’s drive off 
the 6th tee drifted out of bounds and Rickie Fowler’s re-tee ended up in the 
rough against a fence. That forced Mickelson to invert a wedge and take the 
shot right-handed. The ball wound up trickling through a fan’s legs and the 
American pair would concede the hole, but they scored birdies to win the next 
three en route to a stirring fightback that sealed the US team’s morning sweep.

Fan makes most of 15 minutes 

A spectator named David Johnson provided one of the week’s lighter stories on 
Thursday whenhe was pulled from the crowd to attempt a 12ft putt on a $100 bet 
from Justin Rose and Henrik Stenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/30/ryder-cup-heckler-makes-putt-to-win-100-bet-video>
, sinking the putt and punctuating the moment with a hearty fist pump. On 
Friday the North Dakotan was back on the grounds at Hazeltine – this time 
signing autographs and posing for photographs with fans. Milk it while you can.
 