
Finding appropriate context or comparison for the behaviour of spectators at a 
Ryder Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> is not particularly easy.

Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> has no team equivalent of 
similar profile. Chanting or cat-calling does not even approach the territory 
of football matches. If the sense of tribal atmosphere was removed from the 
galleries completely, the definition of the Ryder Cup would be damaged. What we 
have witnessed over two fiercely competitive days at Hazeltine has not 
reflected the routinely nasty scenario of Brookline in 1999.

Nonetheless, so much of what has occurred outside the ropes at this event and 
therefore been broadcast to a watching world has not proven particularly 
tasteful. Empty heads and full cans of lager are not a particularly useful 
combination. PJ Willett’s crazily over-the-top and vitriolic sentiments 
pre-tournament hardly helped the mood.

Ryder Cup 2016: USA lead Europe 6½-5½, day two fourballs – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/01/ryder-cup-2016-usa-lead-5-3-going-into-day-two-foursomes-live>
A minority of US golf fans may not be remotely offensive but they are 
permanently unfunny. Example A: “Hey Danny [Willett], I’ve got your brother in 
a headlock.” Rory McIlroy was subjected to a rendition of “Sweet Caroline” when 
addressing a putt on the 9th green on Friday afternoon. This was a reference to 
his former fiancee, rather than Northern Ireland’s march to Euro 2016.

Golf should not be ashamed of the standards it prides itself on, historical 
prejudice and common snootiness aside. Any discipline that teaches common 
decency, sportsmanship and manners has value beyond athleticism. So here lies 
the Hazeltine issue: the shouting for a ball to enter water hazard or the huge 
scale of cheering when it does. “Get in the woods” became a Saturday morning 
favourite.

Likewise, the moronic screams for a player to miss a putt before he has hit it 
should not be deemed acceptable even in a partisan sporting environment. At 
amateur level, spectators or team members behaving like that would run the risk 
of either causing players to walk off the course or resorting to physical 
violence involving a five-iron. Backing one team is fine, openly wishing ill on 
another not so.

This is not a scene reserved for the Ryder Cup. The treatment of Sergio García 
at the 2015 Players Championship made headlines when the reality is this player 
is commonly subjected to abuse that he chooses to keep quiet about.

Colin Montgomerie, who suffered more than most on this side of the pond, was 
critical of the Hazeltine atmosphere on Saturday. Players have had to spend far 
too much time telling spectators to be quiet. McIlroy, who had earlier pointed 
to a “hostile” environment, even had security remove one after unacceptable 
abuse on the approach to the 8th tee. One gets the impression Europe would 
cherish success even more than normal on account of that backdrop.
 