
Sam Allardyce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sam-allardyce> has called 
on the Football Association to expedite its decision on whether he will face 
disciplinary action over the newspaper sting that led to his departure from the 
England manager’s job after being told he would not be the subject of a police 
investigation.

The City of London police revealed on Friday that it would investigate a 
“single suspected offence of bribery” after reviewing material gathered by the
Daily Telegraph <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> as part of 
an investigation into football corruption, which made allegations against a 
number of managers.

“Detectives from the City of London Police Economic Crime Directorate have 
reviewed material gathered by a recent Daily Telegraph investigation into 
suspected corruption in football,” it said in a statement. “This review of the 
material has concluded and the decision has been taken to begin a criminal 
investigation into a single suspected offence of bribery.”

Having received written confirmation that he would not face a police 
investigation, Allardyce said he welcomed the decision. “I was always confident 
that this would be the case as there was no evidence against me. I now ask that 
the Football Association deals with this matter as quickly as possible,” said 
the 62-year-old, whose England managerial reignlasted one match and 67 days 
after he was caught up in the sting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
. “I would like to thank my friends and family who have stood by me during this 
difficult period. The position of England head coach is the pinnacle of any 
English manager’s career and it was my dream job.”

He added: “While I am sad that my tenure came to an end early, I am 
nonetheless proud to have been chosen to manage the England football team and 
hope that today’s confirmation from the police will give me the opportunity to 
move on.”

The FA has said it may open disciplinary proceedings against Allardyce, with 
whom it agreed a payoff of about £1m, and others implicated but only once it 
has reviewed the Telegraph’s material in full. That cannot happen until it is 
returned to the newspaper by the City of London police. It is unclear whether 
that will happen until it has finished its investigation into the single charge 
of bribery referred to in its statement.

The FA had said it had to part company with Allardyce because sticking by Roy 
Hodgson’s successor would have made the governing body’s position as the game’s 
regulator untenable.

“Every time there was a marginal call we judged we would have Sam Allardyce 
thrown back at us every time. The England job is the most important thing 
within the FA remit but the FA covers many other things too and I appreciate it 
probably has disproportionate importance but we just thought our ability to 
operate was compromised, it was going to be a drag on us for a considerable 
period of time,” said the chief executive, Martin Glenn shortly afterwards.

“It was the hard decision not the easy decision but we judged weighing 
everything up that was the right thing to do.”

It was reported that Allardyce had offered advice on how to circumvent rules 
on third-party ownership on the covert film but the FA strategy director, 
Robert Sullivan, later confirmed before a parliamentary inquiry that was not 
the case.
 