
If it is possible to pull a 6ft 4in rabbit from a hat that is what the 
Scotland coach, Vern Cotter, has managed, selecting a lock forward for the 
World Cup who has not played in any of the three warm-up games so far and was 
not even part of the extended squad from which the final 31 were chosen.

Add the omission of a Kiwi ever present in Scotland’s Six Nations campaign 
plus a South African who will not qualify to play for his new country until 
after the World Cup kicks off and Cotter had plenty of surprises when he 
announced his squad at Edinburgh University’s Old College Quad.

On Saturday, after a comfortable defeat of Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/scotland-italy-rugby-world-cup-warm-up-match-report>
, the coach admitted to doubts about his final 31 and even wondered aloud how 
many locks he might take. However, when Cotter said he did not know whether to 
pick three or four, few assumed he was even thinking about Tim Swinson, who 
that day had just played for Glasgow against Canada in Nova Scotia.

Swinson, who has a degree in political science and is the cousin of Jo 
Swinson, the former Lib Dem MP for East Dunbartonshire, has played 12 times for 
Scotland, coming off the bench in five of those games including thepoor 
performance against Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/21/scotland-ireland-six-nations-match-report>
 which completed the Scottish Six Nations whitewash. He did appear in the 
46-strong squad announced in June but, having failed to make the game against 
Ireland or either match against Italy and being left off the list of 40 from 
which the final cut was to be made while mentioned as having left camp, there 
were few advocating his call-up.

The other surprise was the demise of Blair Cowan, the London Irish Kiwi 
flanker who was thought to have withstood a late challenge from John Barclay 
until Cotter announced that both were out and that he was going with a back-row 
brigade which included John Hardie, another Kiwi who arrived in Scotland only 
five weeks ago.

The Highlander is not attached to a northern hemisphere club, is on a 
short-term contract with the SRU for the duration of the World Cup, and has 
played only 57 minutes of Test rugby. His preferment over the popular Barclay 
is sure to bring rumblings about kilted Kiwis and possibly more besides.

When Cotter tried to parachute Hugh Blake into his Six Nations squad before he 
had played for Glasgow it prompted an on-line petition while the former 
Scotland and Lions prop Peter Wright tweeted: “Who Blake?!!”

As it is, after one cap, Blake also failed to make the cut. There is, though, 
a back-row place for Josh Strauss, the South African, who does not qualify by 
residence until four days before Scotland start their World Cup against Japan 
at Kingsholm in Gloucester. Strauss, at the heart of Glasgow’s campaign to 
become Celtic champions, was another stretching his legs alongside Swinson in 
Halifax.

Scotland 48-7 Italy | Rugby World Cup warm-up match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/scotland-italy-rugby-world-cup-warm-up-match-report>
World Rugby has already warned that it intends to review the three-year 
residency rule which also allowed Willem Nel, from Loeriesfontein, to win two 
Scottish caps in the past fortnight, make the squad and probably be 
first-choice tighthead prop when he meets his former countrymen at St James’ 
Park, Newcastle, on 3 October.

Elsewhere there were few surprises with wings Sean Lamont and Tim Visser 
making the 31 after scoring two tries apiece last Saturday, while neither 
Ruaridh Jackson nor Greig Tonks made the slot to understudy both full-back and 
fly-half when Sean Maitland was declared fit. The medics also passed the wing 
Tommy Seymour, but time has run out for the centre Alex Dunbar.
 