
When others recognize you being present in a world of wonder, you feel the joy 
of existence. That’s why we take selfies. They are pixelated bits of confection 
to remind us that we are all interconnected, no matter how we try to tear each 
other apart.


Our societies celebrate a singular definition of beauty to the exclusion of 
others. I think of this when I see stray posts of young women of color – black 
girls, dark skin girls – sharing their carefree moments, perfect and imperfect. 
Resolution with dark skin in dark light still is a challenge for smartphone 
cameras, yet I adore how adaptive and inventive we are with that limitation.


We fiddle with Instagram filters, use other photo apps to adjust light curves 
values that render us magical, mysterious – the center in our own stories – 
with beauty, drama, and complexity. These photo apps are teaching us to see 
ourselves anew and across multiple situations. While the mainstream may not yet 
reflect a wide, true and constructed representation of people of color, we’re 
creating space for that existence in the cyber world. We’re cultivating a 
vernacular to understand our images beyond stilted paradigms.


I’d imagine that’s what over a billion posts under the hashtag “selfie” on 
Instagram show. There’s community in this generation selfies. In the last four 
years, we’ve witnessed an explosion of shareable images chronicling our highs, 
lows and sillies alone or standing with others. We’ve seen how communal selfies 
can be. It’s a misnomer to describe this act with the prefix self – the group 
self portrait is about so much more than just the individual.

As a photographer, I’m camera shy. I hid behind the camera for so many years, 
documenting moments between friends and family, before I realized that I was 
missing from the picture. The first selfie I ever took was in the exotic nation 
of England in 2002. I was sitting on the side of the Thames in Southwark after 
a resplendent afternoon, wandering the galleries of London’s Tate Modern. I 
turned the analogue camera on myself and adjusted the focus in reverse. I would 
have to wait until I processed the film in a rented darkroom lab to finally see 
the results.


It would be years later before I’d embrace digital cameras. One of my earliest 
digital selfie shots was taken in the forest foothills of the Himalayas. 
Surrounded by rolling clouds, I wanted to locate myself in the immense beauty, 
and capture myself Mona Lisa smizing.

Narcissus, certainly, would relish in the era of selfies had he survived the 
drowning. And Narcissus’ fate will always remain cautionary parable. There are 
limits to self love before it morphs into self absorption or worse.


Still, Rembrandt’s self portraits are as narrative as they are navel gazing. A 
hyper heightened sense of self emerges in them. I’m grateful they exist. Van 
Gogh, in his wild brush strokes, rendered himself imperfect and human, beyond 
vanity. Frida Kahlo’s self portraiture chronicled complex feminine interiority. 
Frida holding Frida’s hand. Frida’s heart connected to Frida’s heart. So 
beautiful and painful, Kahlo’s self portraits explain the passing moments of 
joy, pain, solitude and self love that I’d never be able to articulate.

I also think of Vivian Maier, a reclusive Chicago nanny whose vast photo 
archive was uncovered in a fluke by a real estate broker turned filmmaker. She 
took countless self portraits during her wanderings in the 1950s and1960s. They 
are compelling images – a salvo to a curious mind. Maier was cataloging her 
world. Her fierce glare in some photos fascinate, they are guileless and 
penetrating.

When I think of what led me to photograph self portraits, it started out with 
a benign desire to capture happy, silly moments. Later, it evolved to idle 
curiosity, an adventurous desire to see every incarnation of myself living and 
engaging in the world with silly faces and inspired looks. My own movie. I was 
feeling myself. I could do what I felt most photographers could not do: I could 
capture myself as how I saw myself.

 