
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
is pressing ahead with legislation to overhaul Senate voting laws, arguing it 
will empower citizens to make their own choices despite protests from numerous 
crossbench senators who feel they will be disadvantaged.

The proposals stem from a report by the parliament’s joint standing committee 
on electoral matters 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Electoral_Matters/2013_General_Election/Interim_Report>
, which raised concerns about micro-parties “gaming” the Senate voting system 
through elaborate and secretive preference deals.

Malcolm Turnbull moves to overhaul Senate voting system before election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/malcolm-turnbull-moves-to-overhaul-senate-voting-system-before-election>
So, what will change when Australians head to the ballot box to cast their 
vote? Here we explain the revamp and how it compares with the current system.

What is the current system to elect senators?

In a normal federal election, voters receive two ballot papers – one to decide 
who will represent their local electorate in the House of Representatives and 
the other to elect representatives for their state or territory in the Senate. 
The Senate voting papers are divided into two sections and allow people to 
express their views in one of two ways.

The simplest, and by far most popular way, is to vote “above the line”. This 
means people mark “1” for a single party or group and do not mark any other 
preferences. If their first choice falls short, their vote is reallocated to 
other candidates, but it’s not their personal choice. The party or group they 
vote for above the line decides the order of the preference flows, via “group 
voting tickets” filed with the Australian Electoral Commission.

If someone wants to control their own Senate preference flows, rather than 
leaving it in the hands of the parties, they must vote “below the line”. This 
requires people to mark the order of their preferences for all candidates 
standing for election to the Senate in that state or territory. This can be an 
onerous and time-consuming process that sometimes involves selecting more than 
100 candidates. In 2013 New South Wales voters were presented with a Senate 
ballot paper that was a metre long. The text was small and the AEC had to 
provide voters with plastic magnifying sheets.

What are the main changes?

The big changes are to abolish group voting tickets, the party-submitted 
mechanism for determining how preferences flow for people who vote “above the 
line”, and to enshrine optional preferential voting.


Crossbench senators seething at being 'dumped' in deal to curb micro-parties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/crossbench-senators-seething-at-being-dumped-in-deal-to-curb-micro-parties>
Senate ballot papers will tell people they can vote above the line by 
numbering at least six of the boxes in the order of their choice. They would 
mark their first preference with a 1, their second preference with a 2, and so 
on. Supporters of the plan say this will take preference flows out of the hands 
of “backroom operators” and give a greater say to individual voters.

What happens if people vote for fewer than six options above the line?

The legislation, tabled in the lower house on Monday, shows the new “advice” 
for people to number at least six boxes above the line is a recommendation and 
not a requirement.

Turnbull says if a person numbers only one square above the line, or marks 
fewer than six preferences, the vote would still be counted. This appears 
designed to allay concerns that the changes would lead to an increase in 
“informal” voting and disenfranchise some voters, bearing in mind that people 
have been told for years that they could just vote once on Senate ballots.

If someone marks their top preference and nothing else – and that group falls 
short of a Senate quota – the ballot paper is “exhausted” and there will be no 
preference flows to others. If a voter marks 1, 2, 3 next to their top three 
choices, the preferences would “exhaust” after the third choice falls short.

Are there any changes to the below-the-line voting?

Regardless of the planned changes to above-the-line voting, voters will still 
have the choice of voting below the line. They will be told to number all 
choices if they vote below the line. But the government says the legislation 
will “reduce the number of informal votes by increasing the number of allowable 
‘mistakes’ from three to five, as long as 90% of the ballot paper below the 
line is filled in correctly”.

What about toughening up party registration requirements?

The joint standing committee on electoral matters also called for an increase 
in the number of members needed to apply to be a federally registered party, 
from 500 to 1,500. But the government did not put this measure in the 
legislation, citing a lack of parliamentary support. The legislation includes a 
ban on individuals holding relevant official positions in multiple parties.

Why is the overhaul so controversial?

Criticism focuses on what the changes might mean for the makeup of the Senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/senate-voting-reform-stirs-up-hornets-nest-between-likely-winners-and-losers>
, which serves as the house of review on government legislation. The Liberal 
Democratic party senator for New South Wales, David Leyonhjelm, says it will be 
“extraordinarily difficult” for minor parties to win seats in the Senate, which 
would end up being dominated by the Coalition, Labor, the Greens and Nick 
Xenophon.

Senate voting reform stirs up hornet's nest between likely winners and losers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/senate-voting-reform-stirs-up-hornets-nest-between-likely-winners-and-losers>
Labor has been divided on the issue, with some senior figures fearing it will 
improve the Coalition’s electoral prospects in the upper house. But a spokesman 
for the Labor leader,Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, says “it is not in 
the nation’s interest or our economic future to give the Greens party the 
balance of power in the Senate”.

Labor’s shadow special minister of state, Gary Gray, who served on the 
committee that recommended changes, called for reforms to “accurately translate 
the wishes of voters into winners and losers in the parliament”, but the Senate 
leadership, Penny Wong and Stephen Conroy, have vehemently opposed the changes.

Will it pass the parliament?

Yes. Even without Labor’s support, the government has the numbers to get it 
through the Senate thanks to the backing of the Greens and Xenophon, who say it 
will allow voters to decide their own preference flows.

How does the move affect timing for the 2016 federal election?

The bill has been referred to the joint standing committee on electoral 
matters with a reporting deadline of 2 March, paving the way for a debate and 
decision in the Senate before parliament rises on 17 March for the pre-budget 
break. The AEC, which is planning an education campaign, has said it needs at 
least three months between the passage of the legislation and an election to 
implement them.

In theory, that would still leave open the option of a double-dissolution 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/double-dissolution-is-a-live-option-as-morrison-rules-out-pixie-horse-tax-cuts>
 held in July, in which all senators would face the voters. But the government 
would have to dissolve both houses on the day after the budget is delivered to 
avoid falling foul of the ban on such elections in the final six months of a 
parliament, resulting in an unusually long election campaign.

The earliest date for a normal general election for the House of 
Representatives and half of the Senate is 6 August. Turnbull says he is 
“working on the assumption that the election will be held at the normal time, 
which is August/September/October”.

Does the bill affect the House of Representatives system?

No. House of Representatives ballot papers list all candidates for the local 
electorate and people will still have to number all squares in the order of 
their preference. Although parties routinely provide people with “how to vote” 
cards on their way into polling stations, these are merely recommendations.
 