
I found breakfast in Japan a totally hilarious experience: from snotty seaweed 
to astringently pickled plums that made your eyes water. This is one nation 
that has mastered the art of getting going in the morning.

This dish was part of another multi-dish breakfast feast, including one that 
went down in my diary as "Doctor Who Chicken meets Swamp People".

No … I've no idea either.

This is super-special either warm or at room temperature, but hold on to your 
hats as it's pretty intense, so serve with simply grilled meat/fish and some 
very plain rice.

It takes about 30 minutes to get them in the oven, then 1 hour 30 minutes 
cooking time.

Serves four as a main or six as a side dish.

1kg/2lb aubergines, sliced into pieces about 5cm/2 inches thick
30g/1oz sesame seeds
50g/2oz ginger, washed but unpeeled and diced quite small
100ml/3½fl oz toasted sesame oil
160ml/¼ pint mirin
250ml/8fl oz rice wine vinegar
160ml/¼ pint light soy sauce
4 tbsp honey
salt and pepper

Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Spread about 3 big pinches of salt 
(preferably sea salt) over the base of a baking dish about 40 x 30cm/16 x 12 
inches that will hold the aubergine slices quite tightly.

Score a shallow cross-hatch on each face of the aubergine slices and lay them 
flat in one layer on the salt. Sprinkle over another couple of pinches of salt 
and leave them for about 20 minutes.

Lightly toast the sesame seeds in the oven for a few minutes. Put the ginger, 
oil, mirin, vinegar, soy and honey into a saucepan and bring to a simmer. Turn 
off the heat, and when the sesame seeds come out of the oven add those to the 
pan.

Pat the aubergine slices dry with kitchen paper and wipe out the baking dish. 
Pour in the contents of the pan and sit the aubergine slices in it, flat, so 
that the liquid comes about half to two-thirds of the way up them. Cover the 
dish with foil, sealing the edges as much as possible so that the aubergines 
will steam a bit, and put it into the oven. After 30 minutes throw away the 
foil, turn them over and put them back in the oven for another hour, turning 
again halfway through.

• This is an extract from Bought, Borrowed & Stolen – Recipes & Knives from a 
Travelling Chef by Allegra McEvedy, published by Conran Octopus, £25.
 