
A Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party plan that would 
save Jeremy Corbyn’s seat, which is threatened by boundary changes, has 
resulted in a furious reaction from one of the leader’s closest allies whose 
own constituency is to be split into three under the proposals.

Kate Osamor, the shadow cabinet minister for international aid, surprised 
colleagues by turning up at a public meeting at Havering town hall to oppose 
her own party’s submission on the changes, the Guardian can reveal.

The MP said she was unhappy that Labour was suggesting her own constituency of 
Edmonton, which was barely changed in the original proposals from the Boundary 
Commission, should be broken up.

A leaked document outlining Labour’s response to the boundary changes shows 
that the central aim is to protect Corbyn’s Islington North seat after the 
initial proposals divided it up.

The boundary commission has one chunk of Islington North going into a new 
constituency of Finsbury Park and Stoke Newington, while another slice moves 
into Diane Abbott’s Hackney seat.

The party’s counter-proposal keeps the constituency intact but instead hits 
other MPs, including Osamor and David Lammy, who represents Tottenham.

The submission admits there is an issue, saying: “We recognise that these 
proposals divide communities in Edmonton and Tottenham, as well as Crouch End 
from Hornsey and Highgate. On balance, however, we believe that the consequence 
of the commission’s proposal to include part of Hackney in a seat with part of 
Islington is that much more disruptive proposals are made in the rest of north 
London which break ties more seriously.”

One person present at the hearing told the Guardian that Labour politicians 
there were surprised to see Osamor turn up to tell a panel that she was unhappy 
about the plans and would instead back Lammy, who has argued that his community 
is hundreds of years old and should not be split up.

He has written to the commission to say its initial proposals “maintain the 
integrity of the current constituency boundaries”, and should be maintained 
over Labour’s proposals.

The MP wrote a long letter in which he claimed that dividing Tottenham would 
be risky in terms of cohesion and gang activity, and even included poetry that 
was 700 years old to underline the “separate, independent and distinct nature 
of Tottenham”.

A source in the Labour party said: “It’s so obvious the the party is putting 
leaving Jeremy’s seat unchanged above every single other consideration. 
Everyone knows he can just take his pick of whatever Islington seats the 
boundary commission come up with. Splitting Tottenham is a total nonsense, and 
Kate knows that as well as anyone.”

It is understood that Osamor was sympathetic to the idea of protecting Corbyn 
but was furious about the way that the party put it into action - complaining 
to the individual in charge of the submission for the party. She hoped that a 
number of colleagues could instead all take a smaller hit in order to make the 
plans work.

The person present at the hearing said Osamor appeared particularly upset 
about her Labour colleague, Joan Ryan, who represents Enfield North.

Osamor declined to comment when approached by the Guardian.

A Labour party spokesperson said: “As part of the Boundary Commission’s 
consultation process, the Labour party have put forward counter-proposals that 
better respect local community links and ties. These proposals have been agreed 
by the NEC after a wide-ranging consultation with local parties.”
 