
Fears that the US economy is lurching towards a double-dip recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jun/01/us-economic-recovery-reversing-fears>
 sent world stock markets falling sharply on Thursday.

The sell-off that began in London and New York on Wednesday gathered pace, as 
traders reacted to warnings that the world's biggest economy is running out of 
steam.

The latest downgrade of Greece's credit rating also dampened spirits, with a 
Greek default now seen as a 50:50 chance.

The FTSE 100 index of blue chip shares shed 65 points, or over 1%, at the 
start of trading to 5863, with other major European indices also bathed in red. 
It closed 80 points lower, at 5847, with mining firms domianted the fallers.

This followed losses across Asia, as investors across the globe reacted to the 
worst day's trading in New York in almost a year.

In Japan, the Nikkei tumbled 1.7% to 9,555.04 with exporters leading the 
losers. Confidence was also knocked in Tokyo by the "no confidence" vote in the 
embattled Japanese prime minister Naoto Kan over his handling of the earthquake 
and nuclear crisis at the Fukushima plant. Kan survived the ballot, but has 
offered to quit once Japan's economy is in better shape.

"I think right now there's almost a market consensus of the slowing down of 
economic growth around the world," said Linus Yip, a strategist at First 
Shanghai Securities in Hong Kong told Associated Press.

Market confidence has been hit by grim economic news this week. This includes 
a gloomy report from US factories and worse-than-expected US jobs data on 
Wednesday, with the private sector adding just 38,000 jobs in May against 
market expectations of 175,000.

"A flurry of worse-than-expected economic data yesterday presented the ideal 
conditions for traders to start booking profits off gains from the start of the 
week," commented Cameron Peacock, market analyst at IG Markets. "The resulting 
triple digit losses on Wall Street have been setting the pace for equity 
markets in recent hours," he warned.

The US market suffered its worst day since August on Wednesday, tumbling more 
than 2%, or 280 points, to 12,290.14.

Weaker than expected manufacturing data from Europe and China added to the 
gloom, as did adowngrading of Greece's sovereign debt deep into "junk" status 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-06-01/greece-s-second-rescue-is-readied-by-eu-urging-investors-to-buy-more-debt.html>
 by Moody's. It cut Greece to Caa1 from B1, putting it on a par with Cuba, 
saying there was "at least an even chance of default over the rating horizon."

"Over five-year investment horizons, around 50% of Caa1-rated sovereigns, 
non-financial corporate and financial institutions have consistently met their 
debt-service requirements. Around 50% have defaulted," Moody's said.

Oil prices were also in reverse, with WTI falling back through the $100 a 
barrel level, at $99.44 and Brent crude down 70 cents at $113.84.

Markets are expected to remain volatile ahead of more key economic data from 
across the Atlantic on Friday – non-farm payrolls. Economists have slashed 
their forecasts following the grim private sector jobs numbers, with many now 
expecting an increase of 150,000 jobs rather than 180,000.

The pound also fell on Thursday morning, losing half a cent against the dollar 
to $1.6308. This followed reports that one of the Bank of England's key 
policymakers was not ruling out turning on the electronic printing presses 
again to stimulate growth.

Paul Fisher, who implemented the Bank's £200bn quantitative easing programme, 
told the Daily Mail that a further injection of QE was an option 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/money/article-1393284/CITY-INTERVIEW-ALEX-BRUMMER-Paul-Fisher-fired-new-challenges.html#ixzz1O6Por5Pm>
.

"I would consider it and I've said I still hold that possibility open," said 
Fisher.
 