
As soon as reality TV executives discovered the magic formula of putting a 
low-status pair of dry lips in front of a row of scowling, high-status 
eyebrows, they knew they had their cash cow and immediately tossed originality 
out the window.

Much of the televisual egesta flung in our eyes faithfully adheres to this 
recipe: buy a desk, hire a row of experts-in-the-industry, and force some 
shivering pleb to await judgement. They’re all at it: The Singing One, Insert 
Country’s Got Skills, Cooking Chef.

Some shows have bravely branched out, getting rid of the desk all together in 
favour of a far more revolutionary empty space.The Block 
<http://www.9jumpin.com.au/show/theblock/triplethreat/>, for example, involves 
zero sitting. Instead, judgment is passed off screen and relayed to the 
so-called contestants through a Logie award-winning humanoid.

Should heaven exist, I wouldn’t be surprised if entry depended on a successful 
pitch to a panel of Simon Cowell-esque seraphim. “You callthat a virtuous life? 
I’ve met pebbles that have done more good than you. I’ve made my decision. It’s 
time for you to ... GET OFF MY CLOUD.”

Adding to the world of dreams crushed by a row of utter bastards is Shark Tank 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/shark-tank> (Channel Ten), a show about 
budding entrepreneurs losing all bowel control in front of industry experts or 
“sharks”. It’s an odd translation of the show’s original title, Dragons Den. 
Are we going to cull these tycoons and tying them to the back of a boat?

But hey-ho. Sunday’s episode 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/shark-tank/season-1/episode-1> was typical 
fare. The pitches ranged from inspired to daft, the kind of daft where someone 
asking $3bn for the world’s first invisible television would stand a better 
chance of getting investment. Not that fans of the show would complain: the bad 
ideas are Shark Tank’s more engrossing bits.

Gradually, the nervously smiling, cautiously enthusiastic pitcher gets reduced 
to a bumbling mess as the sharks gleefully question his or her business plan, 
financial expertise, childhood memories and right to life. The camera creeps 
ever closer on the incrementally withering husk of a human, until the TV screen 
is just a close-up of some microbes swimming around in a bead of sweat. 
Eventually the poor sod has to gather their clothes off the floor (I don’t 
remember them coming off), walk out, and give a brief statement in front of 
some pretty fish tanks about their broken dreams.

OK, so I made some of that up, but pound for pound, Shark Tank’s up there with 
all 37 programs in Simon Cowell’s current roster for complete humiliation. 
There are some successful pitches, of course. Lots of them tend to be hybrids 
of things other people have already bothered to invent. A beer cooler in some 
cricket stumps. A skateboard briefcase. A hotdog hamburger (more of a sandwich 
squared than an invention really).

I was starting to detect a pattern. Combine any two common Australian nouns 
and you’ll walk away with your mind intact and your bowels in control. See if 
you can guess what the pitch is going to be next time you’re watching. A USB 
air freshener. A hat you can keep your iPad in. Google Glass in a watch. Easy, 
see?

Danger Seven

While Seven’s Sydney siege special 
<https://au.tv.yahoo.com/plus7/7news-special/-/watch/26227256/the-untold-story/>
 was blessedly lacking in Nine’s dramatic re-enactments, you have to wonder 
what wisdom there was in putting the survivors on television so soon. And the 
questions posed seemed emotionally manipulative and irresponsibly hyperbolic.

At one point, trying to help one victim to describe Man Haron Monis, presenter 
Mark Ferguson offered: “He looked like danger.” Quite how you manage to look 
like an abstract concept, I’m not sure, but there you have it. To me he looked 
strikingly average, which is part of what was so unnerving about the whole 
tragedy. To anyone who happens to resemble Monis, you are now what danger looks 
like. Sensationalism at its unfortunate worst.
 