
I am confident that one day our six-year-old will sleep through the night. It 
may not be this week; it may take until secondary school. If we had sleep 
trained her, it might have been different, but I just couldn’t bear the tears. 
This makes me eligible to join the latest guilt trip after research in 
pediatrics showed that delaying bedtime and letting infants cry for short 
periods until they settle may be an act of kindness. Rather than causing 
emotional harm, it can help both parent and child sleep better.

It’s a debate that gets incredibly heated. Nearly half of mothers with babies 
over six months say their child has sleeping problems. Dr Michael Gradisar, 
lead author of a recent Australian study, says opponents tried to get the 
ethics committee to shut it down. The researchers randomized 43 infants with 
sleep problems between the ages of six and 16 months to either a usual routine, 
graduated extinction (allowing babies to cry for short periods over several 
nights) or fading (where the baby is put to bed a quarter of an hour later).

The study measured levels of cortisol, a stress hormone, to see how long it 
took babies to get to sleep, how often they woke and the effects on parents’ 
stress and children’s behaviour. A technique called the strange situation 
procedure tested infants’ attachment to their parents. Everyone’s sleep 
improved – even the control group’s – because babies naturally mature and sleep 
better. And attachment stayed the same. But the other groups showed larger 
reductions in the time it took for babies to get to sleep and their frequency 
of waking. Neither technique allowed infants to howl for hours in the dark.

Gradisar says his study supports earlier Australian research showing no 
long-term harmful effects to children. The earlier study, of 326 children, lost 
touch with a third during the follow-up. And the current study is small. Is 
this enough reassurance that sleep training will not be emotionally harmful?

You should do what you feel is right. Wendy Hall, a researcher in sleep 
training, argues that helping your child learn to sleep better is an important 
investment. It teaches them self–regulation, and sleep is essential for 
development. Crying, she points out, is their only form of communication, so 
you won’t destroy their sense of attachment by leaving them to self-soothe.

Graduated extinction has recently been rebranded as “controlled comforting”. 
Gradisar says more studies are needed to really answer questions about it’s 
safety. But it’s clear that using it or not is no marker of the quality of your 
parenting. But I haven’t done it, so maybe I would say that.
 