
Theresa May has moved swiftly to calm tensions over the resignation of Sir 
Ivan Rogers as Britain’s ambassador to the EU by appointing career diplomatSir 
Tim Barrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/sir-tim-barrow-profile-he-will-report-back-reliably-on-eu-thinking>
 as his replacement.

The decision means the prime minister has ignored calls to appoint a 
wholehearted Brexiter, in a move that will reassure those in the civil service 
who feared the role would be politicised.

Rogers, the head of UKRep – in effect the British embassy in Brussels – 
resigned in frustration on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/uk-has-lost-one-of-greatest-experts-on-eu-sir-ivan-rogers-says-ex-foreign-office-chief>
, urging fellow civil servants to continue to provide impartial advice, and 
stand up to “ill-founded arguments and muddled thinking”.

Sir Tim Barrow profile: 'He will report back reliably on EU thinking'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/sir-tim-barrow-profile-he-will-report-back-reliably-on-eu-thinking>
He also made clear he thought the UK government not only lacked an agreed exit 
strategy, but also a coherent negotiating team.

An outspoken attack on Rogers’s impartiality by former Conservative ministers 
had led to growing anger among some senior civil servants, with some privately 
claiming they were considering stepping down.

Downing Street’s decision to replace Rogers so quickly is partly because of 
the urgent need to prepare for Brexit talks, but is also likely to reduce 
unease after the resignation highlighted wider strains between some mandarins 
and ministers, including those close to May.

Barrow was the UK ambassador to Moscow until 2015 and in March 2016 succeeded 
Sir Simon Gass as political director at the Foreign Office. He has extensive 
European experience and acted as first secretary at UKRep. His appointment is 
also a victory for the Foreign Office, which lost the UKRep post to former 
Treasury officials in 2012.

EU sources were surprised by the speed of the decision to appoint Barrow, with 
one claiming it revealed the pressure on the UK government. “It shows anxiety,” 
they said. Officials checking Barrow’s CV noted his experience in Brussels 
covered security and foreign policy, but not many of the technical subjects 
that will be in play during the Brexit talks, such as financial services or 
free movement of people.

Barrow said: “I am honoured to be appointed as the UK’s permanent 
representative to the EU at this crucial time. I look forward to joining the 
strong leadership team at UKRep to ensure we get the right outcome for the 
United Kingdom as we leave the EU.”

A Downing Street spokesperson called the senior official “a seasoned and tough 
negotiator, with extensive experience of securing UK objectives in Brussels”. 
They added: “He will bring his trademark energy and creativity to this job, 
working alongside other senior officials and ministers to make a success of 
Brexit.”

One Whitehall source described Barrow as a “quintessential diplomat”, calling 
him the second most powerful man in the Foreign Office who had worked closely 
with the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson.

They suggested the speed of the appointment was testament to the strong 
support from May. Johnson and David Davis, the Brexit secretary, who said 
Barrow’s “knowledge of Brussels means he will be able to hit the ground running 
at a vital time”.

Others suggested Barrow was not a “remoaner”, suggesting that he may well have 
voted to remain in the EU but was now optimistic about Britain’s opportunities 
outside the EU.

Barrow’s appointment came as May prepares to deliver a major speech on Brexit 
this month when she will restate that control of borders will be a red line for 
the government, inevitably making economic access a lower priority.

That means the government must be prepared for Britain to stop being a full 
member of the single market, although the prime minister has said she has an 
objective to secure maximum access for companies to trade with the EU.

The appointment of another mandarin to the role led to anger from some staunch 
Brexiters who wanted to see a political appointment instead.


Nigel Farage, the former Ukip leader, tweeted: 
Nigel Farage (@Nigel_Farage) 
Good to see that the government have replaced a knighted career diplomat 
with.... a knighted career diplomat.
 <https://twitter.com/Nigel_Farage/status/816716960423706624> January 4, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/Nigel_Farage/status/816716960423706624> 
Gerard Batten, the Ukip MP, described the decision as a disappointment because 
it represented “another career diplomat wearing a Brussels jersey”.

He said the Foreign Office needed a “revolutionary shakeup” that saw all civil 
servants removed from such roles in Brussels and some other key positions in 
government. “In their place, we need committed and sincere Brexiteers, people 
who actually want Britain to leave the EU and are prepared to make it happen,” 
he said.

But other high profile leave supporters disagreed. The former cabinet minister 
Iain Duncan Smith told the Guardian that the question was not whether someone 
had voted for or against Brexit but whether they were “determined to find a way 
of getting the job done”.

He particularly welcomed the replacement of a Treasury official with a Foreign 
Office man. “I think the Foreign Office will breathe a sigh of relief because 
they were driven out of the role by the Treasury, and the Treasury has become 
quite powerful,” he said.

Duncan Smith argued that civil servants in most government departments had 
accepted the need to make Brexit into a success. “The problem in government has 
become the Treasury, which wants to fight a rearguard action,” he added.

However, the former minister was clear that he was not referring to the 
chancellor, Philip Hammond, who appointed Barrow as political director when he 
was foreign secretary and knows him very well.

The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/labour-challenges-brexit-theresa-may-ivan-rogers-values>
, welcomed the quick appointment of an experienced figure with a distinguished 
record, insisting there could not be a vacuum in the role. But he said he would 
still push for an urgent statement in parliament because of the questions 
thrown up by Rogers’s departure, including the official’s claim that the 
government did not have a negotiating strategy.

Senior civil servants consider positions over Brexit tensions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/senior-whitehall-civil-servants-consider-positions-brexit-tensions>
“This doesn’t remove urgent questions about the lack of a plan for Brexit, the 
lack of preparedness for negotiations and a lack of accountability,” said 
Starmer.

Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/01/tim-farron-theresa-may-new-year-brexit-pledge>
, added: “The new ambassador can be at his most diplomatic but without a plan 
from this government on where it stands on the big issues, such as Britain’s 
membership of the single market, then it is an impossible task.”

The appointment of an ambassador is different from choosing a permanent 
secretary – or top civil servant – in a department, and does not require the 
exhaustive process of other Whitehall public appointments.

Downing Street would have been aware that Rogers was likely to stand down in 
the autumn and Whitehall will have been thinking of a replacement for some time.

Tom Fletcher, the former UK ambassador to Lebanon, tweeted in response: 
Tom Fletcher (@TFletcher) 
Great news. Tenacious, human, expert, connected, thick skinned enough not to 
worry about nutters, and will avoid poison in the chalice.
https://t.co/JpH8tAN9TW <https://t.co/JpH8tAN9TW>
 <https://twitter.com/TFletcher/status/816710398472753152> January 4, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/TFletcher/status/816710398472753152> 
Barrow’s appointment is also likely to be seen as a vote of confidence by May 
in the impartiality of the civil service.

Eurosceptics have been pressing for the appointment of someone willing to 
consider the possibility of leaving the EU without a full deal on a future 
relationship with Brussels. They say they want someone who is not transfixed by 
the complexities of the task.

Some had even called for the Conservative MEP Daniel Hannan to be handed the 
job of negotiating the UK’s exit.

The head of the civil service, Sir Jeremy Heywood, would have resisted calls 
for a politician to be handed the plum post, although ambassadors have 
occasionally been appointed from outside the core civil service network.

Heywood will be aware that Brexit has been putting the civil service’s 
reputation for impartiality under unprecedented threat.

Duncan Smith had accused Rogers of leaking against ministers and claimed he 
had lost the trust of Conservative politicians. There is no evidence that 
Rogers was responsible for the recent leaks, one of which appeared to damage 
his standing in Downing Street.

In that politicised context, Heywood will have known any decision by May to 
appoint someone from outside Whitehall would be seen as a resounding vote of no 
confidence in the impartiality of the civil service. There was anger in 
Whitehall and among former diplomats at ministers’ refusal to speak out in 
defence of Rogers.

But Barrow will have to race to gather knowledge not only of the thinking 
inside the commission negotiating team led by Michel Barnier, but also how to 
drive a wedge into the EU’s surface unity by locating British allies in key 
European capitals. It was argued, fairly or not, that Rogers would not try hard 
enough to insert those wedges, focusing too much on Germany and France.

Fortunately for Barrow there is a sort of political interregnum in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> through much of this year, as 
elections are held in France, the Netherlands and Germany.
 