
When people find out I had a baby on my own – I mean, I did have some help 
from the man who accidentally put it there in the traditional fashion, but he 
didn’t want to be a father and he left for good – there is a question they 
often ask. It is not, “Were the instructions on the condom packet printed too 
small for you to read?” but rather, “How hard is it, honestly, to raise a kid 
on your own – and do you think I would cope?”

It comes from women in their late 30s and early 40s, who always thought they 
would meet a brilliant man and have children. It hasn’t happened and now 
they’ve started to suspect that a biological clock is not some creepy Daily 
Mail invention but an actual thing that ticks, and they’re worried, wondering 
about sperm donors or other ways to have a baby without having an other half.

I can only tell them my own experience, which is that the hardest bit isn’t 
having nobody to share the burden, it’s having no one to share the love. Nobody 
right there when your child tells their teddy that “people are bears, too, but 
with bones inside”, which you think is the most amazing thing in the history of 
the world, but you have a creeping suspicion nobody else will, and you can’t go 
on Facebook or ring your motheragain.

You will become married to your mother. Your lack of interest in settling down 
young and making a marriage work like she did, in being normal in the suburbs, 
will lead, in the greatest irony of all, to you becoming dependent on the 
loving support you will find in her normal married life in the suburbs. You 
will suddenly understand the suburbs. Your father will also take to 
grandparenting with such gusto that, even though he never let you watch 
schmaltzy Disney cartoons, he will now drive into town and buy your daughter 
two copies of the Frozen DVD in case the first one wears out. It will wear out.

Further ironies: always been a feminist, baffled by relationships where the 
woman does 80% of the domestic chores? Well, you’re now doing 100% of them, 
like a 1950s housewife. You will not sleep for four years and still achieve 
things you never dreamed of, because you are superhuman now.

Every day you will plan what to tell your child when she’s old enough, only, 
before you’re ready, she will say, “My cousin says I had a daddy when I was 
born and he went away?” And it will be like theopening scene of Four Weddings 
And A Funeral <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bjixdVvkfL4> as you try not to 
hop around the room going, “Fuck, fuck, fuck, fuck, fuck.”

One day you will take your kid on a playdate with another family you know, and 
the other mum will say warmly, “Stay for tea!” And when the kids are handed 
their fish fingers and peas at 5.45pm, your belly will rumble and you will 
wonder why there isn’t a plate for you, until it dawns on you that in this 
house, and maybe all other houses, the grownups eat something sophisticated 
after putting their kids to bed, and you aren’t expected to stay for that.

Sophie Heawood: why is David Cameron so afraid of single parents?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/18/david-cameron-fear-of-single-parents-sophie-heawood>
Living outside the nuclear narrative will create so many jarring moments with 
others that soon you won’t speak, only nod. You will do The Nod when the 
nursery sends your kid home with a Happy Father’s Day card that she’s been made 
to copy her name on to. You will employ The Nod when other mums say they know 
exactly what it’s like being a single parent because their lovely husband works 
abroad for up to two weeks at a time. You will employ The Nod when 20 of your 
friends offer to babysit – three will actually do it and the rest, when they 
see you at a party, will ask what you have done with the baby, to which you 
must always reply with these exact words: “I thought I left it at your house?”

Gradually, you will realise that you, too, have made other people do The Nod 
all your life. That you moaned about your mum to a friend whose mum was dead, 
that you complained about being skint to friends who’ll never earn what you do, 
that you phoned in sick with hangovers when a colleague who lives with a 
chronic pain condition wouldn’t dream of missing work. A lifetime of 
selfishness will open up before you like a seam. You will watch a friend lose 
her two-year-old, who dies for no reason in the night, and clutch your own 
child very, very tightly and thank God that she is here, and that the smell of 
her hair is such sweetness that even your nostrils are in love with her. She 
will become your levity and your gravity. You will be more than able to cope.
 