
Some months ago, my friend Dan told me that his friend Chris, whom I’d met 
once six years before when they helped me carry a mattress through a door, was 
working on a TV show aboutDavid Hasselhoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-hasselhoff>. A sort of 
semi-scripted comedy in which The Hoff would play a fictionalised version of 
himself, trying to stage his own media comeback (while actually trying to stage 
his own media comeback). To make it still more postmodern, there would even be 
a scene where the former star ofBaywatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/sep/01/baywatch-your-next-box-set>
 and Knight Rider auditioned against other people to play himself. Well, that 
sounds like a load of old bunkum, I thought to myself.

A few weeks later, Dan told me Chris needed someone to play a feminist 
journalist who could have an on-screen argument with The Hoff about his 
dinosaurish attitudes towards women, and they really wanted me. Clearly this 
was now a ground-breaking work of cultural significance, so I said yes 
immediately. They sent me the character brief. “She writes a column for a 
broadsheet weekend magazine,” it said, “and is not a cliched feminazi, but she 
does quite like the sound of her own voice.” It is always illuminating to find 
out what your friends really think about you. I wondered if this had anything 
to do with the mattress.

My parents were staying with me, so I read the brief aloud to them. The more 
they laughed, the less convinced I became of its ground-breaking cultural 
significance. Still, I went to meet the producers, at an address that turned 
out to be a busy casting agency. Someone ushered me into a room that contained 
people and film cameras, and handed me a script outline from which to 
improvise. It was a shock to gather that this was an actual audition. In which 
I, like The Hoff, was about to be tested on my ability to pretend to be me. 
Reassuringly, though, there was clearly nobody else who could do it.

The story was that The Hoff had been overheard telling his teenage son he 
should persuade girls to sleep with him, that no doesn’t always mean no, and 
this scandal had been leaked to the media. Things got better when they told me 
that The Hoff couldn’t make it that day, so one of them would play him instead 
– it seemed easier, somehow, to do this with someone I didn’t recognise. Things 
got worse when they told me it would be the short Australian lady in the floral 
tea-dress, so I had to direct all my anger about this beefy man’s sexism 
towards a woman half my size, who was grinning at me. She wasn’t an actor, she 
was a producer, helping out. I would just have to get into my stride, and 
forcefully accuse a small, cheerful woman of misogyny. As I attempted to get my 
angry feminist journo vibe on, while also trying to say things that were a bit 
funny, I suddenly realised we were creating comedy around the topic of sexual 
misconduct, and that this might be misconstrued as A Rape Joke.

Thoughts began to swirl around my head about the resulting Twitter furore – 
the 48 hours of agonising retweets of righteous indignation to which I would be 
subjected, by people who hadn’t even watched the programme. I suddenly panicked 
that pretending to be an angry feminist journalist might be about to jeopardise 
my actual career as an angry feminist journalist, so I forgot where we were and 
stopped speaking altogether in the middle of my rant. I asked if we could start 
again. I’m not entirely sure what happened after that, but everybody was 
extremely nice and I went home thinking it might have gone quite well after 
all. Besides, they couldn’t really get anyone else in to play me, could they?

Well, of course they could. And so it was that last week I sat down and 
watched episode two of Hoff The Record. In which an actor called Anna Crilly, 
who I am sure is a wonderful person, played a Guardian journalist who had – 
hang on, she’d written a bloody book now. This was getting worse. The fake me 
was a higher achiever. And she was funnier. And there was no rape joke. I will 
even concede that it was surprisingly decent telly. It’s just that I can never 
ask a man to carry a mattress through a door for me again.
 