
Though I have never actually checked, I am confident that most of us, all 
around the country, walk down the street doing sex maths. This is when you pass 
another person and work out whether you’re more attractive than them, or if 
they’re better looking than you, and who would be luckier to get eye contact 
from whom. Until, bang, a nanosecond later, the mental ratings on both sides 
have clearly matched up, you’ve both checked each other out with an approving 
eye, and now you are perfectly placed to go away and have immediate sexual 
intercourse under the nearby pedestrian flyover. Something you will never 
actually do, because you just keep on walking. Unless you’re both men, in which 
case, if cultural stereotypes are anything to go by, spontaneous togetherness 
events can sometimes just happen like that. (So unfair. So unfair.)

In any case, humans have been rating each other in this way since the dawn of 
pedestrian flyovers, but I have recently noticed that this is now a trend that 
is creeping into commercial experiences, too. For a long time, we customers 
have been able to rate the service of things we’ve paid for, especially if we 
bought them online. An email comes, asking for your feedback on the holiday 
hire car you recently returned, for example. Or the takeaway delivery app asks 
you, when you’re enjoying a prolonged visit to the toilet the morning after, if 
that 2am king prawn bhuna delivery was truly all you had hoped it would be. 
These events are not really like sex maths, they’re just customer feedback, but 
what is new is that we are being rated on our compatibility with the services.

You’ll struggle to get anywhere with Airbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb>, the accommodation site that 
rents out people’s own homes, if others don’t leave you good reviews. Even if 
you’re the one who paid to stay somewhere, they will write down just how 
charming you were on your profile afterwards, for all to see. The speed with 
which you reply to emails is often noted, leaving you too nervy to go to bed 
lest somebody on the west coast of America leaves a query and your time zone 
cheats you out of responding within the hour. Certain dating websites already 
give your profile picture more prominence if lots of people have been 
clicking on you appreciatively – how long will it be before they start giving 
you public ratings after they went on a date with you, too?

Get in an Uber cab these days – something I do far more often than I should – 
and it’s not just you who gives the driver a mark out of five at the end. They 
give you, the customer, a rating too – only, you’ll never be able to see it. 
OtherUber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> drivers can see it, 
though, and the next time you log in to the service to see if anyone in your 
area can pick you up right now, they’ll check your average score and decide if 
you’re worth the hassle.

This is a thought that has left me drooling and deranged, so desperate am I 
now for all Uber drivers to rate me, love me, give me all five of their 
available stars. “WHAT a nice driver he was,” I say in a vile stage whisper to 
my bored three-year-old, whom I increasingly use as a prop. “Say thank you to 
the WONDERFUL man, my darling!” I add, hoping that her plaited pigtails can 
only add to the Personal Charm Experience we offer as passengers. Soon, I will 
be dressing her as Orphan Annie and telling drivers I’m not actually her 
mother, I just brought her in off the streets, in the hope I get higher marks 
for tragedy.

I got in one car the other day and did my usual “Hi, how ARE you?!” spiel to 
the driver before I remembered that it wasn’t an Uber, it was just the local 
minicab guy who couldn’t rate me if he tried, and wouldn’t even have wanted to. 
So I slunk back into the sullen torpor in which you are supposed to enjoy the 
luxury of taxi journeys. Neither of us spoke. Such a relief.

It is nice to be nice, yes; so the merits of the new system are clear. And if 
workers are gaining the right to reply, then that’s all for the good, because 
the customer is often wrong, and sometimes drunk. It’s just that all this fake 
cheeriness is stressing me out. I suppose the answer is to force myself to stop 
using these convenient cabs and apps, and go back to hanging around at bus 
stops and collecting my own takeaways in person. Then I can continue my noble 
sex maths in peace.
 