
The long school summer break is now well under way. Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> holidays are meant to be fun, 
of course, but they can also be stressful. They can often be more stressful 
than fun. Sometimes they can even be the start of criminal proceedings. So here 
are a few handy tips to make yours go with a bang.

1) If you find yourself lying in a sweltering foreign bedroom, try turning on 
the noisy, whirring ceiling fan and spending 30 sleepless, deafening minutes 
with it on. Followed by 30 silent, boiling minutes with it off. Try to 
alternate between the two until the sun rises. Fill in all that extra awake 
time by thinking of the air con you could have paid for if you’d been more 
successful in life. If you hadn’t had children. Think of the person you might 
have been.

2) If your holiday involves catching a train, especially, say, the last one to 
Cornwall on a Friday lunchtime before the off-peak tickets stop working, make 
sure you do not reserve a seat. Children today have high expectations of life, 
and to overcome this, they need to experience five hours slumped against a 
toilet door with salty urine leaking under it, leered over by a racist with a 
sunburnt neck and a six-pack of lager, shouting that he wouldn’t be squashed 
into this vestibule if it weren’t for “the immigrants”.

3) It is always a good idea to thoroughly research the area you’re staying in 
and join in with local customs. Speaking of Cornwall, visitors tend to 
associate it with surfing and cream teas, but the area also has a rich 
tradition of witchcraft. Witches celebrate the coming of the menses, so you can 
hold a special ceremony if your daughter starts her periods there – make sure 
you invite that boy she fancied on the beach to join in with the chanting. 
Wherever you are going, do try to make the most of your surroundings. For 
example, in the Pyrenees, with younger children, you could try playing a game 
of What’s The Time, Mr Wolf? with an actual wolf.

4) Small children tend to be very high-energy, which can easily exhaust the 
parents, who will need ample reserves of stamina to keep going through the 
holidays. A high-carbohydrate diet, with all meals based around chips, pasta or 
bread, can lead to sluggishness. Which sounds quite relaxing, so maybe just 
give them that.

5) If you are married, why not give a narrowboat holiday a whirl, as the lack 
of personal space will mean all your marital tensions are brought to the fore 
more quickly, thereby forcing a resolution. A resolution that may take place 
either on or in the water. Possibly under it.

6) If you are a single parent and have taken the kids away on your own, tell 
them you’ve got some good news, sit them in the local taverna and then announce 
that you’ve met someone special: their teacher at school. But they don’t have 
to worry about telling their friends, because the teacher is going to announce 
it to the class in the new term with a PowerPoint presentation. Complete with 
pictures. So maybe they could just help you take a flattering selfie in your 
swimming cossie?

7) Deal with travel sickness by dressing your children in clothes that look a 
bit like sick anyway.

8) Restrict access to telly, iPads, laptops, etc, to a strict 16 hours a day.

9) If you’re not going anywhere, and your only holiday experience is taking 
the kids to the playground at the weekend, during which outings they say, 
“Watch me, watch me” as they perform an act of no particular skill 487 times, 
do not give in to the temptation to use the words “wow” or “amazing”, as these 
will only encourage them. Instead, say, “Room for improvement” or, “Moderate 
progress sighted” until everyone is so bored with you that you can sneak off 
for a little snooze on the toddler slide.

10) It is often the case that first dabblings in drink and drugs can take 
place in the long summer holidays. If you suspect this could happen in your 
family, do try to keep it private, as it will be very embarrassing if your 
children catch you taking them.
 