
What really annoys me about the whole “prime minister shagged a dead pig” 
scandal is that, if I’d known Oxford University was full of orgies, I’d have 
tried a hell of a lot harder to get in. Why oh why, when state school kids like 
me were told we could possibly apply to the top universities if we toiled and 
toiled, did nobody tell us there would be parties like these? Parties involving 
the abuse of substances so mind-altering that you might actually desire to 
become one with a recently deceased farmyard animal? For this is the 
allegation: that our honourable member,David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, inserted his rather less 
honourable member into a pig. I have no evidence that this even happened, or 
that drugs were involved, but just think whatfantastic drugs they must have 
been. The week before, he was overheard slagging off Yorkshire people, 
something that only earns him respect from Yorkists such as myself. I have 
never liked Cameron more, having never liked him at all.

All of this outreach work that Oxbridge does with the state sector: coming 
round to our schools, telling us that a world-class education isn’t just for 
the rich. If they’d simply come to my sixth-form college and explained that 
hanging out with future leaders of the realm didn’t mean we’d have to stop 
taking ecstasy, we’d have jumped at the chance. As it was, most of my friends 
applied to Manchester, so we could carry on raving, rather than spend three 
years somewhere we suspected we’d have to speak ancient Greek to buy a packet 
of crisps. Had I known that Oxford also offered something called aPiers Gaveston
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/21/dead-pigs-piers-gaveston-piggate-david-cameron>
 party where you can, it is rumoured, watch live sex shows, I’d have reworked 
my life plans accordingly.

As a sixth-former, I had an interview at Cambridge. When they asked me what I 
liked doing at weekends, I seized up and became uncharacteristically shy. 
Wishing to hide my secret life, standing waiting for the drugs to wear off in 
fields outside Leeds, I muttered that I did “a bit of babysitting”. Dull was 
something I truly believed might be required here: don’t let them know the real 
you; pretend to be purely hard-working and good.

If only I had realised that what I actually needed to say was that I tended to 
read a few chapters of Machiavelli’s The Prince before downing three bottles of 
Jameson, raising a toast to the Queen with my braying pals, and then gently 
lowering my genitals into the buccal cavity of a dead swine. I mean, this is 
the sort of information that needs to be fed through to state school kids as a 
matter of urgency. It could really level the playing fields.

My friend Dawn went to a comp in Wales which had never sent anyone to an elite 
university. She and some other local children, chosen for their brightness, 
were put in “a van” (as she puts it) and driven to Cambridge, where they were 
shown around by a posh girl called Tiggy (clearly a made-up name). A lecturer 
announced that he had no idea why there was nobody from Cardiff in his college, 
but would anyone like to hazard a guess? Dawn was already underwhelmed, and 
then found out that, on top of the standard £20 for a UCAS form, she’d have to 
pay £15 to apply to Cambridge. Given that this was the price of a wrap of 
speed, she decided she’d rather spend the money on amphetamines, and applied to 
Sussex and UEA instead.

The David Cameron #piggate storm is a sideshow from the real issues. It’s 
certainly effective | Suzanne Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/21/david-cameron-piggate-sideshow-dead-pig>
More recently, another friend had an interview for a junior teaching post at 
an Oxford college. On entering the ancient don’s ancient office, the two men 
sort of recognised each other, but couldn’t quite work out where from. It was 
only when the younger man got home that he realised he had seen his future 
employer, fully and frontally naked, when they were exchanging photos 
anonymously on the gay dating websiteGrindr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/grindr>. Again, this is exactly the 
sort of exciting information I could have done with when I was 18, back when I 
still feared the dreaming spires might contain only the oldest and deadest of 
dreams.

Still, I can see why Cameron isn’t fond of Yorkshire. It’s a respectable place 
where we look very, very dimly on the shagging of pigs. Where I’m from, 
we much prefer sheep.
 