
The thing about having your sense of self demolished by a group of depraved 
men is that you don’t always think the right things about it afterwards. So 
when the rockstar Chrissie Hynde spoke last week about something that had 
happened to her when she was 21 and high on drugs, andsaid that it was “all my 
doing and I take full responsibility” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/30/chrissie-hynde-rape-comments>, 
she might not have used the best words. She was not the motorbike gang who said 
they would take her to a party, but instead drove her to an empty house. She 
was not the one who forced herself to perform sexual acts and threatened 
herself with violence – they were. They were the predators, she their prey. So, 
a controversy has begun.

Hynde has written about the incident in her new memoir, Reckless 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323615/>, and when 
asked about it went on to say that women who dress provocatively and put 
themselves in the way of dodgy men have to understand what might happen to 
them; that if they “don’t want to entice a rapist”, they’d better be good at 
running.

Understandably, this has upset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/31/chrissie-hynde-victim-blaming-sexual-assault>
 a lot of people, who want to stress that there is only ever one cause of rape, 
and it isn’t what a woman wears or how she behaves: it’s rapists. 
Victim-blaming is misogyny’s cruellest trick, as those leading the backlash 
point out.

They are right, of course, but you can’t then start blaming Hynde for blaming 
herself, or the whole cycle of non-empathy continues. Besides which, it feels 
pretty important to me that a 63-year-old woman can describe her own violation 
any damned way she wants to. If we are progressing as a society and learning to 
listen to victims of sexual assault, we can’t listen only when they tell the 
story in the way that current feminist thinking recommends. Ugly stuff happens. 
What mother of daughters, as Hynde is, wouldn’t want to warn them about going 
off paralytic with strange men? You can’t just wag your finger and tell her she 
should have demanded that the bad guys change instead.

Yes, it’s a misogynist culture that teaches you such attacks were your fault. 
But as one of so many women who has experienced some kind of sexual assault, I 
can tell you there’s another reason for blaming yourself, and that is control. 
You are weakened and confused by what happened to you, and your brain wants to 
make sense of it, to bring a narrative structure to something that didn’t have 
one.

Some of this is sensible, such as taking steps to protect yourself so it can 
never happen again. Except that sometimes rapists are in biker gangs and 
sometimes they are boring-looking men whose alarm goes off on a Monday morning, 
when they put on a shirt and start the office commute. Sometimes they are 
boarding school boys with rows of straight As, as mine was. Sometimes they are 
in your family.

But really, your mind is searching for a way to take retrospective control 
over the part of your life over which it had no control at all – the first day 
you discovered that your will and your body were not the same thing. You blame 
yourself, because your pride is so broken that it begs to be let in on the act. 
You work out how your own decisions were wrong and led you to that place of 
revolting wrongness that has left you feeling so raw.

Plus, once you have decided that you invited an assault, then you don’t have 
to pursue the people who frighten you. You don’t have to go to the police or 
stand in a law court, you don’t have to upset your family, you don’t have to 
tell anyone. You can keep it contained inside of you and avoid any further 
shame being brought on anyone. In a warped sort of way, it can make it easier 
to let it go.

I do not advocate any of this. I’m only trying to explain why blaming yourself 
isn’t necessarily a self-defeating thing to do. It isn’t right, but it isn’t 
stupid, either. In an imperfect world, sometimes the only way to get your power 
back is to make it so that you wrote the story yourself.
 