
Soren Kjeldsen’s specialism isn’t so much of the course and distance type. 
More, wind and rain. Could a golfer from Denmark revel in anything less?

Kjeldsen claimed his fourth European Tour title, and first for six years, last 
year at the Irish Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/31/soren-kjeldsen-irish-open-play-off>
 which was notable for appalling weather at Royal County Down. The venue is 
also significant here; that of links variety.

The Open 2016: Phil Mickelson still in front on day two – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/15/the-open-2016-day-two-live> 
Kjeldsen’s emergence on Friday under a deluge of rain at Royal Troon was 
therefore worthy of little surprise. Perhaps the Dane should have been taken 
seriously anyway, owing to his share of seventh place at this year’s Masters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/11/danny-willett-masterrs-2016-jordan-spieth-lee-westood>
. That was far from a back-door top 10 in Georgia, Kjeldsen remaining no worse 
than eighth at the end of each round.

“I think the biggest difference now is when I go into a major like this, I 
feel normal,” Kjeldsen explained. “I don’t make it more important than anything 
else. I know the importance of the tournament but I also know that for me to 
perform well, I need to get into my little world and get lost in that. And if I 
control what I can control, then I’m doing OK. That’s what I learned from 
Augusta.”

At seven under par here – rounds of 67 and 68 have ensured that – Kjeldsen is 
again turning heads. He provides an obvious explanation for that. “I always 
think about the Open like this: that you want to get all sorts of conditions,” 
Kjeldsen said. “You want different wind directions. You want sun, you want 
rain. We need all four seasons in a good Open, I think.

“These conditions are what I grew up in, as well. So I’m certainly used to 
playing in bad weather. You don’t stay inside when you are learning the game 
because you would miss too many days. So I like playing this kind of golf. I 
like the battling mentality that you need to play. Yes, I do thrive in this.”

Still, there is a touch of the renaissance man about Kjeldsen. That 
long-awaited Irish victory aside, he is now 41. His touch had, for a time, 
deserted him to the point where he thought his career may be entering its 
closing stretch.

“I was struggling for a couple of years,” Kjeldsen admitted. “My problem was 
mainly on the tee shots. I felt very insecure on the tee shots. I just felt 
really weak. Because I don’t hit it a long way, when I hit it nicely, I get it 
out there but I didn’t at the time so I was hitting it short and pretty crooked.

“I found it really, really hard. I had a couple of problems in my game that I 
struggled to solve and turning 40; you have all certainly heard that story 
before when people get to 40 and then it’s downhill from there. So I was 
fighting pretty hard but determined to get through.”

Kjeldsen has sampled the rough and tumble of the Open. If this represents his 
best experience, there is another side to tell, dating from the 2008 Open. “It 
was at Birkdale,” he recalled. “I had a really good tee time, I thought, 6.52am 
on Thursday morning, and it came down so hard all day and it was so windy.

“I’ll never forget walking off the 18th. There was one guy from the Danish 
media. You could see that he was all dry. He had just had a nice cup of coffee 
I could smell on his breath. I had shot 81 and thought I didn’t do too bad. It 
[the weather] was crazy. His first question was like: ‘What happened out 
there?’ That was probably a low point. I think generally I’m quite polite. I 
think I said: ‘Maybe you should try and walk outside the tent.’”

Another player on the bounce back is Keegan Bradley, who tied Kjeldsen’s 
halfway score after a 68. The2011 US PGA winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/aug/14/rory-mcilroy-painful-pga-championship>
 has disappeared from frontline view in recent times, with Bradley’s cause 
hardly helped by the man on the anchored putting stroke that earlier 
contributed to him becoming a major champion.

Troon shows a different face as heavy rain tests Open field’s endurance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/15/open-troon-phil-mickelson-golf> 
“Everybody comes up to me and says, ‘What’s wrong with you?’ And that’s the 
toughest,” Bradley said. “Because I tell them, ‘I’m fine.’ I’m enjoying the 
challenge of getting better.

“I’ve had a lot of veteran players reach out to me, Hall of Fame type guys and 
they’ve all said: ‘We all went through this at some point. It was just a little 
dip and people freak out. It’s your job to enjoy the challenge of coming back.’”

Bradley, though, had a slight worry about an incident he was involved in 
during Monday’s practice day. “I actually snuck up on the leaderboard on 18 
with a couple of guys and we put our names up,” the 30-year-old said.

“I’m probably going to get in trouble for that. Probably shouldn’t have said 
that but it was fun to see my name up there … it was just awesome.”

Bradley has just that one major victory, at Atlanta Athletic Club five years 
ago, to his credit, but believes he thrives in the bigger tournaments. “I feel 
as though when I go to a major I have a little edge on some of the guys so I 
love it,” said the 30-year-old American.

“I love a bigger-field tournament. I just feel like there’s guys that can 
handle it and guys that succeed. I feel more comfortable in the bigger 
atmosphere … it’s just more fun for me.”
 