
Jordan Spieth <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jordan-spieth> admits to 
being schooled by young gun Curtis Luck, who upstaged the American superstar 
and claimed a share of the Australian Open lead at Royal Sydney. Luck, who 
heads a batch of exciting Australian amateurs looking to shock the golfing 
world this week, overcame a first-round wobble on Thursday to finish with seven 
birdies and a five-under 67.

Happily flying under the radar, fellow 20-year-old Lucas Herbert – who carved 
his own distinguished amateur career before turning pro in 2015 – also posted a 
superb 67 just days after receiving a late invitation to the 101st Open.

But all eyes were on Luck and world No5 Spieth as they waged a ding-dong 
battle in perfect morning conditions. The apprentice took the honours after a 
two-shot swing on the 275m par-four eighth – the pair’s second-last hole – 
before drawing praise from dual major winner Spieth.

While Luck – who’s already earned a double exemption to the Masters at Augusta 
National in April after winning the US and Asian amateur titles this year – 
made a tap-in birdie, Spieth made a meal of the hole. He drove through the 
green, chipped short and was unable to get up and down to save par as he 
slipped to three under and a round of 69.

Greg Norman reportedly teed up Malcolm Turnbull's early access to Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/greg-norman-reportedly-teed-up-malcolm-turnbulls-early-access-to-donald-trump>
“He was better composed than I was. No doubt,” Spieth said of the West 
Australian. “Certainly I learned a lot from him today on that side of things. 
He was smiling the whole time, really enjoying himself. I got a little 
frustrated there when I was hitting it close and just couldn’t capitalise.”

“Then he got into some trouble with a couple of bogeys in a row ... He could 
have shot even for the day and instead he turned that into five under. So that 
kind of stuff is unteachable and he has that. Really, really, really impressive 
player.”

Bidding to become the first amateur to win the event since Aaron Baddeley’s 
victory in 1999, Luck said he was inspired by playing in the marquee group 
alongside Spieth and former US Open champion Geoff Ogilvy. “Believe it or not, 
I wasn’t actually that nervous and it was purely because Geoff and Jordan were 
so casual and so legitimately nice,” he said.

Despite his lofty position on the leaderboard, the world No2 amateur refuses 
to start dreaming about lifting the famous Stonehaven Cup on Sunday. “There’s 
so much golf after the first round to come,” said Luck, who tentatively plans 
on giving up exemptions to next year’s US and British Opens by turning pro 
after the Masters.”

“I can still pre-qualify for them and, regardless of which path I take. I kind 
of have to back myself with doing the most with the starts and the 
opportunities that I’ve given myself. If I turn pro after the Masters, I might 
be able to utilise playing on the PGA Tour and earning some money and maybe 
getting some status. Whichever decision I go with, it’s going to take good 
golf, regardless.”

Four players – including Royal Sydney club member Peter O’Malley, who slipped 
up with a bogey on the last – are between co-leaders Luck and Herbert, and 
Spieth. Former champions Geoff Ogilvy, Greg Chalmers and Peter Lonard are three 
strokes back after two-under 70s, while Adam Scott carded a disappointing 73.



 