
Figures have revealed 90% of sports governing bodies have no individuals from 
BAME backgrounds in leadership positions, amid calls to end the “institutional 
racism” endemic in the sector.

Research by Sporting Equals has shown that across 68 sports boards, including 
national governing bodies, there is only one chair from a BAME background and 
one chief executive. Out of 601 board members, only 4% (26) are BAME.

BAME coach numbers stall in English football’s four divisions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/bame-coach-numbers-stall-english-football>
Presenting the research, Mihir Wary, a managing partner at Lowe Counsel and a 
former director of strategy and research at Sport England, said sports bodies 
were increasingly out of step with their participants and the country at large.

Successive studies have shown greater diversity leads to more effective 
decision-making. Wary said that while the percentage of BAME figures on sports 
boards had edged up slightly since 2010, sport compares poorly to most other 
industries.

While 18% of sport participants are BAME and 14% of the population as a whole, 
only 4% of those on sporting boards are from a non-white background. Based on 
demographic trends he said that by 2051, 38% of sports participants would be 
from a BAME background.

Chris Grant, the chief executive of Sported, the charity launched by Sir Keith 
Mills after the London 2012 Olympics to try to deliver on some of its legacy 
promises, said the charge of institutional racism had to be confronted head-on 
and called for more “white warriors” to speak up and further the cause of 
diversity.

“There’s a squeamishness in society at large. A system has to work quite hard 
to have so few black people. We need to get less squeamish about talking about 
institutional racism. When people see who they’re dealing with they make 
decisions that damage that group,” said Grant, who also sits on the board of 
Sport England, which has partnered with Sporting Equals to launch an academy to 
provide a pipeline of BAME candidates. “The code introduces teeth into the 
system. Over a few years, everyone will understand it’s not acceptable to have 
so few people.”

Phil Smith, the Sport England director of sport, said the “status quo wasn’t 
good enough”.

He added: “We recognise there is a lot to do and we do want to help. 
LeaderBoard Academy is a partnership between Sport England and Sporting Equals 
designed to attract the highest quality BAME candidates.

“People running our sports say they want more diversity but we also know many 
of those leaders need some help. This will lead to a pool of high-quality BAME 
candidates, providing training, mentoring and deployment opportunities for 
those individuals.”

Sport England had been criticised by some for setting definitive targets for 
gender diversity in its new governance code but not for other underrepresented 
sectors. But Smith said it would force governing bodies to take diversity 
seriously, or they would risk losing funding.
 