Carlos Alberto, who has died at the age of 72, captained Brazil to glory at the 
1970 World Cup. At how many World Cups did he play?  One His 100% win rate puts 
him up there with former England boss Sam Allardyce, sort of.  Three  Five  
Seven The Chicago Cubs are currently playing the Cleveland Indians in the World 
Series. Who was US president when the Cubs last won the championship?  Theodore 
RooseveltThe Cubs haven't won the World Series since 1908 (when there was no TV 
and only 46 states) – although they did win it in 1907.  John Adams  Bill 
Clinton  Ronald Reagan Jamie Vardy is the only English footballer on the 30-man 
shortlist for the Ballon d'Or award. How many games did he start for England at 
Euro 2016?  None  One The group match against Slovakia  Two  Four Who was the 
last Englishman to win the Ballon d'Or?  David Beckham  Kevin Keegan  Michael 
OwenHe is the only Liverpool player who has won the award.  George Best Who 
texted his boss with the words: "A tsunami just hit my bank account, so thank 
you very much"?  Paul Pogba  Claudio Ranieri  JP Fitzgerald JP Fitzgerald, Rory 
McIlroy's caddie, picked up $1.05m when the golfer won the FedEx Cup. "I think 
he was quite happy," said McIlroy. "He deserved it. He's a big part of what we 
do. He was with me when I was No210 in the world and when I was No1."  Boris 
Becker Four of the eight teams left in the League Cup have never won the 
competition. Which of them has never made it to the final?  Newcastle United  
Hull CityLiverpool have won it eight times, Manchester United four, Arsenal 
twice and Leeds United once.  Southampton  West Ham United José Mourinho 
suffered the indignity of losing 4-0 against Chelsea on Sunday. Against which 
team did his Chelsea side lose 3-0 in the 2014-15 season, when they won the 
league?  Manchester City  Manchester United  Liverpool  West Bromwich Albion In 
fairness to Chelsea, they had already won the league by this stage. Which 
institution has received a $1m donation from Brooklyn Nets basketball player 
Jeremy Lin?  The Jon Bon Jovi Soul Foundation  The Derek Zoolander school for 
kids who can't read good and want to do other stuff good too  Salvation Army  
Harvard UniversityLin studied at the university and has asked that his money go 
towards grant aid and renovations to the basketball arena. If it's Nice in 
Ligue 1, Real Madrid and Villarreal in La Liga, and Bayern Munich, Leipzig and 
Hoffenheim in the Bundesliga, who is it in the Premier League?  Everton  
Manchester City  Tottenham Hotspur Spurs remain the only unbeaten team in the 
Premier League but they welcome the champions to White Hart Lane on Saturday so 
that statistic might change this weekend.  Arsenal The Four Nations is being 
contested by England, Australia, New Zealand and which other country?  France  
Great Britain  South Africa  Scotland Scotland are competing this year 
following appearances from Samoa (2014), Wales (2011), Papua New Guinea (2010) 
and France (2009).  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  