
Democrats spent 17 months branding Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> as fundamentally unqualified 
to be president, a candidate whose campaign was rooted in racism, xenophobia 
and misogyny. Now they are preparing to work with him in the aftermath of a 
demoralizing election loss that plunged the Democratic party into an uncertain 
future.


Barack Obama orders 'full review' of possible Russian hacking in US election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/us-election-hacking-russia-barack-obama-review>
As Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> look to pick up 
the pieces from the outcome of the 8 November election, a debate is only just 
beginning on exactly when, how and at what cost they should cross the aisle to 
support a president-elect who marginalized some of their core constituencies.

Clearly we’ve fought for working people as long as I’ve been a Democrat and 
clearly a lot of them don’t believe us.
Senator Claire McCaskill 
But in an election where working-class white voters were integral to handing 
Trump the keys to the presidency, there is also widespread agreement among 
Democrats that a key faction of their base defected to Republicans because 
Trump successfully co-opted their economic message. And reclaiming it might 
require their cooperation with the same man they decried as one of the most 
divisive candidates in modern history.

In the wake of the election, Democrats on Capitol Hill said they were adopting 
a wait-and-see approach to the incoming administration and how Trump’s cabinet 
appointees might signal the contours of his agenda. But many were also quick to 
put a bitterly fought election behind them, acknowledging the party’s failure 
to reach out to voters in the so-called Rust Belt, which swung in Trump’s favor 
despite representing a Democratic stronghold in years past.

“My job now is not to comment on [Trump’s] campaign,” said Missouri senator 
Claire McCaskill, who faces re-election in 2018 and was just named the top 
Democrat on the Senate committee on homeland security. “My job now is to figure 
out where I can work with Republicans, including the president-elect, to do 
good work on behalf of the people I represent.

“Clearly we’ve fought for working people as long as I’ve been a Democrat and 
clearly a lot of them don’t believe us.”

Senator Joe Manchin, a Democrat from West Virginia and another vulnerable 
incumbent in 2018, is scheduled to meet with Trump early next week and has been 
floated as a possible cabinet pick. Hailing from an overwhelmingly red state, 
the senator has often broken with Democrats andonce described himself 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2014/11/joe-manchin-angus-king-swing-senators-112595>
 as “fiscally responsible and conservative”.

“Party lines do not scare me whatsoever,” Manchin said. “I just want to get 
something accomplished.”

The predicament facing Democrats is not simply Trump’s stunning defeat of 
Hillary Clinton in the presidential race, but the continued Republican control 
of Congress.

The party had hoped last month to regain control of the US Senate and pick up 
at least some seats in the Republican-led House of Representatives. Instead, 
both chambers remain under Republican control. The GOP is also favored to 
further expand its majorities in the 2018 midterm elections.

And then there are the Republican victories that have swept Democrats from 
state governorships and legislatures over the past six years.

The abysmal state of affairs has led to a pitched battle over who will lead 
the party in the Trump era, already a vessel for the wider debate about where 
Democrats went wrong in recent election cycles. And that fight is being waged 
as the party mulls the next leader of the Democratic National Committee.

Representative Keith Ellison, the first Muslim elected to Congress and a 
co-chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, has emerged as an early 
favorite in the contest.

He has the blessing of progressive champions and party leaders, including 
support from Senator Chuck Schumer, the incoming Senate minority leader, 
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Senator Elizabeth Warren of 
Massachusetts. On Thursday, AFL-CIO, one of the largest and most high-profile 
labor unions in the country, endorsed him, calling him a “proven leader”.

On a biting Wednesday morning in Washington, Ellison was introduced to a 
cheering crowd of minimum- and low-wage federal contract workers at a rally 
near Trump’s new hotel as an “organizer in his heart of hearts” who has “walked 
with us” on the picket line.

“Politics is nowhere near as important as being in the street, being active, 
fighting back and raising your voice,” Ellison said to the hundreds of workers 
gathered in Freedom Plaza, waving posters and American flags.

Ellison was an early supporter of Bernie Sanders in the 2016 Democratic 
primary, and has championed a similar populist economic agenda since his 
election to Congress a decade ago


As a lawmaker from Minnesota, Ellison’s supporters say he embodies the sort of 
energizing figure who can heal the party divisions by appealing to 
working-class voters across racial lines. To them, the congressman, with his 
activist credentials and organizer roots, is just the person to orient the 
party.

“They talk about white working class – absolutely we are there for our white 
brothers and sisters,” Ellison said at the rally, his voice building as he 
continued. “But for our black ones too. For our brown ones too. And women too. 
For men too. For Muslims, Christians, Jews, Hindus, people of all faiths, we 
are together and we aren’t going to let nobody pull us apart.”

But Ellison is facing increasing opposition from Jewish groups and labor 
unions who are uneasy with the Minnesota congressman’s past remarks on Israel 
and earlier writings on the Nation of Islam.

He is being challenged by New Hampshire Democratic party chairman Ray Buckley 
and South Carolina Democratic party chairman Jaime Harrison.


If he’s going to try to build roads and bridges, we’d be fools to say no.
Senator Chris Murphy 
Meanwhile, inside the halls of the Senate, the progressive wing of the party 
made gains in the Democratic leadership. Sanders and Warren were both named to 
an expanded 10-member Democratic leadership team that will tailor the party’s 
outreach to voters, as well as its messaging and agenda under Trump.

“We heard the American people loud and clear,” Schumer told reporters on 
Capitol Hill. “They felt that the government wasn’t working for them. They felt 
that the economy was rigged against them in many places and that the government 
was too beholden to big money and special interests.”

Schumer also made clear there was room to achieve common ground with Trump, 
particularly on issues such as infrastructure spending, raising the minimum 
wage and renegotiating trade deals. The sentiment was echoed by Democrats who 
signaled they would work with the president-elect if he was serious about 
following up on the promises he made to working class voters about creating 
jobs and increasing wages.

Hillary Clinton warns fake news can have 'real world consequences'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/hillary-clinton-fake-news-consequences-pizzagate>
“If he’s going to try to build roads and bridges, we’d be fools to say no,” 
said Connecticut senator Chris Murphy. “We don’t have to foreclose the 
possibility of finding some small, meaningful areas of agreement.”

In the House of Representatives, however, there was less consensus over the 
direction of Democrats whose influence has only grown smaller since the party 
lost control of the chamber in 2010.

Although Nancy Pelosi was re-elected as the House minority leader, 63 
Democrats opposed the veteran California lawmaker. She was challenged by Tim 
Ryan, a 43-year-old congressman from Ohio who had argued that choosing the same 
leadership would be yet another slap in the face to the industrial midwest that 
gravitated to Trump.

Democrats in both chambers insisted that the focus on tactics and internal 
squabbles was overblown, and expressed confidence in their ability to go to 
battle against Trump as a unified party. They also maintained that working with 
Trump where appropriate would not legitimize the worst aspects of his campaign, 
such as his attacks on minorities and civil liberties.

“There’s going to be no shortage of big, life-or-death fights with the Trump 
administration next year,” Murphy said.

A Senate Democratic leadership aide, who requested anonymity to discuss the 
strategy more freely, said Trump was an anomaly because he did not campaign on 
a traditional Republican platform. It was entirely likely, the aide said, that 
opposition to some of Trump’s proposals might stem from Republicans and not 
Democrats.

But, the aide added: “If he continues down this dark, divisive rhetoric we 
will call him out on that every single time.”
 