
Conservative rebels have said they are willing to enter an “unholy alliance” 
with the SNP and Labour in an effort to defeat government plans to liberalise 
Sunday trading laws.

The decision leaves Downing Street facing a knife-edge vote in the House of 
Commons <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> on Wednesday.

Whitehall sources accused the SNP of hypocrisy for intervening in the vote, 
because it only relates to England and Wales and the reforms already exist in
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>.

The reforms represent the biggest shakeup in Sunday trading laws for 20 years, 
ending a rule that restricts large stores to open for just six hours between 
10pm and 6pm. Small shops have been able to open for longer since 1994.

The Tory rebellion is being led by David Burrowes, who said he wanted a “more 
sensible, palatable way forward” that might restrict the changes just to 
seaside towns and city centres.

“It is a fairly unholy alliance but it is not so much about what the SNP 
thinks but how the government will deal with the large concerns across party.” 
He suggested that the SNP was justified in its decision because the plans could 
trigger a “domino effect” that could affect Scottish workers.

The SNP fears that the change could reduce the “premium” wages earned by 
Scottish people who work on Sundays. The decision by the party’s deputy leader, 
Stewart Hosie, that he would not support the reforms outlined by George Osborne 
in his budget in July, was a change of tack after the weekly meeting of his 
party’s MPs.

The party’s 54 MPs will vote with the Tory rebels, who are seeking to defeat 
government plans to give councils the right to zone areas that would be free 
from restricted trading hours. Hosie said: “We will support the Burrowes 
amendment.”

UK government sources indicated that the decision by the SNP guarantees that 
the vote on the final Commons stages of the enterprise bill on Wednesday 
afternoon will be tight.

Burrowes has won the support of 24 Tory MPs. If he can increase that number to 
about 36, he should be able to defeat the government with the help of Labour 
and the SNP. The government has a parliamentary majority of 17.

One option would be for the government to seek to reduce the number of Tory 
rebels by accepting an amendment by the former Tory environment secretary 
Caroline Spelman to allow cities with large numbers of tourists to opt out of 
the current Sunday trading laws.

A UK government source said: “It’s disappointing and hypocritical of the SNP 
to be trying to deny people the freedoms to shop that are already available to 
those they represent in Scotland.

“It’s a particularly extraordinary position for a party that supposedly 
believes in devolution of powers from Whitehall to be seeking to stand in the 
way of local leaders in the rest of the UK being able to choose what’s right 
for their communities and their economies.”

Whitehall sources expressed irritation with the SNP, which reportedly 
indicated to the UK government in recent weeks that it would not stand in the 
way of the reforms.

The Conservative MP Grant Shapps called the SNP’s decision to oppose the vote 
as the “most bizarre position I’ve ever heard”. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today 
programme on Wednesday, the former Tory chair argued that the bill provided 
extra protections for workers, pointing to a reduction in the amount of notice 
workers have to give to opt out of Sunday working.

But he conceded that there was no specific policy to offer employees a Sunday 
pay premium, as demanded by the SNP. Instead he argued that could be the 
natural result of the policy as, “businesses who want to employ people on 
Sunday may find they have to pay a premium on a Sunday”. Shapps argued that 
families could purchase goods online on a Sunday and wanted to be able to go to 
the shops for longer as well. “It is a bit ridiculous and it is time to update 
these rules.”

The SNP has an informal policy of abstaining in votes on matters which do not 
relate to Scotland. But Angus Robertson, the SNP leader at Westminster, 
announced last November that the SNP would oppose the plans on the grounds that 
they could drive down the wages of Scottish workers who enjoy a special Sunday 
premium.

The shopworkers’ union Usdaw warned the SNP that normalising Sunday trading 
hours in England and Wales would prompt large retailers to set a lower wage for 
workers across the UK. The government shelved the vote after Robertson’s 
announcement in November.

Whitehall sources said that they had been given indications by the SNP, which 
recently brokered a new fiscal settlement with the UK government, that the 
party had changed its position. It had been widely expected that the SNP would 
abstain in the vote.

Hosie denied that the SNP had changed tack under pressure from the Scottish 
Labour leader, Kezia Dugdale, ahead of the Holyrood elections in May, who had 
warned that the “rights of Scottish workers must not be subject to a Tory-SNP 
stitchup in Westminster”.

The SNP deputy leader said: “There’s never ever been any guarantee at all, any 
understanding, [or] indication that we would be automatically supporting any 
such measure. There was never any agreement that we would support or abstain to 
allow this measure to go through.”

Hosie added: “Our key concern all along was the protection of premium pay for 
employees in Scotland. We have listened to the evidence on both sides of this 
incredibly carefully.

“Our judgment is that should this become a UK-wide system without legal 
protections in place, there would be an inevitable erosion of premium pay for 
employees in Scotland.”

The UK government sought to win over wavering Tory MPs by releasing a letter 
from the leaders of 102 Conservative councils supporting government plans to 
give councils the right to zone areas that would be free from restricted 
trading hours.

Brandon Lewis, the communities minister who received the letter, argues that 
the current law prevents shops that cover more than 3,000 sq ft from opening 
for more than six hours on a Sunday. Lewis says that allowing department 
stores, supermarkets and garden centres to open for longer would rejuvenate 
high streets.
 