
The taxpayer is facing a multimillion-pound legal bill after a supreme court 
judge found against HM Revenue and Customs in a four-year battle with the 
financial adviser Ingenious Media, a promoter of controversial film investment 
schemes.


HMRC was on Wednesday found 
<https://www.supremecourt.uk/cases/uksc-2015-0082.html?platform=hootsuite> to 
have breached its duty of confidentiality after a senior executive at the agency
gave an off-the-record briefing to the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/money/tax/article3905100.ece> in 2012, in which 
he described film investment partnerships as “scams for scumbags”.

Ingenious has been awarded costs, which could run to £5m, and is now deciding 
whether to seek compensation. The firm has previously soughtdamages of £20m 
<http://www.step.org/coa-dismisses-film-relief-scheme-promoter-case-against-hmrc-chief>
 in its battle against HMRC.


Founded by the celebrity accountant Patrick McKenna, Ingenious devised ways to 
use film investment rules introduced by the Labour government to minimise tax 
for its wealthy clients. It attracted investment from a host of famous names, 
including Spice Girls Geri Halliwell and Melanie Chisholm, TV stars Anthony 
McPartlin and Declan Donnelly, singer Robbie Williams and former Big Brother 
presenter Davina McCall.


McKenna’s net worth is estimated at £400m, but his firm’s reputation has 
suffered. He was hauled before parliament’s public accounts select committee in 
2012, and three of his schemes have been challenged byHMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc>, which claims to have saved 
hundreds of millions after taking Ingenious to tax tribunals.

In June 2012, two Times journalists had a background briefing on tax-avoidance 
schemes with Dave Hartnett, the then permanent secretary for tax at HMRC. It 
had been agreed the meeting was off the record, which Hartnett said he 
understood to mean that nothing would be published.

However, a week later some of his comments appeared in a Times article as 
coming from a “senior Revenue official”. The article included statements that 
McKenna had “never left my radar”, that “he’s a big risk for us”, that “we 
would like to recover lots of tax relief he’s generated for himself and for 
other people” and that “we’ll clean up on film schemes over the next few years”.

Hartnett also said Ingenious was one of two main providers of film investment 
schemes in the UK, which had enabled investors to avoid at least £5m in tax.

McKenna responded by launching a defamation action, which he later dropped in 
favour of a claim for judicial review. His case was dismissed by the high 
court, and by the court of appeal. But the supreme court has now found in his 
favour, saying HMRC breached the duty of confidentiality it owed to Ingenious 
as a taxpayer.

“The fact that Mr Hartnett did not anticipate his comments being reported is 
in itself no justification for making them,” Lord Toulson, the supreme court 
justice, said in his ruling. “The whole idea of HMRC officials supplying 
confidential information about individuals to the media on a non-attributable 
basis is, or should be, a matter of serious concern.”

Toulson agreed with HRMC that the information shared by Hartnett was limited 
in scope, but said it was not insignificant given the use the newspaper 
articles made of it.

The tax office had justified arranging the briefing on the grounds that it 
wanted to foster good relations with the media and publicise its views about 
elaborate tax avoidance schemes. Toulson said these arguments “cannot possibly 
justify a senior or any other official of HMRC discussing the affairs of 
individual taxpayers with journalists”.

Section 18 of the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 states 
officials “may not disclose information which is held by the Revenue and 
Customs in connection with a function of the Rvenue and Customs”.

Margaret Hodge is wrong to accuse Ingenious Media of tax avoidance | Patrick 
McKenna
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/feb/20/margaret-hodge-ingenious-media-tax-avoidance>
However, tax campaigners such as the MP Margaret Hodge argue the 
confidentiality rules should be reformed. They say greater transparency is 
needed, for example on tax settlements with big companies and high net worth 
individuals.

A HMRC spokesperson said: “Having earlier won this case in both the high court 
and court of appeal, HMRC is naturally disappointed by the judgment handed down 
by the supreme court.

“It is important to clarify that this judgment has no bearing on the three 
Ingenious film partnerships considered by the first-tier tribunal, where HMRC 
was successful. This protected around £400m in revenues for the exchequer.”

Ingenious declined to comment on whether it would now seek damages, or on how 
much compensation it might seek. The firmsold its investment management arm 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/banksandfinance/privateequity/12142119/Film-investor-Ingenious-sells-its-1.8bn-asset-management-business-to-private-equity.html>
, which managed £1.8bn on behalf of its high net worth clients, to private 
equity earlier this year.


“What this isn’t about is restricting HMRC’s ability to collect taxes,” said 
the Ingenious chief executive, Neil Forster. “Nor is it about restricting the 
freedom of the press to pursue public interest stories. This is about the 
principle of protecting taxpayer confidentiality and ensuring that information 
isn’t used by HMRC contrary to its own guidelines in order to pursue 
relationships with the press.”
 