
The PGA of America may be on a collision course over plans to move the US PGA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/uspga> Championship permanently. It is 
understood moves are afoot to switch the major to the final week in May, which 
would conflict directly with one of the European Tour’s key events, the BMW PGA 
Championship at Wentworth.

The return of golf to the Olympics and the willingness of those within the 
sport to be flexible with regard scheduling is likely to mean significant 
changes before 2020. The Players Championship is set to switch back from May to 
March, allowing the US PGA to become the second major of the year,thereby 
alleviating the congestion which occurred this year after July’s Open 
Championship at Troon 
<http://www.insidethegames.biz/articles/1021748/2016-pga-championships-to-be-moved-forward-to-accommodate-olympics>
. There is a rising feeling that the US PGA’s appeal is diminished by its 
proximity to the Open.

Golf likely to extend its run as an Olympic sport until at least 2024
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/golf-olympic-games-sport-2024-ioc>
The initial sense was that the US PGA change would have been only in Olympic 
years. However, the PGA of America’s chief executive, Pete Bevacqua, pointed 
towards a permanent move.

“We are huge proponents of the Olympics,” he told the Golf Channel. “That’s 
something that, with our peer organisations in the game – thePGA Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pga-tour>, the USGA, the R&A, and the 
European Tour – everyone has to share in the burden of what the schedule is 
going to look like in an Olympic year. We are all about the Olympics but we 
also have to protect the PGA Championship and we can’t just bounce the PGA 
Championship around every four years. To truly make it work, to make it succeed 
and to make sure golf is in the Olympics for the next century, the whole 
schedule needs to be adjusted.”

A US PGA Championship in May would cause problems for venues because of the 
climate in the north-east of the country. It would, however, increase the 
chances for alternatives elsewhere.

The impact of that would be felt on the opposite side of the Atlantic. Last 
week, the BMW PGA Championship was confirmed as part of the European Tour’s 
Rolex Series with an enhanced prize fund of $7m from 2017. A clash with the US 
PGA Championship, or even proximity to it, would cause obvious problems.

“We have had dialogue with the PGA of America on this issue and we will 
continue to do so,” a spokesperson for the European Tour said.

The European Tour’s relationship with Wentworth was complicated by a recent 
change of ownership. Reignwood, which bought the club in 2014, enraged a chunk 
of its membership with the introduction of exorbitant fees. As that row rumbled 
on through lawyers, the Wentworth Residents’ Committee threatened to disrupt 
the BMW PGA Championship.

Keith Pelley, the European Tour’s chief executive, also caused controversy by 
stating that the BMW PGA Championship was no longer the flagship competition of 
his organisation. That clashed with what had always been the Tour’s stance, 
while raising a question as to whether or not BMW would extend its 
sponsorship agreement.
 