
I have not seen an advance copy of the speech that Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> will give to the Conservative 
conference, but I can nevertheless reveal that it will include chunky passages 
dedicating her government to doing a lot more for the “just about managing”. I 
know this because the “just about managing”, also known as “ordinary working 
people” and sometimes appearing as “the many, not the privileged few”, have 
populated every important speech about her domestic ambitions that she has made 
in the past 100 days.

Who exactly does she have in mind and why are they such a preoccupation for 
the prime minister? Whether or not you regard yourself as a member of this 
group rather depends on your expectations in life. There are rich folk who will 
complain that they are “just about managing” to afford a holiday on a 
palm-fringed island because of the cost of paying the school fees. Mrs May does 
not seem to have them in mind. “You have a job, but you don’t always have job 
security,” is one of her definitions. “You worry about the cost of living and 
the quality of the local school.” That’s a lot of people, then. Much has been 
written about “the left behind”, especially in the context of the vote to leave 
the EU. The group that has her attention is better described as “the struggling 
to stay afloat”.

In her view, working families with relatively low earnings have been neglected 
by both the major parties: by Labour because of its central preoccupation with 
the poor and by her own party under its previous management. So this emphasis 
strikes a contrast while also seeking to expand the Tory party’s electoral 
base. When Margaret Thatcher was at the height of her powers, she secured her 
victories, two of them landslides, with the help of “blue-collar Tories”. To 
her three victories, John Major added a fourth for the party by keeping that 
coalition intact. Concentrating on the “just about managing” is a possible way 
for the Tories to lure support from Ukip and to go fishing for voters who used 
to back Labour, but won’t buy Jeremy Corbyn and his “21st-century socialism”. 
Mrs May will be encouraged to think that she is in promising territory by the 
focus groups of voters who currently say they like what they are hearing.

To rebalance the distribution she will need to demonstrate she is as steely as 
her friends claim her to be

More than anything else, her emphasis on the “just managing” is founded on a 
view about the EU referendum and why a majority voted to leave. Mrs May keeps 
telling us that “Brexit means Brexit”. She actually believes that Brexit did 
not just mean Brexit. The rejection of EU membership was a symptom of something 
much deeper; the vote for Out was the boiling up of discontents that have been 
brewing for years. The victory for Leave was powered by the economic and social 
distress of the less affluent. Not just among the white, working class whose 
disaffection has been much reported and whose revolt against their traditional 
party so terrifies many Labour MPs. This alienation went much wider than that.

Mrs May and her strategists will be encouraged to think that their analysis is 
correct by a couple of recently released studies. One comes from theResolution 
Foundation 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/publications/hanging-on-the-stresses-and-strains-of-britains-just-managing-families/>
. It identifies the “just managing” as the six million working-age households 
that receive the majority of their income from employment, but who are counted 
among the poorer half of households. It finds that they have suffered a 
pronounced degradation in their incomes since the Great Crash of 2008. That has 
been accompanied by a significant rise in the cost of living, notably the 
amount spent on housing. They have been squeezed at both ends. For many of the 
“just managing”, the rise in housing costs since the turn of the century is the 
equivalent of an extra 14p on the basic rate of income tax. That’s huge. Little 
wonder they are very unhappy with the status quo.

Since the Brexit vote, people have been dicing and slicing the result to 
describe the different ways in which it revealed us to be a divided nation. Old 
versus young. City versus town. England and Wales versus Scotland and Northern 
Ireland. An analysis by theCentre for Social Justice and the Legatum Institute 
<https://lif.blob.core.windows.net/lif/docs/default-source/publications/48-52-healing-a-divided-nation-october-2016-pdf.pdf?sfvrsn=2>
 looks at the referendum through another lens. It contends that how you voted 
came down, most of all, to class and wealth. The upper AB income group was the 
only one in which a majority voted to remain in the EU. In all the other, lower 
income groups, the majority was for Leave. Of people living in households 
earning more than £60,000 a year, 65% supported Remain. Among households 
earning less than £20,000 a year, 62% backed Out. The authors’ conclude that 
“the vote was a cri de coeur from millions of people who feel Westminster no 
longer knows, or even cares, how it feels to walk in their shoes”.

May under pressure to name article 50 date in Tory conference speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/30/may-under-pressure-to-name-article-50-date-in-tory-conference-speech>
Mrs May strives to sound as if she does know what it is like to walk in their 
shoes, even if her preferred footwear is probably not the same as that of most 
of the people to whom she is trying to appeal. There are the potential 
ingredients for a guiding mission for her government here. Ultimately, though, 
she is going to be judged not by what she says, but what she delivers. Her 
rhetorical flourishes have yet to be backed by much solid policy, apart from a 
distracting diversion into trying to revive grammar schools. There is a signal 
that she is interested in doing something about zero hours contracts and other 
forms of employment insecurity with the appointment ofMatthew Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/matthewtaylorrsa>, a former adviser to 
Tony Blair, to head a review into the “gig economy”. She has made noises about 
cracking down on unscrupulous bosses and curbing excessive executive 
remuneration. Her people show awareness that near-zero interest rates and 
quantitative easing have most benefited those who are already asset-rich, 
fuelling the resentment and discontent of the many more who are asset-poor.

To be serious about rebalancing the distribution of rewards in the economy 
would mean demonstrating that she is as steely as her friends claim her to be. 
For it will entail taking on big vested interests which are powerfully 
represented within her own party. The Tory party’s traditional friends in the 
City, already unhappy because of Brexit, are pushing back against reform of 
corporate governance.

The prime minister has promised the “just managing” that “when it comes to 
taxes, we’ll prioritise not the wealthy, but you 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/theresa-may-becomes-britains-prime-minister>
”. That sounds like a rebuke to George Osborne for cutting the top rate of tax 
and easing inheritance tax while jacking up VAT and raiding tax credits that 
support the living standards of lower earners. Is this just a barb at the 
expense of the previous chancellor or does it hint at a more meaningful intent? 
Will her government tilt the tax burden in the other direction by asking for 
more from the wealthy to fund relief for the less affluent? The introduction of 
a wealth tax would be bold and counterintuitive from a Tory prime minister. It 
would also be hugely unpopular with a great many Tory MPs and donors.

Mrs May’s team identify the chronic shortage of affordable housing as an issue 
that requires intense attention. They are correct. It is and it does. Being 
serious about that will mean confronting the Nimbyism that is especially 
prevalent in her party.

Then there’s Brexit, the great question that dwarfs all others for this 
government. Inescapably, the fortunes of the “just managing” are contingent on 
her government finding a way of departing from the EU which is not disastrous 
for the trade, investment and jobs on which so many livelihoods depend. The 
vision of our economic future promoted by some Tory fundamentalists – an 
ultra-low tax, ultra-low regulation Britain – does not sound at all 
reconcilable with Mrs May’s promises. She will address her conference today on 
the subject of Brexit and does so under mounting pressure to get more specific 
about her plan, if she has a plan. What the government is seeking, according to 
theofficial communique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/31/restricting-immigration-will-be-at-heart-of-brexit-deal-theresa-may-says>
 that was released after the Chequers cabinet at the beginning of September, is 
“controls on the numbers of people who come to Britain from Europe but also a 
positive outcome for those who wish to trade goods and services”. That’s as 
defined as mush.

In the absence of a clearer direction from Mrs May, the hard Brexiters have 
been making nearly all of the running in the Tory party. This is making 
business increasingly nervous that Britain could crash out of the EU without a 
deal on trade that they can live with. Hear the anxiety coming from the car 
industry, which directly or indirectly employs nearly a million people, many of 
whom would regard themselves as “just managing”.

Britons are already poorer for Brexit because of the devaluation of the pound. 
Anyone who went abroad for a holiday over the summer will have noticed that. 
Anyone who buys anything made abroad (and this country buys a lot of things 
manufactured elsewhere) will also be increasingly aware that there is a cost to 
Brexit even before it has happened. If Britain’s departure is botched, many of 
the “just about managing” will be left considerably poorer. Some will no longer 
be managing at all. Mrs May’s fine words about them will then come back to 
haunt her, horribly so.
 