
Running the Big Lottery Fund is an "unbelievable blessing" says Dawn Austwick, 
53, who became its chief executive seven months ago. "We have this gift of 
money from people buying lottery tickets that we can use to help to address 
some of the problems people face and allow them to have a bit more joy in their 
lives."

In its 10-year existence, the fund has given away £6bn to thousands of 
voluntary and community groups across the UK to tackle intractable social 
problems such as domestic violence and substance misuse, as well as repairing 
village halls and funding sports kits. Grants range from as little as £300 for 
a local scout group event to seven-figure sums for organisations such as the 
NSPCCto fund new ways of supporting victims of childhood abuse and neglect 
<http://www.biglotteryfund.org.uk/global-content/press-releases/scotland/270213_sco_iic_big-lottery-fund-in-uk-first>
. It's unlikely that there is any part of Britain untouched by one of the 
myriad BLF grants programmes, Austwick says.

Now the fund is consulting on how to spend a further £4bn between 2015-2021 
<http://yourvoiceourvision.org.uk/>. It has proposed concentrating spending on 
four overarching themes: vibrant communities; addressing disadvantage; working 
together and a stronger sector. The aim is to help charities share best 
practice and to build the capacity of communities and individuals. But initial 
online feedback suggests the best way to boost communities is to provide jobs, 
a task Austwick admits is outside the scope of the BLF, although it can fund 
projects to make people more job-ready.

Austwick points out that although the BLF is a big player, "the notion that 
BLF can address acute need is wrong. We can't".

But how much its funding decisions will be determined by the fallout from the 
government's welfare reforms and the bleak outlook facing many cash-strapped 
charities remains to be seen.

Austwick says there is no evidence that grant applications have substantially 
changed since the coalition's austerity programme kicked in. "There are still 
lots of requests to fund community events," she says.

But earlier this year, a six-figure grant from the BLF to a mental health 
charity in Oxfordshire explicitly linked the government's benefit cuts to 
mental health problems by funding the expansion of a benefits advice service 
for people with a mental illness who were finding it increasingly difficult to 
navigate the plethora of welfare changes.

A £200,000 grant announced this week to Stoke-on-Trent food bank to expand its 
services across the city is also a reflection of the times. It follows anaward 
of just under £1m 
<http://www.biglotteryfund.org.uk/global-content/press-releases/scotland/160414_sco_iic_scotland-food-banks>
 to the Trussell Trust in April to develop a network of food banks across 
Scotland.

Austwick describes food banks as the "classic funders' dilemma". "How do you 
address disdvantage when the need is acute and is going to far outstrip the 
supply of money?" She contests evidence that government policy is driving 
people to food banks and suggests instead that "it's a complicated equation and 
you'd want to deconstruct what is happening here". One solution, she believes, 
could be teaching food bank users to cook. "People being able to cook well on a 
budget may not be the diagnosis of the problem, but it could be a solution and 
arguably has multidimentional benefits both for them and for society," she says.

When John Major created the National Lottery in 1994, he vowed that money from 
the sale of lottery tickets would go to "good causes", not to prop up 
government spending on public services. TheNational Lottery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lottery> Act 2006 wrote the additionality 
principle into legislation and distributors are currently required to outline 
the ways in which they ensure that lottery funding does not act as a 
replacement for government funds.

But how long can that last with libraries closing and parks and playgrounds 
likely to shut their gates as council funding dries up? Austwick points to 
BLF's existing £80m community libraries programme, which has refurbished 77 
libraries in England since 2006, and its joint iniative with fellow lottery 
distributor, the Heritage Lottery Fund, parks for people, which has delivered 
£150m investment in parks in England over eight years. These programmes were 
designed to transform libraries and parks into community hubs, not to keep them 
open. "We won't fund books. No one reads them anyway," she laughs.

Austwick wants to ensure the resilience of the voluntary and community sector, 
but that doesn't mean spending all its money on the sector, nor does it mean 
ensuring the survival of individual organisations. "It's about the health of 
a sector overall," she says.

She says she is in constant awe of the projects she visits, and talks with 
some passion about a father in Derry who set up a charity, called Destined, 
because he saw his daughter, who has learning difficulties, becoming more and 
more excluded; and about A Way Out in Stockton, which has received a number of 
grants over the years after a local woman decided to help women and young 
people in her neighbourhood who were substance misusers.

It is the reason, she says, why she seems so upbeat, in contrast to charity 
campaigners who despair at the impact of austerity. "The people I meet who we 
fund are extraordinary. It's just awe-inspiring what they've done… I accept the 
landscape is complicated and challenging, but I feel privileged and excited 
about what we can do to help."

Curriculum vitae

Age 53

Lives north London.

Family Married, three children.

Education Royal High School, Bath; London University BA Combined Hons, London 
Business School MBA; London Metropolitan University, honorary doctorate.

Career 2013-present: Chief executive, Big Lottery Fund; 2005- 2013: chief 
executive, Esmée Fairbairn Foundation; 2002-2005: deputy director, British 
Museum; 2000-2002: freelance consultant; 1995-2000: project director, Tate 
Modern; 1986-1994: principal consultant, KPMG; 1985-86: theatre manager, Half 
Moon Theatre; 1983-85: projects Co-ordinator, Association for Business 
Sponsorship of the Arts.

Public life member, advisory board and UK advisory board to the G8 Social 
Impact Investment Taskforce of Big Society Capital; chair, Foundations Forum; 
trustee of Historic Royal Palaces (chair of audit committee).

Interests Cycling, gardening and a devoted Gooner.
 