
Not long ago, Tuesday morning’s revelations at the royal commission into 
institutional responses to child abuse would have made headlines round the 
world. Priest after priest in theMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> archdiocese of the 
Catholic church was caught abusing children. And for decades bishop after 
bishop ignored these crimes.


The priests were caught abusing as soon as they left the seminary. They kept 
abusing despite “treatment” and despite being shifted from parish to parish. 
The church knew what was going on and for a very long time no one called the 
police.


But Melbourne fits the now familiar pattern of the Catholic world. Gail 
Furness SC, piling up the numbers in her dry opening address to the 35th case 
study of the royal commission, might have been talking of Chicago, Brussels or 
Caracas.


Catholic archdiocese of Melbourne had 450 child sex abuse claims in 35 years – 
inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/24/catholic-archdiocese-of-melbourne-had-450-child-sex-abuse-claims-in-35-years-inquiry>
In Melbourne over the past 35 years, 454 people made claims or substantiated 
complaints about child sexual abuse by priests, religious employees or 
volunteers. Of those, 335 made claims against priests. Seven accused priests 
accounted for 54% of all claims.

What sets the city apart from cities in Europe and America is how little the 
church has had to pay. Furness puts the bill for damages plus legal and medical 
costs at not quite $18m.


But claims are still coming.


Before the day began, the atmosphere in the foyer of the Melbourne county 
court was strangely cheerful. So much pain and so many years have brought 
victims to this place, but they meet on these occasions as old friends.


They swap war stories about the hassles of the past and their latest dealings 
with the church. Things have changed for the abused and their advocates – the 
commission itself is their triumph – but they report church authorities still 
make tough demands on them.


Absent but everywhere was George Pell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-pell>. Though other bishops 
living and dead will have their reputations raked over by the commission, the 
hearings over the next month will essentially assess the record of the man who 
now sits in Rome as the treasurer of the Catholic church.


The cardinal has broken with the church’s legal team and its gentle 
determination not to cross-examine victims. After turning all his career for 
help to the top end of town, Pell has engaged the Melbourne mega-advocate Allan 
Myers to test his accusers.


To the disappointment of the crowd, Myers was a no-show on day one. But among 
the dozens of lawyers filling the first several rows of the court sat his 
junior, Sam Duggan. He will be Myers’ eyes and ears until the time comes.


The commissioners are circling Pell. They have already explored the foothills 
of his career: his time as a priest in Ballarat when he maintains he was barely 
aware of abuse by priests in the diocese.


The commissioners are circling George Pell

And they have examined his role as archbishop of Melbourne setting up his own 
scheme to compensate abuse victims. But now they are looking at the years in 
between: at his first, crucial post in Melbourne from the mid 1980s as an 
auxiliary bishop under archbishop Frank Little.


Early in that time Little sent Pell to deal with crazed Father Peter Searson 
who was terrifying children in the poor parish of Doveton with guns, knives, 
perpetual confession, hanging around their toilets and much other weird 
behaviour.

 That he did nothing effective to deal with Searson in those years hangs over 
Pell’s reputation today. Parents, parishioners and teachers all wanted the 
priest gone. Complaints about the priest went back a decade. But beyond 
dressing Searson down once or twice, Pell appears to have done little.

George Pell should front child sex abuse inquiry in Ballarat, says Daniel 
Andrews
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/07/george-pell-should-front-child-sex-abuse-inquiry-in-ballarat-says-daniel-andrews>
That little will be closely examined by the commission. Expect hand-to-hand 
forensic contest on this ground. Furness warned in her opening address “there 
was no serious investigation of any complaint made” about Searson “during the 
80s and early 90s”.


And she has foreshadowed a damning verdict by the present archbishop of 
Melbourne of his predecessors’ handling of the Searson scandal. Furness said: 
“Archbishop Hart is expected to say, there was a ‘complete failure of process’ 
in the handling of complaints in Doveton by the archdiocese.”


Pell will also be answering to the commission for his dealings with paedophile 
priests Billy Baker of North Richmond, Kevin O’Donnell of Oakleigh, and Ronald 
Pickering, who fled Gardenvale for London where Pell sent him each month the 
stipend of a retired priest.


Pell’s good work for the finances of the Melbourne archdiocese was documented 
dramatically by Furness in her opening address. Pell’s Melbourne Response paid 
victims so little. In Chicago each abuse claim has cost the church about US$1m. 
In Melbourne the tariff was $46,000.


It’s a little miracle. 

 * This story was amended on 25 November 2015 to clarify the number of claims 
made against priests in the period under consideration by the commission
 