
I can still dimly remember the ructions over the introduction of the sex 
discrimination bill in 1983 but, even so, reading back now, the debate is 
astonishing.

The proposed law was groundbreaking but also pretty modest. It built on 
existing state laws to prohibit discrimination against women on the basis of 
gender, marital status or pregnancy.

But, at the time, some saw it – quite literally – as the end of civilisation. 
It was going to destroy the family, and the economy, and Christianity, and it 
was also a communist plot – a conclusion somehow reached because the 
legislative power was drawn from a UN treaty and because a lot of women worked 
in the Soviet Union.

Inquiry to examine 'disturbingly low' job rate for older Australians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/15/inquiry-to-examine-disturbingly-low-job-rate-for-older-australians>
The woman who did most to push through this building block in Australian 
women’s fight for legal and economic equality, and who bore the brunt of the 
backlash, retired this week fromher final post-politics job as age 
discrimination commissioner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/15/inquiry-to-examine-disturbingly-low-job-rate-for-older-australians>
.

Susan Ryan, who was elected as a senator for the ACT in 1975 (on the platform 
“A woman’s place is in the Senate”) had in 1983 been appointed by Bob Hawke as 
Labor’s first female minister, including as minister assisting the prime 
minister for the status of women. She introduced the SDA and she remembers the 
ensuing furore vividly.

The main anti-feminist group opposed to the bill was the wonderfully named 
Women Who Want to beWomen <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, and 
Ryan recalls them as “very well organised, media savvy and driven – they really 
thought they were having their femininity destroyed”.

“They said they loved their husbands and they didn’t want to take their jobs,” 
she explained when we met for coffee this week.

“They got tens of thousands of petitions and in those days the petitions used 
to be physically wheeled into the Senate, and they had all their petitions on 
pink paper to emphasise their core femininity.”

Greens promise to end religious exemptions to Sex Discrimination Act
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/17/greens-promise-to-end-religious-exemptions-to-sex-discrimination-act>
Most of the parliamentary debate on the bill was by necessity conducted by 
men, since there were only six women elected to the House of Representatives in 
1983 and 13 to the Senate, but many felt well-informed on the subject because 
they had consulted their wives, and sometimes other men’s wives as well.

This was a contribution by Tasmanian Liberal MP Bruce Goodluck about the bill 
and the Women’s Electoral Lobby – a group that strongly supported it.

“I talked to my wife, I talked to other wives in my electorate ... and I could 
not get any views that coincided with the view of the Women’s Electoral Lobby,” 
Goodluck said.

“I started to do my research on this Women’s Electoral Lobby. Most of the 
members of it were given-up Catholics. They are all women who had had problems, 
etcetera. They were women who had something against men. I thought to myself, 
‘Boy, what ... a nucleus for us to follow’, when in fact the silent majority of 
women did not have very much to say about this bill at all.

“They used the word ‘discrimination’ ... I thought: ‘We are living in the 
1980s. My wife is not discriminated against. The women I know are not 
discriminated against.’

“I have looked at the four women on the government side,” he continued.

The majority of Liberal women are quiet and do not say much.

“They are nice ladies … But they are all the same. They are always campaigning 
to save the cats, save the dogs and save the whales. They are anti-nuclear and 
pro-abortion … They are anti the flag and anti the dam … That is predominantly 
what Labor party women are like. But they can talk; they are dashed good 
talkers. We have a few Liberal women who cross those lines and who are called 
trendy. But the majority of Liberal women are quiet and do not say much.”

Ryan needed to be a “dashed good talker” to push the SDA bill through, against 
this storm of opposition and growing nervousness on her own side of politics 
about the electoral ramifications.Fred and Elaine Nile organised a rally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/nov/14/same-sex-marriage-bill-defeated>
 to “Stop the Ryan juggernaut”, labelling her “Australia’s feminist dictator”.

“All that sort of stuff worried my caucus colleagues,” Ryan says.

“They’d say, it’s all right for you running around Canberra but what about me 
in my electorate ... they got very sick of it, including the ministers who 
couldn’t get other legislation through. They called it Susan’s sex bill and 
more than once a colleague would say ‘Can’t we just drop it?’.”

New disability, human rights and age discrimination commissioners appointed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/05/new-disability-human-rights-and-age-discrimination-commissioners-appointed>
The filibuster in the Senate dragged on for months, led by the Tasmanian 
independent senator Brian Harradine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/14/longest-serving-independent-senator-brian-harradine-dies-aged-79>
 and the Liberal senator Shirley Walters.

“It seemed endless,” Ryan says, “and it got ridiculous. Harradine said now 
women would be able to be postmen and what would happen when a motorbike fell 
on them, or another big fear was what if a woman became a truck driver and then 
if the other driver was a man, because that would obviously destroy that man’s 
marriage.”

The SDA did eventually pass. And while women still earn about 17% less than 
men, and workplace discrimination continues, and the third and fourth waves of 
feminism have moved on to other important debates, even a cursory glance at the 
barriers for any woman seeking legal or economic independence before the 
federal and state sex discrimination laws shows how much they helped change 
things.

Ryan’s own working life is a case study. She went to Sydney University on a 
teaching scholarship to do a BA and a diploma of education but when the 
principal of the teachers college saw her engagement ring (she married the
diplomat Richard Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/nov/11/iraq.ewenmacaskill> in 1963) she 
was told she now couldn’t be a teacher and she would have to pay back all the 
tuition money she had already received. When she and Butler arrived in Canberra 
there was still a ban on married women working in the commonwealth public 
service. (It was lifted in 1966.) Industrial courts had begun to accept the 
principle of equal pay but, in practice, Ryan says, women were still “locked by 
discrimination into an employment and pay ghetto”, earning about two-thirds 
less than men and usually relegated to admin and support roles.

Women could not get bank loans independently. “I remember one woman who had 
worked atthe National Library 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/14/national-librarys-trove-a-great-digital-democracy-under-threat>
 for years and was well paid but she wasn’t married, so to get a bank loan she 
had to get her father to go co-guarantor. There were barriers to financial 
independence everywhere. And there was no way to complain against 
discrimination.”

The SDA was one of the legal foundations for women to have economic 
independence and, for second-wave feminists such as Ryan who remember a world 
when discrimination was not unlawful, that independence is the foundation for 
everything else women have achieved. She’s concerned that as that past is 
forgotten, it might be taken for granted.

“I worry sometimes, the way popular culture and advertising works and 
celebrity culture works, that younger women might not always hang on to the 
need for their own economic independence. They’re fed this idea of what we 
always considered a trap of thinking a Prince Charming will save them, that the 
greatest thing that can happen is that a handsome, rich man will marry you.

Labor senators call for party to block marriage equality plebiscite legislation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/04/labor-senators-call-for-party-to-block-marriage-equality-plebiscite-legislation>
“I think the greatest thing that can happen to a girl is that she makes her 
own decisions, is economically independent and can have a family or not have a 
family, marry or not marry, as she decides.”

As a politician, Ryan avoided talking about her private life.

“I felt protective of my children and I didn’t want to present myself as a 
woman who was distracted. After I left parliament it became quite common for 
female politicians to talk endlessly about their juggling. I didn’t do that. I 
didn’t have the children in my election pictures. And I certainly didn’t answer 
any questions about my private life. I was divorced [in 1972]. I lived with a 
guy for the first years of parliament and then we split and then after that I 
didn’t live with anyone for the rest of my parliamentary career but I had 
boyfriends from time to time. I just never acknowledged it, and no one was that 
interested really.”

Now she’ll spend time with her partner, children and grandchild and maybe “set 
up a movement for politically switched on older women”.

I wanted to interview her on her retirement to her to mark what she achieved. 
But as Australia prepares for other big, and inevitably bitter, debates on 
things such as same-sex marriage, it was also a reminder; of how hugely 
divisive fights over fundamental legal equalities can be so quickly forgotten 
and how important it is to remember the inequalities that made them necessary 
in the first place.
 