
All of Dr Seuss’s children’s books – or, at least, the best ones – are sly, 
radical humanitarian and environmental parables. That’s why, for example, The 
Lorax was banned in some Pacific Northwest districts where logging was the 
chief economy.

Or there’s Horton Hears a Who: if you weren’t a child (or reading to a child) 
recently, it’s about an elephant with acute hearing who hears a cry from a dust 
speck. He comes to realize the dust speck is a planet in need of protection, 
and does his best for it.

Of course, all the other creatures mock – and then threaten – Horton for 
raising an alarm over something they can’t see. (Dissent is an easy way to get 
yourself ostracized or worse, as any feminist receiving online death threats 
can remind you.) And though Seuss was reportedlyinspired by the situation in 
post-war Japan 
<http://books.google.com/books?id=IjvHQsCn_pgC&pg=PA54&lpg=PA53#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 when he wrote the book, but its parable is flexible enough for our time.

You could call the scientists and the climate activists of our present moment 
our Hortons. They heard the cry a long time ago, and they’ve been trying to get 
the rest of the world to listen. They’ve had to endure attacks, mockery, and 
lip service ... but mostly just obliviousness to what they’re saying and what 
it demands of us.

Recent polling data suggests most of us do want to see things change. “Two in 
three Americans (66%) support the Congress and president passing laws to 
increase energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy as a way to reduce 
America’s dependence on fossil fuels,”reports the US Climate Action Network 
<http://www.usclimatenetwork.org/resource-database/politics-and-global-warming-spring-2014>
. But I hear firsthand from people who aren’t particularly informed and still 
tell me that they are avoiding thinking about climate because it’s too late.

 It is nearly too late, because we’ve know about climate change for 25 years, 
but the most informed scientists think that we do have a chance and some 
choices, if we make them now.

To listen to such scientists is an amazing and sometimes terrifying thing: 
they fully comprehend what systemic collapse means and where we are in that 
process. They – and others who pay attention to the data – see how terrible the 
possibilities are, but they also see the possibilities for averting the worst.

Seuss’s Horton was alone. Climate activists in the United States are a 
minority, but there are vast numbers of people across the world who know how 
serious the situation is, who are facing it and who are listening and asking 
for action. Some of them will be with us when the biggest climate march in 
history takes place on Sunday 
<http://gothamist.com/2014/09/17/climage_change_march_nyc.php> in New York City 
– starting on the southern edge one of the nation’s largest urban green spaces, 
Central Park, running around Times Square and then moving west to the Hudson 
River – to demand that the UN get serious with this attempt to hammer out a 
climate change treaty at its summit next week.

A whole lot more people are going to come together to demand that our 
political leaders do something about climate than have done so before. In a 
symbolic action, at 12:58pm local time, they will observe a collective couple 
of minutes of silence dedicated to the past. Wherever you are on Sunday, you 
can join us in observing that silence and rememberingthe millions displaced 
last year by the kinds of floods and storms that climate change augments 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/09/16/us-foundation-disasters-displaced-idUSKBN0HB2PG20140916>
, or the residents of island nations whose homes are simply disappearing under 
the waves; the small shellfish whose shells are dissolving or the species that 
have died out altogether; the elderly and inform who have died in our longer, 
hotter heatwaves or the people who died in New York’s Hurricane Sandy not quite 
two years ago.

At 1pm local time, we will face the future, and demand that our leaders face 
the music. The marchers will make two minutes of noise, and every pot-banger, 
church-bell-ringer, hornblower and drummer on earth is invited to join in. 
Churches are invited to ring their bells; synagogues to blow their shofars; 
mosques to use their loudspeakers; secular humanists to get their brass bands 
on. Get your own pots and pans, or your trumpets and whistles.

We needed someone to ring the alarm all these decades of inaction. On Sunday 
don’t wait to hear it from someone else: make some noise yourself. It’s time to 
start making the future we hope for instead of waiting for the one we fear.

I wish that I could write a pat ending for the story of how we saved the 
earth, but that is, so to speak, all up in the air right now.

But at the end of Horton Hears a Who, the small people of Whoville decide to 
make a huge roar so that everyone else could hear them: they all roar and bang 
and blast, but it takes a boy named Jojo (playing with his yoyo) to add his 
yapping voice to the roar for them to become audible.

This is our planet: our little blue sphere in the Orion Spur of the Milky Way 
Galaxy, with the beautifully elaborate systems of birds and insects and weather 
and flowering plants all working together – or that used to work together, and 
which are now falling apart. And it’s your voice that’s needed, so raise it on 
Sunday. Join the roar, so that everyone who wasn’t listening finally has to 
hear.

• This article was updated on 17 September 2014 to reflect that the the New 
York City Police Department only granted the People’s Climate March permission 
to march to Sixth Avenue, and not all the way to theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> building on First Avenue.
 