
Writing of the British intellectuals who fell for Stalin, George Orwell came 
up with a sentence thatapplies 
<http://www.ourcivilisation.com/smartboard/shop/orwellg/whale2.htm> as well to 
today’s conservatives as to the socialists of the 1930s. “So much of leftwing 
thought is a kind of playing with fire by people who don’t even know that fire 
is hot.” I was repeating it almost hourly as I watched the frivolous, 
dishonest, over-privileged and over-grown adolescents who presumed to govern us 
skip away from the consequences of their folly.

At a moment when Britain is more fragile and angry than I have seen it, when 
parliament has been silenced by the referendum, and the opposition has 
collapsed, they have manured the soil in which extremism flourishes.

Before I go on, I accept that you cannot get a hearing on immigration, race 
and the backlashes they inspire until you acknowledge hard truths. It is not 
the case that everyone who voted to leave was racist, or even primarily 
concerned about immigration. It is arguable that the origins of our crisis lie 
in the last Labour government’s decision to open Britain up to hundreds of 
thousands it never expected to arrive.

If you want me to agree that the nags of the multicultural left have alienated 
millions by telling them what they can and cannot say, I am happy to do so. I 
have been saying it for years. I have also noted the danger of telling white 
voters not be sexist, racist and homophobic, and expecting that they wouldn’t 
notice the double-standard when “liberals” condemned those who fought the same 
prejudices in minority cultures as Islamophobes.

Caveats made and faults acknowledged, let us concentrate on the wreckage 
before us. Vote Leave, the respectable campaign of those “progressive” 
Conservatives Michael Gove, Boris Johnson, Iain Duncan Smith, Andrea Leadsom 
and Chris Grayling, promised not to incite racial tension. Last October, it
barely mentioned 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/eu-referendum-why-isnt-immigration-major-issue-vote-leave-campaign-1523288>
 immigration in its propaganda. In May, its officers tried to ban Nigel Farage 
from the airwaves, so wary were they of contamination.

For all that, Farage proved to be the Mephistopheles of the Tory leavers. He 
offered them victory in return for what paltry souls they possessed. Going hard 
on immigration was the only way to win, he said. After a glance at the polls, 
“progressive” Tories agreed. On 3 June, a triumphant Farage could boast that 
their conversion was the “turning point”; the moment when Ukip’s wining stance 
on immigration became “mainstream”. It is still not true to say that race and 
immigration were all that mattered to everyone who voted leave. But they were 
all that mattered to Vote Leave. Mainstream Tories accepted that creating and 
exploiting fear would take them to victory. They played with fire and you can 
hear the flames crackling.

Conservative commentators speak about the violence we are experiencing with 
the glibness of a guilty conscience. The five-fold increase in complaints to 
the police about racial abuse and attacks since the referendum is not as bad as 
it seems, they say. If you look at the actual numbers rather than the 
headline-grabbing percentages, you see a mere increase from63 incidents a week 
to 331 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/30/police-report-fivefold-increase-race-hate-crimes-since-brexit-result>
. It is regrettable that the readers of their newspapers and supporters of 
their Brexit campaign firebomb halal butchers and scrawl “Polish vermin” on 
cultural centres. They deplore it. Of course they do. But let us keep a sense 
of proportion. Let us not get carried away. This is hardly a race war, and we 
are not demagogues.

Even if every one of our Tory Fausts receives the damnation they deserve, we 
are stuck with a pact we never signed

If they were sincere, they would have spoken with care throughout the 
campaign. But how could they? If they had insisted that Poles living here were 
welcome, they would have alienated the “demographic” Farage correctly 
identified would take them to victory. If they had said that immigration would 
continue as it is now when we left the EU, Johnson and many Tory politicians 
would have been expressing their honestly held view. But they would have 
exposed the lie at the heart of the Leave campaign as they spoke their minds. 
It pretended we could slash immigration and boost the economy together, and 
that was a “having it all” fantasy.

The lie is boomeranging back. After making the most expensive leadership 
challenge in British history on behalf of a cause he did not believe in, 
Johnson’s coup has failed. Gove looks as if the best he can hope for is a minor 
role in someone else’s administration. But even if every one of our Tory Fausts 
receives the damnation they deserve, we are stuck with a pact we never signed.

Business, the City, workers with jobs to lose and expats living abroad will 
insist that we retain our current access to the single market and free 
movement. The government may be able to get the immigration figures down a 
little by asking the EU to accept thatonly workers with job offers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/working-eu-uk-free-movement-permit-easy-entry-migrants-jobs-automatic-rights->
 can come to Britain.

Yet the big truth would remain that we have gone through the greatest 
constitutional crisis since the war to end up pretty much where we were before. 
Immigration would not fall significantly. The most striking difference would be 
that we would lose the ability to influence most of the EU laws and regulations 
our businesses have to follow.

Alternatively we could really leave. Inflation would rise as the pound sunk, 
jobs would go, and public services and businesses would suffer as immigrant 
labour abandoned us.

Whatever choice Brexit forces on us, Ukip and forces to its right will 
prosper. They will be able to say to supporters old and new that they were lied 
to and betrayed. Either immigrants would still be coming or their 
grievance-filled followers would be getting poorer.

I cannot imagine better conditions for resentment to rise. A referendum that 
was meant to let “the people take control” and “restore trust” will have 
achieved the opposite. You do not need an over-active imagination to picture 
the threats to the safety of anyone who looks or is foreign that may follow.

Last week’s violence could just be the start. Naturally, not everyone will 
suffer. No one is going to vandalise the Hurlingham club or firebomb Fortnum & 
Mason. Johnson, Farage, Gove, Leadsom, Duncan Smith and Grayling will have 
played with fire safe in the knowledge that, whoever else burned, it would not 
be them.
 