
Ray Webber has a boxful of books to sign, a launch to attend and a nurse to 
make sure he is in full working order. When I arrive at his flat in the Bristol 
suburbs, the nurse has hoisted his shirt over his head and is applying a 
stethoscope to his bare back. Webber says he has trouble breathing and has to 
walk with a frame. But then, as he points out, he did turn 93 in March.


Physically, Webber has seen better days, but his poems are limber and fresh, 
full of a loose, playful energy that has earned him a small but ardent 
following on the city’s arts scene. His debut collection,High on Rust 
<http://www.tangentbooks.co.uk/high-on-rust-ray-webber-selected-poems.html>, 
amounts to an autobiographical flurry. It bounds from his birth in the slums 
(bedbugs, drunken midwife) to the death of an infant sister to his first kiss 
on the cobblestones outside the cigarette factory. Towards the end, Webber 
brings us bang up to date, describing himself as “a sickening hunk of old 
flesh”, a man with one foot already through the exit door.


Best get a move on – it could be curtains for me any time!

Check-up complete, the poet requests that the curtains be drawn because the 
sun hurts his eyes. He explains that he suffers repeated angina attacks and 
then gestures at my recorder. “So you had best get a move on. Any time could be 
curtains.”


Webber has spent his life writing largely in secret, underground, stealing 
moments here and there in the working day. He was raised in poverty, the son of 
the leader of the Bristol communist party, and went on to join the Young 
Communist League. He recalls gatecrashing blackshirt rallies in the 1930s, 
getting beaten up and kicked out. Later he worked as a postman and chaired the 
local painters’ and decorators’ union.

Poetry, he says, was a private obsession. Entirely self-taught, he thrilled to 
the work ofFrank O’Hara <http://www.frankohara.org/writing.html]>, William 
Burroughs <https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamburroughs>, TS Eliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ts-eliot> and developed a habit of plucking 
opening lines from newspaper crosswords and then customising them. “I always 
had words and rhymes running round in my head,” he says. “It made me 
absent-minded. When I was a postman, I kept missing the turnings, walking up to 
the wrong house.”


Yet what’s striking about Webber’s work is how expansive it is. It’s a great 
yawp to the world – it demands to be noticed. Why squirrel these poems away in 
the shadows? Isn’t it the duty of all writers to communicate with the public? 
Webber’s unconvinced, fearing I’m being elitist. “But that’s what I was doing,” 
he says flatly. “And I was doing it on a daily basis. You don’t need poetry or 
any other art form to communicate with people or to have an effect on their 
lives.”

In the mid-70s he briefly broke cover, entering a competition arranged by the 
Bristol Evening Post. Even handing in the envelope, he figured his chances were 
good. “I was cobbling together lines that made no obvious sense, because I was 
very influenced by Burroughs’ cut-up prose. I thought, ‘One thing’s for 
certain: no one’s writing a poem like that about Bristol.’ Then my nephew 
opened the paper and said, ‘You bastard, you won.’”


He was invited to join the Bristol poetry society 
<http://www.poetrysoc.com/content/publications/poetrynews/pn2002/bristol/>. He 
made new friends and “blossomed out”. It was one of these supporters – poet and 
musicianSteve Bush <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Essential_Bop> – who arranged 
for his work to be published.


I haven’t had so many angina attacks. Toni, my nurse, ​thinks it’s down to the 
book

Webber realises his situation makes him a novelty, an aberration – a debut 
author in his 10th decade – but seems sanguine. “Here we are clinging to this 
tiny planet and who knows if there’s any other life out there in the universe? 
When you think of it like that, we’re all aberrations. But now it’s happened, 
it’s good. I feel a lot calmer and I haven’t been getting so many angina 
attacks. Toni, my nurse, thinks it’s down to the book.”


It’s a curious experience, reading Webber’s collection. It casts his life as 
such an open book – teeming with half chances, small epiphanies, aspirations, 
conversations and mishaps – that certain elements become conspicuous by their 
absence. I read the thing from cover to cover. I’m not seeing much evidence of 
a wife and family in there. “No,” he says. “I was always scared by that. I 
didn’t think I was a suitable candidate for marriage. That was because of my 
own general inadequacy. All sorts of neurotic feelings. I had one or two 
periods of anxiety and depression. Just the feeling that I was different, I 
guess.”


I ask him what he’d do differently if he had his time again and he laughs and 
says pretty much everything. “I left school at 14. If I could start over, just 
to let my imagination run wild, I’d get into further education by hook or by 
crook. I’d go for English lit and philosophy. And that would have changed my 
life in other ways, more important than poetry. I might have got married, might 
have met some girls.”


But there’s no point looking back. His life is what it is and it’s all there 
in the book. “I believe in modesty,” he says, “but one can overdo that. I wrote 
some decent poems and I did it all on my own. That’s something to be proud of.”

• High on Rust is published by Tangent Books, price £9.99.
 