
History is often best understood outside of the books that record it, when it 
is experienced in the lands that staged it, by its actors’ descendants.


And history, for all its serpentine connections and resonances, is what 
inspired two priests – Bishop Haigazoun Najarian and Deacon Nishan Basmajian 
from the Armenian Apostolic Church of the holy resurrection in Chatswood, 
Sydney – to recently undertake a 4000km pilgrimage deep into Warlpiri country 
in the Northern Territory.

At the remote community of Lajamanu – over a thousand kilometres from Darwin - 
Najarian presented the local community Baptist church with two ornately 
engraved Armenian “khachkars” or cross stones. The cross stones were blessed 
before a congregation of local elders, children, dogs and a delegation of 
non-Indigenous visitors – the culmination of three years’ planning by 
Australian Catholic University academic Judith Crispin.

During the service Najarian evoked the difficulties that the Warlpiri and 
Armenians faced, historically and currently. Both, he said, had been subject to 
massacres – the Armenians at the hands of the Ottoman Turks and the Warlpiri by 
white settlers, miners and police – and they’d had to fight for the survival of 
their respective cultures.

Why the number of Indigenous deaths in the frontier wars matters | Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/15/why-the-number-of-indigenous-deaths-in-the-frontier-wars-matters>
Crispin explained how it took her three years to convince the Armenians – who 
had never been to remote Australia – to visit Warlpiri country.

“They’ve not been anywhere remote in Australia before so it was a big thing 
for them. I’m working on a project related to the Armenian genocide, which is 
how I know the priests, and I’ve been visiting Lajamanu twice a year for four 
years now ... so it was really just a case of bringing together the two 
groups,” she said.

“It occurred to me that rather than just feeling sickened by my (Australian) 
government’s ongoing refusal to acknowledge the Armenian genocide, or to 
dignify Aboriginal people with a complete account of past massacres, I might 
possibly facilitate a mutually supportive relationship between Armenians and 
Warlpiri.”

After the service at Lajamanu, a mutual statement was hand-written and signed 
by the Armenian clerics and by the local pastor and Warlpiri elder, Jerry 
Jangala Patrick.

It reads: “Together we acknowledge the past massacres of Yapa people and other 
Australian Indigenous people and the genocide of Armenian people in 1915. We 
stand together today as brothers in solidarity.”

The Australian government, like many other liberal democracies, refuses to 
formally acknowledge the mass killings of Armenian people that began in 1915, 
as “genocide”. Turkey expends enormous diplomatic and political effort to 
ensure that countries such as Australia do not formally acknowledge the 
slaughter of the Armenians as genocide.

The beginning of the attempted annihilation of the Armenians coincided almost 
precisely with Australia’s participation in the British invasion and failed 
occupation of Gallipoli in April 1915. There are witness accounts by Australian 
prisoners of war of the Turkish mistreatment and killing of the Armenians – 
though this has never been part of Australia’s carefully cultivated Anzac 
story, a myth that relies heavily on continued warm relations between Ankara 
and Canberra.

Indeed, the Turks have lobbied successive federal governments intensively to 
ensure that mention of the Armenian genocide did not cruel centenary 
commemorative celebrations around the 100th anniversary of the Anzac Gallipoli 
invasion. At one point theTurkish government threatened to ban Australian 
politicians <http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2013/s3831003.htm> who had 
formally acknowledged Armenian genocide from Anzac commemorations at Gallipoli 
in 2015.

In Australia, at least, the Anzac story has eclipsed the history of what 
happened to the minority Armenian Christians, about a million-and-a-half of 
whom died in Ottoman purges.

The Australian War Memorial, despite having ample material in its collections 
about the Turkish orchestrated mass murder of the Armenians, does not tell the 
story.

Anzac, more than any other, has, of course, become Australia’s foundation 
story – at the expense of so much pre- and post-colonial history. The story of 
the failed invasion and occupation on a distant finger of the Ottomans 
supersedes, in public and political consciousness, that other invasion – that 
by the British Empire of this continent on 26 January, 1788, that preceded 
frontier wars and battles across the continent that culminated in massacres of 
Indigenous people well into the 20th century.

While the continuing violence and oppression of Australian Indigenous people, 
and their social disadvantage, can be linked directly to the trauma of the 
frontier and the ensuing assimilation-ist policies, the last accepted 
“massacre” of up to 100 Indigenous people happened at Coniston in 1928.

Coincidentally the man who led the Coniston massacre, mounted constable George 
Murray, was a former Anzac light horseman who served at Gallipoli. His tactics 
of pursuit and “dispersal” of the Indigenes – including many Warlpiri – were an 
acquired part of his training as an Australian Light Horseman. Murray was, 
naturally, exonerated after the white establishment rallied around him (another 
shameful story, for another time, involving some of Australia’s most revered 
public families).

Anyway, such are the roots that link seemingly disparate strands of history.

Of his visit to Lajamanu, Najarian says: “I did not know what to expect – the 
only common thing I could share with the people was suffering, loss of land, a 
culture, tradition and identity ... The catch was our suffering because of the 
genocide ... and the suffering of the Aboriginal people.”
 