
Reeves and Mortimer
Glasgow, then touring

For a while, when scheduled 2015 performances were cancelled because of Bob’s 
triple heart bypass, it looked as if Reeves and Mortimer’s so-called Poignant 
Moments tour wouldn’t even get as far as the stage. But the pop-surrealist duo 
are back with a glut of December performances of their shamelessly nostalgic, 
catchphrase-heavy show marking 25 years of nonsense comedy.

29 November, Clyde Auditorium, Glasgow. 30 November-1 December, Newcastle City 
Hall. Then touring to 16 December

Stewart Lee
Leicester Square theatre, London

The presiding genius of cerebral British comedy returns to his home-from-home, 
the Leicester Square theatre, for another festive-season run. His live work in 
recent times has often been billed as mere prep for his Comedy Vehicle on BBC2 
– but that series, unhappily, was cancelled earlier this year. The silver 
lining may be a renewed focus on Lee’s live work, in which case we’ll be in for 
a treat with his new show, Content Provider.
From 8 November-28 January (not 11 December-1 January), stewartlee.co.uk 
<http://stewartlee.co.uk>

Sofie Hagen
Soho theatre, London

For many, Christmas is a time of anxiety, rather than festivity. Anglo-Danish 
comic Sofie Hagen, voted Edinburgh’s best newcomer in 2015, probably falls into 
that category, but she also offers a remedy in the form of her touring show 
Shimmer Shatter. Launched at this year’s fringe, it addresses her own anxiety 
issues and is now being toured with a “reduced anxiety” agenda, whereby bespoke 
provisions are promised for anyone afflicted, as Hagen is, with acute social 
unease.
From 5-17 December, sofiehagen.com <http://sofiehagen.com>

David Brent and Foregone Conclusion Bournemouth, then touring

Freelove Freeway, Spaceman Came Down, Paris Nights – when David Brent sang 
those excruciating tracks in series one of The Office, none of us expected he’d 
be doing so again to a thousands-strong audience 15 years later – and on the 
back of a movie vehicle for the Wernham Hogg man to boot. But so it came to 
pass, and will again this Christmas, when Ricky Gervais’s alter ego and his 
band play two sizeable seaside gigs.
15 December, Bournemouth International Centre. 16 December, Brighton Centre, 
livenation.co.uk <http://livenation.co.uk>

Scott Gibson
Soho theatre, London

How better to celebrate Christmas than with the cheering tale of a young man’s 
out-of-the-blue brain haemorrhage? Sounds grim, but in Glaswegian comic Scott 
Gibson’s hands it’s anything but. The 32-year-old deservedly won the best 
newcomer gong at this year’s Edinburgh fringe for this unsentimental 
storytelling show,Life After Death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/26/scott-gibson-review-standup>, 
about his near‑fatal haemorrhage, his daft response to it and the various lurid 
indignities of hospital life.
From 20 December-14 January, scottgibsoncomedy.co.uk 
<http://scottgibsoncomedy.co.uk>

comedy
 