
Britain faces its biggest peacetime crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> since 1945. Leaving the EU 
on the slightest of referendum majorities, after a campaign in which the leave 
side was never constitutionally compelled to agree what leave meant, is already 
plunging Britain into a constitutional, political and legal quagmire. Prolonged 
economic stagnation, perhaps depression, seem inevitable. A liberal, tolerant, 
outward-looking country is being transmuted into an illiberal, intolerant, 
inward-looking one. This is as fundamental as it gets. Battle is being joined 
for our soul, yet many of those who see all they hold dear being ripped away 
from them are strangely mute. Nigel Farage was right when he said it was a 
revolution “without a shot being fired”.

It is time to return fire. But the political truth is that no success is 
possible without the full-throated support of theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party, strikingly absent from the 
unfolding trauma. That must change – both in the interests of the country and 
the people it aims to serve.

It is the great unravelling. The painful economic uncertainties of unwinding 
43 years of EU membership must surely trigger an investment strike and 
consequent economic stasis.Britain has a $1tn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/01/gates-closing-tensions-rising-brexit-feels-tangible-and-frightening>
 stock of foreign direct investment – equalled only by China and the US – 
involving some 500 multinationals. Their regional or global headquarters are in 
Britain because of our participation in the European single market. Leaving it, 
as the Japanese government and the US Chamber of Commerce have both 
unequivocally warned, will seriously affect investment. The impact will cascade 
down into every nook and cranny of our economy.

Nissan is an early sign of the downturns and the divisions Brexit could bring 
| Will Hutton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/01/gates-closing-tensions-rising-brexit-feels-tangible-and-frightening>
Hopes of an export boom are overdone. Our export sector is uniquely weak. 
Britain’s share of world markets has been falling for decades, largely because 
of unaddressed systemic economic weaknesses. The response to the devaluation 
after the financial crisis was paltry. It promises to be paltry again. One 
prominent economic forecaster – the National Institute of Economic and Social 
Research – foresees a drop of up to 60% in our service exports as a result of 
Brexit. Exports of goods will have to boom just to offset that effect. They 
can’t and won’t.

British society is in no great shape to handle the consequences. Inequalities 
of income and wealth between generations, regions and classes are unedifyingly 
high. But addressing these inequalities requires financial resources – which 
will be reduced by Brexit. The public sector deficit in the current financial 
year is already £14bn higher than projected. The Resolution Foundation warns 
that just on a modest downward revision of growth, the deficit will widen by 
£23bn by 2020-21 –a cumulative shortfall of £84bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/hammond-80bn-black-hole-economic-worsens-brexit-treasury>
. It is almost certainly an understatement.

As serious is the impact on our culture and national conversation. Although 
leavers talk the language of embracing the globe, they simultaneously talk of 
controlling borders to keep the foreign “other” out. Mounting anti-foreigner 
sentiment is morphing into a generalised language of reaction; bigots of all 
descriptions – racists and misogynists alike – have a new licence to “speak the 
unspeakable”, as they would describe it. This is not the backdrop for a major 
mobilisation and programme of enlightened reform. It is the backdrop for 
retreat, closure and stagnation.

So what to do? The first thing is to get as passionate about what is happening 
as leavers were in making their case. Britain must not leave the EU. It is not 
just that leaving is an act of wilful economic self-harm – it is also 
abandoning the continent’s most noble project. This will be attacked by leavers 
as defying the democratic will. But democracy is about constant argument and 
deliberation, not permanently deifying one vote at one moment in time.

After Mark Carney, the Brexit Bolsheviks have a new target | Rafael Behr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/mark-carney-brexit-bolsheviks-new-target-chancellor>
But to have traction, the argument has to be coupled with a political 
challenge. It must be made by a political party serious about winning political 
power, and capable of doing it. The electorate must be convinced that their 
darkening circumstances can be feasibly and realistically changed. A second 
referendum in this context is no more than an enabling building block in a 
larger programme of improvement.

There are many elements in such a programme. The case needs to be made for a 
repurposing of British capitalism, housed in a reimagined ownership, financial 
and innovation system that can seize the opportunities opened up by new 
technologies. The labour market must be recast tochallenge the gig economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/03/gig-economy-zero-hours-contracts-ethics>
 with trade unions that enfranchise ordinary people. Risk, which haunts so many 
lives, must be minimised by a renewed, cradle-to-grave, flexible and 
skills-based welfare system. The public realm must be reconceived with a 
sufficiently broad tax base to foster public initiative and enterprise. And 
Britain must reaffirm EU membership, which is the bridge to international 
openness and fundamental to our prosperity.

These are the propositions around which the centre and left – and the best of 
the conservative tradition – can unite. They are what the overwhelming majority 
of British people want, if only there were a party capable of making the 
arguments and putting together the coalition of interests to propel it to power 
to implement them.

Millions are aching to contest what is happening. We need a transformative 
public conversation – and a willingness to argue our heads off for tolerance, 
fairness and openness, as well as for membership of pan-European institutions 
and the markets on our continent.

This is above all a political project. It can encompass social movements, but 
cannot be delivered by them. This is why a group of centre-left Labour MPs has 
launched a new movement to make the case. I support their efforts because 
Britain stands on the verge of a great unravelling with untold consequences for 
its economy, society, place in the world, and its people’s souls. The standard 
must be raised: fire must be returned. We need to make the case for a 
reimagined Britain and its membership of the EU. We say not what we are 
against, but what we stand for. We want our country back. And we want it now.

This article is part of a speech delivered <http://www.labourtribunemps.org/> 
at the launch of the Labour Tribune MPs Group on Wednesday.
 