
My mum died last month. She was diagnosed with a rare and aggressive form of 
lung cancer (possibly linked to asbestos exposure; she'd never smoked). She was 
given three months to live without treatment, possibly 12 months if she got 
strong enough for chemotherapy. She didn't.

"From then on, she seemed almost to fall out of the loop of NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> care … Her cancer took hold very 
quickly and she deteriorated rapidly. We were simply not prepared for what 
would happen." These words are part of "Clare's story" – a case study from the 
charity Sue Ryder that illustrates the problems of end-of-life care. But I 
could have written them.

As a provider of specialist palliative care, Sue Ryder comes across many 
incidents 
<http://www.sueryder.org/About-us/Policy-and-campaigns/Our-campaigns/Dying-isnt-working/A-time-and-a-place>
 of patients and their families feeling unsupported, unsure of which way to 
turn, and unclear about what choices they have available to them. The NHS is 
geared towards saving lives. When Mum's oncologist ruled out treatment, it felt 
as if the NHS was washing its hands of us. We took Mum home, largely ignorant 
of what was to come.

End-of-life care is the work of charities: from local, charity-run hospices; 
to at-home support delivered by different organisations according to where you 
live, from Macmillan nurses to Sue Ryder community-based clinical nurse 
specialists. In Mum's case, the hospice provided outreach palliative care. By 
all accounts, they do a fantastic job. Mum died so quickly – barely a month 
after her diagnosis – that we didn't have time to find out.

Sue Ryder is calling for NHS England to include end-of-life indicators as part 
of the performance measurement for clinical commissioning groups. It argues 
that there must be a mechanism for holding CCGs to account for the provision of 
good-quality end-of-life care. "We are concerned that the government and 
decision-makers, including CCGs and GPs, are using 'dying at home' as a proxy 
for quality," says Paul Woodward, chief executive at Sue Ryder. "This is not 
good enough. Dying at home does not always guarantee a 'good death'.Everyone 
deserves a pain-free death 
<http://pressroom.ackura.com/sueryder/1261-People-accept-painful-death-to-be-with-loved-ones--finds-Sue-Ryder-report.aspx>
, in the place of their choosing and to be surrounded by loved ones."

For this to happen, specialist palliative services need to be much more 
widespread, to reduce inequalities in accessing co-ordinated, personalised and 
quality care at the end of life, and health professionals need to provide more 
information and to be measured against end-of-life care targets, the charity's
research 
<http://www.sueryder.org/About-us/Policy-and-campaigns/Our-campaigns/Dying-isnt-working>
 suggests.

Mum refused to talk about death or her cancer, though she was clearly 
terrified of what was happening. As the NHS retreated, having a GP with a duty 
to refer their patient and family to good-quality palliative care may have 
meant we weren't left floundering, rushing her, barely conscious, to hospital 
after an out-of-hours doctor told us she only had hours to live.

Mum died with her family at her side, in hospital. It could have been a better 
death.
 