
Over the last five years, speeding convictions around Britain have gone up by 
nearly a half.

Why are we in so much more of a hurry than we were in 2010? Are we kinder, 
quicker to rush to the aid of a friend in need? Keener to arrive on time for 
all those fantastic new plays and films in our massively improved culture? Or 
simply proceeding faster due to our new, traffic-free and excellent-quality 
roads? Clearly not.

It seems likely that people aren’t actually speeding more, so much as being 
caught more. That being so, I’d like to speak up on behalf of a group that is 
never discussed when speeding is on the agenda: those of us who are breaking 
the lawthrough stupidity alone. Until our considerable numbers are recognised, 
the obvious solutions will never be put in place.

This latest shock story of a 43% speeding rise is couched in the language of 
boy racers, Mr Toads, inveterate nose-thumbers at the law. The assumptions are 
of daredevil types racing about like the Dukes of Hazzard – heads full of 
mischief, boots full of moonshine – who found it easy to evade the slow-witted 
local sheriff, but are hamstrung by the invention of the speed camera.

From those assumptions, the world proceeds merrily on to debate whether the 
speed camera is an excellent thing (Zero tolerance! Firm clampdown! Nothing 
matters but the safety of kiddies!) or an evil robot of oppression (Big 
Brother! Civil Liberties! My old man drove everywhere at 100mph, pissed, never 
did me any harm!).

Hence, the proposed solutions to the “increase in speeding” include: more 
cameras, fewer cameras, harsher fines, lesser fines, more licence points and no 
licence points.

But none of that would make any difference to, for example, me. And my 
opinions might be even more useful than yours, because I bet I’ve been done for 
speeding more often than you have. Each and every time through stupidity. Not 
wilfulness, not carelessness, not thoughtlessness, not forgetfulness: full-on, 
duh-brained, inability to understand.

Any speeding offences I’ve committed since going on a “speed awareness course” 
a few years ago, for example, have been done whileconsciously and simultaneously
attempting to obey the speed limit. But failing. Out of stupidity.

Subjecting me to more cameras, more points and harsher penalties is just 
hitting the donkey harder with the stick. The donkey gets sadder, more bruised 
and more scared, but it still doesn’t actually understand.

I don’t really think of myself as stupid – but then, who does? There is no 
other explanation. The Highway Code can’t be that difficult to understand, and 
yet my brain seems to treat it as a set of nuclear fission instructions in Old 
Japanese.

My speeding offences (whether caught or not) are always in situations where 
the speed limit is 30 but I think it’s 40. And I’m never doing 40, always a 
careful 37.

I do understand that anyone with a driving licence should be able to 
distinguish between the rules on various types of road. The distinctions are 
thus.

A 40mph speed limit is often (but not always) found on the surrounding roads 
of a town or city. The 50mph limit is also used on such roads. But sometimes 
it’s 30mph.

Street lights often (but not always) denote 30, but they can also be found 
when it’s 40. You can assume that the limit is 30 in a built-up area (except 
when it’s 20) and 70 on a dual carriageway (except when it’s 50). The quirky 
60mph is usually to be found on open country roads, except when they are 50 or 
40, which they sometimes are, at the discretion of local officials.

I MEAN, WHAT AM I, BARUCH SPINOZA? (See? I know who Baruch Spinoza was. But I 
still can’t understand the speed limit.)

With further cloudiness, the government website gov.co.uk/speed-limits 
advises: “A speed limit of 30 mph or 48km/h usually applies, unless you see 
signs showing otherwise.”

They might want to reword that. Whether or not you see the signs is not, I’m 
pretty sure, the crucial issue.

There never seem to be as many signs as speed cameras, but that’s only a 
problem because the system’s so complicated. Why can’t it just be 30mph 
everywhere but the motorway? What is thepoint of all these baffling 40s and 50s 
and 60s? For the mass confusion they cause, we’d better be damn sure they’re 
shaving precious minutes off the time it’s taking top research scientists to 
reach the cancer laboratory.

All I want is to be legal and safe. I pay higher premiums because my speeding 
points spell “recklessness” to the insurance company, but you can’t imagine how 
risk-averse I am at the wheel. I only go over 30 at all because it’s dangerous 
to drive too much slower than everyone else. I hear a satnav will tell you the 
speed limit wherever you are – but I don’t have one, because I think it’s 
hazardous to look at a screen while driving a car.

And I think there are millions of us, being cursed and punished as deliberate 
flouters rather than failed triers. This is unfair, dangerous and wrong. It’s 
not what the law is supposed to be for. There’s no rule saying: “Murder is 
illegal except on country roads, without lamp posts, where you haven’t seen a 
sign.”

With my careful 37mph driving, I’d never be stopped by live, busy police. So, 
yes, I’m a “victim” of speed cameras, but that doesn’t mean I disapprove of 
them. They highlight a big problem. But let’s be clear: the problem they 
highlight is not that we are a nation of daredevils. It’s that we have an 
over-complicated system and not enough signs. Sort that out and we’d see this 
43% rise disappear by the end of the month.
 