
All political lives end in failure and when they are the lives of prime 
ministers the fatal fall is the more spectacular. For David Cameron, nemesis 
arrived in one night. His mistakes caught up with him while he was still in 
office and defeat in theEU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> triggered an inevitable 
self-defenestration from Number 10.

Sometimes the full contours of failure take longer to emerge. That has been 
the case with the man Mr Cameron once claimed as his political godfather. 
Listening toTony Blair <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-36733979> over 
the past few days as he has attempted to relitigate his case for the Iraq war – 
familiar accusations meeting familiar defiance – was to relive that time as if 
it had all happened just yesterday. Yet it is more than 13 years since he 
convinced parliament to permit him to order British troops to join the American 
invasion. It is more than nine years since he took his leave of Number 10, at a 
moment not quite of his own choosing, but in a manner that made his departure 
look a lot more planned and graceful than Mr Cameron’s abrupt and involuntary 
exit.

When Mr Blair departed, a solid majority of voters told pollsters that they 
thought he had been a good prime minister overall. They even called him 
likable. Not a bad result after a decade at the top. The years since have done 
more for Mr Blair’s bank balance than they have for his reputation. In terms of 
history’s judgment, his residual hope must now be that last week’s publication 
of theChilcot report <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/iraq-war-inquiry> marked 
rock bottom from which he might eventually be revised upwards when the passage 
of time lends a more rounded perspective on his record. What is most depressing 
for his allies and anyone who had anything invested in New Labour is that the 
legacy of a political project that was once so toweringly dominant also seems 
to be ruined.

There were three essential pillars to his premiership. At home, the animating 
conviction was that there was nothing good to be said for the Labour party’s 
glorious tradition of losing a lot more elections than it ever won. Nothing to 
be said for all those Labour defeats unless you were a Tory. A progressive 
party that was sincere about helping the people it said it cared about needed 
to achieve power to do something for them. In Europe, this most pro-European of 
prime ministers argued often and passionately that Britain should cease being 
the most grudging member of the European Union and become a fully engaged actor 
on its continent. In the world – and this was a conviction that developed in 
office from the time of the successful endeavour in the Balkans to prevent 
Slobodan Milosevic from slaughtering the Kosovans – the overarching belief was 
that democracies should not stand by when bad things are happening in other 
places.

How stand those pillars of Blairism today? Shattered. Each one lies broken in 
the dust. The concept of “liberal intervention” was already badly discredited 
by the Iraq experience before he left office. I write in more detail elsewhere 
about the Chilcot report. Here it is enough to say that we did not really need 
to wait seven years for Sir John to produce 2.6 million words informing us that 
the war was sold on a bogus manifesto about weapons of mass destruction and the 
sequel to the toppling of Saddam Hussein was a disaster. Anyone half-sentient 
had already worked that out for themselves.

The larger surprise, not least to Mr Blair himself, is that the other two 
pillars have collapsed as well. He used office energetically to end his 
country’s marginalisation in the EU and achieved important gains for Britain’s 
national interests and foreign policy goals. When he left Number 10, no one 
mistook us for a country that loved the EU, but it was only in the dreams of 
Nigel Farage that it was imagined that Britain would have voted to leave within 
a decade. As for the Labour party, it wasn’t even in the dreams of Jeremy 
Corbyn that he, a man antithetical to everything New Labour achieved, would 
become the new heir to Blair within 10 years.

Meantime, over in the Tory part of the forest, the Cameron modernisers have 
been scattered and reduced to hoping that Theresa May will save their legacy.
Andrea Leadsom <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom> enlists 
the support of the wilder wings of her party in her bid to do to the 
Conservatives what Mr Corbyn has done to Labour.

Never has the landscape seemed more bleak for the broadly centrist, reforming, 
liberal, internationalist politics that Mr Blair at his peak made so dominant 
that he won three elections in a row.

Can we connect the dots? Is the Iraq disaster responsible at least in part for 
the collapse of the other pillars? I think it is. The domestic consequences of 
Iraq were beyond Chilcot’s remit, but they should be in our scope when we try 
to explain how Britain ended up in the dark place where it stands today.

The Iraq war is a crucial element of the context that put the Labour party in 
the hands of Jeremy Corbyn. Anger about the war on the left has played a huge 
role in obscuring the achievements of New Labour’s time in office. The minimum 
wage. The peace settlement in Northern Ireland. The record sums invested in 
public services. The resources redistributed to the less privileged. Continuous 
economic growth for every quarter of the Blair premiership.

In many minds, the shadow of Iraq loomed so large and so black that it 
eclipsed many other things that progressives ought to have been proud of. In 
the leadership contest that followed the 2010 election defeat, the most 
damaging charge against David Miliband was that he had voted for the war. His 
brother, Ed, who was conveniently not in parliament at the time, exploited that 
and won the contest. Eddism then begat Corbynism.

In the leadership contest after the 2015 defeat, Jeremy Corbyn made a large 
feature of his opposition to the war, successfully tapping the fury that still 
burns so intensely among many on the left. As I write, Mr Corbyn is continuing 
to insist that he can carry on as leader even when four out of five of his 
parliamentary colleagues have publicly declared him unfit for the job. Tom 
Watson, the fixer of fixers, has just declared that even he cannot broker a way 
out of the deadlock. It is quite possible that the outcome of the struggle to 
unseat Mr Corbyn will also be decided by positions taken on Iraq.

It is said by those who think Angela Eagle should not be the leadership 
challenger that she is disqualified from the role because she voted for the 
invasion. A war begun more than a decade ago still has that much reverberation 
in Labour politics.

The long after-tremors of the Iraq war were also felt in the vote to leave the 
European Union. One seismic event was a trigger for another earthquake 13 years 
later. We know that a fierce element of the motivation of many Out voters was 
anger with political “elites”. That building of rage has had many drivers over 
recent years from the parliamentary expenses scandal to the pain of austerity. 
One of those sources was surely Iraq, an episode notably corroding of public 
faith in government because the war was sold on the basis that Saddam Hussein 
had weapons of mass destruction that didn’t exist.

I have never bought the simplistic explanation that Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> simply made it all up. Sir 
John Chilcot directs most of the blame towards MI6 for supplying intelligence 
that turned out to be wrong or sheer fabrication by duplicitous sources. Mr 
Blair’s culpability was representing that intelligence as sound when it was the 
opposite. Had the mistakes just been down to one over-messianic leader, as many 
of the other players have sought to suggest to displace culpability from 
themselves, it would not have been such a damaging episode in our public life. 
It wasn’t just the infamous dossier and it wasn’t just his personal 
miscalculations. Iraq was a collective failure of the political, diplomatic, 
intelligence and military establishments.

I don’t agree with the nihilistic ridiculing of expertise that powered the Out 
campaign to victory, but I sure can see why “trust no one” had such appeal to 
such a large audience.

We now have substantial groups of voters, some to the left, some to the right, 
who reject Tony Blair’s way of doing politics and David Cameron’s imitative 
Tory version of it. Yet it is my strong sense that there remains a constituency 
of moderate opinion which is larger still. The 16 million people who wanted to 
stay within the EU are waiting for a leader to emerge as their champion. Nearly 
half the country seeks an advocate. And of those who voted to quit the EU, I 
think it wrong to characterise them all as people who just want to stop the 
world and get off. Iraq discredited interventionism; Syria has been a no less 
grisly lesson that non-intervention can also have terrible consequences.

There are vast acres of political space between Corbyn Labour and a Ukipified 
Tory party lurching off to the right. Internationalist, broadly centrist, 
liberal, reformist politics has a future in Britain. It will have to be revised 
and revitalised for changed times. It won’t be called Blairism. It won’t be 
labelled Cameroonian. It will emerge as a new iteration under fresh leadership. 
Something will rise from the dust.
 