
When big changes and dangers arise, you have to think big. You don’t put out a 
forest fire with a glass of water. Thinking small can prevent you from even 
recognizing trouble, let alone your options for overcoming it. There’s never 
been a time when thinking big matters more than now. Many across the United 
States are now trying to figure out how to survive Trump, but it may still be 
possible to stop him. His regime is not yet inevitable.

It’s a long shot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/election-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton-donald-trump>
, but one worth trying, the way someone diagnosed with a disease with a 3% 
survival rate might want to do what it takes to try to be part of the 3%. You 
don’t get there if you give up at the outset. Trump represents a catastrophe on 
a scale many seem to have trouble grasping, an attack on what remains 
democratic and uncorrupted in our old and messy system of government, a threat 
to international stability, to efforts toaddress climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/18/global-green-movement-prepares-to-fight-trump-on-climate-change>
, and to human rights at home and around the world.

US election recount: how it began – and what effect it could have
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/election-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton-donald-trump>
Is it possible to prevent him from taking power? Why not explore the wildest 
possibilities, when the alternative is surrendering to the worst? It may be 
very possible – but only if we imagine it is possible and work to make the 
possible the actual.

It is too soon to give up. It is too soon to reconcile ourselves to surviving 
Trump when the possibility of preventing him is before us. It was a huge 
surprise that Jill Stein and the Green partychose to demand recounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/election-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton-donald-trump>
 in three swing states, and another that theClinton campaign got onboard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/26/hillary-clinton-attorney-jill-stein-wisconsin-recount>
. What the recount reveals may also be a surprise. People have used “game 
changer” a lot, but the game of figuring out what this election means and where 
it takes us seems to change daily, and some of that change depends on what we 
do. Why not seize history before it tramples us?

What if the recount Jill Stein and the Green party have initiated finds that 
Trump’s small, surprising lead in three swing states vanishes when the ballots 
are reviewed? What if Alexandra Chalupa’s report now on its way to Congress 
presents compelling evidence that the election was hacked? What if the election 
investigations Republican senator Lindsey Graham and others have asked for 
reveal corruption or collusion? What if someone (please) finally does some 
really solid work on investigating the numerous ties between the Trump campaign 
team and Russia and finds – well, shouldn’t we know what the influences and 
collaborations, if any, have been?

We are in a national emergency as an alarmingly incompetent and utterly amoral 
gang prepares to destroy the climate, human rights, the foreign policy 
positions the US has relied on for stability since the second world war, and 
more. You don’t have to love Clinton or Stein to see that this is a radical 
departure from where we have been.

A story that has haunted me for decades is about the equipment monitoring the 
ozone layer over the South Pole decades ago. The computer program was written 
to filter out improbable data and so missed the dramatic change in the 
atmosphere until the glitch in the program was eliminated. There’s a status quo 
bias at work in our mainstream media and too many of our organizations that 
normalizes the outrageous. There’s been a lot of talk about “normalizing” the 
Trump team’s players and agenda. We might also talk about normalizing 
astonishing news and enormous threats. News that should scream at us in 
six-inch-high letters on the front page is presented in a mumble inside: stuff 
like the fact that we are running out of time to address catastrophic climate 
change, and also the Trump administration promises to sabotage all efforts to 
address climate change. We must not normalize catastrophe out of a desire to 
seem calm or moderate.

As the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/17/us/politics/white-house-confirms-pre-election-warning-to-russia-over-hacking.html?_r=0>
 reported, nine days before the election Barack Obama used his communications 
system to tell Russian leader Vladimir Putin to stop meddling in the US 
election. “The White House confirmed in a statement on Wednesday that eight 
days before the presidential election, the United States ‘contacted the Russian 
government directly regarding malicious cyberactivity’ that was ‘targeting US 
state election-related systems’. It sent the message over a rarely used system: 
a hotline connecting the Nuclear Risk Reduction Centers in both countries, 
which they had agreed three years ago could also be employed to deal with major 
cyberincidents,” the New York Times report said.

These kinds of stories raise questions so big no one seems to have asked them. 
Are we in the middle of a cyberwar? And did the Russians hack the election in 
ways that changed the outcome?

What does it mean that, as the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/moscow-had-contacts-with-trump-team-during-campaign-russian-diplomat-says/2016/11/10/28fb82fa-a73d-11e6-9bd6-184ab22d218e_story.html>
 quietly reported after the election: “Russian government officials conferred 
with members of Donald Trump’s campaign team, a senior Russian diplomat said.”

There are no precedents for the situations we find ourselves in, which is why 
we need to think big about how to respond. I visited Japan after the great 
Tohuko earthquake of 2011. Many people died because they evacuated to the right 
height to escape tsunamis they remembered; they were drowned by a tsunami 
bigger than any in living memory. Extreme responses to extreme situations are 
appropriate.

This week Yale professor and award-winning Holocaust historian Timothy Snyder 
issued cautions about surviving anti-democratic regimes. “Do not obey in 
advance,” he advised. “Much of the power of authoritarianism is freely given. 
In times like these, individuals think ahead about what a more repressive 
government will want, and then start to do it without being asked. You’ve 
already done this, haven’t you? Stop. Anticipatory obedience teaches 
authorities what is possible and accelerates unfreedom.” Anticipatory 
disobedience keeps open space for our power, our voices, and our rights. That’s 
part of what thinking big means, but in this moment it can mean more.

Security experts join Jill Stein's 'election changing' recount campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/security-experts-join-jill-steins-election-changing-recount-campaign>
Regimes have been toppled by the daring whose daring manifested as the 
imagination to believe that things could be different, the confidence that we 
have the power to pursue those possibilities, and the courage to pursue them. 
These last few weeks I’ve been thinking about how what looked like small, 
feeble-looking efforts in eastern Europe grew and amassed over the years to 
topple a series of Soviet satellite regimes in 1989. The audacity, the courage, 
the vision of the people gathered around the Polish Solidarity movement, the 
musicians and theater people in Czechoslovakia, the religious and secular 
groups in East Germany: their spirit and actions shattered the eastern bloc of 
Soviet-aligned nations. In 2013, Ukrainians rose up and drove out Viktor 
Yanukovych, a corrupt Russian-backed president.

We may need to be courageous and strategic as they were; we may need to be for 
years to come. But now we have an extraordinary opportunity to prevent the 
worst-case scenario now facing us or at the very least to weaken and 
marginalize and discredit an outrageous regime-in-waiting. The possibilities 
before us in this moment are like a series of open doors; as time passes, doors 
will slam shut behind us. There is no better time; there is no one else to 
seize the possibilities. It’s up to us, which means it’s up to you. Think big. 
And act. Everything depends on it.
 