
Glad news from Nantwich, which hosted the International Cheese awards 
<http://www.internationalcheeseawards.co.uk/> this week, attracting a record 
5,000 entries – more than half of which were produced in the UK. It’s 
comforting to think that, however nasty Brexit gets, with more than 700 
different varieties of British cheese to choose from, the future of the toastie 
is secure. (Then again, Theresa May may justifiably envy Charles de Gaulle, who 
complained about the difficulties of governing a country with a mere 246.)

While the practically minded might point out that our dominance at the awards 
could be down to the obvious difficulties of transporting something so pungent 
across international borders, we are indisputably living in a golden age for 
British cheese. Indeed, last month saw the launch of a more exclusive 
competition: Ollie Lloyd set up theGreat British Cheese awards 
<http://www.greatbritishchefs.com/cheese-awards> because he believes that 
Britain “is in the midst of a cheese revolution” – and the enthusiasm of fellow 
“cheeseheads” seems to back him up. More than 3,000 votes have been cast online 
in the first fortnight.

Demand is not just strong at home: our cheeses are increasingly fashionable 
abroad, with exports to France last year up 20% from 2014. But it wasn’t so 
long ago that the cross-channel cheese trade only went one way, and with good 
reason. Though cheesemaking was probably introduced to both countries by the 
Romans, the industrial revolution was not kind to British food culture. 
Farmhouses were replaced by factories, a process that reached its peak during 
the second world war, when shortages of milk and labour meant the production of 
many traditional cheeses was outlawed in favour of a handful of hard varieties. 
The rise of the supermarkets in the decades that followed did not encourage 
their revival, and it wasn’t until the 1970s, as part of a wider culinary 
awakening, that Britons began to rediscover the joy of real cheese.

It looks like stilton, tastes like stilton, smells like stilton. So why is it 
called Stichelton?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/27/artisan-cheesemaker-fights-for-stilton-label>
These days you can get anything from Hampshire mozzarella to Highland brie, 
but for me, you can’t beat the classics, so ubiquitous as to be almost 
overlooked in the rush for the new and exotic. The jury may still be out as to 
whether the UK can ever make a goat cheese as aggressively capric as the 
sun-baked crottins of Provence, or even a really amazing emmental, but no 
foreign cheddar can touch a proper west country farmhouse variety for rich, 
nutty complexity, while my own favourite, stilton, is rightly considered one of 
the three kings of blue – along with French roquefort and Italian gorgonzola. 
Jenny Linford, author of the book Great British Cheeses, makes the case for 
Graham Kirkham’s raw-milk Lancashire as “a very gentle cheese with a real taste 
of the dairy to it and a distinctive crumbly texture … a pleasure to eat”; 
Michelin-starred chef Frances Atkins enjoys her local Wensleydale with a slice 
of fruitcake.


That’s not to say there aren’t new cheeses worthy of discovery. Lloyd is a fan 
ofLondonshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/05/urban-local-cheesemaker-wildes-cheese-behind-the-scenes>
, “a really gooey white cheese” from Tottenham, of all places, while Jasmine 
Reeves, from royal cheesemonger Paxton & Whitfield’s Stratford-upon-Avon shop, 
recommendsRollright 
<http://www.thecourtyarddairy.co.uk/shop/buy-rollright-cheese.html>, a 
reblochon-style cheese from Oxfordshire that has only been in production since 
last March, but has already picked up two awards.

The supreme champion in Nantwich, however, was a Dutch gouda. Perhaps those 
pesky Europeans still have their uses after all.
 