
The elimination of Britain’s steel industry in a matter of weeks – the reality 
ofTata’s statement that it wants to close its UK operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/29/tata-set-to-announce-sale-of-uk-steel-business-port-talbot>
 – is, by any standards, shocking. There will be efforts to save something from 
the ruins, but the financial and trading truths are brutal.

This has not happened, however, in a day, or even over the past few years. 
Rather the plight of British steel making is the culmination of 40 years of 
refusal to organise economic, financial and industrial policy to support the 
generation of value. This is done in the laissez-faire belief – contested even 
in economic theory – that any such attempt is self-defeating.Business secretary 
Sajid Javid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/01/steel-crisis-business-secretary-sajid-javid-confronted-by-tata-workers>
 personifies this view. In fact, he is surely the most ideologically driven and 
least practical politician to hold this key post since the war.

The most generous interpretation is that this is creative destruction at work. 
Steel was an integral element of an industrial economy now giving way to a new 
knowledge-based capitalism where know-how is more important than brawn. It is 
tragic for those whose livelihoods and skills are now redundant, but it was no 
less tragic for ostlers, sailmakers and coal miners in their day.

The trouble is that Britain is very good at destruction, much less good at the 
creative part. Nor is it clear that steel’s days are over: its usage in a range 
of key functions – from transport to construction – remains fundamental and is 
growing. Rather, the economic behemoth China has monumentally over-invested in 
steel, for which there is too little domestic demand, and is now flooding world 
markets.

Britain, with a systemically overvalued exchange rate, porous market, high 
energy costs and ideological refusal to join others in the EU to deter imports 
dumped below cost with higher tariffs, is uniquely exposed to the threat. Now 
up to 40,000 workers directly and indirectly connected to steel production are 
about to lose their livelihoods.

Beneath the specifics of the steel industry lie more deep-seated problems. The 
day after Tata’s announcement, the Office of National Statistics (ONS) 
disclosed that the country’s balance of payments deficit in the last quarter of 
2015 climbed to a record 7% of GDP. Britain’s international accounts are more 
in the red than those of any other developed country. Imports of goods and 
services, which have steadily outstripped exports for decades, are now to be 
given an extra impetus by the closure of UK steel capacity. What’s more, the 
same weaknesses that plague the old also inhibit the growth of the new.

After the interventionism of the 1930s – or even the 1950s and 1960s – Britain 
could boast dozens of substantial companies representing industries as 
disparate as pharmaceuticals, chemicals, aerospace and electronics. Not so in 
2016. Only two high-tech companies are represented in the FTSE 100 – ARM and 
Sage. Another 20 years of the laissez-faire framework Javid cherishes – he is a 
devotee of the wild philosopher of hyper-libertarianism Ayn Rand – and the 
economy will be eviscerated, with a current account deficit so large it cannot 
be conventionally financed. The consequences – on living standards, employment, 
inflation, interest rates and house prices – will be severe.

We destroy our steel industry in exchange for Chinese ownership of the next 
generation of nuclear power stations

Start with the pound. Since it was forced out of the European Exchange Rate 
Mechanism in 1992, the consensus has been that the state should make no effort 
to manage the exchange rate. The result is that for all but four or five of the 
past 24 years, the pound has been well above any calculation of its real value, 
buoyed up by money flowing into the UK to buy our companies and our property, 
notwithstanding our ever higher trade deficit.

This is an auction of national assets unmatched by any other industrialised 
country. But it also makes it harder for our producers to compete 
internationally. To manage the exchange rate, to shadow the euro or dollar, or 
even to consider joining the euro to lock in a competitive rate, are rejected 
with irrational hysteria. Result – a current account deficit of 7% of GDP.

Britain is rightly committed to free trade, but again to the point of 
irrationality. China’s Leninist corporatism cannot be understood as a market 
economy. The world’s steel producers should not be rendered uneconomic because 
China’s Communist party has overinvested in steel production to create jobs 
vital to its collapsing political legitimacy, and so dumps steel in world 
markets at below cost. It is an open and shut case of dumping, with protections 
provided by the rules of theWTO <https://www.wto.org/>.

But the UK government, positioning itself as China’s biggest friend in the 
west in order to win investment in the UK nuclear industry, blocked the EU’s 
attempts to invoke theWTO rules <http:>. Thus we destroy our steel industry in 
exchange for Chinese state ownership of the next generation of nuclear power 
stations.

So the list continues. The combination of a privatised electricity industry – 
insisting on sky-high returns for strategic investment – with demanding targets 
for the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions has meant incredible rises in the 
price of electricity, especially for industrial users such as steel. Relief is 
too little and too late. More broadly the same effects impact across all of 
what remains of our manufacturing sector – so it becomes a less solid market 
for steel, adding one more twist to the downward vicious circle.

Britain needs a genuine march of the makers, in George Osborne’s phrase. But 
that would need a completely different policy paradigm, overturning the failed 
attempts of the past 40 years. There was a nascent attempt, launched by Peter 
Mandelson in 2009, and followed through in the coalition government by business 
secretary Vince Cable and science minister David Willetts, to create an 
intelligent industrial strategy.

Eight great technologies were identified in which Britain had strengths; 
convening councils were created to remove obstacles to their growth; the agency 
Innovate UK geared up to support frontier innovation; and anetwork of Catapults 
<https://www.catapult.org.uk/> created to stimulate knowledge transfer, 
business start-ups and scale-ups. Foreign governments, impressed by what was 
happening, commissioned reports on the innovative UK.

Then came Javid, keen to deliver the swingeing cuts in his budget demanded by 
Osborne in his quest for the 36% state. After hobbling the admired innovation 
infrastructure with its role for a smart state, his first piece of legislation 
is the trade union bill.

Javid tilts at Thatcherite windmills – and shows little understanding of 
today’s industrial revolution. Nor does he seem to grasp how government can 
co-create opportunities with entrepreneurs – as well as ensuring that the big 
picture is as attractive as possible.

Something face-saving will be put together to soften the steel crisis, but 
there are bigger lessons to be learned. Be sure they will be ignored. The 
enfeebled Labour party is unable to press the points home and the Tory party 
remains transfixed by anti-state, laissez-faire nihilism. I mix rage with 
sadness for the next generation, and the inheritance it has been left.
 