
The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> has signalled that it is 
prepared to further deepen the establishment’s split over the EU referendum, 
with its editor-in-chief revealing the paper may print further details about 
the Queen’s stance on Brexit.

Tony Gallagher <https://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-gallagher> said he 
reserved the right to print details about the Queen’s views on Europe as he 
accused people “close to Nick Clegg” of trying to implicate Michael Gove, the 
justice secretary, in leaking the claims that she supports Britain leaving the 
EU.

Gallagher’s comments came as David Cameron said it would be “very serious” if 
it were found that a minister had disclosed a private conversation with the 
Queen to the Sun.

Speaking at a car factory in Ellesmere Port, where he had been making the case 
for Britain to stay in the EU, Cameron said: “Obviously, that would be very 
serious. But there’s a statement by Buckingham Palace denying the story and a 
statement by the then deputy prime minister denying the story, where they made 
it clear they didn’t know where this came from.”

Arguing for Britain to remain in the EU, Cameron said: “I want to cut through 
the rhetoric. Because we have the leave campaigners saying that any hint that 
you think Britain may not get a good deal is ‘talking Britain down’. And we 
have remain campaigners saying it’s all very difficult and very hard.

“So I just need to present you with the facts, so you can make up your mind. 
If Britain was to vote to leave, we would have to enter discussions with the EU 
on what our trade relationship should be like. And these will be the 
negotiating dynamics: one nation negotiating with 27 other nations.”


But Gallagher made clear that the Sun was prepared to complicate the 
establishment fightback against its story by revealing further details of the 
Queen’s alleged Euroscepticism.

Buckingham Palace has taken the unusual step of referring the Sun to regulator 
the Independent Press Standards Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/palace-sun-queen-backs-brexit-ipso>
 (Ipso), claiming the story headlined “Queen backs Brexit” breached rules on 
accuracy.

It cited clause one of the Ipso <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> code 
on accuracy, which says headlines must reflect the content of articles. The Sun 
story said the Queen had expressed Eurosceptic views at an event at Windsor 
Castle in 2011, but it said nothing about whether the Queen thought the UK 
should or should not be a member of the EU.


Clegg, whom the Sun claims was the recipient of the Queen’s alleged 
anti-European views at the time he was deputy prime minister, hasalso issued a 
denial, calling the story “nonsense” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/09/eurosceptic-rant-by-the-queen-never-happened-says-nick-clegg>
. Senior Lib Dem sources said the Queen often makes pointed remarks about 
contemporary events and may well have made remarks about the EU at the lunch, 
which took place at a time when the eurozone was facing a series of crises. But 
Clegg said he has no recollection of the Queen questioning the UK’s membership 
of the EU.

A spokesman for Gove said: “We don’t comment on private conversations with the 
Queen.”

The Sun editor warned that he was prepared to challenge the responses of 
Buckingham Palace, No 10 and Clegg, saying the matter now rested with Ipso. 
Gallaghertold the ITV politics editor, Robert Peston 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-03-10/the-sun-could-reveal-more-on-queen-brexit-story-editor-tony-gallagher-tells-itv-news/>
: “We do know more than we’ve printed ... I haven’t yet decided whether we are 
or whether we are not going to do that. We will defend ourselves very, very 
stoutly and our position remains extremely strong.”

Gallagher said the newspaper would “never reveal who our sources are” but 
added that there was a “smear operation” against Gove.


“It wouldn’t take too much of a cynic to assume that part of the reason for 
that is the desire to remove him as a leading light in the Leave campaign,” he 
told Peston. “And I think it’s worth putting into the public domain that among 
those circulating the idea that it is Michael Gove are people close to Nick 
Clegg ... I think Nick Clegg has questions to answer because he’s gone from ‘I 
don’t recollect this event’ to ‘it’s nonsense’ to now being certain it’sMichael 
Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>. So which is it? I 
think he has to answer that.”

Asked whether he was worried about an investigation by Ipso, Gallagher said he 
did not think his job was at risk. “Ipso will have to do what it does and we 
will have to report it faithfully. I don’t think my job is on the line 
whatsoever. What we will have to do is abide by the Ipso code – which we do – 
and if they find against us we’ll report it quite faithfully. They’ve found 
against us already and we’ve reported it quite faithfully. It’s what we do.”

The warnings from Gallagher may ring alarm bells at No 10, where there will be 
concerns that members of Gove’s circle – if not the justice secretary himself – 
may have decided to brief the newspaper about the Queen’s thoughts. Buckingham 
Palace may also be pondering whether it will have to devise another carefully 
worded statement to deny any further claims.
 