
The world gapes at Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>
 in amazement and arrives at the conclusion that we must be having some sort of 
national nervous breakdown. The most dramatic expression of that view has come 
from Mark Rutte, the prime minister of the Netherlands and a disappointed 
Anglophile, who declares: “England has collapsed politically, monetarily, 
constitutionally and economically.” That’s over-saucing the language of 
apocalypse, but you can understand why even level-headed Dutchmen turn 
hyperbolic when they gaze across the English Channel. Stability is supposed to 
be one of our strongest national brands. Over the past 10 days, Britain has 
behaved like a country without either a government or an opposition as both our 
major parties have been convulsed by cascading crises. If the climate were a 
bit warmer, people would be calling us a banana republic.

The prime minister elected just a year ago has been toppled by a 
referendum-cum-coup.David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> was astonishingly cool when 
he faced parliament and the meltdown of his government was somewhat disguised 
by the simultaneous civil war devouring the Labour party, but he is a dead 
prime minister walking, a man decapitated by his fatal miscalculations and the 
treacherous ambitions of people he mistook for friends. Humiliation has also 
been heaped on George Osborne. Not so long ago, the chancellor was many a 
pundit’s favourite to be the next prime minister. He will not even be a 
candidate for the succession and his fiscal plans are being consigned to the 
shredder.

You may recall that the Tories spent the election campaign last year telling 
Britons to sign up for their deficit-reduction programme or risk economic 
Armageddon. Those same Tories are now binning their commitments as if they were 
old shopping lists. This may be sensible when the governor of the Bank of 
England is warning that Brexit Britain faces “economic post-traumatic stress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/30/interest-rate-cut-likely-brexit-bank-of-england-mark-carney>
”. But such sudden lurches in policy are not likely to instil confidence in 
British economic decision-making. As for what is actually intended by Brexit, 
we are still no closer to an answer to that towering question than on the night 
of the referendum. “Can we get back to you on that?” has been the message to 
the world from the government as the Tory party has descended into an orgy of 
political assassination.

Boris Johnson knifed David Cameron in the back only then to be stabbed in the 
front by his erstwhile comrade, Michael Gove. That was poetic justice for the 
former mayor who destroyed his leader and unleashed turmoil on his country by 
championing a cause in which he never believed. As for Mr Gove, in a matter of 
days he has ruined the premiership of Mr Cameron and then wrecked Mr Johnson’s 
ambition to succeed to Number 10.

To murder the two largest figures in the Tory firmament is quite a double. To 
the bitter delight of them both, Mr Gove seems to have been mortally wounded in 
the process. Only a handful of Tory MPs turned up to cheer him on when he 
launched his bid for the job he has often declared himself incapable of doing. 
The Conservative party can live with a rat, but even it recoils from a double 
rat.

“Who can ever trust him again?” asks one Tory MP. Many others simply preface 
his name with words beginning with a “c” or an “f”.

In such turbulent times, it seems reckless to dare venture any predictions 
about what is going to happen next. I’m going to take the risk of making a 
forecast. I suggest to you that we have probably passed peak chaos in the Tory 
party.

Conservatives don’t mind being seen as ruthless, but they are troubled when 
they start to look ludicrous. That is feeding a strong desire among Tory MPs to 
cart away their dead, mop up the blood and place a steady hand on the wheel. 
They are now looking for a restoration of leadership and order. Enter, with 
perfect timing,Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>. 
The rapid gravitation of support to the home secretary is driven by this 
yearning among Tories for the chaos to be over.

In her quiet but deadly way, Mrs May has been the most ruthless player of them 
all. She kept her head down during the poisonous battles between fellow Tories 
during the referendum campaign, winning some points for loyalty by paying lip 
service to the prime minister’s position while saying nothing to infuriate the 
other side. She waited for the Tory boys to finish knifing each other in their 
pantomime version ofHouse of Cards and then elegantly stepped over their 
twitching corpses to seize pole position for the succession. Offering herself 
as a serious person for a serious time is a shrewd pitch. The choice of next 
Tory leader, and therefore prime minister, is ultimately in the hands of Tory 
activists so it is important to remember what they are like. They are 
predominantly elderly. They mainly live in shires and suburbs. They want a 
leader who looks and sounds like a prime minister. They think that their party 
had its best years when it was led by a woman of steely fibre. Mrs May is 
unlike Mrs Thatcher in quite a lot of significant ways, but she is similar to 
the party’s old heroine in enough respects to tick an awful lot of boxes for 
the Tory selectorate. Some of them and some Tory MPs may be a bit wary that Mrs 
May was, at least nominally, a Remainer, but she has already moved to settle 
doubts by declaring her acceptance of Brexit. It will be the sort of irony that 
politics loves to throw up if the referendum propels into Number 10 a woman who 
played virtually no role in the result.

The five candidates for the leadership will be whittled down to a shortlist of 
two in a series of ballots of Tory MPs, the first this Tuesday. Technically, 
this could take three rounds and last until Tuesday week. My strong hunch is 
that it will be over this week as unpopular candidates drop out before they are 
formally eliminated. Two names will then be put to Tory activists. Unless, 
which seems increasingly possible, the home secretary so runs away with support 
from MPs that she is crowned queen of the Tories without the bother of a ballot 
of the members.

So by early September, and conceivably much sooner than that, the Conservative 
party will have a new leader who will then be hosannaed at the party conference 
in October in a choreographed display of adulation. Historically, the Tory 
party has had a genius for switching from darkest treachery to sycophantic 
unity and performing the somersault at astonishing speed.

So there is a clearly marked route out of its current turmoil and back to 
something resembling stability for the Conservative party. The same, I’m 
afraid, cannot be said for Labour. How its agonies are going to be resolved is 
much harder to foresee. If Jeremy Corbyn were any other leader, he would have 
been gone by now. In fact, he would have gone on Monday when he lost most of 
his shadow cabinet. So many of his frontbenchers have quit that Labour is 
simply no longer functional as a parliamentary opposition.Pat Glass  
<http://www.chroniclelive.co.uk/news/north-east-news/who-labour-party-mp-pat-11543780>
was appointed as a substitute shadow education spokeswoman on Monday only then 
to resign by Wednesday, setting a new allcomers record for the brevity with 
which she was in post.

By an unprecedented margin of four to one, Labour MPs have declared that they 
have no confidence in Mr Corbyn. Every single living former leader of the party 
has implored him to go. This is so wide and so deep that it cannot be 
characterised as a “plot” by “embittered Blairites”. The resignees and the 
no-confidence voters included many Labour MPs who had done their best to try to 
make his leadership work. What happened in theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party in parliament last week was 
not so much a coup as a riot of despair.

The deeper tragedy is that this period presented a golden opportunity for any 
half-decent opposition to present itself to the country as an authoritative 
voice. Rarely has Britain so needed an effective alternative to the government. 
Brexit was rejected by 48% of voters and there are second thoughts among some 
of the 52% and expressions of regret by many who failed to vote. That’s a lot 
of potential energy and support waiting to be tapped by a confident Labour 
party under attractive leadership.

This weekend, senior Labour figures are still clinging to the hope that Mr 
Corbyn will finally reach the conclusion that his position is unsustainable and 
announce that he is standing down. Attempts are being made to persuade him that 
there is a way to depart that does not look as if he has abandoned his 
supporters and betrayed his causes. A vacancy would allow an open contest 
involving multiple candidates. If Mr Corbyn does not resign, then his MPs will 
have to take the bloodier course. They have gone way too far to pull back from 
triggering a formal challenge to his leadership that will pitch them directly 
against many of the party’s members. If that does not unseat him, it becomes 
increasingly hard to see how the party can avoid a trajectory that leads to a 
formal split.

While the Tories are probably past peak chaos, for Labour the worst may be yet 
to come.
 