
Being a good guest starts before you arrive. Reply to any invitation as 
promptly as you can. (If you can’t accept, say so early.) The answer to any 
invitation is yes or no; you don’t have to share issues with how you’ll get 
there, babysitters/parking/travel/what you’ll do with Granny and the dog. 
Talking of which, don’t ask if you can bring extra guests or pets who weren’t 
invited – that bit is your job to deal with.

1. The best guests are … hosts. No one has the potential to understand what is 
needed of a guest and how to behave more than those who regularly invite people 
into their own house. The worst guests are those who never reciprocate and 
never have guests round themselves. These are the people who think it is OK to 
ask an already busy host for a 33rd cup of tea and act as if they have checked 
into a hotel. Prefixing everything with “do you mind if we have?” does not make 
it better.

2. Never turn up empty-handed unless you are visiting the house of someone 
whom you also regularly host. Saying “I didn’t know where the local supermarket 
was” or “we came on the train” are poor excuses for laziness and lack of 
organisation. You do not need to spend loads (although a well-picked personal 
hamper always goes down well if you are staying overnight, but avoid chutneys 
because good hosts always have at least 15 different chutneys and they really 
don’t need more).

3. Do not bring food that has to be consumed during your stay but 
underestimates the number of people it has to feed. Unless it’s cheese. Do not 
have a complicated, indulgent list of what you or your children won’t eat. 
Unless you are allergic to something, the correct response to any food likes is 
“we eat everything and anything and are grateful for it”. Your host is unlikely 
to cook tripe and liver unless they hate you. And if there is something you 
don’t like, you don’t have to eat it.

4. When food is served, if there is something you don’t like, just shut up and 
avoid it. You don’t have to announce to the whole room that you will only eat 
line-caught fish, organic raspberries or that it’s “not your favourite” (I have 
done this, and cringe when I remember). Do not – ever – say the words “eating 
clean”. If you want a menu to choose from, go to a restaurant and pay for it.

5. Do not spend the whole time you are there on your phone. No one is that 
important. Do not bicker with your partner, children or anyone else in the 
party. Do not use this opportunity to espouse your political views or call 
Jesus into the fray. If you are a bad drunk, don’t drink. And if you plan to 
drink loads (but are a good drunk), bring some (good) booze. Do not use this 
opportunity to have a go at the host and ask why they are not married/don’t 
have children yet.

6. Make a positive comment on something to do with the house. Lie if you have 
to. Saying nothing, especially if it’s the first time you have been to 
someone’s house, is pretty shabby. Even if you ache with jealousy, find it deep 
in your core to say something nice. Passive-aggressive comments such as “this 
house must be a lot of work” just make you look very sad.

7. If you do drink lots of tea/coffee, ask if you can be shown how to make 
your own and offer others one, too – especially your host. Use the same cup 
each time, otherwise your host will have a nervous breakdown.

8. When the host sits down after a meal, this is probably their one pit stop 
before it all starts again for the next meal. Do not use this time to ask if 
your child can have a ham sandwich because “they didn’t eat much at lunch”. 
Tough.

9. Offer to do the washing up and bring your plate into the kitchen unless 
your host has asked you not to (some people don’t like anyone else in their 
kitchen). This isn’t so relevant if you regularly visit each other’s houses.

10. Leave when you said you would. If you are fussy about bedding, bring your 
own. Bring extra layers if you are visiting someone in the country. Don’t ask 
if they can turn the heating up (or on). Do star jumps.

11. Smile and enjoy yourself. The lowest impact guests are the ones who 
leave everyone feeling good, either by helping, or not hindering. If you get an 
invite back, you’ll know.
 