
If you ask the wrong question, you get the wrong answer.

And when the question is about the $300bn the federal government spends on 
services that help create a fair society, getting the wrong answer could be 
very, very bad.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison, asked the Productivity Commission to “identify 
services within the human services sector that are best suited to the 
introduction of greater competition, contestability and user choice”.

Productivity Commission calls to privatise public health and housing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/22/productivity-commission-calls-to-privatise-public-health-and-housing>
And this week the PC gave its preliminary answer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/22/productivity-commission-calls-to-privatise-public-health-and-housing>
: “Reformcould offer the greatest improvements in outcomes for people who use 
social housing, public hospitals, specialist palliative care, public dental 
services, services in remote Indigenous communities, and grant-based family and 
community services.”

I add the italics to the proposals for that list of very essential services 
because it was widely reported as a recommendation that theyshould be subject 
to more competition and privatisation, when even the PC added some very 
important caveats.

Change, it said, would have to be “well-designed” and “underpinned by strong 
government stewardship”. If it was, then it could “improve the quality of 
services, increase access to services, and help people have a greater say over 
the services they use and who provides them”.

But recent changes (I won’t use “reform” because it’s a value-positive term 
which pre-judges the idea we are debating) have not been well designed.

In the case of vocational education and training, for example, changes started 
by Labor in 2009 and expanded by the Coalition in 2012 led to rampant rorting 
of billions of dollars of taxpayer funds by get-rich-quick shysters who preyed 
on the most disadvantaged.

Employment services, which the Howard government turned into a competitive 
market 20 years ago, are often held up as a successful case study. But 
successive studies have shown this has been most successful in getting jobs for 
unemployed people who are pretty well placed to get jobs anyway, and least 
successful for the most disadvantaged job seekers, who regularly report 
receiving extremely poor services.

Australia does not have a welfare problem. We have a poverty problem | John 
Falzon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/australia-does-not-have-a-welfare-problem-we-have-a-poverty-problem>
And the very process of outsourcing can denude the public service of the 
people and skills it needs to deliver “strong stewardship” to properly check 
and monitor the services which non-government bodies are now providing.

Consumer choice sounds good in theory, and might even be good in practice, if 
the choices are made by well-informed citizens. But almost by definition some 
of the people seeking these kind of services are going to have their ability to 
make good choices impeded by sickness, disability or poverty.

In short, there are especially good policy reasons to proceed very cautiously 
with this kind of change, debate it vigorously and not prejudge the outcome.

And even if the treasurer doesn’t really buy these policy caveats or calls for 
caution, there are political reasons to have this debate properly.

The Liberal federal director, Tony Nutt, can rage about  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/22/liberal-campaign-director-defends-positive-election-tactics-and-attacks-medicare-lie>
what he called Labor’s “cold-blooded lie” over Medicare privatisation during 
the election campaign, but the reason the ALP was able to make such a big deal 
of a back-office data outsourcing plan is that decades of “competition policy” 
and “outsourcing” have left the public deeply sceptical about its alleged 
benefits and intensely mistrustful of the Coalition’s plans.

Scepticism of this process to consider more competition for human services is 
so sky-high various groups are setting up alternative ways to have a proper 
debate, even if the government doesn’t want to.

The union movement, through Public Services International, is conducting a 
“people’s inquiry into privatisation” <http://www.peoplesinquiry.org.au/>, 
chaired by the executive director of the progressive thinktank Per Capita, 
David Hetherington, to “start a national conversation about the impacts of 
privatisation, and talk directly with communities about the services they 
need”. Its other members are the former Western Australian Labor politician 
Yvonne Henderson and Archie Law, executive director of ActionAid.

Unions are obviously interested in protecting public-sector jobs, but the 
“people’s inquiry” is striking a chord when it argues that the government 
started with the wrong question.


“The Turnbull government has directed the Productivity Commission to conduct 
an inquiry into how to further privatise our public services, without looking 
at whether handing over control of our services to corporations is in the best 
interests of all Australians,” it says. Submissions closed on Friday and 
hearings start next month.


In other places <http://www.powertopersuade.org.au/social-services-futures> 
academics and non-government organisations are also actively debating the 
issues they think the PC won’t – or hasn’t been asked to – consider.


If it is really after better, smarter services, rather than just saving money, 
the Turnbull government should take a few steps back from its PC brief and get 
into this discussion.


Because however much the treasurer tries to skew the question, when this 
debate gets down to specifics, the electorate is not going to buy any “user 
choice” or “contestability” or “competition” in human services unless they are 
convinced the government is not only thinking about cheaper services but also 
about the humans who need them and the society they hold together.

 