
When the #illridewithyou 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23illridewithyou&src=typd&lang=en> hashtag went 
global in December after Sydney’s Lindt cafe shootings, criticism was levelled 
at the presumption that Australia was full of people poised to enact 
anti-Islamic retribution.

“Anti-Islamic sentiment’s got nothing to do with racism; Islam’s not a race,” 
I hear people type-shouting. Yes, true – and you and I both know that, but you 
can’t expect racists to know that. Criticising a religion isn’t racist; 
assuming someone belongs to a particular religion on the basis of their skin 
colour is. It’s all in the nuance, you see.

Anyway, I thought at the time: to hell with the reputation of some fictional 
average Australian; presumption was a far better move than waiting and seeing. 
Others disagreed, perhaps the sort who put on a seatbelt after they’ve crashed 
their car.

Watching The Great Australian Race Riot 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/379838019966/The-Great-Australian-Race-Riot-S1-Ep3-The-Great-Australian-Race-Riot-Series-1-Ep-3>
 (SBS), you repeatedly get a sense of how easily a spark can set off widespread 
violence when tensions are ratcheted up. Each case might present a “perfect 
storm” of causality, as sociologist Andrew Jakubowicz puts it, but viewed 
across the whole of Australia’s short history, these storms seem to register 
too low on the Richter scale to justify the violence that follows them.

 Series host and narrator Peter FitzSimons makes for passionately engaging 
company. Photograph: SBS 
Talking us through the specific cocktail of circumstances that led to each 
riot is Fairfax columnist and headwear ambassador Peter FitzSimons. He makes 
for passionately engaging company, in equal parts inquisitive, authoritative 
and respectful – a crucial combination given the subject matter. You couldn’t 
have Attenborough here, lying down in front of a detention centre and speaking 
in reverent whispers. You need someone with a bit of gusto.

FitzSimons’ methodical explanation of events is accompanied by some dynamic 
visuals that help paint the picture. Animated stills might not be for everyone, 
but the alternative – TV’s much loved “dramatic re-enactment” – is all too 
often wooden and distracting: a history textbook meets The Bold and The 
Beautiful. By not taking this route, the show keeps things moving along, 
communicating the runaway momentum that carried these riots from bubbling rage 
to violent outbreak.

Occasionally this results in unnecessary kinetic energy – FitzSimons often 
ends his links by walking off screen with hasty purpose. It’s not the worst 
stylistic quirk, but it can suggest he has some terribly important business to 
attend to just out of shot. I’m not sure where he is off to in such a hurry, 
but I honestly wouldn’t mind if he stayed put for a few minutes.


Unexpectedly, one positive (or negative, depending on how you look at it) 
take-away from the series is a sense of the sheer diversity of race riots in 
Australia.

In the second episode 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/377723459808/the-great-australian-race-riot-s1-ep-2>
, we heard of conflict in Broome between Koepanger pearl divers and the 
Japanese, and Anglo-Australian miners erupting against Italian immigrants. In 
Sunday’s instalment, FitzSimons brings us closer to the present day with a look 
at the riots at the Woomera detention facility and in Redfern, Sydney.

Each set of circumstances is obviously unique, but what connects these riots 
is the tendency for tensions between communities to boil over into violence. 
It’s a disappointing commonality. But each group’s battle for autonomy and 
acceptance is also a sign that, beneath all that distracting skin pigment, we 
belong to the same species.

These “great” Australian riots are often cathartic, too, revealing a desire to 
cooperate that’s lain buried under longstanding antagonism. Once there’s been a 
violent purge, the willingness to forget our differences comes back stronger. 
Again, another positive-negative, and just one of many intriguing lessons from 
this excellent, history-spanning series.
 