
1) Trevor Francis

Probably the best way to gauge the way Trevor Francis introduced himself to 
English football is to go back to those early days and the headlines on the 
BBC's Sports Report one night. "And Trevor Francis did not score today!" came 
the announcement during his first season at Birmingham City. The date was 
February 1970. Francis was two months short of his 17th birthday.

By any standards, his induction into the Football League had been phenomenal. 
Francis scored 15 goals in his first 15 matches. He was fast, brave and he 
could score goals from any angle and any distance. "St Francis of St Andrew's", 
as the newspapers tagged him, or simply "Super Boy", bagged four in one 
afternoon against Bolton Wanderers. Many years later, I asked him about that 
game and his abiding memory was not actually scoring but having to come off 
injured. His replacement had missed a good chance to make it five – and Francis 
said, very matter-of-factly, that he would have scored it.

The following day he was back with the apprentices sweeping the terraces and 
cleaning the other players' boots. "There was no way I could possibly believe 
the wonderboy tag."

The sad thing about modern-day football is that a club of Birmingham's size 
would have almost no chance these days of hanging on to a player who was 
banging in goals with so much panache.

Back then, Francis lasted almost 10 years at St Andrew's before Nottingham 
Forest made him the first-ever £1m footballer – or £999,999, to be pedantic – 
and the pinnacle of his brilliant yet ultimately injury-affected career, on a 
balmy night in Munich's Olympiastadion, when Francis ended up on the 
shot-putters' circle, having just headed in the winner in a European Cup final.

Brian Clough would later describe him as "a disgrace to his profession at 
Birmingham." Yet try telling the Brummie fans that. Rob Hughes, in his 1980 book
Trevor Francis, Anatomy of a £1m Player, remembers there being a "Francis cult" 
at St Andrew's.

In his first two seasons, with the club in the old Second Division, the 
teenager's emergence can be directly linked to why Birmingham's crowds swelled 
to nearly 50,000. In 1972, after winning promotion, 52,104 people shoehorned 
into St Andrew's for one game. When Francis left seven years later, and 
Birmingham's decline set in, the gates were a quarter of that amount.

Francis also belonged to a time that nostalgia can make feel that little bit 
more innocent. His father, Roy, a shift foreman with the South West Gas Board, 
would make the seven-hour drive from Plymouth (before the days of the M5) to 
every game at St Andrew's. His mother, Phyllis, raised petrol money by sewing 
and tailoring, at six shillings an hour. From the age of 15 to 17, the scorer 
of 800-plus goals in Devon schools football lived in three lots of digs. As a 
16-year-old tipped for England stardom and described by his manager, Freddie 
Goodwin, as "the best prospect since George Best", he was operating to a 
10.30pm curfew and had to get written permission before he was allowed to see 
in the new year.

"You looked at Trevor and saw everything you want as a footballer," Goodwin 
said very early on. "If a manager is lucky, he comes across a youngster like 
this once in his career. Looking for comparisons, I'd say Jimmy Greaves, Denis 
Law and that's it. Francis is in this exclusive scorer's bracket."DT

2) Martina Hingis

Tennis is not short of prodigious talent: making her professional debut at 
around the same time as Hingis, late on in 1994, was another 14-year-old, Venus 
Williams – who, in case you had to google "tennis" at the start of this 
sentence, went on to have quite the career, winning seven grand slam singles 
titles to Hingis's five. By 1994, of course, Jennifer Capriati had already had 
time to win the US and French Open junior singles titles (aged 13), an Olympic 
gold medal (three years later), and get arrested for shoplifting and possession 
of marijuana. By that token she was, as the Chicago Sun-Times put it, "the 
poster child for burned-out sports prodigies".

Though one of Hingis's retirements followed a positive test for cocaine at the 
age of 27, she cannot challenge Capriati for that title. No, the "Swiss Miss", 
to use a title seemingly invented with the sole intention of exercising our gag 
reflexes, was simply an outstanding junior. She was the youngest ever winner of 
a junior slam title when, at 12, she won the French Open. Twelve years old! And 
by then she had been playing tournament tennis for eight years. At the age of 
13, she held on to the French title and added Wimbledon, becoming in the 
process SW19's youngest junior champion. Bored on the junior tour, she turned 
professional just after her 14th birthday – and just before the rule change 
that would have kept her off the women's tour until 15.

With Capriati's mugshot all over the newsstands, the reaction was cautious 
with more than a dash of foreboding. "If she is good at 13, she will be good at 
18," said her namesake Martina Navratilova, scared as much by the potential for 
catastrophe as she was impressed by the solidity of Hingis's game. She was 
small but she was smart, able to play from the front and back of the court and 
work players who could overpower her given time to catch their breath. By the 
time she had her first crack at the senior French Open, aged 14, she was 
inspiring breathy prose. "Hingis floats above the ground almost," wrote Diane 
Pucin, then with the Philly Inquirer. "She is so light, and when the rain made 
the clay mushy and thick, Hingis couldn't tell the difference." Hingis reached 
the third round before losing to Lindsay Davenport.

Under the new rules she would have been kept out of grand slam competitions 
until the age of 16 – as it was, she was restricted to 12 tournaments a year 
until then. "I wish I could play more," she said. Part of that was her then 
unshakable self-belief: already she would look at the draw for a tournament and 
see a path through it (she once said to Davenport, a player she always admired, 
during a coin toss: "Do you want me to serve, or break you?" Later her 
willingness to comment on her opponents would get her into trouble). But she 
had the game to back it up: at 15, she became the youngest ever grand slam 
champion by winning the Wimbledon doubles title with Helena Sukova.

The best that most of us can hope for from the year we turn 16 is a decent set 
of exam results and a dinner out at TGI Fridays (milkshakes allowed). Hingis, 
meanwhile, competed in all four grand slam singles finals, winning three of 
them – only the French slipped messily from her grasp, an improbable defeat to 
Iva Majoli. When Hingis had lost to Mary Pierce in her first professional 
tournament just over two years earlier, reporters made the most of their 
differing statures. "Martina Hingis found out how the big girls play," said the 
Daily Mail. "Hingis's time will come when she grows a little and adds an adult 
serve to an already impressive armoury." In the final of the 97 Australian 
Open, Hingis beat Pierce in what the Times described as "an hour of withering 
tennis" with a 6-2, 6-2 scoreline. She also won the doubles title, this time 
with Natasha Zvereva. "[Hingis has] matured from a little girl into a young 
woman," said the Times. "A lot of women are going to feel middle-aged." That 
included the 17-year-old Venus Williams, swatted aside in that year's US Open 
final.

Although she retained the Australian Open title for the next two years, and in 
1998 held all four grand slam doubles titles, Hingis was never more frightening 
than she was at 16: a precocious talent with a game so full of assets that it 
was hard to appreciate them all in the same glance.GT

3) Beverly Klass

Think about what you did as a 10-year-old. Beverly Klass was playing on the 
LPGA Tour. "It was my father's decision," she later ruefully recalled. "I 
didn't even know there was a pro Tour. But it didn't faze me one way or 
another." By now – driven on by father Jack (more of whom later) – Klass had 
been playing for six years, could drive the ball a reported 223 yards and had 
won around 25 junior tournaments, among them the 1964 National Pee Wee 
Championship … by 65 strokes. So it was that this pint-sized tyro from 
California, all 4ft 10in of her, stepped on to the tee at the 1965 Dallas 
Civitan Open. She carded two 88s.

Klass played in three more tournaments, making a solitary cut and earning 
$135, before the LPGA put its foot down, refusing to accept her entry fee at 
the next event on account of child labour laws and imposing a minimum age of 
18. The Klass Clause. Undeterred, Klass waited, winning 25 amateur events, all 
the while enduring a volatile relationship with her father, one that even 
forced her to run away from home. "He'd yell and scream and corner me in the 
bathroom with a belt,"Klass told USA Today in 2003 
<http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/sports/golf/lpga/2003-06-26-klass_x.htm>. "He 
hit me until my back was bleeding. He cursed at me from the sidelines at 
tournaments." When she turned 18, Klass caught the Greyhound to Florida and 
embarked on a 13-year Tour career, collecting $234,330 in the process. "Child 
prodigies develop talent but they don't develop relationships," Klass would 
later say. "And my talent was a blessing that became a burden. I suppose my 
parents did the best they could but it didn't turn out great. There were more 
times of horror than good times."JD

4) Joy Foster 

By the age of eight, Joy Foster had three Jamaican national titles under her 
belt and a place in the Guinness record book as the world's youngest champion. 
Yet her feats in 1958 are little remembered outside of the Caribbean. However, 
those three 1958 titles were just a handful of the trophies she would go on to 
win – even aged eight, the Jamaica Gleaner photographed her stood by a trophy 
cabinet groaning under the weight of the 20 pewter cups it held, the caption 
reporting that she had more trophies than anyone else on the island.

Chubby-cheeked and innocent-faced, she played with her hair in ponytails and 
ribbons. She would beat adults more than twice her age and go on to win the 
Caribbean women's single titles twice before she was 12, compete in the United 
States and be named Jamaica's first sportswoman of the year at 11 years of age.

And then, in her teens, she turned away from the sport that had made her 
famous having already peaked. From there, she slipped away from the spotlight – 
at least outside Jamaica. Perhaps she would have been more heralded around the 
globe if she hadn't – but then again the sport in which she excelled has never 
had the same cachet as the footballs and crickets of the world. But, for a few 
years at least, Joy Foster was the greatest child to have ever picked up a 
table-tennis bat.TB

5) Mike Tyson

The youngest ever heavyweight champion at 20 years, four months and 21 days; 
the undisputed champion of the world just 19 months later – Mike Tyson may seem 
old compared to some of the names listed here, but in a sport where world 
champions are commonly in their 30s his prodigy pedigree cannot be doubted.

Initially written off as too short for a heavyweight at 1.78m (5ft 10in) – 
Tyson enjoyed proving his doubters wrong, rising from his deprived Brooklyn 
childhood to dominate the boxing scene. Pointed in the direction of renowned 
trainer Cus D'Amato by a juvenile detention centre worker, D'Amato channelled 
the 13-year-old's demons and moulded the boxer he was to become. Tyson's 
compact frame suited the Peek-A-Boo style developed by his tutor, and he earned 
his first shot at a beltin 1986 against Trevor Berbick 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aak6ZDzFVtQ> – 13 years his senior. It didn't 
last long – the referee put a halt to proceedings at the start of the second 
round when Tyson connected with a sweet left-hook. Berbick tumbled to the 
canvas and then staggered around the ring like a drunk uncle at a wedding, 
falling over twice more before regaining some semblance of composure. And so a 
boxing superstar was born.

Of course, Tyson has since followed a path familiar to so many who enjoy 
success so young – who knows what may have been had his mentor D'Amato not died 
when Tyson was only 19. It's both ugly and tragic that, for many, one of the 
world's great fighters will be better remembered for rape, bitten ears and the 
terribleHangover <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ELc9Aw3fS-g> movies than the 
epic battles fought within the ring.TM

6) Hachim Mastour <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qqk6FqRqxZw>

In the internet age, nobody is a secret any more. If you think you've heard of 
him first, or him or evenhim, you're wrong, someone else already got there last 
week and it's already gone viral. Which is precisely what happened when young 
Hachim Mastour burst on to the scene last year, alerting the world to his 
awesome potential when he was caught on camera playing for Milan's youth team 
andbecoming an overnight YouTube sensation 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qqk6FqRqxZw>, nicknamed the Moroccan Messi. A 
performance of amazing tricks, dinky flicks, defence-splitting passes and an 
outrageously impudent goal led to his anointment as the Chosen One. Milan even 
appealed to Serie A for special permission to include Mastour in their squad, 
even though he's under-age. And there's the rub: he's only 15. Mastour is not 
the first Mastour. He may make it but there have been many like him who have 
been unable to handle the expectation on them, the Freddy Adus of this world. 
But let's hope he doesn't go down that route. The boy does look special.JS
 