
One party contested the last general election with a commitment to create more 
grammar schools. That party wasn’t the Conservatives – it was Ukip. So why did 
Theresa May pick a fight for which she lacks a mandate? Why start it now when 
she was under absolutely no pressure to do so? Why unfurl her standard on 
terrain that looks heavily stacked against her from the start? In seeking to 
understand why she has chosen to makegrammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
 her first domestic battlefield, we will find that political psychology is a 
more useful guide than anything else.

There was no public clamour for a programme of expanding grammar schools. Even 
in the minority of counties where they have survived the wave of abolitions 
that began in the 1960s, only a small segment of the electorate have any direct 
experience of them. That is why I don’t place much trust in opinion polls 
suggesting that there is a lot of public support for expanding the number of 
schools allocating places by academic selection. I am not confident that most 
people responding to these polls understand what grammars are and what more of 
them would mean. In her big speech on Friday, Mrs May contended that her new 
version of the grammar is intended to be “inclusive, not exclusive”. But 
exclusivity is the whole point about them and it is so for both their 
supporters and opponents. Giving to the gifted child a different, and 
implicitly superior, kind of schooling is precisely the attraction of grammars 
to those who think they are a fantastic idea; just as it is why they are so 
passionately opposed by the many critics, among them the chief inspector of 
schools, who think that segregating children is a dreadful concept.

It is a political problem with grammars as well as a social and educational 
one that they divide children into winners and losers. This was one of the 
major reasons that previous Tory governments have not attempted to restore 
them. Margaret Thatcher may have been a proud alumnus of Kesteven and Grantham 
Girls’ School, but as education secretary she presided over a record number of 
closures and never sought to revive the grammar/secondary modern split when she 
was prime minister. “Bring back the grammars” has, though, always been an 
effective way of harvesting applause from Tory audiences. It is especially 
popular with Conservatives who, like the current prime minister, had a grammar 
school education themselves and believe that it explains their life stories. 
Autobiography may be a bad way of making policy, but in my experience it has an 
especially potent influence on politicians when it comes to education. Full 
declaration of my own background: I went to all-ability state primary and 
junior schools, sat what was then the 12-plus and attended a grammar in 
Warwickshire before going on a scholarship to a private school. I hope that 
multi-environment experience gives me a bit of insight into how the 
protagonists are thinking.

During the exchanges about the government’s intentions in parliament, some of 
the Tory contributors lingered affectionately on their school days.Chris Philp 
<http://www.chrisphilp.com>, the MP for Croydon South, declared: “I went to a 
state grammar school in south London and I owe my place here to that school.”
Justine Greening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/greening-struggles-to-produce-evidence-to-back-grammar-schools>
, the comprehensive-schooled education secretary, responded rather icily: “I 
think all of us are here because of the education that we were lucky enough to 
have.”

Education is one of those subjects that provokes Conservatives to fight a form 
of class war with each other. It is rare for this war to be openly declared, 
but it is lurking in the background and becomes visceral when they debate 
schooling. Grammar Tories think of themselves as the product of intelligence 
allied to effort and ambition. They often feel this most intensely. When 
Michael Howard was Tory leader, I never saw him more passionate than when he 
shouted over the dispatch box at Tony Blair that he, Howard “this 
grammar-school boy”, was not going to take any lectures about privilege from 
“that public-school boy”.

This sense of moral superiority among grammar-school Tories is felt just as 
keenly, even more so in fact, when they compare themselves with private-school 
Tories whom they often regard as unmerited beneficiaries of wealth and 
inherited advantage. “Meritocracy” was a word that David Cameron struggled to 
use without being mocked because of where he went to school. Mrs May is much 
more comfortable with it and “meritocracy” made repeat appearances in her 
speech. Her declared ambition was to make “Britain the great meritocracy of the 
world”. Many Tories of her background hated Mr Cameron for his refusal to 
countenance a revival of grammars. They regarded this as a man with an 
expensive education denying life chances to people who had not enjoyed his 
early advantages. Mrs May has made a big feature of the opening period of her 
premiership of defining herself through contrasts with her predecessor. This is 
a way of virtue-signalling to other Tories and the wider electorate that she is 
a friend of aspiration and opportunity in a way her predecessor was not.

Let us assume that she sincerely wants to do more for gifted children from 
less advantaged backgrounds. In taking this road, she simply ignores the great 
weight of evidence that says her chosen instrument will not do that and might 
very well sharpen inequalities. Specialist after specialist has reminded the 
prime minister of this since she declared her intentions. So have many 
colleagues from her own party. David Willetts, the Tory minister for the 
universities in the last parliament, has pointed out that if your aim is to 
lubricate social mobility, then expanding the number of grammars is not the way 
to go about it. Nicky Morgan, the former education secretary, bluntly calls the 
policy a “weird” distraction from driving up the performance of all schools 
while Ms Greening couldn’t sound less enthused.Alan Milburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/grammar-schools-expansion-disaster-social-mobility-tsar-alan-milburn>
, the chairman of the government’s commission on social mobility, predicts that 
it will be a “disaster” because it will not lead to more selection by ability 
but more “selection socially”. Mrs May has had to acknowledge that affluent 
parents will try to maximise the chances of their offspring prospering from an 
extension of selection. She has also conceded that no one has yet managed to 
come up with a test that is “tutor-proof”. She can’t or won’t say how many new 
grammars she would like.

When you get into the detail, the government is not putting all that much 
money where the prime minister’s mouth is. She envisages spending £50m a year 
on expanding grammars, a tiny fraction of an education budget totalling more 
than £80bn. That’s not really the supposed “schools revolution” blared in some 
of the headlines. This suggests it is more about symbolism.

That symbolism is nevertheless important because expanding grammars is an 
implied repudiation of the idea that every school should strive for excellence. 
It upsets a well-grounded consensus that the most effective way to drive up 
educational attainment is to concentrate on recruiting talented teachers and 
put them under effective leadership. There is also plenty of evidence about the 
best way to tackle underachievement, which is to focus extra help on poorer 
children through mechanisms such as the pupil premium and paying extra to good 
teachers who work in disadvantaged areas.

Projecting grammars on to the top of the news bulletins has also obscured 
other ideas from Mrs May that were potentially more radical and more likely to 
gather wide support. It was arresting to hear a Tory prime minister say that 
private schools must do more for their communities to earn their charitable tax 
breaks. That has largely gone unremarked upon because of the emotional potency 
of the grammars issue. Opposition will be wide, deep and fierce. This is one of 
those rare issues – in fact, it is the only one – which unites the teaching 
unions, Michael Gove, the Lib Dems, the Scottish Nationalists, Jeremy Corbyn 
and the parliamentary Labour party. It will require legislation. Memo to Mrs 
May: your working majority in the Commons is just 17. A chunk of Tory MPs, 
among them the Conservative chairman of the education select committee, are 
already indicating that they are not comfortable. Further memo to Mrs May: you 
do not have a majority at all in the Lords. The upper house will not be 
constrained by the Salisbury Convention that binds peers not to oppose a policy 
that was in the ruling party’s election manifesto because expanding the number 
of grammars was not in the Tory manifesto.

The prime minister is setting herself up for a ferocious battle for which she 
does not have an electoral mandate over a relatively trivial amount of money to 
implement a policy that will have an impact only on a tiny minority of 
schoolchildren and with no evidence that it will have the intended effect. “My 
teachers made me the woman I am today,” Mrs May wrote for yesterday’sDaily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3782457/My-debt-grammar-schools-Theresa-s-personal-crusade-child-chance-education-revolution-attacks-fee-paying-schools-divorced-reality.html>
. She must have missed the lesson about only starting battles worth fighting 
and where there is a good chance of winning.
 