
TIGER RETURNS

After one false start, cautious optimism best be the watchword in anticipating 
Tiger Woods making his comeback to competitive golf. He was due to play the 
Safeway Open in October after a 16-month absence from the game following 
surgery on his back butwithdrew from the tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/tiger-woods-luke-donald-golf>. 
The 14-times major winner is now ranked No879 in the world, but will be hoping 
to begin what is a long journey back to the sharp end at the Hero World 
Challenge in the Bahamas on Thursday (Sky Sports 4, 6.30pm). It might be 
described as a home fixture for the 40-year-old, whose foundation backs and 
hosts the event. However, it will be testing for him. The Hero is an 
invitational, with a field of 18 – all expected to be players at the top of 
their game, including Jordan Spieth, Jason Day and Dustin Johnson.

FA CUP TIES

Macclesfield Town and Oxford United begin a weekend of FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> second round action on Friday 
(BBC2, 7.30pm), with the chance for a big tie up for grabs in the next round. 
Macclesfield, of the National League, are the form side having unexpectedly 
knocked out Walsall to advance. Other televised games are Curzon Ashton v AFC 
Wimbledon (Sunday, BT Sport 1, 12pm) and Lincoln City v Oldham Athletic 
(Monday, BT Sport 1, 7.45pm). The BBC will cover the action on Sunday afternoon 
inFA Cup Final Score on BBC1 from 1.45pm and the draw for the third round will 
be made on the Monday at 7.10pm.

Tiger Woods has to be careful over this comeback as there will not be another 
| Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/tiger-woods-comeback-golf-last-chance>
SEVENS BACK ON PITCH

Having gone down a storm at the Rio Olympics, sevens returns in its annual 
form as HSBC World Rugby Sevens Series begins in Dubai (day one, Friday, Sky 
Sports 2, 6am). The opening part of the tournament sees the teams in four 
groups of four competing in a round robin. Fiji have been the cup holders for 
two seasons and showed no signs of letting up after theirdominant performance 
at the Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/great-britain-fiji-rugby-sevens-rio-2016-olympics>
 this summer when they secured the country’s first gold medal and, more 
recently, became the Oceania Rugby Sevens champions. Uganda are the newest 
competitors, having beaten Namibia to win the Rugby Africa Sevens.

OLD RIVALRY RESUMES

Australia meet New Zealand for the first match of the Chappell-Hadlee One-Day 
International Series on Saturday (BT Sport 3, 3am) with the honours between the 
two rivals delicately poised. Although Australia held the trophy between 2008 
and 2011 and are 4-3 up in overall wins, the two sides share 12 wins apiece 
from the 27 games played since 2004 and New Zealand will be eager to have the 
edge and make it all square for the trophy as a whole. Sydney hosts the first 
match, with Canberra and Melbourne following on the Monday and Thursday.

SPOTY NAMES OUT

The BBC will announce the shortlist for Sports Personality of the Year during 
The One Show on Monday (BBC1, 7pm) when Spoty host Gabby Logan will reveal who 
has been chosen for the public vote.Last year’s winner, Andy Murray, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2015/dec/21/andy-murray-wins-bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-video>
 became firm favourite with the bookies after his victory at Wimbledon, and is 
heavily odds-on in front of Alistair Brownlee, Mo Farah, and Laura Trott.

LOOK OUT FOR … MASSIMO CELLINO

What’s he said now? Not so much lately – he’s been preoccupied by takeovers, 
plus an embezzlement case and an FA “bung” inquiry – he denies wrongdoing in 
both. But this week should raise his profile again as Leeds eye their biggest 
night since he took over: Tuesday’s EFL Cup quarter-final at Anfield.

So Leeds are good again now, are they? They’re getting there – and it’s been a 
while. When Cellino arrived in 2014 he told a wary fanbase not to listen to 
media sceptics: “Me, I sort out the fucking problems at Leeds. The fans, they 
will enjoy this, I promise.” Since then he’s delivered instability, rows, seven 
managers and a laser-sharp focus on superstition: railing against the 
appearance of the number 17 on seats, shirts, in players’ birthdates and on the 
match programme – with an issue 16b published last season. It’s not been dull – 
but it’s not looked like being successful, either. Until now.

How so? Thanks to some rare self-restraint. According to reports, Cellino 
first toyed with sacking Garry Monk two games into this season. Then again 
after four games. But then Monk’s side started performing, hitting form in time 
for Tuesday’s glamour tie, and reviving memories of their most recent golden 
era.

How long ago was that? It’s 15 years since they reached the Champions League 
semis. Three years later they were relegated in financial chaos. And it’s been 
seven years since they last faced Liverpool – also in the League Cup.

How did that one go? The League One side charged into it in on the back of 15 
home league wins on the trot – but lost 1-0 at Elland Road. David N’Gog scored 
Liverpool’s second-half winner.

So what are their chances this time? Never discount the magic of the 
Rumbelows, or the impact of squad rotation – but it looks like it’ll be tough 
under the lights at Anfield. “We’ve had some mighty battles with Liverpool over 
the years,” says former star Eddie Gray. “I just wish it was at Elland Road.”

Any omens? One big one – and it has nothing to do with the number 17. Almost 
exactly 19 years ago David O’Leary’s Leeds were 1-0 down at Anfield with 10 
minutes left. Then 18-year-old debutant Alan Smith came off the bench to 
equalise with his first touch, before Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink scored twice to 
win it 3-1. Something similar on Tuesday should tick Cellino’s boxes. No 
pressure, Garry.
 