
Now that New Year’s Eve has been and gone we can conclusively say 2014 was 
absolutely rubbish. Of course, some of you were already saying that in November 
or, in my case,last January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/02/2014-pop-culture-miley-cyrus-kanye-west>
.

Premature perhaps. There was a chance it could have turned out ok if we’d 
fixed everything horrendous before the end of EnWhyEe (the only noise most 
people can make by 2am on 1 January while draped in Kings Cross kebab meat). 
Sadly, the carbon-drenched, troll-infested, science-abandoning, testicle-heavy 
botch of a year was allowed to ooze across the finishing line unhindered, 
making it officially regrettable in its entirety, even though there was that 
Thursday in March that was quite good.

For those of us stuck indoors, the ABC was there, as always, to verify 2014 
was definitely gone with itsNYE coverage 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/new-years-eve/FA1449H003S00>. I can’t imagine 
a TV gig any worse than broadcasting a massive party into the homes of people 
who failed to go to one (myself included). Well done, then, to Julia Zemiro and 
Toby Truslove who proved relentlessly affable company for the whole marathon 
and made a wise choice to stay standing for most of the evening.

You might think that an odd thing to observe, but Lawrence Mooney and 
Stephanie Brantzsitting pretty last year 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/tv-and-radio/cringe-time-nothing-went-right-in-abcs-new-years-eve-coverage-20140101-305lt.html>
 made it feel as though we were watching some particularly underwhelming 
Olympics coverage. If I’m carefully incubating a sofa, I don’t need to tune in 
to see other people spending New Year’s Eve the same way. I could just erect a 
mirror for that.

Thanks to ABC’s two hosts, this year’s broadcast felt more active and even the 
segments were funnier. Particular props go to Peter Helliar’s guide to spending 
the evening alone, Tom Ballard’s non-event report over a dark patch of ocean, 
and Alan Kohler’s financial review-style wrap up of a typical New Year’s Eve. 
Mooney was put to better use this year too, playing to his strengths as a quiz 
host rather than having to attempt stiff decorum for a four-hour stretch.

Overall, then, a success. Which isn’t to say it was incredible television – 
how could it be? It was epically long. Slap in a song about mountains and it 
could have been another instalment of The Hobbit. And if having a 3D Gandalf 
battle a troll inches from your face isn’t enough to keep you awake, what 
chance does the ABC have?

Eventually the fireworks went off, which I bet you thought weren’t good enough 
because they didn’t write your name in the sky or something. But for me, here 
was the final proof of 2014’s demise – what better way to wave off a year in 
these times of economic uncertainty than by blowing up tonnes of money in front 
of the public?

Why 2015 will be worse

Gogglebox  <http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/gogglebox>is coming to Australia 
in 2015, a show where you watch people watching television. To add to the 
confusion, I’ll probably end up writing about it, essentially reviewing people 
reviewing television. And then you lot will comment below, reviewing my review 
of reviewers.

No-one will know where the show ends and reaction to the show begins, turning 
us into a giant human centipede of pointless opinion. Obviously I think it’s a 
terrible idea, but then all you Jeremy Bentham-esque “everything is valid” 
keyboard goblins will defend it because it’s entertaining, much like looped 
footage of an elderly pedestrian slipping on a large bird dropping.

If it’s successful in Australia, I’ll release my first album, Audioguff: 12 
tracks of the noises people make while they’re listening to music. I’ll follow 
up with Movieplop: three hours of footage of cinemagoers watching The Hobbit. 
And I might end up with The Week in Columns: a Guardian column where I type in 
real time what I’m thinking while I read Guardian columns.

Dear me. Can we skip to the fireworks already and get 2015 over with?
 