
7.50pm BST 

Shiv Kapur, at -3 through 14, and Francesco Molinari, -1 going up 17, are the 
only players still out there anywhere near the top of the leader board. Time, 
then, for this report to close down for the day. Please join us again tomorrow 
morning. Nighty night!

-5: Z Johnson (F)

-4: Cabrera-Bello (F), O'Meara (F)

-3: Jimenez (F), D Johnson (F), Snedeker (F), Lehman (F), Kapur (14)

-2: Hamilton (F), Mickelson (F), Cabrera (F), Spieth (F), Woods (F)

Updated at 7.51pm BST

7.44pm BST 

No par saver for G-Mac: a final-hole bogey, and a 75. He's +4. And then Tiger. 
He's made some magnificent putts to save himself today, and this one's no 
different, a missable eight-footer which goes straight into the centre of the 
cup. As the ball drops, he almost sprints after it to grab it out the hole, a 
burst of energy which perhaps shows just how happy he'll be with that 69. 
That's the round of the day, no question, a determined fight in difficult 
conditions after a hellish start.

7.41pm BST 

G-Mac sends a wedge to ten feet, giving himself good chance to scramble a par. 
Tiger clatters a long putt towards the flag from a distance off the green; he's 
got the pace, but hasn't particularly read it well, the ball breaking to the 
left and leaving a testing par putt.

7.39pm BST 

The back nine's not being as kind to Shiv Kapur as the front nine. He went out 
in 30 strokes; he's already taken 21 coming home, and he's only just through 
14, where he's just dropped another stroke. He's back to -3 now. 

7.35pm BST 

McDowell scythes his ball back out onto the fairway. Tiger decides to drive 
one up the track, setting it out to the right, hoping the ball will hook round 
and take a hot bounce onto the green. He gets the direction right, but no 
favourable bounce, so he's short of the putting surface.

7.31pm BST 

Tiger ends his round like he began it, hoicking a tee shot into the deep stuff 
down the left. It only just slips in the rough, though, so he may get away with 
it. McDowell then hooks one deep into the nonsense, before trudging off after 
it with his head hanging low. There's a man who is tired of golf.

7.26pm BST 

Tiger can't quite make his eagle, but a birdie will do very, very nicely. No 
birdie for G-Mac. Woods is now nudging the upper echelons of the leader board. 
Here's what it looks like:

-5: Z Johnson (F)
-4: Cabrera-Bello (F), O'Meara (F), Kapur (13)
-3: Jimenez (F), D Johnson (F), Snedeker (F), Lehman (F)
-2: Hamilton (F), Mickelson (F), Cabrera (F), Spieth (F), Woods (17)

7.22pm BST 

Any problems with the pin positions, Lee Westwood? "Well, they're on the 
greens," he deadpans, before breaking into a cheeky smile in response to some 
off-camera guffawing. "I wouldn't have had any complaints had you not mentioned 
it!" He then opines, with a twinkle in his eye, that Ian Poulter is "always 
moaning" and therefore shouldn't be listened to. Haw. Hero of the day.

7.19pm BST 

Tiger is in the mood for this championship, I'll be bound. He splits the 17th 
fairway, then skelps a long iron into the centre of the green, allowing the 
bank on the right to take the ball round towards the hole. He's left with a 
25-foot eagle chance from the back of the green. Magnificent. And an equally 
good approach by G-Mac, who dumped his drive into a bunker, was forced to chip 
out, and has guided a fairway wood into the green, off the same bank on the 
right, giving himself a birdie chance from 15 feet.

7.15pm BST 

Luke Donald played the last seven holes in seven over par. He's just bogeyed 
the last, to sign for an 80. That's nothing short of abysmal, no matter what 
the conditions are. His playing partner Adam Scott chucks in a farcical finish 
of his own, three putting from the fringe. He scribbles his name at the bottom 
of a 71, level par for the day.

7.11pm BST 

Tiger manages to get up and down from the back of 16 with minimum fuss. This 
is turning into a superlative round. No magical shots, birdie charges, and not 
even too many amazing escapes: it's just been trudge, plod, hack, a complete 
and total refusal to kow-tow to a difficult set-up and hellish conditions. It's 
what you have to do sometimes to win major championships. He's been the most 
impressive player out there today, and today's afternoon grind may reap some 
rewards in the morning tomorrow if conditions are roughly similar.

7.05pm BST 

Sergio trudged down the 17th via many bunkers, dropping a shot. He's now shed 
another, three putting 18 to sign for a four-over 75. Westwood, who picked one 
up on 17, scrambles par at 18 and walks off with a one-over 72. He's not out of 
this yet, though his playing partners Schwartzel and Sergio probably are. 
Meanwhile on 14, shot of the day surely, Francesco Molinari creaming a mid-iron 
to a couple of inches, the ball finding the front of the green before rolling 
serenely up to the cup. He moves to -1.

7.00pm BST 

Tiger's through the back of 16, where an up and down would be a pipe dream for 
most. It'll be a test for him, too. Up on 18, Schwartzel has found the bunker 
to the left of the green, and he can't get much of a stance in there. No 
worries; he bangs his club down as hard as he can, popping the ball up, and 
sending it curving left to right and into the cup for a birdie. He signs for a 
75, a round that's cost him four strokes and a broken club. He walks off 
smiling, having the good grace to see the funny side of a hellish back nine.

6.57pm BST 

Scott's another who has kept going: he's just rattled in a monster on 17 for 
birdie, and he's suddenly -1 despite not enjoying the best of the conditions. 
Kapur meanwhile responds well to his double bogey at 10 by sending his approach 
at 11 over the flag to 12 feet. But he can't knock in the birdie effort, so 
remains at -4.

6.55pm BST 

Well, it would have restricted the damage to a bogey, but G-Mac has a B-rush 
to the Nog-in, and races a tiddler past the hole. In fact, he'll drop back to 
+3. Tiger remains at -1: he only has to tippy-tap his ball up the 15th for it 
to scamper all the way to the cup. Lovely judgement. If he pars the final three 
holes, or better, this will be one of the great battling rounds, a textbook 
example of how to go about one's business, as opposed to letting one's 
shoulders slump or getting a cob on. And he'll be in decent shape for the rest 
of the week, too.

6.51pm BST 

Tiger's on the dancefloor at 15, a conservative approach to the middle of the 
green, its Tory heartland if you will. G-Mac's stuck his second in a fairway 
bunker, and can only send his third to the front of the green. He's got a 
monster to save his par, and so nearly makes it, an almost perfectly weighted 
rake up the green stopping by the pin. That'll restrict the damage to a bogey; 
he'll drop back to +2.

6.46pm BST 

Right, well I'm going to hand back to Scott now, who is hopefully fed and 
watered and ready to go again. McDowell has tried to play safe on the 15th – 
and effed it up. Whereas Tiger has found the middle of the fairway, the big 
show-off. Bye.

6.40pm BST 

Shiv Kapur has dropped a shot. In fact, he's dropped two. It had to happen 
eventually. Having found a bunker off the tee on the 10th, he bashed it out 
onto the fairway and then found the back of the green with his 3rd and left 
himself a 20-footer for par. He missed it, and then overhit his bogey putt from 
5ft and drops back to -4 for the day. Oh dear. The back nine has found many a 
poor soul out today. Kapur will hope that it doesn't devour him.So, Zach 
Johnson leads again on -5.

Updated at 6.42pm BST

6.34pm BST 

Did I say Tiger had taken his foot off the accelerator? He's gone into reverse 
on 14, clocking his 40ft left-to-right putt about this 
far-------------------------------------- wide and sending it scooting off the 
back of the green. His rescue attempt from the fringes misses by a foot to the 
right, leaving him with a 5ft bogey putt that he holes. He's paid for his 
conservatism there.

Updated at 6.34pm BST

6.29pm BST 

Tiger has taken his foot off the accelerator on the 14th, opting to land his 
tee shot shy of the bunkers and then clack an iron to the front of the green, 
where a two-putt won't be easy. Meanwhile, Luke Donald, has had a back nine 
that could prompt him to head straight to the bar for a stiff one when he 
finally limps home. He's in all kinds of trouble on the 16th having already 
just dropped four shots on the last two holes.

6.23pm BST 

The surprise leader, Shiv Kapur, has made par on the 9th to go out in a 
magnificent 30 and stay at -6. He's just simply got his head down and played 
golf. Lee Westwood, is gamely hanging in there too. He's scooped a bunker shot 
out to within 3ft on the par three 16th. He stays at +2. He shouldn't be 
anywhere near that score with some of the errant shots he has played. But his 
rescue game has been fantastic.

6.15pm BST 

Evening. Gregg Bakowski here. I'll try to keep you up to speed with what's 
happening at Muirfield while Scott takes a well-earned break.Tiger's on it! 
That's what I can tell you. He's stroked in an absolute beauty on the 13th for 
another birdie, A left-to-right 35-footer. He's also looking as slim as he has 
done in a long while. That probably has nothing to do with his good form here, 
but I'm sure it's giving him a little more spring in the step.

Updated at 6.30pm BST

6.04pm BST 

An absolute beauty from Tiger, who is forced to perch on the side of a bunker 
at 12, his knee cocked back, his body shaped like a treble clef. He splashes 
out to ten feet, as near as he could possibly get, and then drains the par 
saver. This is a simply stunning display from Tiger, who is refusing to let 
conditions at Muirfield defeat him. Once bitten, etc. Anyway, at six bells, 
here's how we stand:

-6: Kapur (7)
-5: Z Johnson (F)
-4: Cabrera-Bello (F), O'Meara (F),
-3: Jimenez (F), D Johnson (F), Snedeker (F), Lehman (F)
-2: Hamilton (F), Mickelson (F), Cabrera (F), Spieth (F)

Meantime, I'm off for a quick cool down. (Which is what Charl Schwartzel 
needs, by the way, having just broken one of his irons in two after a wee 
toy-pram divestment scenario in the rough down 15. I suppose that's what four 
birdies in five holes does to a man.) Gregg Bakowski will see you through the 
next 30 minutes or so.

5.54pm BST 

Martin Laird, having worked his way up to -3 at one point, slipped all the way 
back to level par with bogeys at 10, 13 and 14, but a birdie at 17 puts him 
back into credit at -1. He's only avoided the cut once in four appearances at 
the Open, but this is looking promising for the US-based Scot. Meanwhile Lee 
Westwood has been rattling home several long-distance par savers today, and 
he's just banged another in, from 20-plus feet up 14. He remains at +1. And on 
17, the 2011 champ Darren Clarke sends a birdie putt into the cup at 498mph; 
he's level par here.

5.49pm BST 

Another birdie for Adam Scott, this time at 13. He really is showing some 
mettle this afternoon. He's now -1. These players just need to dig in; they'll 
get the better of the conditions tomorrow, seeing the forecast is for more of 
the same. And along with Scott, Tiger's showing the way forward: he knocked in 
his birdie putt on 10, and now he's just birdied 11 too. Suddenly he's under 
par. Meanwhile up on 18 Spieth nearly strokes in a 15-footer for birdie, but 
taps in instead for par, signing for a 69. He's been fearless, in the trademark 
teenage style.

5.39pm BST 

It's six in seven now for Shiv Kapur! He rolls in his putt on 7 for a deserved 
birdie, and he's the sole leader of the Open, -6 already! If he pars his way to 
the turn, he'll be out in 30 strokes. A birdie will see him become only the 
13th player to play the front nine in an Open in less than 30 strokes. He needs 
to pick up two more strokes if he's to match Denis Durnian's record of 28, set 
at Birkdale in 1983.

5.32pm BST 

Tiger can't be bothered a-feudin' and a-fussin', either. He's just clipped an 
approach to ten feet at 10 giving himself a chance to get back to level par. 
And Sergio, to his credit, is fighting too, which is something that can't 
always be said. He'd dropped shots at 8, 9 and 12, but has given himself the 
chance of getting something back with a pin-high tee shot at 13. Finally, our 
co-leader Kapur has just stroked his tee shot at 7 to ten feet, a chance to 
grab the outright lead.

5.29pm BST 

For all the suffering, we have a new joint leader. Shiv Kapur, who has only 
ever played in one Open before, missing the cut at Hoylake in 2006, has just 
stroked in a 15-footer on 6 to move to -5. He's birdied five of the first six 
holes! Meanwhile on 17, young Master Fitzpatrick wasn't too far from making 
eagle, but tapped in for his birdie; he's level par for this championship! And 
19-year-old Jordan Spieth, who made history last week by winning as a teenager 
on the US tour, has decided to eschew the song and dance routine performed by 
his elders, and is just playing some golf: he's traversed the first eight holes 
of the supposedly hellish back nine in seven pars and now a birdie. He's -2 for 
his first ever round in the white-hot heat of major links golf, with only the 
18th to go.

5.23pm BST 

G-Mac's in all sorts of bother down 9. Finding himself in all manner of bother 
down the right - in rough described as "fecund" with tongue-rolling glee by 
Mark James on the BBC - he's forced to take an unplayable, then fizzes his chip 
straight through the green. This could get very ugly. A little dink with his 
rescue club sails past the flag and way across the green. He ends with a 
double-bogey 7. Tiger plays it conservatively into the heart of the green, then 
taps an uphill putt from 25 yards which sails a good 12 feet past the cup. But 
he slides the par putt straight into the hole. "He's done that in true Jack 
Nicklaus fashion," says the very wise BBC sage Peter Alliss, of the 14-time 
major winner's battling qualities. "A few of them give up before they even get 
going."

5.16pm BST 

A hell of a birdie for Adam Scott on 11. He could only just get his ball near 
the front of the green after powering out from a bunker. He rakes in the putt 
to get back to par. Lee Westwood just three putted that green to drop back to 
+1. And up on 18, Tom Lehman, the 1996 champion, rakes a birdie effort in from 
the front of the green, past the windmill, through the circus-themed chicane, 
and signs for a 68.

5.12pm BST 

Louis Oosthuizen has had to withdraw, injured, with a recurrence of a hip 
injury. Or perhaps it's a hamstring problem, writes Dr Murray.He's shaken hands 
with his playing partners Woods and McDowell, who are now hacking their way 
down the 9th in a very undistinguished style, the latter especially so. "Memo 
to the disgruntled golfers," begins Steve Buist. "Boo frickety hoo indeed. Mark 
O’Meara, who’s about 97 years of age, made it through at 4-under. So suck it up 
and stop your whining."

5.08pm BST 

The 1998 champion Mark O'Meara parred 18 - his 30-foot birdie putt lipped out 
at super-slo-mo speed - and he's signed for a magnificent 67. Meanwhile Shiv 
Kapur nearly drained a 20-foot eagle effort on 5. Now's a good time, then, to 
have a look at the top of the leader board:

-5: Z Johnson (F)
-4: Cabrera-Bello (F), O'Meara (F), Kapur (5)
-3: Jimenez (F), D Johnson (F), Snedeker (F)
-2: Hamilton (F), Mickelson (F), Cabrera (F), Lehman (17)

Quite a few wise old heads on that leader board, which may or may not bolster 
the R&A's course management argument.

5.01pm BST 

Of course, Poulter may have a point. Tiger's putt is far from a gimme, despite 
the distance, and he dribbles his downhill birdie putt just to the left of the 
hole. It wasn't a great stroke, tell the truth, but it was a proper poser down 
the glacial green, and you can't really chastise the player too much for the 
miss. A minute before, McDowell rakes a 30-foot birdie effort up the green, and 
walks off with a smile as wide as his head. Moral: stay short. Peter Dawson 
would point to his course management argument here, but let's be reasonable 
people.

4.56pm BST 

Poulter also says the pin position on 8 is "a joke". Tiger has just eased in 
an approach to four feet. ____________________________________

____________________________________

____________________________________.

Some space there for you to scribble in your own conclusion / joke / cheap 
jibe.

4.53pm BST 

O'Meara has just raked in an eagle putt on 17. He's back to -4, a shot off the 
lead. Meanwhile the likes of Phil Mickelson and Thomas Bjorn have been having a 
wee chunter about the difficulty of the course. Ian Poulter, on popular mob 
rule site Twitter, says he's "beyond angry at the moment". The final hole 
"needs a windmill & clown face", he says. You can hear Paddy Power's marketing 
department going into overdrive, can't you. Anyway, Peter Dawson, head R&A 
honcho, has just been on BBC television basically playing a straight bat, 
saying he'll listen to what the players have to say, but also suggesting that 
it's a course management test, and if they can't work out the best way round, 
well boo hoo hoo. I'm guessing we'll not have heard the last of this.

4.45pm BST 

Fluke Donald: He's out in 39, after bogeys at 1, 5 and 8, and now he's hacking 
his way down 10. Powering his second shot out of thick rubbish down the right, 
he sends his ball way left towards OB. But he's got Schwartzelian luck: the 
ball bounces on top of a stone wall, flies out of bounds, but then clatters off 
either an overhanging tree branch or the grandstand (I didn't see which, 
contact your attorney if this has caused you grievous damages) and back into 
play! That's hilariously fortunate. Whether he'll manage to save his par is 
another issue, of course.

4.41pm BST 

This is like a US Open at the moment. The greens, dried out under a blistering 
sun, are like very tightly stretched trampolines. And to think the players 
would be bitching if the rain was rodding down. On 10, Sergio plants his drive 
in the nonsense down the left. That's nothing compared to Westwood, who has hit 
his 3-wood about 48 miles left, forcing him to clip a provisional after it. 
Naturally, that's in thick filth too. This is piss-poor, and you can't just be 
blaming conditions for it. Exhibit A: Shiv Kapur, who has birdied the first 
three holes to move to -3. Exhibit B: Francesco Molinari, who opened 
bogey-bogey but has bounced back with three birdies on the spin to sit at -1 
through 5. "Apparently Sir Nick was saving up all that prattle so that one day 
he could unleash it on American television viewers," quips Steve Buist.

4.34pm BST 

The entire course has been cooked. The greens are insanely fast now. 
Westwood's just played a putt up the 9th green for birdie. The ball's just 
shaved the hole - then raced off 12 feet past. He can't knock in the return 
putt and that's a bogey; he's back to level par. He walks off the green 
wearing, somewhat understandably, a look of disbelief. Sergio drops a shot too; 
he could only find the fringe from a bunker 100 yards down the right of the 
hole, and wasn't able to get up and down. A triptych of misery is completed by 
Schwartzel, who sends a bunker shot to 15 feet, misses the birdie effort, and 
settles for a par, not the worst result after that amateur tee shot. They're 
all on level par at the turn. Meanwhile on 6 Tiger makes his bogey putt with a 
little tickle; he's back to +1.

4.27pm BST 

So much for Adam Scott's dodgy putter. He strokes a 15-footer into the cup on 
8, and suddenly he's back to level par. Meanwhile Tiger's in more bother. He 
hits a decent approach into 6, but it scampers across the polished-tin green 
and off the back. The ball nestles into a divot, which may or may not explain 
Tiger's misjudgement in bouncing the ball back up onto the green. He gets it to 
the top of the bank, only for it to topple back down. His second effort is only 
one turn away from coming back towards his feet again; he's very lucky that 
stayed up. He's left with a 12-footer for his bogey.

4.21pm BST 

Magnificent nonsense from Charl Schwartzel on 9. He snap hooks a godawful 
drive out of bounds down the left - or so it seems. Just as the ball's sailing 
towards penal bother, it clatters into a wall and balloons back onto the 
fairway! What astonishing luck! Sergio meanwhile is back with a vengeance; from 
the centre of the same fairway, he takes a massive divot out of the ground with 
his wood as he sends a dreadful approach sailing into trouble down the right.

4.17pm BST 

Bye bye Bizarrosergio! The old one's back! He's just missed a short par putt 
on 8. Hello, hello, we've missed you Sergio! He's -1 now. A birdie meanwhile 
for McDowell on 5, who has taken over the mantle of Steady Eddie. "The golf 
course is turning into glass now," says Sir Nick Faldo, which might explain why 
there's not so much movement at the top of the leader board as the day goes on. 
"I haven't got the touch any more," he modestly admits, which is fair enough, 
seeing he hasn't played a competitive round for over three years. Is Faldo the 
most under-appreciated sports star in British history? Six majors, he won. Six! 
And yet so strangely unloved. His failing, of course, is that he never gave a 
flying one about PR. Not a joule wasted on prattle. Which should really make 
the man a hero, but such is the way of the mob.

4.10pm BST 

Martin Laird's lost some momentum. I should have kept it zipped. He bogeyed 
10, and now he's just sent a simple wedge into 11, miles from the pin. He's not 
in danger of shedding another shot, unless he has a rush of blood with the flat 
stick, but still. Meanwhile Matt Kuchar's had a shocker on 7. His ball's 
plugged under the lip of a bunker; he should probably take a drop, but elects 
to dig it out backwards, moving the ball not much more than an inch. He manages 
to bang out, but then misses a short bogey putt. He's +4 for his round already 
through 7.

4.04pm BST 

The 19-year-old amateur Jimmy Mullen has just signed for a stunningly good 71. 
I doubt he'll beat himself up too much about a dropped shot on the last hole, 
or at least he shouldn't do: that's a stupendous performance by the teenager. 
He's a shot behind Matthew Fitzpatrick, the 18 year old from Sheffield who is 
currently -1 through 11. Imagine being that young, and that talented, if you 
can bear it. What precocious brilliance.

3.58pm BST 

O'Meara's just dropped a shot on 14, and now he's pushed his tee shot into 
deep nonsense down the left of 15. I hope the old boy's wheels don't come 
clattering off. But the course does appear to be in a more unforgiving mood 
than it was earlier on, baked as it has been in the summer sun. "Is this the 
best sporting Thursday ever?" asks Guy Hornsby, in an email that hasn't been 
sent exclusively to this particular report, I'll be bound. "The open at 
Muirfield, with Sergio and Lee resplendent (ok, I can dream) on their way to 
the title, Miguel puffing away in the clubhouse with a large vermouth, while at 
Lords we have another rearguard action by Sir Ian Ronald Bell and Johnny 
Bairstow, and in France, Chris Froome's tackling the fearsome Alpe d'Huez not 
once, but twice in a single day? I can't remember a more majestic midweek day 
of sport in my memory. Can anyone else?" They'll have a job, I reckon. But I do 
know one thing: everything's so much better without football, isn't it.

3.56pm BST 

Oh Lee! What buffoonery. On 7, he sticks his tee shot to the left of the 
green, leaving himself a proper poser, a bunker between his ball and the 
dancefloor, and not much in the way of green to play with when he gets there. 
So he looks to play a thoroughly Scottish bump and run, sending his ball 
scampering just to the left of the bunker. Unfortunately, the monster of 
Muirfield eats shots like that up for its supper; the corner of the bunker 
snaffles Westwood's ball, which is sucked into the sand. Chomp, gulp, belch. 
That was far too ambitious. But rather brilliantly, Westwood manages to get up 
and down from the sand, splashing to 12 feet then rolling in a very tricky 
right-to-left slider. Only a bogey. That was staunch. Sergioesque, even. 
Speaking of the man himself, he makes a common-or-garden par. He's going round 
very quietly, and extremely efficiently. Huh? It's Bizarro Sergio. It can't 
last.

Updated at 3.59pm BST

3.46pm BST 

Sergio! He's just trundled in a 30-footer on 6 to move to -2! That's a most 
pleasant development. He looks in good nick today, which can only mean one 
thing: yep, impending disaster. Best keep the auto refresh switched on. Back on 
4, McDowell's not far from raking in a long birdie effort; he's been there or 
there abouts in a few Opens now, without ever keeping it going to the business 
end. Perhaps this is his year? I wonder how many people I can ask that question 
of. Meanwhile, the 2010 US Open winner's playing partner, Tiger, tinkles in a 
downhill putt on the same hole for birdie, after a majestic iron to 12 feet. 
He's back to level par. Perhaps this is his year.

3.42pm BST 

There hasn't been a Scottish winner of the Open since Paul Lawrie in 1999. 
With Sandy Lyle +6 through 14, having just carded three bogeys and a double in 
five holes, and Paul Lawrie having just managed to take aquadruple bogey 7 on 
the 7th - he's +5 now - it looks like being down to Martin Laird. Just as well 
the Glaswegian is on his game today; after an opening bogey, he's birdied 2, 4, 
5 and now 9 to move to -3. 

3.37pm BST 

It's been a dodgy start for the Master golfer Adam Scott, who bogeyed 2 and 4. 
But he's now picked a shot up on 5, and is +1. With these greens so fast and 
unforgiving, I'm not sure he's got a chance this week with that unpredictable 
and slightly shaky putter. "That's the thing about professional golfers, isn't 
it?" begins Simon McMahon, having been thinking about McIlroy for 36 minutes. 
"Even when they're in the worst form of their life, they're still at a level 
way beyond the wildest dreams of most of us. Take young Rory. Completely out of 
sorts, weight of the world on his shoulders, psychological meltdown etc etc, 
and he still breaks 80."

3.33pm BST 

In fact, Tiger can just wriggle his feet into the bunker, and powers his ball 
out. He takes a sackful of sand in the grid, turning and blinking furiously, 
thus missing his ball rolling to within three feet of the flag. What a 
superlative shot! Par. Thing people often ignore about Tiger, so metronomic has 
been his general brilliance over the years, is his almost Severianoesque 
ability to fashion escapes from ludicrous situations. Man's an artist.

3.27pm BST 

The travails o'Tiger continue apace. He clips a wedge into 3, overcooks it by 
nothing more than one degree, and watches in horror as his ball topples off the 
back of the green and into a bunker. It's only just crept in, too, so he'll be 
facing quite the escape, with the ball against the lip and no stance. Meanwhile 
Schwartzel, who doubled the opening hole, has birdied 4 and now 5 to drag 
himself back to level par. Garcia, for the record, parred the par-five 5th 
after misjudging his chip into the green.

3.24pm BST 

These greens are becoming treacherously fast. Cabrera putts down 18 for a 
birdie and a 67. His ball only just makes it along its 30-foot journey, then 
decides to scuttle off past the hole by a good eight feet or so! He can't knock 
in the return, and has to settle for a 69. Still, -2 for his opening round, 
three off the lead, isn't to be sniffed at.

3.21pm BST 

The easiest of eagle putts, by contrast, for Alvaro Quiros, who sends his 
second at 9 to three feet, and taps in to move to -1. Making the same journey 
from +1 to -1 is the journeyman Ken Duke, up on 17. And while Westwood was 
never likely to rake in his long eagle putt on 5, he strokes a gorgeous 50-foot 
left-to-right effort to a few inches, and taps in for birdie. He moves to -2.

3.14pm BST 

O'Meara has found another green in regulation, pin high at 12, and he's a 
dimple away from stroking a 20-footer in for birdie. He'll remain a shot behind 
Zach Johnson. Back at 5, Sergio finds the centre of the fairway, then pushes 
his iron to the green into the deep stuff down the right. He's so lucky that 
the ball takes one bounce out of it, creeping into the semi-rough instead. 
Westwood meanwhile finds the heart of the green, though he'll have an eagle 
effort that isn't so much a putt as an odyssey.

3.11pm BST 

Over half the names on this leader board are American. With no major currently 
held by anyone from the States, maybe it's about that time.

-5: Z Johnson (F)
-4: Cabrera-Bello (F), O'Meara (11)
-3: Jimenez (F), D Johnson (F), Snedeker (F), Cabrera (17)
-2: Hamilton (F), Mickelson (F), Fitzpatrick (8), Laird (7)

3.06pm BST 

A few interesting names edging under par on the leader board. Lee Westwood we 
already know about. He's -1 alongside Padraig Harrington, Tom Lehman, the young 
sensation Jordan Spieth, and ... Sergio, who birdied 4. Leader board coming up, 
because Zach Johnson has two putts on 18 for a 66.

3.01pm BST 

You have to hand it to Rory McIlroy. He's just been beaten black and blue by 
Muirfield, and yet he still comes out to talk to the media. "I sort of hung in 
there ... then let a few shots get away from me. A few silly mental errors that 
cost me. Just stupid mental errors that I shouldn't be making. If you're not in 
total control of your golf ball out there, it's going to be quite difficult." 
He appears very down. And chances are he won't be here for the weekend unless 
he manages something spectacular tomorrow. But he's bounced back from bigger 
blows than this, even if that 79 is going to take a while to forget. God speed, 
young man. And you have to hand it to Tiger Woods, as well; he splashes out to 
five feet, limiting the damage to a bogey. There are not many players who could 
escape from a predicament like that.
 Rory McIlroy: 'A few silly mental errors cost me'. Photograph: Lee 
Smith/Action Images 
Updated at 3.18pm BST

2.56pm BST 

Tiger's found his ball. It's right by a small tree, so he's taking an 
unplayable and dropping it further back, in line. He batters his third shot 
into the bunker to the right of the green. It won't be an easy shot - he's near 
the lip at the back, on the downslope - but he does have a bit of green between 
bunker and pin to play with. Elsewhere, Westwood has just missed a dribbler for 
birdie on 3, O'Meara has dropped a stroke on 10, leaving Zach Johnson alone in 
the lead, and Martin Laird has birdied 2, 4 and 5 to wipe out an opening hole 
bogey and move to -2.

2.51pm BST 

Tiger's on the tee! And immediately we're into the realms of komik kutz. Has 
he ever hit a good opening shot in an Open? Well, he's certainly not done so 
here, winging an awful fairway wood miles left, nearly out of bounds. He'll do 
well to find that. He hits a provisional, and that one's belted into thick 
nonsense down the left too. What a carry on! The world number two's just shot 
79 in benign conditions, and now the number one is off on safari. You can't 
beat golf, in more ways than one.

2.48pm BST 

Matsuyama curls in a lovely birdie effort to haul himself back to level par. 
Mickelson nearly makes his, too, but his ball scoots on five feet past the 
hole, and this time he can't make the par putt; that's a bogey, and he signs 
for a two-under 69. And McIlroy chips into the centre of the green, then two 
putts for a 79. He came back in 42 shots. He's +8. To put that into some sort 
of context, Tiger's infamous 81 here is considered the worst round of his 
career, and that was in the middle of a tempest, stair rods flying straight 
into his startled coupon. That's appalling from McIlroy, a nadir, and it really 
must be time for a serious rethink, if not a root-and-branch re-evaluation. 
This deal with Nike is turning into a PR disaster to file alongside Gerald 
Ratner, and a strategic decision not dissimilar to Coke changing their recipe 
during the 1980s.

2.42pm BST 

If Rory McIlroy was a horse, they'd be erecting a tarpaulin fence around him 
right now. He's currently hacking his way up 18, having dropped another shot at 
17 to fall back to +7, tied for 114th place out of 122. His playing partners 
Matsuyama (+1) and Mickelson (-3) have both peppered the pin; McIlroy's managed 
to confuse the cameraman, so wayward is his approach from thick filth down the 
left.

2.35pm BST 

"Just catching up here in Canada," begins Steve Buist, presumably from Canada. 
"In addition to his warmup cigar, if I’m not mistaken, it appears that Jimenez 
isn’t wearing any socks either. This man is my hero." He's going to turn up at 
the first tee one day in his dressing gown and slippers, isn't he. Perhaps with 
a newspaper under his arm. Incidentally, Jason Dufner has signed for a 72.

2.31pm BST 

Lefty's in good position after birdies at 14 and 15, and he's so unlucky at 
17, his birdie putt horseshoeing out and then racing off at speed. He's got to 
dig deep to knock in from five feet for his par, but manages it, and will go up 
18 at -3, in prime position and good heart. Back on 2, Sergio is unfortunate to 
see a 15-foot birdie chance lip out. Westwood's got a shorter effort, but he 
misreads, the ball always going to stay out right from the second it left the 
blade. How many majors would Westwood have won if he had any sort of short 
game? And on 9, the on-fire O'Meara clacks a wedge to two feet and pops in the 
birdie putt. He's gone out in 31 strokes, and joins Zach Johnson in the lead at 
-5. Mark O'Meara!

2.27pm BST 

Poulter can't make his birdie putt, leaving the ball five feet short. And then 
his par effort lips out. That is abysmal. The player himself would presumably 
agree with this analysis, because he cocks his putter back, high into the sky, 
and momentarily considers battering the cover off the ball, which is sitting on 
the lip of the hole. Common sense eventually prevails, and after keeping the 
club behind his head for several seconds, in the style of 2013 US Open women's 
champion Inbee Park, he taps home for a 72. There's a round that promised much 
and didn't deliver.

2.24pm BST 

The 18-year-old amateur Matthew Fitzpatrick birdied 2, and now he's nearly 
raked in a 40-foot eagle opportunity on 5. He'll have a birdie that'll take him 
to -2, a marvellous start for the young man on the round of his life. "Nike are 
having a rare old time of recently aren't they?" opines Ben Atherton. "What 
with your Armstrongs and your Tigers and now your McIlroys. And I missed at 
least three sitters at five-a-side on Sunday and guess which make of trainers I 
was wearing? Exactly, point proven." 
 Teenager Matthew Fitzpatrick in action at Muirfield. Photograph: Andrew 
Redington/Getty Images 
Updated at 3.22pm BST

2.20pm BST 

Schwartzel is punished for his terrible opening iron with a double at the 1st. 
Sergio, keeping out of trouble for once, knocks in a solid ten-footer for his 
par. And Westwood rattles in his birdie putt. He has the good grace to walk off 
the green with a goofy grin on his grid, realising full well he could easily 
have suffered Schwartzel's fate on another day. Now here's a man for whom a 
major is well overdue. I wonder if that's the sort of thing that'll put him in 
the right frame of mind for the entire week?

2.16pm BST 

Lee Westwood was this close to making the most unlikely eagle in the history 
of AllGolf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf>. His piss-poor drive didn't 
quite escape the thick stuff, and his second took a flyer, but it scampered 
around the left bank of the green and gathered towards the hole, nearly rolling 
in. He'll have a three footer for an opening birdie, which is far from a gimme 
the way Westwood putts; remember he missed one from a few inches at Merion. Ian 
Poulter's had it bad over the closing stages, meanwhile, with bogeys at 14, 15 
and 16, but he's grabbed a shot back at 17 and is level par for the tournament. 
And now he's got a 20-footer for birdie at the last; if he can drain that, 
he'll be feeling a whole lot better about himself.

2.12pm BST 

Els bogeys the last and signs for a three-over 74. It's already looking 
unlikely that he'll become only the eighth man in Open history to hang onto the 
Auld Claret Jug. Brandt Snedeker signs for a three-under 68; a second Open tilt 
in a row is on, if he can keep it going. And Justin Rose isn't going to follow 
his US Open victory with an Open win, if that first round of 75 is anything to 
go on.

2.09pm BST 

Here comes Sergio, everyone! Now here's a man who could shoot 63 or 83. First 
Lee Westwood pushes his driver nearly out of bounds on the right, but it was 
such a bad shot he'll be on trampled ground instead of deep stuff. Then it's 
Charl Schwartzel, who takes an iron for safety and sends his ball, ludicrously, 
into the waist-high stuff. And finally Sergio blasts a fairway wood down the 
middle, just about. He gets a monstrous cheer when he takes the tee, the crowd 
perhaps thinking that having served penance at Merion for being such an eejit 
regarding Tiger, and appearing genuinely sorry for his rank stupidity, he 
deserves a shot at redemption. Muirfield's hardly a bastion of progressive 
thinking, of course, but let's not cloud the issue.

2.02pm BST 

Two o'clock and all's not well! Ernie Els has just dumped his second shot down 
18 into the middle of the grandstand down the right. That'll have clattered off 
some poor sod's noggin. What an end to the defending champion's round: a 
meltdown in the sand at 16, when he was trying to be way too smart in his 
escape, birdie at 17, and now this show. This is the great thing about golf: 
nobody can ever quite best it. Though Zach Johnson's been giving it a good go 
today, of course.

-5: Z Johnson (14)
-4: Cabrera-Bello (F), O'Meara (7)
-3: Jimenez (F), D Johnson (F), Snedeker (17), Mickelson (16)
-2: Hamilton (F), Cabrera (14), Tiley (11)

1.55pm BST 

Only six names lie below Rory McIlroy on the leaderboard of the 114 to have 
started their first rounds. Anyways, Scott is back in the hole, you'll be more 
than glad to know. Enjoy.

1.53pm BST 

Leading Englishman … is now Steven Tiley. He's -2 through 10. There's some 
respite for Justin Rose, who birdies the 17th and gets to +4, though his eagle 
putt just lipped out. Back on the first, here comes Tiger …

1.50pm BST 

Double bogey for Jimmy Mullen and back to level par. Our bad.

1.47pm BST 

Oh Rory. That something special fails to transpire, as his putt races past the 
cup on 15, then races a bit further on, then a bit more and then a bit more … 
into the bunker behind the green. That's one for the lowlights reel. He plays 
out weakly, misses the bogey putt and ends with a six. He falls to +6. 
Mickelson rolls in for a birdie, meanwhile, to reach -3.
 Rory McIlroy looks in the direction he's heading on the leaderboard. 
Photograph: Mike Egerton/PA 
Updated at 1.48pm BST

1.44pm BST 

A tale of two Johnsons. D pars the 18th and is in with a three-under 68 … Z 
finds a tough spot in the sand on 14. He chops out, but merely to the fringe 
and a likely dropped shot. The long putt comes up a little shy to the right and 
he'll settle for a bogey five, falling back to -5.

Updated at 1.44pm BST

1.40pm BST 

Rory was unable to birdie 14, and he's back in bother in a fairway trap on the 
15th. He manages to find the front apron, but it's going to take something 
rather special to get down in two from there. Playing partner Mickelson fires a 
tasty approach in close, leaving him a short putt to reach -3. And what's this: 
another birdie for Mark O'Meara – that's him to -4 through the first six holes.

1.38pm BST 

Els ends up with a triple on the 16th. That's him back to +3. "If Craig McEwan 
(1.25pm) doesn't know it by know, he will come Sunday," advises Simon McMahon. 
"There isno answer to Sergio."

1.36pm BST 

Mercifully, reader Chris Lewis has his game-head on. "Jimmy Mullen is back up 
to 2 under," he writes. "Great story which shows you don't have to be rich to 
play golf. The members at Royal North Devon (the oldest club in England) paid 
his £140 so that he could take part in the local qualifying, he then beat a 
star studded field in final qualifying to be at Muirfield. He's -2 after 9 and 
being criminally ignored by the BBC." He's out in 34 with four birdies.
 Amateur Jimmy Mullen shows the pros how to do it. Photograph: Andrew 
Redington/Getty Images 
Updated at 1.42pm BST

1.29pm BST 

Another sublime approach from Zach Johnson at the 13th leaves him a slippery 
12-footer. It slides by wide left, giving him a little teaser back up the slope 
which he confidently holes. One hole ahead, Mickelson birdies to reach -2, but 
there's some strife for Ernie Els, leaving two bunker shots on 16 in the sand. 
His third flies well past the pin, a mild steam emitting from the champion.

Updated at 1.34pm BST

1.25pm BST 

"I have said this before, but big DJ must be the US's answer to Sergio," 
hollers Craig McEwan. "And while I'm at it, Vamos Miguel Angel!" And after 
three back-nine bogies, Johnson rolls back with an eagle at 17. He's back to -3.

1.20pm BST 

Here comes Angel Cabrera, firing one in stiff at 11. That's a birdie and 
that's him to -3. Meanwhile, a staggering shot from McIlroy from the deep stuff 
wide right of the 14th fairway. He mows through the rough with an iron, keeping 
the ball low, but fading it majestically as it runs up from in front of the 
green, bearing right towards the pin all the while. It ends about eight feet 
from the cup. He'll have that to move nine strokes behind Zach Johnson.
 Angel Cabrera in action. Photograph: Andrew Redington/Getty Images 
Updated at 1.31pm BST

1.17pm BST 

Rose takes three more to get down – a double bogey six, propelling him 
downwards to +5.

1.15pm BST 

Brandt Snedeker, playing alongside Rose, is having no such issues and he rolls 
in a 12-footer for a three and goes to -2. It still leaves him four behind, 
though, asZach Johnson birdies the 12th to reach -6.

1.12pm BST 

Such a glorious day at Muirfield. Not for Justin Rose, mind. He's on 15, fresh 
from a bogey, and back in sand, right at the bank of a greenside trap too. He 
chops out … into another one.

1.07pm BST 

Afternoon. While Scott grabs a well-deserved break, Rory's only gone and 
stemmed the bleeding: pinging a tee shot at 13 to four feet and rattling in the 
birdie. He's now +4, just a stroke behind fellow day-one struggler Justin Rose.

1.03pm BST 

And with that, I'm going to hand over to James Dart for a few minutes, while I 
nip off todrink a large glass of red wine and chew on a Cohiba eat a power bar 
and go for a run. See you soon.

1.01pm BST 

Mind you, Rory's not the only one having something of a shocker. Justin Rose 
misses a simple par putt on 14, another dropped shot. He's +3. Dustin Johnson 
repeats the trick on 15, dropping back to -2. So this is the all-new shape of 
things at the top:

-5: Z Johnson (10)
-4: Cabrera-Bello (F)
-3: Jimenez (F), Tiley (8)
-2: Hamilton (F), D Johnson (15), Poulter (13), Cabrera (10), Mullen (8), 
O'Meara (4), Jacobsen (3)

12.56pm BST 

If it's your day, it's your day. And it's not all about birdies with Zach 
Johnson: on 10, he rattles in a 30-foot par saver to stay in the lead at -5. 
McIlroy's not miles away from draining his bogey putt, of similar length, up on 
12, but it shaves the right-hand side of the hole and that's a double. He's 
back to +5. He rubs the bridge of his nose and looks to the floor. He barely 
has the energy to lift his eyes from the turf. The young chap looks genuinely 
upset. We're not quite in Lisicki Territory, but it's not much fun to watch, 
either.

12.52pm BST 

It's fingers through the eyes with Po' Rory now. His chip up the bank at 12 
reaches the top; the ball has a quick look at the putting surface, then decides 
the rough was far more comfy and rolls all the way back down. That most 
spine-chilling of sounds, the gentle groan of pity, oozes from the gallery. His 
second chip flies miles past the flag. It's approaching the time for a root and 
branch re-evaluation.
 Ian Poulter tees off on the 11th during the first round at Muirfield. 
Photograph: Richard Heathcote/R&A via Getty Images 
Updated at 1.05pm BST

12.49pm BST 

Rafael Cabrera-Bello is only playing in his second Open, and last year's 
run-out at Lytham was distinctly unmemorable: tied for 81st. But there's a fair 
chance he could be the first-round leader today. He gets up and down rather 
well from the back of 18, trickling in a very missable eight-foot par putt, to 
sign for a four-under 67. He's the clubhouse leader. That's a fine round.

12.46pm BST 

Bubba Watson doesn't have the greatest record in the Open for a player of his 
ability: two missed cuts, a top 20 finish and a top 30 finish. He's ticking 
along nicely today, though; back to back birdies at 12 and 13 have seen him 
move to -1. He's alongside Phil Mickelson, who had dropped a shot at 8 and is 
currently playing steady but not spectacular golf. He was threatening to go on 
the rampage early doors, but it's not quite clicking now; a very average 
approach into 12. Still, at least he's not suffering like his playing partner 
Rory, who has followed up that bogey at 10 with another at 11, and has just 
sent his approach at 12 down a bank to the left. The confidence regained just 
before the turn has quickly buggered off again. Some of his round today has 
been pretty hard to watch, mainly because he's carrying the weight of the world 
on his very young shoulders.

12.39pm BST 

On 12, Poulter clips a short iron pin high to ten feet, a glorious birdie 
chance, but can't convert. He remains at -2, a shot behind his less heralded 
compatriot Steven Tiley, who is off at Johnsonian pace: birdies at 2 and 3, and 
now another at 5. Up on 18, Cabrera-Bello threatens to undo a lot of his good 
work, sending his tee shot into thick rubbish down the right, then battering 
his escape straight through the back of the green. An up and down from the 
fringe for par, and a 67, won't be beyond him, having said all that.

12.34pm BST 

Jimenez pulls his approach at 18 into the Azinger Bunker down the left and can 
only splash to ten feet. But he's not of a mind to let an excellent round peter 
out totally, and smacks the putt into the back of the cup for his par, and a 
wonderful round of 68. He's the early clubhouse leader.

-5: Z Johnson (9)
-4: Cabrera-Bello (17)
-3: Jimenez (F), D Johnson (14), Tiley (6)

12.31pm BST 

Angel Cabrera, erstwhile cigar lover and still very much one to proselytize 
for lightly charred Argentinian steak, means business. After an opening bogey, 
he birdied 5 and 6, and now he's just stroked a gentle iron to two feet on 8 
for a third birdie in four holes. He's -2. Meanwhile Cabrera-Bello gives his 
eagle putt on 17 a chance, but it's always staying high to the right and races 
a couple of feet past. He knocks the return in for birdie, and is alone in 
second at -4. 

12.24pm BST 

Cabrera-Bello's hit a simply wonderful second shot into the par-five 17th. 
He's landed it 40 or 50 yards before the green, bumping it onto the playing 
surface and leaving himself with a pin-high eagle opportunity from 20 feet. 
Snedeker rattles in a 25-footer on 12 to move back into the red numbers. And so 
much for the McIlroy-Stockton axis: he rushes through the ball on 10 and pushes 
a ten-foot putt to the right, dropping back to +2.

12.18pm BST 

Poulter is so close to draining a 20-foot birdie putt on 11, but just as it 
looks to be breaking in from the left, the ball straightens up. Equal and 
opposite reactions, Poulter's knees buckle in irritation, but he quickly 
regains his composure and departs the green looking happy enough with life. And 
so he should, he's -2 for the championship.

12.15pm BST 

Jimenez is beginning to run out of steam, which you could blame on the tobacco 
and red wine if you're some sort of body fascist or tedious fitness obsessive, 
but the guy's 49 years old, he's doing well enough. He finds the fringe at 17 
with his second shot, but can't get up and down and has to settle for par. His 
round's fizzled out a bit, though a par up the last will give him a very 
respectable 68, and there are plenty of folk with gym memberships and bicycles 
with panniers full of broccoli who would settle for that.

12.12pm BST 

Hello, who's this coming up on the rails? It's Jason Day, who started with a 
double bogey but has been chipping away ever since: birdies at 5, 8 and now 13, 
and he's -1 for the tournament, in very healthy nick.The Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/theopen> is the only major he's not 
seriously competed for. If anyone in world golf is due a major title, it's this 
young Australian: he's only competed in 12 major championships, yet has three 
second-placed finishes to his name, plus one third, and another top ten. It's 
coming, and sometime soon to boot.

12.07pm BST 

Rory is a turn of the ball away from escaping out of the front nine level par. 
He booms his second at 9 pin high, but his chip out is hot. Nevertheless, his 
Stocktonian putt from 20 feet nearly drops. He'll have to make to with a par, 
and remains at +1, but given how badly he played for most of the front nine, 
that's not a total disaster, and he looks much chipper than he did when coming 
off the 5th. Meanwhile Zach Johnson is playing some wonderful golf. He sends 
his approach into 8 to 15 feet, and would have been closer if his ball, arrowed 
straight at the flag, didn't take a particularly hard spring forward. He'll 
still have a good chance for birdie.

12.02pm BST 

Two minutes, and that leader baord is already out of date. Thank you, my super 
soaraway Guardian Sport! Blame Dustin Johnson for this latest travesty; he's 
bogeyed 12 to drop back to -3, and did well to limit the damage to a single 
stroke, knocking in a very missable bogey putt from six feet.

12.00pm BST 

And he does: Zach Johnson is the new leader of the Open at -5. You'll notice I 
didn't mention Miguel Angel Jimenez in the last entry; that's because his tee 
shot at 16 went flying through the green, and his attempt to get the ball close 
coming back was an appalling mess. It zips 15 feet past the hole, and that's a 
bogey. With the sun at its highest point, here's how the top of the leader 
board looks:

-5: Z Johnson (7)
-4: D Johnson (11)
-3: Jimenez (16), Cabrera-Bello (15)
-2: Hamilton (F), Poulter (10), Watney (9), Tiley (4)

11.55am BST 

Zach Johnson is the hot player here. He came close at the John Deere last 
weekend, losing the play-off to the teenage sensation Jordan Spieth, and has 
taken that good form over the briny to Muirfield. He's followed up that eagle 
on 5 by picking up another shot at 6, rolling in a birdie effort from 20 feet. 
And now he's just clipped a delicious tee shot at 7 to four feet. He's 
currently sharing the lead with Dustin Johnson at -4, but will surely take sole 
ownership of it in a couple of minutes.

11.52am BST 

Dave Stockton, who won a couple of PGAs back in the 1970s and wasn't far off 
landing a Masters and US Open too, is very much of the no-nonsense school of 
putting. No practice strokes, just bang the thing into the cup. He's helping 
McIlroy at the moment, and the method works perfectly well here, as the current 
PGA champion rattles a short but missable one into the cup at 8 for par, a 
decent result seeing he'd only just got his approach onto the front of the 
green. He's still +1, but it looks as though his spirits are up again after a 
thoroughly miserable opening.

11.47am BST 

Poulter might be of a mind that it's about time to win a major. He's through 
the back of the par-five 9th in two huge skelps, and chips back to a couple of 
feet for his birdie. he's out in 34, a fine effort especially after that 
opening bogey. He's at -2 alongside a couple of his fellow Englishmen, the 
Canterbury journeyman Steven Tiley and the 19-year-old north Devon amateur 
Jimmy Mullen, who has birdied 2 and 3.

11.42am BST 

Superb effort from Jimenez on 15. His second shot was highly decent, but there 
was one joule too many applied to it, and the ball agonisingly rolled into the 
bunker at the back. The co-leader splashed out delicately to six feet, then 
popped the par putt into the cup. That's a fine escape, a bogey would have been 
an injustice there. Meanwhile on 10, Rose's nightmare continues; he's in the 
thigh-high stuff down the right, and can only squirt his ball out into the semi 
down the other side. He's wearing his face in the pinched style.

11.36am BST 

Back-to-back majors aren't easy to come by, no matter what Tiger Woods or 
Padraig Harrington might say. Justin Rose certainly doesn't look like he's hot 
enough to follow up his victory at Merion with another win in the slams. He 
nudges a very uncertain par putt past the cup on 9 to drop back to +2; he's out 
in 38 without a birdie on his card.

11.33am BST 

Dustin's namesake Zach has just found the heart of the 5th in two, then 
stroked in a lovely left-to-right curler for eagle; he's -3. Meanwhile up on 7, 
finally a summery smile from McIlroy, whose tee shot lands softly into the 
middle of the green and gathers round towards the hole. He tickles in a little 
downhill left-to-right dribbler, picks his ball out of the hole, and 
acknowledges the crowd acknowledging his birdie. He's back to +1, some good 
news for - let's not forget - theyoung man. Hopefully a catalyst for better 
things.

11.27am BST 

Dustin Johnson, from distance at the front of the 10th green, is only a dimple 
or so away from taking the outright lead, but settles for par. Scott Piercy of 
Las Vegas, making his Open debut at the age of 34, so nearly drains a mammoth 
eagle effort on 5. He'll make do with birdie, happily so, as it moves him to -2 
and a share of second place. And on 8, Ian Poulter, who opened with a bogey but 
has since birdied 3 and 7, keeps himself at -1 with a marvellous up and down 
from down a bank to the left of the green. A chip to eight feet, and a 
confident rattled par saver: he looks very determined, and very confident. Like 
that's news.
 Dustin Johnson and Nicolas Colsaerts walk up the 10th hole. Photograph: 
Richard Heathcote/R&A/R&A via Getty Images 
Updated at 11.46am BST

11.19am BST 

Cabrera-Bello makes his birdie as expected to move to -4. Todd Hamilton 
strokes in a missable par putt on the last to sign for a 69. So here's how it's 
looking:

-4: Jimenez (13), Cabrera-Bello (13), D Johnson (9)
-2: Hamilton (F), Watney (6), Mickelson (5)
-1: Fisher (F), Kaymer (10), Poulter (7), Fernandez-Castano (6), Matsuyama 
(5), Piercy (4), Katayama (4), Z Johnson (4)

11.15am BST 

Here's how the opening group of this year's Open ended up. Oliver Fisher's 
signed for a 70. He's the only one of the early starters in the clubhouse under 
par. The aptly monickered veteran Peter Senior, who hit the first shot of the 
championship, is in with a 73, while poor old Lloyd Saltman still props up the 
entire field, having scribbled his name at the bottom of a very ugly card of 79.

11.14am BST 

Dustin Johnson has rattled in another birdie putt, the big hitter sashaying 
down another par five in style. He's now joint leader of the Open at -4. 
Cabrera-Bello is about to join the easy-going American and his compatriot 
Jimenez in the lead. His tee shot at 13 lands on a hillock to the right of the 
green, then gathers round to a couple of feet. That's a delightful shot, 
letting the contours of the land do the work.

11.11am BST 

The two-time Muirfield champion Nick Faldo has just raked in a 30-footer on 8 
to move back to +1. You never forget it, it never goes away. Jimenez has to 
settle for par on 13 after rattling his birdie effort a good eight feet past 
the hole. "I really don’t know how I’m going to contain my tabbed browser 
selection (or my job for that matter) when we get into the afternoon session 
and there is simultaneously: The Open OBO, The Ashes OBO and The Tour OBO," 
writes Kevin Casemore, suffering from a very modern malaise. "I feel I’ll need 
to dedicate equal time to each one otherwise I’ll feel like I’m cheating 
slightly on the others. I even deliberated about writing this to you or Andy 
Bull, but opted for you as you’ve been putting the hours in. Keep up the good 
work." Why don't you go for a walk? It's sunny out.

11.05am BST 

Jimenez responds well to dropping his first stroke of the day, scooping a 
gorgeous iron into 13, pin high, half a chance of birdie. Back on 5, Mickelson 
gets in for par. McIlroy however drops another after blasting out of rough into 
a bunker, and only just escaping from the sand after battering his splash into 
the face of the trap. He can't get up and down from the front of the green, 
missing a par effort from six feet. "Oh wow," he shouts to the skies with one 
of those embarrassed smiles plastered across his boat. Just do it, that's the 
old Nike slogan. Well, they've just done for McIlroy's confidence. He's shot. 
He's jiggered. He looks a broken man.

11.00am BST 

An eagle chance for the 2004 champion Todd Hamilton on 17. He can't rake it in 
from 30 feet, but a birdie will do, as it takes him to -2. More sandy suffering 
for Snedeker, this time on 7, the American dropping another shot. Justin Rose 
manages to bogey 6 after hitting a sand wedge into the green from prime 
position in the middle of the fairway. And Mickelson plays arguably the worst 
chip of his entire career on 5, a gentle wedge from the centre of the fairway 
that dribbles apologetically into the middle of the green, but a mile from the 
pin. No realistic birdie chance there on a hole that's been offering up one or 
two eagles.

10.54am BST 

If Jimenez doesn't knock in that par putt, the top of the leader board could 
have a different look in a minute or so. Because Dustin Johnson, on 8, and 
Rafael Cabrera-Bello, up on 11, have both stroked in medium-distance birdie 
efforts to move to -3. And Nick Watney has just eagled 5 to climb to -2. And 
indeed Jimenez can't make it, the ball refusing to turn left as it trickles 
past the hole. He's back to -4.

10.49am BST 

Thomas Bjorn, two-time runner up, has just put his ball through the lens of a 
BBC camera while hacking out from rough. Oh me, oh my, or in the local patois, 
michty me. On 12, Jimenez is in danger of dropping his first stroke of the day 
after finding rough down the left. He can only blast out to the fairway, then 
chips to ten feet. And Snedeker double bogeys 6 after finding a fairway bunker 
and then misreading a short bogey putt; he's back to level par.

10.43am BST 

Jimenez is a couple of turns away from another birdie, this time from the 
fringe at 11. Mickelson can't make his birdie effort on 4; it was probably 
about 20 feet away, in fairness. Par. His playing partner McIlroy, who had 
started steadily if in a rather dull fashion, nearly rakes a birdie chance in 
from similar distance, but it skates past the cup on the high side. And then he 
misses the one coming back to drop back to +1. He's walking around with a 
little black cartoon raincloud over his head. It's sad to watch, the youthful, 
joyful spring in his step has - hopefully momentarily - gone.

10.35am BST 

The leaderboard has a very agreeable look to it at the moment. It features 
quite a few players who perambulate about the place in the relaxed, 
gentlemanly, devil-may-care style. Brandt Snedeker has just birdied 5, while 
Mickelson has just banged a 7-iron straight into the heart of 4 to set up 
another birdie chance, 12 feet from the cup. Here are all the good folk 
currently under par:

-5: Jimenez (10)
-2: Cabrera-Bello (9), Kaymer (8), Johnson (7), Snedeker (5), Mickelson (3)
-1: Hamilton (15), Aphibarnrat (14), Cink (11), Couples (5), Fernandez-Castano 
(4), Matsuyama (3)

10.30am BST 

Couples batters his second shot at the par-five 5th to the back of the green. 
Two putts, and he's -1. Another old boy - our leader Jimenez - knocks in a 
tricky par saver on 10 to remain three shots clear at the top, the 
second-placed Cabrera-Bello having dropped a shot at 9 to move back to -2. Way 
too early to be getting carried away, of course - but let's get carried away! 
Just say Jimenez was to win this, the precursor to a five-week wine-and-cigar 
bender, he'd be the oldest winner ever of a major at 49 years old,beating the 
equally laid-back Julius Boros, he of the "stately pace", by a few months 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2011/aug/12/joy-of-six-us-pga-wins>. The 
ice-cool Couples, meanwhile, is 53. Golfing gods, are you working for us this 
week?
 Ice-cool Fred Couples has made a tidy start. Photograph: Andrew 
Redington/Getty Images 
Updated at 10.43am BST

10.24am BST 

Is Phil about to go on one of his trademark charges? Because that putter of 
his is hot all right! His chip into 3 wasn't the best, bounding through the 
green and only just holding on at the back, but he strokes in a 15-footer for a 
second birdie on the bounce! He's -2. McIlroy, half the distance inside him, 
prods an uncertain effort towards the cup and the ball dies away to the left. 
What a miss. He isn't exactly exuding confidence at the moment.

10.20am BST 

The Japanese prodigy Hideki Matsuyama has already shown his worth at the 
Masters, last year becoming the first amateur to make consecutive cuts at 
Augusta since Manny Zerman managed it two decades previously. Now turned pro, 
he's started his first Open well, following Mickelson all the way down 2 for an 
equally impressive birdie. He's unlikely to make another on the similarly 
generous 3rd, but he's found the green in regulation and should at least make 
off with his birdie to remain at -1.

10.13am BST 

Dustin Johnson is due a major meltdown championship. And he's started well 
today, a birdie on the opening hole now followed with another at 5, the big man 
reaching the green in two powerful blows with ease, then only being a couple of 
turns away from stroking in a long eagle effort. He's -2. Meanwhile on 2, 
Mickelson arrows a delightful approach to five feet, then strokes the short 
birdie effort into the middle of the cup. He's claiming he's never putted as 
well as he's doing now, which raises an eyebrow seeing he missed a putt inside 
Doug Sanders range to win the Scottish Open last Sunday (before finally getting 
the job done in a play-off). The short putts have cost him so many majors, not 
least bringing his birdie charge during the final round of the 2011 Open to a 
juddering halt, giving Darren Clarke a clear run. Hopefully he's got it all 
sorted, as it'd be lovely to see him win this title, but you'd not put a whole 
load of money on his stroke holding up when the pressure's on.

10.05am BST 

Jimenez splashes out of the bunker at 9 with a yawn, then strokes in the 
birdie putt to move to -5. He's out in 31 strokes! This is a magnificent 
performance, and a wonderful advertisment for fags and booze. Back on the 
opening hole, McIlroy scrambles his par, which will hopefully settle him down. 
Mickelson makes par too, in a ludicrous manner, missing the green from the 
centre of the fairway, leaving his chip 20 feet from the hole, and rapping in 
his par putt. You have to love Lefty.
 Miguel Angel Jiménez hits his 3rd shot on the 9th hole. Photograph: Ross 
Kinnaird/R&A/R&A via Getty Images 
Updated at 10.45am BST

10.03am BST 

They say the Open Championship was at its lowest ebb during the 1950s, when 
few of the big American stars deigned to cross the Atlantic to compete in the 
competition. But at least the thing was repeatedly won by greats like Bobby 
Locke and Peter Thomson. Ben Hogan won one too. So I wonder if the early-to-mid 
2000s will go down in history as the nadir instead: The Curtis-Hamilton Years. 
They will, won't they. What an era of beige, nondescript awfulness. Anyway, the 
pair are both at -1, Curtis through 8, Hamilton through 13. As for another 
erstwhile annoyance, dreamwrecker Stewart Cink has reached the turn in 34, -2 
for the tournament.

9.57am BST 

Rose and Snedeker pepper the flag at 3, but it's only the American who makes 
off with a birdie, the US Open champion missing a fairly simple putt. He 
remains at level par, Snedeker - who came so close last year - now at -1. Up on 
9, Jimenez pushes his approach into a pot bunker, then ambles up the fairway 
kidding on like he doesn't care. He might not actually care.

9.54am BST 

Rory's stopped just short of the really silly nonsense, but that doesn't stop 
him getting a flyer from the rough. He's lucky his ball finds the bunker to the 
right of the green, because otherwise that one was landing firm and scampering 
off down the road to Edinburgh. Meanwhile shot of the day so far on 4, Couples 
stroking his tee shot straight at the flag to a couple of feet. At least I 
think that was a shot, the swing was so smooth I'm not sure anything actually 
happened. He'll be back to level par.

9.49am BST 

Rory is out, and he's ballooned his drive into the thick stuff down the right. 
That really isn't the start he was looking for. A better opening shot by Phil 
Mickelson, though, who has left his driver at home for the week. The Scottish 
Open champion splits the fairway, having finally sussed links golf. What a 
popular winner he'd be, especially after the poor old bugger's travails on the 
final day at Merion.

9.45am BST 

An eagle for Martin Kaymer on 5, the former US PGA winner stroking in a putt 
from the front of the green to move to -2. Up on 8, Jimenez so nearly rattles 
in his long birdie putt, but the ball horseshoes out and wangs off down the 
green. He's left with a tricky eight footer for par, but that's not a problem. 
Par. "Nice one posting the BBC classic golf theme," begins Simon Adelman. "It 
takes me back to a 1980s Seve dominated golfing golden era: but on listening 
now found it disturbingly reminding me of the Love Boat? Just me?" Golf! It's 
exciting and new! Come aboard. We're expecting you. Jimenez would be in his 
element on the love boat, wouldn't he. Cigar on in one hand, glass of red and 
bottle in the other, bow tie rakishly undone. Come aboard!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DicAwcByaNtY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DicAwcByaNtY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DicAwcByaNtY&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DicAwcByaNtY&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DicAwcByaNtY>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DicAwcByaNtY&media=>
close 
9.37am BST 

Another of our preamble pals, the highly entertaining Kiradech Aphibarnrat, is 
making a wee move up the leader board. He's just stroked a 25-footer into the 
cup at 10, and the big lad's at -2. The go-for-glory galoot isn't hanging 
around to make an impression on his Open debut, having put in a fairly good 
performance at Castle Stuart last week. One that would have been a lot better 
than his 38th-placed finish were it not for a closing round of 75. Back on 7, 
Jimenez can't make his birdie putt and stays at -4. Now he's pin high with his 
approach at 8, but facing a long putt across the green. He'd greedily snaffle a 
par from there if you offered it to him.

9.30am BST 

This opening hole is causing all sorts of bother. Jason Day, who seems to come 
second in every major these days, started out with a painful double-bogey. The 
defending champ Els drops one, as expected. Faldo and Watson, for the record, 
both dropped a shot at the 1st too. Justin Rose, doesn't, though, displaying 
the tenacity that won him the US Open at Merion, another course that wasn't 
taking any prisoners. He found some thick rough down the left with his drive, 
but powered out to the front of the green, hit a long putt that trickled past 
the hole and then inexplicably kept going, then stroked in a very missable par 
putt. He'll be very happy with that, a proper nerve settler.

9.27am BST 

Life's not getting any better for poor Lloyd Saltman, who is propping up the 
entire field at +6 after a run of bogeys between 7 and 10. The 2001 champion 
David Duval is chasing after him, a double at 8 leaves him at +4. And John 
Senden, who has been involved at the business end of a few majors recently, has 
started poorly, an opening-hole double followed by more dropped shots at 2 and 
3. A birdie at 4 picks things up a wee bit for the Australian, but he's +3.

9.23am BST 

When you're on, you're on. Jimenez has just arrowed his tee shot at the 
par-three 7th straight at the flag. He'll have a 12-foot uphill putt for yet 
another birdie. No birdies appear to be on offer back on the opening hole, 
though, as Els has hoicked his second into thick stuff to the left of the green 
and hacked his third a good 30 feet past the flag. That'll not be an ideal 
start for the champion.

9.18am BST 

Oliver Fisher looked to be throwing away all his early work. Three under after 
5, he dropped shots at 6 and then 8, but he bounced back with a birdie at 9, 
and he's now just clipped a delicious approach at 11 to six feet, and rattled 
in the birdie putt; he's back to -3, a shot behind Jimenez.

9.15am BST 

They say there aren't many lucky bounces to be found around Muirfield, but 
reigning champion Ernie Els has just enjoyed one of them. His opening drive is 
scampering towards the thick nonsense down the right, but the ball takes a 
friendly kick to the left and nestles in the semi rough. Not ideal, but he'll 
take that. This is an astonishingly difficult opening drive, there's little 
wonder some chaps have been running up cricket scores. Meanwhile Simon McMahon 
wants to tell us about a dream he had a couple of weeks ago. "You know, the one 
about the Lions, Andy Murray, Chris Froome, the Ashes, Sergio winning the Op 
... OK, stop it, stop it now. This heat is getting to me."

9.12am BST 

Whey shakes and ice baths my hat. Take note, kids! Jimenez's cigars and 
stretching and cigars routine really is doing the trick: he's added to that 
birdie-birdie opening with another birdie at 3 and then yet another at 5. He's 
-4, and there's a very Spanish flavour to the top of the leader board, Rafael 
Cabrera-Bello having opened with birdies at 2, 4 and 5. Cohibas all round!

9.07am BST 

With live coverage starting now on the British Broadcasting Corporation's 
second television channel, I should probably post this:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da-bd5j18N0s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da-bd5j18N0s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da-bd5j18N0s&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da-bd5j18N0s&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da-bd5j18N0s>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da-bd5j18N0s&media=>
close 
Also written by the drummer from Cliff Richard's backing band The Shadows: the 
theme to questionable trattoria-based sitcom Robin's Nest, as covered here by 
the bloke from Felt.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNarL1RXtvBI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNarL1RXtvBI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNarL1RXtvBI&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNarL1RXtvBI&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNarL1RXtvBI>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNarL1RXtvBI&media=>
close 
And what a start to the Beeb's live coverage, as the group of the day tees 
off: Nick Faldo (winner at Muirfield in 1987 and 1992), Tom Watson (victorious 
here in 1980) and Freddie Couples (no Open wins, but a triumph at Augusta isn't 
too shabby) make their way down the 1st. Sort of. Watson's wanged one into the 
thick stuff down the right, while the other two have found the semi rough. Good 
luck to the three legends, they may well need some of it.

8.58am BST 

Chris Wood thought he had it bad. Lloyd Saltman ran up a quadruple bogey on 
the opening hole. Four over after one! That's Flitcroftian. In fairness, he's 
bounced back well with birdies at 3 and 4 before dropping another shot at 7; 
he's +3 alongside Wood and the American Brooks Koepka, another player who has 
managed to rattle up eight shots on the 1st. That was the first hole the 
23-year-old Koepka has ever played in an Open. Oh man. He'd come off the back 
of a very decent showing at the Scottish Open, too, a tie for 12th. But he's 
battled back with a birdie at 3. You have to wish these dudes god speed. 
There's more than likely a low score for someone around sunny Muirfield today, 
but that doesn't mean the course isn't going to give a few unsuspecting players 
an awful smack in the mouth.

8.39am BST 

The opening hole is already showing its teeth. The 447-yard par four has 
already been double bogeyed or worse five times, the hole currently being 
played on average in nearly 4.8 strokes. Chris Wood really didn't help the 
stats by registering an "or worse" triple-bogey 7. He's currently propping up 
the nascent leader board at +3 through 3. Wood won the silver medal for low 
amateur in 2008 at Birkdale finishing tied for fifth, and was a shot off Bambi 
Killer Stewart Cink and Tom Watson at Turnberry a year later, ending his first 
Open as a professional in a tie for third place. A similar finish already looks 
like a pipe dream, but golf is golf and you never know.

8.24am BST 

'Keep Fit with Miguel Angel'. Athleticism is ruining all sports, with the 
possible exception of athletics. For example, football fans can no longer dream 
of jumping the hoardings and running the game from the centre circle, pie in 
hand, Jan Molby style, while rugby used to be a whole lot more engaging when it 
was contested by pot-bellied policemen and half-cut solicitors with anger 
management issues from the Borders. I'm not wrong about this. But golf remains 
one of the few activities where folk aren't required to take ice baths and 
guzzle gallon after gallon of gluten-free whey shake in order to get on. With 
thanks to Lars Eriksen for the spot, here's Senor Jimenez, taking us through 
his daily fitness routine. If you look closely, he's got a cigar on. "There 
really is no finer way to start the day," says Lars. Absolutely. If it's good 
enough for the joint leader of the Open Championship, it's good enough for us. 
Pass the cutter, I'm off for a stretch.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRGiGEDnU6Tg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRGiGEDnU6Tg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRGiGEDnU6Tg&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRGiGEDnU6Tg&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRGiGEDnU6Tg>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRGiGEDnU6Tg&media=>
close 
8.13am BST 

Bad news for DA Points, Brendan Jones and Kiradech Aphibarnrat: the preamble 
is full of it. Nothing but snake oil.Fisher is now going the other way, having 
dropped a shot at 6. He's back into a tie for the early tournament lead with 
Ilonen - and Jimenez, who has back-to-back birdies at the opening two holes! 
Far too early to be getting carried away, of course, but let's get carried 
away. Imagine if Jimenez won. There'd be few more popular winners. There's a 
man who'd treat the Auld Claret Jug properly, utilising every facet of its 
design.

8.04am BST 

Miguel Angel Jimenez is another man who has started well in Opens past. He 
shot an opening-day 64 in 2009 at Turnberry, and now he's come wheeching out of 
the blocks again with an opening-hole birdie this morning. He's -1, alongside 
the man who wrecked all our dreams that year, Stewart Cink, who has registered 
a birdie up ahead on the 2nd. No, I can't think about the end of that 
tournament without a shudder either. That's me brought down off my 
first-day-of-the-Open high already.

7.58am BST 

Good news for DA Points, Brendan Jones and Kiradech Aphibarnrat: the preamble 
seems to be casting some sort of strange spell. The aforementioned Oliver 
Fisher, who has only finished higher than 35th in one European Tour event this 
season so far, and missed the cut in nine of them, has indeed taken his 
opportunity to break from the pack and make a name for himself. The young 
Londoner has put together the first few significant holes of the 2013 Open, 
with birdies at 2, 3 and 5. He's -3, a shot clear of Mikko Ilonen, the Finn 
having birdied 1 and 3. Just three more birdies, then, and Fisher will have 
that 65. No pressure. A ridiculously early leaderboard, showing the only 
players under par so far, would look something like this:

-3: Fisher (5)
-2: Ilonen (3)
-1: Stow (4), Wiesberger (2)

7.38am BST 

So, before we get properly under way, a few bits of assorted admin to tidy up.

1) The weather: Expect some decent scoring this week, at least from those who 
refrain from swishing the big stick around like a madman and avoid the rough. 
The sun's out for the first three days, it'll be a wee bit overcast on Sunday, 
and there's no great issue with high winds. Of course all that comes with the 
traditional Scottish weather caveat: aye, right you are, we'll see.

2) The course: Hard but fair. Gary Player, who won here in 1959, walks it with 
you. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/interactive/2013/jul/17/open-2013-golf-muirfield-interactive>

3) I Think It Was Me Who Said dept. Recall Muirfield Opens past with this Joy 
of Six 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2013/jul/12/joy-of-six-muirfield-open-memories>
.

4) Raging bias disclaimer. This MBM will be rooting, and you'll just have to 
put up with it whether you like it or not, for: Tiger, Rory, G-Mac, Lefty, 
Jason 'The Somnambulist' Dufner, DA Points, Bubba, Dustin Johnson, the group 
consisting of Watson, Faldo and Couples, Sandy Lyle, and of course Sergio. 
There are probably others, too, but that's just for starters. It might also be 
impossible not to fall for Jordan Spieth, 19, who grabbed the last vacant spot 
on Sunday after slam-dunking a bunker shot into the cup on his way to becoming 
the first teenager to win on the PGA Tour since the year dot. He says he enjoys 
links golf, as he doesn't spin the ball much, flies it low, and likes using his 
imagination when chipping. "I'm just kind of free swinging," he yawns. Haw. 
You're in love with him already, aren't you. What if it's Spieth who shoots 
that 65 today, eh? Oh, come on, golfing gods, make this happen for us.

Updated at 7.39am BST

5.21pm BST 

The first day of the Open Championship, and a chance for an unlikely hero to 
grab 15 minutes of fame. Here are just a few opening-round leaders of the past, 
folk who were never realistically going to lift the Auld Claret Jug come 
Sunday, but topped the leader board on Thursday evening and stole our hearts 
for 24 hours: Nick Job, Wayne Stephens, Greg Turner, Rodney Pampling, Tom 
Lewis, Michael Allen, Hennie Otto, Sergio Garcia.

Will a relative unknown emerge from the pack today, shooting 65 around a sunny 
and benign Muirfield to claim the headlines that usually evade them? DA Points, 
Oliver Fisher, Brendan Jones, Kiradech Aphibarnrat, your time is now! Or will 
one of the big boys hit the front from the off? Tiger Woods, Rory McIlroy, 
Graeme McDowell, Adam Scott and the defending champion Ernie Els have all 
enjoyed first-round leads in the past, too, and all of them are expected to 
take a serious tilt at this year's title. There's only one way to find out, and 
that's by staying obsessively glued to events at Muirfield for the next 12 
hours. Life's not so bad, eh?

Chronology of obsession:

6.32am: Lloyd Saltman, Peter Senior (Aus), Oliver Fisher
6.43am: Robert Karlsson (Swe), Todd Hamilton (USA), Ben Stow
6.54am: Thomas Aiken (Rsa), Kiradech Aphibarnrat (Tha), Bud Cauley (USA)
7.05am: Brooks Koepka (USA), Mikko Ilonen (Fin), Ashun Wu (Chn)
7.16am: David Duval (USA), Bernd Wiesberger (Aut), Chris Wood
7.27am: Stewart Cink (USA), Scott Stallings (USA), Richard McEvoy
7.38am: Miguel Angel Jimenez (Spa), K J Choi (Kor), Jimmy Walker (USA)
7.49am: Ben Curtis (USA), Shane Lowry, Rafael Cabrera Bello (Spa)
8am: Brian Davis, Jonas Blixt (Swe), Graham Delaet (Can)
8.11am: Robert Garrigus (USA), John Senden (Aus), Marc Warren
8.22am: Martin Kaymer (Ger), Garrick Porteous, Jason Day (Aus)
8.33am: Carl Pettersson (Swe), Jason Dufner (USA), David Lynn
8.44am: Bubba Watson (USA), Nicolas Colsaerts (Bel), Dustin Johnson (USA)
9am: Tom Watson (USA), Sir Nick Faldo, Fred Couples (USA)
9.11am: Justin Rose, Ernie Els (Rsa), Brandt Snedeker (USA)
9.22am: Ian Poulter, Keegan Bradley (USA), Billy Horschel (USA)
9.33am: Richard Sterne (Rsa), Gonzalo Fernandez-Castano (Spa), Nick Watney 
(USA)
9.44am: Rory McIlroy, Hideki Matsuyama (Jpn), Phil Mickelson (USA)
9.55am: Tim Clark (Rsa), Scott Piercy (USA), Kevin Streelman (USA)
10.06am: Shingo Katayama (Jpn), Zach Johnson (USA), Thomas Bjorn (Den)
10.17am: Angel Cabrera (Arg), Camilo Villegas (Col), Tano Goya (Arg)
10.28am: Ken Duke (USA), George Coetzee (Rsa), Mark Calcavecchia (USA)
10.39am: John Huh (USA), Brendan Jones (Aus), Hyung-sung Kim (Kor)
10.50am: Josh Teater (USA), Steven Tiley, Jimmy Mullen
11.01am: K.T. Kim (Kor), Steven Jeffress (Aus), Luke Guthrie (USA)
11.12am: Gareth Wright, John Wade (Aus), Makoto Inoue (Jpn)
11.33am: Y.E. Yang (Kor), Danny Willett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/danny-willett>, Johnson Wagner (USA)
11.44am: Thaworn Wiratchant (Tha), Lucas Glover (USA), Oscar Floren (Swe)
11.55am: Boo Weekley (USA), Sandy Lyle, Niclas Fasth (Swe)
12.06pm: Grant Forrest, Marcus Fraser (Aus), Mark O'Meara (USA)
12.17pm: Tom Lehman (USA), Thongchai Jaidee (Tha), Fredrik Jacobson (Swe)
12.28pm: Rhys Pugh, Justin Leonard (USA), Marc Leishman (Aus)
12.39pm: Kyle Stanley (USA), Alvaro Quiros (Spa), Alexander Noren (Swe)
12.50pm: Russell Henley (USA), Jordan Spieth (USA), Matthew Fitzpatrick
13.01pm: Michael Thompson (USA), Padraig Harrington, Richie Ramsay
13.12pm: Vijay Singh (Fij), Darren Clarke, Martin Laird
13.23pm: Ryan Moore (USA), Henrik Stenson (Swe), Steven Fox (USA)
13.34pm: Thorbjorn Olesen (Den), Jim Furyk (USA), Paul Lawrie
13.45pm: Harris English (USA), Geoff Ogilvy (Aus), Stephen Gallacher
14.01pm: Charl Schwartzel (Rsa), Lee Westwood, Sergio Garcia (Spa)
14.12pm: Adam Scott (Aus), Matt Kuchar (USA), Luke Donald
14.23pm: Matteo Manassero (Ita), Rickie Fowler (USA), Hunter Mahan (USA)
14.34pm: Peter Hanson (Swe), Hiroyuki Fujita (Jpn), Bill Haas (USA)
14.45pm: Tiger Woods (USA), Graeme McDowell, Louis Oosthuizen (Rsa)
14.56pm: Webb Simpson (USA), Branden Grace (Rsa), Jamie Donaldson
15.07pm: Francesco Molinari (Ita), Toru Taniguchi (Jpn), Bo Van Pelt (USA)
15.18pm: Brett Rumford (Aus), D.A. Points (USA), Marcel Siem (Ger)
15.29pm: George Murray, Mark Brown (Nzl), Justin Harding (Rsa)
15.40pm: Scott Jamieson, Gregory Bourdy (Fra), Shiv Kapur (Ind)
15.51pm: Scott Brown (USA), Satoshi Kodaira (Jpn), Gareth Maybin
16.02pm: Tyrrell Hatton, Eduardo De La Riva (Spa), Kenichi Kuboya (Jpn)
16.13pm: Stephen Dartnall (Aus), Darryn Lloyd (Rsa), Daisuke Maruyama (Jpn)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjul%2F17%2Faustralia-adam-scott-open-ashes-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F7%2F17%2F1374069877750%2FAustralias-Adam-Scott-hop-012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia's%20Adam%20Scott%20hopes%20Open%20performance%20will%20inspire%20Ashes%20turnaround%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjul%2F17%2Faustralia-adam-scott-open-ashes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%27s%20Adam%20Scott%20hopes%20Open%20performance%20will%20inspire%20Ashes%20turnaround%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjul%2F17%2Faustralia-adam-scott-open-ashes-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F7%2F17%2F1374069877750%2FAustralias-Adam-Scott-hop-012.jpg>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjul%2F17%2Faustralia-adam-scott-open-ashes-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F7%2F17%2F1374069877750%2FAustralias-Adam-Scott-hop-012.jpg>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia's%20Adam%20Scott%20hopes%20Open%20performance%20will%20inspire%20Ashes%20turnaround%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjul%2F17%2Faustralia-adam-scott-open-ashes-video>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%27s%20Adam%20Scott%20hopes%20Open%20performance%20will%20inspire%20Ashes%20turnaround%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjul%2F17%2Faustralia-adam-scott-open-ashes-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F7%2F17%2F1374069877750%2FAustralias-Adam-Scott-hop-012.jpg>
close  Adam Scott looks ahead to The Open at Muirfield 
Updated at 7.31am BST
 