
When you are ordering Christmas presents from the comfort of your armchair, 
online shopping feels like progress. With a few clinical clicks of the mouse, 
you can tick off the trying business of the consumption season.

However, underneath this modern miracle of convenience lies regression, as our 
undercover reporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 in a Sports Direct warehouse revealed this week: agency workers harangued 
by public address system for not working fast enough, sick children left 
at school by their parents for fear of losing their jobs, lengthy body searches 
and lists of prohibitions for staff, enduring casualised hours. This used to be 
the stuff of Dickensian fiction – yet it is the daily experience 
of many workers in the UK today.

Revealed: how Sports Direct effectively pays below minimum wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
At the very least, there is something primitively direct and open about 
humiliation by loudspeaker. Even more chilling is an account from another 
retailer’s distribution centre relayed to me in recent years: there workers 
described having to wear wristbands reminiscent of convicts’ electronic 
tags, which not only scanned the barcodes of goods they were picking but 
tracked their movements. They calculated the number of hand movements made per 
minute so that workers could be sent a chivvying text whenever their work rate 
slowed down. This is man dehumanised and reduced to machine, dystopian science 
fiction come true. Festive shopping may lead to instant gratification for some 
– just-in-time ordering, next-day delivery – but it also leads to long-term 
personalised misery and relentless, minute-by-minute pressure for others.

Sadly, the Sports Direct warehouse is not an aberration. Much of the growth in 
employment of recent years has been in this field: jobs that in fact represent 
the death of the real job. The idea that a company’s value and brand is built 
not just by its owners but by the labour of all its workers has become a lost 
paternalistic dream. The notion that staff should be rewarded for their part in 
success with a fair share not just of profit but of security has all but 
disappeared. The risks of doing business, traditionally carried by capital, 
have been pushed down to those who can least afford them.

The risks of doing business, traditionally carried by capital, have been 
pushed down to those who can least afford them

Agency working, unpredictable and unsocial hours that may be terminated with 
no notice, pay well below a living wage, absence of sickness or holiday pay – 
these are the lived reality for workers in many sectors of the mainstream 
economy. Not surprisingly, many of these kind of jobs are filled by young, 
single migrant workers rather than local people. They are incompatible with any 
decent settled family life – reliable childminders cannot generally be turned 
on just in time, children do not oblige with sickness to order.

Back in 2007, when unions were fighting for a European directive to win parity 
for agency workers – thus protecting permanent jobs – thelist of sectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/sep/24/labourconference.workandcareers> 
being converted to these sort of conditions already went well beyond retail. 
Car making, steelworks, shipbuilding, construction and printing were joining 
food and drink manufacturing, agricultural processing, care and catering – even 
back then.

The directive was opposed by British business and the then Labour government, 
who said it would undermine “flexibility”. When it was finally implemented in 
2010, it was with a huge get-out clause known as the “Swedish derogation”. The 
result is clear. By the beginning of this year, theONS reckoned 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/lmac/contracts-with-no-guaranteed-hours/employee-contracts-that-do-not-guarantee-a-minimum-number-of-hours--2015-update-/index.html>
 that the number of jobs in the UK with no guaranteed hours was 1.5m. Unions 
put the number far higher.

A day at 'the gulag': what it's like to work at Sports Direct's warehouse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
Britain’s so-called recovery since the economic crash has involved 290,000 
more people being stuck in temporary work than in 2008. “Temporary” has a 
peculiarly contemporary meaning here: it is often not the work itself or the 
demand that is temporary but the employment arrangement too. Christmas creates 
its own peaks, but typically a warehouse may have 300 permanent employees while 
using 3,000 to 4,000 workers on site all year round.

As consumers we may want to do our bit and boycott companies who treat their 
workforce so casually. Clicking elsewhere when Amazon fails to pay its fair 
share of tax, or when Sports Direct offers trainers picked out by someone who 
has been searched and tannoyed, sends a signal to businesses that we are not 
happy with the system as it is. But shopping boycotts have their limitations.

Revolutions in information technology and logistics have changed the nature of 
employment as profoundly as mechanisation did during the industrial revolution. 
It took centuries to win the factory acts and regulations that improved working 
conditions, and it will take as much of a fight again to rebalance these new 
inequalities of power.
 