
Some people like to divide prime ministers into two types: warriors and 
healers. Margaret Thatcher, Britain’s first female premier, was a famous 
exemplar of the martial category.Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has begun her time at Number 
10 by projecting herself as the balm after the storm.

“Unity” was the theme of the speech in Downing Street in which she introduced 
herself to the country as its new prime minister. That was quite bold because 
cohesion is the quality most conspicuously lacking in the disunited kingdom 
that she has inherited from David Cameron. The referendum result revealed a 
country split generationally, geographically, demographically and between its 
constituent parts. Her first trip across a border as prime minister was to 
Scotland. The speech in Downing Street dwelt on other fractures.

She spoke of the “burning injustice” experienced by the poor, contrasted the 
life chances of those educated in state schools and those privately, and was 
generally very rude about “the privileged few”. It was a speech packed with a 
lot of hostages to future fortune because it amounted to a promise that her 
version of one-nation Conservatism will do something big about inequalities at 
a time when money is tight and her own party is riddled with internal conflicts.

She finds herself where she is because she was the only grown-up left standing 
when the Tory party had indulged its orgy of cannibalism. A thing we know about 
Mrs May is that she likes life to be orderly. One of the few members of her 
government with a claim to really know her says of the new prime minister: 
“Theresa doesn’t like surprises.”

But life as prime minister is a sequence of shocks. Within 72 hours of 
arriving at Number 10, the atrocity in Nice and the attempted military coup in 
Turkey gave early warnings of the disruptive power of outside events. There is 
an economic outlook so glowering that her friend and new chancellor, Philip 
Hammond, has had to temper his own fiscal flintiness and junk any idea of 
clearing the deficit by the end of the parliament. Over everything towers 
Brexit, the most complex, fraught and energy-devouring task to face any British 
government since 1945. Mr Hammond’s guess is that it could take six years to 
complete the divorce.

It is understandable that Mrs May does not want her premiership to be defined 
exclusively by withdrawal from the EU, but her early days in office were 
dictated by the referendum result and so will be many more days of her time at 
Number 10. Being a Remainer during the referendum, albeit a mainly invisible 
one, she needed to reassure her party that she will deliver, which is why she 
keeps saying: “Brexit means Brexit.” That is one of those declarations that is 
designed to sound resoundingly firm, but is essentially meaningless when 
subject to closer inspection.

Brexit could take many forms and the Brexiters don’t agree among themselves 
about which version they should aim for. There are softer forms that would 
preserve a lot of the current relationship with the EU and harder modes 
involving a much starker rupture. This is the battlefield that will be fought 
over within the government and beyond. As prime minister, she will have to 
arbitrate between the various models of Brexit contending for dominance and 
then see whether the version she wants can satisfy Scotland and be agreed with 
the EU.

It is an interesting thought experiment to place three of the most prominent 
Leave campaigners at the forefront of the Brexit negotiations. The Outers told 
us that a post-EU Britain would grow prosperous with an abundance of new 
opportunities to trade with the world. Liam Fox is now tasked with making this 
come true in the bespoke role of international trade secretary. The Outers told 
us they could get a cracking deal from the EU. The man who will have to make 
that happen is David Davis as secretary of state for divorce negotiations, his 
first job in government since he was minister for Europe back in the 1990s when 
his counterparts used to call him “Monsieur Non”.

In an essay 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/platform/2016/07/david-davis-trade-deals-tax-cuts-and-taking-time-before-triggering-article-50-a-brexit-economic-strategy-for-britain.html>
 he wrote very recently, Mr Davis argued that “the ideal outcome (and in my 
view the most likely, after a lot of wrangling) is continued tariff-free 
access. Once the European nations realise that we are not going to budge on 
control of borders, they will want to talk, in their own interest.” Now we will 
see whether Mr Davis possesses the wrangling skills to deliver the manifesto he 
wrote for the chief negotiator before he knew that person was going to be 
himself.

The Outers told us that a post-EU Britain would stand not smaller and isolated 
in the world but taller and more admired. Mrs May’s choice of ambassador to the 
planet indicates that she has more of a sense of humour than she is given 
credit for. She made Boris Johnson foreign secretary less than a week after 
ridiculing his negotiating skills: “The last time he did a deal with the 
Germans he came back with three nearly new water cannons.”

The rest of the world is being slow to get this very British joke. The French 
foreign minister has publicly called our new foreign secretary a liar and his 
German counterpart has described his behaviour as “monstrous”. Carl Bildt, the 
former prime minister of Sweden, predicts that it will be “an uphill struggle 
of Olympic proportions” for Mr Johnson to establish relationships of trust.

As for Andrea Leadsom, the prime minister again displayed her mischievous side 
by rewarding her former rival for the leadership with the task of explaining to 
farmers what will happen to their subsidies when Britain parts company with the 
EU.

The snap judgment of Westminster was to see these appointments as a 
demonstration of the Machiavellian wiles of Mrs May. The Brexiters are now 
responsible for trying to make a success of it. With a trio of their own at the 
forefront of the negotiations, the Outers on the Tory benches will find it much 
harder to cry betrayal if they don’t deliver. One senior Conservative MP 
expressed admiration for Mrs May’s guile: “She has created a firewall between 
herself and the headbangers.”

I don’t think it will turn out to be quite that simple. The prime minister 
will not be able to detach herself from the divorce negotiations. Not when the 
country’s prosperity and the future of the United Kingdom itself are both 
contingent on the outcome. Nor surely is it in her character simply to let the 
three Brexiters trot about the planet and wait for them to phone in with the 
results of their travels. We learned a lot about Mrs May’s style of leadership 
from her long tenure at the Home Office. She pays attention to detail. She 
likes to have an extremely tight grip. She has never been famed, especially not 
with her junior ministers and civil servants, as a delegator. She doesn’t 
lightly or easily place her trust in other people. She doesn’t trust her 
foreign secretary further than she can throw him.

So she will be central to the negotiations. The most important bargains will 
be struck at the level of heads of government, as they always have been with 
the EU. Much as she might not want it to be the case, Brexit will consume huge 
amounts of prime ministerial time and have an inevitable impact on her domestic 
ambitions. If it all goes horribly wrong, and the country slides into a 
Brexit-induced recession, the popular anger that fuelled the Out vote will 
start flaming in her direction.

All this would be a formidable array of challenges for a prime minister armed 
with a substantial parliamentary majority and a direct mandate from the 
country. She inherits a government with a fragile majority in the Commons and 
no majority at all in the Lords. She also arrives in office without the 
unambiguous mandate that is enjoyed by a leader who has secured Number 10 by 
winning a general election in his or her own name. The ruthlessness with which 
she sacked allies of her predecessor – this was not any old reshuffle, this was 
a purge – was one way of compensating for that by stamping her authority on the 
government.

The dispossession of the house of Camborne has been popular with everyone who 
was not a member of their gilded club. But they do have a bit of a point when 
they acidly remark that it was David Cameron and George Osborne who authored 
the surprise election victory last year with a campaign in which the then home 
secretary did not play an especially conspicuous part.

British politics has become increasingly presidential, but this is still a 
parliamentary democracy so there is nothing in the constitution to compel Mrs 
May to call an election before 2020. She is under no great pressure to go to 
the country from Ukip, which is currently leaderless, or from a Labour party 
that is self-combusting. Her lack of a direct mandate from the people is not an 
issue at the moment. It will become a bone of contention when she wants or 
needs to do things that were not in the Tory election manifesto. Or when the 
divorce negotiations with the EU start to hit the reality of what is involved. 
Or when stuff starts to go wrong and stuff will go wrong, because it always 
does.

For all those reasons, I don’t think it safe to completely rule out an early 
election.
 