
Would you ever tell your daughter she was fat? I don’t think I would.

Hard to tell because my daughter is still very small, but I sense I’m not 
going to be that sort of mother. I think I’ll be more of an intense, adoring, 
over-praising, neurotic sort. More of a feeder.

I don’t picture myself sneering: “Get some weight off!”, or even gently 
advising a low-carb diet, to a needy child who cares for my opinion. More 
likely I’m clutching her to my own vast embonpoint (in the image, I’m wearing a 
purple jumper), proffering doughnuts, shouting: “You’re perfect! You’re a 
flawless, beautiful, brilliant gem!” at an irritated teenager who writhes to 
get free.

I hope so. Better that way round. A child should take its parents’ admiration 
for granted. Better to go into the world with too high an expectation of love 
than too low. The first person you encounter who makes you feel unattractive, 
annoying or stupid should not be the first person you encounterat all. That 
feeling should come as a surprise, not a confirmation. You should have a decent 
chance of understanding, by the time someone audibly criticises you, that 
opinion is subjective.

Better to struggle claustrophobically from the grasp of an overly adoring 
parent than to fall serially in love with emotionally cruel or distant 
partners, which is what everyone with underly adoring parents always does. (And 
if you are currently hissing: “Underly is not a word!” then I don’t care, 
because my dad told me I was good at words, so I believe that I am, so screw 
you.)

Regular readers – of any newspaper column, not just this one – will know there 
must be some topical bent to all this, and here goes: a study in America has 
found thatwomen whose parents called them “fat” in childhood are more likely to 
suffer from eating disorders 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/comments-about-childhood-weight-more-likely-to-give-women-body-confidence-issues-in-adult-life-a7071496.html>
 and consider themselves overweight, whether they are or not.

As is often the way with science one reads about in the popular press, there 
are a few apparent flaws in the logic of this study’s conclusions. For example: 
it needn’t be that the negative comments triggered the eating disorders. It 
might just as well be that someone with a tendency to that sort of illness is 
more likely tonotice and remember negative comments, even going back to early 
childhood. They are just more bruisable, more easily damaged.

But either way, the message for parents is the same: don’t tell your children 
they’re fat. Jesus! What a thing to do! Don’t tell anybody they’re fat!

Would you say it to someone you’re not related to? A neighbour? An employee? A 
passing bus driver? Why are we so much more likely to make rude, upsetting 
personal remarks to people we care about than people we don’t? So much 
unhappiness and pain could be avoided if we all tried to treat our families 
with just a fraction of the nervous courtesy we show everyone else.

Some people think that “home truths” are part of love, and that pointing out 
weight gain is a sort of kindly, helpful intervention. It isn’t. People who are 
fat know they’re fat. They aren’t sitting there waiting for your divine 
pronouncement. You can only hurt them.

I was a fat teenager and it was a really wretched experience. Oy, the 
miserable little “Lean Cuisine” sachets; the chalky tablets of Canderel 
sweetener; the flowing black T-shirts and risible attempts to pretty them up 
with accessories (hats! I wore hats! Aged 16!); the aching hours on the cycling 
machine; the sickly glasses of Slimfast; the thundering jogs round the block, 
Kylie Minogue on my Sony Walkman, imagining being tiny like her.

I thought about nothing else at all. Nothing. And you must understand, my 
teenage years were improbably interesting. I gambled illegally. I published a 
book. I went on a chatshow with Jason Donovan. Didn’t give a toss about any of 
it. I just wanted, desperately and yearningly wanted, to have a bony face and 
slender limbs and the confidence to wear a swimsuit in front of people.

It was so painful and lonely. It’s really weird to despise your own body; you 
can’t escape it, you feel like you’re choking. I cried and prayed and wished, 
daily and nightly. There was only one thing that could have made the experience 
any worse, and that’s someone telling me I was fat.

I never became thin, but I did stop caring. Thank God. Literally, I thank God 
for the liberation from my own craving to be different. Ungovernable teenage 
hormones behind me, I nowcould be thin if I did all the stuff (you know, low 
carbs, no booze, lots of poached fish and circuit training) but I simply don’t 
care enough to do it.

I know the principle extends into adulthood, though, because I remember it 
from my quest to stop smoking aged 37. Other people telling you that smoking is 
ugly, smelly, antisocial… yellow teeth, dull hair, black lungs… whether it’s a 
beloved friend/partner/relative or a busybody on a train platform, it simply 
never “helps”. As the brilliant Allen Carr pointed out in hisEasy Way To Stop 
Smoking, the negativity of the criticism just makes you feel bad about yourself 
and drives you to the illusory comfort of another cigarette.

We are kidding ourselves if we ever think it’s “helpful” to tell somebody what 
we think is wrong with them. Deep down, our motivation is not so benign; it’s 
actually about our own desire to vent irritation at someone else’s weakness. 
It’s a nasty trait. Look what’s going on around us at the moment, for crying 
out loud: nobody currently seems to have the faintest interest in the motes in 
their own eyes.

Never mind your opinions. Just be nice to people.
 