
No sooner had Monday’s news been delivered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/tiger-woods-calls-off-safeway-open-comeback>
 than the conspiracy theories started. Tiger Woods, it was suggested, never had 
any intention of returning to action either in California this week or Turkey 
next month; earlier assertions to the contrary had been linked to some wider 
commercial plan. The fact so much of Woods’s life is shrouded in secrecy only 
fuels such theories.

Tiger Woods ditched comeback due to ‘mental anguish’ says Luke Donald
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/tiger-woods-luke-donald-golf> 
For once, this sceptical thought process does not make any sense. For all 
Woods may be fond of the dollar signs he can attach to his name, the scale of 
reputational damage attached to announcing a comeback after 15 months before 
stating he does not regard his golf to be good enough to appear is huge. Even 
the notion he was paid a fee simply for stating he would feature in the Turkish 
Airlines Open does not come close to offsetting what happened next. For Woods, 
not least in terms of public perception, this is nothing other than a serious 
setback.

Had he pointed towards an issue with his back and, perhaps, the taking of 
added precautions on medical advice as a reason to kick his return into the 
long grass, there would have been questions as to whether his fitness would 
ever be of a level where competing again is a reality. There would also have 
been widespread nods of understanding.

Instead Woods – he of 79 PGA Tour wins including 14 majors – highlighted a 
“vulnerable” golf game. The player once so unwilling to pinpoint weakness to 
the point where he may have thought himself infallible, is now telling the 
world he would most likely embarrass himself in tournament play. A man who as 
recently as the 2013 Masters boasted about the ability to play an approach shot 
two yards differently to the one before is now conjuring visions of shanks and 
duffs. If that seems an exaggeration,Woods’s second round of 82 at last year’s 
Phoenix Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/30/tiger-woods-career-worst-phoenix-open>
 is a decent reference point.

If this is deep-rooted performance anxiety, it is highly serious. If Woods’s 
golf is broken to the point where either yips are apparent or it has to be 
completely rebuilt, the same grim outlook applies. Woods seemed to bean 
important figure to the USA team at the Ryder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/tiger-woods-usa-tactician-ryder-cup-2016-hazeltine>
, where he was a vice-captain, but did not move with the same ease or carried 
the same aura as before. Something has changed, albeit gradually rather than 
swiftly.

Two aspects are unique to Woods. First, every shot of every tournament he 
played was scrutinised even before the injury and form woes that have ruined 
his last three years. When trying to recapture even some of his greatness, the 
level of attention means errors will be amplified tenfold. The Catch 22 is the 
only way Woods can become competitive again is by sampling tournament golf.

The other pertinent aspect relates to his character. Whereas other players 
returning from multiple back surgeries may be content to float around the 
midriff of PGA Tour events, Woods’s ferocious competitive instinct can never be 
toned down. Turning up at any event with no aspiration whatsoever of winning, 
regardless of backdrop, would seem pointless. Aligning this lifelong approach 
with his current circumstances represents a massive psychological challenge for 
him.

Tiger Woods calls off Safeway Open comeback citing ‘vulnerable’ game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/tiger-woods-calls-off-safeway-open-comeback>
Aspects of Monday’s announcement were strange. Woods had formally entered the 
Safeway Open only on Friday, his manager Mark Steinberg revealing he had 
subsequently travelled to California for intense warmup work.

“When he ramped it up the past few days, hole by hole he realised his game was 
just not responding in the way he wanted it to,” Steinberg said. This is not a 
14-year-old cramming for a physics exam. It is legitimate to ask what precisely 
changed over the tiny timeframe of a weekend in the context of Woods’s longer 
absence.

Even more curiously, Steinberg insisted Woods was not taking part in Turkey 
out of “respect for the PGA Tour”. The agent said his client did not feel it 
“appropriate” to restart his career outside of the United States. While there 
is sympathy due towards the people who bought tickets for the Safeway Open in 
expectation Woods would turn up, the location for his next appearance is surely 
irrelevant. When able to play, he has to, whether in San Diego or San Marino. 
The PGA Tour has benefited more than enough from Woods’s status to be chippy 
about his schedule.

As Woods will know only too well, there cannot be continued comebacks. This, 
bluntly and whenever it arrives, will be his final tilt at adding to the roll 
of honour that established him as one of golf’s all-time greats. For that 
reason, perhaps the erring on the side of caution is a sensible move. What 
cannot be overstated is how serious a predicament Woods remains in. His own 
terminology offers proof of that.
 