
British politics will undergo a “significant realignment” after the EU 
referendum which could see the Liberal Democrats follow theexample of their 
Canadian cousins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/20/justin-trudeau-set-to-become-pm-as-liberals-sweep-board-in-canada-election>
 to mount a serious challenge to be the main party of government within the 
next decade, the party leader, Tim Farron, has said.

As he hailed the “quiet rise” of the Lib Dems after their devastating losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/08/lib-dems-bad-night-share-of-vote-plummets-election>
 in last year’s general election when they won only eight seats, Farron said 
his party could become a major force at the 2025 general election as a “meeting 
place” for pro-EU liberals from Labour and the Conservative parties after the 
referendum.

Farron said the presence of pro-EU Tories and Labour MPs appalled by the 
“utter shambles” of Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership meant the Lib Dems could 
entertain ambitions higher than simply holding the balance of power within a 
decade.

In a Guardian interview before this weekend’s spring conference in York, the 
Lib Dem leader said he hoped to repeat the success of the newCanadian prime 
minister, Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/20/justin-trudeau-canada-new-prime-minister-liberals>
, who took his party from third place in 2011 to lead a majority government 
last year.

“I know all the analogies to the Canadian Liberals don’t stack up entirely,” 
he says. “But they were not seriously thought of as the alternative government 
to the Conservatives certainly even 12 months ago. You have just got to push 
your chest out and when an opportunity arises, fill that space, so we need to 
do that … The scale of the task is massive but I don’t see why my ambition 
shouldn’t be equally massive.”

The Lib Dem leader, whose party shrank from 57 MPs at the 2010 general 
election to just eight MPs last May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/12/strange-death-of-liberal-democrats-leadership-vote>
, said the party was enjoying a “quiet rise”. Adrian Sanders, who lost the 
Torbay seat last year to the Tories after 18 years in parliament, stormed back 
in a local council byelection win last November. The party has also seen its 
vote increase in council byelections this week in Farron’s Westmorland and 
Lonsdale seat and in Theresa May’s Maidenhead constituency.

Farron, who declined the opportunity to serve as a minister in the coalition 
government and carved out a niche as a grassroots campaigner to the left of 
Nick Clegg, secured a decisive win in the leadership contest last year. But the 
Lib Dem leader has had to fight hard to establish his presence in parliament in 
the past year after the Lib Dems lost their cherished status as the third 
party. Farron is only allowed one pop at prime minister’s questions every three 
months, which he has used to highlight what he regards as the main parties’ 
timidity over therefugee crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/03/david-cameron-must-do-more-refugee-crisis-charities-urge>
.

In his Guardian interview Farron moved to set out distinctive yellow water 
between the Lib Dems and the other two main GB parties with a strong attack on 
the investigatory powers bill, or snooper’s charter,published by the home 
secretary earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/01/snoopers-charter-to-extend-police-access-to-phone-and-internet-data>
. The Lib Dem leader warns that far from helping combat terrorism the 
government’s proposals will undermine the fight because the powers handed to 
the intelligence agencies are too broad.

 “There are always finite resources in terms of time and attention as well as 
money, but every hour spent on looking at what people are shopping for on 
Amazon is time not spent tracking people who are a genuine threat to our 
security,” he said. “If you are looking for a needle in a haystack, don’t 
triple the size of the haystack. We hope the bill will be gutted and will come 
back as a proportionate and effective response to the terrorist threat … It 
undermines our ability to catch people who are a genuine threat to our country 
because we will be permitting the security forces, services, to look at data 
that in reality is of little interest.”

 Farron hopes that his strong stance on touchstone liberal issues such as the 
snooper’s charter shows that the Lib Dems could provide a welcome refuge for 
like-minded Labour and Tory politicians who may feel alienated by their parties 
after the referendum. “It’s frustrating that a classroom squabble between Boris 
and Cameron is becoming the focus of this referendum and potentially runs the 
risk of us losing it,” he said.

 The Lib Dem leader recalls how the 1975 referendum on Britain’s EEC 
membership failed to resolve differences over Europe in spite of the emphatic 
yes vote. The winning side within the Labour party, led by Roy Jenkins, founded 
the breakaway SDP six years later when the losing side, led by Tony Benn, 
sought to move the party to the left.

 Farron believes that even if the remain side wins in this year’s referendum, 
many pro-EU Labour and Tory MPs may feel more comfortable with the Lib Dems as 
he embarks on his “two-election strategy” (2020 and 2025) to return his party 
to the frontline.

“The question is whether this is a historic moment where we could become the 
meeting place for liberals in other parties and there could be some quite 
significant realignment around theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats>. I don’t want to say 
things which are not deemed credible at this moment but we could have ambitions 
higher than that [holding the balance of power in a hung parliament].

“I’m not going to get my crystal ball out but I am quite sure there are good 
liberals in both of the other parties and there is one Liberal party which is 
united and very comfortable with being liberal. The point is, how do we get 
ourselves into a position where we are sufficiently credible and have 
sufficient mass to be that Liberal party? Who knows? A hundred years ago there 
were two progressive parties. One blew the moment, one took the moment. Who 
knows?”
 