
The next three months will be crucial for the future of work in general, and 
for British trade unionism in particular. There are two threats. The first is 
the trade union bill – surely one of the most pernicious pieces of proposed 
legislation in recent history. The second, the possibility of leaving the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> – so suspending the array 
of protections it offers in the workplace – would erode what remains of British 
worker rights and entitlements.

Britain already possesses the least regulated labour market in the developed 
world. The evaporation of these last protections will reduce employees to pawns 
– notations on spreadsheets to be disposed of at will in just-in-time 
workplaces. The division in Britain between an aristocracy of privileged 
workers enjoying international standards and a mass precariat of the rest will 
grow more acute. Brexiteers cheer at the prospect; the “burden” of Brussels 
regulations that they rail against fall into two main clusters. Firstly there 
are those essential to creating common standards and protocols in a single 
market of 28 countries and 500 million people. To complain about these is as 
futile as complaining about the weather. In or out they are vital to sustaining 
a level playing field as a precondition for trade. The only question is whether 
we want to share in their formulation.

The other cluster of regulations relates to minimum worker rights. No leading 
Brexiteers have ever committed themselves to maintaining them if Britain 
leaves. Nor will they. The economic case for leaving comes from the same 
intellectual stable as the trade union bill. In this universe, workers are not 
conceived as part of the capital of the workplace, assets whose energies and 
commitment need to be harnessed and whose humanity respected. Rather they are 
seen as problematic liabilities – costs to be minimised – that get in the way 
of “wealth generation”, a top-down process, initiated only by senior management 
and entrepreneurs which any worker entitlement necessarily obstructs.

Jeremy Corbyn 'not on same side' as David Cameron in EU debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/jeremy-corbyn-not-on-same-side-as-david-cameron-in-eu-debate>
Plainly there is a balance to be struck. Too many worker entitlements can 
stifle the agility of an enterprise and overload it with cost; too few and the 
world of work is turned into a high risk, unfair hell. This is bad for 
companies who are forced into a race to the bottom that is hardly the route to 
innovative capitalism; and bad for wider British society. A mass precariat will 
find it difficult to become great parents, active citizens or even provide a 
discerning mass market on which production depends. The balance struck during 
the years of the Labour and coalition governments is about right: Britain has a 
labour market that has proved remarkably good at creating jobs while most work 
environments are tolerable, offering minimum protections – even if the 
prevailing dynamic is to continue to load more risk on employee shoulders.Trade 
unions <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tradeunions> get a terrible press, 
even with only 2.7 million members out of a private sector of 19 million, and 
3.8 million among the 7 million public workforce. But despite their 
demonisation, their efforts – on wages, discrimination, safety and fairness – 
along with EU provisions together create the balanced workplace. It is that 
which is now fatally threatened.

The recent qualifications imposed on the trade union bill in the House of 
Lords mitigate some of the worst of what was intended – but still it remains 
destructive. It is stunning that unions were legally to be prevented from 
electronically balloting members in a digital age for fear it might make 
compliance with tough balloting requirements easier – the House of Lords has 
instead demanded a review of the issue. Similarly it has tried to soften 
measures on political party funding.

But the bulk of the bill remains intact. Strikes, already difficult to call 
and win – and in any case at an all time low – are to be made even harder to 
call and easier to break. Ominously police powers to regulate protests and 
pickets are to be vastly extended, for example with a requirement to create 
“picket supervisors” who must wear identifiable armbands – just as police 
states around the world require. To cap it all, a newly empowered certification 
office will be able to investigate any union at any time even if no complaint 
has been made, calling any witness it likes – again a familiar tool of police 
states. Britain’s press, loud in defence of any regulatory intrusion on its 
rights, on this ominous evolution of a British authoritarian state is mute.

Winning trade union support for EU vote will be 'difficult', PM warned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/09/remain-campaign-len-mccluskey-trade-union-support-eu-referendum>
Anybody who imagines that in this culture, a post-Brexit Conservative 
government would legislate to retain the rights for information and 
consultation required by European law, women’s rights when pregnant, 
limitations to the working week and the rights for temporary, part-time and 
agency work is sadly deluded. Belatedly the unions are recognising the danger. 
The executive of Unite, our biggest union, has voted nearly unanimously to 
campaign to stay. So has the GMB, and Unison, more Eurosceptic, looks likely to 
follow. Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, makes apowerful case 
<http://touchstoneblog.org.uk/2016/03/sticking-union-eu-referendum-matters-working-britons/>
 for staying. But it is a campaign struggling to find its voice.

For a start, the attitude of Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leadership makes any common cause 
– either with unions or the wider Remain coalition – difficult to create. Too 
many on the left, in particular Corbyn, his close coterie and their supporters 
in Momentum, only want to campaign – if they campaign at all – for another 
“social” Europe that does not exist. They hold their noses at the Europe that 
is, with its necessarily complex tradeoffs and inability to represent a 
socialist Jerusalem. Certainly they never want to sully themselves with sharing 
a platform with members of the wider coalition, from David Cameron through to 
the CBI. But there is only the Europe we have: it has enough critics in the 
Leave campaign without half-hearted, qualified semi-advocacy from Corbyn. The 
CBI likes the single market; the City likes being the EU’s financial centre; 
the military and security institutions like the co-operative access; and 
British workers like the rights and entitlements. In the same way different 
interest groups might campaign for, say, a thriving parliament – 
notwithstanding political divisions – so should different interest groups come 
together for EU membership.

Cameron could help the unions by calling off his dogs of war on the union 
bill, accepting the Lords’ changes and dropping the most contentious clauses. 
He needs the unions to make common cause. In any case, a liberal Tory should 
not be trying to create elements of a police state. But equally, the 
centre-left must recognise where its interests lie. Brexit would move the 
centre of gravity of British politics enormously to the right – and that would 
be felt by most people soonest in the workplace. Time to campaign, to mobilise 
and speak for Europe as it is instead of a make-believe nirvana. There are only 
three months left.
 