
Time may move on but some Tongan targets, it seems, remain the same. The last 
time Epi Taione was at a World Cup in Europe, in 2007, he was a back-row whom 
the organisers denied permission to change his name to Paddy Power and then 
went on to threaten with dire consequences when he and the rest of the team to 
play England in Paris dyed their hair green.

Rugby World Cup 2015 podcast: England on the brink after Wales defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audio/2015/sep/28/rugby-world-cup-2015-podcast-england-on-the-brink-wales-defeat>
Their intention was to say thank you to the Irish bookie for digging deep to 
provide kit and a training camp. This week Taione was back in action, this time 
as chairman of Tonga Rugby railing at the supposed inequalities in the global 
game and accusing World Rugby of being out-of-touch colonialists who should 
give the Pacific Island Nations the same money and voting rights as the game’s 
elite. Taione, who played centre, flanker, No8 or wing for Newcastle, Sale, 
Sanyo Wild Knights, Natal Sharks, Harlequins, Racing Métro and, finally, London 
Welsh, was showing his upset atTonga going down to Georgia in their opening 
match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/tonga-georgia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, something of a shock since Georgia had never previously beaten any side 
ranked above them in the world rankings.

It also ended Tonga’s hopes of making the quarter-finals, leaving the remote 
target as automatic qualification for 2019. To do that they have to beat 
Namibia at Exeter Tuesday and then get something from Sunday’s match against 
Argentina or New Zealand, whom they play in Newcastle on 9 October.

Taione was blaming lack of funding from World Rugby for Tonga’s woes and 
distorted voting rights for island voices not being heard. “They want us to 
compete but we get $1.58m [£1.04m] a year while Argentina, New Zealand and the 
other Sanzar [South Africa and Australia] countries have received $18m [£12m] 
before the tournament,” he claimed.

“The money should be evenly distributed. And we still only get one vote for 
all of the Pacific Island members. It should be Tonga one vote, Samoa one vote, 
Fiji one vote. I cannot see how our voice will be heard. Rugby is so out of 
touch. It’s run by colonialists who still think they run the world like it was 
100 years ago. Until they’re willing to give up power, nothing will change. 
Until they evenly distribute the resources, they’re going nowhere. Considering 
the way we’re treated, we compete very well.”

World Rugby replied by saying it had invested £16m in Pacific Islands rugby 
over the past four years, funding specialist coaching support, competition 
structures and administrative programmes.

Today, though, the argument is on the pitch, Tonga having to beat a Namibian 
side which refused to be cowed by the All Blacks at the Olympic Stadium and 
whose second-row Tjiuee Uanivi is said to be attracting interest from several 
Premiership clubs.

Tonga have named nine changes to the starting line-up that lost to Georgia. 
Namibia, the lowest ranked side in the tournament, have made eight.

Tonga Vungakoto Lilo; David Halaifuna, Siale Piutau (co-capt), Sione Piukala, 
Fetu’u Vainikolo; Latiume Fosita, Sonatane Takulua; Soane Tonga’uiha, Aleki 
Lutui, Sila Puafisi, Hale T-Pole, Joseph Tu’ineau, Sione Kalamafoni, Jack Ram, 
Viliami Ma’afu (co-capt).Replacements Paula Ngauamo, Tevita Mailau, Halani 
‘Aulika, Tukulua Lokotui, Opeti Fonua, Samisoni Fisilau, Kurt Morath, Telusa 
Veainu

Namibia Janco Venter; Johan Tromp, Danie van Wyk, Johan Deysel, Russel van 
Wyk; Theuns Kotze, Eneill Buitendag; Casper Viviers, Torsten van Jaarsveld, 
Johannes Coetzee, Janco Venter, Tjiuee Uanivi, Jacques Burger (capt), Rohan 
Kitshoff, Renaldo Bothma.Replacements Louis van der Westhuizen, Johnny 
Redelinghuys, AJ De Klerk, Tinus du Plessis, PJ van Lill, Damian Stevens, 
Darryl de la Harpe, David Philander.
 