
All week long a group of beefy rugby players have been huddled in rooms at a 
hotel just outside Gloucester tuning in to a talk programme on Radio Tonga and 
marvelling how their opening game of the World Cup against Georgia on Saturday 
is unifying their nation.

Night after night, sometimes through to the early hours, even when training is 
only hours away, they have been tuning in to hear the prayers and greetings 
coming from halfway around the world. The Christian Brothers took rugby to the 
islands and a combination of ball and bible has been the cement in Tongan 
society ever since.

According to Siale Piutau, the vice-captain and one of those self-confessed 
late-night listeners, the government has designated Saturday Red Day, meaning 
the population of just over 100,000 is being encouraged to wear the team 
colours to business and church before boats from all over the archipelago head 
for parties and barbecues before settling in to watch the match which starts at 
around midnight Tongatapu time.

And not just in Tonga. According to Piutau, Tongan communities around the 
world, and particularly in Australia and New Zealand, will be hoping for the 
kind of performance that unsettled andembarrassed France four years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/01/rugby-world-cup-france-tonga> 
before the French pulled themselves together to make lifesimilarly difficult 
for New Zealand in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/23/rugby-world-cup-final-all-blacks>
.

This time around it is Tonga who face New Zealand – the red-hot favourites and 
No1 in the world. That game, at St James’ Park, Newcastle, early next month, is 
probably a step too far for the Pacific islanders, but by then they should know 
whether they have done well enough to qualify automatically for a sixth 
successive global gathering, closer to home this time, in Japan and in four 
years.

Rugby World Cup preview No13: Tonga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/15/rugby-world-cup-preview-tonga> 
To do that, Tonga will have to come third in their group, a realistic ambition 
some would say, but far too small a target for another of the squad’s natural 
leaders, Sitiveni (better known over here and particularly in Leicester, as 
Steve) Mafi, now with Western Force, based in Perth, but for four years a Tiger.

According to Mafi, who made quite a name for himself at Welford Road and was 
as adept at running in tries as doing a hard shift normally associated with a 
lock or No6, the side wants more – the first quarter-final in their World Cup 
history.

“We have set ourselves the target of getting to the quarter-finals and then 
kick on from that,” said Mafi after he had been named in the starting XV.

“We’ll go week by week, but the aim is to get out of our group. It’ll be the 
first time,” says the 25-year-old whose career is typical of the 31-strong 
squad, hardly any of whom actually play in Tonga. Eleven are based in the UK, 
including three, Sione Kalamafoni, Aleki Lutui and Sila Puafisi, with 
Gloucester.

Mafi grew up in Fairfield, a suburb of Sydney and played for the New South 
Wales Waratahs, leaving him to decide whether to go for the country of his 
birth or the country of his heritage. “Obviously it was something I thought 
about a lot,” he said this week.

“My grandfather played and captained the side and I’ve been hearing the story 
over and over.”

Having decided, there were many who watched the Leicester side of the time, 
who wondered why Mafi was not part of the last World Cup in New Zealand where 
Tonga came up with that beating of France. It was, he says, unfortunate.

“There was some misunderstanding with coaching and selection. I don’t want to 
go into it too much, but I’d had a long season here with Leicester, had a break 
of about two weeks and didn’t get that call up.”

Lines of communication also got a little stretched around the time of the 
birth of Mafi’s son, Fine Sefo.

Richard Cockerill, the Leicester director of rugby, gave Mafi time to head 
home and then spent the next three months asking when his star forward was 
returning. In the end the call of home proved too strong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/dec/14/leicester-steve-mafi-premiership-salary-cap>
 and, after four acclaimed seasons, Mafi headed to Australia leaving a hole in 
the Leicester side and some fond memories.

“I definitely miss Leicester, probably not the weather, but the brotherhood we 
had there and the stuff after the games. Mainly it was with the Samoans, the 
Tuilagi family, Niki Goneva [in the Fijian lineup to face England].

“When I left two other Tongans came. I speak to Opeti Fonua and he’s quite 
enjoying it there,” said Mafi, who was surprised recently when stopped in the 
streets of the east Midlands by a fan who recognised the 6ft 7in 18-stoner.

“I still have some of the kit and occasionally wear it and, I think it was in 
Loughborough, I was stopped by a fan who recognised me.”

Oddly if Mafi and the Tongans are to meet their ambitions and a first entry in 
the knockout stages of the World Cup, then Leicester will be the stage on which 
the deal will be done. Third game up, Tonga face Argentina – the favourites to 
go through with the All Blacks – not at Welford Road, but just across the way 
at Leicester City’s ground.

“Obviously I’m very excited about it and seeing some of the Leicester old 
boys, but focus is now Georgia and then Namibia” – and more late nights 
listening in to Radio Tonga.

“It’s just amazing the support we have from back in the islands. Families and 
villages come together to pray … the boys can feel it so much here. It’s almost 
like we were there.”
 