


Britain and its western allies must be prepared to send ground troops to 
“crush”Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> forces or risk a 
terror attack in Europe of “such size and horror” that draconian security 
measures would have to be introduced, Tony Blair has said.

In a lengthy article on the Brussels bombings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/27/brussels-bombing-last-gasp-isis-latest-attack-europe>
, the former prime minister said local forces could be used against Isis in 
Iraq, Syria and Libya. But he said western ground forces would eventually be 
needed to defeat Isis as it sought to create a caliphate.

Blair wrote in the Sunday Times 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/uk_news/article1682498.ece>: “We must 
build military capability able to confront and defeat the terrorists wherever 
they try to hold territory. This is not just about local forces. It is a 
challenge for the west. Ground forces are necessary to win this fight and ours 
are the most capable.”

Brussels attacks: last gasp of Isis terror in Europe, or sign of growing 
threat?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/27/brussels-bombing-last-gasp-isis-latest-attack-europe>
The allied countries carrying out airstrikes against Isis targets in Syria and 
Iraq, including the UK and US, have so far not deployed ground forces beyond 
unannounced special forces to guide the bombers and troops that train Iraqi 
forces in combating Isis. Britain is understood to be considering contributing 
1,000 non-combat troops to a 5,000-strong international force to train the 
Libyan army as it seeks to overcome Isis forces that are building up a 
stronghold in the North African country.

Blair suggested that Britain may need to go further, at least in Iraq and 
Syria. He wrote: “We are making progress in the fight against Isis but it has 
to be eliminated with greater speed and vigour. This ‘caliphate’ is itself a 
source of recruitment. We can use local allies in the fight, but they need 
equipment and where they need active, on-the-ground, military support from us, 
we should give it. The Americans are doing this now – at least to a degree and 
with effect. But to have allowed Isis to become the largest militia in Libya 
right on Europe’s doorstep is extraordinary. It has to be crushed.”

Blair issued a stark warning of the dangers of failing to defeat Isis. He 
wrote: “We will have periodic but increasingly frequent acts of terrorism that 
will result in many more victims and start to destabilise our political and 
social cohesion. Eventually the terrorists will commit an act of such size and 
horror that we will change our posture; but by then the battle will be much 
harder to win without measures that contradict our basic value system.”

The former prime minister said the military fight against Isis should be part 
of a wider strategy to confront what he called the “perversion” of the Islamic 
faith by the ideology of Islamism. He said people should be careful talking 
about tackling violent extremism because Islamism was a “much broader problem 
of ideology”, whose supporters run into the millions across the globe.

Blair wrote: “The reality is that the adherents of this view of Islam are 
numbered in many millions, have, in some countries, elements of official 
support, and are systematically teaching it to millions of young people across 
the world … This ideology is not interested in coexistence. It does not seek 
dialogue but dominance. It cannot therefore be contained. It has to be 
defeated.”

He said Islamism could not be defeated if the “paralysing grip of the present 
political discourse” on the right and left continued. In an apparent dig at
Donald Trump, who has spoken of denying entry to the US to all Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
, Blair criticised the tendency on the right to trip into bigotry towards 
Muslims.

In what appeared to be a rebuke to the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, the 
former prime minister criticised those on the left who warn that “calling it 
Islamism is stigmatic”. They preferred, Blair wrote, “to believe that in any 
event we have caused all of this through western policy although the countries 
now affected cover the gamut of policy positions from the most interventionist 
to the expressly pacific”.


Blair said Islamism could be defeated by marshalling an alliance within Islam. 
“Many Muslims are speaking out and as they do, others gain confidence and 
follow; because the majority of Muslims hate the way their faith has been 
hijacked. And never forget the majority of terrorist victims are Muslim.”


He said David Cameron could lead the fight against Islamism within Europe if 
he won the EU referendum. Blair said of Cameron, who has spoken of the need to 
defeat the ideology of violent extremism: “For the UK and for a Cameron 
premiership, if liberated from Britain’s internal European debate, it could 
mean the leadership of this task in Europe where Britain’s strengths and the 
PM’s own instincts are uniquely suited to it.”


The intervention by Blair came as the archbishop of Canterbury urged people to 
allow hope to overcome fear. In his Easter sermon at Canterbury Cathedral, 
Justin Welby said: “In the shadow of Brussels, with the memory of Srebrenica, 
hope can seem far, far away. People here will feel hope has faded because of 
illness, bereavement, unemployment, money worries, family breakdown. When hope 
fails, fear draws close, and whispers sly deceits in our minds. On Easter Day 
hope decisively overcame fear and Christians are called to be witnesses to the 
hope that is found only in Jesus Christ.”

 