
Tony Pulis recently said something very difficult to believe and it had 
nothing to do with thathigh court imbroglio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/tony-pulis-crystal-palace-appeal>
. He said it after Salomón Rondón headed ahat‑trick against Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/west-bromwich-albion-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
 on Wednesday, when the Venezuela striker offered a timely reminder of his 
expertise before Saturday’s home game with Manchester United, against whom 
Rondón scored the winning goal on their last visit to The Hawthorns.

The odd remark Pulis made amid his praise for his striker was this: “He finds 
it extremely difficult to understand how hard every game is in the Premier 
League.” Really? Few people in the world can have as keen an understanding as 
Rondón of how hard every game is in the Premier League.

As West Bromwich Albion’s lone centre-forward Rondón performs a role often 
akin to self-flagellation, although it is Pulis who wields the whip. Rondón 
runs down every channel, challenges for every ball, duels with every defender 
and generally drains every bead of sweat from his body and every bit of 
strength from his muscles.

From a United perspective Saturday’s is a particularly bad match for Eric 
Bailly to miss. Oft times Rondón is not even rewarded for his work with a 
scoring opportunity, which is why his tally of seven goals from 15 matches this 
season is so impressive. But Pulis knows that. His remark was just an 
unnecessary reminder there must be no let-up, no resting on laurels, no 
delusion the war is ever won. The likelihood is every West Brom player gets 
such reminders from the manager every minute of every day. Pulis is insatiable.

West Bromwich Albion v Manchester United: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/west-bromwich-albion-manchester-united-match-preview>
That is one of the characteristics that have enabled him to drive West Brom to 
a situation whereby Saturday’s game can be presented as a contest between the 
teams in sixth and seventh place in the table and at least two West Brom 
players, James McClean and Chris Brunt, have talked openly about qualifying for 
Europe. West Brom’s last match in European competition was in the 1981-82 Uefa 
Cup, when a team featuring Bryan Robson, Cyrille Regis and Brendan Batson were 
beaten by Grasshoppers Zurich (that is, to discount the Anglo-Italian Cup as a 
fully fledged European competition, especially as West Brom’s last matches in 
it, in 1996, were against Birmingham City and Port Vale).

Pulis has assembled a team of sound players who work selflessly to strict 
instructions. That is not so easy, as the managerial sack rate makes plain, and 
Pulis has been doing it for years. He, like his players, sacrifices himself for 
the team, insofar as his approach to management is quite egoless. He does not 
seek acclaim for tactical innovations or fine play. He frankly does not care 
whether anyone enjoys watching his team, so long as everyone hates playing 
against them. The commentariat can talk to his hand, because his ears are not 
listening. And his mouth, unlike Sam Allardyce’s, has never invited people to 
consider what he could do if he were given a gig at Real Madrid, United or any 
other club where he could vie for titles.

José Mourinho <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho> has spent 
practically his whole career at such clubs. That might be the biggest 
difference between him and Pulis. Mourinho has never relished comparisons 
between the functionalism of Pulis’s teams and his own, even though he is an 
admirer of the Welshman’s consistent ability to get the best out of squads. On 
Friday he repeated what he first said in May 2015, that if he were a Premier 
League club owner, he would hire Pulis as his manager. “It’s a guarantee to 
achieve what the club wants,” he said the first time. “He does what some people 
don’t understand – but I do – and what other people sometimes don’t rate – but 
I do, which is the relation between what the manager wants and what the team 
is.”

What Pulis will want on Saturday is for his team to sabotage Mourinho’s. There 
is a chance he will order his players merely to try to suffocate United, as he 
tried to do at Anfield earlier in the season, like Mourinho, and at Stamford 
Bridge last week. But since the match is at The Hawthorns Pulis is likely to be 
more enterprising than that. West Brom have scored 10 goals in their past three 
home matches. Admittedly those were against Burnley, Watford and Swansea but, 
then again, United drew 0-0 at home to Burnley and lost at Watford.

West Brom’s goal spree has come for several reasons. One is that Rondón has 
been getting better support. Midfielders have got forward more, especially 
since James Morrison’s return to full fitness. Service from wide has been 
excellent, thanks to the terrific form of Matt Phillips and the impeccable 
crossing of Brunt. So West Brom will likely ask questions of United’s defence 
beyond the mandatory starter one posed by Pulis’s teams: can you defend set 
pieces?

The victory over United in March to all intents ensured West Brom’s Premier 
League status. They wound down after that and won none of their remaining nine 
matches. That was extremely unPulis-like and enraged the manager. He has 
amended and recharged his team. If they were to beat United again, it would 
secure nothing but optimism around The Hawthorns. Whatever the result, no 
player at West Brom is likely to wind down again any time soon.
 