
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has condemned 
House Republicans for voting to severely weaken an independent congressional 
ethics watchdog, the latest sign of his willingness to rebuke his own party.

Outcry after Republicans vote to dismantle independent ethics body
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/outcry-after-republicans-vote-to-dismantle-independent-ethics-body>
Republicans sparked an outcry on Monday when they agreed behind closed doors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/outcry-after-republicans-vote-to-dismantle-independent-ethics-body>
 to give lawmakers themselves ultimate control over the Office of Congressional 
Ethics (OCE), the independent body created in 2008 to investigate allegations 
of misconduct.

Trump tweeted on Tuesday morning: “With all that Congress has to work on, do 
they really have to make the weakening of the Independent Ethics Watchdog, as 
unfair as it may be, their number one act and priority. Focus on tax reform, 
healthcare and so many other things of far greater importance!”

He added the hashtag #DTS, for his campaign slogan “drain the swamp”.
The OCE was created after several bribery and corruption scandals that 
resulted in members going to prison. The ethics change is part of a rules 
package that the full House will vote on after convening for a new session on 
Tuesday.

It was not immediately clear whether Trump’s comments might prompt lawmakers 
to try to undo the move – or whether that would even be possible.

Speaker Paul Ryan and majority leader Kevin McCarthy, the two top House 
Republicans, had argued in Monday’s meeting – held with no prior notice – 
against making the unilateral ethics change, calling for a bipartisan approach 
at a later date, but rank-and-file Republicans defied their leadership.

Asked about Trump’s tweets on Tuesday, McCarthy told reporters: “Those are the 
same arguments I made last night.”

But while saying he disagreed with the timing of the decision, he challenged 
the way changes to the OCE had been reported by the media. “What teeth did it 
lose? How is it not independent? ... It is still the same entity, it still has 
the principle going forward.”

The public can still register a complaint about lawmakers, he added. “There is 
still an OCE that has a name so people know where to register a complaint. The 
public can register a complaint and it will be forwarded to the ethics 
committee, just as it was before.”


The 119-74 vote reflected the frustration of many lawmakers who have felt 
unfairly targeted by the OCE, but it was a setback for leadership caught 
off-guard by the swift action.

Under the ethics change pushed by Representative Bob Goodlatte, a Republican 
from Virginia, the nonpartisan Office of Congressional Ethics would fall under 
the control of the House Ethics Committee, which is run by lawmakers. It would 
be known as the Office of Congressional Complaint Review, and the rule change 
would require that “any matter that may involve a violation of criminal law 
must be referred to the Committee on Ethics for potential referral to law 
enforcement agencies after an affirmative vote by the members”, according to 
Goodlatte’s office.

Lawmakers would have the final say on their colleagues under the change.

Democrats, led by minority leader Nancy Pelosi, reacted angrily.

“Republicans claim they want to ‘drain the swamp,’ but the night before the 
new Congress gets sworn in, the House GOP has eliminated the only independent 
ethics oversight of their actions,” the California Democrat said in a 
statement. “Evidently, ethics are the first casualty of the new Republican 
Congress.”

In a statement, Goodlatte said the rules amendment “builds upon and 
strengthens the existing Office of Congressional Ethics by maintaining its 
primary area of focus of accepting and reviewing complaints from the public and 
referring them, if appropriate, to the Committee on Ethics”.

Before Trump’s tweets on the issue, Kellyanne Conway, a top Trump adviser, 
spoke supportively of the move. She said she had not talked to Trump directly 
about the issue but that under the previous system there had been 
“overzealousness” in going after lawmakers. “We don’t want people wrongly 
accused,” she said Tuesday on ABC’s Good Morning America.

But others said the new system would make it easier for corruption to flourish 
under Ryan and his leadership team.

“We all know the so-called House Ethics Committee is worthless for anything 
other than a whitewash – sweeping corruption under the rug,” Chris Carson, 
president of the League of Women Voters, said. “That’s why the independent 
Office of Congressional Ethics has been so important. The OCE works to stop 
corruption and that’s why speaker Ryan is cutting its authority. Speaker Ryan 
is giving a green light to congressional corruption.”

The OCE was created in March 2008 after the cases of former Representative 
Randy “Duke” Cunningham, a Republican from California, who served more than 
seven years in prison on bribery and other charges; as well as cases involving 
former Representative Bob Ney, a Republican from Ohio, who was charged in the 
Jack Abramoff lobbying scandal and pleaded guilty to corruption charges, and 
former Representative William Jefferson, a Democrat from Louisiana, convicted 
on corruption in a separate case.

The package approved Monday also includes a means for Republican leaders to 
punish lawmakers if there is a repeat ofthe Democratic sit-in last summer over 
gun control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/23/house-democrats-gun-control-sit-in-civil-disobedience>
.

The Associated Press contributed to this report
 