
Donald Trump’s victory in the Nevada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nevada> Republican caucus wasn’t even a 
close one; he reportedly led in practically every demographic (and listed them 
in his victory speech). Evangelicals, young, old, Hispanics, the highly 
educated and “the poorly educated” they all loved him on Tuesday night.

Hispanics? Yes, even Hispanics, even after that line about “drugs and rapists” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
.

And though establishment toffs like to issue signifying snorts about Trump 
voters being predominantly “poorly educated”, in the minutes after the caucus 
even CNN started to come around to the most elusive explanation: Trump’s 
popularity isn’t about his supporters’ education, their religion or the 
policies they’d like to see enacted. Trump is popular because of his 
supporters’ anger.

Anger isn’t something that Beltway pundits recognize, let alone understand 
because everyone employed in media or in politics in and around Washington DC 
is pretty well off. Even ink-stained wretches pull down five-figures – and, 
unlike everywhere else in America, since journalism is built on documenting 
nonsense, there’s some real job security in documenting Washington. Television 
people fare even better, because TV money is stupid money. Thinktank 
malefactors reap great sums from the aggrieved heartland or from industries 
looking to build a canon of falsified data, and Congress and the attendant 
lobbying is a helluva racket.

Anger is pretty easy to miss when it’s something pretty difficult to feel. 
When you sit at the center of the world and are unlikely to ever lack for the 
basic materials of self-sufficiency, the idea of blind, gnawing resentment – 
let alone of feeding that resentment even with irrational aims – is ineluctably 
beyond your ken.

It’s harder still to understand that there are millions of people in America 
whose ambitions for a life of steadily improving conditions cratered sometime 
around nine years ago and have never recovered. If you can hardly imagine that 
you could follow the Horatio Alger script to the letter and still find yourself 
sinking in quicksand, you’re never going to understand why someone would be so 
contemptuous of the pieties of a system that only pays attention to you when 
doing soft-focus interviews in search of a journalism award or a campaign ad.

And anger isn’t something so easily ratiocinated. When your job is explaining 
world events, irrational phenomena lie fundamentally outside your brief. 
Explaining things with, “Well, people are angry!” is like surrender; it’s 
explaining badly resolved story lines in a TV show with, “A wizard did it.” 
Journalists learn to see the world in terms of the push/pull of conflicting 
ideologies and the necessary stratagems within a needlessly complicated 
governmental system; they’re necessarily going seek their explanations for 
seeming irrationality in the more elegant realms of philosophy and economics 
and political science.

Doing so fails them all the time. Look at the Tea Party, which the Beltway (at 
various points) tried desperately to explain as populist resentment of Business 
As Usual, or a new libertarian moment. Only recently has the media madding 
crowd come around to some kind of consensus about it just being racist as hell.

That wasn’t a difficult conclusion to reach, and it didn’t need to take seven 
years; all they had to do was look at their damn signage – all those placards 
of Obama as “Curious George” themonkey and signs like “OBAMA’S PLAN = WHITE 
SLAVERY” were kind of unambiguous.

Which brings us back to Trump’s victory speech in Nevada, which was his usual 
gallimaufry of disconnected thoughts. They aren’t traditional political 
speeches as much as they are The Donald emceeing his own Dean Martin roast for 
everyone and everything he hates, with interruptions for what he loves. He 
burns his enemies to a crisp, tells America it’s wonderful and drops in random 
praise. “Florida, we love Florida.”

Hey, Florida, baby, you’re beautiful. You’re wonderful. I tell ya, I love ya. 
You’re aces. Here’s $100 for the tables. I know you’re going to be lucky 
tonight because I can feel it.

There’s a great temptation to fume at the emptiness and banality of Trump’s 
statements and at the absence of traditional policy plans; it’s almost 
irresistible to seek some grander explanation for his success than that people 
like him.

But you don’t need some grand overarching political science theory. There are 
millions of miserable people in America who know exactly who engineered the 
shattering of their worlds, and Trump isn’t one of those people – and, with the 
exception of Bernie Sanders, everyone else in the field is running on the basis 
of their experience being one of those people.

When you are abused and bullied enough, anyone willing to beat up or burn down 
whomever put you in that position is your friend. Even a bully can be a hero if 
he targets others bullies – and that is, more or less, what Trump has done 
since day one.

Trump’s nativism is horrifying and nauseating, as is his delight in talking 
about beating up protesters and intimidating anyone who hassles him. People are 
right to fear the way he has turned movement conservatism’s loathing of 
protest, the media and non-white foreigners up to 11 and ripped the knob off.

But that disgusting behavior gets paired with the sight of Trump humiliating 
establishment empty suits like Scott Walker, stuffed shirts like Jeb Bush, 
party pets like Marco Rubio and habitual liars like Ted Cruz. The fact that 
Trump himself is frequently lying doesn’t matter to those that see themselves 
as the establishment’s victims if he’s lying in service of exposing another 
government predator.

As tacky and thuggish as it might be, Trump plays the hero to people that the 
wise warriors of the system have abandoned. He’s the ultimate Gary Stu 
character: a billionaire beholden to no one and able to abuse every 
disingenuous and pettifogging remora latched headfirst on the nation and 
sucking upward.

And as long as people can enjoy the elbow-throwing wish-fulfillment of 
watching him in action, most of the rest doesn’t matter to them – not the 
bombast, not the war-mongering, not the unfeasibility of even his signature 
promises and certainly not the consequences if he keeps them. If the system is 
already so broken that it abandoned you, its preservation is not your concern. 
Hell, burning it down might be what you want most.

Anger has a clarity all its own. It renders most detail extraneous, and it 
animates like nothing else. It is not to be underestimated, and, at this point, 
we will probably have to wait until November to find out if it truly has been.
 