
The UK’s hugely popular public parks face falling into decline and neglect as 
a result of budget cuts, a new report warns.

Park use is rising, with 57% of adults now visiting their park once a month or 
more, while 90% of families with children under five head to their local green 
space at least monthly, the State of UK Public Parks 2016 study reveals.

But the Heritage Lottery Fund (HLF) study warns a decline in the condition of 
parks predicted ina first report in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/26/uk-parks-crisis-budget-cuts-campaigners>
 is set to continue, with almost all park managers experiencing ongoing cuts as 
austerity squeezes local authority budgets.

Some 92% of park managers had seen budgets cut and 95% were facing more 
reductions, a worsening of the situation since 2014, according to a survey of 
193 councils as part of the report.


Just under one fifth of local authorities (18%) believed the condition of 
their public parks had declined in the past three years but 39% were expecting 
them to decline in the coming three years, it found.

Dave Morris, chair of National Federation of Parks and Green Spaces, said: 
“The only way to halt the ever deepening funding crisis affecting all parks 
across the UK is to make it a statutory service.”

He added: “Parks take a long time to fall apart. It’s not immediately 
noticeable, like a library closing, but all the pillars of effective park 
management and maintenance are crumbling. If not reversed, parks will be 
plunged into the disaster crisis of the 1980s and 1990s when they became no go 
areas full of syringes and no park rangers.”

Merrick Denton-Thompson, president of the Landscape Institute, said: “To 
secure their future we need to decide whether a new statutory obligation is 
placed on local government to create or manage urban parks. An authority could 
then have the choice either to provide it themselves or use their regulatory 
powers to deliver and manage green infrastructure through the private sector.”

Tightening budgets are expected to lead to declines in quality of green 
spaces, morale, support for park friends and user groups, recruiting volunteers 
and staffing events.

Three-quarters of local authorities have cut staff, with the loss of skills 
such as horticulture, landscape design and wildlife management.

The report also warned of rising inequality in park services, with councils in 
urban areas and those in the East Midlands and North of England expected to 
have higher than average reductions in their budgets over the next three years.

Tom Cranston, treasurer of the National Federation of Parks and Green Spaces 
and former chair of Friends of Doxford Park, six miles outside of Sunderland 
city centre, said three “Green Flag” parks got most of local funding while 
other parks in the Sunderland area decayed.

He said Doxford, a small local park with a stream and walled garden dating 
from the 1800s, was full of colour in spring but paths needed maintaining, 
seats were in poor condition, the walled garden was crumbling and there was 
lots of graffiti.

“The friends [of the park] group organised an annual Teddy Bear picnic enjoyed 
by 300-400 local people. We had school children in, and group of people with 
learning disabilities came in to do horticulture which they found very 
therapeutic to the point that 12 out of the 36 came unaccompanied which to them 
was like climbing Everest,” he says. “I was very proud of that but then the 
funding was pulled.”

In the introduction to the report, Ros Kerslake, chief executive of HLF, said 
the downward trend predicted in 2014 “looks set to continue and there is a 
danger that many parks and green spaces may fall back to a state of decline and 
neglect”.

Half of local authorities have sold parks and green spaces or transferred 
ownership or management to community groups or trusts.

And, having exhausted opportunities to make savings and efficiencies, councils 
are having to raise income in other ways, such as through charges on local 
development, National Lottery grants for regeneration and charging for services.

More than £850m of National Lottery money has been invested in hundreds of 
parks across the country

Kerslake said: “These are financially tough times and, if we are to 
successfully halt the onset of decline in our parks and avoid wasting this 
investment, we need to come together now to find innovative and sustainable 
models of funding and maintaining these highly valued community spaces.”

A poll of 2,130 people aged 16 and over for the report revealed that only a 
fifth backed more charges for using park facilities such as car parking or 
tennis courts.

Almost six out of 10 (59%) backed more commercial use of parks such as 
ticketed music events and fairs.

But more fundraising by local communities, more cash levied from local 
development, further sponsorship by businesses and greater funding from the 
National Lottery were all more popular options.

Mark Camley, chairman of the Parks Alliance, said: “HLF’s findings that the 
recent renaissance in parks over last 20 years is now coming to an end is of 
great concern and should be a wake-up call for us.

“Local authorities, voluntary groups and contractors have done an excellent 
job of offsetting significant budget reductions by working inventively and 
collaboratively to find new solutions and this is disguising the depth of the 
crisis.”

But he warned parks were at a “tipping point” and called on the government and 
local authorities to recognise the benefits of parks and fund them 
appropriately.

A select committee inquiry is examining the impact of reduced local authority 
budgets on these open spaces and considering concerns that their existence is 
under threat.

Communities and Local Government Committee Chair, Clive Betts MP, said:
“Whether it is kicking the ball about with friends, joining a parkrun, walking 
the dog or just relaxing with a paperback, people value their local parks.

But with councils under enormous financial pressures and with no legal 
obligation to fund and maintain public parks, these precious community 
resources may be at risk.”

Paralympian Baroness Tanni Grey-Thompson, chairwoman of ukactive, said: “Our 
parks are an integral part of our lives, places where we relax, play, and 
exercise. Such assets need to be protected and prioritised, not threatened with 
decay and closure.”


Dr Mike Clarke, chief executive of the RSPB, said: “Nature conservation and 
the parks movement share deep roots. Well managed public parks that give nature 
a home, are an ideal place to have fun and learn about the natural environment.”
 