
The UN high commissioner for refugees has said it is “profoundly concerned” by 
Australia’s plan to ban for life any asylum seeker who has attempted to reach 
the country by sea.

“Seeking asylum is not ‘illegal’,” said Thomas Albrecht, the UNHCR’s regional 
representative in Canberra.

“Refugees need and deserve protection and respect. The basic human right of 
every person to seek asylum from persecution is not diminished by their mode of 
arrival. Those forced to flee persecution need and deserve conducive conditions 
of protection, and a sustainable long-term solution.”

Julie Bishop <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>, the 
foreign minister, said on Tuesday the proposed ban was “the last piece of the 
work that we have to do to clean up the chaos after Labor’s border protection 
policies”.

Albrecht said the policy of offshore processing did not diminish Australia’s 
legal responsibility for people who sought asylum in the country.

Nauru, detention, the ABC and us: putting misconceptions about Australia and 
refugees to rest | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/nauru-detention-the-abc-and-us-putting-misconceptions-about-australia-and-refugees-to-rest>
Australia retained responsibility for refugees and asylum seekers, even when 
they were transferred to another state under bilateral arrangements. And where 
transfer arrangements were used, Australia retained the obligation to ensure 
their wellbeing and to find adequate long-term solutions for those found to be 
refugees, Albrecht said.

The UN’s refugee agency maintains that asylum seekers should have their claims 
processed in the territory of the state from which asylum is sought or which 
otherwise has jurisdiction over them. In the case of those now held onManus 
Island <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> or Nauru, that 
would mean processing on Australian soil.

There is significant disquiet politically at the government’s proposed bill – 
the Labor leader,Bill Shorten, described it as “ridiculous … on its face”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/labor-mps-oppose-refugee-ban-despite-leadership-saying-it-will-wait-and-see>
– and it may breach Australia’s international legal obligations.

Article 31 of the refugees convention <http://www.unhcr.org/en-au/3b66c2aa10> 
– to which Australia is a party and legally bound – prohibits states from 
imposing any sanction or punishment on an asylum seeker because of the way in 
which they arrived, or imposing any permanent restriction on movement.

“States shall not impose penalties, on account of their illegal entry or 
presence, on refugees who … enter or are present in their territory without 
authorisation,” the convention states.

“States shall not apply to the movements of such refugees restrictions other 
than those which are necessary and such restrictions shall only be applied 
until their status in the country is regularised or they obtain admission into 
another country.”

Greg Barns of the Australian Lawyers Alliance said if the bill were passed it 
was “likely to be scrutinised critically by the high court” and could be ruled 
unconstitutional.

“The court has made it clear the government has international obligations and 
that it is not above the law when it comes to people’s rights. To ban a person 
simply on the basis of mode of transport might be a step too far.”

The government has defended the proposed legislation, with the immigration 
minister, Peter Dutton, saying the legislation did not breach any of 
Australia’s international obligations.

“The legal advice is very clear … there are no constitutional issues here … 
and we are absolutely confident in terms of the constitutionality and that we 
meet our international obligations.

Dutton said the new law would enable third-country resettlement. “We are keen 
to get people off to third countries if they can’t return to their country of 
origin,” he said. “We are working with a number of countries now.

 “What we don’t want is if somebody is to go to a third country that they 
apply for a tourist visa or some other way to circumvent what the government’s 
policy is by coming back to Australia from that third country.”

The proposed legislation is widely seen as a pre-emptive move ahead of an 
announcement on third-country resettlement options for those held on Manus and
Nauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru>. It would be a legislative 
instrument to prevent people resettled elsewhere from then applying to come to 
Australia by another migration channel.

Both offshore detention centres have been plagued by systemic physical 
violence and sexual assault of detainees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/17/australian-immigration-regime-on-nauru-an-open-air-prison-and-akin-to-torture-says-amnesty>
, epidemic rates of mental health damage, and acts of self-harm and suicide, 
including public self-immolation.

The Nauru files: the lives of asylum seekers in detention detailed in a unique 
database – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-the-lives-of-asylum-seekers-in-detention-detailed-in-a-unique-database-interactive>
Within the upper echelons of the immigration department, it is widely accepted 
the two offshore islands are unsustainable solutions, and, in the words of one 
department official “they are ticking time bombs”, for further acts of 
self-harm, violence and unrest, unless other options are found.

The government is furiously working diplomatic channels to secure a 
third-country resettlement deal and, internally at least, believes a deal with 
a new country can be brokered in coming months.

Publicly the government maintains that Cambodia is a viable resettlement 
option for those on Nauru but it is conceded inside the department that the 
attempt to encourage people to go there has been a catastrophic and costly – 
more than $40m – failure, resettling only one person so far.

Ministers have resolutely refused to be drawn on possible resettlement 
countries, but the US, Canada, the Philippines, New Zealand and Malaysia (which 
would now be legal after being struck down by the high court in 2012) are those 
most commonly discussed.

But it is understood Australia’s search for a suitable third-country has 
extended across the globe and it appears likely any deal might need to involve 
several countries to clear both islands.

The rhetoric surrounding the proposed legislation, reinforcing the position 
that those who arrive by boat will never be allowed into Australia, is seen by 
the government as vital “messaging” to potential asylum seekers in the region 
who might be willing to consider a boat journey to Australia.

It is also aimed at those on Nauru and Manus, aimed at encouraging them to 
accept a third-country resettlement deal when it is offered.
 