
On the face of it, it was just another end-of-term party: wine, fruit juice 
and crisps under a screen showing jokey videos of course highlights and 
affectionate tributes to teachers. Outside the London pubs were buzzing at the 
end of a summer day. But there was music in Arabic, chatter in Hebrew and fond 
farewells from students from the front lines of the world’s most intractable 
conflict.

 In the 12 years since the launch of the Olive Tree scholarship programme 
<http://www.city.ac.uk/olive-tree/about-us> 58 Palestinians and Israelis have 
graduated from City University – their degree studies supplemented by dialogue, 
interaction and debate. On top of the routine challenges of student life they 
have had to deal with terrible distractions: two days earlier Palestinian 
gunmen had shot dead four Israelis in the heart of Tel Aviv and the entire 
occupied West Bank was sealed off.

Other low points were three wars over Gaza (the last one, in 2014, killed 
2,100 Palestinians, many of them civilians, and 66 Israeli soldiers) and 
another betweenIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> and Hezbollah 
in Lebanon. Yet throughout them the students attended classes together, shared 
apartments and reached out across the Middle Eastern divide in a unique 
environment that – most agree - enabled them to better understand the conflict 
that has shaped their lives. Back home most would probably never have met.

“The programme provided us with a special space that neither Israeli nor 
Palestinian could experience in the region,” was the conclusion of Stav 
Shaffir, who graduated from City in sociology and journalism 2009 and is now a 
celebrated social activist and the youngest member of the Knesset in Jerusalem.

 Ahmed, born to Palestinian refugee parents in Libya and raised in Nablus, 
studied engineering in the first cohort, and, like several other former 
students, has been able to stay on in London. He is certain he benefitted from 
being able to talk to the enemy. “Everyone was able to listen to each other,” 
he says. “I gained a tremendous amount of knowledge, though I still don’t know 
how to resolve the conflict.” He remains good friends with Gilad, who runs a 
Tel Aviv radio station.

“The Olive Tree changed my life,” the Israeli says, joking that the worst 
problem with Ahmed and a second Palestinian flatmate was that they were both 
heavy smokers and wouldn’t do the washing up. “We were all radicalised - in a 
good way: that means relying on politics in a way that can make an impact.”

 Many argue that the real value of the experience was prolonged exposure to 
the other side - not the fleeting, inevitably charged encounters of brief 
dialogues run by well-meaning intermediaries. There is little talk of 
solutions: “It’s not about peace, too simple, too sure/ It’s about journey and 
depth and the will to endure” - goes a poem penned in the programme’s honour.

 Haneen, graduating with a politics degree this summer, is a Palestinian 
citizen of Israel who speaks fluent Hebrew. So for this 22 year-old the chief 
novelty was meeting not Jews but fellow Palestinians from Gaza, shut off from 
their compatriots by a decade long-blockade that has helped keep Hamas in 
power. “If all Israelis were like my classmates things would be easier,” she 
reflects. “But what’s happening back home is so deadly it’s not going to be 
solved any time soon.”

 On the Palestinian side, where there is often fierce opposition to any kind 
of “normalisation” with Israel or Israelis, most prefer not to give their full 
names. Adel, from southern Gaza, has not even told his family he is on the 
programme. “They wouldn’t understand. Maybe I will tell them – after the next 
war. Now I just feel more sorry for both peoples.”

Niztan, the Israeli who compered the farewell event, felt she had more in 
common with Palestinians – food and slang - than the Brits she encountered, she 
said during an earlier discussion 
<http://www.city.ac.uk/olive-tree/forum/talking-to-the-enemy>. Bahaa, from 
Bethlehem, now a presenter with an Arabic TV channel in London, agreed. “It 
gave me chance to talk to the other, the enemy. We have more things in common 
than disliking English weather.”

 The party was doubly poignant because the entire programme, not just another 
academic year, is now ending due to rising costs and increased calls on 
philanthropic giving. Work will continue on a research project on conflict 
resolution in general.

 And it brought thoughtful reflections as well as expressions of gratitude to 
the conveners, Rosemary Hollis, a professor of politics, and Damian Gorman, a 
writer from Northern Ireland who applied some of the province’s lessons to the 
even harsher conditions of the holy land. Hollis talked about how hard it is to 
explain exactly what the programme has achieved. But she had a simple summary: 
“If you can get enemies to learn from each other – not to agree- that can be 
valuable.”

Gilad’s personal moment of truth came during the Israeli army’s Operation Cast 
Lead in Gaza in 2009, when he refused to report for reserve duty with his army 
unit, mobilised to put an end to Hamas rocket fire. “How could I take part in 
this butchery when the relatives of the people I know and call my friends are 
there on the other side?” he said. “This is the lasting effect of Olive Tree: 
it was a humanising project, one that continues to counter the ongoing 
dehumanisation of the other side that has proved so effective in recent years.”
 