
The US and Russia have united to condemn the Nice attack  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/nice-attack-leaves-84-dead-and-france-in-shock>
and to identify the war in Syria as the world’s principal “incubator” for 
terrorism as they discuss tightening coordination to handle the five-year 
crisis.

The US secretary of state, John Kerry, and his Russian counterpart, Sergei 
Lavrov, began a meeting in Moscow with a moment of silence for the victims of 
the atrocity, with Kerry expressing “absolute abhorrence for the incredible 
carnage”.

Kerry said: “The problem is that you and I and other foreign ministers and 
leaders are now doing this almost on a weekly basis, and nowhere is there a 
greater hotbed or incubator for these terrorists than inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

Mohamed Lahouaiej-Bouhlel: who was the Bastille Day truck attacker?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/bastille-day-truck-driver-was-known-to-police-reports-say>
“People all over the world are looking to us ... to find a faster and more 
tangible way of them feeling that everything that is possible is being done to 
end this terrorist scourge and to unite the world in the most comprehensive 
efforts possible to fight back against their nihilistic and depraved approach 
to life and death.”


The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, sent a message of condolence to 
France’s François Hollande, saying: “Russia knows what terror is and the threat 
it poses to all of us ... and we have sympathy for and solidarity with the 
French people. The crime in Nice was committed with particular cruelty and 
cynicism. We can only defeat terrorism with joint efforts.”

Washington and Moscow have been negotiating a plan to increase military and 
intelligence coordination in Syria to defeat Islamic State and the 
al-Qaida-affiliated Jabhat al-Nusra, despite disagreements over the fate of 
Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, and mounting concern among Syrian rebels 
that Assad will be strengthened in the name of fighting terrorism.

But a Moscow press conference was repeatedly delayed. Talks stopped in the 
early evening after six hours for a visit to sign the book of condolences at 
the French embassy.

The Nice attack was also condemned by religious and political leaders across 
the Muslim and Arab world as well as on Arabic-language and English social 
media. Egypt’s grand mufti lambasted “saboteurs who follow Satan (who will) be 
damned in this life and in the hereafter”.


Similar sentiments were expressed by the popular Saudi cleric Sheikh Salman 
al-Auda, who said the killer would be cursed by “God, his angels and all human 
beings”. Many comments on social media attacked Muslims. Saudi religious 
scholars also warned that the world should not be distracted from the war in 
Syria and what it called crimes by the “Syrian regime”.

Egypt’s Al-Azhar University, Sunni Islam’s leading centre of learning, said 
that the “vile terrorist attack” contradicted Islam and called for “uniting 
efforts to defeat terrorism and rid the world of its evil”.


In Iran, the ministry of foreign affairs strongly condemned the “criminal 
terrorist attack”. Terrorism would be eradicated “only with international 
cooperation and consensus”, it said.

The Tunisian government said that the attacker, who police said held joint 
French-Tunisian citizenship, had committed an act of “extreme cowardice” and 
expressed solidarity withFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> 
against the “scourge of terrorism”.


‘Some parents are so shocked they can’t speak’ – Nice children’s hospital 
treating victims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/some-parents-are-so-shocked-they-cant-speak-nice-childrens-hospital-treating-victims>
Saudi Arabia and its Gulf neighbours issued a joint statement saying that they 
“strongly” condemned the “terrorist” act in Nice. “The Gulf Cooperation Council 
states stand in solidarity with the French republic following this cowardly 
criminal incident whose perpetrators have been stripped of all moral and human 
values,” said the bloc’s secretary general, Abdullatif al-Zayani.

The Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, condemned “in the strongest terms 
the vile terrorist attack”, his office said. The Arab League chief, Ahmed Abul 
Gheit, also denounced the “craven terrorist attack”.

Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, said in a statement: “Israel 
strongly condemns the terrible terror attack. Israelis stand united with the 
French people. Israel is willing to help the French government fight this evil 
until it is defeated.”


The Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, also wrote to Hollande, 
denouncing the “cowardly act in the strongest terms”.


The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said: “Terror has no religion, 
ethnic and nation. The perpetrators of this bloodthirsty attack have nothing to 
do with humanity. In fact, this barbaric have no place in this world.”


In Pakistan, the prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, said the government and people 
of Pakistan were “deeply saddened” by the attack. “Being the frontline state in 
the war against terror, Pakistan itself has suffered immensely and has seen a 
series of tragedies,” he said. President Ghani of Afghanistan called the attack 
a “brutal and unforgivable crime, unjustifiable under any circumstances”.
 