
The US and Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> will take their 
newfound climate alliance to the next level on Thursday, advancing efforts to 
curb emissions of methane, a powerful warming agent produced at fracking sites 
and tar sands, ageing oil installations and pipelines.

Thursday’s meeting in Ottawa represents one of the last chances to grow on the 
climate partnership agreed on by the US president, Barack Obama, and Canadian 
prime minister, Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/08/barack-obama-and-justin-trudeau-to-join-forces-on-climate-change>
, before the president leaves the White House.

The US and Canadian leaders enjoyed a mind meld on climate change, according 
to Gina McCarthy, who heads the Environmental Protection Agency.

“We have real kindred spirits in Canada right now, and a tremendous interest 
on the part of prime minister Trudeau and president Obama to really work 
together,” McCarthy told a breakfast hosted by the Christian Science Monitor.


Obama and Trudeau agreed last month to cut methane emissions from the oil and 
gas industry by up to 45% from 2012 levels by 2025. The understanding was a 
break with the pro-energy policies ofStephen Harper, the former prime minister, 
who had lobbied heavily for the Keystone XL pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/16/canada-election-stephen-harper-fossil-fuel-backfires>
.

McCarthy said the US-Canadian initiative and other such partnerships were a 
key part of Obama’s efforts to use his presidency to shore up the Paris climate 
change agreement.

“I think the president has brought a visibility to the issue in a way no 
president has before,” she said. “He has been using more of his personal time 
to connect with leaders in other countries. I think if you ask anyone, that 
changed the dynamic in Paris.”


Now it falls to McCarthy and Catherine McKenna, Canada’s environment and 
climate change minister, to find ways of making those cuts during Thursday’s 
talks.


 McKenna publicly fretted about the difficulties of navigating between 
provinces such as Ontario and Quebec, which this week launched new clean energy 
initiatives, and energy producers Alberta and Saskatchewan whose economies 
depend heavily on fossil fuels.

“I’m a realist on this,” she told a forum in Ottawa 
<http://www.torontosun.com/2016/04/03/sensible-talk-from-trudeaus-point-person-on-climate-change>
 last week. “There are a lot of people who have lost jobs in Alberta. I’m not 
saying that we destroy our planet. But I think we need to be thoughtful of how 
we move forward.”

Methane is more than 80 times more warming than carbon dioxide over 20 years, 
and scientists are increasingly concerned that fugitive emissions from ageing 
oil and gas infrastructure could overwhelm other efforts to reduce climate 
pollution.

McCarthy said the officials would be looking at how to reduce emissions along 
the entire oil and gas production and supply chain – from mining sites to 
pipelines.

The EPA is already in the process of cracking down on methane emissions from 
new and existing oil and gas wells. Alberta, which is Canada’s biggest 
oil-producing province, committed to a 45% cut in methane emissions last 
November.

But methane is a moving target, McCarthy admitted. As the fracking boom got 
underway, the EPA drastically underestimated emissions from the oil and gas 
industry – by nearly 30%, according to the agency’s own figures. The EPA now 
has more work to do just to get an accurate measure of the powerful climate 
pollutant, McCarthy said.
 