
Harold Varner III and Australian Ashley Hall have snatched a share of the lead 
with Queenslander Andrew Dodt at the Australian PGA Championship at Royal Pines.

Recommencing after late storms washed away Thursday afternoon’s play, 
Victorian Hall birdied four of his final seven holes on Friday morning to go 
seven-under.

The trio hold a one-shot lead over Australian Matthew Griffin, who finished 
his interrupted round at six-under par on Friday morning.

Tiger Woods returns with one-over-par round at Hero World Challenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/tiger-woods-returns-one-over-par-round-hero-world-challenge>
Meanwhile Varner’s move to the top came after he birdied his final two holes, 
finishing his run on Thursday where he went one-under at four consecutive holes 
midway through his round.

“It was a good way to finish,” Varner said.

“I’ve played it well. I just want to keep doing that. There’s a lot of golf 
left.”

Varner lost a playoff at last year’s championship at the Gold Coast course, 
finishing tied for second.

Griffin was the other form player of Friday morning, getting birdies on five 
of six holes on the back nine to rocket up the leaderboard.

He’s one shot ahead of New Zealander Ryan Fox and Julian Suri, while world No7 
Adam Scott is tied for seventh after he birdied his final three holes on Friday 
to go in at four-under par.

And while Scott admits he did have the best of the conditions on Thursday he 
believes he is best placed to capitalise if the winds pick up as expected on 
the weekend.


“Anything getting tougher should play into my favour,” Scott said.


“Because I think you’ve got to hit the greens and I’m a good ball-striker and 
if I hit more greens than anyone then I think I’m going to be in good shape 
this weekend.”


Last year’s winning score at the course was an even-par – shot by Nathan 
Holman, Dylan Frittelli and Harold Varner III, before Holman won in a playoff – 
as competitors struggled to contend with howling winds across the four days.


It was a stark contrast to the seven-under-65 struck by Queenslander Andrew 
Dodt on Thursday morning to give him the daily lead, which Scott finds himself 
three shots behind.


2013 champion, Scott, missed last year’s tournament, but said he doesn’t 
expect conditions to be as benign when he gets back on the course sometime on 
Friday afternoon.


“I expect (Friday) afternoon to be a lot tougher,” he said.
 