
Three weeks out from the real thing, Vern Cotter’s World Cup plans are 
comfortably on track.Having squeezed home with a late try in Turin last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/22/italy-scotland-world-cup-warm-up>
, a much stronger Scotland – seven guaranteed World Cup starters were relieved 
of their cotton-wool blankets and played for the first time – were far too much 
for a weaker Italy side.

Italy 12-16 Scotland | Rugby World Cup warm-up match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/22/italy-scotland-world-cup-warm-up>
So after going almost a year without a victory Scotland head for Paris and a 
buoyant France, with the momentum of two wins, the second a record over Italy, 
in a week. By then Cotter will have given the organisers his squad then, 24 
hours later on Tuesday, announce the 31, many of whom formed the core of 
Saturday’s starting XV, playing with considerable self-belief and ambition from 
the start.

By half-time, with the score at 21-7 and replacements about to ruin continuity 
if not the flow of tries, the game was in the bag and the Mexican wave about to 
lap the stadium. A sunny day at Murrayfield, it seemed a long way from the dog 
days of the Six Nations whitewash. Not that the coach was entirely happy: “It 
was a mixed bag,” Cotter said, “three tries came from intercepts which says 
something. We threw a few balls on the ground and have to be more accurate. 
There is certainly a lot more to be done, but we are improving.”

With Cotter thought to have sorted most positions the few issues to be decided 
included who would partner Tommy Seymour on the wing, with both the candidates 
getting a start – Tim Visser, who once scored tries for fun, but had not 
crossed the whitewash in a year, on the left and Sean Lamont, whose 34-year-old 
legs have now earned him 96 caps on the other. The head scratching will 
continue as they both scored twice. It was the Glasgow man who stole an early 
lead in this particular talent contest getting on the end of Finn Russell’s 
ninth-minute chip for the first try and then adding a intercept try 52 minutes 
later.

Visser will have earned brownie points for industry only to lose them for 
failing to control a chip which then ricocheted into the arms of Michele 
Campagnaro for Italy’s try. Against that Visser did run in a third Scotland try 
18 minutes after the break and followed it with an eye-catching 70-metre dash 
for his second.

Then there was the question of the centres. Like England, Scotland have 
issues, but rather in reverse with the gamble being whether Alex Dunbar will be 
fit in time after knee surgery in March, or whether the starters Mark Bennett, 
always constructive and Peter Horne, plus Matt Scott, this time coming off the 
bench and Richie Vernon, in reserve answer the question without the orthopaedic 
worries.

Finally there is the back-row conundrum and the question of John Barclay, the 
Scarlet who was all over the breakdown and drove over for the second try but 
who has been ignored by Scotland for the past 18 months, as opposed to John 
Hardie, a late Kiwi import. Ryan Wilson, described by Cotter this week as 
exceptional but returning after a ban imposed following an assault in a kebab 
shop, also did his case no harm.

For a nation which still dotes on memories of John Jeffrey and Findlay Calder 
it would be quite something to field a back row in the first match against 
Japan without any of them born in Scotland. However, with David Denton from 
Zimbabwe, the Kiwis Blair Cowan and Hardie, plus the South African Josh 
Strauss, who only meets the three-year residency qualifications the day after 
the tournament starts, that is entirely possible.

Up front all eyes were on the meeting of the front rows, Matias Agüero, 
Leonardo Ghiraldini and Martin Castrogiovanni, versus Alasdair Dickinson, Ross 
Ford and new boy WP Nel for Scotland, very much centre of attention after a 
decade of Euan Murray at tighthead.

Nel, seen as something of a coup for Edinburgh when they brought him from the 
Free State Cheetah’s specifically with Scotland in mind, got his first taste of 
Test rugby in Turin but made first start and there was much back-slapping when 
the pack won penalties at the first three scrums, the second leading to Greg 
Laidlaw giving Scotland the lead in the fifth minute.

Nel may not be the biggest prop at the World Cup but has the reputation of a 
scrummager and the Scotland pack continued to eke out the penalties. Paris will 
tell us more.
 