
Tales of Victor Dubuisson’s demise may be greatly exaggerated. This maverick 
Frenchman, a Ryder Cup player only two years ago, has rather disappeared from 
mainstream view in the meantime. He also had two major top 10s in 2014; in the 
seven he has played since, Dubuisson has missed five cuts.

The 26-year-old served notice that he remains a force to be reckoned with in 
Dubai, courtesy of a 64 at the DP World Tour Championship. Dubuisson, who has 
slipped to 93rd in the world, holds a one-shot lead over Tyrrell Hatton, 
Matthew Fitzpatrick and another renaissance man, Nicolas Colsaerts, with 18 
holes to play. Colsaerts and Fitzpatrick arrived in contention courtesy of 66s, 
with Hatton faring one shot worse.

This is quite the congested picture. As darkness fell at the end of the third 
day, which had been disrupted by morning desert fog, 11 competitors were within 
five shots of Dubuisson’s 13-under-par aggregate. The prospect of further 
weather issues on Sunday morning means that the final round will be played in 
three-balls; ominously for the European Tour, given the timing delays that may 
ensue, a play-off has to be a live possibility.

Lee Westwood hopes camera slip does not cost him Dubai glory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/lee-westwood-dubai-world-tour-championship-sergio-garcia>
Lee Westwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lee-westwood> played his final 
four holes in three under par for an 11-under 54-hole total. This marked an 
impressive recovery from Westwood, who had taken six at the par-five 14th. 
“I’ve got a good chance,” Westwood said. “This is a good position to be in.” 
The 43-year-old can draw on experience, having won here in 2009.

Round of the day was produced by Rafa Cabrera Bello, who rattled around the 
Earth Course in 63 to put himself alongside Westwood and Francesco Molinari, 
just two from the lead. “It’s been a very good year for me,” said Cabrera 
Bello. “I pretty much accomplished every single goal, and many of my childhood 
dreams as well. I’m just trying to get my third European Tour win now and I’m 
really happy to have put myself in a position, hopefully, to do so tomorrow.

“It’s been a great season for me, regardless of what happens tomorrow. It’s 
just really nice to go to bed tonight knowing that I will have a chance of 
winning this season’s final event. I’m just glad to be in that position.”

Henrik Stenson made what may well prove a decisive step towards the European 
Tour’s order of merit title with a back nine of 32 before signing for a 70. 
Stenson is five under par, which, crucially, is now six clear of Danny Willett 
with that Race to Dubai crown in mind. The Masters champion slipped to a 76 on 
day three, continuing what has been a curiously inconsistent spell.

Rory McIlroy admits he was ‘too proud and too stubborn’ over putting problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/rory-mcilroy-too-proud-stubborn-putting-problem>
Alex Noren could yet upstage Stenson. Noren’s 69 moved him to minus seven and, 
so, with possibilities on Sunday’ to bridge a €600,000 gap to his compatriot. 
Given Noren’s run of four victories in 11 starts, including the Nedbank 
Challenge last week in South Africa, it would be folly to write off his chances.

Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> rued “turning a 
62 into a 68”. The Northern Irishman’s position of eight strokes from the lead 
means he requires something miraculous to successfully defend his title. 
McIlroy’s frustrations were summed up on the final hole, where he found water 
from the middle of the fairway and so dropped a shot where at least a birdie 
had seemed likely. “It was one of those days,” McIlroy said. “I hit a lot of 
good shots and didn’t really hole many putts.

“I played much better than the score suggested. I gave myself so many chances 
out there; I had a look at birdie most holes and couldn’t really take advantage 
of it. I could have posted a low score, but it just wasn’t meant to be.

“It’s OK. I’ve got a great afternoon of sport coming up; I’m going to go home 
and sit myself on the couch, and watch a couple of football matches and a rugby 
match, and all will be well.”

Four major championships and tens of millions of pounds in the bank are 
clearly useful when it comes to the application of perspective.
 