
The anti-EU Vote Leave campaign group has been forced to revise a list of more 
than 250 business supporters after it emerged that the names of two leading 
figures were wrongly included.

Supporters of Britain’s membership of the EU said that the Vote Leave letter 
published on Saturday, which was designed to show that credible business 
leaders support an EU exit and to which the list of names was attached, had 
fallen apart.

Vote Leave amended its list after David Ross, the co-founder of Carphone 
Warehouse, and John Caudwell, the co-founder of Phones 4U, said their names had 
been wrongly included.

A spokesman for Ross told the Sunday Times: “Mr Ross has not made any 
commitment at all. We have no idea where this has come from. Mr Ross will make 
a decision one way or the other when he gets back from his Easter break in a 
couple of weeks.”

A spokesman for Caudwell said he had not added his name to the list although 
he has supported a UK exit from the EU. “You have to question how this list has 
been compiled,” the spokesman told the newspaper.

The row is a setback to Vote Leave, which is working hard to overcome the 
perception that the pro-EU camp has the overwhelming support of British 
businesses. The letter was published on Saturday in conjunction with a YouGov 
poll which found that only 14% of more than 1,000 small or medium-sized 
businesses felt that the EU made it easier for businesses to employ people.

The pro-EU Britain Stronger in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> group said that the list did 
not include a single leader of a FTSE 100 company. It had earlier highlighted a 
survey which found that 82% of UK businesses favoured membership of the EU.

The mix-up over the names is an echo of the embarrassing row when Downing 
Street was forced to apologise after wrongly including the retired SAS 
commander General Sir Michael Rose in a list of retired military figures who 
supported EU membership. Vote Leave seized on the mistake to accuse No 10 of 
“trying to bully people into backing the EU”.

Nick Herbert, chairman of Conservatives In, said that Vote Leave’s claim that 
it has the support of business leaders had fallen apart. Herbert told the 
Sunday Times: “Less than 24 hours after its launch, the Vote Leave business 
letter is falling apart. Some of those named on the letter say they never 
signed it, many are not business ‘leaders’ at all – there isn’t a single FTSE 
100 [chief executive] among them – and others have publicly admitted Brexit 
would cause severe damage to Britain’s economy.”

A Vote Leave spokesman said: “Mr Ross’s name was included on our supporters 
list in error. We apologise for any confusion that has been caused. John 
Caudwell has been listed as a supporter of the campaign since he signed up in 
October last year. He has now been removed.”
 