
The World Anti-Doping Agency is expected to call for the power to set its own 
sanctions against non-compliant countries in the wake of this summer’s farce 
over Russia’s involvement in the Rio Olympics.

Sunday’s meeting in Glasgow of its board, at which the president, Sir Craig 
Reedie, is expected to be re-elected for another three-year term, is due to 
feature discussion of a paper that recommends more powers forWada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada>.

It is set to be the latest round in a bruising debate over the future of the 
anti-doping movement after the International Olympic Committee ignored Wada’s 
recommendation thatRussia be banned from the Rio Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/15/russian-rio-olympic-hopes-recede-wada-report>
 over the systemic state-sponsored doping programme uncovered byProfessor 
Richard McLaren’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/18/wada-report-russia-sochi-winter-olympics>
. Wada came under vicious, coordinated attack from IOC members in Rio and again 
last week in Doha at a meeting of the Association of National Olympic 
Committees.

The IOC has been leading its own series of Olympic summits to try to plot a 
way forward for anti-doping, but appears reluctant to give up control of its 
power over whether countries can compete in the Games.

Under its proposal, Wada would define “non-compliance” for the first time on a 
sliding scale of seriousness and be given the power to set sanctions ranging 
from warnings and fines to full suspension of a country in the event of 
industrial scale state-sponsored doping.

Reedie has promised to battle on as Wada president despite being attacked from 
both sides, with critics not seeing him as independent enough given his IOC 
membership. He has also faced blame from the “Olympic family” for recommending 
the Russia ban in the wake of McLaren’s report.

Wada is also expected to highlight its determination to focus on 
investigations of the kind that led to the eventual exposure of the full scale 
of state-sponsored doping in Russia, albeit only after the media led the way.

The recent appointment of Günter Younger, a former head of the cybercrimes 
unit for the German police, as director of intelligence and investigations is 
set to lead to a renewed focus in that area, with plans to increase the unit’s 
staff from two to six. But greater concentration on investigations will also 
require greater funding. Reedie has previously suggested that broadcasting and 
sponsorship income could help add to its $30m (£24.5m) budget, currently split 
equally between the IOC and governments from around the world.

But following the recent Olympic Summit called by Thomas Bach, the IOC 
president appeared to downplay that idea. Bach has also defended the IOC’s 
handling of the crisis in the summer, saying he was comfortable with the 
decision to allow individual sports to decide whether to allow Russian athletes 
to compete.

The global anti-doping watchdog is due to discuss its governance arrangements, 
amid calls for greater independence from sport, and publish a full 
whistleblower’s policy for the first time, including details of the protection 
and support Wada will provide.

Britain’s sports minister, Tracey Crouch, will attend the meeting on Sunday, 
the first since she was appointed as one of five government representatives 
from Europe. “It is vital that we take a unified approach to tackle doping in 
sport and work together across countries and continents to ensure best practice 
in testing, education and intelligence,” Crouch said. “The integrity of sport 
is absolutely paramount and the message has to be clear - that drug cheats will 
have no place to hide.”
 