
Arts journalism is a fairly low-stakes gig. Your newsroom colleagues will 
break stories, field lawsuits, protect their sources and occasionally risk 
their lives – and you will marvel at their bravery through the haze of a mild 
opening-night hangover.

Public humiliation is about as bad as it gets, as the New York Times’ TV 
critic Mike Halefound out last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/22/new-york-times-review-pans-series-but-then-admits-critic-saw-it-in-wrong-order>
.

In a review of Amazon’s new legal drama Goliath, Hale criticised the show’s 
“split personality”, “narrative juggling” and its “needlessly complicated 
structure”. He wrote: “Presumably because the first episode leaves so much 
unanswered, the next jumps back in time to fill in the history of the case — 
and when the second episode ends, the story hasn’t even caught up to where it 
started.”

New York Times review pans series – but then admits critic saw it in wrong 
order
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/22/new-york-times-review-pans-series-but-then-admits-critic-saw-it-in-wrong-order>
On 18 October the Times issued a correction: Hale had watched the first two 
episodes in the wrong order.

We’ve all been there. To prove it, Guardian Australia’s arts writers offer 
their worst mistakes. Prepare to cringe.

Van Badham, arts critic and columnist

Crime against criticism: Got it wrong, badly.

It’s 2004, I’ve just finished my undergraduate degree with a scriptwriting 
major, and I am convinced I know everything. I’m employed as a reader for an 
actor agency; it’s my job to read and assess scripts and hand a report to the 
agent, who then decides if the project is worth considering for their talent.


After writing these reports for months I’m at the point where I am totally 
cocky about it, and I get given this script for a horror film that the agency 
says there’s a “lot of heat” about.

And I read it and I hate it. Nothing seems to happen for the first 40 pages, 
then there’s this orgy of gratuitous violence towards women that just 
infuriates me. I write the report to end all reports, excoriating this script 
in – ahem – non-ambiguous terms. The movie is so appalling, I insist, it will 
destroy forever the career of any actor who appears in it.

I learned later that the report was so brutal it was passed around quite a 
broad circle of agents and industry types. Our agency passed on the project and 
none of our actors were cast.

The movie was Wolf Creek, and it turned out to be the most commercially 
successful Australian movie in years. The part of the villain went to John 
Jarratt, who got on the Hollywood radar and ended up working with Tarantino. I 
never worked as a script reader again.

Elle Hunt, journalist

Crime against criticism: Didn’t swap names.

Last year I was due to interview a member of Death Cab for Cutie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/25/death-cab-for-cutie-review-a-reminder-of-who-you-used-to-be>
 at a music festival. The instruction from the PR was to meet at a picnic table 
in the outdoor backstage area in the early evening. I sat down and was 
eventually joined by a man who initiated conversation without introducing 
himself. Only about 90 seconds into our “interview” – when he noticed I was 
recording our chat – did it become apparent he was in fact a label guy.

I learned a lot about humility that day
Andrew Stafford 
I think it made his night but he did promise not to tell anyone.

Andrew Frost, art critic

Crime against criticism: Did swap names.

I somehow confused the artist Charles Blackman with John Blackman, the voice 
over guy from Hey Hey It’s Saturday. The piece sailed through subbing and into 
print, where Charles was referred to as John throughout.

A friend of mine used to brutally remind me of that stuff-up for many years, 
until she did a gig as a guest editor of an issue of an art magazine, which had 
the cover line “Artists of the 21st Millennium”.

Thankfully she’s never mentioned the Charles/John thing again. 

Andrew Stafford, music critic and columnist

Crime against criticism: Missing humility.

I’m sure I’ve made a few howlers in my time writing about music, but what 
really sticks with me is the time I bumped into the Go-Betweens’ Grant McLennan 
in a record store just a few weeks before he died.

We were chatting as we flipped through the racks of CDs and he pulled out a 
copy of PJ Harvey’s Stories from the City, Stories from the Sea and went on a 
passionate rave about it. I demurred; I was a big fan of her early work and 
wasn’t so enamoured with this new, glossy version of Polly.

Grant asked me what I didn’t like about it and I said something like I didn’t 
think her songwriting was on the same level as her earlier work. Grant had a 
lazy eye which veered disconcertingly off to one side, but at that moment I 
caught him looking right through me. “Really?” he said.

He had a little lopsided grin on his face and at that moment I realised the 
absurdity of my position, dissing one of the great songwriters of the age to 
another – and never having written a song in my life.

I have a Matt Groening Life in Hell strip stuck to my fridge called “How to be 
a Feisty Rock Critic” which serves as a constant reminder that my career choice 
is vaguely ridiculous, and I have never felt more ridiculous than I did in that 
moment. I learned a lot about humility that day.

Marcus Teague, music critic

Crime against criticism: Missing recording.

It was the EP launch of a beloved Sydney band at a beloved Sydney pub, so I 
pretended to be deeply familiar with both
Steph Harmon 
I was the editor of pop culture title TheVine <http://thevine.com.au/> when 
the opportunity for a face-to-face interview with PJ Harvey popped up. A 
lifelong fan, I jumped at the chance.

On the allotted day I headed down to the theatre where she was performing that 
night, and was led through a labyrinth of passageways to a tiny dressing room. 
I sat down, placed my voice recorder and notebook on a bench, and waited for 
Polly while wrestling with my nerves. Finally, she arrived alone, quietly said 
hello, closed the door behind her, and sat down opposite me, knee-to-knee, 
waiting for my questions.

Knowing she doesn’t suffer fools, I was determined to not waste her time. 
Polly’s eyes are big – alien, almost – and as we held eye contact and chatted 
about the intense themes of her new record for 45 minutes, it was all I could 
do to not congratulate myself for conducting such a great, in-the-moment chat 
straight off the top of my head. So much so that afterwards, as I wandered 
blinking out into the sunshine, it was with great horror I discovered I hadn’t 
recorded a single word of it. I’d been so intent on having a natural 
conversation with one of my idols I hadn’t actually pressed record. Like a 
journalist would.

Steph Harmon, culture editor

Crime against criticism: Faked it, badly.

I cut my teeth on music blogs, writing terrible album reviews packed with 
empty platitudes, phrases I didn’t understand (“the rhythm section is 
undeniable, but far too high in the mix”), and generic, gendered words like 
“chanteuse”. After a few years I was ready to cover my first live show. Haha, 
just kidding, no I wasn’t.

It was the EP launch of a beloved Sydney band at a beloved Sydney pub, so I 
pretended to be deeply familiar with both. I referred to the guitarist by the 
nickname I was pretty sure his friends used, and described the venue as if I’d 
been there dozens of times.

The memory of my misplaced enthusiasm has taken on the nebulous form of a 
fever dream: Did I really say that? In print?
Clem Bastow 
“The lead singer is making lots of eye contact with the drummer, which makes 
for a very cohesive sound,” I wrote, exhibiting exactly zero understanding of 
how music works. I thought the band sounded just fine (probably all that eye 
contact!), but there was one problem I couldn’t get over: before they came on, 
the curtain had been lowered over the stage to “build hype” and a “pretentious 
aura of importance that this rough and ready band don’t deserve”. The worst 
part? They made us wait for their performance.

The day after it was published, I read the comments and learned four things: 
the curtain drop was apparently a venue tradition; it takes time for bands to 
swap backlines; the guitarist with the nickname hadn’t played that night; and I 
was an idiot.

Clem Bastow, columnist

Crime against criticism: Backstreet’s back, oh no.

Match the withering review to the movie – quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/14/match-the-withering-review-to-the-movie-quiz>
Somehow, dazzled by the genuine magnificence of the Backstreet Boys’ downbeat 
comeback single Incomplete (the music video for which 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WVe80iZtlYU> featured the Boys walking away 
from a variety of near-death experiences; brilliant!), I decided that the 
just-OK accompanying album was worthy of a four-and-a-half star review – 
Christ, it might actually have been five.

The review is, mercifully, not online, and my copy now exists only in some 
long-decommissioned hard drive, which means the memory of my misplaced 
enthusiasm has taken on the nebulous form of a fever dream: “Did I really say 
that?In print?”

I have always been prepared to go in to bat for pop music, particularly when 
other critics consider it chintzy or not worthy of genuine critical examination 
– but,come on, Clem-in-2005. 
 