
Dear allies,

Forgive me if I briefly take my eyes off the prize to brush away some flies, 
but the buzzing has gone on for some time. I have a grand goal, and that is to 
counter the Republican right with its deep desire to annihilate everything I 
love and to move toward far more radical goals than the Democrats ever truly 
support. In the course of pursuing that, however, I’ve come up against the 
habits of my presumed allies again and again.

O rancid sector of the far left, please stop your grousing! Compared to you, 
Eeyore sounds like a Teletubby. If I gave you a pony, you would not only be 
furious that not everyone has a pony, but you would pick on the pony for not 
being radical enough until it wept big, sad, hot pony tears. Because what we’re 
talking about here is not an analysis, a strategy, or a cosmology, but an 
attitude, and one that is poisoning us. Not just me, but you, us, and our 
possibilities.

Leftists explain things to me

The poison often emerges around electoral politics. Look, Barack Obama does 
bad things and I deplore them, though not with a lot of fuss, since they’re 
hardly a surprise. He sometimes also does not-bad things, and I sometimes 
mention them in passing, and mentioning them does not negate the reality of the 
bad things.

The same has been true of other politicians: the recent governor of my state, 
Arnold Schwarzenegger, was in some respects quite good on climate change. Yet 
it was impossible for me to say so to a radical without receiving an earful 
about all the other ways in which Schwarzenegger was terrible, as if the 
speaker had a news scoop, as if he or she thought I had been living under a 
rock, as if the presence of bad things made the existence of good ones 
irrelevant. As a result, it was impossible to discuss what Schwarzenegger was 
doing on climate change (and unnecessary for my interlocutors to know about it, 
no less figure out how to use it).

So here I want to lay out an insanely obvious principle that apparently needs 
clarification.There are bad things and they are bad. There are good things and 
they are good, even though the bad things are bad. The mentioning of something 
good does not require the automatic assertion of a bad thing. The good thing 
might be an interesting avenue to pursue in itself if you want to get anywhere. 
In that context, the bad thing has all the safety of a dead end. And yes, much 
in the realm of electoral politics is hideous, but since it also shapes quite a 
bit of the world, if you want to be political or even informed you have to pay 
attention to it and maybe even work with it.

Instead, I constantly encounter a response that presumes the job at hand is to 
figure out what’s wrong, even when dealing with an actual victory, or a 
constructive development. Recently, I mentioned that California’s current 
attorney general, Kamala Harris, is anti-death penalty and also acting in good 
ways to defend people against foreclosure. A snarky Berkeley professor’s 
immediate response began: “Excuse me, she’s anti-death penalty, but let the 
record show that her office condoned the illegal purchase of lethal injection 
drugs.”

Apparently, we are not allowed to celebrate the fact that the attorney general 
for 12% of all Americans is pretty cool in a few key ways or figure out where 
that could take us. My respondent was attempting to crush my ebullience and 
wither the discussion, and what purpose exactly does that serve?

This kind of response often has an air of punishing or condemning those who 
are less radical, and it is exactly the opposite of movement- or 
alliance-building. Those who don’t simply exit the premises will be that much 
more cautious about opening their mouths. Except to bitch, the acceptable 
currency of the realm.

My friend Jaime Cortez, a magnificent person and writer, sent this my way: “At 
a dinner party recently, I expressed my pleasure that some parts of Obamacare 
passed, and starting 2014, the picture would be improved. I was regaled with 
reminders of the horrors of the drone programme that Obama supports, and 
reminded how inadequate Obamacare was. I responded that it is not perfect, but 
it was an incremental improvement, and I was glad for it. But really, I felt 
dumb and flat-footed for being grateful.”

The emperor is naked and uninteresting 

Maybe it’s part of our country’s puritan heritage, of demonstrating one’s own 
purity and superiority rather than focusing on fixing problems or being 
compassionate. Maybe it comes from people who grew up in the mainstream and 
felt like the kid who pointed out that the emperor had no clothes, that there 
were naked lies, hypocrisies and corruptions in the system.

Believe me, a lot of us already know most of the dimples on the imperial 
derriere by now, and there are other things worth discussing. Often, it’s not 
the emperor that’s the important news anyway, but the peasants in their revolts 
and even their triumphs, while this mindset I’m trying to describe remains 
locked on the emperor, in fury and maybe in self-affirmation.

When you’re a hammer everything looks like a nail, but that’s not a good 
reason to continue to pound down anything in the vicinity. Consider what needs 
to be raised up as well. Consider our powers, our victories, our possibilities; 
ask yourself just what you’re contributing, what kind of story you’re telling, 
and what kind you want to be telling.

Sitting around with the first occupiers of Zuccotti Park on the first 
anniversary of Occupy, I listened to one lovely young man talking about the 
rage that his peers, particularly his gender, often have. But, he added, fury 
is not a tactic or a strategy, though it might sometimes provide the necessary 
energy for getting things done.

There are so many ways to imagine this mindset – or maybe its many mindsets 
with many origins – in which so many are mired. Perhaps one version devolves 
from academic debate, which at its best is a constructive, collaborative 
building of an argument through testing and challenge, but at its worst 
represents the habitual tearing down of everything, and encourages a subculture 
of sourness that couldn’t be less productive.

Can you imagine how far the civil rights movement would have gotten, had it 
been run entirely by complainers for whom nothing was ever good enough? To hell 
with integrating the Montgomery public transit system when the problem was so 
much larger!

Picture Gandhi’s salt marchers bitching all the way to the sea, or the 
Zapatistas, if subcomandante Marcos was merely the master kvetcher of the 
Lacandon jungle, or an Aung San Suu Kyi who conducted herself like a caustic 
American pundit. Why did the Egyptian revolutionary who told me about being 
tortured repeatedly seem so much less bitter than many of those I run into here 
who have never suffered such harm?

There is idealism somewhere under this pile of bile, the pernicious idealism 
that wants the world to be perfect and is disgruntled that it isn’t – and that 
it never will be. That’s why the perfect is the enemy of the good. Because, 
really, people, part of how we are going to thrive in this imperfect moment is 
through élan, esprit de corps, fierce hope and generous hearts.

We talk about prefigurative politics, the idea that you can embody your goal. 
This is often discussed as doing your political organising through 
direct-democratic means, but not as being heroic in your spirit or generous in 
your gestures.

Leftwing vote suppression

One manifestation of this indiscriminate biliousness is the statement that 
gets aired every four years: that in presidential elections we are asked to 
choose the lesser of two evils. Now, this is not an analysis or an insight; it 
is a cliche, and a very tired one, and it often comes in the same package as 
the insistence that there is no difference between the candidates. You can 
reframe it, however, by saying: we get a choice, and not choosing at all can be 
tantamount in its consequences to choosing the greater of two evils.

But having marriage rights or discrimination protection or access to 
healthcare is not the lesser of two evils. If I vote for a Democrat, I do so in 
the hopes that fewer people will suffer, not in the belief that that option 
will eliminate suffering or bring us to anywhere near my goals or represent my 
values perfectly. Yet people are willing to use this “evils” slogan to wrap up 
all the infinite complexity of the fate of the Earth and everything living on 
it and throw it away.

I don’t love electoral politics, particularly the national variety. I 
generally find such elections depressing and look for real hope to the 
people-powered movements around the globe and subtler social and imaginative 
shifts toward more compassion and more creativity. Still, every four years we 
are asked if we want to have our foot trod upon or sawed off at the ankle 
without anaesthetic. The usual reply on the left is that there’s no difference 
between the two experiences and they prefer that Che Guevara give them a spa 
pedicure. Now, the Che pedicure is not actually one of the available options, 
though surely in heaven we will all have our toenails painted camo green by El 
Jefe.

Before that transpires, there’s something to be said for actually examining 
the differences. In some cases not choosing the trod foot may bring us all 
closer to that unbearable amputation. Or maybe it’s that the people in question 
won’t be the ones to suffer, because their finances, healthcare, educational 
access and so forth are not at stake.

An undocumented immigrant writes me 
<http://www.syracusenewtimes.com/newyork/article-5931-undocumented-immigra.html>
: “The Democratic party is not our friend: it is the only party we can 
negotiate with.” Or as a Nevada activist friend put it: “Oh my God, go be 
sanctimonious in California and don’t vote or whatever, but those bitching 
radicals are basically suppressing the vote in states where it matters.” 
Presidential electoral politics is as riddled with corporate money and 
lobbyists as a long-dead dog with maggots, and deeply mired in the manure of 
the status quo – and everyone knows it. (So stop those news bulletins, please.) 
People who told me back in 2000 that there was no difference between Bush and 
Gore never got back to me afterward.

I didn’t like Gore, the ex-NAFTA-advocate and pro-WTO shill, but I knew that 
the differences did matter, especially to the most vulnerable among us, whether 
to people in Africa dying from the early impacts of climate change or to the 
shift since 2000 that has turned our nation from a place where more than 
two-thirds of women had abortion rights in their states to one whereless than 
half of them <http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/gpr/15/1/gpr150114.html> have 
those rights. Liberals often concentrate on domestic policy, where education, 
healthcare, and economic justice matter more and where Democrats are sometimes 
decent, even lifesaving, while radicals are often obsessed with foreign policy 
to the exclusion of all else.

I’m with those who are horrified by Obama’s presidential drone wars 
<http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0086EF89K/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=tomdispatch-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B0086EF89K>
, his dismal inaction on global climate treaties and his administration’s 
soaring numbers of deportations of undocumented immigrants. That some of you 
find his actions so repugnant you may not vote for him, or that you find the 
whole electoral political system poisonous, I also understand.

At a demonstration in support of Bradley Manning this month, I was handed a 
postcard of a dead child with the caption: “Tell this child the Democrats are 
the lesser of two evils.” It behoves us not to use the dead for our own 
devices, but that child did die thanks to an Obama administration policy. 
Others live because of the way that same administration has providedhealth 
insurance <http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/05/us/politics/05health.html> for 
millions of poor children or, for example, reinstatedenvironmental regulations 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2012/09/18/866681/permitting-poison-in-the-air-means-more-money-for-the-romney-ryan-campaign/>
 that save thousands of lives.

You could argue that to vote for Obama is to vote for the killing of children, 
or that to vote for him is to vote for the protection for other children or 
even killing fewer children. Virtually all US presidents have called down death 
upon their fellow human beings. It is an immoral system.

You don’t have to participate in this system, but you do have to describe it 
and its complexities and contradictions accurately, and you do have to 
understand that when you choose not to participate, it better be for reasons 
more interesting than the cultivation of your own moral superiority, which is 
so often also the cultivation of recreational bitterness.

Bitterness poisons you and it poisons the people you feed it to, and with it 
you drive away a lot of people who don’t like poison. You don’t have to punish 
those who do choose to participate. Actually, you don’t have to punish anyone, 
period.

We could be heroes 

We are facing a radical right that has abandoned all interest in truth and 
fact. We face not only their specific policies, but a kind of cultural decay 
that comes from not valuing truth, not trying to understand the complexities 
and nuances of our situation, and not making empathy a force with which to act. 
To oppose them requires us to be different from them, and that begins with both 
empathy and intelligence, which are not as separate as we have often been told.

Being different means celebrating what you have in common with potential 
allies, not punishing them for often-minor differences. It means developing a 
more complex understanding of the matters under consideration than the 
cartoonish black and white that both left and the right tend to fall back on.

Dismissiveness is a way of disengaging from both the facts on the ground and 
the obligations those facts bring to bear on your life. As Michael Eric Dyson 
recentlyput it 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2012/9/7/effective_evil_or_progressives_best_hope>
, “What is not good are ideals and rhetorics that don’t have the possibility of 
changing the condition that you analyse. Otherwise, you’re engaging in a form 
of rhetorical narcissism and ideological self-preoccupation that has no 
consequence on the material conditions of actually existing poor people.”

Nine years ago I began writing about hope 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/677/>, and I eventually began to refer to my 
project as “snatching the teddy bear of despair from the loving arms of the 
left”. All that complaining is a form of defeatism, a premature surrender, or 
an excuse for not really doing much. Despair is also a form of dismissiveness, 
a way of saying that you already know what will happen and nothing can be done, 
or that the differences don’t matter, or that nothing but the impossibly 
perfect is acceptable. If you’re privileged you can then go home and watch bad 
TV or reinforce your grumpiness with equally grumpy friends.

The desperate are often much more hopeful than that – the Coalition of 
Immokalee Workers <http://www.ciw-online.org/>, that amazingly effective 
immigrant farmworkers’ rights group, is hopeful because quitting for them would 
mean surrendering to modern-day slavery, dire poverty, hunger, or death, not 
cable-TV reruns. They’re hopeful and they’re powerful, and they went up against 
Taco Bell, McDonald’s, Safeway, Whole Foods and Trader Joe’s, and they won.

The great human rights activist Harvey Milk was hopeful, even though when he 
was assassinated gays and lesbians had almost no rights (but had just won two 
major victories in which he played a role). He famously said, “You have to give 
people hope.”

In terms of the rights since won by gays and lesbians, where we are now would 
undoubtedly amaze Milk, and we got there step by step, one pragmatic and 
imperfect victory at a time – with so many more yet to be won. To be hopeful 
means to be uncertain about the future, to be tender toward possibilities, to 
be dedicated to change all the way down to the bottom of your heart.

There are really only two questions for activists: what do you want to 
achieve? And who do you want to be? And those two questions are deeply 
entwined. Every minute of every hour of every day you are making the world, 
just as you are making yourself, and you might as well do it with generosity 
and kindness and style.

That is the small ongoing victory on which great victories can be built, and 
you do want victories, don’t you? Make sure you’re clear on the answer to that, 
and think about what they would look like.

Love, Rebecca

• The headlines on this article were amended on 7 July 2016 to better reflect 
the intent of the writer
 