
Pity poor George Pell <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-pell>
. He was such a sensitive young priest that even reading about child abuse 
caused him pain. He did it as little as he could.

“I have never enjoyed reading the accounts of these sufferings,” he confessed 
on Thursday. “I tried to do that only when it was professionally absolutely 
appropriate because the behaviour is abhorrent and painful to read about.”

Pell’s pain …

That he said this to a roomful of survivors gathered in the Albergo Quirinale 
in Rome defies belief. And just as incredible is the fact that Pell offered 
this line to clarify his earlier “very poor” words about paedophilia in 
Ballarat being a “sad story” that didn’t interest him much.

Was there no one to tell the cardinal what a terrible idea it was to appeal 
for sympathy in the face of such pain? Where were his advisers? Are they the 
same crew that let him argue last year that paedophile priests and their 
victims are like truck drivers and hitchhikers?

Character is the great subject of cross-examination. Pell has emerged from 
four days harshly exposed. There is so much missing.

George Pell: they didn't tell me because they were worried I might ask 
difficult questions | First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2016/mar/02/george-pell-they-didnt-tell-me-because-they-were-worried-i-might-ask-difficult-questions>
He was wary and had to be. He was rehearsed and that’s no surprise. He told 
the little press conference on the steps of the hotel when the interrogation 
was all over that the most difficult moment for him in the last few days was 
doing his homework: “Reading the transcripts of the way the victims suffered.”

Pell’s pain …

Day after day he punctuated his evidence of knowing nothing about Ridsdale and 
doing nothing about Searson with expressions of sympathy for the victims of 
these apparently licensed paedophiles.

But there was no poetry in the man. His rhetoric seemed cut from cardboard. 

Pell’s supporters say he has a good heart but is clumsy with words. That’s 
hard to credit after watching him for days in the witness box. He knows how to 
work the language. And in any case, what would be more convincing, more moving, 
than awkward words delivered from the heart?

He’s heartfelt when the subject is history. At these moments, Pell beamed as 
he swept the commissioner into the past: “The church has been going for a 
couple of thousand years and our patterns of organisation predate modern 
corporations and, as a matter of fact, are a bit similar to the patterns of 
organisation of the Roman Empire …”

His evidence reveals a man who has thought deeply for years about his reasons 
for doing so little when it counted. He was deceived of course. Then there was 
the pain of reading stories of abuse. But there was more, which he has worked 
up over time into a little philosophy of inaction.

So the commissioners heard Pell’s principles of permissible ignorance and the 
subtle degrees of rumour: “Some are inherently unlikely. Some are of an 
indeterminate nature. Some are plausible.”

Yet Pell acted on none of them. He didn’t ask. He didn’t dig through the 
files. He never investigated for himself. He left these ugly problems to the 
responsible authorities. He passed them up the line. So a priest who pulled a 
knife on a little girl was left in his parish because the archbishop said 
nothing could be done.

At times Pell seemed to be heading towards a confession, one he could never 
make. The sin the cardinal had to get off his chest makes sense of his life and 
career: it’s the sin of obedience.

“I did what I was asked,” he said, “and was happy at that time to do just 
that.”

Where was alarm? He was always so cool. Was this career priest ever urgently 
worried about the fate of these children? Where is the evidence of his human 
sympathies?

Time and again he claimed not to be “plugged in” to the life of the diocese of 
Ballarat, though he lived and worked at the very heart of the diocese. But 
where’s the evidence this career priest is plugged into life?

Pell is tough. He emerged from the Quirinale with a friendly and rather weary 
smile. “I’m a bit tired,” he told the waiting journalists. He has high hopes 
for the royal commission and for his own testimony: “I hope that my appearance 
here has contributed a bit to healing, to improving the situation.”

In Sydney the lawyers packed their bags and the survivors hugged one another.

Over the years they’ve become an oddly functional family: here is the boy who 
warned Pell in the dressing room, the headmaster sacked for trying to get rid 
of Searson, the child Ridsdale raped while his church looked the other way.

They hope Pell is finished. They’ll be back for the commission’s verdict 
sometime in winter. And of course Rome will have to make up its mind.
 