
Labour will fight the next general election campaign without any plans for 
spending cuts, the shadow chancellorJohn McDonnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell> has said.

After the party’s leader, Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, said George Osborne’s 
budget was laced with “unfairness at its very core”, the shadow chancellor 
pledged to eliminate the current budget deficit by stimulating greater economic 
growth and leading a more effective crackdown on tax avoidance.

McDonnell, who has said that Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> would balance the budget but 
would permit borrowing to fund capital investment, said: “We will invest in 
growth and we will also have a fairer taxation system … We’re not going to come 
back and say we are supporting cuts. No.”

The remarks by McDonnell came as Corbyn said the budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-george-osborne-sugar-tax-growth-forecast-falls>
 marked the culmination of six years of failure as he reeled off a series of 
targets the chancellor has missed.

In one of his strongest performances at the dispatch box, Corbyn said: “The 
budget the chancellor has just delivered is actually the culmination of six 
years of his failures. It’s a recovery built on sand on a budget of failure. 
He’s failed on the budget deficit, failed on debt, failed on investment, failed 
on productivity, failed on trade deficit, failed on the welfare cap, failed to 
tackleinequality in this country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/18/poverty-inequality-uk-poorer-countries-sustainable-development-goals-climate-change-womens-rights>
.”

In a briefing after the budget, McDonnell said Osborne had delivered a “budget 
of failure” – failing to deliver growth or meet his target to ensure debt falls 
as a proportion of GDP or deliver his target to double UK exports.

The shadow chancellor believes that Osborne’s failures provide an opportunity 
for Labour to highlight his own “fiscal credibility rule”. This echoes the 
plans outlined by Ed Balls in the last parliament to balance the current budget 
but to permit government borrowing to fund capital projects.

McDonnell said: “We will invest in growth and we will also have a fairer 
taxation system … If we have a fairer taxation system, it will render us into a 
situation where we can avoid [cuts]. On the OBR [Office forBudget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> Responsibility] forecasts before this – 
to balance the budget there was no need for cuts.

“Let me make it clear as well, and I gave this commitment to the parliamentary 
Labour party, we are going to do exactly as we said during Jeremy’s campaign. 
When we go back into government, we will have zero-based budgeting, we will 
examine every penny of expenditure to ensure it is effectively and efficiently 
spent.”

McDonnell believes that his plans show that Labour is fiscally credible 
without embracing, as Corbyn said, austerity as a “political choice” by 
targeting an overall budget surplus. In hisbudget statement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/budget-2016-george-osbornes-speech>, 
Osborne said he would aim to move from a fiscal deficit of £21.4bn in 2018-19 
to an overall budget surplus of £10.4bn in 2019-20.

The shadow chancellor said: “We are not aiming for a £10bn surplus. He still 
is. Through creative accountancy, he may well meet that surplus. But we will 
see as we move on.”


In his response to the budget, Corbyn stuck to a largely pre-prepared script 
as he sought to deliver two core messages: Osborne had failed to meet his own 
targets as chancellor and presided over growing unfairness. Corbyn focused on 
Osborne’s overall record, rather than examining specific details of the budget, 
as he lambasted the chancellor’s achievements during his six years at the 
Treasury.

The Labour leader pointed to what he described as a gulf between what the 
Tories expected from the wealthiest and from ordinary taxpayers as he 
highlighted what have been labelledsweetheart tax deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/03/george-osborne-google-tax-labour>
. He said: “The mates’ rates deals for big corporations on tax deals is 
something they will be forever remembered for. This is a chancellor who has 
produced a budget for hedge fund managers more than for small businesses.”

A team of high-profile Labour backbenchers, who had feared that Corbyn would 
struggle in his response to the budget, organised their own coordinated 
response. The MPs – including several who have ministerial experience or have 
held senior shadow cabinet portfolios – made a series of interventions in the 
House of Commons and toured the television studios to put across their own 
version of Labour’s response after Osborne delivered his eighth budget.

Chuka Umunna, who briefly joined last year’s leadership race before pulling 
out, and Chris Leslie, the former shadow chancellor, are both part of a group 
working separately from the shadow cabinet to beef up Labour’s economic 
credibility.

Leslie, the MP for Nottingham East, asked the prime minister a question about 
whether Osborne had unwisely squandered the £27bn forecasting windfall he was 
handed by the independent Office for Budget Responsibility in November’s autumn 
statement.

He said: “We’re all here to help: we have got to make sure that we step up to 
the plate and give proper scrutiny to the government.”

McDonnell has signed up a team of well-respected experts as advisers, 
including Nobel prize-winner Joseph Stiglitz, and the French star economist 
Thomas Piketty.

But some senior party backbenchers fear his message that Osborne’s economic 
recovery is “built on sand” will fail to restore Labour’s reputation for 
economic competence.

Allies of Corbyn played down the significance of the backbench alliance, 
saying the leader would continue to hold the chancellor to account for “six 
years of failure”.

However, the grouping of economics specialists thinks of itself as Labour’s 
“first 11”. Fellow Labour MPs have dubbed it the “G10”, a grouping of those who 
refused to serve in Corbyn’s shadow cabinet that meets regularly before the 
weekly gathering of the parliamentary Labour party.

Other Labour MPs appear to be sceptical about the group, painting them as an 
exclusive “cool gang” who believe themselves the rightful rulers of the Labour 
party. One MP said the effort was hopelessand they should realise they are 
making matters worse by setting themselves up to look like Blairite plotters.

One of the MPs described their approach as a “show not tell” plan in which the 
backbenchers make arguments to try to persuade members who backed Corbyn that 
there may be a more voter-friendly alternative.

But some see their regular gatherings as laying the groundwork for former 
paratrooper Dan Jarvis to launch a leadership challenge while not including him 
directly so he can deny direct involvement.

A row erupted over Jarvis’s backers last week, when Ken Livingstone, the 
former mayor of London who is close to Corbyn, described his decision to take 
money from a hedge fund tycoon as,“like Jimmy Savile funding a children’s group”
 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/politics/2016/mar/11/ken-livingstone-stands-by-dan-jarvis-hedge-fund-comments>
.

Greg Hands, the chief secretary to the Treasury, said: “More spending, more 
borrowing and more taxes. Labour would put our economic security at risk by 
burdening our children with more debt than they could ever hope to repay.

“The chancellor today published figures showing that if we had listened to 
Labour then cumulative borrowing would have been £930bn more by the end of the 
decade than it is now forecast to be.

“Labour still haven’t learned their lesson and at a time of global economic 
uncertainty, we should stick to our plan and not put the economy at risk.”
 