
When you’re at a British airport, do you ever reflect to yourself that the 
experience simply isn’t irritating enough? As you climb out of your shoes and 
stand, shy and barefoot, on a grimy concourse, do you think: “They could do 
more to wind me up”?

As you laboriously decant asthma inhalers and contact-lens solution into a 
clear plastic bag, do you think: “They could do more”?

As you throw a half-full bottle of apple juice in a bin, do you think: “They 
could do more”?

As a haughty help-desk attendant delights in informing you that no, of course 
there is no “smoking lounge” because why should the flawless authori-bots who 
make the rules leave room for human weakness, do you think: “They could do 
more”?

As you watch an embarrassed old lady forced to empty her entire hand luggage 
in front of an unsmiling official as a “terror check” triggered by her 
forgetting to remove a lipstick from an outside pocket, do you think: “They 
could do more”?

As you get on to the plane and sit for two hours on the tarmac because, 
although you bought your ticket nine months ago, the scheduled departure seems 
to have come as a surprise to air traffic control who haven’t given it a slot, 
do you think: “They could do more”?

As you wait and wait and wait and wait under a sign in the baggage hall that 
doesn’t even tell you which carousel your suitcase will be coming to, never 
mind when it’s coming, do you think: “They could do more”?

Well, good news! They’re doing more.

The Home Office has confirmed that travellers are to be charged up to £17.50 
to “fast-track” through passport control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/11/travellers-face-5-charge-to-get-through-passport-control-more-quickly>
 when they arrive at British airports. So you will soon have the opportunity 
either to pay a fee in order to fulfil the legal requirement of showing your 
passport, or not pay it and watch other people walk ahead of you into your own 
country purely by virtue of being richer. All animals are equal but some are 
more equal than others, I guess.

This is disgusting – and I say that as someone who’s happy to throw money 
around at airports. And that’s “throw” like Fatima Whitbread threw the javelin.

In 2006, when I won first prize in a poker tournament (the kind of money that 
one is traditionally meant to spend on cars, coke and hookers), I horrified 
fellow gamblers by paying off my mortgage. I also joined a gym, which was 
marginally more expensive than paying off the mortgage, but there was still a 
bit of money left. With this, I decided to create a “first-class flight fund”.

That was my crazy act of self-indulgence; where other people might have bought 
a Ferrari or had their boobs done, I ringfenced a bankroll solely for the 
purpose of first-class air travel. Discovering in later years that a) business 
class is cheaper but often nicer than first, and b) once you start buying 
expensive flights, they give you enough air miles to get lots of free ones 
anyway, I haven’t flown economy since.

The reason I chose that particular splurge is I’m absolutely terrified of 
flying. I don’t mean nervous. I don’t mean jumpy. I mean sobbing as the plane 
taxis down the runway. I mean strangers offering to hold my hand. I mean people 
10 rows behind going: “Is that the woman fromHave I Got News For You, shouting 
the Lord’s Prayer at the drinks trolley?”

Travelling business class helps – not in the sense of taking the edge off with 
creature comforts, because I’m too scared to enjoy them, but because it means 
you’re very near the cabin crew. They are nearly always good at reassurance and 
will often let you speak to the pilot before takeoff.

Look at it another way: when I’m at an airport, I’ve usually spent the best 
part of three grand on a reclining seat and metal cutlery. Plus, I genuinely 
think I’m about to die. So, trust me, I am not slow to put my hand in my pocket.

I have no problem with most of the perks that come with this ludicrous 
extravagance. I’m happy to use a special, queue-free “bag drop”. I’ve got no 
guilt about being allowed an extra piece of hand luggage, or knowing I’ll 
definitely get the nice meal rather than the inexplicably horrible second 
choice they offer (by row 47, it’s always: “I’m afraid the roast chicken is now 
finished but wedo have plenty of the beetroot and bison-sperm salad…”).

I’m fine with all that. It’s a fair fight; I get a mouthful of chicken and an 
extra bag of magazines, economy passengers get the comfort of knowing they 
haven’t pissed thousands of pounds up the wall on basically nothing. All of the 
really annoying stuff – the stuff I listed at the beginning – still happens if 
you fly first class. That’s why the super-rich get their own planes.

Certainly, the experience of coming into the country is the same. And so it 
bloody should be. A UK passport-holder returning to her home country should be 
welcomed back: not sneered at, not treated with unwonted suspicion, and 
certainly not made to wait while someone else pays to skip ahead. Don’t get me 
wrong; if they bring in the fast track, I’ll pay the money and do it, but I 
don’t want to be allowed to.

This is a huge symbolic moment. If this goes ahead, we are openly saying that 
it’s OK to pay a public servant for preferential treatment. It’s not even 
secret bribery, it’s state-approved favouritism.

And of all public servants, a border guard! That’s like your mum giving your 
brother his Christmas dinner ahead of you because he earns more money. It 
mustn’t work like that. Coming home is coming home.
 