
Marmite, Brexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>: both are 
sticky, strongly flavoured and loved or hated in about even measure. So it is 
rather appropriate that the row and ensuing panic over a hike in the price of 
the yeasty spread was the moment when we could say that we passed peak euphoria 
for the Brexiters.

In the immediate aftermath of the referendum, they felt entitled to be 
extremely pleased with themselves. They won when most of them expected to lose. 
They destroyed the prime minister who tried to stop them and punched the 
establishment in the mouth. Remainers who had warned that divorcing the EU 
would unleash severe economic shocks were left looking a bit foolish because 
those consequences did not materialise immediately.

The Outers had a success during the referendum in persuading many voters to 
ignore the “so-called” experts on the other side and their cautions that there 
would be a steep bill to pay. You may recall that some of those much-derided 
experts did predict that Brexit would trigger a fall in the value of the pound 
with the result that the prices of many household goods would go up. You may 
also recall that this was dismissed as “scare-mongering” by “Project Fear”.

Now some of the consequences of Brexit are beginning to knock on the door. The 
loudest knock – more of an almighty crash, actually – is thetumble in the value 
of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/british-shoppers-told-to-expect-price-rises-after-steep-fall-in-pound>
. It has slumped a long way against the euro and plunged even more dramatically 
against the dollar. “Take back control” served the Outers well as a referendum 
campaign slogan. It was probably their most effective persuader. It was also a 
highly misleading guide to what would happen in a world in which a government 
does not have unalloyed sovereignty even over its currency. A pound is only 
worth as much as the world is willing to pay for it. If the world starts to 
believe that Britain’s economic prospects have darkened and that the country 
has become a less attractive destination for foreign investment, then the world 
will be less inclined to hold pounds. If the world starts to think that Britain 
is becoming less politically stable, a more unpredictable place to do business 
and a more risky country to lend to, then the world will be even less 
enthusiastic about owning pounds.

The slumping value of sterling tells us that this is exactly what the world 
now thinks. Markets are reacting to a government that is on a trajectory 
towards a “hard” Brexit that will be incompatible with remaining within the 
single market and may well see Britain’s departure from the European customs 
union as well. Companies are becoming spooked as they grasp how protracted the 
negotiation with the EU is going to be. Those company bosses who have managed 
to secure time with the ministers in charge of the process come away not 
reassured by the conversations, but more disturbed. They shudder that the 
people who are supposed to be directing the process don’t really know what they 
are doing or agree with one another about where they are headed.

The Brexiter ministers continue to insist that ultimately the EU will want to 
give Britain a sweetheart deal

The pound has become a “political currency” and not in a good way. It would be 
a mistake to think that the rest of the globe follows every cough and splutter 
of our domestic debates, but they do hear enough of it to catch the general 
drift. The noise coming out of the mouths of senior Tories at their party 
conference was belligerent enough to be heard everywhere. It broadcast the 
message that Mrs May’s Britain is turning hostile to talent and investment from 
abroad. The government has since rowed back on some of it, executing a forced 
retreat from the idea of compelling businesses to declare how many of their 
staff are from other countries, but the overall tone still echoes in everyone’s 
ears.

The martial music played by senior Tories is now being reciprocated from the 
other side of the channel. There is a toughening of the language being used by 
EU leaders and even by figures who were originally seen as conciliators. Donald 
Tusk, the president of the European Council, has generally been regarded as 
more sympathetic to Britain and more willing to help achieve a gentle 
uncoupling rather than an acrimonious rupture. A member of the cabinet to whom 
I spoke recently identified Mr Tusk as the man they hoped that they could do 
business with rather than Jean-Claude Juncker and a European commission that is 
seen as determined to follow a “punishment strategy” of maximising the pain 
inflicted on Britain for jilting the EU. Yet it was Mr Tusk who last week made 
a point of ridiculing the “cake philosophy” of Boris Johnson, as in you can 
have your cake and eat it. Oh no you can’t, retorted Mr Tusk. He invited any 
adherents to the foreign secretary’s brand of magical thinking to conduct a 
simple experiment. Buy a cake, consume it and then take a look at what is left 
on the plate. The choice for Britain, he declared, was not soft or hard Brexit, 
buthard Brexit or no Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/its-hard-brexit-or-no-brexit-at-all-says-eu-council-president>
. That is a precise echo of what the hard Brexiters in Mrs May’s government are 
saying.

The Brexiter ministers continue to insist that ultimately the EU will want to 
give Britain a sweetheart deal. Everything coming back from the other side 
suggests the opposite and for entirely understandable reasons. European leaders 
are not wavering in the clarity with which they declare that Britain cannot be 
seen to get a better deal from being outside the EU than it had as a member. 
They will be able to give that message in person to Mrs May this week when she 
travels to Brussels for her first European Council as prime minister.

There is a risk to making any comment on the falling pound; the risk is to be 
accused of being a poor loser, a “Remoaner”, a miserable naysayer who refuses 
to embrace the wonderful vista of opportunities that are presented by having a 
collapsing currency. It is true that there are some upsides to a plunging 
pound. It will make some British exports more competitive, provided that their 
manufacture doesn’t rely on a lot of imported parts. Higher prices for things 
made abroad may encourage Britons to reduce their appetite for imported goods, 
which would help to close our yawning trade deficit. The cut-price pound will 
also make Britain a bargain destination for tourists. Nigel Farage will be able 
to celebrate all the extra foreigners that Brexit is drawing to our shores.

But it is another delusion to think that devaluation is a perfect economic 
tonic. If it were that, Britain should already be the envy of the world. Since 
we came off the gold standard in the 1930s, when a pound bought five dollars, 
this country has experienced a lot of devaluations, planned and unplanned. If 
making your currency cheaper was the route to riches, our streets ought to be 
encrusted with diamonds by now.

The main political consequence of a falling pound will be felt in a spike in 
inflation. We will be paying more for petrol, clothing, food, electrical goods 
and all the other stuff that this country buys from abroad. Inflation, which 
has been dormant for a considerable period, is set to have a resurgence in its 
salience as a political issue. The governor of the Bank of England is right to 
say that these price rises will inflict the hardest hit on those least able to 
bear it, because people on lower wages spend proportionately more of their 
income on the things that are going to get more expensive. A rise in inflation 
will also impact on the cost of anything that is index-linked, which means 
paying more for everything from rail fares to water.

It is already worrying ministers that increased inflation will also have a 
significant knock-on effect for the government’s finances, which weren’t 
exactly in rude health before this happened. Among other things, it will make 
it more expensive for the government to keep its pricey promise to increase the 
state pension by at least inflation. It will add further pressure on public 
services, not least the NHS. If the cost of living is going up, public sector 
workers will think they deserve a compensating rise in pay and will become 
seriously discontented if they don’t get it. Mrs May inherited a policy of 
freezing benefits and credits for lower-paid workers. The pain for those 
subjected to that freeze will be increased if their cost of living is 
escalating. Private sector workers will either extract wage rises from their 
employers to offset increases in prices, with all the further consequences that 
has, or they will suffer a degradation in their living standards. The number of 
people who are only “just about managing”, to use Mrs May’s phrase, will 
increase. So will the number who can’t manage.

But I don’t want to sound like a “Remoaner”, so I am delighted to report that 
there will be one group of people for whom a plunging pound is very good news 
indeed. London property has just become massively cheaper if you are a foreign 
buyer. For holders of dollars and euros and other “citizens of the world”, the 
sale is now on. Britain is becoming a poundland bargain – so long as you don’t 
actually earn your living here.
 