
The former Olympic Stadium, now home to West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited>, is facing operational 
losses running into millions of pounds for years to come due to problems 
finding a naming-rights partner and hugely increased costs for retractable 
seating, the Guardian can reveal.

How West Ham struck the deal of the century with Olympic Stadium move
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/west-ham-deal-century-olympic-stadium>
In the wake of the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, ordering an inquiry into the 
rising costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/sadiq-khan-mayor-london-west-ham-stadium-inquiry>
 of converting the stadium into a venue suitable for football and athletics, 
the sobering figures are likely to reignite the debate over whetherWest Ham’s 
£2.5m-a-year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/west-ham-olympic-stadium-club-pay-per-season-rent>
 rent represents value for money for the taxpayer.

Proponents of the deal, including the former mayor Boris Johnson, always 
argued that only football offered a future for the stadium free of public 
subsidy.

And yet it is understood that after a naming-rights deal fell through in the 
summer and the full extent of the increased costs of moving the seats back and 
forth to make way for a running track became clear, there is a black hole in 
the budget that makes it unlikely the stadium will break even for the 
foreseeable future.

Inside West Ham’s new home: how football came to 2012’s Olympic Stadium
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/18/west-ham-football-2012-olympic-stadium>
The cost of moving rows of seats from football mode to accommodate the running 
track, and back again, every summer has soared from an estimated £300,000 to an 
extraordinary £8m.

That would have to be paid every year to fully move the seats back from the 
pitch, although if the lower tier of the east stand remains in place – a 
configuration that would still allow athletics to take place as at this year’s 
Anniversary Games – the likely bill drops to between £3m–4m.

However, for next summer’s World Athletics Championships it is understood all 
the stands will have to be rolled all the way back. The Guardian has learned 
the problem began when the stadium owner, faced with rising costs over the new 
roof and other factors, plumped for the cheapest option available when it came 
to retractable seating.

However, it soon became clear it would take at least 15 days to remove the 
lower tiers, even with a team of labourers working 24 hours a day, and the same 
again to put them back.

The implications of the Wembley fiasco
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/mar/08/Olympics2012.politics> 
Costs are so high partly because the seats have to be stored off-site in a 
specific configuration to enable them to be put back again, like a giant jigsaw 
puzzle. That will hit profits when staging non-sporting events like concerts – 
a major revenue generator for E20 and its operating company LS185.

If the process of reconfiguring the stadium takes more than a fortnight, that 
will leave less time to host concerts before athletics takes over for its 
mandated five or six weekends each year. Depeche Mode are among those due to 
play at the London Stadium next summer.

The original quote for moving the seats was given by Alto Seating, a company 
that went into liquidation in October 2015. A new tender document is based on 
the assumption that the total cost would be around £8m if all four stands were 
to be moved, although it is hoped that figure could be reduced over time.

The soaring cost of the retractable seating, always considered a prerequisite 
by West Ham if the stadium was to be suitable for football, will now be one of 
the major focuses for the wide-ranging inquiry ordered by Khan.

Although the mayor is believed to have been advised the contract with West Ham 
appears to be legally binding, he is determined to look into the “full range” 
of financial issues now that the cost of converting the stadium has risen by a 
further £51m to £323m, taking the overall cost of the stadium since the Olympic 
bid was won to £752m.The Football Association spent £757m building the new 
Wembley <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/mar/08/Olympics2012.politics>, 
which opened in 2007.

A proposed naming rights deal with Mahindra, an Indian conglomerate, fell 
through in the summer when negotiations collapsed because E20 – a joint venture 
between London Legacy Development Corporation and Newham council – felt the 
offer was too low. It hopes to bring in more than £4m a year from naming rights.

But sponsorship experts have warned that finding a naming-rights partner for 
the stadium will become increasingly difficult in an unfavourable market as 
time goes on; the venue was established as first the Olympic Stadium and now 
the London Stadium. The operational issues experienced during the opening 
months of West Ham’s tenancy, including the crowd trouble duringlast week’s EFL 
Cup tie with Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/west-ham-ban-200-supporters-trouble-chelsea-london-stadium>
, are also expected to make it less attractive to sponsors.

There is also understood to be concern over whether the stadium configuration 
can be returned to football mode following the World Athletics Championships in 
time for West Ham to play their first home game of the 2017-18 season, despite 
the fact they already have agreement from the Premier League to play their 
first two matches away from the London Stadium.

Finding a naming-rights partner was always a key part of the business plan 
under the original contract agreed with West Ham because the first £4m annually 
of any contract goes directly to E20, with any sum over that amount being 
shared with West Ham.The east London club’s costs are capped at the £15m it 
pledged towards the stadium conversion and the £2.5m a year, variable depending 
on performance payments and various other revenue-sharing clauses, it pays in 
rent. It is more than four years since the LLDC’s predecessor, the Olympic Park 
Legacy Company, first began searching for a naming-rights partner.

Khan has described the financial situation surrounding the stadium as “a real 
mess”. Damian Collins, the Conservative MP who chairs the culture, media and 
sport select committee, welcomed the inquiry. He said it should look into the 
decisions taken during Johnson’s tenure as mayor, but also those taken before 
the Olympics when it was decided to press ahead with a semi-permanent design 
that could be “demounted” to become a 25,000-seat athletics stadium after the 
Games.

“I do welcome this inquiry and I think it should also go back to before the 
building of the stadium to consider the design of it,” said Collins.

“They hoped they would find a use for it afterwards and there was no advance 
planning. If there had been they would have been much more effective at keeping 
their options open.”

Collins said the select committee would consider the outcome of Khan’s review 
before deciding whether to follow up with its own inquiry.

It is understood Khan and his City Hall team found out only recently about the 
issue with the additional £51m overspend and ongoing increase in operational 
costs related to the seating problems.

Yet the LLDC had always indicated it had invested heavily in a retractable 
seating solution that was state of the art. “The big decision was to go for 
full retractable seats,” said the then LLDC chief executive, Neale Coleman, in 
an interview with the Observer last year. “You either do it properly or you 
don’t do it at all.”

The LLDC is likely to argue that any operating losses on the stadium can be 
covered from revenues generated elsewhere on the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, 
including housing developments.
 