
The total cost of converting the Olympic Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-stadium> from an athletics stadium 
into a multi-use venue has soared to £323m, taking the overall cost of West Ham 
United’s new home to £752m – largely borne by taxpayers. How did we get here?

London mayor Sadiq Khan orders inquiry into West Ham stadium costs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/sadiq-khan-mayor-london-west-ham-stadium-inquiry>
How long have you got? The story begins in 2003 when Lord Rogers wrote to Tony 
Blair suggesting a stadium in Stratford built for football with interim use for 
athletics as the centrepiece of any Olympics bid, to be funded by joint tenancy 
between Tottenham Hotspur and West Ham. The Water City scheme foundered over 
land issues. Once the bidwas won in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/jul/06/olympics2012.olympicgames1>, with 
Sebastian Coe’s promise to retain the running track as a legacy for athletics 
one factor in swinging votes, there was a determination to get on with building 
– problems with spiralling costs and delays at Wembley and the embarrassing
Picketts Lock fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2001/oct/05/athletics.arts> (where plans to 
host the 2005 World Athletics Championships had to be abandoned) were weighing 
heavy on the minds of Olympic officials and ministers. Tentative talks with 
football clubs, including West Ham, had proved inconclusive. As such, at a 
fateful meeting of the Olympic board in February 2007, it was decided to press 
on with building an athletics stadium that could easily be become a community 
facility with a 25,000-seat capacity but was harder to convert to a football 
stadium. In effect, discussions over the future use of the stadium were parked.

When did football re-enter the equation? 

With Boris Johnson, and his love of eye-catching projects, replacing Ken 
Livingstone in 2008 and the coalition government coming to power in 2010 the 
idea of finding a solution that would enable the stadium to be retained as a 
larger, dual-use facility gained popularity. In order to make the finances 
work, a Premier League football club was considered a prerequisite. The Olympic 
Park Legacy Company launched a contest for the stadium. Encouraged to provide 
West Ham with some competition by Johnson, Spurs proposed to knock down the 
stadium and rebuild it for football, upgrading Crystal Palace as an athletics 
venue. That idea met a furious backlash from Coe and others involved in the 
Olympic bid who said it would be a betrayal of the promised athletics legacy. 
Following a bitter, controversial battle - including allegations of spying, 
phone hacking and industrial espionage – West Hamwere awarded the stadium in 
February 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/feb/09/west-ham-winning-battle-olympic-stadium>
.

Why did they did not move in sooner? 

The plan for West Ham to take over the stadium was challenged in the courts by 
Spurs and Leyton Orient and the whole plan had to be scrapped when a complaint 
was made to the European Commission on state aid grounds. The contest was 
relaunched, with West Ham – effectively by now the only game in town – this 
time emerging as tenants rather than leaseholders following a long and bruising 
negotiation. The 99-year agreement was finally confirmed in March 2013 and work 
began in earnest to convert the stadium so it could become West Ham’s home 
ground and then used for athletics, concerts and other events in the summer.

What was the bill for the conversion? 

Because the original canopy covered only two-third of the seats, the initial 
estimated cost was £160m to build a new cantilevered roof, the largest of its 
kind in the world – using technology developed for use on North Sea oil rigs – 
and to install 21,000 state of the art retractable seats that would bring the 
lower tiers closer to the action and assuage fears of fans who worried it would 
not be suitable for football. Permanent toilets, catering facilities, executive 
boxes and so on also had to be built. In essence, the stadium had to be almost 
rebuilt from scratch from the inside out as a 54,000 capacity dual-use arena.

Who paid what? 

The largest chunk of funding for the transformation comes from a one-off 
settlement of £148.8m from the exchequer in 2010. On top of that Newham council 
provided £40m through a loan (in return for a 35% stake), almost £40m came from 
the original £9.3bn budget for the Olympics and a further £25m from the 
government. UK Athletics invested £1m and the London Marathon Charitable Trust 
provided £3.5m.

West Ham agreed to pay £15m towards the overall conversion costs, plus a basic 
£2.5m a year in rent. The rest of the conversion budget is funded by London 
Legacy Development Corporation (LLDC). Following a long freedom of information 
battle, campaigners eventually uncovered the detailed terms of the contract – 
including extra payments by West Ham if they succeeded on the pitch but 
reductions in the annual rent if they were relegated. In return the joint 
venture between LLDC and Newham council that owns the stadium meets all the 
running costs. Under various formulae, West Ham also share in profits from 
hospitality and catering.

Critics said West Ham had secured “the deal of the century” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/west-ham-deal-century-olympic-stadium>
 at the expense of the taxpayer. The club, who hoped to use the move from Upton 
Park as a springboard to boost revenues, attendance and their status (as 
signified by adding the word London to their badge), contended that only they 
could offer the stadium a sustainable future free of subsidy and that the deal 
was fair for all parties.

Why did costs rise?

It quickly became clear that the £160m budgeted would not be enough. First, 
the costs rose to £193.3m as a result of difficulties that the constructor 
Balfour Beatty experienced building the cantilevered roof and in the face of 
challenging weather conditions. In June last year the pricerose to £272m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/19/olympic-stadium-cost-rises-west-ham>
. This was presented as a final budget, although with the caveat that costs 
could yet rise further. As the blame game intensified, Johnson turned on the 
pre-Games planners. “A very bad call was made when those in charge at the time 
backed a stadium construction plan that would leave the Olympic Park with a 
much smaller, mouldering and tumbleweed ridden arena following the Games,” he 
said. “Following that plan would have literally torn the heart out of the park 
and put at risk the incredible economic regeneration we are now seeing in east 
London.”

And now the cost has risen even further? 

Yes. It is now estimated that the total bill for the conversion will be at 
least £323m – more than twice the original estimate. Added to the final cost of 
building the Olympic Stadium (put at £429m by the Olympic Delivery Authority) 
the final bill for the rebuilt, renamed London Stadium now stands at £752m.

Why has the bill risen again? 

One factor is that the retractable seats – supposed to be the jewel in the 
crown of the design – have encountered problems that have pushed costs from 
£300,000 to an estimated £8m. It has also emerged that they will take longer to 
shift from football mode to athletics mode than anticipated, threatening the 
revenue-generating potential for the French operators, Vinci, employed on a 
20-year contract. Another factor is the cost of the ambitious wrap and huge 
digital screen that will soon greet fans when they arrive at the stadium. 
Following typically intensive negotiations with West Ham, the E20 Stadium 
Partnership (the special purpose vehicle formed by Newham and LLDC that owns 
the stadium) is meeting most of the costs.

Why has Sadiq Khan, the London mayor, launched an inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/sadiq-khan-mayor-london-west-ham-stadium-inquiry>
 now?

Partly to get to the bottom of what has gone wrong. But also because, 
politically, it makes sense for a Labour mayor to pin the blame for the 
problems on Johnson’s administration. It may not be a coincidence that the new 
inquiry, which will report jointly to Newham council, comes as Khan also 
questions his spending on everything from the regeneration project at Old Oak 
Common in the north-west of the city – like the stadium, this week branded “a 
mess” – to plans for the Garden Bridge over the Thames.

The new inquiry also comes at a particularly sensitive time for LLDC and for 
West Ham. Already under pressure, rightly or wrongly, over the perception that 
West Ham were gifted the stadium at the expense of taxpayers, the first few 
months in their new home have been far from smooth for the east London club. 
Serious problems with the migration of fans from Upton Park and problems with 
stewarding have cast a pall.

Last week, the negative publicity continued with television pictures of fans 
posturing and hurling seats and coins inside the stadium duringthe EFL Cup tie 
against Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/west-ham-chelsea-efl-cup-match-report>
. The various relationships between West Ham, LS185 (the stadium operator), 
LLDC and Newham have remained strained. The new questions over rising costs and 
how they are met will only increase that tension.
 