








My daughter has asked for a Windows laptop for Christmas, for schoolwork and 
games. I’m a Mac user and haven’t set up a Windows machine for many years so 
I’d appreciate any advice ... except “get her a Mac/Linux” from below the line!
Stuart

Windows has changed a lot in the past decade, and now it’s a mobile operating 
system. If your daughter has some experience with Google Android, she’ll 
probably cope quite well. Many of Windows 10’s main features came from the 
mobile world. These include sandboxed apps installed and updated from an online 
store, log-on PINs, touch screens, notifications, a voice-aware intelligent 
assistant (Cortana), location awareness and a “Find my device 
<https://support.microsoft.com/en-gb/help/11579/microsoft-account-find-lost-phone-device>
” feature.

Your daughter should ideally have some information ready before going through 
Windows 10’s “out of box experience”, or OOBE, as it’s known in the trade. Some 
are obvious: country, preferred language, time zone etc. She should also have 
your Wi-Fi password, and a working email address for her log-on. Otherwise, she 
can choose Express Settings to speed up the process. She can change the 
settings later.

Microsoft Accounts

Your daughter can use any email address as her Microsoft account (MSA). It’s 
the Microsoft equivalent of a Google Account (Gmail address) or an Apple ID. 
It’s used to link her laptop to OneDrive cloud storage, the Windows Store, 
Skype,Cortana’s personalisation data 
<https://www.bing.com/account/personalization>, the free online Microsoft 
Office programs etc. It also links her PC to other Windows devices, Android and 
Apple smartphones and tablets, Xbox One games consoles, and so on. Finally, the 
MSA stores the laptop’s activation details (which used to be a product key) and 
encryption keys.

People typically use an existing Microsoft email address. This can be at 
Hotmail, Live, MSN, Outlook.com or whatever. If she doesn’t have one, the
Windows 10 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows-10> set-up procedure 
will create one. However, it’s simpler and less stressful to have one ready to 
go.

When your daughter enters her email address and password, Windows 10’s Mail 
app will automatically download recent emails. If she has used this account on 
a Windows machine before, Windows 10 will offer to set up her new laptop with 
the same settings. This includes her wallpaper (desktop background) and any 
apps she has downloaded from the Windows Store.

Setting up

Once logged on to Windows 10, click the Start button in the bottom left, type 
‘get’ in the Search box and click the “Get Started” app. This introduces most 
of Windows 10’s features, and includes around 50 short videos. The What’s New 
section covers Cortana and the Edge browser. I strongly recommend watching 
Reduce Distractions, a two-minute video in the Ease of Access section. It shows 
how to remove unwanted animations, tiles, pinned programs, and so on.

Frequently used programs should be pinned to the taskbar, though many people 
still keep icons on the desktop. Programs that aren’t used very often can be 
unpinned, then run from the search box, the Start menu, or a live tile.

Next, run the Settings app (cogwheel icon) for simplified access to most of 
Windows 10 settings. It hasn’t completely replaced the old Control Panel, yet, 
but it links to Control Panel pages for more advanced settings.

It’s a good idea to browse Settings just to see what’s where. After that, you 
can find things by typing a few letters into the search box, or by asking 
Cortana.

The System section of the Settings app lists all the programs installed, and 
what they are allowed to do. The Default apps part lets users choose default 
programs for browsing the web, showing photos, playing music and videos, 
collecting emails and so on. These will be the Microsoft programs included in 
Windows 10, until your daughter installs alternatives.

The Personalisation section is for picking a lockscreen photo and wallpapers, 
and for customising the Start menu and Taskbar. It’s where you turn off 
“suggested apps”.

The Privacy section lets you opt out of personalised advertising (ie turn off 
your “advertising ID”), and choose which apps can use which features. Go 
through the Camera, Microphone and Location settings to deny access to every 
program all at once, or allow/deny one app at a time. Apps can’t force you to 
give them permissions they shouldn’t need.

Telemetry

The penultimate entry in Privacy is “Feedback & diagnostics”. Windows versions 
7 to 10 include telemetry, which means the PC sends information to Microsoft 
about how well it’s working. None of this is personal information – it doesn’t 
include the contents of files, chats or emails – and none of it is normally 
accessible to Microsoft staff, or anyone else. The telemetry is used for “big 
data” analysis based on more than 400m Windows 10 systems. Google and Facebook, 
among others, use the same techniques for the same purposes: to find problems, 
and to create more useful and more reliable software.

You can set telemetry data to Basic, Enhanced or Full. The Basic level 
includes the PC’s specification, app use and any compatibility problems. The 
aim is to keep your PC up-to-date and working. The Enhanced level includes more 
advanced performance and reliability data, to check that your PC is working 
well. The Full level includes access to “crash dumps” (data saved after a 
program crashes) and the ability to trigger diagnostics. I have my PCs on Full, 
but crash data may contain some unwanted personal data. For example, if 
Microsoft Word fell over, the crash dump might well contain fragments of 
whatever I was writing. If that worries you, set Basic.

Note that telemetry data is different from functional data. If Microsoft’s 
Mail app checks for email, or OneDrive synchronises files, or the Weather app 
checks your location for updates, that is not telemetry. It’s just the way 
every connected PC, tablet or smartphone works.

Controlling updates

Windows 10 is updated on a regular basis, sometimes at inconvenient times. The 
“Update & security” section of Settings lets you set “active hours” when your 
PC will not install updates and restart. You can set times up to 12 hours 
apart, such as 8am to 8pm. Alternatively, you can choose a custom restart time 
when your PC will be switched on.

The Pro and Enterprise versions of Windows 10 can postpone feature upgrades 
for a few months, but not essential security updates. Of course, most home 
users have the Home version.

Phone companion

Windows 10 includes Phone Companion 
<https://blogs.windows.com/windowsexperience/2015/05/26/your-windows-10-pc-will-love-all-the-devices-you-own/>
, an app that provides integration with a Windows, Android or Apple smartphone 
or tablet. Plug your device into a USB port and the app helps you set up 
Cortana (if available), photos, music, to-do lists, Skype, email, and online 
Microsoft Office apps. Of course, you still have to download the Microsoft apps 
from iTunes, Google Play or the Windows Store.

You can plug a phone or tablet into a Windows 10 laptop and use File Explorer 
to copy files manually. However, OneDrive can automatically collect camera roll 
photos from your smartphone and copy them to your PC, which is handy. You can 
also create playlists and play tracks from OneDrive on your phone.

Next week

Setting up a new laptop usually involves downloading a selection of familiar 
programs, often starting with a web browser such as Firefox or Google Chrome. 
I’ll cover that topic next week ...

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 