
For the past week I have been thinking, like most people, about the big issue 
of our time: bras.

Among all the surveys and polls and statistics of the last few days, I found 
one that really delighted me. Nearly 30% of women, despite owning several bras, 
wear only two of them. Or, as the Sun put it: BRAVO TWO WEAR-O! WOMEN STICK TO 
THEIR FAVOURITE PAIR. 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1311830/women-stick-to-their-favourite-pair-despite-having-drawers-stuffed-full-of-bras/>

This is in the general run of their lives, you understand. Not two bras at 
once. Although, in this changeable climate, never say never.

Meanwhile, 50% of women admit to having a drawer full of new lingerie they 
never wear. A third of women reveal that they “frequently” discard a bra 
immediately after purchase, shoving it into the drawer and never looking at it 
again.

I’m so relieved. This isn’t something I’ve ever asked my friends about, for 
fear of being the only one. Also, most of my friends are men. It can be quite 
tricky, in the middle of a poker game where all the talk is of horses and goals 
and dog prices, to pipe up with: “Is it just me or is satin a simply 
unrealistic fabric in a bra?” Not impossible, but tricky.

So it has remained the most secret of experiences: the moment where you slide 
open the underwear drawer and reach over the pricey ranks of shimmering, 
matching, handwash-only sets to grab one of the two baggy old friends you 
always wear, asking yourself nothing more complicated than: “Black or white 
today?”

(As if they hadn’t both gone beige with time anyway.)

For me, the donning of new bras is not exactly never. I’ll wear a colourful 
matching set under a nice dress for a special occasion and I take armfuls of 
them on holiday. But they often do more harm than good. All very well if you 
get the chance to wander rounddéshabillé at bedtime (“What? Oh yes, I quite 
forgot to finish getting changed, as I reclined here doing the crossword in my 
peach silk smalls, sucking the pencil suggestively…”), but for every time that 
happens there will be five occasions where I feel fat after dinner and hurry 
into a voluminous bathrobe, or my husband, who is slow to read underwear code 
and quick to make yet another doomed attempt at chapter 438 ofWolf Hall, falls 
unwittingly asleep.

On those nights, I feel at worst furious (I tend to prod him awake, shouting: 
“Just about the companionship now, is it? Someone to grow old with? Allotments 
and cocoa? Perhaps you’d prefer me to turn a blind eye while you TAKE A 
LOVER?”) and at best wistful as I think of the waste of time that still lies 
ahead, handwashing the blasted things.

I’m kidding myself. By “handwashing”, I mean putting the expensive underwear 
in the machine, where it will shrink without even a romantic memory to show for 
it. Whatever the label says, and whatever I promised myself at point of 
purchase, I know in my heart that I’ll handwash a pair of pants the day my 
doctor tells me I have a thousand years to live.

It all comes back, as always, to the relationship between shopping and 
self-image. I’m afraid this is a predominantly female condition; it does apply 
to a certain sort of metrosexual man but, in the main, men still think in a 
straightforwardly acquisitive way: “I want a burger… I need socks… I feel 
thirsty… I’d like to grope a buttock.”

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, however, think: “I’m 
going to be the kind of person who has hummus. I will buy a tub of hummus to 
effect this.”

It’s all a narrative. We picture ourselves flitting about in Italian shoes, 
carrying a bundle of newspapers under one arm, buying fresh bread, laughing as 
we pass a dog, exchanging a smile with an attractive passer-by, leaving a trace 
of floral scent on the breeze.

When we buy the new, satiny, pinchy bra & pants set, we might picture 
ourselves wearing nothing else as we crawl across the floor towards a 
dazzle-toothed Brazilian paramour – but we might just as easily imagine it 
completely hidden under a pencil skirt and tweed jacket as we sip cappuccino in 
a town square while reading an improving novel on a Kindle. The question of 
whether the thingsfit… well, that doesn’t come into play until you’re back 
home, hence the 30% who “frequently” discard a bra immediately on purchase.

It’s not just clothes. I own, for example, an unused “rice cooker”. That was 
never about cooking rice. It was about me laughing round a table with some 
witty yet intellectual friends, one of them perhaps in MI6, one of them a 
redhead and another Polish, all of us drinking bellinis and setting the world 
to rights as the risotto simmers gently on the stove. That’s never happened. I 
sometimes stick some rice in an old saucepan when I’m eating alone, it’s gone 
9pm and there’s no time to bake a potato.

I own several coloured glass vases for the fresh flowers I never buy. I own a 
calf-length pale cream woollen coat for the day I walk through Central Park 
with Robert Redford, cuddling en route to an art gallery. I own an 
old-fashioned ladies’ bicycle for the day I freewheel around town with a 
basketful of books and cherries, miraculously sweat-free as I hop off at the 
library. I own many tiny beaded handbags, for the day I have nothing to carry 
with me for the night but a handkerchief and a single aspirin.

I own an ankle bracelet. God knows what I pictured myself doing with that on.

And I own, I would say, 30 or 40 bras. I wear two. And, since having a baby, 
those two don’t even really fit.
 