
About a thousand years ago, when I was a kid at summer camp in Maine, my 
fellow cabinmates announced a game in which everyone had to ignore someone 
whose name began with an H and ended with a Y. Naturally I was quite hurt by 
this, and a little confused. Hadn’t we all been friends yesterday? Two of them 
had already said they wanted to be my pen pals for life! I couldn’t understand 
it. It turned out they didn’t mean me, they meant a different 11-year-old girl, 
one called Holly. (I can’t remember why they didn’t like Holly.) I was still 
bruised, and never really felt the same way about my cabinmates again. The 
following week, I switched cabins.

Which brings me to what it’s like being a foreigner in Brexit Britain or, to 
put it more accurately, if less alliteratively, Brexit England. Now, when 
politicians bang on about immigrants stealing British jobs, and suggest all 
foreign workers should be on some kind of list – maybe not a “name and shame” 
list, but at least a private list (because this is somehow better) – I know 
they’re not thinking of me, exactly. I am a white Jewish American lady who 
speaks the language, pays her taxes, understands the cultural significance of 
Phillip Schofield, and manages to do all those other things foreigners 
allegedly don’t.

But I also know they’re not not thinking of me, either. After all, I am a 
foreigner who works for a British company, so I am in the general 
neighbourhood. (But could a native Brit make as many jokes as I have done over 
the years aboutKarl Lagerfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/karl-lagerfeld> on this newspaper’s 
fashion pages?I don’t think so. Don’t forsake us skilled immigrants, Britain!)

At least we all now know for certain what “Brexit means Brexit” really means: 
it means blaming everything on immigration. I’d like to talk a little about 
this idea of putting foreigners on lists. Of late, I’ve been researching my 
father’s family, who were all in Paris during the war. Don’t worry, I’m not 
going to go full Nazi analogy on you: I don’t actually think Theresa May is 
Hitler. (Although whether Donald Trump might be is still very much TBD, in my 
opinion.)

But let me tell you a not especially heartwarming story. My grandmother lived 
inthe Marais <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Le_Marais>, the Jewish ghetto, with 
her three brothers, Henri, Alex and Jacques, having fled Poland during the 
pogroms. A few years after they arrived, my great-uncle Alex sensed the way the 
political wind was going, and convinced an American tourist he’d met at most 
twice to marry my grandmother, which might at least get her out of the country. 
This is how my grandmother met my grandfather.

Soon after, in September 1940, Jews in France’s occupied zone were ordered to 
register at their local police station. To go on a list, you see. Of the three 
brothers, only trusting Jacques obeyed. In May 1941, thousands of foreign male 
Jews, including Jacques, were arrested and shipped off to internment camps and 
eventually, concentration camps, where Jacques was killed.

Alex, by contrast, never trusted lists. He didn’t even keep his money in a 
bank. Instead, he joined the underground and spent part of the war in France 
and part of it in Britain, which he loved. He spoke fondly of BBC radio for the 
rest of his life, until he died in 1999, because he associated it with the one 
European country where he, a foreigner, had felt welcome.

Brad and Angelina proved there's no such thing as the perfect marriage: so why 
do we pretend?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/01/brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-no-such-thing-perfect-marriage-why-pretend>
As politicians love to say, we can talk about immigration without being racist 
(unfortunately, they usually say this right before saying something pretty 
racist). Butusing slogans 
<https://www.neweurope.eu/article/britain-u-turns-british-jobs-british-people-policy/>
 (“British jobs for British people!”)the BNP was bandying about 
<https://www.bnp.org.uk/news/british-jobs-must-be-british-workers> a decade ago 
is just not a good look for a government. Obviously Brexit England is not Vichy 
France (asif England would take orders from Germany, those EU bastards), and 
the grossed-out reaction to the stupid list idea, even among some Tories, 
reinforces this. But that it was even pitched in the first place certainly 
gives a flavour of how this government pictures post-referendum England.

So if Brexit means a Britain in which politicians vilify all the foreigners 
all the time, well, you can understand some of us might start looking towards 
other cabins, which I guess is their point anyway. No one wants to be somewhere 
they’re not wanted, and I never really believed that my cabinmates meant just 
Holly and not me, too. Unfortunately, the threat of a hard Brexit has so 
devalued sterling that none of us foreigners can actually afford to go back 
to where we came from. How about that for irony, Brexiteers?
 