
A friend recently expressed surprise and disquiet that each time she had 
encountered the NHS over the past 12 months or so, she had not actually seen or 
spoken to anyone directly employed by the NationalHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Service. Her out-of-hours GP 
service is run by Harmoni, now part of private healthcare company, Care UK, she 
discovered when she needed an inhaler for her asthma over a bank holiday 
weekend. And when she visited her local health clinic to see a podiatrist, the 
branding at reception informed her that it was now run by Virgin.

Virgin Care won the contract from NHS Surrey to deliver community services 
across much of the county from 2012 to 2017. This seemed to have passed my 
friend by until she needed to see someone about her feet. She didn't consider 
the service she received to be any better or worse than if the podiatrist had 
been an NHS employee (she was told her condition was untreatable), yet she 
can't shake off a niggling feeling that it's wrong for a private firm to be 
providing her healthcare, despite the fact it is still free at the point of 
delivery. She couldn't quite put her finger on why she felt this way. She is 
not a member of theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party 
(I am pretty sure she voted Lib Dem at the last election, if she voted at all) 
and she would argue that our healthcare system should be about getting the best 
service for patients at the best price for the taxpayer. I suspect what she is 
objecting to is the dismantling of the NHS by stealth without her or anyone 
else having agreed to it at the ballot box.

Shadow health minister Andy Burnham has accused the prime minister of putting 
the NHS up for sale without permission. Ina speech in February 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/75477510021/the-state-of-the-nhs-speech-by-andy-burnham>
, he made it clear that the electorate in England faces a stark choice between 
a "public, integrated NHS under Labour" or a "health market under David 
Cameron". And he has vowed to fight the 2015 election on these grounds.

With the general election now just a year away, we will hopefully start to 
hear more about what we can expect from a future Labour government. We already 
know that it plans to freeze energy bills and cap rent increases for private 
landlords and provide longer, more secure tenancies. Both ideas are pooh-poohed 
by the Tories and business leaders; the same ones who warned of the grave 
dangers of a minimum wage.

Lisa Nandy, the shadow charities minister, is set to announce that a Labour 
government would repeal the Lobbying Act and remove barriers that make it 
difficult for voluntary organisations to compete with private firms to win 
public sector contracts in health and an array of other public services.

Yet what we need is a bold vision to transform the UK from a country where 
inequality reigns, social mobility is dead and poverty, deprivation and cuts in 
welfare all conspire to makechildren here more likely to die here before they 
reach their fifth birthday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/02/uk-child-death-rate-western-europe-health>
 than in any other western European country (except Malta). The authors of the 
shocking report into child mortality last week, described as "the most 
authoritative number-crunchers on health in the world", said the high rates in 
the UK were surprising for a country with free universal healthcare.

But as public health guru professor Michael Marmot has pointed out, health 
isn't just about services, but also the kind of society in which we choose to 
live. Nothing illustrates the failure of this government to create the society 
I wish to live in more visibly than therise of food banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/22/food-banks-booming-affluent-areas>
.

Nandy says in her speech today to charities that "the problems we face are not 
about the size of the state, they are about the structure of our economy". She 
is right, of course, but unless Labour vows to tear up the coalition's spending 
plans, its welfare reforms, and to restructure the economy, more children will 
be reliant on handouts of baked beans. So what difference will it make who 
delivers the NHS; public, private or the voluntary sector?
 