
Reporter and presenter:

 LL Lucy Lamble 

Reporter:

CNC Clár Ní Chonghaile

Interviewees:

 H Hamza

 JO’R Joseph Nhan-O’Reilly

 KW Kevin Watkins

 ROSE Rose

 PR Pauline Rose

 CN Crepin Namdenganana

SB Sarah Brown


 JN Jean

 MM Marius Mobia 

 H I am 17. If you don’t go to school you don’t know your future, your past 
and your present. If you go to school you’ll make something good of your life, 
you will think well and react well. Education is at the root of everything.

 LL According to the Overseas Development Institute 75 million children aged 
between 3-18 living in 35 crisis-affected countries don’t have access to 
adequate education.

 JNO’R I’m Joseph Nhan-O’Reilly and I’m head of education policy and advocacy 
at Save the Children. We’ve done this project called Hear It From The Children 
and we go to these situations and we ask people what’s at the top of their list 
of needs; and 98% of respondents, children and their parents and communities 
say they want education. They end up in a place and the girl said, “We eat, we 
sleep and there’s nothing else.”

 LL I’m Lucy Lamble. This month’s podcast looks at why we still have so many 
children out of school globally. Ahead of the World Humanitarian Summit in 
Istanbul we also look at a new initiative to raise funds to deliver education 
for all children, especially those whose learning is being disrupted by 
emergencies. And we hear from children directly affected from both Syria and 
Central African Republic. The names of the children in this podcast have been 
changed for their protection.

 JNO’R The average length of displacement for someone who moves across a 
border because of a humanitarian crisis is now eight years; and 17 years is 
what people are saying that they should plan for. So that’s a whole lifetime in 
school for a child. But in a way, we haven’t quite accepted that reality.

 H My name is Hamza. I am 13 years old. I am the eldest boy here. There are 
two other boys who are younger than me. We work here. My other younger 
brothers, one of them is 12; the other is 11 years old. We love school but no 
one is feeding us. I work on the machines.

 LL 13-year-old Hamza is a refugee in southern Turkey. His family fled from 
Syria two years ago when his father was reportedly killed by Isis fighters. 
Hamza’s mother works as a housekeeper; and along with his brothers he works 12 
hour days, six days a week, sewing shoes. In order to survive the whole family 
must work and the boys just can’t go to school. Displacement and poverty can 
force children into child labour. Kevin Watkins is the executive director of 
the Overseas Development Institute in London.

Central African Republic's children dream of education – and peace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/19/central-african-republic-car-children-dream-of-education-and-peace>
 KW The kids out of school because of the Syria crisis are now working in very 
dangerous sectors in Turkey, in Lebanon, in Jordan. In other cases, of course, 
you have longstanding issues like early marriage, which is pushing huge numbers 
of girls out of school. One of the biggest factors, and we see this in the 
total number of out of school children, is armed conflict.

 ROSE The crisis we had here in central Africa, it was really hard. So many 
things happened to us. We couldn’t even go where we wanted. We stayed at home. 
Even if you had nothing, even if you were hungry, even if you had no money, you 
stayed at home. And then when it was over you could go out and do what you 
wanted to do; look for food and buy it and bring it home to eat. That’s what I 
can say about this crisis.

 LL That’s the voice of 16-year-old Rose from Central African Republic 
speaking to reporter Clár Ní Chonghaile in the capital, Bangui.

 KW If you look at the parts of the world that are suffering the greatest 
intensity of armed conflict, the greatest state fragility you think of eastern 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Central African Republic, parts of Pakistan; and 
in some cases it’s because kids are being targeted for the crime of being at 
school by groups like Daesh, Boko Haram. In others it’s because the schools 
have been destroyed. In other cases it’s because of parental fear. If you’re 
living in North Kivu you’d be very concerned about sending a young girl on a 
1km journey to go to a school.

 These conflict-affected countries have really become the frontline, if you 
like, of the struggle to deliver on the2030 development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
; one of which is universal secondary education. Now frankly you can forget 
universal primary education unless we get to grips with this problem. Universal 
secondary education is such a remote possibility for these kids at the moment.

 LL Despite the evident need and repeated calls for greater funding for 
education, the humanitarian system has, up until recently, focused instead, 
mainly, on urgent lifesaving demands such as food, shelter and water. Professor 
Pauline Rose leads the Research for Equitable Access and Learning Centre at the 
University of Cambridge.

 PR What I find quite amazing is the humanitarian system has almost explicitly 
ignored education. Education has not been seen as lifesaving, so in the 
framework, education is not considered as lifesaving. Even though the millions 
of families that are affected by conflict who are displaced because of conflict 
themselves call for education as one of the top priorities. And as a result of 
that less than 2% of humanitarian aid has been spent on education.

Schools reduced to rubble and ruins by conflict – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/may/24/schools-ruins-conflict-war-yemen-syria-south-sudan-in-pictures>
 KW The current situation is dire. If you look at the average over the last 
few years, only around 2% of overall humanitarian funding goes into the 
education sector. Education is typically the most underfunded part of any 
humanitarian appeal. If you look at the current appeals for the Democratic 
Republic of Congo over a million children are out of school. Central African 
Republic, the Burundian refugees who are living in Tanzania, the refugees from 
the Democratic Republic of Congo who are living in Uganda – the current 
commitment for education in those appeals is zero. So that tells you something 
about how bad it is.

 So at the moment we’re trying to tackle a systemic problem which involves 
long-term displacement by very short-term appeals – often three months to six 
months – and a high level of unpredictability. Because when the next crisis 
comes along everyone’s attention will shift somewhere else. But it’s also 
because of a tendency of the humanitarian system to work through channels that 
it knows, feels comfortable with and is familiar with and that’s the big 
international NGOs, it’s the big UN agencies. It’s not the small communities, 
the diaspora groups, who are actually risking their lives to do what the 
international community says it wants to do, which is to get education for 
every child. And that’s why we need to reform the system and we need to get 
behind this new fund which Gordon Brown and others have argued for.

 LL Crepin Namdenganana is head of War Child’s projects in the Bossangoa 
district in Central African Republic.

 CN After three lost years without school, without education, many children 
have lost the rhythm of going to school and few schools are training teachers. 
We do not have enough teachers. There are lots of children without teachers.

 KW The overall funding for the Syria appeal is 16% for inside Syria; 
education is just 7%. Now there are teachers and communities across that 
country who are working really hard to keep these bombed out schools open, who 
are running classes in basements, in shelters, and the international community 
is not getting behind them. These people are heroes and they deserve our 
support, and they’re not getting it.

 CN If today our country is going from conflict to conflict it’s because the 
level of illiteracy is very high. Fewer people go to school and even fewer than 
that understand the importance of school. So the Central African Republic has 
many people who do not go to school and the illiteracy rate is too high.

 LL As forced displacements continue to increase around the world, the 
long-term impacts such as the lack of access to education have started to gain 
more attention on the world stage. The world humanitarian summit this month 
will see the formal launch of theEducation Cannot Wait fund 
<http://www.un.org/youthenvoy/2016/05/education-cannot-wait-fund-to-be-launched-at-un-world-humanitarian-summit/>
. This is designed to fulfil the right to education for young people affected 
by crises.

Children fleeing conflict deserve more than razor wire and border fences | 
Carsten Völz and Andreas Papp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/20/children-fleeing-conflict-deserve-more-world-humanitarian-summit>
 KW The estimated financing requirement over a five-year period is between 
£4bn to £5bn. I’m a great believer that the real challenge here is we need to 
get this thing working and we need to show that it can produce results; because 
I could sit here and throw a number at you. I mean, clearly we need more than 
£5bn if we’re to make a serious inroad here, but with £5bn we could reach 
between 13 and 20 million children; that would make a material difference.

 LL A credible mechanism is crucial for constructive and efficient cooperation 
between all the parties involved and, ultimately, to attract further funds.

 KW But my belief is that once this facility is up and running, the private 
sector will look at it, philanthropists will look at it, and actually see it as 
an opportunity to address a very real problem. Because the great challenge for 
a philanthropic organisation or a private sector company now is if you want to 
set up a facility in the Central African Republic or Burundi you’re taking very 
high levels of risk. You don’t have an organisation on the ground. This is a 
facility that does have organisation on the ground and it could be used to 
support local NGOs and local organisations that can really make a difference 
without incurring the massive transaction costs that often come with this 
rather cumbersome, UN-led response to the crises.

 SB I’m Sarah Brown and I’m the president of the children’s charity 
TheirWorld. Nothing has been more important for us than to look at those 
children who are caught up in some of the world’s greatest emergencies.

 LL I asked Sarah Brown what she hopes will be achieved at the world 
humanitarian summit. Is this yet another talking shop?

 SB As a charity we’re regulars at a lot of the international meetings and 
this first world humanitarian summit represents a moment where we can really 
focus on the critical issues for children and their families; and really look 
at what’s been happening to children around the world, the crises that they’re 
facing and the great challenge that brings for governments but also for civil 
society around as to how we address what feels like a kind of continuing, 
unrolling crisis after crisis, conflict after conflict around the world. So I 
think the humanitarian summit brings all the different interested parties 
together to look at how we can look more innovatively at what we do to address 
these crises and how we fund it.

 H Education is very good. It helps to study and become someone in life. We 
are the people who will replace those in power in the future.

 LL Professor Rose points to huge amounts of evidence that education is 
important for children’s futures, and especially for girls.

 PR As a result of educating girls we see a reduction in child deaths, of 
malnutrition in children. We see that girls themselves are more likely to get 
married later and to have children later, which also is better for their own 
lives but also those of their children.

 LL According to Kevin Watkins, education can also be a broad support for 
children in conflict situations.

 KW I think education does a number of things. First of all, it helps kids to 
process what has often been a very traumatic experience. I’ve spoken to a lot 
of children who are now working in the Bekaa Valley, some of whom were coming 
from the suburbs of Damascus where they’d been bombed. They’d seen family 
members killed, they’d often suffered very first-hand. Now school is not a 
perfect environment to address trauma but it’s better than the alternative of 
sitting on your own at home or working when you’re 12 years old.

 The second thing that education does is it re-establishes a sense of 
normality. And in the life of a child that’s incredibly important. And I think 
any parent who’s got a child will understand that – the ability to send them in 
safety and security out to school to get an education, it’s part of a routine, 
it’s part of their daily calendar.

30 million children have lost their homes – they must not lose their education 
| Kevin Watkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/16/education-30-million-children-have-lost-their-homes-syria-new-fund>
 The third thing it does and you really can’t overstate the importance of this 
is that it enables them to build for the future. These are kids whose families 
have lost everything. What education can do is to give them the skills and the 
competencies to go out into the workplace when they’re 18 or 19 as literate, 
motivated, skilled people who will be in a position to find a resilient 
livelihood. Now the flip side of all of this is if you take away education 
you’re consigning these kids who are 10 years old, 11 years old, 12 years old 
to not just a few years of poverty but to a lifetime of poverty and deprivation.

 LL Joseph Nhan-O’Reilly from Save the Children again. 

 JNO’R There’s no doubt in the international community or the domestic 
policy-making community about the importance of education. It’s axiomatic that 
we know that kids need to go to school, they need that for their futures. And 
there’s this huge body of evidence about benefits both for the individual but 
for society as a whole; it’s benefits for HIV prevention, for delivering 
messages to children around other infectious diseases, for economic growth. And 
critically, in a lot of these crisis-affected communities or countries, for 
peace and stability.

 JN I’m Jean, I am 17. There is really a poor education in our country. Many 
people don’t know why they live and it is easy to manipulate them and that’s 
why we are here. And that’s why education is so necessary for us.

 LL Marius Mobia works with children like Jean and is from Enfants sans 
Frontières, a local partner with War Child in Central African Republic.

 MM A child has a right to survive, a child has the right to development, a 
child has the right to protection and the child also has the right to 
education. For example, if my child goes to school tomorrow he will replace me. 
That child will know how to read and write and will also help the country. If 
my child does not go to school it means I don’t want the country to flourish. 
So it is a cornerstone, it is inescapable in life. Someone who can read and 
write and go other places, he will be able to carry out what we call changing 
the mindsets of others.

 SB I think we’re learning that having left education out of that mix there’s 
been a higher price to pay. Where you can put education in at the forefront of 
that humanitarian response you have children with a place to go to, there’s a 
place to stabilise life quite quickly. There’s an opportunity to provide a meal 
and provide vaccinations in that same space. But also the psychosocial support, 
the learning, the return to normalcy; and I think the cost of not doing that is 
far greater.

 LL That’s all for this month. My name is Lucy Lamble. The producer is Kary 
Stewart. All our podcasts are available from The Guardian’s website,
theguardian.com/global-development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>, and on SoundCloud, iTunes and 
all podcasting apps. Until next month thank you for listening. Goodbye.
 