
My bank is in an unprepossessing part of town. It squats, square and concrete, 
on a busy stretch of the long trunk road that links London to Birkenhead.

It is flanked by a pound shop (outside which stands a large bucket of 99p 
mops) and a McDonald’s (outside which blow abandoned, still-warm, polystyrene 
burger tubs). If the litter bothers you, at least you can solve the problem 
immediately for only 99p.

But I like it. When I was a child, this area was an exciting destination. To 
get there, you had to walk for 10 minutes up our residential road, then stand 
for an unpredictable amount of time at the bus stop opposite the “naughty 
knickers shop” (for reasons I may never understand, there were just two shops 
at the top of our road: a cheap Ann Summers knock-off underwear shop and a 
chemist. Very convenient for anyone who needed a pair of split-crotch scarlet 
pants, a packet of throat lozenges and nothing else at all).

When the bus came, “one and a half tickets” were bought (or “one and two 
halves”, if my brother was of the party) and the journey took… well, that 
changed as traffic changed. When I was five years old, it was probably seven or 
eight minutes. By the time I was a teenager, it could be 40. At the end of this 
adventurous journey lay all the excitements of stationery, toys, records, 
perhaps a packet of Mintolas and a copy of Jackie. I don’t think I understood 
that it wasn’t anattractive shopping district. It was just exciting: colourful, 
busy, grown up.

Nowadays, I only go there for the bank. The record shop, the toy shop and the 
bakery have long since closed; McDonald’s is no longer a destination restaurant 
for me (though might become so again, once my daughter has a full set of teeth) 
and the pound shop sells nothing you can’t get at a proper hardware store for 
the same kind of money anyway.

But I love that bank. I opened my first account at Lloyds when I was still at 
school, the year Great-Auntie Serena supplemented her traditional Christmas 
gift of cherry chocolates with a fat £10 cheque. I chose Lloyds because I liked 
the horse and I’ve never left.

These days, everyone hates banking as a concept – except those who continue to 
milk it for corpulent bonuses, I suppose – but it is still possible, and too 
little discussed, to love aparticular branch. Apart from the staff I know and 
like, I love the satisfying feeling of conducting business there: filling in 
forms with the special pen on a chain, sliding cheques under the partition 
window, collecting holiday money. It’s so grown up and yet, at the same time, 
so redolent ofMary Poppins.

I don’t care whether or not the boss of Lloyds 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3732478/The-8-5million-smoothie-loves-play-family-man-Lloyds-boss-accused-affair-took-eight-weeks-work-spend-time-family.html>
 had an extramarital affair. I don’t care if he or anyone else breached 
expenses rules by spending £300 at theMandarin Oriental spa 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/08/10/lloyds-boss-antonio-horta-osorio-probed-by-his-own-bank-over-exp/>
 in Singapore. I hate spas, all weird smells and impertinent prodding. This one 
apparently does a £150 “aromatherapy massage”, which strikes me as punishment 
enough for any alleged transgressions.

But I do care that my branch of Lloyds is closing down, along with 199 other 
branches nationwide with the loss of thousands of jobs. The letter I’ve just 
received advises me that “other ways to bank” include the internet and the 
telephone. Thanks for pointing that out, guys! Frankly, it was irresponsible of 
you to give me a credit card if you think I’m such a f***ing moron.

I don’t think the branches are closing because the boss spent too much on 
massages. I don’t think they’re closing because of Brexit. I think they’re 
closing because of a failure of imagination at the top.

Sure, the bean counters can save £££££s by locking doors, selling up and 
firing staff. Sure, most transactions can be done online. Sure, fewer of us are 
queuing up in person for day-to-day admin. But the existence of a local branch 
has a vital role, even if we never go in there: it’s key to the illusion that 
money is a thing.

Money is not, of course, a thing; it’s an idea. But the illusion of thing-ness 
(which so nearly disintegrated when we caught that catastrophic glimpse behind 
the curtain in 2008) is vital to its desirability. Once we cease to desire it, 
the acquiescent balance of society is in grave danger. The pleasing physicality 
of banknotes, coins and cheque books is half gone already. The gold reserve’s 
been sold. If the bricks-and-mortar banks, counters and partition windows, 
paper forms and special pens go with them, there’ll be nothing left to “money” 
but numbers on a screen.

Only a mug would bother to keep paying fees for a bank account when the idea 
of a physical storage facility and physical guardians is so completely gone.

And then… who cares? Who wants it? There is no “it” anyway! The tenuous 
reasons to work long hours in a boring job, or to accept even theoretically a 
status quo where some people have private jets while others are homeless, 
disintegrate entirely. I am just not enough of an anarchist to hope this 
happens. Even if I were poor, I still wouldn’t; I’d be frightened of looting, 
violence and social breakdown.

If I were talking to whatever fat cat or bigwig waved through the closure of 
200 more Lloyds branches, and the redundancy of thousands more workers, I would 
say: Don’t be so sure you understand how this all works. Today, you make a 
saving; long term, you might lose everything. If you want to keep your padded 
arse in that padded chair, you’d better leave those branches alone. Just sit 
quietly and keep on clapping like you believe in Tinkerbell.
 