
There has always been a tension at the heart of capitalism. Although it is the 
best wealth-creating mechanism we’ve made, it can’t be left to its own devices. 
Its self-regulating properties, contrary to the efforts of generations of 
economists trying to prove otherwise, are weak.

It needs embedded countervailing power – effective trade unions, law and 
public action – to keep it honest and sustain the demand off which it feeds. 
Above all, it needs an ordered international framework of law, finance and 
trade in which it can do deals and business. It certainly can’t invent one 
itself. Themayhem in the financial markets over the last fortnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/13/oil-and-us-share-prices-tumble-over-fears-for-global-economy>
 is the result of confronting this tension. The oil price collapse should be 
good news. It makes everything cheaper. It puts purchasing power in the hands 
of business and consumers elsewhere in the world who have a greater propensity 
to spend than most oil-producing countries. A low oil price historically 
presages economic good times. Instead, the markets are panicking.

They are panicking because what is driving the lower oil price is global 
disorder, which capitalism is powerless to correct. Indeed, it is capitalism 
running amok that is one of the reasons for the disorder. Profits as a share of 
national income in Britain and the US touch all-time highs; wages touch an 
all-time low as the power of organised labour diminishes and the gig economy of 
short-term contracts takes hold. The excesses of the rich, digging underground 
basements to house swimming pools, cinemas and lavish gyms, sit alongside the 
travails of the new middle-class poor. These are no longer able to secure 
themselves decent pensions and their gig-economy children defer starting 
families because of the financial pressures.

Global markets turmoil echoes 2008 financial crisis, warns George Soros
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/07/global-markets-turmoil-echoes-2008-financial-crisis-warns-george-soros>
The story is similar if less marked in continental Europe and Japan. Demand 
has only been sustained across all these countries since the mid-1980s because 
of the relentless willingness of banks to pump credit into the hands of 
consumers at rates much faster than the rate of economic growth to compensate 
for squeezed wages. It was a trend only interrupted by the credit crunch and 
which has now resumed with a vengeance. The result is a mountain of mortgage 
and personal debt but with ever-lower pay packets to service it, creating a 
banking system that is fundamentally precarious. The country that has taken 
this further than any other is China. TheChinese economy is a giant Ponzi scheme
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/chinese-economy>. Tens of trillions of 
dollars are owed to essentially bankrupt banks – and worse, bankrupt near-banks 
that operate in the murky shadowlands of a deeply dysfunctional mix of Leninism 
and rapacious capitalism. The Chinese Communist party has bought itself 
temporary legitimacy by its shameless willingness to direct state-owned banks 
to lend to consumers and businesses with little attention to their 
creditworthiness. Thus it has lifted growth and created millions of jobs.

It is an edifice waiting to implode. Chinese business habitually bribes 
Communist officials to put pressure on their bankers to forgive loans or 
commute interest; most loans only receive interest payments haphazardly or not 
at all. If the losses were crystallised, the banking system would be bust 
overnight. On top, huge loans have been made to China’s vast oil, gas and 
chemical industries on the basis of oil being above $60 a barrel, so more 
losses are in prospect.

Investors in China’s stock market took fright in the new year, with falling 
share prices only another turn of the screw. The only surprise is that nobody 
saw through it all earlier. China’s leaders are visibly frightened and at a 
loss, clamping down on any possible source of dissent as they flail to keep 
their Ponzi economy alive. As consumer demand falters in Europe, North America 
and Asia, so the demand for oil falls, even as Saudi Arabia, waging economic 
war against Iran and US shale producers, pumps oil out of the ground without 
limit. The whole structure of banking that was predicated upon higher oil 
prices gets more rickety still.

At just this crucially sensitive moment, the US Federal Reserve last month 
raised interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/16/federal-reserve-us-interest-rate-rise-fed-funds-janet-yellen>
 from their extraordinary lows, more concerned to signal its ardent desire to 
return to the normality of business as usual than to face the reality we live 
in abnormal times. There is no danger of inflation. If credit growth is out of 
hand, the tool central banks must use, as the Bank of England recognises 
intellectually by equipping itself with such tools but as yet not bold enough 
to use them, is direct quantitative controls to constrain the growth of credit. 
The system is not robust enough to withstand a rise in interest rates.

Indeed, further evidence of global disorder, as the Fed must have known when 
it raised interest rates, was the resulting acceleration of the flight of 
capital out of the so-called emerging economies in Africa and Latin America. 
Brazil, for example, is now in its worst recession since 1901. But the US 
central bank accepts no responsibilities for global economic management. Nor 
does anybody else.

When will banks learn that dodgy tax practices actually cost them dear? | Will 
Hutton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/03/powrful-political-voice-calling-banks-to-account>
It’s clear what needs to happen. There needs to be wholesale change in 
economic thinking. Forces in world labour markets – new forms of 21st-century 
trade unionism – need to be strengthened. The power of financial markets needs 
to be constrained. Credit growth needs to be managed by direct controls on the 
growth of bank balance sheets and banks need to be weaned off the financial 
casino they have built. Great companies need to be allowed to purpose 
themselves around creating value rather than dancing to the interests of 
disengaged shareholders.

There needs to be parallel change in how countries think of the international 
order: it has to be built and sustained rather than assumed to be someone 
else’s responsibility. We need to keep the EU together around open trade, open 
movement of peoples (notwithstanding the refugee crisis) and respect for 
political pluralism so menaced by new forces in eastern Europe. To keep the 
world open, there has to be international agreement on deepening and extending 
a framework for trade, and a new system of managed exchange rates to replace 
the tyranny of floating rates. Shia Muslims need to be befriended; Sunni Muslim 
helped to weed out poisonous Jihadism. Israel needs to be a genuine 
peace-seeker.China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> must be allowed to 
be convulsed by the coming regime change, vital to depoliticise its economy, 
without fearing foreigners are going to exploit the turmoil.

All this requires a new generation of political leaders prepared to throw off 
the categories in which thinking has been cast since 1980 – and remake our 
world rather as the world was remade in the years after 1945. Prosperity, 
peace, co-existence and recognition of mutual interdependencies are too easily 
taken for granted. The financial markets are signalling deep unease, not least 
at the world they themselves have helped build. It is a message that should be 
heeded.
 