
Last Sunday morning, Sir Ian Botham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/16/the-sunsian-botham-impotence-cure-marketing>
’s penis was on my doorstep.

The world is changing fast; millions of others found Sir Ian’s penis on their 
laptop, Kindle or mobile phone. But I still love the elegance of a printed 
page, so the cricket legend’s john thomas was delivered to me the old-fashioned 
way. At dawn. Through the letter-box. With a bang. I haven’t finished. When I 
woke up, I was amazed by what I found all over the mat. (I know I already said 
it was left on the doorstep, but let’s just assume I get two copies of the Sun 
on Sunday, and move on to the next paragraph.)

Last Sunday, news that Ian Botham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ian-botham> does not suffer from erectile 
dysfunction was splashed across the front of Britain’s cheeriest tabloid. The 
great sportsmanhas been having impotence treatment, he “bravely revealed”, but 
only as a preventative measure. He urged men to throw off pride issues around 
penile function and confidently seek treatment for impotence – but not men like 
himself, because he doesn’t suffer from it. No siree. No Sir-Ian.

“I’m a male and men do have problems and you have to front up to them,” said 
Botham, adding: “I don’t have a problem.”

Nevertheless, Ian Botham has been undergoing Vigore Linear Shockwave Therapy. 
He mentioned this several times, while bravely revealing his total lack of a 
problem. It doesn’t say he was paid for this, although he does also appear on 
the website for Vigore Linear Shockwave Therapy saying: “I’m happy to recommend 
Vigore offered by the Regenerative Medical Group and they will provide a 
screening first to ensure you are suitable. Please call 0800 999 2662 or email 
admin@vigore.co.uk for further information.”

It’s certainly possible that Sir Ian is doing all this for free, in order to 
encourage men to have no shame about undergoing such treatment. After all, he 
is keen to see the end of the embarrassment albatross: “There’s nothing to be 
embarrassed about,” he assured potential patients in his interview. Not that 
Ian Botham would need to be embarrassed anyway, because, as he quickly 
clarified: “I didn’t need the treatment.”

We would already know that Ian Botham has no trouble in that department if 
we’d ever seen a photograph of his erect penis on Twitter, which of course we 
haven’t, because the person who put a photograph of their erect penis on Ian 
Botham’s Twitter feed with the note “What are you thinking..xx” was a hacker.

But we trust him. He volunteered to have his privates zapped with shockwaves 
for no motive other than insurance against the possibility of erectile problems 
in the future. It may sound grisly but it’s better than using Viagra, argues 
Sir Ian. Not that he has ever used Viagra himself. (“I have never needed to,” 
he explains.)

Poor men. It seems like they have to have erections all the time these days. 
Ubiquitous internet porn access shows a relentless gallery of unrealistic women 
demanding to be satisfied around the clock. The documentaryBrought Up On Porn, 
released on BBC iPlayer last Monday, reveals that one in four new erectile 
dysfunction patients is under 40, which seems to reflect the anxiety created by 
technology.

Latest news in London is that businessman Bradley Charvet, who is launching 
the Fellatio Cafe 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/london-fellatio-cafe-planned-near-paddington-station-claims-geneva-businessman-a3311406.html>
 in Geneva this December, now hopes to open a branch in Marylebone. Yes, it is 
what you think: a cafe where men can receive oral sex while having a coffee. 
This is an appalling, dangerous and irresponsible idea. We drink far too much 
coffee already.

The prospective cafe’s name is disappointing. “The Fellatio Cafe”? They’re not 
even trying. I myself would have called it Cup And Saucy. But even Hot Drinks 
would have been better.

What about Just A Splash, An Extra Shot or Mine’s A Grande? Other 
possibilities (I have given this some thought) include The Daily Grind, Morning 
Glory, French Roast, Johnny Come Lattely, Our Coffee Sucks, The Foamy Lip, A 
Little Bit Of Sugar In Your Bowl, Fluid, The Drip Method, Cup And Balls, Cup 
This and Starsucks. I’ll leave it with you. Have a nice afternoon.

Where was I? Ah yes. I’m sure this ghastly cafe won’t open, though it really 
is opening in Geneva, but thevery idea that a normal man might be expected to 
perform under such circumstances adds to the general taxing expectations (and 
the word “perform” itself is a stressful one, which should probably be phased 
out.)

So Ian Botham’s interview in last Sunday’s Sun was not “brave” at all: it was 
weedy, unhelpful and wrong. Correctly or incorrectly, people will assume he was 
paid for his Vigore endorsement and people are pretty media-savvy. They’ll know 
a company like that would look long and hard (yes, yes) for a celebrity who 
suffered from erectile dysfunction and the closest they could evidently find is 
someone who’s careful to state over and over again that hedefinitely doesn’t. 
The company could find nobody who would talk openly about it without this 
tub-thumping proviso. And celebrities will doanything.

Therefore the notion that it’s taboo is emphatically reinforced! And it’s 
reinforced alongside the weird possibility of extra guilt and regret for any 
impotent men who didn’t have shockwave treatment as a “preventative measure”.

Of course there should be no shame in this sort of thing. The human body is a 
beautiful, complicated, interesting ecosystem; glitches happen. Impotence 
causes such terrible sadness, loneliness and frustration, it’s a proper 
wide-scale tragedy that thoughts of ignominy and humiliation prevent anyone 
from either seeking help or living a proud and happy life regardless.

That Ian Botham would despise the idea of anyone thinking he has “a problem”, 
yet agree to be the man who talks publicly about impotence anyway … if there is 
shame in anything, it’s that.
 