
On the recommendation of a Labour veteran, who had already spotted that she 
was a star in the making, I’d got to know Jo Cox a little since she arrived in 
parliament. Everything that everyone has said about her is true. She was a 
dedicated local MP, extremely proud to represent the part of Yorkshire where 
she grew up. She fizzed with a zest to make a difference. She was very 
engaging, not least because she put so much effort into engaging with others.

So it is right that her killing should be the prompt for deep soul-searching 
about how casually we, as a country, have been seduced by the corrosive cliches 
about all our politicians being worthless or worse. As in every walk of life, 
so with MPs. There are excellent ones and there are rotten ones. They are human 
beings, in her case, a highly impressive example of humanity.

The very fact that she was killed outside a constituency surgery held in a 
public library gives the lie to another lazily destructive trope about 
politicians: that they are all members of an “out of touch” elite engaged in a 
wicked and treacherous conspiracy against the people. Here was an MP trying to 
serve her people. Here was an MP killed doing her job.

I’d add a couple more things about her. While she was serious about her 
causes, she also appreciated that modern politics is often a surreal comedy and 
sometimes the only way to cope with its absurdities is to embrace them. The day 
before her killing, Nigel Farage took his mini armada of Outer boats down the 
Thames for one of the funnier stunts of the referendum campaign. Jo waved off 
her husband, Brendan, as he went down the river with their two children to join 
the rival flotilla mustered by the In crowd. A boat from the Farage gang showed 
what lovely people they are by hosing the Cox family with grey Thames water.

She also understood that politics is complex. She didn’t pretend that every 
question has glibly simple answers and that she was already in possession of 
them all. She worked with politicians from other parties. She was passionate 
for her causes, but also collaborative and consensual, not an especially 
fashionable style at the moment. She’d worked for aid agencies for more than a 
decade, often in some of the world’s most dangerous conflict zones. She 
represented one of the less privileged parts of Britain. She knew that life 
throws up choices that are rarely straightforward and anyone telling you there 
are instant solutions to difficult challenges is either a liar or a fool. Which 
unavoidably draws us to contrast her approach to public service with the 
poisons brought forth during the debate over Europe. Let me be clear. I am not 
making a causal link between her death and the toxic manner in which the 
campaign has been conducted, though you may be struck by the hypersensitive 
reaction from Leave propagandists when anyone suggests that there might be a 
link. I am saying that her example demonstrates that British democracy can be a 
whole lot better than the ugliness with which we have been assailed during this 
campaign.

You will have probably gathered by now that I think this is the most 
significant choice for our country in at least a generation and that it would 
be bad for Britain, Europe and the world if we amputated ourselves from our 
continent. I have also acknowledged that there are cons as well as pros to 
membership. Areferendum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> 
campaign that served this country well would have seen a rational debate 
grounded in the facts to help the British people make an informed decision 
about which of the options on the ballot paper was the best for their country’s 
future. That we have not had from a campaign dominated by the stoking and 
exploitation of fear.

There is fault on both sides. The Remain campaign has not always been a source 
of pristine information, nor has it been strong on a positive vision. The 
Inners defined their task as making Brexit sound as scary as possible. Some of 
their forecasts of the impact of departure have been reasonable; some have 
escalated into hyperbole. But the Outers, with their ruthless endeavour to 
crush any rational debate, have been so much worse. The way they have conducted 
their campaign has increasingly suggested that they have consciously attempted 
to destroy intelligent argument by unleashing nihilism.

The governor of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/24/bank-of-england-governor-rejects-accusations-of-bias-over-eu-referendum>
 cautions that Brexit will be a hazard to trade, investment and jobs. He is 
perfectly entitled to do that, just as the Outers are perfectly entitled to 
challenge his analysis. But that’s not what they do. They try to shout him into 
silence by disputing his right to express an opinion and denounce him as a 
mouthpiece for a sinister plot against the people. The boss of the NHS says he 
thinks Brexit would not be good for the health service. Do the Outers argue 
with his assessment? No, they venomously dismiss him as another establishment 
lackey. He, along with all the professional bodies in the NHS, is just an 
operative of the conspiracy against the people that is apparently so vast that 
it also encompasses the Greens, the Lib Dems, the Nationalists, Jeremy Corbyn 
and the major trade unions. The impeccably independentInstitute for Fiscal 
Studies <http://www.ifs.org.uk> is another voice of caution about the 
consequences of Brexit. Do the Outers engage with the analysis? No, they 
denounce the IFS as yet another stooge of Brussels, a claim so ludicrous that 
even some Outers are too embarrassed to repeat it.

The president of the United States joins the chorus of friendly foreign 
countries saying that they believe the smart choice for Britain is to stick 
with the EU. Is the most powerful man on the planet engaged with on a rational 
level? No, he is sneeringly dismissed by Boris Johnson on the grounds that he 
is “part-Kenyan”.

We can see why the Outers chose this course. They saw a path to victory by 
feeding on and amplifying the anti-politics mood that seethes in an angry 
segment of the electorate. When you have so little expert opinion on your side 
of the argument, I suppose your only recourse is to trash the very notion that 
anyone can possess expertise about anything. “The people of this country have 
had enough of experts,” scoffedMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/michael-gove-experts-academics-vote>
 when the lord chancellor struck his implausible pose as the tribune of the 
oppressed against the elite. Does he really think that expertise has no value? 
Of course not. Should he ever need a medical operation, I fancy Mr Gove will 
seek the services of a surgeon, not hand the scalpel to Nigel Farage and ask 
his new best mate to do his worst.

The Outers have had another calculation as they spray everyone with their 
dirty water. Once you have created an anarchic world where no one has any 
authority to speak about anything, there is no one who can be trusted to offer 
any facts. In a fact-free, post-truth, Trumpian world – they have borrowed 
liberally from his playbook – you can make up anything you like in the pursuit 
of votes.

I’ve covered a lot of campaigns and regularly been witness to the bending of 
the truth and sometimes the breaking of it. In my experience, though, the 
telling of bare-faced lies has been rarer in our politics if only for fear 
among its protagonists of what will happen to their credibility when they are 
found out. This campaign has introduced a novelty to British politics: the 
persistence with a lie even when it is verifiably a lie. The Out campaign know 
that the number on the side of their battle bus is a lie. But on the side of 
their bus that lie is still painted. The Outers know that it is a lie to say 
that Turkey is about to join the EU as it is also mendacious to suggest that 77 
million Turks are on their way to the UK. Yet they persist with those whoppers 
too. Then there is the overarching duplicity of their campaign – the mendacity 
that will haunt them and Britain if they win – when they pretend that all the 
fears and resentments that they have exploited will magically evaporate if we 
choose Brexit.

The more thoughtful people among the Outers might ask themselves whether they 
are really happy that the overall effect has been to depress respect for 
politicians on both sides. The suspension of campaigning is a last opportunity 
to rethink and reset. The life of Jo Cox is an example to us that we don’t have 
to conduct our politics in such a malignant way. She crackled with passion for 
her causes. She also pursued them through persuasion and reasoned argument that 
had respect for both the facts and the right of others to hold a contrary 
opinion. That has usually been the British way of democracy. You might even say 
it has been the genius of British democracy. I agree with those who say that 
her death should force some reflection on the way we conduct politics. If that 
is to mean something, when campaigning resumes, the debate ought to be 
concluded in a serious way that reflects the gravity of the question 
confronting the United Kingdom.

The economy, security, immigration and influence are all on the ballot paper 
on Thursday. There’s something even larger there too. We will be saying what 
sort of country we are and want to be.
 