
Imagine going to a job interview where you aren't quizzed about your track 
record and no references are requested from former employers. This may sound 
silly, foolhardy even – but when it comes to outsourcing billions of pounds 
worth of public services, this is exactly what's been happening. When G4S, 
Serco or Capita, for example, put in a bid for a prison, or a tagging service 
or a welfare-to-work programme, their previous performance of running 
privatised services is never taken into account. Just as well for the 
shareholders of these outsourcing giants, since a catalogue of failures lie in 
their wake, from"serious failings" 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-birmingham-24459678> identified by the 
prison ombudsman at the UK's largest privately run prison, managed by G4S, to 
Serco's"substandard"  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jul/11/serco-gp-out-of-hours-substandard>
GP out-of-hours service in Cornwall, and the countless missed targets for 
getting people into jobs by the predominately private sector firms running the 
Work Programme.

With such an abysmal record, it beggars belief how any of these companies 
could be in the running to win more public service business. Yet Serco is among 
10 bidders that made it through to the second stage of a £800m contract to 
deliver older people's services in Cambridgeshire and Peterborough.

How can this be? Simply because EU procurement law has, until now, decreed 
that previous performance – however bad – is not a measure for how well a 
bidder could deliver a public service in the future.

But the lawmakers are finally coming to their senses. From next year, changes 
to EU rules will mean that piss-poor performance under previous contracts can 
be explicitly permitted as grounds for exclusion. While this long-overdue 
revision is to be welcomed, it alone may not be enough to break up the 
oligopoly that now exists in the UK's pseudo-market in outsourced public 
services that is estimated to be worth an astonishing £100bn. The size of the 
contracts and capital required to bid has also kept all but the largest 
companies from getting a look in. But under the new rules, tenders could be 
broken into much smaller lots and public bodies will even be able to reserve 
the award of many health, social and cultural services to social enterprises 
and public service mutuals owned by either employees, users or stakeholders, or 
a combination of all three.

In a report published last week Out of the Shadows? 
<http://socialenterprise.org.uk/advice-support/resources/out-the-shadowss>, 
Social Enterprise UK highlights how the EU rules are the latest in a series of 
measures that could help to loosen the stranglehold of the big firms. The 
Social Value Act, passed earlier this year, places a duty on public officials 
to consider wider social value when they procure services. Already, some 
pioneering local authorities are doing this. Liverpool, for example, is 
committed to awarding contracts to organisations with a smaller gap between 
highest and lowest paid staff and ones that can demonstrate clear local 
benefits. And a new campaign,We Own It <http://weownit.org.uk/about-us>, is 
calling for a public service users bill to give beneficiaries of public 
services – pretty much everyone – a greater say over sell-offs and outsourcing. 
Momentum is growing even within Whitehall of the dangers to taxpayers and 
public service users of heavily weighting contracts in favour of a handful of 
private companies, with little transparency and accountability.Labour  
<http://www.socialenterprise.org.uk/news/seuk-welcomes-extension-foi-firms-delivering-public-services>
hears the mood music and has said that it would extend freedom of information 
legislation to companies delivering public services.

But for many, the changes won't come in time. As one public service manager 
who is setting up a mutual to bid for a flagship government contract recently 
told me: "Given the size of our contract area and the financial requirements 
set by [the department], we would need to bid in partnership with a commercial 
partner – almost certainly from the private sector.
 