
No one who follows the Palestinian issue will be very surprised to hear of the 
call 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/palestinians-preparing-to-sue-uk-over-balfour-declaration/>
 by Mahmoud Abbas to sue the British government over the Balfour declaration of 
November 1917. That was the famous letter which pledged to support the 
establishment of a “national home” for the Jewish people in Palestine and is 
seen as a key milestone for the Zionist movement.

The promise by Arthur Balfour, then foreign secretary, led to the British 
mandate, mass Jewish immigration and eventually to the creation ofIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> in the wake of the second world war 
and the Holocaust, and to the Palestinian “Nakba” (catastrophe).


Abbas, president of the Palestinian Authority and chairman of the PLO, raised 
the prospect of legal action against Britain at an Arab League summit in 
Mauritania via his foreign minister, Riyad al-Malki, on Monday. Balfour, said 
Malki, “gave people who don’t belong there something that wasn’t theirs”.

Israeli spokesmen quickly attacked Abbas for trying to “de-legitimise” the 
Jewish state. “Don’t be surprised if the next phase will be an expansion of the 
Palestinian claim against Britain, and France as well since they were also 
partners in the Sykes-Picot agreement that divided control in our region,”said  
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.733256>public security minister 
Gilad Erdan. “Everything is kosher in Abu Mazen’s [Abbas’] path of lies and 
incitement.”

Threatening legal action over a 99-year-old document is certainly a stretch, 
and it attracted more ridicule than serious analysis. It has in any case long 
been superseded by other decisions including UN resolutions. Still, the 
statement may be seen as a symptom of desperation about the Palestinian cause 
at a time when the peace process is non-existent and hopes for an end to 
occupation and a two-state solution to the conflict appear moribund.

“I regard what Abbas said as as a cry of anger and despair rather than a 
statement of intent,” said Sir Vincent Fean, former British consul-general in 
Jerusalem and effectively ambassador to thePalestinian territories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories> occupied in 1967. 
“I don’t see how he can do what he has undertaken to do. But the problem is 
that the two-state solution that he has advocated and argued for for so long is 
rapidly drifting away.”

The story has re-awakened interest in how the Balfour declaration will be 
remembered on its centenary in 2017. Last year, the Foreign Office held a
brainstorming session 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/on-the-middle-east/2015/dec/30/middle-east-still-rocking-from-first-world-war-pacts-made-100-years-ago>
 about how to handle the legacy of still politically sensitive first world war 
agreements, including Sykes-Picot and Balfour, at a time of unprecedented 
turmoil in the Middle East. But it is unclear if plans have been finalised.

Mark Regev, Israel’s ambassador in London, has spoken 
<http://jewishnews.timesofisrael.com/mark-regev-reveals-uk-and-israel-working-on-public-celebration-of-balfour/>
 of a “public celebration together with the British government”. But Tobias 
Ellwood, FCO minister for the Middle East, said in June that he would use the 
word “mark” rather than “celebrate” what he admitted was still “a live issue” 
in the region.

Balfour promised to support a national home for the Jews in Palestine as long 
as the “civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities” were 
respected – crucially, those communities then constituted some 90% of the 
population of the Ottoman province. Fean and other supporters of theBalfour 
Project <http://www.balfourproject.org/> are working to promote understanding 
of the declaration’s continuing consequences in the coming months.

“I think that there is a moral responsibility on our government to complete 
the work that it started when Britain wasthe world power,” argues the now 
retired diplomat. “It should work to deliver an outcome which respects the 
rights both of Israelis and Palestinians. That is two states – and on the basis 
of the 1967 borders. And it’s got be soon because if we stand idly by that 
equitable outcome will disappear.”


Controversy surrounding the anniversary is unlikely to disappear even if the 
British government, struggling with the implications of Brexit, now has far 
more pressing problems to deal with. “If Boris Johnson lasts as foreign 
secretary until next November, he’ll be the one commemorating the Balfour 
declaration centenary,” tweeted the Haaretz journalist Anshel Pfeffer. “Can’t 
wait.”

Ian Black is writing a new history of the Palestine-Israel conflict to be 
published by Penguin Books in 2017
 