
Sometimes the criticism of golf’s scheduling can be a soft option. 
Conversation with those involved in such matters reveals all manner of 
complexities from television time constraints to commercial demands and, 
bluntly, self-interest.

Yet it seems impossible to divert from the notion that golf’s summer of 2016 
has completely failed to handle the timing demands placed on it by a return to 
the Olympic Games. Seven years have passed since the International Olympic 
Committee welcomed golf, which is hardly insufficient time to avoid the 
undermining of tournaments as is transpiring this week in what feels like 
another example ofgolf’s uneasy Olympic alliance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/golf-olympic-games-special-ioc-rio-2016>
.

The sense that the US PGA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/uspga> 
Championship, a second major in just three weeks, is the main loser from this 
scene is in fact incorrect. The tournament has lost appeal and interest, of 
that there is no doubt, but there is a more significant victim: the Ricoh 
Women’s British Open.

Don’t rush to praise Muirfield if women are finally admitted | Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/06/royal-troon-muirfield-open-golf>
One glance at the intermittent Ladies European Tour schedule offers insight 
into how difficult the women’s game – on one side of the Atlantic at least – 
finds maintaining sporting prominence. The hosting of a major at Woburn for its 
40th anniversary, featuring the imperious world No1 Lydia Ko and a total of 144 
players including one aged 15, should be cause to claim some of the spotlight. 
Ko, still only 19, has not finished worse than third in her past five majors. 
In her past five starts on the LPGA Tour, Ko’s “worst” placing is a share of 
fourth.

Instead, inevitably this e vent will not capture the imagination of latent or 
would-be golf fans and will end up viewed as an afterthought. This is not the 
fault of Ricoh, which is in the 10th year of its sponsorship, or IMG which does 
an outstanding job as tournament organiser and promoter. Rather, those in all 
forms of the game who allowed such a clash to prevail have sold the women’s 
game short. A few heads will inevitably be banged against brick walls in the 
coming days, regardless of how strong the Woburn storylines are.

Ross Hallett, the Women’s Open tournament director, at least won’t hide that 
running parallel withBaltusrol and the US PGA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/26/rory-mcilroy-groove-baltusrol-us-pga-championship>
 is far from ideal. “The championship remains in its traditional week on the 
schedule which is the best from a scheduling point of view on the women’s golf 
calendar,” he said.

“While there is a clash with the US PGA, which we would obviously choose to 
avoid, this hasn’t been possible due to a congested schedule with the addition 
of the Olympic Games. It is worth noting that it will have minimal impact on 
the TV broadcast this week due to the different time zones. We have strong 
media representation at the event and great coverage so far, albeit with a few 
of the regular golf writers choosing to travel to the US PGA.

“We are on for record attendance at this year’s championship based on pre 
-tournament ticket sales with more than 60,000 spectators anticipated. Media 
coverage has continued to show year on year growth in line with this being the 
premier championship in women’s golf.”

Golf’s Olympic shambles further undermines Games’ special allure | Owen Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/golf-olympic-games-special-ioc-rio-2016>
This is admirably upbeat sentiment but Hallett is entitled to ask questions. 
Breaking down precisely why this muddle has ensued owes plenty to the 
individual aspirations of separate golfing entities, namely the PGA of America 
andPGA Tour <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pga-tour>. The former should 
have looked to move the US PGA sufficiently away from the Open Championship but 
both would want to hang on to as close to traditional date as possible. This 
year, the proximity to the Open means the US PGA looks like doing little more 
than tagging on.

One caveat is required here: when it was formed, the US PGA tournament 
initially took place in October. Now, the PGA of America want status with 
regards to Ryder Cup points. The Olympics, meanwhile, will run straight into 
the PGA Tour’s much-valued FedEx Cup series. That is the same PGA Tour which 
has no commercial stake in the Ryder Cup. The same PGA Tour which values its 
Players Championship May date far too much to offer it as an alternative 
tournament window for the likes of the US PGA.

Piece all of this together and one can imagine why those behind the Women’s 
British Open thought they may as well carry on regardless. But in terms of 
assisting the profile of a sport which has more to offer than is recognised, 
that cannot be helpful. By the time 2020 comes around, it is to be hoped those 
in golf’s corridors of power – male and female – display proper joined-up 
thinking rather than paying lip service to the concept of making sacrifices for 
each other. It is golf as a whole which is toiling for status, after all.
 