
This article is part of the Guardian's World Cup 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2014> Experts' Network, a 
co-operation between 32 of the best media organisations from the countries who 
have qualified for the finals in Brazil. theguardian.com is running previews 
from four countries each day in the run-up to the tournament kicking off on 12 
June.

Thiago Silva had not been feeling well for a while by the time Porto ran out 
of patience with him in August 2005. A year earlier, the Portuguese club had 
signed the Brazilian defender, right after the departure of José Mourinho to 
Chelsea, as part of their effort to rebuild a squad that had been plundered by 
European rivals after their surprise Champions League triumph. But after only 
appearing for the reserves, Silva had been shipped out to Dynamo Moscow.

He was 20 years old and seemed unable to match the pace of his team-mates. 
Porto's medical team couldn't find the source of whatever was making Silva 
complain of flu-like symptoms, including an irritating cough. It was only in 
Russia that doctors finally found out that Silva's lungs were on the verge of 
collapsing due to tuberculosis.

Despite significant progress in diagnosis and treatment, TB remains one of the 
deadliest diseases in the world, having killed 1.3 million people in 2012. Most 
cases of contamination and death occur in developing countries, within 
low-income families – the usual cradle for most non-European footballers. While 
in western Europe it has been virtually eradicated, in Russia it is still 
active, which explains why Dynamo's doctors finally nailed down what was not 
only holding Silva back, but also slowly killing him.

"The doctors told me I would be sidelined for 12 weeks because the lungs were 
compromised. I didn't know what to do", explains the defender, who spent the 
first two months locked in a hospital room to avoid spreading the disease.

It would get worse: Silva spent 24 weeks in hospital and in total did not play 
for a year. For the second time it looked as if a career as a footballer was 
slipping through his fingers – just as he had felt at 13, when the Rio de 
Janeiro club Flamengo turned him down after a short spell at their youth 
academy.

Crestfallen, Silva went home and announced to his mother he was quitting. "I 
had to remind him there weren't a lot of good jobs around for a boy from the 
reality we lived in. That seemed to put him back on course," reminisces Angela.

She was by his side when he returned in 2006, using his contacts to find a 
place at another Rio side, Fluminense, where he had also spent a few months at 
youth level. A year later, he would win the Brazilian Cup and marshal a defence 
that conceded only 39 goals in 38 league games. While 2008 would include the 
disappointment of losing the Copa Libertadores title at home to the Ecuadorian 
minnows LDU, the year finished with a double triumph: Silva dominated Cristiano 
Ronaldo in a 6-2 demolition of Portugal by the Seleção in a friendly, and soon 
after Milan announced that they had paid a figure of around £9m to sign the 
defender.

"It was unbelievable: after everything I had been through, there was the 
chance to play for one of the biggest clubs in the world and to learn my trade 
in Serie A, famous for its defensive proficiency," says Silva.

He stayed in Italy for almost four years, playing 93 games and scoring five 
goals, including a peach of a header against Barcelona in the Champions League. 
His Seleção debut took place at the Beijing Olympics in 2008, where hopes for a 
gold medal were dashed by a 3-0 defeat to Argentina in the semi-finals.

Silva watched the 2010 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> from the substitutes' 
bench but in the first post-tournament squad was promoted to a starting place. 
The armband came two years later, ahead of veteran team-mates such as Dani 
Alves and even Ronaldinho.

In last year's Confederations Cup, after playing through pain in the last 
stages,including the final against Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/30/brazil-spain-live-confederations-cup-final>
, Silva finally lifted a trophy as the Seleção captain, which he now dreams of 
doing again on home soil at the World Cup. By the time Brazil had played Spain 
off the park last June, he had already become the world's most expensive 
defender thanks to PSG forking out £37m to convince Milan to sell.

Soon he would be also be wearing the armband for PSG, which meant he had to 
deal with a huge degree of scrutiny from public, media and team-mates. However, 
performances on the pitch and a decision to say no to Barcelona have helped to 
make the 29-year-old a firm favourite in Paris.

"I have immense responsibility for club and country but that doesn't scare 
me," he says. "It is a privilege to be a football player and there are many 
people who will never have a chance to make it. I know what it is to think your 
career is over so I respect the second chance that life has given me."

Life hasn't been a bed of roses since; thigh injuries have worried him in the 
past two seasons and PSG have failed to make the semi-finals of the Champions 
League in agonising fashion. Silva, however, has learned the true meaning of 
the word perspective.

Fernando Duarte writes for uol.com, the Guardian and the Observer

Follow him here on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Fernando_Duarte>

Click here to read the tactical analysis of Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/31/world-cup-2014-brazil-tactical-analysis>

Click here to read the secrets of the Brazil players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/31/world-cup-2014-brazil-secrets-players>
 