
I’m in Melbourne for the city’s annual comedy festival, prepping my 90 minute 
set list. I’ll soon commence a financially unfeasible run of shows, where I’ll 
be bring myself on to the stage with the unfortunately accurate opening line, 
“good evening, lady and gentleman”.

Not that I’m bitter: it’s just a crowded market. At this time of the year, it 
feels like there are at least two million comedians in Melbourne, meaning that 
promotional flyering often becomes just a time-consuming way to cover the 
pavement in narcissistically customised litter. You might as well be handing 
out puddles during a flood.

 Thank goodness I’m able to draw comfort from former fishmonger Roger Barton, 
the gruff and cheeky company provided inWorld’s Greatest Food Markets 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/415522371722/worlds-greatest-food-markets-ep2-mexico-city>
 (SBS). Each episode follows the plucky whiskered chap (known as the Bastard of 
Billingsgate, a Harry Potter title that never quite made it) as he’s taken out 
of his home turf of London, gets thrown into an overcrowded, bustling market of 
a new international city, and has to use his full repertoire of hustling skills 
to buy and sell his way to profit. I should have been taking notes.

The most recent episode sees Barton head to Central de Abasto in Mexico City. 
It’s a giant hive of scurrying traders, some 600 acres in size, serving 400,000 
people. Every shot in this documentary is a visual cacophony worth tuning in 
for in itself. And there’s something charming about watching Roger “the 
Bastard” wander around in his tattered straw boater, fish-out-of-water as he 
effs and mutters “bollocks” at the swirling array of fruit and vegetables. It’s 
as if Guy Ritchie penned the script for a Mexican Coles ad.

The episode becomes more compelling with the introduction of antagonist, Don 
Cesar, one of the country’s biggest chilli sellers. He openly admits to 
benefiting from Barton’s uninformed trading, as does the market, and says 
Barton doesn’t fully understand the product he’s selling. Spurred on by Cesar’s 
assurance there’s a chilli scarcity, Barton is suddenly heading to the 
countryside in a hired lorry to pick up several tonnes of chilli to bring back 
to market. It’s a 2,000km round trip from which Roger cannot afford to return 
empty-handed.

Looking haggard as the hat on his head, Roger arrives at the chilli farm in 
the countryside and wanders the fields, prodding various chillies while 
declaring them “the bollocks” (which, if you don’t speak cockney, means the 
opposite of “bollocks”). However, back in Mexico City Cesar won’t answer the 
phone and let him know how many chillies are expected in the market the 
following day. Blind, Barton’s weak position is quickly exploited and he has to 
buy high.

Returning to Central de Abasto at dawn and looking like a sleep-deprived 
collection of hair and straw, Bastard Bollocks Barton soon discovers the market 
is awash in comedians – sorry, chilli – and he is forced to sell at a lower 
price. Eventually the manipulative Don Cesar turns up and puts Barton out of 
his misery by buying up most of what remains, pushing Barton into serious loss.

World’s Greatest Food Markets is not a series I was expecting to enjoy. 
Generally any show that has a superlative in the title puts me off, as if being 
“the most” anything is enough to make it good TV: dangerous logic that leads to 
us all plonking ourselves down on the sofa to enjoy World’s Bendiest Potatoes. 
And what could have been a gimmicky premise, in execution is a fascinating and 
fresh glimpse into the world of food markets. Host Barton is earnestly plying 
his trade as best he knows how, and from the comfort of a sofa makes for 
engrossing television. First hand, I’m sure it’s a rather stressful experience.

Speaking of which, want a flyer for my show “The Disgrunta ... ” No? OK, I’ll 
just leave it here on the street in case you change your mind.

• World’s Greatest Food Markets 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/415522371722/worlds-greatest-food-markets-ep2-mexico-city>
 airs in Australia on SBS
 