
All Brazilians learn to play football on the beach

It is impossible not to sigh when commentators – professional or the ones with 
pint in hand – start raving about how playing on the beach is a crucial factor 
in explaining the skills of Brazilian footballers. It couldn't be further from 
the truth. In reality the seaside has historically been off-limits for poor and 
working class kids. A great number of Brazilian footballers, Pelé included, 
were either born or bred in towns and cities that are landlocked. It has always 
been much easier to find kids kicking a ball (or assorted spherical objects) on 
the streets. Or in a futsal court: the indoor version of the game is a much 
more fertile breeding ground than the sands. While beach football can boast 
only the 1970 reserve Paulo César as aWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> winner, such as 
Ronaldo, Romário, Rivellino and Ronaldinho hail from futsal and many observers 
believe the indoor game helped enhance dribbling and passing abilities: legend 
is that Rivellino's outrageous "elastic dribble" was developed in a futsal 
court.

With all those brilliant players, anybody could manage Brazil

This notion of an abundant footballing talent pool has become more than some 
kind of old wives' tale. It has actually hampered the job prospects for 
Brazilian managers, much as language and cultural barriers rank higher in a 
list of explanations for the majority of sad endings for their professional 
abroad incursions. It is true thatBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> has been blessed with some pretty 
special crops of players but to neglect the work done by the "misters" is 
foolish. The mythical 1970 team, for example, was also a result of much 
tinkering by a manager, who managed to squeeze together players whom Brazilians 
back home didn't really see together on the pitch – Tostão's use as a 
proto-false No9 as exhibit A.

Brazilian footballers have no tactical discipline

After Brazil's shocking 3-2 defeat to Italy in Spain 1982 came the accusation 
that Telê Santana's beautiful squad were incapable of defending. Yet that team 
conceded only six goals in five games and at the moment Paolo Rossi scored his 
third goal in that game, there were 10 Brazilian players in the box. After 
winning the 1994 World Cup with a side whose defence were beaten only three 
times in the tournament, Brazil should have put those claims to rest.

The military government intervened in Brazil's 1970 team

Between 1964 and 1985 Brazil was ruled by a military dictatorship that wrote a 
dark chapter in the country's history. The generals used football as a 
political tool and it is no surprise that this period marked the biggest boom 
in stadium construction in Brazil before these 2014 finals. But a notorious 
tale of how the president Emílio Médici decided to sack the manager João 
Saldanha weeks before the 1970 World Cup finals because of his refusal to pick 
a striker favoured by the general is baloney. First, if Médici were that 
ruthless Saldanha would never have been appointed, since he was openly 
communist at a time when left-wingers were routinely tortured by the regime's 
agents. Second, Saldanha had actually picked a fight with a much higher power 
in Brazil: Pelé.

The 1998 "Nike conspiracy" undermined Brazil's chances

Yes, the American sportswear giant did impose a host of conditions when 
signing a groundbreaking $200m contract with the Brazilian Football 
Confederation in 1996. It even granted Nike the power to determine who the
Seleção would play in friendlies, alongside a commitment to use a certain 
number of their sponsored players in those matches. The blame for Ronaldo's 
inclusion in the 1998 World Cup final hours after suffering what seemed like a 
convulsion rests on the appalling crisis management by Brazil's management, not 
on lobbying by Nike executives. There is no evidence to suggest they had access 
to the team on that day.

All Brazilian footballers are partying on a gravy train

Not necessarily. Although turnover in the first division increased by more 
than 300% between 2003 and 2011, huge wages are still restricted to a minority 
of players. According to figures from the Brazilian Football Confederation, 
more than seven out of 10 professional footballers in the country earn around 
£400 – yes, four hundred pounds – a month.

Pelé boycotted the 1974 World Cup in protest against the dictatorship

The king himself said and wrote so, but some of his closest friends in 
football have denied Pelé has ever held any political opinions strong enough 
for him to boycott a finals. After his international retirement in 1971 Pelé 
indeed received offers from the president Ernesto Geisel to reconsider, but 
apart from having signed a lucrative sponsorship with Pepsi, Pelé was warned 
off a comeback by his advisers, who feared that he was past his prime and would 
be blamed if Brazil failed to win their fourth title – which indeed happened 
when they were knocked out by Johan Cruyff's Holland.

An Englishman introduced football to Brazil

It is common to define 1894 as Year Zero in Brazilian football: on 18 
February, Charles Miller, the Brazilian-born son of a Scottish railway 
engineer, returned from his studies in Southampton with two footballs in his 
trunk. Although Miller went on to organise the first formal league in Brazil, 
the game was already being played in the country decades before as a pastime 
for sailors from different nationalities stopping at the nation's ports and it 
was actually part of the PE curriculum in some Jesuit schools.

Brazilian goalkeepers are dodgy

This erroneous claim seems to be generated by a general lack of Brazilian No1s 
playing regularly in the big European leagues. Goalkeepers are not usually that 
high on the shopping list when foreign buyers stop by in Brazil, but for those 
remembering only Heurelho Gomes's woes at Tottenham, it's worth remembering 
that Júlio César won a treble with Internazionale and across town Dida won two 
Champions League titles with Milan. Ah, and Cláudio Taffarel saved crucial 
penalties for Brazil in a World Cup final (1994) and semi-final (1998).

Brazilians are obsessed with football

While the claim is valid given the amount of titles the country won and how 
many remarkable players produced over the last few decades, the Brazilian 
league has seen it attendance levels plunge since the 80s. It now attracts less 
than 15,000 fans per game, which places the league even behind the MLS in terms 
of popularity.
 