
It could have been much worse of course. Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> find themselves in a group with 
Croatia, Mexico and Cameroon.

Two of these teams immediately stand out as tricky opponents: Cameroon will 
not be fazed by the weather conditions while Mexico have been Brazil's biggest 
nightmare in the last 15 years, having beaten theSeleçao at a Confederations 
Cup final (1999) and famously denying Neymar and co the chance to win gold at 
the 2012 Olympics.

Having been comfortably upstaged by Belgium in the European qualifiers, 
Croatia reached theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> after seeing off 
Iceland in the play-offs. They are not as dangerous as they were 10 or 15 years 
ago, but it will be quite a moment for one of their forwards, the former 
Arsenal forward Eduardo, born in Rio de Janeiro and whose debut for Croatia was 
against Brazil in 2005.

Cameroon, funnily enough, also bring bad memories for Brazilians. In the 
Sydney Olympics, a side which included Ronaldinho among others, were knocked 
out by the Africans, a result that led to the sacking of the then manager 
Vanderlei Luxemburgo. In World Cups, they met in 1994, with Brazil cantering to 
a 3-0 win.

Mexico are the team Brazilians may feel the most uneasy about. They do not 
seem to fear theSeleçao and have had decent results lately after a terrible 
start to their qualifying campaign, although they were poor as they lost to 
Brazil in the recent Confederations Cup.

Given all the factors, including the promise of roaring home support and a 
young team that has gelled and lost some of the nervousness shown in their 
first matches since Luiz Felipe Scolari took over, Brazil should have a safe 
passage to the second round.

The problem is that even a first-place spot might still mean they could face 
Spain or Holland in the last 16. Brazilians will have to pay a lot of attention 
to what actually takes place in Group B. So there is enough excitement for the 
200 million "football managers'' in the country to get busy with for the next 
six months. And that is probably the only thing we can say for certain after 
yesterday's draw.
 