
If they could have bet on which footballer was most likely to walk into the 
headquarters of the International Evangelical Community, a pentecostal temple 
located in Rio de Janeiro's Flamengo neighbourhood, Frederico Guedes would 
probably not have been high up on the congregation's list.

But the striker, also known as Fred, has recently become their newest member; 
the Fred who is almost as famous for his heavy partying and womanising as for 
his goals for Fluminense and theBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> national team is now a devout 
Christian who on 12 March was pictured walking into the temple with a Bible in 
his left hand.

Even his club manager found it hard to believe. Renato Gaúcho, whose 
hell-raising antics might have slowed down since his retirement in the 90s but 
still make him a famous lothario, did not hold back when commenting on Fred's 
conversion. "Is he going to church now? Well that would make me a priest then 
because we are both up to the same shenanigans. That kills me, to hear he's an 
'Athlete in Christ' now," said Gaucho, roaring with laughter.

That last phrase gave away more than banter, though. Although religion pretty 
much drenches every aspect of Brazilian life, its role in sports and politics 
is mired in controversy. Still the country with the biggest Catholic population 
in the world (123m out of 190m people),Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> in the past few decades 
experienced significant gains from evangelical denominations.

In the past 40 years the number of Brazilians declaring themselves Catholics 
decreased from 92% of the population to 57%. Evidence of this swing can be seen 
in the Brazilian parliament, where 15% of MPs openly defend an evangelical 
agenda, and football has also become a highly visible arena for militancy.

In 1984, a group of footballers led by Baltazar, a cult-hero centre-forward 
nicknamed "God's Striker" thanks to his professed faith, founded the Athletes 
in Christ, an association of protestant sportsmen that would prove to be one of 
the most influential power groups in Brazilian football over the next decade.

Their grip over the Seleção was specifically felt at the 1990 World Cup, where 
they would meet regularly for prayer, invariably led by right-back Jorginho, 
who years later would be the assistant manager in the 2010World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> campaign.

Italia 90 ended miserably for the Seleção, amid tales of infighting and a 
mutiny over prize money and sponsorship deals, and did not work as good 
publicity for the group.

The Seleção has hardly been a secular environment: in 1958, a pep talk about 
how the blue away kit had the same colour of Mother Mary's shroud worked 
wonders to calm down Pelé and co's nerves when the team learned before the 
final game that the hosts, Sweden, would be playing in yellow shirts. 
Celebrations on the pitch after Roberto Baggio sent a penalty into the 
Californian sky in 1994 included prayers on the pitch, a ritual replicated in 
2002 – in fact, the managerLuiz Felipe Scolari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/luiz-felipe-scolari> carried around a 
Mother Mary statue that "blessed" the dressing room and actually followed him 
to the Portugal job.

However, militancy never went down well and the issue became thornier when 
Kaká, a devout Christian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/jul/25/acmilan> who didn't shy away 
from talking about God and faith, became Brazil's biggest player of the second 
part of the Noughties. Alongside the defender Lúcio, their effusive use of 
apparel with religious messages (does anyone remember the 'I belong to Jesus' 
boots) ruffled feathers at Fifa, which officially told off the Brazilian 
Football Confederation after the2009 Confederations Cup final in South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/jun/28/usa-brazil-confederations-cup-live>
.

A year later, the Seleção not only had Jorginho as assistant manager and vocal 
evangelist who would threaten critics with divine retribution; a preacher was 
an informal addition to the technical staff. Four years on, the picture could 
not be more different.

These days, few people outside Brazil know that Neymar is a protestant, 
alongside the captain Thiago Silva and Chelsea's David Luiz, even though it is 
quite normal to hear them thanking God for achievements and assorted blessings. 
There are no organised activities while on national duty and even talking about 
faith became a bit of a hot potato. "Let's say we keep the praying to 
ourselves, without trying to make a big issue out of it", says oneSeleção 
player, who asked to remain anonymous.

After months of struggling with his fitness, Fred is allowed to resort to any 
comforts he wants. But his decision to "do God" publicly – the striker has been 
photographed in the Fluminense training ground with bilingual religious shirts 
– is certainly something that will send chills down the spines of some 
Brazilians before the nation stages the World Cup this year.
 