
Latin America


Governments have often preferred Republican presidential candidates because 
they historically put an emphasis on free trade, but this time, politicians and 
commentators are lining up to express doubts about Donald Trump, who has 
alarmed many with hisdismissive comments about Latinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
, plans to build a wall on the Mexican border, and his unpredictable behaviour.

Demétrio Magnoli, a sociologist and prominent voice of Brazil’s “new right”, 
said a Trump victory would be a geopolitical earthquake. “Trump is the closest 
the US has gotten to fascism. You would have an American president that is 
nationalist and nativist and we would see mass deportations, and a wall being 
built, which is likely since he will most likely not deport 11 million people.”

He predicted this would force Mexico to turn more towards Latin America and 
could upset free trade agreements and hurt economic growth.

“Trump is so unpredictable and politically inexperienced. We have no idea what 
he will do, but he seems authoritarian, sexist and contemptuous about Latinos,” 
said Violeta Granera, of the opposition alliance in Nicaragua.

By comparison, Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> is seen as a safe pair of 
hands who is likely to continue the relatively benign policies of the Obama 
administration.

Carlos Lins da Silva, a senior consultant for the São Paulo Research 
Foundation, said US regional policies were unlikely to see a major change, but 
added: “The election of Trump would – at least in the short term – cause 
dramatic impacts on the international system … if he puts into practice some of 
the programmes he is advocating. Brazil won’t come away unscathed. For example, 
if he makes the entrance of Muslim people more difficult, builds a wall between 
Mexico and the US, has Nato members pay for US defence, encourages Japan to 
have a nuclear bomb, gets tougher on Nafta and other free trade deals. All of 
these ideas would have negative consequences for many countries.

Diplomats said they did not expect a major shift in Washington’s Latin 
American policy regardless of the outcome.

“Hillary Clinton knows Brazil better than Trump, as she has been here before 
and knows people here, but there will not be any substantial change in 
relations either way because external relations with South America are a low 
priority for the US,” said Rubens Barbosa, former Brazilian ambassador to 
Washington.

The country with most at stake may be Cuba, which has enjoyed a reconciliation 
with the US under Barack Obama. Former Cuban president Fidel Castro weighed in 
with an article last month in theGranma newspaper in which he awarded Trump 
“the medal of mud”, but the old revolutionary also had nothing good to say 
about the Democrats.

Middle East


Trump outraged the Arab world with his comments on Muslim immigration – and 
regional public opinion certainly reflects this. A survey of 3,017 people in 
the Middle East and North Africa found that – if they had a vote – half would 
snub both Trump and Clinton.

On the fight against Islamic State, Clinton has pledged to never send troops 
back to Iraq, and ruled out boots on the ground in Syria. Trump has been less 
specific about his plan to fight Isis, but said in March that the US has “no 
choice” but to send 20,000 to 30,000 combat troops to the region.

In the survey, from the Jeddah-based daily Arab News and pollsters YouGov, 46% 
said the US should send troops to fight Isis and collaborate closely with 
Russia on Syria. The rest did not want a US presence on the ground but did feel 
that Washington should be more involved in the humanitarian efforts for Syrian 
refugees, arm moderate groups and increase air strikes on Isis. Clinton was 
most popular, with 78% saying she would be the best for the Arab world.

On the candidates’ policies, Arab opinion is much more balanced. Clinton’s 
stance on climate change and US Israel policy found strong support in the poll. 
But Arabs overwhelmingly back Trump’s stance on abortion and, ironically 
perhaps, border controls.

Russia

Vladimir Putin was thrust into an unexpected starring role in this election, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/08/trump-putin-senate-republicans-marco-rubio-john-mccain>
 and whatever the result, it will please the Kremlin that it has been able to 
cause so much mischief. How much of this was down to direct Kremlin meddling, 
we will perhaps never know, although the state media’s bias towards Trump has 
been fairly clear.

Most Russian analysts believe the US is systemically set up to oppose Russia, 
and while there is an understanding that Trump is an unusual candidate, many 
believe a Trump presidency would not change things much. Other more sober heads 
are well aware that for all Trump’s friendly rhetoric, as president he would be 
a much more unpredictable quantity than Clinton, the devil they know.

To go on the public rhetoric alone, the casual observer would think the 
Russian establishment is banking on Trump. Russian television has been giving 
airtime to many of Trump’s claims that the election could be rigged, but this 
is as much to help discredit the US system in the eyes of viewers as it is 
sincere backing for Trump. He has been backed not because of his politics, but 
because he is the chaos candidate; in the same way Russia was also keen on 
Brexit. Even if Clinton wins, Russia knows that after this divisive campaign, 
US democracy is in for a period of soul-searching which will leave less energy 
and focus for meeting external threats.

Africa

If Africa has barely featured in the campaign, then the continent has, in 
part, returned the compliment. But though many experts believe the result may 
not imply any drastic change in US policies in Africa, there is still 
widespread anxiety and Trump has already alienated many, particularly with his 
apparently racist rhetoric.

“Few Africans are putting any store on Trump if he wins the election, that is 
if he remembers we exist once he’s done with Mexicans and illegal immigrants,” 
wrote Gitau Warigi, in Kenya’sDaily Nation.

Trump’s call for a ban on Muslims entering the US received widespread coverage 
and provoked outrage. The Somalia-based Islamic militant group, al-Shabaab, 
included a clip of Trump proposing the temporary ban in one of its recruiting 
videos.

The tycoon does have supporters. Although a poll  
<http://www.wingia.com/web/files/richeditor/filemanager/WINGIA_Global_Poll_on_US_Election_-_FINALIZED_Revised_Global_Press_Release.pdf>
in Nigeria found that 77% would vote Clinton and only 19% Trump, while in South 
Africa the proportion was 59% to 15%, some African commentators see Trump as an 
anti-establishment candidate of a sort they would welcome: one who could 
disrupt an unjust status quo.

“The world and nations don’t reform when they are comfortable. They only do so 
when they are afraid or have been severely injured …bring on Trump 
<http://www.africareview.com/opinion/Bring-on-Donald-Trump-he-will-change-our-rotten-ways-/979188-3184656-rs3h5n/index.html>
,” wrote Charles Onyango-Obbo, a Kenyan publisher and columnist.

However, neither candidate has given any real clues to their attitude on 
Africa. On trade, there is speculation that Trump’s support for greater 
protection of US industries could mean higher tariffs that woulddamage some 
African economies 
<http://www.nation.co.ke/news/world/Africa-unsure-how-a-post-Obama-regime-will-treat-Agoa/1068-3434786-x65cxy/index.html>
, local analysts say. Nearly 40 countries in sub-Saharan Africa can export 
goods to the US duty-free under legislation from 2000. In some, the regime has 
served as a catalyst for industrial production.

On aid, there are fears for the funding of projects to prevent and treat HIV 
and Aids which have helped millions. Clinton is seen as backing continued, or 
enhanced, public health assistance.

Trump’s allegations of vote rigging in the US have prompted strong reactions 
in a continent where manipulation of electoral process is widespread.

“Donald Trump is a gift to all tin-pot dictators on the African continent. He 
is giving currency and legitimacy to rigging because if it can exist in 
America, it can exist anywhere,” Zimbabwean opposition leader Tendai Biti told 
Reuters news agency last week. However, it is a fake quote which has caused the 
biggest stir. Trump has been widely reported to have pledged to “lock up” both 
Robert Mugabe, the veteran president of Zimbabwe, and Museveni. The false 
comment was not questioned and prompted anger, hope, ridicule, excitement and 
hilarity – as well as a small demonstration of support in Uganda where five 
protesters waved placards outside the US embassy.

Germany

A new video by German comedian Jan Böhmermann was released last week, entitled 
Grab US by the Pussy. It waxes lyrical about the foreign policy that Washington 
might pursue if Trump were in the White House.

“We like the new spirit of your nation / Let’s walk hand in hand into 
isolation” goes one of the lines.

In reality, the majority of Germans view the prospect of a Republican victory 
on Tuesday with fear. Some 65% of respondents in a YouGov survey released last 
week said that they were afraid of such an outcome. If Germans could vote, a 
poll by the magazineStern found that only 5% would cast their vote for Trump.

In political circles, Germany’s biggest concerns relate to how much damage a 
Trump presidency would do to the transatlantic alliance. The US is the key 
contributor to the UN budget and has the highest military budget within Nato, 
yet during his campaign Trump has described Nato as “obsolete” and indicated 
that he would, at the very least, seek to renegotiate its framework.

If the Republican wins and lives up to his own words, Germany and France 
would, after Brexit, be the two countries expected to try to fill the 
geopolitical vacuum in Europe. Hope remains that Trump’s rhetoric would prove 
more dramatic than his actions.

“In Berlin government circles,” Der Spiegel recently wrote, “officials are 
more concerned about Trump’s character than the radical political about-face he 
might introduce.”
 