
More than 170 governments declared an end to the fossil fuel era on Friday, 
using the signing ceremony for the landmark Paris agreement as an occasion to 
renew their vows to fight climate change.

The outpouring of support – the largest ever single-day turn-out for a signing 
ceremony – underscored strong international commitment to deliver on the 
promises made in Paris last December to avoid a climate catastrophe, the 
leaders said.


Donald Trump warned against scrapping Paris climate deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/16/todd-stern-warns-republicans-against-scrapping-paris-climate-deal>
“There is no turning back,” François Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande>, the French president, 
told the United Nations assembly.


The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, said signatories to the deal were 
embracing “a new covenant of the future”. Leonardo DiCaprio, a UN climate 
ambassador, likened efforts against climate change to the campaign to end 
slavery.

Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim, an indigenous women’s leader from Chad, called on 
countries to following through on their promises. Temperatures in her country 
were already a blistering 48C (118F), she said, and climate change threatened 
to obliterate billions spent on development aid over recent decades.

“Climate change is adding to poverty every day,” she said.


Friday’s gathering was entirely ceremonial, with schoolchildren and brass 
bands filling out the UN hall, andJohn Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, the secretary of state, 
toting his granddaughter in his arms when it came his turn to sign the 
agreement.

But the turnout – including the presence of about 60 presidents and prime 
ministers – and stirring rhetoric were seen as an important measure of the 
momentum behind efforts to bring the Paris agreement into force earlier than 
originally thought, possibly even this year.

Leaders also reaffirmed previous commitments to help poor countries protect 
their people from climate change.

Early implementation would prevent the drift that set in with the Kyoto 
protocol in the 1990s and – crucially with Donald Trump’s ascendancy in the 
Republican presidential primaries – impose a four-year delay on any future 
leaders seeking to exit the agreement.

But as the leaders noted, events on the ground are moving fast. Last year was 
the hottest year on record – and so were the first three months of this year. 
Temperatures at the North Pole rose above freezing last December, the depths of 
the polar night; and temperatures there were 30C (54F) above normal.

“Today is a day to mark and to celebrate the hard work done by so many to win 
the battle of securing the Paris agreement,” Kerry said. “But knowing what we 
know, this is also a day to recommit ourselves to actually win this war.”

On Australia’s Great Barrier Reef, some 93% of coral showed evidence of 
bleaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/19/great-barrier-reef-93-of-reefs-hit-by-coral-bleaching>
, because of long-term ocean warming due to carbon emissions, and the El Niño 
weather phenomenon.

If countries do not make deep emissions cuts by 2020, they will miss their 
chance to hit the Paris goal of limiting warming to 1.5-2C (2.7-3.6F), leaders 
and campaign groups warned.


Campaign groups called on governments and businesses to follow through on the 
rhetoric by ramping up emissions cuts, and protecting vulnerable populations 
from rising seas, extreme temperatures and other effects of climate change.

 “The decisions in the Paris agreement now need to be incorporated into 
government and corporate decisions by breaking free from fossil fuels,” 
Jennifer Morgan, the director of Greenpeace, said. “Nature is telling us that 
time is running out, and running out fast.”

The first hurdle was making the agreement operational by winning approval from 
55 countries representing 55% of global greenhouse gas emissions.


That critical threshold moved closer into reach after the world’s biggest 
climate polluters reiterated their promises to approve the deal – with some 
committing to a specific time line.


China, the world’s biggest climate polluter, said it would formally approve 
the agreement before the G20 meeting in September. The US and India, the second 
and third biggest emitters, also reaffirmed their intention to approve the deal 
this year. Canada’s Justin Trudeau said he would present the agreement to 
approval by parliament next month.

Brazil’s Dilma Rousseff <https://www.theguardian.com/world/dilma-rousseff>, 
engulfed in a fight for her political survival after being impeached earlier 
this week, made a personal promise to help bring the agreement into force.

“I take on the commitment to ensure the prompt entering into effect of this 
agreement in Brazil,” she told the UN.

However, the European Union is unlikely to be in a position to join the 
agreement at an early date.

Miguel Arias Cañete, the EU climate commissioner, admitted that internal 
processes, under which the individual countries must first sign off on 
proposals to achieve the common goal for 2030 of a 40% emissions cut measured 
against 1990 levels, would make it difficult to keep pace.

More climate-concerned governments such as France and Germany are thought 
likely to move quickly. But there are still concerns about the response that 
can be expected in Poland and some other central and eastern European countries.

“This will take some time,” he said in a statement, “but it will ensure that 
when we act, we will act on a solid legal basis. And let me assure you: it will 
be done as soon as possible.”

 In a pointer to battles ahead, Arias Cañete said that his office was 
preparing new legislation on renewable energy, electricity markets, energy 
efficiency and a mid-century low greenhouse gas emissions strategy to be 
unveiled in 2020.


Fifteen countries – mainly small islands such as Fiji and the Maldives but 
also Palestine and Somalia – formally joined the agreement on Friday.


The next phase is even more challenging as governments and businesses move to 
phase out carbon emissions from the global economy – first by targeting 
economic sectors that were left out of the Paris agreement.

Jonathan Pershing, the State Department climate envoy, told reporters that the 
US and other countries would now focus on cutting emissions from shipping and 
aviation, as well as the climate super pollutants, known as HFCs, used in 
cooling.

“From now we have to ensure that we have a green economic model, one that is 
no longer based on carbon emissions,” Hollande said.
 