
You might not have seen the current Star Wars movie. In which case I won’t 
ruin it by revealing any top-secret plot twists, like the imperial 
weapon‑shield with one small fatal flaw; the return of a bullish, roided-up 
Darth Vader; or the usual mawkish family stuff that can only be resolved by the 
violent death of a male parent.

Aside from that you’ll find all the usual things. Infomercial-level acting 
that doesn’t matter because there are some excellent “fffft” and “zzzzz” weapon 
noises going on in the background. Good bits where stormtroopers make crackly 
1950s‑style small talk just before being killed. And above all the familiar 
organic landscape of junk, robot-men and animated machines that is the real 
star of these films and the most obvious reason for the films’ staggering 
success.

This interaction between machine world and human world is what Star Wars is 
really all about. Everywhere organic details intrude. The shiny new space 
station already has a worm in its garbage compactor. The Imperial AT-AT walkers 
imitate the movements of half‑speed camels and end up being capsized by a few 
bears with bits of string. The entire opening trilogy rests on whether Darth 
Vader really is more machine than man or man than machine.

Manchester City leave it late before Touré and Iheanacho see off Hull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/hull-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
The obvious comparison is with Charles Dickens, franchise juggernaut of a 
previous age. Dickens’ novels were also full of schmaltz and sentiment. They 
were also redeemed by this same astonishing imaginative landscape where 
buildings come alive, people turn into machines, the industrial world intrudes 
into the world of people, and where the real question in every story is whether 
the people can both survive and remain recognisably themselves.

All of which is quite a roundabout way of getting on to the glorious return of 
Yaya Touré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/hull-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. This has been one of the most unexpected plot twists of the Premier League 
season, and perhaps the most interesting element so far in the Guardiola-era 
making over of Manchester City.

Not least because it wasn’t supposed to happen. Touré was meant to be 
finished, exiled, a rusting hulk junked for parts. In the last month he has 
instead been the key figure in City’s mini-revival before the Premier League 
meeting with Liverpool at the Etihad Stadium on New Year’s Eve. Best of all he 
looks like a different kind of Touré, not just a stone and half lighter and “in 
love with football again” as he declared himself this week, but tactically 
reconditioned, circuit boards wiped, Barça-years memory stick successfully 
reinstalled.

With apologies, but he does seem to attract this kind of robot talk. “I’m not 
a machine, I’m a man,” Touré insisted a couple of seasons ago during a run of 
poor form. And for all the glories of the past six years, there does seem to 
have been a slight note of confusion on this front. The internet is full of 
Touré tribute videos called things like The Machine, or The War Machine. He’s 
the Train, the Powerhouse, the Unstoppable Midfield Goal-Tractor. Does he 
clank, do you think, when he walks in his stockinged feet? Do his gears whirr?

On balance probably not. The Yaya‑as‑machine stuff has always been a nod more 
to his basic physical strength, not to mention a certain playing style, those 
moments where Touré moves upfield and clanks into engine‑of‑war mode, ball 
trapped beneath his thundering pistons, hurtling at some retreating defence 
like an English fire ship scattering the Armada at Calais.

In reality the best part of Touré is quite the opposite, the human qualities, 
the intelligence and adaptability that have made him the most influential part 
in City’s own imperial rise. These are early days. Barring injury and 
suspension he would probably still be an over-qualified spare part. But often 
the best things do happen by accident and it would be a wonderful moment of 
vindication if Touré were to remain a key cog in Guardiola actually making this 
City team work.

Liverpool sink Stoke City to go second after Adam Lallana sparks recovery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/liverpool-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
This is a player who was edged out at Barcelona because Guardiola preferred 
the young Sergio Busquets in central midfield, which was on reflection a fair 
old call. Six years on Touré is playing that Busquets role for Guardiola in 
England. In the winning run against Watford, Arsenal and Hull City Touré has 
had the most touches, completed 90% of his passes, sat massively in front of 
the backline, and looked every inch a footballer who has won the league in four 
countries, a shared all-time record.

Has there ever been a more intelligent and adaptable Premier League 
footballer? Touré has played at centre-back in a Champions League victory. 
Three years later he scored 20 league goals, many from a bespoke Touré-role 
best described as Midfield Forward Run-Clanker, or Goal-Pylon Stampede-Machine. 
Right now he’s re-gearing himself as a kind of Iron Giant version of Xavi, 
reminding the world of the range and rhythm of his long and short game, but 
also blocking and sitting and putting in actual tackles, more then any other 
City player in the last three games. City have won the last eight times Touré 
has played 90 minutes. Every trophy of the modern City era has also been a 
Touré trophy. This isn’t an accident.

For the neutral, Touré has also been a humanising element in City’s ongoing 
transformation. In theory these super-club projects should be deathly, 
steamrollering, essentially quite boring things. A football-industrial complex 
headed up by the world’s most expensive manager and funded by bottomless 
wealth. This sounds in outline like the exact opposite of sport.

Instead it is tribute to football’s basic difficulty, its endless human 
variables, that City’s attempts to become the greatest team on earth should 
boil down, for now, to the slightly fraught personal relationship between a 
33‑year‑old inherited part and a super‑manager who seems to have become 
obsessed with “second balls”, to be in his own way agreeably drunk on English 
football.Jürgen Klopp’s fine, evolving Liverpool  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/liverpool-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
will provide a huge test. Touré might not even play if Guardiola decides to go 
with a more prosaic Fernando‑Fernandinho central pivot. But his driving 
presence remains the key note, six years on, in City’s own very human 
east Manchester death star.
 