
Why do people go to art galleries? For me, it’s to improve the taste of a cup 
of tea.

This is something my mother taught me, early in life, about buying clothes. If 
you make a successful visit to a clothes shop, you can have tea and cake 
afterwards.

Some people evidently consider clothes shopping a pleasure in itself, but my 
mother was not of that school and neither am I. There’s no joy for us in 
schlepping up and down crowded high streets, squeezing in and out of silken 
disappointments. The experience is hot, dull and demoralising. (Less 
demoralising for my mother than me, because she’s slender and everything fits, 
but, like the guests at Jay Gatsby’s parties, she is both slender and easily 
bored.)

So I was not brought up to believe that shopping is a viable leisure activity. 
It can be hell, my mother explained, but it’s a hell mitigated by the presence 
of cafes. I would trot happily behind her round the Brent Cross shopping 
centre, knowing we’d soon be sitting in Lindy’s with a cup of tea and a 
cheesecake (in my mother’s case, a cigarette) (and in my case, a cheesecake and 
a cigarette), rewarding ourselves for acquiring whatever lay in the C&A bag at 
our feet. Owning new clothes was, and is, exciting; the problem was the 
acquisition bit.

That’s all fine. I’m happy to declare it openly. Being bored by clothes 
shopping feels smart and intellectual: “Ooh, get me, insufficiently entertained 
by racks of skinny jeans; my mind is on higher things.”

Unfortunately, it isn’t on higher things. Privately, I feel the same way about 
art galleries. The best thing about them is the cup of tea afterwards. Its 
taste is improved by a sense of achievement, of a well-earned rest, ofsomething 
done.

I’ve been thinking about this because of a certain Stephen Ellcock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/aug/31/facebook-banned-holbein-hand-hans-art-erotic>
. He’s been in the news after being banned from Facebook for “breaching 
community standards” with a Holbein drawing of Erasmus’s hand.

Whether the disembodied hand was considered too sexy for Facebook, or too 
grisly, nobody knows. Facebook admitted it was a mistake and lifted the ban. 
The whole story has been rather useful for Mr Ellcock, as it has drawn 
attention to his bigger Facebook project: he is posting myriad images of 
artworks in an attempt to create a fully accessible cyber-gallery. Most major 
galleries put their collections on the internet these days, but Mr Ellcock says 
he hopes to build his own “online museum, in the same way Uber is a cab company 
without any cabs”.

I’ve had a look at the museum so far. He’s certainly energetic. On the evening 
of 28 August, between 7.15pm and 10.07pm, he posted a different Japanese 
artwork every three minutes.

I wasn’t entirely sure what to make of them. I liked the one of the frog. The 
one of the plum tree (“spans nearly sixteen feet across four sliding panels”) 
sounded like it would be quite impressive if you saw it in real life. On my 
computer it’s 5cm across.

Not that I would’ve had a more profound experience if I’d seen the original. 
Here are some things I have thought while standing in front of the world’s 
great artworks:

• “So that’s the Mona Lisa. She’s got one of those flat faces like people have 
in old paintings. I thought it would be a bit more lifelike, more 
eyes-followey. I wonder what would happen if I ran at it with a marker pen. Is 
it someone else’s turn to stand in front of it? Shall I move? Or does that look 
like I’m not appreciating it properly?”

• “Is Judas meant to look guiltier than the rest of them? They all look 
guilty! If that was a poker game I’d pick my money up and get out fast. What 
are they having for this supper? I can’t make it out. Is it bread rolls? It 
looks like bread rolls. I’d have thought bread rolls were a more recent thing. 
I’m hungry. I wonder if they do sandwiches.”

• “Small cock. I wonder if you could do that on a 3D printer? Those veins on 
his arms really look like veins, I must say. I suppose while I’m here I should 
go round the back and look at the bum. Yes. There it is. Now what? You’re 
supposed to admire sculpture from all angles, otherwise people think you’re a 
philistine. But maybe it’s creepy to stare for ages at a nude one. I’ll go 
round the front again. No that’s worse.”

Is this happening in everyone’s heads? It can’t be. I can’t believe that 100% 
of the people who stand in art galleries looking at art are thinking: “Well, 
here I am, looking at art.” They must be having some sort of other, 
unselfconscious experience.

It’s not that I can’t find art beautiful. I just don’t know what to do, 
standing there in the gallery. I don’t know what to think about. Once I’ve seen 
it I’ve seen it; that takes about two seconds. I am interested and then 
immediately bored, immediately.

I think other people must have an inner calm, a serenity, which makes it 
possible for them to stand there without thinking about how they’re standing 
there. Me, it’s like I can hear a giant comedy clock ticking. It’s awful.

But I want art galleries to exist. It would be even more awful if there 
weren’t any. And they will close if people think they can get the same 
experience online. So I have to hope Stephen Ellcock’s great project is a 
failure: that his virtual gallery won’t do for art what Uber is doing to cabs.

I need people who love looking at art to keep going to art galleries, because 
otherwise I’ll have to go myself.
 