
Five World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> 
titles over five decades have left Brazil with a wide selection of champions of 
all sizes, ages and colours, who understandably squeeze out trophyless legends 
from ceremonial roles regarding the country's second hosting of the tournament. 
But Arthur Antunes Coimbra is not complaining. The veteran of three unsuccessful
Seleção campaigns, he nevertheless is getting enough attention to make any of 
his more garlanded colleagues jealous.

Zico, however, would not touch with a bargepole a place on the organising 
committee after his experience as leading man of Brazil's ill-fated bid to host 
to the 2006 tournament, which was curtailed by a voting deal with South Africa 
with the connivance of the Brazilian FA's president, Ricardo Teixeira, and 
without Zico's knowledge. "While the team and I were touring the globe trying 
to amass support for the bid the president decided to pull the bloody plug and 
do some horse-trading with South Africa without giving us the courtesy of a 
heads-up. We never spoke again after that," saysZico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zico>.

The reason why the former Flamengo, Udinese and Kashima Antlers player decides 
to start his hour-long conversation with the Guardian – for whom he will write 
throughout the World Cup – by revisiting one of his less treasured memories, is 
simple. Although Teixeira has been instrumental in securing the tournament's 
return toBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> for the first 
time in 64 years, Zico does not let a grudge affect his support for the project.

Unlike fellow legends such as Romário – who went from World Cup posterboy to 
one of its most vocal critics – the 61-year-old still believes his country 
deserves the opportunity. "For its history in the game, Brazil was overdue a 
second World Cup. In 1950, when it took place here, the country was by no means 
what it represents in football today, so it was about time the tournament came 
back here.

"Regardless of my problems with Teixeira, I never spoke against it. On the 
contrary, I always had support for having a modern World Cup in Brazil."

Which doesn't mean Zico has got no problems with how Brazil is staging Fifa's 
flagship competition. Apart from obvious disapproval regarding delays and 
spiralling costs – a recent report estimates that stadium construction and 
upgrade costs have jumped 300% since Brazil was awarded the World Cup in 
October 2007 – the man who served as the country's first government sports tsar 
in the early 90s rues what he sees as project failures. "We should not have 
left things until the last minute because this is also the reason why the new 
stadiums, which Brazilian football badly needed, are costing much more than the 
organising committee announced. The people also expected the urban development 
works to be ready on time too, which is not going to happen. It's a huge missed 
opportunity and people got angry."

Nonetheless, in analysing the violent protests that marred last year's 
Confederations Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2013/jul/01/confederations-cup-protesters-maracana-video>
 and threaten to be as regular an occurrence as scenes of supporters wearing 
silly hats during the tournament, Zico believes some of those opposing it are 
guilty of opportunism. "I would like to see people protesting every day instead 
of simply during the World Cup. Because the fact is that the competition is 
happening and all of a sudden I don't see the same joy around as in previous 
tournaments, where people decorated the streets with bunting and everything. We 
need to make this tournament special for the right reasons, because Brazil has 
a duty to deliver the World Cup. I am not against protesting but perhaps it is 
time for a truce."
 Zico celebrates after opening the scoring against New Zealand during the 1982 
World Cup finals. Photograph: Bob Thomas Sports Photography 
Zico reckons that truce would be more easily negotiated if the Seleção was not 
so much a virtual team for many Brazilians these days. While the storied 1982 
World Cup side of which he was the leading light had only two players (Falcão 
and Dirceu) based abroad, the class of 2014 is not only dominated by expats 
(Luiz Felipe Scolari's 23-man squad has only four "domestic" players) but 
contains a number of regulars – David Luiz, Dani Alves, Marcelo, Luiz Gustavo, 
Hulk – who developed their talent abroad and never featured regularly for 
Brazilian clubs.

Added to the fact that Brazil play the bulk of their friendlies abroad in 
order to avoid bickering with European clubs – creating handsome paydays for 
the Confederação Brasileira de Futebol in the process – and you get what Zico 
calls a lack of familiarity between team and public. "A lot of people talk 
about what the 1982 team did on the pitch but that side was so dear to 
Brazilian fans also because it featured players that supporters would see in 
flesh and bone on a regular basis, either at games or even on the streets. Now 
they basically only see theSeleção on the TV.

"It is even worse with the current side, because they did not have to play the 
qualifiers. There is a distance that prevents proper bonding." That can be a 
big deal for crowds as demanding as Brazilians. Last year the tear-jerking 
renditions of the national anthem atthe Confederations Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/30/brazil-spain-live-confederations-cup-final>
 led Spain's manager, Vicente del Bosque, to give credit to the crowd after the 
world and European champions were steamrollered by Scolari's side at the 
Maracanã.

But just a couple of months earlier vicious treatment of the team during a 2-2 
draw with Chile in Belo Horizonte, where Neymar was singled out with boos and 
cries of the Portuguese equivalent of "bottler", led the captain, Thiago Silva, 
to beg fans to give the players a break. "This has always been typical 
behaviour from Brazilian fans, even in my day, but if you are not used to the 
crowd booing it can be pretty daunting. Fortunately, the Confederations Cup 
title helped to endear this group to the public," says Zico.

Unlike some former Seleção favourites, he is not overly pessimistic about 
Brazil's chances of a sixth trophy and the chance to at least dilutethe painful 
memories of the 1950 loss to Uruguay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/feb/18/world-cup-25-stunning-moments-no2-uruguay-brazil-1950-scott-murray>
 at the same Maracanã stadium that will host the 2014 final.

"Scolari's Brazil is a team that is very strong collectively; they put 
opponents under pressure. They go for the jugular from the start and try to get 
an early goal instead of waiting to counterattack. That helps with the 
supporters, who appreciate the boldness. My biggest worry is that this is a 
group where 17 out of 23 players have never played in a World Cup and 
two-thirds of our likely starting XI haven't even taken part in a qualifying 
campaign. That cannot be replaced by Champions League games, I'm afraid. But 
these are good players who as a group have become very tough to beat."

Much has been said about how the draw could force a meeting between Brazil and 
Spain in the first knockout game but Zico scoffs at such fears. "You can't win 
the World Cup without playing the big boys. Indeed, the draw has pitfalls, but 
you have to remember the European countries will have to handle the experience 
of playing in South America. Brazil have shown composure and the players 
understood the responsibility that comes with playing a World Cup at home."
 Brazil versus Argentina in the 1982 World Cup. Photograph: Bongarts/Getty 
Images 
The fourth-highest scorer in Seleção history (with 52 goals in 72 games) does 
not believe that the totem of the 2014 generation, will be more anxious than 
his peers. "Neymar is in a different situation than Lionel Messi. Messi has 
Argentina's team built around him while theSeleção is not as dependent on 
Neymar. Neymar will be instrumental if Brazil want to go far and he has not had 
any serious injuries. People say that all the controversy around his transfer 
has affected him but I see a simple case of Neymar having to adapt to a change 
of country and a move to a club [Barcelona] where the manager [Gerardo Martino] 
sometimes insists on playing him out of position."

Speaking of Messi, Zico sees Argentina as the biggest danger. "They found a 
way to get the best of Messi and they have an absurd amount of attacking 
players. Their group is not difficult [Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iran and 
Nigeria] and they will travel much less than other teams."

He also thinks Spain and Germany are obvious contenders, warns about Italy's 
resurgence and predicts a few shocks. "The South American sides will cause some 
surprises. I think Chile might well qualify ahead of Holland in Group B and 
Uruguay gave Brazil a scare in the Confederations Cup." That is not necessarily 
horrendous news for England, as Zico sees their group being decided by the 
fourth country, Costa Rica. "Italy, England and Uruguay are traditional teams 
and they will probably take points off each other which would make their 
results against Costa Rica very, very important."

Never shy of complaining about negative tactics, Zico disagrees with claims 
that Scolari's adaptation of Bayern Munich's high pressing game is 
"un-Brazilian". "TheSeleção has been playing well and I like the way they 
closed Spain down last year. Football nowadays demands teams attacking and 
defending more collectively than ever."

He draws a comparison with the recent clash between Real Madrid and Bayern 
Munich in the Champions League. "Carlo Ancelotti [Real's manager] was 
criticised in the first game for sitting back too much but it makes sense when 
you have sprinters like Ronaldo and [Gareth] Bale, who are lethal on the break. 
But it is also nonsense to say Bayern's defeat represents the end of tiki-taka. 
I don't think Pep Guardiola needs to remind anyone of how many trophies he won 
playing this way. He still made it to a Champions League semi-final. Mistakes 
were made but it doesn't mean a style needs to be killed."

Stylistic consistency is something he has repeated almost to exhaustion in 
recent decades. The 1982 side failed to win the World Cup but they still won 
plaudits for their elegance on the ball, and Zico is adamant thatthe epic 3-2 
defeat to Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/jul/25/italy-brazil-1982> in 
Barcelona 32 years ago was not unfair but did send the wrong message. "Italy 
played well when it mattered but that should not have invalidated our approach 
to the game. The fact people still remember ours and the Dutch 1974 squads, for 
example, shows that there is no shame in dying while being faithful to a 
philosophy where the result was not an obsession."

As well as three World Cups as a player (1978, '82, and '86) and one as Mário 
Zagallo's assistant manager (1998), Zico has a World Cup managerial experience 
on his CV.

It was in Germany 2006, where after taking Japan to an Asian Cup title two 
years before he had to endure the experience of facing his own country. The 
images of the formerSeleção player singing the Brazil national anthem in Japan 
kit showed how mixed his feelings were. "That was horrendous. I would hate to 
go through that experience again," he recalls.
 Zico, coaching Japan, watches his players during an official World Cup 
practice session in Dortmund. Photograph: Kimimasa Mayama/Reuters 
Japan failed to win a single game (Brazil hammered them 4-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/worldcup2006/minbymin/0,,1788382,00.html>
) and Zico resigned to take over Fenerbahce. His two-year spell at the Turkish 
club was marked by their 2007-08 Champions League campaign, where they were 
narrowly defeated by Chelsea in the quarter-finals. His managerial career never 
again hit the heights and included stints in Greece, Uzbekistan, Russia and 
with the Iraq national team as well as the Qatari side al-Gharafa, with whom he 
parted company in January.

Does he miss sitting in the dugout, especially with a World Cup round the 
corner? "No, I am not in a hurry to return to management at all. It's hard for 
me to get to grips with how much players have changed since I retired. There 
are too many annoying habits; the kids are getting rich earlier and earlier, 
which brings a weird sense of entitlement."

Not even the Seleção job, which will quite likely be available whether or not 
Scolari becomes the first man since Italy's Vittorio Pozzo in 1938 to win the 
World Cup twice as manager, seems to entice him, principally because he is 
dismayed by the current technical levels in Brazilian club football and by the 
fact managerial positions have a higher turnover rate than the drummer's job in 
Spinal Tap. "I have always said that to manage Brazil I would have to be 
managing in Brazil first. And I am not happy at all with the way things are 
going here now." A month of hosting the world's biggest sporting festival, he 
hopes, may begin to alter that.

• A picture caption was amended on 14 May 2014 to give the details of the 
match at the 1982 World Cup in which Zico opened the scoring
 