
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
extended their quietly compelling run of Premier League victories to six here 
with a stodgy, lopsided, but still oddly inevitable 2-0 defeat of West Ham 
United pegged out around two decisive moments.

Asked afterwards about decisions going his team’s way, José Mourinho offered a 
playful show of innocence, agreeing that his own decision to rejig his team’s 
attacking personnel had made the difference. This was only half the story. The 
real turning point here was a Mike Dean joint, the Premier League’s most 
theatrically exhibitionist referee choosing to send off Sofiane Feghouli with 
15 minutes gone after a challenge with Phil Jones that saw both men tackle 
strongly for a loose ball.

With the match scoreless at half‑time, Mourinho took his own moment to 
intervene, demonstrating the muscle in this United squad by bringing on Juan 
Mata and then after nearly an hour Marcus Rashford, who combined for the 
opening goal. Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s second near the end, lashed in coming back 
from an offside position, continued his own sublime run of form, a 12th goal in 
12 games that will no doubt once again have his critics, such as they are, 
eating their balls.

Slaven Bilic felt hard done by at the final whistle after a disciplined West 
Ham rearguard. But despite some obvious fatigue at the tail end of the festive 
thrash, United still looked like a team gathering momentum. Victory in a bitty 
game, 48 hours after their previous win against Middlesbrough, leaves them in 
sixth and playing here with a sense of strength in reserve.

West Ham United v Manchester United: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/02/west-ham-united-v-manchester-united-premier-league-live>
There was a stodginess to the early exchanges on a chilly night in east 
London. West Ham brought the first waves of noise rolling around this vast, 
open, egg‑shaped bowl, Feghouli and Dimitri Payet putting Manuel Lanzini in 
space for a low shot that David de Gea plunged to palm wide.

With 15 minutes gone the key moment in the match arrived. Michail Antonio 
chested the ball back towards Feghouli, who stretched to reach the ball, as did 
Jones. No studs were raised. It looked like a hard but fair challenge, although 
Jones came off worse. The referee took his time and then flourished – the word 
is apt – a straight red card.

It was a poor decision in many ways, a needless intervention that skewed the 
entire night for players, TV viewers and the near 57,000 people inside the 
stadium. As mistakes go it was at least on a fittingly Olympian scale, in 
keeping with the hauteur of a referee whose sweeping gestures suggest each 
match he attends is a spectacle made up of three interlocking forces, Team A, 
Team B and Mike D.

The flow of possession switched immediately. Michael Carrick began to tick in 
midfield as West Ham fell back into a hard-pressing 4-3-2 shape. Mourinho had 
made five changes to his starting XI, with Anthony Martial replaced by Jesse 
Lingard. In theory the front line retained its balance of speed and mobility 
either side of Ibrahimovic but on this wide pitch and against a team down to 
10, Martial’s absence seemed significant. Havard Nordtveit was a fill-in at 
right back but United barely troubled him in the first half.

They should still have scored with 34 minutes gone. Ibrahimovic played a 
crossfield pass to Henrikh Mkhitaryan. He found Antonio Valencia in the middle. 
His weak, scuffed shot was straight at Darren Randolph, who scooped it away on 
the line. The ball trickled to Lingard, who somehow managed to hit the post. On 
the touchline Mourinho whirled around in search of someone to share his disgust 
with before spotting the rest of his dugout 50 metres behind him in one of the 
bubbles of empty space left by jamming a football pitch into this borrowed 
stadium.

West Ham had their moments, Lanzini’s curling shot drawing another clawing 
save from De Gea. Half-time arrived accompanied by a chorus of Dean-related 
boos, only partly drowned out by a blast of jarring and irrelevant music from 
the deafening stadium PA. At which point Mourinho made the change that would 
prove decisive, bringing Carrick back into defence and sending on Mata to lurk 
usefully just behind Ibrahimovic.

For a while things continued to almost happen. Cheikhou Kouyaté escaped 
without a card after a horrible tackle on Mkhitaryan. Antonio almost got his 
head to Payet’s free-kick. With United dominant but lacking punch, Mourinho 
brought on Rashford for Lingaard to test that right side with some thrust 
coming in from the touchline.

The home team still fought gamely, Lanzini skittering forward to put Antonio 
in on goal with a lovely little through pass. De Gea saved with his legs, but 
Antonio had time and space to find a corner. He really should have scored.

West Ham were punished two minutes later with a goal made and scored by 
Mourinho’s two substitutes. Rashford ran at Nordtveit, beat him twice and laid 
back a neat pass for Mata. His finish was instant, drawing a roar of pent-up 
relief from the away supporters.

United were cruising now as West Ham’s energy levels sagged. Paul Pogba picked 
up a loose Payet pass and shot just wide. Andy Carroll entered finally to test 
United’s own rejigged back line. They held on and with 78 minutes gone 
Ibrahimovic spanked in the second. He was offside. Pogba was also offside and 
arguably obstructing the defence. It was a goal that summed up both West Ham’s 
night and United’s own sense of gathering conviction.

Islam Slimani heads relieved Leicester to victory over West Ham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/leicester-city-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report> 