
There is a popular uniform for many of those attending the present round of 
fashion shows in the world's hippest cities – skinny jeans, trainers and a fur 
coat. Big-name design houses including Dolce & Gabbana,Alexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen>, Prada, Louis Vuitton, 
Fendi and Tom Ford have been pushing fur on the catwalks, and the fur coat for 
the male market is a major new trend for next winter.

This month the biggest auction of furs ever seen in the industry will take 
place in Helsinki, when dealers and designers will be vying for 11 million mink 
pelts, two million fox and one million assorted wild animal furs. Prices are 
expected to reach record levels.

Mark Oaten, chief executive of the International Fur Trade Federation, says 
that demand for fur is so huge that the industry is suffering a desperate 
skills shortage. According to Oaten, a younger generation has discovered fur, 
while recent technological advances mean that the industry can do far more with 
fur in terms of mixing it with other fabrics, thinning it and dyeing it.

"The traditional fur was grandma's fur coat, which was a one-off luxury buy 
that you bought and treasured all your life," he said. "But five or six years 
ago technology moved on and allowed designers to use fur in fashion, allowing 
it to be used in a million ways. It can be affordable and there is a whole new 
generation to fall in love with fur."

The renaissance of fur poses a major challenge to anti-fur campaigners such as 
Meg Mathews, who is now leading the latest effort byPeople for the Ethical 
Treatment of Animals <http://www.peta.org> (Peta) to persuade people to stop 
wearing furs.

Mathews was behind last week's decision by the nightclub Mahiki, frequented by 
London's young rich, to announce that it would no longer admit anyone wearing 
fur. She spent last Thursday evening at the Mayfair venue's front door, handing 
out "no fur" badges to customers. "The idea of wearing an animal's fur has 
always made me feel sick," she said. "You only have to see the videos of 
skinned animals lying in a heap, still breathing and lifting their heads, to 
understand that stealing an animal's skin for the sake of vanity is wrong.

"I remember when Peta released its first iconic 'I'd rather go naked than wear 
fur' campaign in the early 1990s – back when few people had ever seen a video 
or even a photograph of how horribly animals die for fur. The impact was huge. 
Almost overnight, wearing fur became unfashionable and designers couldn't wait 
to shout about how they were fur-free and fabulous. Retailers such as 
Selfridges and Liberty brought in strict no-fur policies.

"There are so many great designers working with cruelty-free fabrics, and 
that's what we should be celebrating during fashion season.

"My daughter Anais is at a time in her life when she's making choices about 
the kind of person she wants to be, and I want to show her that it's cool to be 
kind and that making compassionate choices shows character. We had a great 
turnout this week for the celebration of Mahiki's new fur-free policy, and we 
hope that other clubs follow Mahiki's positive example by going fur-free as 
well."

But can anyone persuade the fashion-leaders to abandon fur? Vocal anti-fur 
campaigners Stella McCartney, Sadie Frost and now Mathews are all chums of model
Kate Moss <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss>, who has a wardrobe 
packed with fur jerkins and sealskin boots and seems supremely unfazed by her 
controversial choices. Models and celebrities have been notoriously contrary 
around the issue. Naomi Campbell appeared naked in 1994 in an advert for Peta 
under the strapline "I'd rather go naked than wear fur"; 15 years later she 
caused consternation by becoming the face of a furrier firm. Cindy Crawford was 
another high-profile defector from the Peta cause.

Shortly after Tony Blair's government signed into law a bill banning fur 
farming in the UK – which came into effect in 2003 – his wife, Cherie, was 
unhelpfully photographed while wearing a rabbit-fur coat.

Designer Vivienne Westwood has gone the other way. Persuaded to strip out fur 
from her collections, she became a convert after seeing a video of steel traps 
used to catch wild animals for their furs – some 10% to 15% of fur comes from 
wild as opposed to farmed animals.

Many high-street shops in the UK have banned fur, including H&M, Topshop, New 
Look, Selfridges and House of Fraser. Diesel, Calvin Klein, Ralph Lauren and 
Zara joined them last month. But there are plenty of specialised UK outlets 
selling fur, including a new one specialising in buying and selling vintage and 
remodelling existing items.

One owner of a store in northern England asked not to be named by the Observer 
but said: "We're very cautious about drawing attention to ourselves because of 
past events and the way some people are. There's definitely a resurgence and we 
are happy to see our sales growing; it's nice to see."

Peta rejects the defence that a fur is fine to wear if it is vintage or 
second-hand. "Whether the animal died 50 years ago or last week is hardly 
relevant. Wearing it is sending an unacceptable message that it is OK to wear 
fur," said Ben Williamson of the lobby group.

He urged people to give any furs they have to Peta. "We use them as bedding 
for animal rescue centres," he said. "You will always get celebrities and 
designers using fur to provoke controversy, but it doesn't translate to what 
people are wearing on the streets. An RSPCA survey in 2011 showed that 95% of 
British people would not wear fur."

The cold winter has seen record sales of fur in New York, while China and 
other Asian markets are clamouring for it. Even Dubai now has 400 shops selling 
fur.

Peta is holding out for a hero to change the mood. Can Mathews be the one to 
get fur's most famous UK ambassador, Kate Moss, to stop wearing it? "We're 
always hoping," said Williamson.
 