
BP chief executive Tony Hayward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tony-hayward> felt the full-on wrath of a 
powerful committee of the US Congress today, determined to bring him to account 
for what it called an astonishing culture of "corporate complacency" that has 
led to America's worst environmental catastrophe.

In the 59 days since the oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico, Hayward has been 
transformed into one of the most hated men in the US, and the ferocity of the 
encounter between him and the House of Representatives committee on energy and 
commerce was much-anticipated. As one committee member noted: "The anger atBP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> is at fever pitch. It's almost 
palpable."

The committee has been conducting an aggressive inquiry into the gusher, and 
called Hayward in to answer specific charges of suspected safety lapses and 
shortcuts in the design plan of the well in the days before the explosion on 
the ill-fated Deepwater Horizon rig.

But Hayward, who had been carefully coached by legal and media teams and was 
testifying under oath, failed to satisfy.

"The committee is extremely frustrated with your lack of candour," Bart 
Stupak, who is leading the investigation, told him. "You are the CEO. You have 
a PhD. We hope you have more candour in your responses."

The reprimand was just a taste of the rancour towards Hayward. He was told by 
angry committee members that BP had a history of cavalier disregard for 
environmental rules and workers' safety.

Hayward's claims to have ushered in a new regime of safety after taking over 
as chief executive of the company in 2007 were plainly ridiculed.

"When I heard of the explosion in the Gulf, the name that immediately popped 
into my mind was BP," said Stupak.
 Panel member Steve Scalise holds a photo of a pelican - the state bird of 
Louisiana - covered in oil, as he questions BP chief executive Tony Hayward. 
Photograph: Haraz N Ghanbari/AP 
But the committee's search for answers was repeatedly frustrated by Hayward, 
who denied any involvement in or prior knowledge of the ill-fated decisions 
about the well that led to the blow-out.

"I was not part of the decision making process on this well," he said. "I had 
no prior knowledge."

Hayward had multiple variations on the same theme: that he had no direct 
involvement or knowledge of problems on the Deepwater Horizon, even though 
engineers lower down in BP's hierarchy had spoken about a "nightmare well".

He clung to his argument that it would be premature to comment until 
investigations had run their course. However, he did allow that BP was pursuing 
seven lines of inquiry into the disaster, focusing on the cement casing of the 
well and well control procedures, as well as the failed blow-out preventer 
safety device.

His answers, all delivered in flat, impassive tones, infuriated committee 
members. "You are kicking the can down the road," said Henry Waxman, the 
chairman of the committee. "I find that irresponsible."

Ed Markey, who chairs the subcommittee on global warming, snapped: "Your 
equivocation is not reassuring." Even the Republican members were frustrated. 
"You are copping out," said Phil Gingrey. "It seems like your testimony has 
been way too evasive."

Today's session in Congress looked set to erase whatever modest rehabilitation 
in BP's image was affected by the company's decision to pay $20bn into an 
independently managed fund to pay victims of the disaster.

But in one glimmer of hope, the US official overseeing the administration's 
response to the spill said that the drilling of a relief well meant to staunch 
the gusher was proceeding ahead of schedule.

Hayward admitted to the committee that a relief well would be the only sure 
way of stopping the gusher.
 