
There should be no shame attached to Gordon Strachan’s Scotland side, which 
does not contain a single world-class player, being defeated by a team 
featuring 11 of them. The frustration in Strachan’s camp must be that an 
attitude so prevalent against Germany here was conspicuous by its absencethree 
days earlier in Georgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/04/georgia-scotland-euro-2016-qualifying-match-report>
.

Northern Ireland 1-1 Hungary | Euro 2016 Qualifying Group F match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/07/northern-ireland-hungary-euro-2016-qualifying-match-report>
Germany, inspired by Thomas Müller, were worthy winners from an occasionally 
breathless encounter. It is a matter of when, not if, Joachim Löw’s World Cup 
winners will qualify forEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>. They remain a joy to watch.

Scotland’s hopes now lie in the play-off route, a matter not aided by the 
Republic of Ireland’s defeat of Georgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/07/republic-of-ireland-georgia-euro-2016-qualifiers-match-report>
. The Irish have their destiny in their own hands.

Still, Strachan was at his most emphatic yet when the dust had settled on 
Monday night. Meetings with Poland and Gibraltar will round off the Scottish 
campaign.

“We are still in this, trust me,” said the Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland> manager. “If we play like that 
with the same determination and get a wee bit of luck, there is absolutely no 
doubt about it.

“I can’t wait to get them back together to go for it again over the next two 
games. I’m really proud of them. They are disappointed in there but they should 
be proud of themselves. I can feel within their disappointment they know they 
gave it a good shot. Someone said to me that we didn’t attack them much 
tonight. Well, go and ask Brazil how they got on against them.”

Löw cut a contented figure. “It was anything but easy,” he said. “Scotland put 
men behind the ball, used long balls and were hoping for dead-ball situations 
in front of our box. We didn’t allow the Scots any chances from open play. It 
was a fully deserved win.”

Scotland’s team bus arrived at Hampden just an hour before kick-off; a 
multi-vehicle accident had triggered teatime chaos on Scotland’s main motorway.

The nature of the German opener was as much a cause for home frustration as 
the fact that it arrived at all. Müller, hardly an unknown protagonist in this 
movie, was allowed to stroll towards the penalty area without anything remotely 
resembling close attention. His 18-yard shot was not particularly well hit, but 
a deflection played a part in deceiving the helpless David Marshall.

Republic of Ireland keep alive Euro 2016 hopes as Jonathan Walters sinks 
Georgia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/07/republic-of-ireland-georgia-euro-2016-qualifiers-match-report>
Just when Scotland would have been forgiven an expectation of the worst, 
salvation arrived. A terrific Shaun Maloney free-kick, from near the corner of 
the German penalty area, worried Manuel Neuer to the extent that he could only 
parry the ball straight against the legs of his team-mate Mats Hummels. Neither 
German player could prevent the subsequent and inevitable own-goal.

Scottish eagerness may have played its part in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> edging back in front. Emre Can 
was afforded far too much space to shoot at Marshall when meeting a cross from 
the left. Marshall’s stop reached the head of Müller, who nodded home via the 
left post. Goalkeeping traditionalists will bemoan the direction of Marshall’s 
save but the generosity bestowed on Can was the bigger crime. Müller had his 
eighth goal in this group.

Were Scotland suitably chastised? Far from it. They rounded off the first half 
with the game’s fourth goal. Maloney was again involved, with his poor corner 
only partially cleared by the Germans. James McArthur, one of three Scotland 
changes from Tbilisi, returned the ball with side-footed interest. Neuer would 
again have been unhappy with his role, with the custodian apparently confused 
by the abundance of bodies in front of him.

Strachan’s half-time decision surrounded whether to stick or twist. Before the 
game Scotland’s manager had spoken of his desire to garner a point. Strachan 
cannot have banked on such a pulsating affair or, surely, defensive raggedness 
at either end.

Germany had the ball in the net within five minutes of the restart, only for 
the offside flag to deny them a goal for the second time of the evening. It was 
the correct decision; Mario Götze had drifted a yard to the wrong side of 
Scotland’s last defender.

The harsh critique would be to point to Scottish failure to heed a warning. In 
reality they were undone by a wonderful piece of play, befitting Germany’s 
status.

Müller’s movement was superb as he collected a pass from Can before an 
exchange or three with Ilkay Gündogan. The Borussia Dortmund player justified 
his inclusion with a crisp finish.

The more learned among the Scottish support applauded the goal and rightly so. 
Gündogan’s strike was the precursor to Germany’s finest spell, thought Alan 
Hutton again raised Scottish hopes with a shot which flew narrowly wide of 
Neuer’s upright. Generally, though, Germany were keeping the Scots at arms’ 
length.

Götze should have settled matters five minutes from time but blazed over. 
Marshall entered the opposition penalty area for a corner in the dying seconds 
but there was to be no dramatic intervention. If truth be told, it would not 
have been deserved.
 