
Becoming an octogenarian is something to celebrate whatever your line of work 
– but to turn 80 in fashion, and still be a household name worn on underpants, 
watches and accessories around the world, is a bit special. Such is the happy 
fate of Giorgio Armani, who reaches his ninth decade on Friday. Here are eight 
things you might not know about the designer.
 Charlotte Rampling in Armani. Photograph: Conde Nast Archive/Corbis 
1. The current cult of the bomber jacket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2014/jun/30/what-we-learned-from-the-spring-2015-menswear-shows>
 can be traced back to Armani. The first pieces he designed under his own name 
were a series of leather bomber jackets in 1970.

2. He is a regular in rap lyrics, with Wiz Khalifa, Kanye West and TI recently 
giving Armani a shout-out. Biggie Smalls was also a fan – he had a penchant for 
Armani pyjamas, apparently.

3. His brand, with couture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jul/08/giorgio-armani-haute-couture-paris>
, ready-to-wear and Emporio lines on the catwalk, is big business. In 2012, the 
annual revenue reached £1.67bn. Armani himself is worth a cool £4.96bn, and is 
officially the most successful Italian designer ever.

4. Armani was well-versed in fashion before he went out on his own. He was a 
window dresser first, working at La Rinascente department store in Milan. 
Freelance gigs for Zegna, Cerruti and Loewe followed.
 Chelsea players in Armani suits. 
5. Armani loves sport. He is a fan of Inter Milan and is on the board of 
Olimpia Milano basketball team. If he had to pick a team in the Premier League, 
it would probably be Chelsea. He designed suits for the team and worked on the 
interiors at Stamford Bridge.

6. Fashion wasn't his first career choice. Armani studied medicine and 
completed military service before deciding it was clothes, not bandages, that 
were his calling.
 Giorgio Armani in 1980. Photograph: Mondadori via Getty Images 
7. The designer, who wears a uniform of navy, is a self-described 
perfectionist, even arguing in a Vogue interview that he was "10 times" worse 
than fashion's most high-profile stickler, Mr Tom Ford.

8. Armani is practically fashion's patron saint in Italy. He has designed 
uniforms for the police force, kitted out Milanese taxi drivers and even 
designed the cover of a gospels book for the pope.
 