
Michelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> got dressed 
today knowing that every thread of the outfit she picked for the moment she 
became first lady would be forensically inspected for meaning. Her choice was a 
dress and coat in Swiss wool lace, lined in French silk, designed by a 
Cuban-American fashion designer, Isabel Toledo, and made by a team of Chinese, 
Polish and Spanish seamstresses in Toledo's New York studio. As the images were 
beamed around the world, the colour was being described by many commentators as 
gold, with all the regal connotations of that colour; the New York Times, 
however, judged it to be the rather more subtle and sophisticated shade of 
lemon grass. Toledo herself, who only knew for sure that her outfit had made 
the cut when she saw it on CNN today, described it as an "optimistic" colour, 
that "had sunshine".

The bold choices that characterised her campaign wardrobe made Michelle Obama 
a fashion icon even before the election. Today was her first attempt to blend 
her own, very modern image with the venerated position of first lady. Stung, 
perhaps, by the lukewarm reception to the daring black-and-red dress she wore 
on election night (one wit described that as "an apron designed by Mark 
Rothko") she seemed to lean a little too heavily on recent precedent today. In 
her richly textured lace, and abiding by a now old-fashioned convention of a 
matching dress and coat, Obama appeared to be "channelling" the stately look 
favoured by Barbara and Laura Bush on state occasions, rather than the sleek, 
pared down image of Jackie Kennedy, to whom she has often been compared. What 
lifted the outfit were the accessories: sleek leather gloves (which she used to 
hold the Bible during her husband's swearing in) and Jimmy Choo pumps in a 
smartly offbeat shade of olive.

From a fashion-watcher's perspective, it was Malia and Sasha Obama who stole 
the show today. Not even Aretha Franklin's spectacular hat could compete with a 
virtuoso display of on-trend colour-blocking by the first daughters, in their 
contrasting coats and scarves. Malia, 10, looked terrific in electric blue and 
black while Sasha, 7, hit it out of the park in this season's hot 
orange-and-pink colour combination. You heard it here first: orange and pink is 
the new red, white and blue.
 