
Taking four points off Germany does not amount to qualification if you get 
only one each from Poland and, most damagingly, Scotland, and that is why the
Republic of Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> 
must now navigate their way through a two-legged play-off if they are to reach 
Euro 2016.

Martin O’Neill’s side were outgunned in a gripping and chaotic duel for 
automatic qualification and the winning goal was struck, rather inevitably, by 
Europe’s deadliest striker, Robert Lewandowski. It was the Bayern Munich 
forward’s 13th goal of the campaign – equalling a record – and he is the main 
reason whyPoland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland> advance directly 
to France while Ireland have to wait for next Sunday’s draw to discover their 
play-off opponents.

O’Neill made five alterations to the line-up that started that famous win over 
the world champions four days previously but in Warsaw his side looked a touch 
drained by those exertions, although a spirited late rally almost yielded a 
second equaliser, Richard Keogh’s close-range header being saved by Lukasz 
Fabianski late on.

Jeff Hendrick: Republic of Ireland will channel anger from Poland defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/12/jeff-hendrick-republic-of-ireland-channel-anger-poland-defeat>
The fresh additions – especially Seamus Coleman – in theory made Ireland even 
stronger than against Germany, but the accompanying rejig did not work, with 
James McClean and Glenn Whelan struggling to get a foothold in midfield. The 
visitors strained to match the offensive verve of the Poles, who showed no sign 
of settling for the scoreless draw that would have been enough for them to 
progress. With Wes Hoolahan fit enough only for a place on the bench Ireland 
had to pursue the goals they needed without their primary creator.

Poland, by contrast, had their talisman and Lewandowski quickly set about 
trying to justify his manager’s pre-match assertion that no one could stop him. 
After a jagged run into the box by Lukasz Piszczek it took two Irish defenders 
and the goalkeeper, Darren Randolph, to block Lewandowski’s first shot after 12 
minutes. The reprieve was only momentary. The set piece was delivered to 
Grzegorz Krychowiak, standing alone 25 yards out, and he took one touch before 
rifling a low shot into the bottom corner.

Ireland equalised within three minutes after Michal Pazdan was penalised for 
catching Shane Long in the face with a raised foot. The Poles protested that 
the foul occurred outside the box but the referee ruled otherwise. Jon Walters 
kept cool to fire in from the penalty spot. It became a frantic, hurly-burly 
contest in which both teams hurtled forward when they could, driven on by the 
prize at stake and the apparent fragility of the opposing defence.

But it was Poland who did most of the attacking. Kamil Grosicki’s regular 
raids in-field from the left were a particular irritant to Coleman in the first 
half and the forward could have put the hosts back in front on the half hour 
but curled wide from 16 yards. Ireland did not make it to the break without 
further damage.

In the 41st minute Krzysztof Maczynski clipped a cross towards the penalty 
spot. Lewandowski’s finish was lethal as he powered a splendid header into the 
net from 10 yards. It said much for how stretched Ireland’s defence had become 
that Walters was the nearest Irish player to a striker about whom the visitors 
could not have been more forewarned.

Ireland needed a second-half improvement like the ones that they had mustered 
several times already in the campaign, including in the drawn match with Poland 
in Dublin. Make it 2-2 and Ireland, not Poland, would qualify automatically.

Scotland stroll to 6-0 win over Gibraltar as Steven Fletcher scores hat-trick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/11/gibraltar-scotland-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
Yet Poland continued to mount the most raids. Pazdan glanced a header wide 
after charging up from the back to join in the attacking. Ireland did not get 
another glimpse of the Polish goal until the 52nd minute when Glenn Whelan 
brought a save from Fabianski from 25 yards. Long’s week of glory then took a 
turn for the worse as he departed injured in the 54th minute. Would his veteran 
replacement, Robbie Keane, summon another act of heroism at this stage of his 
career? No.

Aiden McGeady was introduced moments later for Whelan and that change did have 
a positive effect. Jeff Hendrick moved from wide to central midfield and helped 
Ireland secure a better platform in the middle. They began to put more pressure 
on the Poles, whose nerves jangled. Grosicki would have soothed them if he had 
scored in the 64th minute when one-on-one with Randolph, but the goalkeeper 
rushed off his line to save well. Coleman made a terrific last-ditch tackle to 
deny Lewandowski in the 71st minute.

O’Neill turned to Hoolahan with 18 minutes to go. Ireland began pushing Poland 
further back. Keogh went agonisingly close 10 minutes from time but, after a 
fine work from McGeady, Fabianksi parried the defender’s close-range header and 
Poland scrambled the ball to safety. Poland held on, and O’Shea will be 
suspended for the first leg of the play-off after being dismissed for a second 
bookable offence in stoppage time. Walters’ yellow card means he will also be 
absent.

“I think because of the quick turnaround after the Germany game the intensity 
wasn’t there in the first half,” said O’Neill. “It was just hard to replicate 
that effort only a couple of days later, away from home against a very fine 
Polish [team] who may go on to do very well indeed in France. But we’ve got two 
matches left, and we’ll go for it.”
 