
Karim Benzema scored twice as Real Madrid thrashed Real Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> 4-1 at home on Saturday 
without the suspended Cristiano Ronaldo to ensure they remained top of La Liga.

Sociedad defender Aritz Elustondo scored his first goal for the Basque club 36 
seconds into the match, but James Rodríguez headed the hosts level in the third 
minute and Madrid never looked back.

Sergio Ramos scored eight minutes before half-time and Benzema made it 3-1 in 
the 53rd minute before he struck an exquisite second in the 76th.

Ronaldo watched from the stands at Santiago Bernabéu stadium as he served the 
first of a two-game ban forkicking Córdoba defender Edimar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/24/cordoba-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
 last weekend.

Madrid opened a four-point gap over Barcelona who face Villarreal at home on 
Sunday. Madrid will also play a game in hand against Sevilla on Wednesday.

David Moyes’s Sociedad displayed little of the verve which helped them 
overcome a 2-0 deficit to fight back fora stunning 4-2 victory over Madrid in 
August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2014/aug/31/realsociedad-v-realmadrid>
, before the former Everton manager’s arrival in Spain.

Only Gerónimo Rulli’s goalkeeping spared Sociedad a bigger defeat as Moyes and 
his side remain in 11th place and are still the only team yet to win away in 
the league this season. They did catch Madrid cold on this occasion as 
left-back Yuri Berchiche charged up the pitch to win a corner, which Rubén 
Pardo fired into the area for Elustondo to thump in.

But the European champions did not take long to respond as Rodríguez slipped 
between Sociedad’s central defenders to head Marcelo’s floated pass into the 
corner of the goal.

Sociedad never looked steady at the back, but continued to threaten until 
forward Carlos Vela hurt his right knee and had to be substituted in the 17th 
minute.

Rulli saved shots from Benzema and Rodríguez before denying the France 
international a second time, only for Ramos to blast Madrid into the lead.

With Ronaldo out, Gareth Bale had been expected to take over scoring duties, 
but his eagerness got the better of him in the 40th minute when he intercepted 
a Benzema pass meant for Rodríguez and shot wide with Rulli off his line.

Bale made amends after the restart when he worked a passing combination with 
Benzema before slipping the ball back for the striker to score. The France 
forward then capped a strong showing with an unstoppable curling shot past 
Rulli.
 