
Shane Long came off the bench to fire the Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> to a historic victory 
over the world champions and guarantee Martin O’Neill’s team a place in the 
Euro 2016 play-offs at least. But why should they settle for that now they have 
shown they are capable of victories like this? On Sunday they will duel with 
Poland in Warsaw for automatic qualification.

“I’m ecstatic to win – you’d think that would at least be deserving of winning 
the tournament,” joked a jubilant O’Neill. “But it’s not the case and we 
haven’t even qualified.” A win on Sunday, or even a high-scoring draw, would 
complete the job.Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> would 
have been through with a draw in Dublin but they too face an intense final 
game, although they are unlikely to drop points at home to Georgia.

Scotland Euro 2016 dream over after Poland’s sting in the tail
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/scotland-poland-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
Then again, it had seemed unlikely they would drop points in Dublin. You could 
almost hear a gulp go around a packed Aviva Stadium before kick-off as home 
fans considered the lineups. Injuries and suspensions forced O’Neill to make 
four changes to the side who edged past Georgia last month, with the Ipswich 
Town striker Daryl Murphy and the Burnley left-back Stephen Ward surprising 
inclusions. Ward’s only action this season had been in a Capital One Cup defeat 
at Port Vale in August.

Eight of Germany’s starters triumphed in the last World Cup final.

Germany threatened to score after 21 seconds. Ward, however, proved his 
sharpness by getting his toe to a cross just before Thomas Müller could turn it 
into the net.

The hosts went forward when they got the ball but that was not often early on, 
as Germany made themselves at home. They sought to thrive down the left, in 
particular, with Marco Reus and Mario Götze taking early turns to test Cyrus 
Christie, the right-back gaining his third cap in place of the injured Seamus 
Coleman. The Irish strained manfully to keep track of the visitors’ cunning 
movement but were negligent in the eighth minute when Jérôme Boateng was left 
free to meet a corner from eight yards out. He headed over.

John O’Shea was more vigilant moments later when he threw himself in front of 
a shot by Ilkay Gündogan after another piercing German move down the left. 
Richard Keogh then had to make a similar last-gasp intervention to cut out a 
cross from Matthias Ginter, Germany this time raiding down the right. Ireland 
were now being attacked from all angles. But their resistance was growing 
stronger.

Germany had to replace Götze with André Schürrle after 35 minutes and Ireland 
suffered another blow when Shay Given was carried off on a stretcher after 
twisting his knee. Darren Randolph, second-choice at West Ham, was thrust into 
the biggest game of his career. He, like his team-mates, rose to the challenge. 
But he was grateful that Mesut Özil shot wide when presented with a clear 
chance just before the referee blew for half-time and well-earned applause rung 
out for the home team’s defiance. A reprise of the draw that Ireland fought for 
in Gelsenkirchen a year ago was starting to look realistic.

Ireland re-emerged emboldened. Wes Hoolahan and James McCarthy grew in 
influence and German swagger was turned down a touch. At times Germany became 
downright flaky. As the crowd began to sense that a famous victory might be 
brewing came a reminder of the threat Ireland faced – Reus crossing for 
Schürrle, who volleyed wide from eight yards.

Murphy then went close, firing just wide after fine work by Hoolahan. The roar 
that greeted Long’s introduction in the 65th minute showed the home crowd felt 
their trump card was being played.

They were right. Five minutes later the striker scored the most important of 
his 14 goals for his country. Rushing on to a long kick by Randolph, he left 
defenders in his wake before walloping the ball past Manuel Neuer and into the 
net. Simple in its conception, superb in its execution.

Germany tried to restore order. Müller had a fine chance to do so in the 77th 
minute but blazed wide from 10 yards and dropped to his knees in incredulity. 
Ireland held firm to complete a win that few outside their dressing room had 
believed possible.

“To beat the world champions considering the things that we had to overcome 
was a fantastic effort by the players,” O’Neill said.

Joachim Löw said: “It was one of the most unnecessary defeats we’ve had to 
accept. They had one opportunity to score whereas we had many and got punished 
for missing them. We avoided 99 of those long balls but the 100th was just too 
many.”

That was a slightly disingenuous account, for Ireland did show guile as well 
as guts. “He’s won the World Cup, he’s entitled to a fairly decent opinion,” 
O’Neill said. “But we were brilliant.”
 