
1. Who we are and about these terms

1.1. Guardian Live events events, Guardian Local events and Guardian Live
Weekenders are operated by Guardian News & Media Limited, a private limited 
company registered in England and Wales (company number 00908396) having its 
registered address at Kings Place, 90 York Way, N1P 2AP ("GNM", "us" or "we"). 
Our VAT number is GB 145 7744 45. If you have any questions, you can contact us 
by email at GuardianLive.events@theguardian.com or by telephone on 020 3353 
2000.

1.2. These are the terms and conditions which apply to Guardian Live events 
events, Guardian Local events and Guardian Live Weekenders and form an 
agreement between you and us. We will not file a copy of our agreement with 
you. These terms and conditions are available in the English language only.

1.3. By booking a Guardian Live event, Guardian Local event or a Guardian Live 
Weekender, you accept these terms and conditions. You should read them 
carefully before making a booking. We recommend you save a copy of them for 
your future reference.

2. Guardian Live events, Guardian Local events and Guardian Live Weekenders

2.1. You acknowledge that restrictions and additional terms may apply to 
Guardian Live events, Guardian Local events and Guardian Live Weekenders (e.g. 
age restrictions). You must check the relevant event description for details of 
any additional terms or restrictions before making a booking. You promise that 
you, and anyone on whose behalf you make a Guardian live event, Guardian Local 
event or Guardian Live Weekender booking, will observe and comply with any such 
terms or restrictions.

2.2. When you submit a booking for a Guardian Live event, Guardian Local event 
or Guardian Live Weekender you are making an application to us to attend that 
Guardian Live event, Guardian Local event or Guardian Live Weekender. Our 
acceptance of your booking will take place when we issue a written confirmation 
of your booking. GNM reserves the right to refuse an application for attendance.

2.3. In order to get the most from the Guardian Live event, Guardian Local 
event or Guardian Live Weekender you should ensure you arrive promptly.

2.4. We reserve the right to request that any person leaves a Guardian Live 
event, Guardian Local event or Guardian Live Weekender if that person's conduct 
is unacceptable (in GNM's reasonable opinion). No refund of fees or any other 
costs will be made in these circumstances.

2.5. You acknowledge that the venue, timings, speakers and programme of any 
Guardian Live event, Guardian Local event or Guardian Live Weekender are 
subject to reasonable changes.

2.6 We will send an email confirmation of your booking to the email address 
you provide to us shortly after we accept your booking. It is your 
responsibility to ensure that the email address you provide to us is valid.

2.7 Except as permitted by section 4.1 below, all bookings are 
non-transferable and must not be resold or passed on for commercial gain.

2.8. The unauthorised use of photographic and recording equipment is 
prohibited at Guardian Live events, Guardian Local event or Guardian Live 
Weekender. Restrictions on items which may be taken into Guardian Live event, 
Guardian Local event or Guardian Live Weekender venues may also apply (e.g. 
your own food and drink). You are advised to check when before booking.

3. Fees

3.1. When booking a Guardian Live event, Guardian Local event or Guardian Live 
Weekender full payment of the fee is required at the time we accept your 
booking.

3.2. Details of the fees for each Guardian Live event, Guardian Local event or 
Guardian Live Weekender will be set out on theGuardian live events website 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/events> and the booking page. The prices 
include VAT. Our prices may change at any time but price changes will not 
affect bookings that we have confirmed with you.

3.3. Payment can only be made by credit or debit card. Cash or cheques will 
not be accepted.

3.4. A limited allocation of concession tickets are available for senior 
citizens, registered unemploy​ed, disabled, full time students and under 16's. 
Tickets are sold on first-come-first-served basis. Once sold, no further 
tickets are available by any method of booking. ​Appropriate identification 
cards are to be shown at the event​.​

4. Refunds and cancellation

4.1. If you cancel your event booking, or do not attend the Guardian live 
event, Guardian Local event or Guardian Live Weekender the event fee will not 
be refunded, although you may transfer your booking to another person by 
passing on your original ticket.

4.2. GNM may cancel any Guardian Live event, Guardian Local event or Guardian 
Live Weekender at any time prior to its commencement. Except as set out in 
clause 4.5 below, GNM will refund you the full price of your booking by BACS. 
GNM shall not be responsible for any extra costs incurred as a result of a 
cancelled or rescheduled event.

4.3. There is no entitlement to a refund where GNM is forced to cancel part or 
all of a Guardian Live event, Guardian Local event or Guardian Live Weekender 
due to reasons beyond our reasonable control. However, refunds may be given at 
GNM's discretion.

4.4. We regret we cannot offer refunds where we have to make reasonable 
changes as described in section 2.5 above.

4.5. You do not benefit from a legal cooling off period for bookings for 
Guardian Live events, Guardian Local event or Guardian Live Weekender

5. Feedback and Complaints

5.1. Guardian Live events, Guardian Local event or Guardian Live Weekender are 
designed to provide an enjoyable and high-quality experience for those 
attending. At the end of each Guardian Live event, Guardian Local event or 
Guardian Live Weekender we will provide an evaluation form, which will offer 
you the opportunity to provide feedback.

5.2. In the event of a complaint, please make your complaint in writing and 
send to Guardian News & Media, Kings Place, 90 York Way, N1 9GU and mark it for 
the attention of the head of Guardian live events, Guardian Local event or 
Guardian Live Weekender. You are advised to make your complaint within 14 days 
of the Guardian live event ending. We take complaints seriously and will aim to 
investigate and respond as quickly as possible.

6. Our liability to you

6.1. Nothing excludes or limits GNM's liability for personal injury or death 
due to its negligence. You have certain rights under the law, for example that 
we will provide the Guardian Live events, Guardian Local event or Guardian Live 
Weekender with reasonable care and skill. Nothing in these terms will affect 
these rights.

6.2. Please ensure you take care of your personal possessions as GNM cannot 
accept any liability for them unless loss or damage is caused by our negligence.

6.3. Except as stated in section 6.1, we are not responsible for: (i) losses 
not caused by our breach; (ii) indirect losses which means loss to you which is 
a side effect of the main loss or damage and where you and we could not have 
reasonably anticipated that type of loss arising at the time of entering into 
these terms and condition; (iii) failure to meet any of our obligations where 
such failure is due to events beyond our control; or (iv) any increase in any 
loss or damage which results from breach by you of any of these terms and 
conditions or your negligence.

6.4. Except as stated above in this section 6, GNM's total liability to you is 
limited to the fees you have actually paid for the relevant Guardian Live 
event, Guardian Local event or Guardian Live Weekender and we shall not be 
liable for any loss of enjoyment or wasted expenditure. Personal arrangements 
including travel, accommodation or hospitality relating to a Guardian live 
event which have been arranged by you are at your own risk.

6.5. You are responsible for your transport to and from Guardian Live 
Weekenders and other costs not specifically included in the price of the 
Guardian Live Weekender (such as drinks, snacks and meals not included in the 
price).

7. Personal Information

7.1 GNM's privacy policy <https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy> 
describes how any personal information you provide to us in connection with a 
Guardian Live events, Guardian Live event, Guardian Local event or Guardian 
Live Weekender will be used. We will use the information you have provided to 
us to process your booking, for the purposes of contacting you with information 
relating to Guardian Live events, Guardian Live event, Guardian Local events or 
Guardian Live Weekender and to conduct analysis for the purposes of providing 
future Guardian Live events, Guardian Live event, Guardian Local events or 
Guardian Live Weekender.

7.2 Filming and photography may take place at Guardian Live events, Guardian 
Live event, Guardian Local events or Guardian Live Weekender. You consent to 
your image and likeness being used in marketing and films for Guardian Live 
events, Guardian Live event, Guardian Local events or Guardian Live Weekender 
and on the Guardian Live microsite without any payment to you.

8. General

8.1. These terms and conditions are a contract between you and us. No other 
person shall have any right to enforce any of the terms.

8.2. Each of the paragraphs of these terms and conditions operates separately. 
If any court or relevant authority decides that any of them are unlawful, the 
remaining paragraphs will remain in full force and effect.

8.3. We may revise our terms and conditions from time to time, for example to 
reflect changes in relevant laws or regulatory requirements or improvements we 
make to the Guardian Live events, Guardian Live event, Guardian Local events or 
Guardian Live Weekender and related services.

8.4. This agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with 
English law and the parties agree that the English courts shall have 
non-exclusive jurisdiction in relation to this agreement. However if you are a 
resident of Northern Ireland you may also bring proceedings in Northern 
Ireland, and if you are a resident of Scotland, you may also bring proceedings 
in Scotland.
 