
When it came to solving the riddle of the peacock's tail, Charles Darwin's 
powers of evolutionary deduction were second to none – the more extravagant 
their feathered displays, he reasoned, the greater their chances of attracting 
a peahen. But when he tried to account for the human propensity to weep, Darwin 
found himself at a loss. "We must look at weeping as an incidental result, as 
purposeless as the secretion of tears from a blow outside the eye," he wrote in 
1872.

In this Darwin was almost certainly wrong. In recent decades, scientists have 
offered several accounts of how the capacity for tears may have given early 
hominids an adaptive advantage. These range from the aquatic ape theory, 
according to which tears were an adaptation to saltwater living, to the notion 
that by blurring our vision tears may serve as a "white flag" to potential 
aggressors – a signal that the crier is incapable of harm. Then there are the 
straightforward biological theories, such as the claim that tears evolved to 
keep the eye moist and free of harmful bacteria.

But perhaps the theory enjoying the widest currency at the moment is the 
notion that tears are a form of social signalling that evolved from mammalian 
distress calls – a clear visual signal in other words that someone is in pain 
or danger and needs help.

"Tears are highly symbolic," says Ad Vingerhoets 
<http://www.tilburguniversity.edu/webwijs/show/?uid=vingerhoets>, a Dutch 
psychologist who has spent 20 years studying why and when we weep. "They signal 
helplessness, especially during childhood when humans are at their most 
vulnerable."

Vingerhoets is not the only thinker to point to the social significance of 
tears. The psychiatrist John Bowlby long ago highlighted the role of crying in 
engendering attachment between mother and child, while the British neurologist 
Michael Trimble recently linked crying to the human capacity for empathy – 
hence our propensity to weep during inspiring music.

However, in his new book, Why Only Humans Weep, Vingerhoets argues that none 
of these explanations is sufficient. Although crying has been documented in 
apes, elephants and even camels, it seems that only humans produce emotional 
tears, and it is only in humans that crying behaviours persist into adulthood. 
The challenge is to explain why this should be so, given that tears also run 
the risk of signalling our presence to predators.

Vingerhoets's explanation is novel: although in certain situations weeping can 
be risky, he suggests it is far less risky than screaming or emitting some 
other loud acoustic signal. This is particularly true in the case of 
interactions at close quarters, such as occur during the extended period of 
human childhood, when a tear may be all that is required to alert a mother to 
her baby's suffering.

"When other animals grow old, most no longer emit distress signals, presumably 
because it is too dangerous, says Vingerhoets. "By contrast, in humans there is 
a shift from the acoustic signal, emitted in all directions, toward the visual 
signal of tears, which especially fit closer, more intimate interactions.'

In support of his theory Vingerhoets points to the enlarged visual cortex in 
humans and old-world primates – a structure, he argues, that most probably 
evolved to read the nuances of facial musculature and other strong visual 
clues, such as tears and blushing. In addition, crying is an emotional 
expression that signals appeasement and supplication in adults – something that 
he argues would have been advantageous in early human communities as a means of 
promoting greater mutual trust and social connectedness.

So far, so fine. But of course crying is not only associated with the human 
need for attachment. Tears can also be moral, signifying our sympathy with an 
injustice. Moreover, as the cultural historianThomas Dixon points out 
<http://www.aeonmagazine.com/oceanic-feeling/thomas-dixon-tears/>, tears are 
sometimes associated with joy and ecstasy rather than grief and sorrow – hence 
the mass emotional displays during the London Olympics.

The trouble with tears is that they are always "thick" with description. 
"Tears are intellectual things," argues Dixon. "They are produced both by 
thoughts and the lachrymal glands. In each age, different texts collaborate 
with different bodies to produce tears with different meanings."

To be fair, Vingerhoets is very much alive to the way that crying is both a 
product of involuntarily neurophysiological processes and cognition. Sometimes, 
as when we weep while chopping an onion, tears may signify nothing at all; at 
other times they may be an expression of profound grief or sadness.

The trouble is that quite often – as when people cry when driving alone, a 
common phenomenon according to Vingerhoets – our tears catch us unawares, 
prompting us to become upset where perhaps no upset is called for. In such 
cases, it seems, tears are mother to the emotion rather than the other way 
round.

More so than any other form of emotional expression, tears are also subject to 
shifting cultural and historical readings, symbolising piety and sensitivity in 
one age and hysteria and weakness in another.

Whatever the precipitant, however, there is a widespread belief that crying is 
cathartic. However, even this may be a construct, says Vingerhoets. Although 
people frequently report feeling better after watching a Hollywood "tearjerker" 
with a friend, when asked to watch a similar movie in a laboratory setting they 
usually report no improvement in mood at all. For Vingerhoets this is further 
evidence of the social function of crying. "Tears are less important when you 
are alone because there is no one to witness them," he says.

But while we may prefer to cry in the presence of friends and family, this 
need not be the case. As the pious tears shed by monks in contemplation of God 
attest, we can also shed tears for distant and highly symbolic attachment 
figures. What counts, it seems, is the feeling that our helplessness is being 
acknowledged.
 