 Keira Knightley wears a fur jacket to an awards ceremony. Photograph: Richard 
Young/Rex Features 
On an otherwise unremarkable grey autumn day in London last month, a few 
hundred protesters took to the streets around Knightsbridge armed with 
home-made banners and loudspeakers. Some of them had their faces half-obscured 
by scarves. Others came with their children, holding their hands tightly 
against the scrum.

Escorted by police, the crowd marched to several high-end clothing stores, 
stopping outside Giorgio Armani, Fendi, Joseph and Gucci. If it had not been 
for the banners and the chants and the drum beats, one might have thought they 
were on a guided tourist walk of the capital's best retail locations. But these 
were no ordinary shoppers. These were members of the Coalition to Abolish the 
Fur Trade, who were out to target the specific shops that continue to sell 
clothes made from fur.

When they reached Harrods, one of the few department stores in the UK that 
still stocks real fur, the crowd started to chant and jeer. But their 
sentiments were perhaps best expressed by one bespectacled woman, wrapped up 
against the cold in a hat and coat, who carried a handwritten sign that read 
simply: "The Devil Wears Fur".

Six months before the Knightsbridge protest, the catwalks of New York, London 
and Milan fashion week were filled with animal skins of all description. Fur 
coats made an appearance at Versace, Alexander McQueen and Jean Paul Gaultier. 
Karl Lagerfeld covered motorbike helmets with mink and chinchilla. Dolce & 
Gabbana added bright-pink fur sleeves to jackets, and fur was also shown at 
Louis Vuitton, Fendi and Prada.

In London, Issa showed fur for the first time – ironically, the star turn on 
their catwalk was Naomi Campbell, who in 1994 appeared alongside her fellow 
supermodels in an advertisment for Peta (People for the Ethical Treatment of 
Animals) claiming she would "rather go naked than wear fur". Now Campbell 
fronts a campaign for the luxury furrier Dennis Basso.

The November issue of French Vogue included a 12-page story entitled "Fur 
Play" featuring the Brazilian supermodel Raquel Zimmermann in a flurry of fur 
and tribal-themed leopard print, and the trend has been enthusiastically 
embraced by the British high street. Several shoe chains, including Nine West 
and Dune, have in the recent past stocked boots lined with rabbit fur. And 
while real fur still remains beyond the price range of the average customer, 
the look of fur has become increasingly sought after: convincing imitation 
jackets and stoles have sprouted up in Mango, H&M, Warehouse and Miss 
Selfridge. The Spanish high-street retailer Zara, meanwhile, has received 
criticism for trimming some items with real rabbit fur.

Where once celebrities were wary of walking out in a fur-trimmed jacket for 
fear of being drenched in red paint by animal rights activists, now there seems 
to be no such stigma. Keira Knightley recently attended an awards ceremony in a 
black karakul lambskin coat, and Jennifer Lopez has worn an array of mink and 
chinchilla at red-carpet events over the years. Madonna, Eva Longoria, Linda 
Evangelista, Kate Moss and Lindsay Lohan have all worn fur in public.

"Fur has never been more popular," says a spokesman for Origin Assured, an 
initiative developed by the International Fur Trade Federation that states that 
it sources "ethical" fur. "From 1998 to 2008 there has been year-on-year growth 
in global sales for fur. People now are more comfortable showing their love of 
fur.

"The younger generation seems to be saying: 'We'll make up our own minds', and 
part of that has its core in the rise of hip-hop culture – we've just heard 
that Rihanna's new album cover is going to feature her in a white fur coat. 
It's also to do with the fact that young designers are featuring fur in their 
collections."

The shifting tide of public opinion is reflected in the figures. In 2007, fur 
sales worldwide totalled £10bn, up 11% on the previous year, with nine years of 
continuous growth. Last year, the fur trade contributed £13bn to the global 
economy, and although fur farming was banned in Britain in 2003, the UK's fur 
trade turnover is about £400-500m a year.

In the 15 years since Peta's original "I'd rather go naked than wear fur" ad 
campaign, we seem to have gone from a nation that equates fur with inexcusable 
animal cruelty to one that views it merely as an occasional fashion statement. 
As a measure of just how much the climate has changed, one need only look at 
the five supermodels featured in that first campaign. From a line-up that 
included Naomi Campbell, Cindy Crawford, Christy Turlington, Claudia Schiffer 
and Elle Macpherson, only Turlington has stayed true to her word. All the 
others have, at one time or another, chosen to promote or wear real fur in the 
intervening years.

Fur used to be the mark of a social pariah . Yet now we barely blink an eyelid 
when Kate Moss is photographed popping to the shops in a pair of sealskin 
Mukluk boots. What has driven this change in attitude? How has fur become 
fashionable? And most importantly, do we care about whether the wearing of fur 
is ethically defensible, or has it simply become another trend, like shoulder 
pads or bodycon dresses, whose desirability is determined only by how quickly 
it dates?

In a historic building in central Copenhagen, the  lobby is filled with the 
murmur of cocktail chatter and the clink of glasses. The guests are 
up-and-coming fashion designers from around the world, flown here for an 
all-expenses-paid trip arranged by representatives from one of the world's 
largest fur companies, Kopenhagen Fur.

As part of their programme, the designers will be taken to the company's 
studio, where they will have a chance to look at the merchandise on offer – 
mink, fox, chinchilla, seal, sable, rabbit and karakul. They are assured that 
the animals on Kopenhagen Fur farms are treated well, with fresh food, regular 
vaccination programmes and housing in open sheds. Some of the designers will 
visit the fur farms; some choose not to. In return for their attendance, they 
are then offered free samples of top-quality fur to use in their collections.

"There are loads of people on these jollies," says one designer who has worked 
with Kopenhagen Fur but does not want to be named. "They take you to a plush 
house and ply you with champagne, and at the end of it you get to work with 
fantastic material – they give you free fur, make it to your specifications, 
and then you put it down the runway and they hopefully get a lot of publicity 
for it."

Over the last few years companies like Kopenhagen Fur or Saga Furs – powerful 
international suppliers that dominate the luxury market – have been 
spearheading a quiet campaign to break the fur taboo. From the designer's 
perspective, the offer of free top-quality material in a tough economic climate 
is often too good to turn down, especially if they are relative newcomers 
struggling to make a name in the industry.

In return, the fur provided gets exposure on the catwalk and becomes 
associated with a younger, edgier type of fashion that is far removed from the 
traditional, fusty image of a mothballed coat your granny might wear. Slowly 
but surely, so the reasoning goes, there is a trickle-down effect and fur 
becomes gradually more acceptable to a whole new generation of potential 
customers.

"We don't force anybody to use fur; we don't pay anybody," insists Michael 
Holm, design and production manager for Kopenhagen Fur. "If people are 
interested, we like to work with them. If people don't like fur, fine – that's 
their opinion.

"Younger designers are more innovative when it comes to using fur as a fabric. 
They are not so afraid of the material as prior generations."

For Todd Lynn, a Canadian-born designer who has used fur in his collections 
provided at no cost from Saga Furs, the most important thing to consider is 
whether he is comfortable with the company's farming standards. He refuses to 
buy fur from China, where farming is unregulated and where no law protects the 
millions of animals that are routinely skinned alive. "I am very careful about 
where my products come from. I work with Saga fur – it comes from Finland, they 
have a vested interest in proper product and breeding, and the animals have to 
be treated properly. I'm not a heartless person, but for those of us who work 
in high-end fashion, there are certain things we need to use. Fur is something 
my clients want. You make the choice. We don't do a lot of it – it's just part 
of the collection, the way leather is."

But leather is a by-product, whereas animals are killed solely for their fur. 
Can it ever be truly "ethical"? "I don't have a problem with people following 
their principles, but what bugs me is when people pick and choose," says Lynn. 
"People are really misinformed about the products they wear. Nobody argues with 
the pesticides used on cotton plants that will kill wildlife. To think that 
silk or cotton doesn't do damage to the environment is a lie."

The fur apologists insist that real fur is natural, renewable, biodegradable 
and energy efficient in comparison to the synthetic versions. The truth of this 
is somewhat difficult to establish. According to the British Fur Trade 
Association, it takes a gallon of oil to make three fake-fur coats. Animal 
rights groups tend to hit back with a study by researchers at the University of 
Michigan that claims the energy needed to produce a real fur coat from 
farm-raised animal skins is 20 times that required for a fake one. But when I 
look for this study online, it turns out to be from 1979 and there is a limited 
amount of more recent academic research.

In any case, many of the designers I speak to say that their use of fur is a 
simple question of providing what the client wants: demand for the material in 
the high-end, luxury market has never gone away. If anything, the influx of 
Russian money has prompted an increase in demand: an oligarch's wife who has 
grown up in a sub-zero climate with a taste for conspicuous consumption is 
unlikely to think twice about buying fur. The rise in "bling" culture, 
spearheaded by artists such as Beyoncé and P Diddy, has also played its part in 
making fur a status symbol for the modern jet set.

Karl Lagerfeld, perennial bete noire of the anti-fur lobby, is unapologetic 
about using it: "In a meat-eating world, wearing leather for shoes and clothes 
and even handbags, the discussion of fur is childish," he said in a radio 
interview earlier this year.

Of course, part of the attraction for Lagerfeld is that, whatever the ethical 
ramifications, fur remains a remarkable material to work with. "It reacts in a 
different way," says Geoffrey Finch, director of cult womenswear label 
Antipodium, who is including a kangaroo-skin gilet in his next collection. 
"There is something luxurious about it. I love the texture and I love the 
colour. There's something a little bit racy about fur.

"Personally, I love a bit of fur. No one wants to go out and shoot an 
endangered species, but people can buy ethically. I came across a supplier of 
kangaroo fur from Western Australia where, because of changes to the 
environment, kangaroo numbers have become far too high in areas and the 
vegetation has been destroyed, so they have to be culled."

For Finch the rising popularity of vintage fashion has had a "big impact" on 
changing attitudes towards fur in a younger generation which is "socially aware 
and quite happy to jump online and do their own research. Maybe big advertising 
pushes [like the Peta campaigns] don't have as much punch to them now".

And while the Peta anti-fur campaigns were extremely high profile in the early 
1990s, there now seems to be a growing concern for bigger global issues like 
climate change or child poverty. Fur has begun to look like a bit of a side 
issue, a slightly old-fashioned thing to get het up about. "Certainly other 
environmental and ecological issues seem to be more prevalent in people's 
minds," agrees Alexandra Shulman, editor of BritishVogue. "There aren't the 
same reservations about wearing vintage fur as there are about new. But there 
is also quite a fuzzy-wuzzy attitude to the wearing of fur in general. If you 
go to a market like Portobello, there is rail upon rail of old fur coats and 
jackets with fur trim which people seem to be perfectly happy to buy. If you 
asked some of them whether they were happy with the fur industry, many of them 
would probably say no, but they don't have the budget to go out and buy a new 
mink or chinchilla, so it's not a choice they are really making.

"I wear the odd piece of fur; I don't have strong personal feelings against 
it, but I would feel uncomfortable swathed in a mink coat. It would seem 
unnecessary, ostentatious and somewhat unfeeling, though I can't explain it 
more than that."

Shulman says that, "broadly speaking", British Vogue does not feature fur, 
other than fur advertising, which is not in her remit. "However, there is an 
element of common sense to my policy on this which dictates that since we are 
there to report on fashion trends, if those trends include fur we will, for 
instance, show catwalk images that include fur. We do carry some skins like 
sheepskin, and occasionally a fur trim creeps in."

Across the Atlantic it is a slightly different story. Anna Wintour, the 
editor-in-chief of AmericanVogue, has consistently run pro-fur editorials and 
had fur-themed photo shoots.
 Anna Wintour, editor-in-chief of US Vogue, is repeatedly targeted by anti-fur 
activists. Photograph: Joe Kohen/Joe Kohen/WireImage.com 
When anti-fur protesters surrounded the Condé Nast offices during the 
company's Christmas party several years ago, Wintour retaliated in inimitable 
style by sending them down a plate of roast beef. In the past decade, Wintour 
has had a dead racoon dumped on her plate at the Four Seasons and her front 
steps splattered with red paint. She remains unrepentant. "Fur is still part of 
fashion," Wintour said earlier this year, "soVogue will continue to report on 
it."

Ingrid Newkirk once offered to give Wintour a brain  scan for her birthday. 
"There is this thing called a 'mirror neuron' that allows you to empathise," 
explains Newkirk with a wry smile. "In some people it's not developed, so I 
said: 'If the result comes back and it's not developed, then it's not your 
fault that people loathe you.'"

Newkirk, the president and co-founder of Peta, has spent much of the past 
decade attempting to change Wintour's mind on the issue of fur – the dead 
racoon was very much her idea.

"Oh that!" she laughs when I ask whether such stunts actually backfire and 
risk losing public sympathy. "I don't believe that's the case. It's had to 
escalate to such a point – that's after the polite inquiry, the begging letter 
asking: 'Please watch this video', the standing quietly outside their office – 
by the time it's got to a racoon on the plate, we've tried everything. At that 
point, it's just: 'Shame on you'." She shakes her head slowly. "'Shame. On. 
You.'"

Newkirk does not look like an extremist. At 60 she is slim, blonde and neatly 
dressed, the sort of woman one can more easily imagine running a florist's shop 
in Guildford than being the mastermind behind the world's largest animal rights 
organisation. Born in Hertfordshire, she moved to America with her family when 
she was 18 and founded Peta almost 30 years ago from her house in suburban 
Maryland after being outraged that a dozen abandoned cats she had taken to a 
nearby animal shelter to be looked after were immediately put down.

Since then, Peta has become one of the most headline-grabbingly effective 
campaigning groups of modern times and is supported by a string of celebrities 
including Pamela Anderson, Chrissie Hynde and Eva Mendes. The group's basic 
premise is that animals have as much right to be here as humans, and that our 
treatment of them – killing them for food or clothing simply because we are 
able to – is the abiding moral outrage of our times.

Whatever you might think of Peta's tactics, which include placing caged, naked 
women in city centres, and billboard ads promoting vegetarianism with the 
illustration of an overweight woman in a bikini, there is no doubt that Peta 
activists know how to make themselves heard. They have thrown buckets of money 
soaked in fake blood on audiences at the International Fur Fair. They have 
stormed the offices of FrenchVogue wearing leg traps around their feet. A 
recent Peta ad campaign even compared the slaughter of animals for food to the 
murder of six million Jews in the Holocaust.

For Newkirk "ethical fur" is an oxymoron. "It's a bunch of poppycock," she 
says calmly, sipping on a soya-milk coffee in Peta's London offices. "You can 
easily find wonderful, fashionable, glamorous alternatives to anything you have 
to steal from animals or kill animals to get… If you look at the amount of 
British thermal units of energy used to make a real fur, especially to farm a 
fur, versus even the most synthetic of synthetics, the real fur is the loser 
environmentally." (Later I look for evidence of this statement online and come 
up with a study from the Scientific Research Laboratory at Ford Motor Company 
that found a synthetic fur coat required 120,300 BTUs compared to the 7,965,800 
needed to produce a coat from a cage-raised animal. Again, its findings are 30 
years old.)

Is Newkirk worried about the resurgence of fur on the catwalk? "These 
designers who are given junkets to Scandinavia and are given free material – I 
hate to call fur a 'material' – I suppose they must be desperate. If you're 
truly creative, you don't design with something someone hands you. Fur has lost 
all its cachet. It's yesterday. I see prostitutes in Atlantic City wearing fur."

She points instead to the work done by Stella McCartney, who refuses to use 
leather or fur in her designs, in developing viable alternatives: "Stella has 
got wonderful materials infused with nettle fibres. You can wear a warm thing 
that doesn't weigh 20lb and make you smell like a bear."

But for Newkirk, the most powerful argument against wearing fur is the 
suffering of the animals raised to provide it. She points out that at some fur 
farms, up to four foxes can be kept in cages measuring 2 and a half feet 
square. For minks, the cage can be as small as 1ft by 3ft. When wild animals 
are trapped for fur, they are usually strangled or beaten to death. On farms, 
they can be gassed, electrocuted, poisoned with strychnine or have their necks 
broken. One of Peta's recent videos shows a Chinese fur farm where the rabbits 
are shot in the head with handheld electrical devices before being decapitated.

"If you stop seeing animals as handbags, hamburgers or amusements, if you see 
them as fellow animals and you know that they feel joy and pain and all the 
same things we feel, how can you kill them for fur?" asks Newkirk.

It is a subject about which Newkirk feels so strongly that she cannot stop 
herself from accosting women in the street if she sees them wearing fur. "I'm 
always polite. I say: 'That's a beautiful fur. You'd look so much better 
without it. It makes you look cold-hearted.' I used to wear fur and I wish 
there had been someone who jogged my conscience. I used to have the most 
amazing coat made of 100 squirrels. I got so many compliments wearing it. I 
deeply regret that. It didn't occur to me what had happened to make that coat."

Although she denies it, there is no doubt in my mind that Newkirk holds an 
extreme view. This is, after all, the woman who opted for a voluntary 
sterilisation at 22 because "the world has enough babies" and who has 
stipulated in her will that her feet be turned into umbrella stands "as a 
reminder of the depravity of killing innocent animals". Over the years she has 
attracted respect and revulsion in equal measure for her initiatives and her 
refusal to bend her opinions to the wind of public opinion.

But perhaps we need someone like Newkirk to remind us of the choice to be 
made; someone who, each time we pick up a fur-trimmed jacket, to make us think 
a little bit about what we are doing. We might decide to ignore her. We might 
even decide there are bigger things to worry about. But at least we have been 
asked the question. Because however ethical a fur coat might or might not be, 
an animal has still had to die for it to end up on the hanger. That is probably 
worth thinking about, no matter how fashionable it might seem.
 