
Get cashback

Used wisely, credit cards can be a hugely powerful means of spending. If you 
can get cashback or rewards, like the 5% cashback for the first three months on 
an American Express Platinum Cashback Credit Card, you are effectively getting 
paid to spend.

Use protection

If you spend between £100 and £30,000, the credit card company is jointly 
liable with the retailer if anything goes wrong. It is an incredibly valuable 
protection. And the card company is liable for the entire amount regardless of 
what put on your credit card. We had a woman who bought a £12,000 kitchen and 
only paid a £100 deposit using the credit card. The kitchen company went bust 
and she got the full £12,000 back.

Borrow smart

If you need to do some planned borrowing for something specific and know that 
you can repay it, credit cards can be the cheapest way to do do it. You can get 
cards with 27 months of 0%, or totally free, borrowing. There is nothing close 
to that anywhere else. But it is only smart if you pay it off in full within 
that period.

Fire risk

Debt is like fire. It is a powerful tool used right but use it wrong and you 
will get burned. If you are using cards to fill in gaps in income on a regular 
basis, that is a bad sign because it tends to mean you’re overspending. The 
card becomes your enabler and the risk is a debt spiral in which you are 
spending all your disposable income on debt. If this is you, take action. Leave 
your credit card at home. Or put it in a bowl of water in the freezer so that 
if you really have to use it you are going to have to smash it or wait a while.

Minimal gains

If you tick the minimum-repayment box you are just keeping yourself in debt – 
and that is what they want. If you have £3,000 on minimum repayments, it could 
take 25 years to clear with thousands in costs. But your first repayment was 
probably about 90 quid. Plan to stick to that amount and you will be clear in 
more like seven years.

Switch wisely

You should plan to pay off debt before your 0% period ends but, if you have to 
shift debt, look for the best guaranteed rate and watch out for one-off fees to 
make the transfer.

Calculate eligibility

In the old days, the credit system punished you for shopping around. The only 
way to know if you would be accepted on a card was to apply. And if you did not 
get the deal it would mark your credit file, making it harder to get a good 
deal elsewhere. Moneysavingexpert.com has campaigned against this for years and 
now hasan eligibility calculator on its site 
<https://www.moneysavingexpert.com/eligibility/credit-cards/> for all kinds of 
cards. It is a kind of soft search that lenders cannot see.

No pressure

If you have a bad credit score or no credit history, getting a card and 
spending 50 quid a month, paying it off in full with a direct debit, is a good 
thing. But if you are in the credit system and you have got a mortgage or other 
products then you do not need to use your credit cards.
 