
When anti-immigrant, anti-Mexican, pro-Trump graffiti began showing up around 
theirCalifornia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> high school, 
Angelina Alvarez and other Latino students fought back with Dump Trump T-shirts.

After Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> won the 
US election, the Guardian askedAlvarez, 17, to keep a diary about her life and 
feelings in this new era.

Latino students win battle to wear Dump Trump shirts to school
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/03/donald-dump-trump-shirts-latino-vote-calfornia-high-school>
Election Day – 8 November 

Trump won … I don’t even know what to think. I’m just scared, I want to be 
with my grandma right now and just hug her. My grandma that came here as an 
immigrant, who worked hard, who was able to buy a home, who sent her kids to 
college, who later became documented. How can people hate someone like her?

I’m looking at my friend’s Snapchat stories and seeing that even a few of my 
“friends” are excited that he won. I ask them why they hate themselves. Unsure 
how to answer, they delete their stories. I’m just thinking about all of the 
families that are going to be affected by this. I pray that we all stay strong 
and do not back down to any of the obstacles we have ahead of us. It is such a 
disappointment. Our country is a disappointment.

9 November

It was so uncomfortable at school today … I had my classes that have the 
biggest Trump supporters in my school. They were surprisingly dead silent, all 
of them. They didn’t look at me and I didn’t really look at them. I wonder why 
they were so quiet though, it scares me honestly but I don’t know why.

My sister and friends told me that they saw a lot of people wearing their 
Trump gear and congratulating each other. I didn’t want to be there, I just 
wanted to go home. My stomach was uneasy and I didn’t even want to eat lunch. I 
couldn’t think in class, I couldn’t stay focused. I wanted to run home and just 
lay in my bed.

Is this really my neighborhood or am I an intruder?

One of my friends that I’ve known since I was in kindergarten, whose mother is 
undocumented, saw my sister and broke down sobbing. And I just read a post from 
another friend, she and her mother were taunted by junior high kids yelling 
“Trump” and “Go back to Mexico”. This is happening here, at my school, in my 
neighborhood. Is this really my neighborhood or am I an intruder?

10 November

 This morning I got a message from a teacher that we were having a meeting to 
talk about everything that’s going on with Trump. I love that our teachers care 
about us and how we are feeling. In reading all the posts that people are 
putting up I feel sad that they are alone and wish they could join us.

I took a couple of my friends to the meeting. At first, there were only about 
10 people – 15 minutes later there were about 100 of us. I felt so liberated 
and happy seeing everyone walking in. My heart was beating so fast I wanted to 
cry, I wanted to hug everyone. Seeing everyone in solidarity made me so proud, 
it made me feel hopeful.

About 10 students spoke up and talked about not being scared, to unite and to 
prove the Trump supporters wrong. I wanted to get up there and point out that 
it’s not just Trump – he has all these followers behind him that are capable of 
worse things. I want to compare our situation with what the Jews must have felt 
when Hitler went from being a joke to being their leader. The pigment of our 
skin and the accent in our voice is like the star on their clothing.

I want to say so much but I can’t. I don’t want to disrupt the unity in the 
room and the hopefulness that is being shared. I wish we could have another 
meeting so I could share all my thoughts and emotions. I’m upset with myself 
for staying quiet. It’s not the time to stay quiet, I’ve been silenced enough.

11 November 

 I am so glad we were off from school today. I feel drained, so tired, I feel 
heavy like I don’t want to do anything. I feel anxious like I am worried 
something is going to happen. I don’t want the TV on or any kind of news. I 
asked my sister not to play music loud. I don’t want my mom to hear political 
shows. I want a break from the elections, I need a break from all of it.

12 November

 My mom told me about a huge rally in Los Angeles put on by an organization I 
know, Union del Barrio. I begged her to go, I had to go, I had to release my 
anger and frustration. I needed to feel connected to other people. When we 
arrived we were shocked to see thousands of people!

There were people holding up flags from different countries, different 
struggles, different identities, it was the most beautiful thing I have ever 
seen. We were all chanting loudly, holding our fists up for justice, and 
showing love for one another, forming a rhythm together with our voices. Even 
though I arrived with anger in my heart, I couldn’t stop smiling from all the 
love and unity I saw around me.

We watched as more and more people joined, we listened to speakers call out 
for action, telling us not to back down. I held my mom’s hand, I told her I 
couldn’t believe this was going on. I looked over at her and saw she was 
crying. I hugged her because I knew how she was feeling. I told her that this 
was just what I needed. We were unstoppable and unafraid.

13 November

 Part of me wanted to go to a rally in Santa Ana today because it is local and 
I want to show support, but another part of me didn’t. I read the rules for 
this rally, which made me uncomfortable; it’s a “respectability politics” kind 
of rally. I have gone to rallies like this before, where they criticize youth 
who “get too radical”.

Please don’t tell me it’s going to be OK, you don’t know what’s going to 
happen so stop saying that

Those kinds of views are what got us Trump in the first place. I don’t know, 
maybe it was a great rally but I don’t want resistance to be criticized. I 
stand by all people who protest; whether it’s peaceful or not, we all have the 
right to feel, we have the right to react, we have the right to be angry. 
Please don’t tell me it’s going to be OK, you don’t know what’s going to happen 
so stop saying that. We, youth, ultimately, have to face the consequences, we 
have to live with decisions we had no control over.


I told my mother I would rather hang out at the house. I want to rest; I want 
to feel normal again, whatever that means. I noticed that when I’m out at the 
store, I am constantly wondering what people are thinking of me. I wonder if 
they voted for Trump, if they don’t like me or if they will say something to us.

24 November

Hmm … Thanksgiving was super uncomfortable for me. We spent the day with 
extended family, some of who are white. I honestly have never really felt 
comfortable around them.

After our Thanksgiving dinner, we were all in the living room talking. My 
cousins made a remark about the grandpa looking like Bernie Sanders – right 
away they all seemed disgusted when they heard his name. My cousins kept saying 
how Bernie Sanders was the best and my extended family kept saying, “Well he 
didn’t win, he didn’t win.” Pretty much insinuating that Donald Trump is the 
best since he won. Then my cousin asked them why they like Donald Trump and 
they just stayed quiet.

I looked over and saw my grandmother, my uncle and aunts, all of whom were 
undocumented at some point in their life, who take pride in their culture, 
their language, and their customs and wonder if they feel the tension in the 
room. I can tell my grandmother wants to go home. I want to go home too. But I 
would also defend them if anyone tried to insult them. I don’t want to feel 
like this in my safe space on this special day.

8 December 

Trump has named Scott Pruitt, Oklahoma’s attorney general, to head the EPA 
(Environmental Protection Agency). How does that even make sense? Even I, a 
high school student, know that’s bad decision. It’s like having narcos lead the 
war on drugs.

9 January

People are salivating just waiting to see people being arrested and deported 
on TV. The same people whose relatives immigrated here years back but for some 
reason think they are the “True Americans”. The same people that stereotype 
immigrants as being Mexican criminals but don’t know that Mexicans are not the 
majority of immigrants in the US. The same people who are not aware that the 
majority of those immigrant people never committed a serious crime. The same 
people that will root for unborn babies “pro choice” and at the same time for 
root for children to be separated from their parents.

My heart hurts for my undocumented Daca brothers and sisters who may be at 
risk starting next week. History repeats itself, get ready for another 
Operation Wetback.

16 January

Today I had basketball practice, then got to spend the day with people who 
practice Martin Luther King’s teachings every day. I was so annoyed seeing 
people post about MLK, sharing his quotes when they just recently were in 
support of Trump or criticized BLM. How can they not see the hypocrisy in that? 
It’s like they have selective discrimination, they discriminate when it’s 
popular.

Sometimes I wish I didn’t know so much maybe then I wouldn’t feel pain when I 
hear stories, but other days I am glad that I am 17 and woke.

We finalized our plans for Inauguration Day – I am excited and angry. Excited 
that thousands of people from all over the world will stand against Trump and 
his fascist ideas, yet angry that this day kicks off his plans to harm people.

We are going to start the day with thousands of people in Downtown Los 
Angeles, then join an evening protest with mostly young people in Santa Ana. 
The following day Saturday January 21 we will be joining women in Orange County 
for a big march standing for women’s rights. Standing up against Trump is 
important and I hope other people join, it is to show him and his followers 
that we will not back down and we will resist hate. May the universe help us.
 