
Stockbroking media analysts are dispassionate observers of the industry. One 
of the most respected of their number is Lorna Tilbian, now head of media at 
Numis. So what does she think of the current state of play, and the future? 
Here’s an edited version of her chapter in the forthcoming book, Last words? 
How can journalism survive the decline of print?

Any financial assessment of print’s structural change has been overwhelmed by 
the severe downturn in advertising as corporate profitability and consumer 
confidence collapsed in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 
September 2008.

This downturn has been particularly felt in higher yielding classified 
advertising sector where the main categories - recruitment, property and motors 
- have seen declines.

These reflect the initial weaknesses of their underlying markets in 
combination with the advent of powerful online players such as Rightmove, Auto 
Trader and Zoopla.

Historically, regional newspapers operated in local near-monopoly situations 
with respect to local advertisers and readers. But the internet allowed the 
development of pure-play classified sites that extended beyond print 
circulation areas.

They built a pre-eminent market share of “eyeballs”, which have provided a 
powerful barrier to entry to regional publishers who tried to maintain a local, 
or hyperlocal, alternative.

By contrast, the combined revenues of Rightmove and Zoopla now represent more 
than 50% of estate agent marketing spend. As for motors, Auto Trader has been 
the big digital winner.

Regional newspapers have therefore become increasingly reliant on display 
advertising.

The circulation of regional papers has been in decline for several decades, 
reflecting demographic change and increasing competition from other media. 
Cover price increases have been used to keep circulation revenue decline to 
single digit percentages.

There has been a divergence in the performance of paid weeklies and morning 
and evening daily titles. Paid weeklies tend to serve smaller communities where 
local ties are stronger. As a result, they have experienced more stable 
circulation.

By contrast, declines in morning and evening daily titles have been more 
significant. They tend to serve larger towns and cities where competition from 
other media is stronger and local community ties are weaker.

The biggest expense in running a newspaper business are employees who account 
for almost half of industry costs, followed by newsprint, which takes around 
10%. The remaining costs are for distribution, production, retailing and 
general administration.

Continued significant declines in regional display advertising hammer home the 
structural pressures that publishers continue to face as a result of the 
transition to digital along with the presence of competing digital players in 
each of the key advertising markets.

More people are reading newspapers than ever before. But that increased 
audience is doing so through access to free content on newspaper websites.

And publishers have yet to find an online circulation model that can replicate 
the circulation revenue stream they made from print.


A subscription model offers several advantages over newsstand copy sales, with 
greater resilience to economic pressure and the ability to implement smaller, 
regular price rises.

In addition, a direct billing relationship with readers offers greater 
potential to sell additional goods and services, while a better knowledge of 
the reader creates a more attractive advertising proposition. At face value, 
transition to an online paid model should be more straightforward.


Broadly speaking, publishers have been slow to capitalise on the opportunities 
that digital presents. Group M estimates digital revenues accounted for just 
over 22% of regional advertising revenues in 2016.


The next decade will see newspapers move away from a free ad-funded model 
towards a diverse range of online business models appropriate to the 
publisher’s readership base.


I think audience reach and demographic are key to determining online success, 
especially through “enterprise revenues”, those derived from selling additional 
goods and services to a newspaper’s readership base.

Whilst accounting at present for a small proportion of industry revenue, 
enterprise will become an increasingly important part of a diversified online 
model and is an area increasingly being investigated by a number of consumer 
publishers (both newspaper and magazines).

Four important factors will drive the development of enterprise revenues. 
First, titles with affluent demographics have had the most success is 
generating enterprise revenues. Second, the larger the circulation, the larger 
the potential customer base.

Third, a strong brand is trusted by potential consumers. Fourth, a direct 
billing relationship with readers, through a pre-paid subscription, provides a 
powerful advantage in driving enterprise revenues.

The debate over charging for content continues to be at the forefront of the 
newspaper industry. While a number of paid-content models have been introduced 
over the last few years, there is limited financial detail allowing an accurate 
assessment of the relative success of the varying models.


There are clearly a number of paid-content options ranging from a complete 
“walled-garden” or models that work on a metered basis or pay-per-article. But 
there are several important factors that must be considered when assessing the 
paid-content debate.

Firstly, general national and international news has been commoditised and the 
market for it has been obscured by the BBC’s significant online presence.

Secondly, consumers will only pay for content they value. This can be for its 
journalistic enjoyment (favouring a particular columnist), its niche content 
(sports/financial/special interest) or its lack of substitutability.

Thirdly, the addictive popularity of smartphones and tablets may increase 
readers’ propensity to pay for content that is delivered through an app. 
Consumers would therefore be paying for “context” as well as content.

In summary, a true digital strategy will incorporate a range of revenue models 
suitable for the readership size and demographic.

*Last words? How can journalism survive the decline of print? Edited by John 
Mair, Tor Clark, Neil Fowler, Raymond Snoddy and Richard Tait (Abramis, 
£19.95). £15 for Guardian readers, available by email torichard@abramis.co.uk 
<mailto:richard@abramis.co.uk> 
 