
The UK risks creating a “fatherhood penalty” as an increasing number of men 
jettison their careers for less demanding jobs which give them more time with 
their families, according to a major new study.

The 2017 Modern Families Index, published on Monday, is the largest survey of 
its kind to measure how families achieve a work-life balance.

It finds that nearly half of working fathers (47%) want to downshift to a less 
stressful job because they cannot balance the demands of work and family life. 
Just over a third (38%) say they would be willing to take a pay cut to achieve 
a better work-life balance.

Significantly, these aspirations are more pronounced among younger fathers. 
The index, produced by the charity Working Families and nursery provider Bright 
Horizons, found that 53% of millennial fathers want to downshift to a less 
stressful job while 48% would take a pay cut to achieve a better work-life 
balance.

The existence of the “motherhood penalty” is well documented. The Fawcett 
Society campaign group says the penalty results in women being “more likely to 
work part-time, to be in low-skilled jobs and [to make up] two-thirds of the 
low-paid”.

Sarah Jackson, chief executive of Working Families, says a “fatherhood 
penalty” is also now emerging.

“Employers need to ensure that work is designed in a way that helps women and 
men find a good work-life fit,” Jackson said. “Making roles flexible by 
default, and a healthy dose of realism when it comes to what can be done in the 
hours available, are absolutely vital. A game-changing first step would be 
government creating a new, properly paid, extended period of paternity leave.”

Overall, the survey found only one in five families believe they are managing 
to achieve a balance between the money they bring in and the amount of time 
they spend together. Over a third of families believe they either have not got 
enough time or money.

This year’s survey suggests a significant proportion of fathers are playing a 
more active role in child-rearing. A quarter said that they dropped their 
children at school or nursery every day. Seven out of ten said that they worked 
flexibly to fulfil their caring responsibilities.

But the survey also found that many fathers reported working extra hours 
because it was the only way to deal with their workload and that “being seen to 
do long hours” was important where they worked. Twice the number of fathers as 
mothers believe that flexible workers are viewed as less committed by employers.

“It’s clear that the reconciliation of work and family life is now a priority 
for both mothers and fathers,” said Denise Priest, director of employer 
partnerships at Bright Horizons. “It is impossible to overstate the positive 
impact of an understanding and supportive employer – one that adapts to its 
employees’ needs so that they can progress in their careers. Leading employers 
are those that protect their employees from parental penalties and provide 
optimum work and care arrangements.”

The survey found that almost three-quarters of parents said they worked at 
home in the evenings and at weekends. One in five parents working full time 
said they put in five extra weeks a year – the equivalent of their annual 
holiday allowance – in unpaid work, just to keep up with the demands of their 
job.
 