
All Blacks flyhalf Aaron Cruden will leave New Zealand at the end of this 
year’sSuper Rugby <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/super-rugby> season after 
signing a three-year contract with French side Montpellier. 

The 28-year-old, who made the announcement on the Waikato Chiefs’ Facebook 
page on Wednesday, will still be eligible for All Blacks selection when the 
British and Irish Lions tour New Zealand later this year. 

Growing popularity of sevens demands it be given the respect it deserves | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/17/rugby-sevens-growing-popularity-rio-olympics-tom-mitchell>
“It is with great sadness but great excitement that this will be my last year 
playing rugby here in New Zealand,” Cruden said in a video posted on the 
Chiefs’ page. 

“I have signed a three-year deal with Montpellier in France, which is a 
beautiful part of the world, a fantastic rugby club and a real opportunity [for 
me] to go out there and experience something different.” 

Cruden played 47 Tests for the All Blacks and for a long time was seen as the 
heir apparent to Dan Carter in the No10 jersey, though injuries cut short his 
opportunities to truly cement the role. 

He was chosen ahead of Beauden Barrett for last June’s Wales series, the first 
since Carter left New Zealand to play in France, but a neck injury in the 
second Test allowed the Wellington Hurricanes flyhalf to seize his opportunity. 

Barrett quickly established himself as the starting flyhalf, after mostly 
being used as an impact player, and was named World Rugby’s Player of the Year 
in 2016. 

Cruden was one of three high-profile All Blacks players who had been targeted 
by European clubs over the southern hemisphere summer, with the playing futures 
of fullbacks Israel Dagg and Ben Smith still undecided. 

Tighthead prop Charlie Faumuina has previously confirmed he will be leaving 
after the Lions tour. 

Scotland’s New Zealand-born coach Vern Cotter is taking over at Montpellier 
following this year’s Six Nations. 
 