

The actor Jamie King’s son died when staff at an NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> hospital decided to delay his 
delivery and sent his mother home, a coroner has said.

Benjamin King died from severe brain damage five days after being born in an 
emergency caesarean section at the Royal United hospital (RUH) in Bath, 
Somerset.

He is likely to have been deprived of oxygen after his mother, Canadian actor 
Tamara Podemski, 39, had her C-section delayed by 12 hours.

Maria Voisin, the senior coroner for Avon, said the decision to reschedule the 
procedure and send Podemski home to Frome, in Somerset, resulted in Benjamin’s 
death.

After the inquest, it emerged that Voisin has contacted police about 
allegations that the hospital trust altered staff witness statements for the 
hearing.

A spokesman for Avon and Somerset police said: “We can confirm that the 
coroner has contacted us regarding this matter.”

King, 35, who starred in Mad Men and The Tudors, said: “Rather than hearing 
the truth, we’ve had to listen to misremembered stories, altered accounts, 
deflection and diversion.”

Benjamin was Podemski’s second child and she was categorised as high risk as 
her first had been born by C-section.

On the morning of 4 May, when Podemski was 14 days overdue, midwives at Frome 
Birth Centre noticed decelerations in Benjamin’s heartbeat during a CTG test. 
Podemski was taken to the RUH by ambulance and a decision was made to deliver 
the baby by C-section at 8pm that day.

She was classed as a category three case, meaning the procedure should have 
been performed as soon as it was safe to do so. A plan was made that if an 
emergency case came in, Podemski’s procedure would be “bumped” until 8am the 
following day. This meant moving her case to an elective or category four 
procedure, to be carried out at the convenience of the hospital and parents.

“There was no foetal or maternal concern,” the consultant obstetrician Ayesha 
Qureshi told the inquest. The events were never predictable from the time that 
I was making this decision.”

An emergency case came in and Podemski went home at 10.30pm after two CTG 
tests.

King, who now lives in Canada, said staff at the hospital did not give “any 
clear reasons” why the C-section had been delayed.

“They ignored our objections and they sent us home,” he said. “We believed 
them when they said it was safe to go home, but it is now very clear that we 
should have never been sent home that night.”

Podemski rushed back to the hospital at 5am after she had a prolonged 
contraction lasting for up to 18 minutes.Benjamin was delivered in a “poor 
condition” at 6.55am. He died at St Michael’shospital in Bristol on 10 May from 
a massive perinatal hypoxic ischemic brain injury.

An investigation found it was highly likely Benjamin would have been born 
alive and in a good condition if the C-section had taken place on 4 May.

Reaching a narrative conclusion, Voisin said she would be writing to the trust 
with the aim of preventing future deaths.

“Benjamin King’s mother attended hospital on May 4. It was a high-risk 
pregnancy,” the coroner said. “She was 14 days overdue and there had been an 
antenatal trace which was abnormal.

“Benjamin’s birth was appropriately planned as a category three C-section for 
that day. A decision was made to delay that delivery to the following day. This 
decision, together with the decision to send his mum home, resulted in Benjamin 
being born in a poor condition and his subsequent death.”

In her letter to the trust, Voisin will raise the need for a clear birthing 
plan, with risks and advice for parents, for all mothers delivering a baby 
after a previous C-section.

She will ask for staff to make clear notes for category three C-sections, 
including time of delivery and whether the mother should remain in hospital 
until then.

Voisin halted an inquest into Benjamin’s death in November after allegations 
that statements had been altered by the hospital trust. “I would say I remain 
very concerned about this very serious matter,” she said.

Independent and internal investigations into the allegations are continuing.

King said the coroner had informed him that the matter had been reported to 
police, and he hoped for a “thorough investigation”. “We will continue our 
fight for justice for our Benjamin and we will make sure that his story is 
told,” he said.

Helen Blanchard, director of nursing and midwifery at the Royal United 
hospitals Bath NHS foundation trust, apologised to Benjamin’s family for the 
inquest delay.

She said improvements had been made to hospital systems as a result of the 
child’s death and the trust would look at Voisin’s findings.

“We have cooperated fully with the coroner’s directions following the 
adjournment of the initial inquest,” she said. “We would like to provide 
further assurance that the trust has taken the matter very seriously and 
continues to address the concerns which have been raised. We are unable to 
comment further while this matter is ongoing.”
 