
When Robert Howley took the biggest decision of his reign as Wales’s interim 
head coach this week and toldSam Warburton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> he was losing the captaincy 
after six years, he told the flanker that after years of selfless service it 
was time to be selfish if he was to keep his place in the side.

Howley made it clear that it was his decision, and that he reached it after 
speaking to Warburton and his successor, Alun Wyn Jones, although he ran it 
past Warren Gatland, who is taking a sabbatical as the Wales head coach to 
focus on the British & Irish Lions’ tour to New Zealand this summer, before 
making it public when he announced hisSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> squad on Tuesday.

Back-row balance key for Wales with Sam Warburton set for return to rank and 
file | Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/16/sam-warburton-justin-tipuric-wales-six-nations-back-row>
Howley has freshened up the squad, which contains seven uncapped players, 
including the Wasps flanker Thomas Young and the Leicester outside-half Owen 
Williams, and cited increased competition in the back row as one reason why 
Warburton’s tenure as captain ended after nearly six years and 49 Tests.

“No one is guaranteed their position, but Alun Wyn’s is the first name on the 
teamsheet,” he said. “As a coaching team, we feel it is right that Sam 
concentrates on getting his mojo back and playing at his best. He is a very 
honest, humble man and he agreed. He has been a very successful captain and his 
experience will be crucial going into a very competitive Six Nations.

“I am sure he will be a bit disappointed, but it is the best decision for Sam 
and for Wales. He is a world-class player and we want him to be the best he can 
be. He has been captain and a fantastic ambassador for Welsh rugby for the last 
six years and maybe he needs to be selfish and look after himself. We want the 
Sam Warburton we know back.”

Gethin Jenkins led Wales in the two autumn matches Warburton missed, but the 
prop is injured and Howley saw in Jones that month, following the death of his 
father, the captain he wanted to pilot Wales as they evolved their gameplan. “I 
watched a player perform to a level in adversity I had not seen before,” he 
said. “He can motivate through actions as well as words and I am sure the 
players will follow.”

Asked about Jones’s chances of leading the Lions and whether he would lead 
Wales beyond the Six Nations, Howley replied: “Those decisions are for Warren.”

Wales are being tipped to finish among the also-rans in the Six Nations, but 
Howley, who has strengthened his coaching team by bringing in his former Wasps 
half-back partner, Alex King, to oversee the attack, has faith in his squad. In 
another sign of the freedom he has in his role, a quarter of the squad are 
based in England or France.

“It is an exciting selection with fresh ingredients,” he said, although the 
18-year old wing Keelan Giles missed out with a hamstring injury. “We have 
young talent playing with self-belief and bringing the edge to training we 
need. Thomas Young’s form was hard to ignore and with bonus points in the Six 
Nations, having creative players in the back row gives us options.

“We will look to play rugby and continue the style we embedded in the autumn 
and I think Alex will make a difference.”

Wales Six Nations squad 

Backs L Halfpenny (Toulon), L Williams (Scarlets), G North (Northampton), S 
Evans (Scarlets), A Cuthbert (Cardiff Blues), A Hewitt (Newport Gwent Dragons), 
S Williams (Scarlets), J Davies (Scarlets), J Roberts (Harlequins), O Williams 
(Leicester), S Davies (Ospreys), D Biggar (Ospreys), G Davies (Scarlets), 
R Webb (Ospreys), A Davies (Scarlets).

Forwards S Andrews (Cardiff), N Smith (Ospreys), R Evans (Scarlets), R Jones 
(Ospreys), T Francis (Exeter), S Lee (Scarlets), K Dacey (Cardiff Blues), 
K Owens (Scarlets), S Baldwin (Ospreys), J Ball (Scarlets), A W Jones (Ospreys, 
capt), R Thornton (Ospreys), L Charteris (Bath), C HIll (NGD), J King 
(Ospreys), J Tipuric (Ospreys), O Cracknell (Ospreys), R Moriarty (Gloucester), 
T Faletau (Bath), S Warburton (Cardiff), T Young (Wasps).
 