
My e-mailbag has contained a lively correspondence, following my comments last 
month about English spelling and what might (or might not) constitute 
legitimate alternatives. There seems widespread agreement that, in spelling and 
grammar, American influence is steadily growing and a general acceptance that, 
given the dynamics involved, it is pretty futile to try to stop the trend.

From a previous life working in Fleet Street I remember how we all held out, 
years after sensible people had accepted the inevitable, for the English 
billion as against the invading American upstart. Taking up inordinate headline 
space, we would insist that the amount the UK was borrowing from the 
International Monetary Fund was '£5,000m' (or whatever), rather than just 
'£5b'. It was the Financial Times that cracked first, recognising that the 
adjustment was sensible in the light of continuing high inflation and the usage 
of most of its international business readership. The rest of us all followed 
suit within a year or two.

The pace of the American linguistic invasion has accelerated exponentially in 
the last fifteen years, not least because so many of the dictionaries and 
spellchecks available online are American based. Also, more and more important 
academic textbooks use American spelling. I am indebted to my former colleague 
Wynford Hicks, author of 'English for Journalists' (now in its fourth edition), 
for the tale of a British author whose Chrome spellcheck blocked all his 
attempts to type the word 'furore', changing it always to 'furor'. Wynford's 
view, also, is that the British distinction between licence or license, or 
practice and practise, for example, is rapidly getting lost, even in 'educated' 
circles. Equally, there was once a tendency to regard words ending in -ize to 
be American, with the -ise ending being seen as more English. The major British 
newspapers use -ise (the Times held out for -ize until 1992 before switching), 
but -ize endings are regularly the norm for British book publishers. One 
sometimes half longs for the authoritarian approach to grammar and spelling of 
the Académie Française with its world-wide war in defence of the French 
language, but we know that it isn't winning!
___

I get regular requests that the names of the setters of the Quick puzzles 
should be made known, as those of the Cryptics are. The reason that they 
aren't, beyond the feeble one that they never have been, is that the Quicks are 
much more heavily edited than the Cryptics. When a clue in a Cryptic puzzle is 
modified (generally for reasons of taste, decency, accuracy or political 
correctness), the editing process involves full consultation, leading 
(sometimes after full and frank exchanges) to agreement between setter and 
editor. With the Quicks the editing process of a particular puzzle is often so 
extensive that its character is significantly changed. T, D, A and PC may also 
be involved here but by far the most dominant reason is to remove duplication 
of a recent solution or clue, which can involve changing a whole corner of a 
grid.

The puzzles are set in rotation in batches of 18 puzzles (three weeks' worth) 
by three setters and, while they (usually) remember solutions that they have 
included in their last few batches, they do not have in their minds ones that 
have been used by their two colleagues. At one time Araucaria set all of the 
Quicks. When I took over editing in 1997 there was a team of three: Araucaria, 
Rufus and the late Mercury. The present trio is Paul, Chifonie and Orlando.

At the risk of being told I am failing by some Quickster with a good memory, 
my aim it to avoid an 'ordinary' word or phrase appearing as a solution more 
frequently than once in three months and a striking one (eg 'shopaholic' or 
'daddy-long-legs') more than once in nine months.
___

Advance warning: the August Bank Holiday special offering will be published on 
Saturday 24 August. It is a double-grid alphabetical jigsaw puzzle, which 
should keep you occupied for at least some of the long weekend. It is by a new 
setter, Maskarade, as Araucaria has this time been unable to set it because of 
illness.
___

You seem to have found the July Genius puzzle (No 121 by Crucible) harder than 
average, as there were only 122 entries by the deadline (of which nine on the 
first day). Congratulations to Tony Sever, from Ealing, London, who is the July 
winner.
___

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .

• This article was amended on the 7 August 2013 to correct mistake in the 
spelling of the word "license".
 