
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> sometimes struggles 
to hit a convincing rhythm early in grand slam tournaments but, after a 
hesitant start on Monday, he goes into the third round against Sam Querrey on 
Friday looking as dominant as he did when stringing together 28 wins in a row 
on his rise to No1 in the world.

He made the most of a heaven-sent opportunity against the little-known Russian 
teenager and world No156 Andrey Rublev, to win 6-3, 6-0, 6-2, with a slight 
chill lurking in the cloudless night skies after a couple of days of killing 
heat.

Nick Kyrgios unravels in baffling Australian Open defeat to Andreas Seppi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/18/nick-kyrgios-unravels-in-baffling-australian-open-defeat-to-andreas-seppi>
Murray advances in a tournament he loves but has yet to conquer in five losing 
finals with an imperious dismissal of an opponent who did not look old enough 
to be out this late unaccompanied, but whose reputation for pugnacity preceded 
him. Fernando Verdasco, the friendly Spaniard, is among those who have been 
irritated in a match by the brashness of Rublev, who has sparred under the 
tutelage of his father, a respected amateur boxer in the old Soviet Union.

Murray, a keen student of pugilism, had not heard of the father, but, as he 
does for every match, acquainted himself with the strengths and weakness of his 
opponent, the son, and duly dismantled his game in a little over an 
hour-and-a-half in Rod Laver Arena.

He crumpled behind the baseline on his right ankle in the third game of the 
third set and had the trainer on to check for damage, of which there appeared 
to be little. His serving percentages were respectable and he did not give 
Rublev a break opportunity, which gave the match something of an exhibition 
feel.

Serving for the match, Murray graciously offered to replay the first point 
after movement behind him in the crowd; that is the way knights of the realm 
roll. Rublev appreciated the gesture and finished with a bit of a flourish to 
force deuce but shoved his last backhand long.
 Play Video  Australian Open day three: wins for Murray, Evans and Federer – 
video highlights 
“There’s something about this kid that people gravitate to,” John McEnroe 
observed of Rublev. He is usually right. We will hear more of him, hopefully 
without a subtext of aggression. He was charming throughout and appreciated the 
reception on his departure.

Murray said his ankle was “just a little bit stiff” after he had warmed down 
but added: “It’s not too bad. I was moving fine on it.”

As for his performance, he said, “I did pretty good. It was better than the 
first match. I was hitting the ball a bit cleaner, hitting through the court 
more. More winners. I was able to get myself up to the net more. I served way 
better, too. My second serve was harder than the other day. Most things were 
better tonight, but I think I can still improve.”

He is in prime shape, physically fresh and mentally alert before the tougher 
challenges ahead. He faces Querrey next, whose most recent favour to Murray was 
beatingNovak Djokovic in the first week of Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/02/novak-djokovic-knocked-out-wimbledon-sam-querrey>
. It cleared the way for his second title there and contributed significantly 
to the minor crash of the Serb’s tennis for the rest of the season, which also 
facilitated Murray’s rise to the top of the rankings.

Querrey, who earlier finished strongly after a slow start to wreck the home 
debut of the exciting Australian teenager, Alex De Minaur, in three sets, said 
of his third-round challenge: “Whether he is No1 or No2, it doesn’t really make 
a difference. He is Andy Murray, he has got an unbelievable record, he is on 
top of his game right now so that is going to be tough. I am going to have to 
play like I did in the second and third sets today for the entire match in 
order to have a shot.”

He said of his win over Djokovic: “That let me know I can do it. I have one 
other win over Murray in 2010 in a final in LA but I have got a handful of 
losses to him.”

“Sam’s got a big game, takes a lot of chances with his forehand,” Murray said. 
“I’ll need to be on my game.”
 