
As Tony Blair repeatedly confirms, and John Cridland notes in his interim 
report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/559943/independent-review-of-the-state-pension-age-interim-report.pdf>
 on the state pension age, a “significant” number of workers who left the 
labour market before the age of 63 “wish they had postponed their retirement”.

In many ways, the response to Blair’s longing for a second act, in full 
knowledge of his power irredeemably to contaminate any political project, is a 
timely reminder to younger workers, as the retirement age rises, of the need to 
plan ahead. Leave early – whether for reasons of ill health, burn-out or for 
being universally denounced as an avaricious, world-blighting menace – and it 
may prove almost impossible, as the TUC recently noted, for the older worker to 
find another job.

But with his determination to defy the above obstacles, Blair is also a 
terrific example of the model, can-do, older worker. One whose undimmed desire 
to serve – or do incalculable harm to his own side – so compellingly supports 
the proposition, one especially dear to British politicians, that increased 
longevity should naturally be accompanied by an ever-extended working life. 
Cridland, the former Confederation of British Industry chief, is the latest to 
reassess the retirement age and is still consulting for a report due next year.

As it stands, the state’s reward for scientific advances that should usher 
millions more people into their 90s is the raised retirement age of 68 
(rescheduled for 2041), the highest in the OECD. Behind Cridland’s interim 
report is the expectation, supposing longevity keeps increasing, that it should 
be raised again.

Quite why the British older worker should, if only in this respect, have 
become synonymous with drudgery, has never, so far as I can discover, been 
explained. Maybe decades of strong tea are what helps our oldest people to 
become, with their furious, late-onset capacity for record-breaking 
productivity, the envy of the world. Or maybe younger workers, or the 
politicians who should represent their interests, are lamentably passive. As it 
is, with their proved success in delivering, by adjusting the retirement age, 
what are, in effect, huge fines on generations too youthful and busy to notice, 
there is every reason for British politicians to continue to impose penalties 
for age-defying insouciance.

And with so much to divert public attention, now is the perfect time for the 
pensions minister, Richard Harrington,to mention that he has asked 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/future-life-expectancy-to-be-considered-in-first-state-pension-age-review>
 the Government Actuary’s Department to recalculate life expectancy and project 
what might be a nifty way of relieving younger generations of a few more 
hundred billion pounds – if the percentage of adult life (from the age of 20) 
considered eligible for state-pensioned retirement were lowered from the 
current 33.3% to 32%. “People are living and working longer than ever before,” 
Harrington said. “That is why it is important we get this right to ensure the 
system stays fair and sustainable for generations to come.” Or, alternatively, 
until modern medicine buys the government another year or two’s pension 
deferral.

Supposing the lower figure were adopted, a pension consultant told the 
Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/21/30-million-55s-will-have-work-extra-year-getting-state-pension/>
, the government “would struggle to find a more politically painless way to 
take £8,000 off tens of millions of people”. Moreover, if and when affected 
workers began to make a fuss, many of those responsible would, themselves, be 
safely retired on final salary pensions, and protected, as Women Against State 
Pension Inequality protests – by 50s-born women obliged to work beyond 60 – has 
shown, by intergenerational indifference.

Described by the New Statesman, in its article “Tony Blair’s Unfinished 
Business”, as looking “anything but broken” – and allegedly reminiscent of the 
figure whosecojones were so esteemed by George Bush – the tanned Blair, no less 
than orangeTrump, is, in contrast, a poster boy for the five decades of toil 
that will, if some pension lobbyists have their way, become the norm in the UK 
and the US. Trump’s example was somewhat compromised, in this respect, by his 
age-related insulting of Hillary Clinton. “Importantly,” he said, “she [also] 
lacks the mental and physical stamina to take on Isis and all the many 
adversaries we face.”

As many future, almost 70-year-old workers may eventually discover, strategies 
for reducing age prejudice and intergenerational resentment have failed – 
largely through not existing – to keep pace with deferments of state 
pensionable age and the end of obligatory retirement. Outside politics and the 
BBC, and anywhere else Farage’s “big silverback gorillas” are not delightedly 
deferred to, the lingering presence of pension-defying, grandparent-age 
colleagues can, one gathers, be distinctly unwelcome to co-workers – and not 
only those hoping for promotion within the next century or so.

The recent proposal, by the Financial Times columnist Lucy Kellaway, that 
older graduates consider, like her, apre-retirement switch to teaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/20/lucy-kellaway-to-leave-the-financial-times-to-become-a-teacher>
 elicited some wry responses from members of a profession where the average 
retirement age is 59. For instance: “Teaching is a young person’s game.”

The word “ageism” does not appear in Cridland’s 100-page report, a document 
that may not only cheer politicians praying for the go-ahead on 70, but 
reassure anyone who fears – whether from experience, or from listening too 
closely to health officials, or from reading too much literature – that 
advancing age and physical decline are in any way connected.

“Old age isn’t a battle,” thinks one of Philip Roth’s ageing protagonists. 
“Old age is a massacre.” Not any more, to judge by the cheerful Cridland. 
“Longevity is changing the pensions landscape.”

A decade after Roth’s Everyman, Cridland depicts many of us as promisingly 
situated for the payment or, rather, non-payment, of pensions, since, with 
“quite substantial” geographical variations, “healthy life expectancy (the 
proportion of life someone can expect to spend in ‘good’ or ‘very good’ health) 
appears to be keeping track with overall life expectancy”. If a man aged 65 can 
expect around nine years of good health, some will ask: why not use up over 
half of those at work?

It is for academics and actuaries to judge how Cridland’s analysis squares 
with the gloomier conclusions of a 2015 governmentreport 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/464275/gs-15-13-future-ageing-trends-life-expectancy-er12.pdf>
: Trends in Life Expectancy and Healthy Life Expectancy. Its key finding: 
“Increases in health expectancies in the UK are not keeping pace with gains in 
life expectancy, particularly at older ages.”

Still, if Cridland is willing to factor into his pension recommendations the 
assumption of protracted liveliness in Britain’s long living over 65s, 
Generations X and Y may want to consider how this sunny outlook might feature 
in their own career plans. With flexibility on the government’s part they could 
offer to work, say, between 70 and 80, later if the actuaries agree, in 
exchange for a state pension in their 20s or 30s. Just in case, through sheer 
over-optimism, a Cridland-influenced proposal keeps them indentured until the 
last five years, or less, of healthy life.

Any interested generations have until 31 December to tell Mr Cridland how they 
feel about becoming the oldest non-pensioners in the developed world.
 