
Fiona Millar erroneously portrays ASCL as reflecting rather than challenging 
government policy (Anti-academy head squares up to establishment elite in union 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/10/anti-academy-head-union-election-ascl>
, 10 January). Nothing could be further from the reality. The association has 
robustly challenged government policy on many issues and continues to do so. 
ASCL currently campaigns vigorously for improved funding for schools and 
colleges, and for urgent action to address the crisis in teacher recruitment 
and retention. ASCL is not in a “comfort zone” about these or any other issues, 
as a study of my press statements would immediately reveal.

ASCL is playing a leading role in fighting for improved funding and teacher 
supply, often alongside other education unions and associations. The 
association has argued directly to ministers and in public that a properly 
resourced education system is essential to the life chances of young people and 
the future economic wellbeing of the country. I make no apologies for taking a 
constructive approach to negotiating with government, or basing arguments on 
evidence, because this is the most effective way of achieving results.

The government’s recent decision not to press ahead with controversial plans 
to introduce mandatory Year 7 resits, and a number of concessions it has made 
over compulsory entry to the English baccalaureate, were a result of ASCL 
pressure. ASCL’s policymaking is proactive and forward-thinking, and it is set 
by our members through ASCL Council, an elected body made up of serving school 
and college leaders. ASCL exists to serve all its members and campaigns on 
their behalf, and will continue to represent their views vigorously.
Malcolm Trobe
Interim general secretary, Association of School and College Leaders

• I wonder if any other readers shared my sense of irony on seeing in today’s 
Education section – two pages after the harrowing first-hand accounts of the 
damage to state schools’ provision of support services for vulnerable pupils – 
an advert from that renowned charity, Eton college, for a clinical psychologist 
to join their existing team, whose work will include “a coaching service to the 
staff, the delivery of resilience programmes to both boys and teaching staff 
and more general participation in the design and delivery of … the wellbeing 
modules in our Personal, Social and Health Education Programme”. I am shocked 
and sorry to discover that the lives of the boys and staff in this privileged 
establishment are so bereft of wellbeing and resilience.
Geoff Fagence
Weston Oakham, Rutland

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 