
MPs have called for a ban on unpaid internships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/04/government-refuses-to-ban-unpaid-internships>
, which they say unfairly penalise working-class young people who cannot spend 
long periods of time working for free to get into their chosen career.

More employers should also consider contextual recruitment, according to a 
report by members of the all-party parliamentary group (APPG) on social 
mobility. Under this system, firms are required to consider a candidate’s 
achievements in the context of their underprivileged background.

Leading figures in the arts and media, including Peter Bazalgette, chair of 
the Arts Council and ITV, told MPs that the growing expectation that young 
people will work for free or for less than the national minimum wage was the 
key barrier to a creative career for working-class young people.

Bazalgette called unpaid internships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/30/unpaid-internships-face-ban-damian-hinds-uk-employment-minister>
 “the curse of the arts industry” during the inquiry sessions, which also heard 
from actor Michael Sheen, who said the failure to promote working-class voices 
in film, theatre and TV had a wider impact on society as a whole.

In their report, titled the Class Ceiling, the MPs also recommend that 
employers increase efforts to make recruitment less London-centric, by covering 
travel costs for interviews or work experience placements and increasing 
regional outreach.

Unpaid internships rig the system. Curb them, now | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/15/unpaid-internships-rig-system-curb-them-labour>
The inquiry followed findings by the education charity the Sutton Trust in 
2016, which showed that the UK’s most high-profile jobs – from the 
entertainment industry to politics and journalism – were disproportionately 
populated by alumni of private schools and Oxbridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/15/unpaid-internships-rig-system-curb-them-labour>
.

Roughly a third of MPs and FTSE 100 chief executives who were educated in the 
UK went to private schools, which rose to half of the top 100 news journalists, 
three-quarters of all high court and appeals court judges, and more than 
two-thirds of British Oscar winners. About 7% of children are educated 
privately in the UK.

The MPs’ report said employers would “ultimately benefit from harnessing the 
broader experience and potential of the country as a whole and not just 
established groups”. It said young people who started from a disadvantaged 
background needed more encouragement to reach their full potential. “Employers 
look for confidence, resilience, social skills and self-motivation in their 
employees, but for those who have had little to no exposure to extracurricular 
activities, work experience or mentoring, these skills can be difficult to 
acquire,” the report said.

The Labour MP Justin Madders, chair of the APPG, said social mobility was 
“shamefully low” at the top of UK society. “Throughout this inquiry we have 
heard from profession after profession that significant barriers exist to young 
people from less advantaged backgrounds,” he said.

“If the current government is serious about improving access to top jobs for 
those from less advantaged homes, they need to take a much more strategic 
approach. This means linking the work of schools, universities and employers to 
build a real business case and practical plan for improving social mobility.”

Peter Lampl, founder and chair of the Sutton Trust, said employers – supported 
by the government – had to do more to improve diversity through recruitment 
practices, including greater use of contextual admissions. “Getting more 
graduates from low- and middle-income backgrounds to the top of the professions 
is vital both for social mobility and the economic success of the country,” he 
said.

Alan Milburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/12/unpaid-interns-elitist-uk-social-mobility-alan-milburn>
, chair of the government’s social mobility commission, said: “Research has 
consistently shown that people from more affluent backgrounds, who attend 
private schools and elite universities, take a disproportionate number of the 
best jobs, while those from poorer backgrounds are being systematically locked 
out.

“Many top firms are doing excellent work in opening their doors to people from 
all social backgrounds, but there are still too many that need to wake up and 
realise that it makes sound business sense to recruit people from all 
backgrounds. We welcome the findings in this report and fully support its 
recommendations – in particular, the call for employers to use contextualised 
recruitment tools and for unpaid internships to be banned.”
 