
Thank goodness Morrisons never succumbed to the briefly fashionable, but 
always absurd, idea that shareholders should flog the freehold-rich company to 
a crew of private equity barons to conduct a salvage operation. Morrisons was 
always a better business than that, as the injection of a few basic retailing 
disciplines as demonstrated. At Christmas 2015, when Aldi and Lidl were picking 
Morrisons’ pockets, you could have bought the shares for 140p. Now, afterthe 
chain’s best Christmas in seven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/morrisons-enjoys-some-remarkable-christmas-cheer>
, they cost 246p.

“We stocked more of what our customers wanted to buy,” explained chief 
executive David Potts, with admirable simplicity. It was not intended as a 
piece of strategic insight but there’s no shame in that. Self-improvement can 
get a retailer a long way and the scope atMorrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> was always plain. Notepads and 
pencils used to be the main way of reordering stock; now “over half” of the 
sales go through an automated system.

Let’s not get carried away, however. That boast about Christmas 2016 
witnessing the strongest performance in seven years is strictly defined in 
terms of like-for-like sales growth (up 2.9%). In profits terms, it won’t be. 
Five years ago, annual underlying pre-tax profits were £948m but this financial 
year, after Tuesday’s modest upgrade to forecasts, they will be £335m-ish, up 
from £242m a year ago. Morrisons can stop shooting itself in the foot, but it 
can’t make Aldi and Lidl disappear, or bring back its old profit margins.

Still, the staff should be excited, or impatient for their share of the spoils 
of revival. Potts, a boss on a success-related £4m-a-year package, says “our 
improving performance is entirely due to the continuing hard work of the 
Morrisons team of food makers and shopkeepers.” Note the word “entirely.” If 
that’s correct, Potts will surely wish to channel the spirit ofJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> and ensure bonuses reach 
the right people and not take all the glory himself.

Corbyn’s focus on pay ratios could reap rewards

On to the Corbyn pay proposals. The idea of a maximum pay cap, floated in the 
morning, seemed to have been ditched by the time of the speech in the 
afternoon. Quite right too. How would a pay cap be enforced? How, as economist 
and Corbyn’s former adviser Danny Blanchflower pointed out, would you stop 
companies paying top executives in shares? The proposal is a non-starter.

Corbyn’s other five ideas – the ones that made the speech – weren’t so airy. 
The Labour leader at least started from the premise that relative pay between 
senior and junior staff, and not absolute pay at the top, is the place to look. 
But none of Corbyn’s thought could be described as fully fleshed out.

First: a government-backed kitemark for companies that have agreed a pay ratio 
with a trade union. This would allow “consumers to choose for themselves,” said 
Corbyn. OK, but why should Sir Martin Sorrell at WPP, whose key customers are 
other well-paid marketing executives, care about a government kitemark? Does 
anyone?

Second, executive pay could be signed off by remuneration committees on which 
workers have a majority, said Corbyn. That is not going to happen. The 
corporate world bullied Theresa May into dropping her proposal to place a 
single worker on a board. A majority is asking for the moon. Start with what is 
practical and achievable.

Third, the highest 1% or 5% of earners could pay a higher rate of income tax. 
That is definitely possible. The skill lies in setting the right rates of tax. 
France dropped its 75% supertax on earnings above €1m because of meagre returns 
but its version always seemed too blunt. A better design wouldn’t necessarily 
improve the wages of those at the bottom of a company’s pay ladder, but it 
could raise revenue for the Treasury. Under Margaret Thatcher, the top rate of 
income tax was 60% between 1979 and 1988. Corbyn should set out his proposed 
rates – it’s the detail that matters.

Fourth, Corbyn said companies that don’t pay anyone more than a certain 
multiple of the pay of the lowest earner could enjoy a lower rate of 
corporation tax. Interesting but, again, how would this be policed? It sounds 
like torture for tax officials already struggling to ensure compliance with 
minimum-wage rules. And an unwelcome effect could be companies gaming the 
system by outsourcing their lowest-paid roles.

Fifth, Corbyn said companies bidding for a government contract would have to 
meet a 20:1 pay ratio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-maximum-wage-for-all-government-contractors>
. That has the merit of being a rule the government could enforce. Over time, 
the policy could exert influence. But what if the best bid comes from a company 
with a 30:1 ratio? Would Corbyn insist that government departments use public 
funds to pay over the odds for an inferior service? Plus, there could be the 
same incentive to game the rules via outsourcing.

In short, a lot more work required. But pay ratios – and income tax – are the 
place to concentrate. It is disgraceful that ratios have reached an average of 
130:1 at FTSE 100 companies, up from 50 times a couple of decades ago, with no 
obvious improvement in boardroom performance. An easy political tactic would be 
to lobby for compulsory disclosure on a company-by-company basis. Theresa May 
raised that prospect but now seems vulnerable to more corporate lobbying. 
Corbyn should hold her feet to the fire. It is likely to be more effective 
short-term strategy than showering us with fresh ideas, some of which have 
plainly not been thought through.
 