
BBC Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is aiming to fend off 
intense competition from main rival STV by airing a new weekly primetime 
current affairs programme later this month, amid ongoing delays for its 
flagship “Scottish Six” plans.

BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> executives have not been able to 
agree on the case for a major new Scottish Six news programme to replace the 
Six O’Clock News on BBC1,


The live programme, to be called Timeline, will be shown on BBC2 for half an 
hour every Thursday evening.

It is claimed it will “go behind the headlines and the political spin”, by 
giving its viewers “an authentic voice on the stories and issues that matter”.


STV aims to outflank BBC by launching news show before proposed Scottish Six
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/21/stv-to-launch-domestic-news-bulletin-in-bid-to-outflank-bbc-in-scotland>
Timeline will partially replace the BBC’s flagship current affairs programme, 
Scotland 2016, which was axed last year from its four-nights-a-week slot at 
10.30pm on BBC2 after its audience figures slumped to only about 30,000 viewers 
a night.

The programme will be anchored by BBC Scotland’s political correspondent Glenn 
Campbell and one of the Scottish industry’s few Asian broadcasters, Shereen 
Nanjiani. A veteran radio and TV presenter, Nanjiani will become BBC Scotland’s 
only on-air ethnic minority news journalist.

Aired in the same slot as Newsnight in the rest of the UK, Scotland 2016 was 
unable to compete against STV’s current affairs programme Scotland Tonight, 
which ran at the same time, and was far more successful in building a loyal 
audience.

Confirmation that the new programme will be aired will increase scrutiny of 
the BBC’s wider plans to improve and expand its news and current affairs 
programming, and to increase spending in Scotland.

With BBC executives still unsure about launching a Scottish Six, STV is now 
poised tobeat the corporation  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/21/stv-to-launch-domestic-news-bulletin-in-bid-to-outflank-bbc-in-scotland>
to that too.

STV is expecting to launch its own version of the Scottish Six in February or 
March, in the form of a nightly half-hourly Scottish, UK and international news 
programme using ITV’s overseas and London-based output.

Some observers say the BBC will not make a final decision on whether to launch 
a dedicated hour-long Scottish Six until early summer.

The STV programme will be aired on a second channel the company has been able 
to create by merging its local city licences in Aberdeen, Ayr, Dundee, 
Edinburgh and Glasgow into a single Freeview service called STV2.

The broadcaster has taken on 12 editors, reporters and production staff to 
boost its newsroom operation.

While many observers believe the new programme will have a small audience, 
since STV2 is still little known, the commercial broadcaster said its new 
channel will cover 85% of Scotland’s population, and also be shown on Sky and 
Virgin cable services.

BBC executives were stung by intense criticism during the 2014 referendum 
campaign from former first minister Alex Salmond and protesters in the 
independence movement, who alleged the corporation was biased.

BBC surveys have found Scottish licence fee payers are among the most critical 
of its general output.

The Scottish National party, which has repeatedly pressed the BBC to increase 
spending and original output, said it would watch the new show with interest.


In a joint statement, the National Union of Journalists, actors’ union Equity 
and two independent producers said it was unacceptable that the BBC’s spend in 
Scotland amounted to only 55% of the £320m raised in Scotland by the licence 
fee.

“The current imbalance is not in the interests of Scottish audiences, Scottish 
talent or the BBC,” they said.

• This article was amended on 12 January 2017. An earlier version said Shereen 
Nanjiani would become BBC Scotland’s only “on-air ethnic minority journalist”. 
That description would also include the BBC Scotland sports reporter Kheredine 
Idessane.

 