
An ally of the former Italian prime minister Silvio Berlusconi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/silvio-berlusconi> has been elected 
president of the European parliament after a deal was struck between two of the 
institution’s largest political groups, consolidating a conservative grip on 
key European Union institutions.

Antonio Tajani, who has been elected as an MEP four times and was previously a 
vice-president of the European parliament, beat the centre-left leader and 
fellow Italian Gianni Pittella by 351 votes to 282 in a rare fourth-round 
runoff, contrary to past appointments decided by mainstream parties before the 
voting.

Tajani’s victory followed a pact between his centre-right group and the 
liberals, led by the Brexit negotiator, Guy Verhofstadt. He relied for his 
victory on support from the ruling conservative parties of Britain and Poland, 
which are sharply critical of the EU.

The combined weight of Tajani’s European People’s party and Verhofstadt’s 
liberals – the first and fourth largest groups respectively – made it difficult 
for a rival candidate to prevail.


Tajani, a former spokesman for Berlusconi who went on to serve as Italy’s 
European commissioner for two successive mandates, is a familiar face in EU 
politics. During the VW emissions scandal he was accused ofnot carrying out his 
responsibilities as EU industry commissioner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/20/european-commission-guilty-negligence-diesel-defeat-devices-draft-report-dieselgate>
. Tajani has always insisted he knew nothing about problems with car emissions 
tests, despitewarnings from colleagues (paywall) 
<https://www.ft.com/content/d593256c-78c8-11e5-a95a-27d368e1ddf7> at the 
European commission.


The way was cleared for Tajani after Verhofstadt made clear he was pulling out 
of the race on Tuesday morning. The liberals agreed to support Tajani in 
exchange for an agreement to create a “reflection group” on the future of the 
EU, as well as a new committee on EU police cooperation.

The agreement also secures the position of Verhofstadt as the parliament’s 
Brexit representative. The European parliament must approve the final Brexit 
deal and MEPs from both groups are anxious to ensure they are involved from the 
start of negotiations, after Theresa May triggers article 50.

The deal is a boost for Verhofstadt, who last week suffered a blow after his 
liberal colleagues failed to back hisplan to join forces with Beppe Grillo’s 
populist Five Star Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/five-star-movement-allianceukip-back-on-meps-block-split-nigel-farage-beppe-grillo>
. The liberal leader described the deal as “a first important step in the 
construction of a pro-European coalition to reform and strengthen our union, 
which is absolutely necessary”.

The European Conservatives and Reformists, the British Tory-dominated alliance 
which is the third largest group, is likely to be kingmaker, although for now 
it continues to support its candidate, the Belgian MEP Helga Stevens.

The biggest loser from the deal was Gianni Pittella. Under a decades-old 
tradition, the parliament’s two largest blocs, the centre-right EPP and the 
socialists, passed the presidency between them. But the socialists angered the 
centre-right by attempting to get the post for a third successive mandate, 
following thedeparture of Martin Schulz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/european-parliament-president-martin-schulz-to-stand-down-german-elections>
.

Schulz, who is leaving Brussels and Strasbourg for national politics, has 
given the European parliament a bigger profile than under previous leaders. The 
German Social Democrat has set the tone on Brexit, by calling for the UK to 
make a swift exit, and frequently made waves by lamenting the failure of 
national leaders to sell the European project.


There are no guarantees his successor will enjoy the same standing, although 
that person will continue to represent MEPs at European leaders’ summits and 
lead plenary sessions in Brussels and Strasbourg.


Tajani’s victory cements the centre-right’s dominance of top EU jobs. The 
European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, and the European council 
leader, Donald Tusk, are drawn from the EPP. The EU’s foreign policy chief, 
Federica Mogherini, and the head of the eurogroup, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, 
represent the centre-left.

Reuters contributed to this report
 