
When the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> looks around in a 
couple of years to replace Mark Carney as governor, Andy Haldane will need to 
work hard to win over the selection panel. The central bank’s chief economist 
can’t help attracting publicity, and not always in a good way.

Last week he was in hot water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/chief-economist-of-bank-of-england-admits-errors>
 following his capitulation to the bullying Brexiters and their claim that 
experts were dunces. He said it was “a fair cop” in answer to critics who 
accuse his profession of missing the financial crisis and misjudging the impact 
of the Brexit vote.

The Bank certainly did fail to highlight the oncoming juggernaut of debt that 
overwhelmed the west in 2008. And now, post-Brexit, all is calm in the British 
economy where Threadneedle Street saidthere would be turmoil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bank-of-england-warns-brexit-could-do-serious-harm-to-uk-economy>
. As for a recession sometime soon,which the Treasury said was a possibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/22/brexit-would-cause-diy-recession-says-george-osborne>
, there is not a sliver of evidence. If anything, the economy is one of the 
fastest growing in the developed world.

These specific errors call for an apology. Experts are under the spotlight now 
and need to examine their conduct, especially when they become partial and are 
undone by facts they sweep under the carpet or ignore.

But Haldane went further than just apologising for discrete mistakes. And 
worse, he made some bizarre comparisons that will make those concerned about 
the demise of experts think he is part of the problem.

He said that the 2008 crash was economic forecasting’s “Michael Fish moment”, 
referring to the BBC weatherman’sinfamous dismissal of hurricane warnings in 
1987 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uqs1YXfdtGE> that were soon proved all 
too accurate across southern England.

He carried the analogy through to the Met Office’s solution, which was to 
include more data, more quickly, into its forecasting system. This brought 
about a huge improvement in weather predictions that economists could copy, 
claimed Haldane. Yet it is not clear why more data would make a difference when 
it was institutional myopia that was behind the Bank’s embarrassing ignorance 
of an unstable financial system in 2008.

Furthermore, Haldane said the forecasts of doom and gloom ahead of the Brexit 
vote were also wrong, even though the Bank was right about the fall in sterling 
and will be proved right about its limited impact on exports and significant 
impact on inflation, leading to slowing growth. It was only wrong about the 
strength of consumer borrowing, which was partly due to a misreading of the 
ultra-low loan rates on offer that make spending on credit so seductive.

Haldane’s Bank also failed to tell politicians, the City and the public that 
if there were a post-referendum panic, it would probably cut interest rates 
again and boost its stimulus package. The fact that it pulled the trigger on 
both these measures when the situation looked sticky is one reason consumer 
confidence has bounced back and the economy has recovered. He didn’t mention 
that either.

And he didn’t emphasise the inherent uncertainty surrounding economic 
forecasts. For instance, exports could be higher than expected, and the economy 
grow faster this year than the widely forecast 1%, as a result of the promised 
spending spree by Donald Trump when he gets into the Oval Office. All boats 
will float on a tide of US munificence that could scarcely have been foreseen 
last year, when the polls put Trump well behind Clinton.

Where Haldane hit the spot was in his critique of economics teaching. It is 
too narrow, it relies on equations to explain a world where many things don’t 
add up, and it lacks historical perspective.

Maybe universities can rescue the situation by developing a fresh cohort of 
economists with a broader and more grounded outlook. So Haldane may have been 
too harsh on his profession: but he is right that change is needed.

Is Ashley in need of anger management?

Was Mike Ashley’s new year resolution to stop being so conciliatory? That 
quality hasn’t often been attached to Sports Direct’s founder, chief executive 
and 55% shareholder but, by his standards, 2016 was a year of peace, love and 
reconciliation.

He turned up to Iain Wright’s business select committee, confounding some 
expectations. He apologised for “serious shortcomings” in working practices in 
the Shirebrook warehouse and launched a governance review. He pledged to raise 
standards, to offer all retail staff guaranteed hours instead of zero-hours 
contracts and that an elected workers’ representative would join the board. 
Ashley even held an open day at Shirebrook in September for all to witness the 
dawn of Sports Direct’s new “open and compliant” era.

And now? In the first week of 2017, Ashley performed three U-turns in one day. 
The first was merely odd: Sports Direct will resume share buybacks after 
abandoning them only a month ago. But the other two announcements suggested the 
old belligerence is back.

Ashley said he had asked chairman Keith Hellawell to reconsider his pledge to 
resign if outside shareholders vote against his reappointment next September. 
That was a big “up yours” to those who had just voted against Hellawell for a 
second time.

Then Ashley said the board would reconsider “all options” in its governance 
review “in view of continuing frustrations”. Whose frustrations? Outside 
investors’ or his? It wasn’t clear, but one option for the review is to abandon 
the idea of appointing an independent figure to lead it. Review arrangements 
are under discussion with the Investor Forum, representing City fund managers, 
and dialogue was described as “constructive” before Christmas. But that was 
before the latest vote against Hellawell.

Ashley could be making a mistake. A bunker mentality helped push Sports Direct 
into last year’s crisis. A big sulk wouldn’t improve matters now. Governance 
reform is harder that it sounds. Sometimes it involves hearing judgments you 
may not like.

Still decking the halls

Christmas is over – but not for City bankers. They are about to find out the 
size of their annual bonuses. The US banks traditionally go first: JP Morgan 
and Bank of America report results – and the size of their bonus pools – this 
week, with Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley to follow. All have sizable London 
operations. The European banks will follow suit a few weeks later.

Bankers insist that the bonus season is not what was it before the 2008 
crisis. Then they got their payouts in lump sum cash amounts or, going back 20 
years or so, in gold bars to take the sting out of taxes​. These days bonuses 
are partly paid in shares and spread over a number of years. Even so, the 
rewards are big. Data for 2015 shows the big four US banks handing €1m to 
almost 1,000 City workers. The rainmakers are also raking it in. Three 
employees at boutique Robey Warshaw shared £37m for their efforts advising on 
big takeovers. That’s all their Christmases at once.
 