
Britons are bracing themselves for a Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>-related slowdown in 2017 
by stashing away cash at increasing rates, according to the latest snapshot 
from the UK’s high street banks.

Personal deposits grew by 4.8% year-on-year in November, figures from the 
British Bankers’ Association (BBA) showed, as people prepared for a tougher 
year of weaker economic growth and lower wage growth.

Over the first 11 months of the year, personal deposits grew by £32.4bn 
compared with £19.8bn over the same period in 2015.


Rebecca Harding, chief economist at the BBA, said: “A corollary of a low 
interest rate environment is a growth in deposits and we’ve seen personal 
deposits, in particular, grow more strongly in recent months as consumers hoard 
cash in the absence of higher-yielding, liquid investment opportunities.

“This growth in personal deposits may also suggest that consumers are looking 
to grow their cash reserves against potential economic uncertainties, such as 
an expectation of lower wage growth.”

The UK economy is expected to slow significantly in 2017 as uncertainty builds 
about Britain’s future outside the European Union.The International Monetary 
Fund is predicting growth will slow to 1.1% next year from 1.8% in 2016. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/britain-fastest-growing-g7-economy-imf-international-monetary-fund-brexit-vote>

The same BBA report showed mortgage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/mortgages> approvals dropped 9% year-on-year 
in November as the housing market lost momentum at the end of 2016.

Approvals for house purchases fell to 40,659 last month, and were down 4% over 
the first 11 months of the year.

Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Markit, said the dip in approvals was 
a sign the housing market would weaken in 2017, as the backdrop for consumers 
became more challenging.

He said: “We believe the fundamentals for house buyers will progressively 
deteriorate during 2017 with consumers’ purchasing power weakening markedly and 
the labour market likely softening. Increasing economic uncertainty is also 
likely to weigh down on consumer confidence and willingness to engage in major 
transactions such as buying a house.”

Archer added that house prices were likely to be flat in 2017 overall.

However, there were signs from the BBA report that existing home owners took 
advantage of the Bank of England’s decision to cut interest rates in August to 
a record low of 0.25%, as the number of remortgages approved jumped 14% in 
November compared with a year earlier.


Away from housing loans, the annual rate of growth in consumer credit slowed 
to 6.4% last month from 7.2% in October. Credit card lending rose by 6%, while 
personal loans and overdrafts were up by 6.8%.


Harding said: “Consumer credit growth continues to be strong, despite falling 
back a little in November, reflecting strong retail sales in recent months.

“The reduction in interest rates in August may have boosted remortgaging 
approvals, with consumers looking to take advantage of the current economic 
conditions and lock in lower interest rates.”

Borrowing among UK companies outside the financial sector fell by £1.2bn in 
November, which could be a sign that businesses are reining in investment plans 
and using internal funds where possible, according to the BBA.
 