
Such was the relief which swept around the smattering of local supporters at 
the final whistle it was tempting to suggest that, for all the exploits of 
Sutton United and Lincoln City, the real surprise from the night’sFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> replays had actually been 
witnessed in this freezing corner of south-east London.

Crystal Palace have found victories so hard to come by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/bolton-wanderers-crystal-palace-fa-cup-match-report>
 in dire recent times that even a slender success over League One opposition is 
to be cherished. Indeed, with an impressive Bolton Wanderers side having led 
and later threatened to force extra-time, with Zach Clough poking just wide of 
a post, there was even a little instinctive punch of the air offered up by Sam 
Allardyce at the full‑time whistle. Manchester City will hardly be quaking in 
their boots at the prospect of visiting in the fourth round, but that is a 
concern for another day.
Atom 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=423a8bb1-dbf0-44d3-a200-76ac10f99080>
The last time Allardyce had overseen a victory was in Slovakia with England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/slovakia-england-world-cup-2018-qualifier-sam-allardyce>
 in happier times, back in early September. “It has been a while for me,” he 
offered, before tempering any outward sense of glee with warnings that this 
team must still be more ruthless, must defend better, must believe in 
themselves more, “and, well, just play better”. Such is the state of fragility 
around Palace at present that stripping this squad back to basics, adding steel 
and quality where he can in the market, is the only way they will survive. A 
first win in six games under his stewardship, and only a second in 17 over a 
campaign that has long carried the stench of under-achievement, must prove to 
be a start.

It was not achieved with ease. Bolton, with an experienced core at the heart 
of their defence and the spritely energy of Jay Spearing, Josh Vela and Clough 
posing a threat, forced the home side to call in the cavalry just after an hour 
with all the familiar anxiety flaring in home ranks. James Henry’s first-time 
cross-shot, whipped left-footed to loop over Julian Speroni from Gary Madine’s 
knockdown, had put the visitors ahead. For a brief period after that goal, 
Palace’s players wore the look of condemned men, shuffling round the turf with 
no conviction that the tie could be retrieved.

Allardyce was sufficiently alarmed to fling on Christian Benteke, with the 
Belgian duly seizing an opportunity to impose his quality on the occasion. It 
was his thumped header from Mathieu Flamini’s delicious cross which put the 
hosts level, the forward attacking his leap with glee where Premier League 
defenders do not afford him such space. His 10th goal of the season followed 
nine minutes later, Benteke collecting Andros Townsend’s cross with his back to 
goal, then spinning instinctively and placing his shot beyond Ben Alnwick and 
those Bolton players seeking to block the attempt.

Nathan Arnold’s late winner sends ecstatic Lincoln City into fourth round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/17/lincoln-city-ipswich-town-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report>
Benteke remains an asset most of the clubs scrapping at the foot of the 
Premier League would crave to have as their own, and those first goals after 
six scoreless games might pep his form for the visit of Everton on Saturday. By 
then, Allardyce will hope to have added to his ranks. Carl Jenkinson is close 
to a £7m move from Arsenal, while there is interest in the Montpellier 
centre-half, William Rémy.

“We are trying and spreading our wings far and wide,” said Allardyce, who will 
hold further talks with his chairman, Steve Parish, on Wednesday. “Hopefully, 
in the next 48 hours, at least one of those targets will say yes and sign on. I 
know we’ve had five or six or eight bids in for players, across Europe as well 
as in this country, and only had the offer for Jeffrey Schlupp accepted so far.”

Bolton, under a transfer embargo of sorts, will also seek to do business in 
the loan market over what remains of the window and their performances in this 
tie bode well for their attempt to scramble from the third tier. There is a 
fine blend of experience and youthful energy in their ranks. Allardyce is still 
seeking his own balance but, for now, at least he has a victory to savour. It 
has been a long time coming.
 