
Scope

This document covers all aspects of community interaction and moderation on 
the Guardian website, including comments on blogs or articles.

Moderation aims

The Guardian website provides a growing number of opportunities for readers 
who wish to discuss content we publish, or debate issues more generally. Our 
aim is to ensure this platform is inclusive and safe, and that the Guardian 
website is the place on the net where you will always find lively, entertaining 
and, above all, intelligent discussions.

Community standards

There are 10 simple guidelines which we expect all participants in the 
community areas of the Guardian website to abide by, all of which directly 
inform our approach to community moderation (detailed below). These apply 
across the site, while moderation decisions are also informed by the context in 
which comments are made.

1. We welcome debate and dissent, but personal attacks (against authors or 
other users), persistent trolling and mindless abuse will not be tolerated. The 
key to maintaining the Guardian website as an inviting space is to focus on 
intelligent discussion of topics.

2. We acknowledge criticism of the articles we publish, but will not allow 
misrepresentation of the Guardian and our journalists to be published on our 
website. For the sake of robust debate, we will distinguish between 
constructive, focused argument and smear tactics.

3. We understand that people often feel strongly about issues debated on the 
site, but we will consider removing any content that others might find 
extremely offensive or threatening. Please respect other people’s views and 
beliefs and consider your impact on others when making your contribution.

4. We reserve the right to redirect or curtail conversations which descend 
into flame-wars based on ingrained partisanship or generalisations. We don’t 
want to stop people discussing topics they are enthusiastic about, but we do 
ask users to find ways of sharing their views that do not feel divisive, 
threatening or toxic to others.

5. We will not tolerate racism, sexism, homophobia or other forms of 
hate-speech, or contributions that could be interpreted as such. We recognise 
the difference between criticising a particular government, organisation, 
community or belief and attacking people on the basis of their race, religion, 
sex, gender, sexual orientation, disability or age.

6. We will remove any content that may put us in legal jeopardy, such as 
potentially libellous or defamatory postings, or material posted in potential 
breach of copyright.

7. We will remove any posts that are obviously commercial or otherwise 
spam-like. Our aim is that this site should provide a space for people to 
interact with our content and each other, and we actively discourage commercial 
entities passing themselves off as individuals, in order to post advertising 
material or links. This may also apply to people or organisations who 
frequently post propaganda or external links without adding substantively to 
the quality of the discussion on the Guardian website.

8. Keep it relevant. We know that some conversations can be wide-ranging, but 
if you post something which is unrelated to the original topic (“off-topic”) 
then it may be removed, in order to keep the thread on track. This also applies 
to queries or comments about moderation, which should not be posted as comments.

9. Be aware that you may be misunderstood, so try to be clear about what you 
are saying, and expect that people may understand your contribution differently 
than you intended. Remember that text isn’t always a great medium for 
conversation: tone of voice (sarcasm, humour and so on) doesn’t always come 
across when using words on a screen.You can help to keep the Guardian community 
areas open to all viewpoints by maintaining a reasonable tone, even in 
unreasonable circumstances.

10. The platform is ours, but the conversation belongs to everybody. We want 
this to be a welcoming space for intelligent discussion, and we expect 
participants to help us achieve this by notifying us of potential problems and 
helping each other to keep conversations inviting and appropriate. If you spot 
something problematic in community interaction areas, please report it.When we 
all take responsibility for maintaining an appropriate and constructive 
environment, the debate itself is improved and everyone benefits.

In short:

- If you act with maturity and consideration for other users, you should have 
no problems.
- Don’t be unpleasant. Demonstrate and share the intelligence, wisdom and 
humour we know you possess.
- Take some responsibility for the quality of the conversations in which 
you’re participating. Help make this an intelligent place for discussion and it 
will be.

Community FAQ

There is a comprehensive list of frequently asked questions about 
participation and community moderation, which also provides more detail about 
particular examples of the standards listed above.

theguardian.com/community-faqs <https://www.theguardian.com/community-faqs>

Moderation approach

Participants who seriously, persistently or wilfully ignore the community 
standards, participation guidelines or terms and conditions will have their 
posting privileges for all the Guardian community areas withdrawn.
This is not an action that we take lightly or arbitrarily. However, we are 
aiming to create and maintain an online experience consistent with Guardian 
values, and we reserve the right to make decisions which we feel support that. 
Please be aware that moderators may contact you by email in relation to your 
participation, especially where an issue comes up in relation to these 
community standards. Any advice they give/request they make should be adhered 
to, as our moderators are employed to enforce these community standards and 
create a constructive environment for everyone who contributes to our site.

We will, when necessary, remove user postings or comments from our articles, 
and blog posts. *
If a contribution to the Guardian website is perceived as breaching the 
community guidelines set out above, then it will be removed by the community 
team, in the interests of keeping community areas of the site appropriate for 
the vast majority of the people who visit.

(*NB: We will not edit user posts to change the meaning, spelling, or anything 
else intended by the user. Even if only part of a comment or posting is 
perceived as breaching the community guidelines, the whole thing may be 
removed. Also, when a comment or post is removed for any of the reasons above, 
it is sometimes necessary to delete subsequent messages which refer to 
explicitly or quote from the original (removed) comment, in order to preserve 
some notion of conversational thread. This may also happen because a later 
comment quotes directly the problematic bits of the original comment, which 
just perpetuates the problem. In such cases not every deletion will be marked 
individually.)

We reserve the right to take steps or implement measures which we hope will 
benefit the whole community of the Guardian community participants.
Because we are ultimately responsible for everything which appears on this 
site, all actions and decisions taken by our moderators are final. 
Unfortunately, the huge (and growing) quantity of user content on the Guardian 
website means that we can’t enter into correspondence regarding specific 
moderation activity, although all correspondence will be read.

If you have suggestions or questions about any aspect of community 
participation on the Guardian website, you can write to
moderation@theguardian.com <mailto:moderation@theguardian.com> or 
opinion.moderation@theguardian.com <mailto:opinion.moderation@theguardian.com> 
(for moderation on Opinion articles specifically).

Please mark all queries clearly in the subject line (e.g. Question about 
moderation decision on Books blog)

For queries about your user account, you should contact 
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>

Note about community content

The views expressed in community areas of this site do not necessarily reflect 
or represent the views of GNM, its staff or contributors.

About this document

This policy is a collaborative document, created by representatives of GNM 
editorial including the Head of Communities, moderators and editors, together 
with the Readers Editor and incorporating feedback from users and content 
creators across the site.

It has evolved over many years of community participation on the Guardian 
website, and aims to reflect best practice in community management as well as 
GNM’s editorial values.

It is regularly reviewed and refreshed, so please bookmark this page and check 
back frequently.

Further information and resources

There is an extensive list of frequently asked questions (FAQs) about 
community participation <https://www.theguardian.com/community-faqs> which we 
hope will answer any questions you have about interaction functionality and 
moderation process.

Additional questions can be sent to moderation@theguardian.com 
<mailto:moderation@theguardian.com> or opinion.moderation@theguardian.com 
<mailto:opinion.moderation@theguardian.com> (for moderation on Opinion articles 
specifically).

Please remember that by registering for the Guardian website you have also 
agreed to ourterms of service 
<http://users.theguardian.com/help/article/0,,933909,00.html>.
 