
A reliable high street stalwart and City favourite for years, fashion chain 
Next rocked the City last week as it admitted to having had a gloomy Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/next-shares-2017-inflation-pound-brexit>
, after a poor year, and warned of an even gloomier outlook for 2017.

Traditionally the first major retailer to report on Christmas trading, Next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> has long been viewed as a 
bellwether for the high street and news of its poor performance dragged down 
the share prices of Marks & Spencer and others. Even Next’s ever-reliable 
winter sale – when eager customers queue up for its 5am Boxing Day opening – 
was a disappointment, with sales down 7% on last year.

The company said store sales in the weeks before Christmas were down 3.5%, and 
profits for 2017-18 could come in a full £100m below market forecasts thanks to 
extra costs from rises in the minimum wage for over-25s, business rates and the 
new apprenticeship levy.

The shares plunged 14% and are now changing hands at just over £40 – valuing 
the chain at £6bn – down from almost £80 little more than 12 months ago. And 
even £40 is too high for Next boss Lord Wolfson, it would seem. In recent years 
he hasbought back shares worth hundreds of millions of pounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/mar/21/lord-wolfson-next-shares-buyback>
; now he has chosen instead to pay special dividends – a move that suggests he 
still doesn’t think the shares are good value.

Wolfson blamed the poor performance on unseasonal weather and a shift in 
consumer spending away from fashion in favour of eating out and holidays. It 
also forecast that fashion sales were likely to be squeezed further in 2017 as 
inflation leaves consumers with less money spare for non-essentials.

But a number of analysts believe Next’s problems are more fundamental, with 
some voicing fears that it is running into the problems that have beset Marks & 
Spencer for years – ageing customers, dull ranges and a tired brand.

Emily Stella of Verdict Retail said: “Next’s customer is ageing, and it is not 
attracting the people they think are their core customer – 25-44-year-olds who 
are buying furniture and childrenswear as well as clothing. It really needs to 
improve its product and make something more relevant and inspirational for that 
demographic.”

Verdict’s research indicates that less than half of Next’s shoppers, 46%, are 
now in that key 25-44 age group, compared with 64% a decade ago. Younger 
shoppers have defected to competitors such as Zara, Ted Baker, Primark and 
online retailer Asos.

“It could be going down the same route as M&S, which is not where anyone wants 
to be going,” said Stella.

For years, the Next Directory online and catalogue business benefited from a 
combination of an attractive credit offer and slick delivery – both of which 
outclassed its rivals. “Directory has been driven by consumer credit rather 
than the desirability of the product,” said veteran analyst Tony Shiret. “Now 
credit has become more widely available.”

Shiret added that by focusing on credit, Next had failed to invest enough in 
keeping its online operations up to speed. Last Christmas, there was a dramatic 
shift towards buying via smartphones, and Next did not at the time have a 
specialist mobile site.

Next’s UK online sales rose just 1.4% in the year to 24 December – a poor 
performance compared with the 18% growth for online fashion in general last 
year, according to trade body IMRG.

“There is clear evidence that in terms of an online offering, Next has been 
squeezed by new, more nimble entrants,” said Clive Black of Shore Capital. He 
believes last year was the “apex of profit generation” for Next and that 
erosion of earnings is likely to continue.

Last week, Wolfson promised to spend £10m in the coming year on improving its 
website and online marketing, but there are other problems.

Fixing Next’s fashion ranges may be trickier. Wolfson has admitted that all UK 
growth is coming from selling brands other than Next. The group’s Label 
catalogue sells its own young fashion brand, Lipsy, alongside brands such as 
Calvin Klein, Nike, Whistles and Ted Baker, but those names are not stocked in 
Next’s high street stores and that’s where the real disappointment lay over 
Christmas.

Partly of course, Next has the same issue as its great rival Marks & Spencer 
in being a mature business with high market share – which means finding new 
converts is tough. It’s a long time since Next has excited fashion editors, but 
that didn’t stop it enjoying fairly consistent growth for years. However, 
2014’s loss of product directorChristos Angelides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2014/jun/10/next-christos-angelides-abercrombie-replace>
 after 28 years may have hit it harder than expected.

The retailer is still generating big profits, and the cerebral Wolfson is by 
no means in panic mode. In recent years he has focused on larger department 
store-style locations and points to a downturn in Christmas shopper numbers in 
those shops of only 4%. “We don’t think it’s a turning point,” he says.

But if the retailer can’t revive shoppers’ interest, closing stores, or 
downsizing, may have to move on to the agenda.
 