
Ben Barba’s return to Cronulla looks increasingly likely after the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> premiers confirmed they want the star 
fullback on their playing roster. But Sharks boss Lyall Gorman says the club 
needs evidence the 27-year-old’s off-field woes are behind him.

Ben Barba again at NRL crossroads but Sharks show lessons have been learnt | 
Nick Tedeschi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/ben-barba-again-at-nrl-crossroads-but-sharks-show-lessons-have-been-learnt>
Barba will reportedly work as a builder’s labourer over the summer to keep his 
focus. “The door’s open for him but he’s got to want to come back to football, 
first of all,” Gorman told Sky Sports Radio on Thursday. “More importantly, 
he’s got to be settled in his own life.”

Barba has returned to Sydney after spending a month in a Thai rehabilitation 
centre. He faces a 12-match suspension should he choose to return to the NRL 
after being released from his contract in the wake of the positive cocaine test 
last month.

While reports have linked Barba to cashed-up Japanese rugby union clubs, 
Cronulla players have also backed his return. Barba’s agent Gavin Orr said the 
Dally M winner would endeavour to “stay busy” while he spends time away from 
the game.

“A lot of rugby league players turn to the drink or get on the punt because 
they have so much free time, so this [construction job] will be good for Ben,” 
Orr told News Corp Australia. “To Ben’s credit, he wants to stay active and 
this will be an important part of his recovery.”

Barba returned the second positive drug test of his career days after the 
Sharks’ breakthrough grand final win in October. Gorman reiterated it was a 
“mutual decision” for Barba to be released from his playing contract.

“He needed to be well away from the distractions of professional sport and the 
demands of professional sport and, for the first time in a long time, focus on 
himself and his future and his wife,” he said.

“He’s the first to acknowledge, and he put his hand up and said ‘I’ve got some 
issues I need to address. I’ve put them on the backburner for too long’. If we 
can look back in 40 years and say, ‘look at Benny and the life he’s led, not 
just around football’, we’ll be a better club for that and he’ll be a better 
person.”
 