
Best wishes to one and all for 2015. 
_____

Genius puzzle groupies started to have problems submitting entries early in 
December, for which I apologise. I could try to give a long explanation as to 
why the previous tried and tested system for entering this prize competition 
online no longer works but, as I don't really understand it myself, that would 
probably end up leaving you both confused and angrier than you are already.

The short explanation is that, back in the mists of time (July 2003 in fact) 
when the Genius software, including the facility for submitting entries online, 
was written, it was done as a one-off exercise and not as part of the the 
programs for all the other online puzzles.

The Guardian is presently in the middle of a major revamp of all its digital 
platforms and communications, including an upgrading of its IT security 
systems, passwords, protocols etc. So far as I am aware this has been going 
smoothly, so far as the regular Guardian and Observer crossword puzzles are 
concerned, but it resulted in the unforeseen consequence of knocking out the 
Genius submission system.

In due course this will be restored but, hard as it may be for crossword fans 
to accept, a problem with the couple of hundred Genius submissions a month is 
not top of the list of global priorities that the programmers are grappling 
with.

So, as a stopgap, a temporary solution has been found for the problem:

1. When you bring the current Genius puzzle to your screen, it should come up 
in an interactive format with the name of the setter, but without the essential 
special instructions to go with it. You should see a message, reading: 'To 
access the temporary Genius page click here'.

2. With that page, you should get the special instructions for the puzzle, 
plus beneath it a form in which to fill in the across and down solutions and 
asking for your email address. At the bottom of that there is a 'submit form' 
button.

3. After you have successfully clicked on 'submit form' you can scroll up to a 
message with a tick that says: 'Thank You. The form was submitted successfully'

_____

Here is a cheering Christmas story for crossword lovers. On the day after 
Boxing Day 2013 two Canadians from Toronto, Temma Gentles and her husband Paul 
Kay, arrived from Coventry at a hotel near the British Museum in London. 
Needing food, having been thrown out when the museum closed at 8.30pm, they 
ended up in The Plough, in Museum Street, opposite the main entrance to the 
museum. There were no free tables, so they asked a man, sitting alone and doing 
a crossword, if they might share his table. He said his name was Michael. They 
soon discovered a shared liking for Guardian crossword puzzles and agreed that 
Araucaria was their favourite setter and that Paul was also quite good.

As the conversation meandered, Michael revealed that he was a children's book 
illustrator and that he often visited Toronto, where he had a friend who was a 
judge. He recommended that, on the morrow, they should visit the Cartoon Museum 
next door. Finally they parted, leaving him with one of Temma's business cards 
with their Toronto details. However, at the end of Museum Street they were 
overtaken by Michael, who told them that they had forgotten to pay but that he 
had settled their bill and that they could buy him dinner next time he was in 
Toronto.

The next day they returned in embarrassment to The Plough, intending to leave 
money there to pay back Michael for his kindness, assuming that he must be a 
regular, perhaps connected with the Cartoon Museum. The staff at The Plough 
said that they remembered the man paying but none of them had never seen him 
before in their lives. The Cartoon Museum did not open until the New Year and a 
Google search for British children's book illustrators called Michael produced 
no one looking remotely like him. A year later and Michael has not been in 
contract with them on a visit to Toronto.

Conclusion to the story: if Michael, or anyone who recognises from the above 
who Michael might be, gets in touch with me, I should he delighted to put them 
in touch with the grateful Canadians for whom he bought dinner in December 2013.

Moral of the story: if you are ever in a crowded pub, having difficulty 
finding a table, look out for someone sitting alone, doing the Guardian 
crossword. Nice things could happen.

Unless you are Paul. He once spotted someone in the London underground doing 
the Guardian crossword on a day that it was one of his. Friendly fellow that he 
is, as the train came into a station he could not resist asking the solver if 
he was enjoying the puzzle, admitting that he asked because he was Paul. The 
man leapt to his feet and just made it out through the closing doors, turning 
as he did so to shout: 'I hate you!'

_____

For reasons hinted about above, I cannot tell you the final number of those 
who sent in entries for the December's Genius (No 138 set by Picaroon) because 
entries after 7 December went to a secure file that I can't yet get access to 
it.

However, the first correct entry was from Tony with Demon at 00:45, followed 
by Ian with Oce… (01:45) and Jeremy with Goul… (02:02). The next entry, a 
newcomer to this list was Thomasrg… (10:38). There were 11 entries on the first 
day and 24 by 7 December, all of which were added to the pool for the selection 
of the December winner, who is Ernie Morrison from Coleraine, Northern Ireland.

_____

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com> . 
For Observer crosswords pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 