
Dan Evans is on some sort of a roll, dismissing the former US Open champion 
Marin Cilic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/marin-cilic> in four sublime 
sets to reach the third round of a grand slam for the fifth time, a record at 
odds with the outdated perception of him as a tearaway and underachiever.

It would be a shame, however, if he were to dilute his beguiling swagger, as 
it is the very quality that may carry him into the second week of theAustralian 
Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

Andy Murray shrugs off Australian Open ankle issue to beat Andrey Rublev
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/18/andy-murray-australian-open-andrey-rublev-tennis-report>
In any case, this was by a distance his biggest win. It was his second in a 
week against a top-10 player, after beating Dominic Thiem on the way to his 
breakthrough ATP Tour-level final in Sydney and probably the most convincing 
performance of a career that has swooped and dived like some of the seagulls 
that got in free under the lights of Show Court 3 on a cool and loud evening.

It had the feel of a rock concert as much as a tennis match, and Evans loved 
every minute of it – some more than others, as his expletives demonstrated 
during distractions created by late-comers to the outside court. He produced 
tennis of consistent excellence against an opponent 44 places above him in the 
rankings and who grew steadily disillusioned as his own best work was artfully 
deconstructed in just under three hours.

Evans won 3-6, 7-5, 6-3, 6-3, and played with a mix of adventure and 
discipline that proved irresistible. He struck five aces, 32 unreturned serves 
and seven double faults, 29 winners and 44 unforced errors, as well as 
outscoring Cilic in four-shots-and-under rallies 85-76, with a more even 
distribution of points from the back of the court.

“To come through on the last match point was pretty pleasing for me,” he said. 
“I struggled early with the shade on the court and his ball was coming through 
pretty quick [Cilic hit 14 aces]. Once the sun went down I got into it. It was 
great [to have the crowd’s support]. The Aussie boys told me it was going to be 
pretty noisy. I’m looking forward to Friday.”

Ever the master of the understatement, is our Dan – not Daniel, he reminded us 
this week, as some local media insist on calling him. And there will be no more 
open courts for him here. He is almost certain to be in the main stadium, Rod 
Laver Arena, or Margaret Court Arena. It will not bother him.
 Play Video  Australian Open day three: wins for Murray, Evans and Federer – 
video highlights 
Later he said, “Five sets is the ultimate test. It was really good. I think I 
played as well as I can play today. I knew I could win, but there’s no point 
sort of sprouting off beforehand that I could win. He was giving me a good 
hiding at the start. I just hung in there.

“I try not to think about the finishing line too far into the match because 
you get ahead of yourself. You’re thinking about it, then you’re not thinking 
about it. Love-30 at the end was a big point, and I really started to think I 
was going to break him and win the match. It was definitely the biggest win of 
my career.”

The euphoria of reaching his first ATP Tour final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/dan-evans-sydney-andrey-luznetsov>
 in Sydney clearly lifted a player for whom injury, lack of application and a 
rebellious nature held him back in a stormy youth. He is 26 and maturing 
without losing his cheek and self-belief, an encouraging development.

The 6ft 6in Cilic, eight inches taller than Evans, looked as if he might 
overpower the world No51 with his big serve, as the Birmingham player, troubled 
by a gnat in his eye midway through the first set, struggled to find the rhythm 
or confidence he showed beating Fecundo Bagnis in three sets on Monday.

After having his eye cleared during the break, he saved two break points at 
the start of the second. They traded breaks, then Evans lit up the gloaming 
with a glorious running backhand, single-handed, that found the deuce corner 
for a 4-3 lead, on serve. It would have done Ken Rosewall proud.

When Cilic hit three sloppy ground strokes from deep in the 12th game, Evans 
had a spring in his step again – wearing a fresh pair of shoes, as it happens – 
and levelled at a set apiece.

Within half an hour, he was a set up, playing way above his ranking and 
sucking the self-belief from the bemused Croat with measured slices and 
well-timed forehands deep and wide to both wings. Cilic saved two set points in 
the eighth game, but could not hold Evans off with ball in hand.

Cilic held without ceremony at the start of the fourth, but could hardly have 
imagined what was to come. In an epic second game that lasted a quarter of an 
hour, Evans saved eight break points, with nine deuce points.

It was, surely, the best fight of the tournament, littered with invention and 
skill on both sides of the net, a treat for the late-evening spectators – 
although the stewarding was poor, and both players complained about what at 
times resembled a relay of beer glasses.

It appeared to take more out of Cilic than it did Evans, whose spirits soared 
and he broke for 2-1 but he handed it back in the fourth game, so on they 
scrapped. As if scripted, Cilic obliged on his serve and Evans held, moving 
within two games of a victory few beforehand would have predicted.

Cilic, who had not lost here to a player ranked as low as Evans since 2007, 
was serving to stay in the tournament and saved two of three match points 
before dumping a regulation forehand to bring an enthralling match to a 
downbeat end.
 