
I want out of a dysfunctional two-man firm, but don’t want to leave on bad 
terms

I work for a two-man consulting company – my boss is a friend from university 
and owns all the business. Over the past 12 months he seems to have lost all 
interest and has not been performing at all. He has had many problems in his 
personal life involving a bereavement, and hasn’t been interested in winning 
new business or seeing to it that our current client work is done properly.

I’ve always been paid an extremely low salary, way below market rate, on the 
understanding that future business success could make up for this. However, now 
I feel that I’ve been taken advantage of, with my boss taking our client fees 
at market rate and using my low wage to subsidise himself. I have no proof of 
this, however: we don’t have an office, so we work from home and I very rarely 
see my boss, and he doesn’t always answer my calls or reply to my texts. We’ll 
meet, allocate tasks, then they just won’t get done.

I’ve been offered a good, stable job at another company and have decided to go 
full time with them in March. However, until the end of February I have one 
client for whom I need to do a report, but I need the help of my boss – and try 
as I might to ask him, nothing gets done. I feel completely isolated, 
responsible for a project which I know will fail without help from someone who 
seems a million miles away.

Should I just leave and let him sort out the mess by himself, knowing that 
I’ll be fine as I’ll be starting with my other company soon? Or is there 
anything I can say to give my boss that burst of motivation that’s needed to at 
least get this project over the finishing line, after which we can wind up the 
company and go our separate ways?

I don’t want to let down a friend, but this is a nightmare, and by failing on 
this project I’d also be letting down a high-profile client who doesn’t deserve 
this treatment. I’ve considered informing the client about the problems, but it 
would be very embarrassing at this late stage. Any help would be appreciated.

Jeremy says

It says a lot for your good nature that you can still think of your boss as a 
friend and be concerned about letting him down. From what you tell me he’s 
hugely in your debt and you owe him nothing. I suspect you’ve been altogether 
too good natured for too long. I’m relieved you’ve been offered a good, proper 
job and have decided to take it.

In the meantime you’re left with the problem of your high-profile client, and 
here your concern is wholly justified. Given that the project will fail without 
input from your boss, and given his absolute absence of responsiveness to date, 
I can see no possible solution that doesn’t involve the client.

By that, however, I don’t just mean informing them about your problems and 
tacitly conceding that you’re unlikely to be able to complete the project 
satisfactorily. I think your best chance of jolting your boss back into action 
is through a personal intervention by the client, and that means taking them 
into your confidence. Tell them about your boss’s private problems, including 
the bereavement. Don’t be at all censorious, be very sympathetic and 
understanding. Say that you need your boss’s help to complete the task and that 
only a direct appeal from the client is likely to have the desired effect. 
Draft a letter to your boss, for the client to sign, that makes it crystal 
clear, though without overt threat, that the client regards your boss’s 
involvement as imperative.

It should work. But if it doesn’t your client is at least be aware that you’ve 
done everything you could to complete the project. If the result is 
unfavourable word-of-mouth about your boss and his business, you’ll know you 
gave him every chance to retrieve the situation.

Readers say 

• Level with your boss. I would frame it in terms of informing him you are 
moving on and agreeing a transition plan, including successful delivery of the 
project. I would steer clear of talking about his underperformance or the 
unfair allocation of salaries. These things are only worth mentioning if you 
want to fix them. If you have decided to move on, then do so as friends.

Don’t badmouth your boss or company to the client, but do let them know 
they’ll be working with your boss from now on as you have decided to move on to 
a great new opportunity.neeny

• Somehow seeing the project through to the finish is in the best interest for 
you, your boss and the client. Tell your boss you’re leaving and set out a plan 
for completion of the project. Tell him all the reasons why it’s important to 
do it well: the high-profile client, both of your names are associated with it, 
the payment you’ll get from them. Maybe the company has run its course, but you 
can still go out with a bang.Jodie Houghton

• 1) My friends generally respond to my emails/texts/calls etc fairly quickly, 
so this chap is not really your friend, is he? 2) Give him your notice in 
writing with recommendations as to how to finish the project in time. 3) Inform 
the client that all communications should be with your boss after the end of 
February; say how good it was to work with them and hopefully your paths will 
cross in the future. 4) Think about how you will use the extra salary.
DavidRennie

I’m an international student struggling to find a fashion internship. Any 
ideas?

I am an international student planning to study in the UK with a view to a 
career in fashion. As I understand my Tier 4 visa I am not allowed to work 
during the course, but can work full-time in holidays and seasonal breaks.

I’d like to know if there are any fashion summer internships I could apply 
for. I’ve seen a lot of LinkedIn profiles that proudly list two-month 
internships at Vogue, Cosmopolitan, Harrods and so on, but although I’ve been 
looking, these opportunities seem to be rare. How do I find them?

Jeremy says

Guardian readers may know of such opportunities but I’m afraid I don’t. 
However, I can suggest spending some time working on a presentation of 
yourself. It’s obvious what you would gain from a fashion-related internship – 
now give some creative thought as to what you could offer in return. If you can 
present yourself as an unusually attractive and inventive person, with flair 
and drive, you’ll greatly increase your chances of landing one of the few 
opportunities that do exist.

Readers say 

• A standard Tier 4 visa will allow you to work for 20 hours a week in term 
time and full-time during holidays. Do double check as you may have unusual 
restrictions on your visa!procrastcreate

• Check Graduate Talent Pool 
<https://graduatetalentpoolsearch.direct.gov.uk/gtp/index>, a government-funded 
internship site where all vacancies pay at least the national minimum wage. 
Fashion is under represented, but it may be worth looking.

I talk to a lot of students/graduates looking for internships and my first 
question is always “Have you been to your careers service?”. It is often the 
first port of call for local recruiters looking for students, and ultimately 
it’s their job to get you a job. It’s also worth tryingEnternships 
<https://enternships.com/>, Step <http://www.step.org.uk/>, or Inspiring Interns
 <http://www.inspiringinterns.com/>. edwardprichard

• Getting a part-time job selling higher-end clothes could give you an 
advantage asking about internships.ajchm

Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a 
brief email todear.jeremy@theguardian.com <mailto:dear.jeremy@theguardian.com>. 
Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply 
personally.
 