
Please help me get an explanation for the non-delivery of a Christmas bouquet 
fromDebenhams <https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> Flowers. I am on 
a mailing list and there was a half-price offer (£25 rather than £50), so I 
bought a festive centrepiece. On 25 November I placed the order, which was to 
be delivered two days before Christmas. I received an email saying it had been 
despatched, including a link to delivery company DX, but the flowers did not 
arrive.

I contacted DX, which eventually said it had had an electronic notification, 
but no flowers. Debenhams Flowers does not operate at weekends so there was no 
reply to my phone calls or emails. On Christmas Eve I had to buy a last-minute 
£10 bunch to have flowers on my Christmas dinner table, which was a huge 
disappointment.

I’ve contacted Debenhams online three times but have not even had an 
acknowledgement. I have also posted my complaint on Facebook and used Facebook 
messaging. Debenhams says it will contact me but so far hasn’t.

As I used PayPal for the transaction, I raised an action with it for 
non-delivery and received a refund within 24 hours. On my Debenhams account the 
order is marked “closed”, but I have still had no explanation or contact from 
Debenhams, which I consider appalling. SN, Whitley Bay, Northumberland

Though not entirely clear from its website, Debenhams Flowers is part of the 
Debenhams retail group, so it was surprising and disappointing that you were on 
the receiving end of such poor service. We also rang the customer service 
number and nobody phoned us back. We then contacted the company via Debenhams 
itself, and its version of events is slightly different from yours.

A spokeswoman said its customer services team did respond to you to apologise 
and offer a goodwill gesture at the same time that it authorised the refund on 
your PayPal transaction. She said: “I am sorry SN did not receive this 
response, but we do have records of the message that was sent. We have now 
spoken to SN and she has accepted a goodwill gesture.”

That was two bunches of flowers – one for you and one for your stepmother.

Looking at the volume of complaints on talkboards we think the firm needs to 
sharpen up its customer service – this was clearly not a one-off incident.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 