
Q My husband and I are in the process of buying a property. We have agreed to 
get life cover for the money we feel we can afford, but have just received a 
recommendation from our mortgage adviser that is more than £120 higher than 
previously agreed.

Do we have to take the life insurance out with them? I know we have to buy 
their buildings insurance, but what about the life insurance? Please could you 
give me some advice on this.MW

A You are right in thinking that you have to buy buildings insurance because 
your lender will insist on it and you need to have a policy in place from the 
date you exchange contracts. However, you do not have to buy your buildings 
policy either from your lender or from your mortgage adviser. It will not 
invalidate your mortgage if you choose to shop around for this insurance – 
using comparison sites such as Gocompare.com or Moneysupermarket.com, for 
example – and buy your policy elsewhere.

You also don’t have to buy the life insurance that’s on offer alongside your 
mortgage. It could be cheaper to look elsewhere without compromising on cover. 
And you could save money by opting for a different type of insurance policy.


The purpose of buying life insurance is to make sure that if one of you died, 
the other would have the mortgage paid off using the proceeds of the insurance 
payout or be able to afford to keep paying the mortgage. The most 
straightforward type of term insurance, which pays out if you die within the 
term but otherwise not, is “level” cover, where you buy a policy for the same 
amount as the mortgage debt. Whenever you die during the term of the policy, 
usually the same length as the mortgage term, you will get that fixed amount.


A cheaper alternative is decreasing cover, usually sold with repayment 
mortgages, where the amount that will be paid out in the event of death goes 
down broadly in line with the mortgage debt.

Cheaper still is a family income benefit policy, which pays out a series of 
smaller regular lump sums that can be used as income for as many years as the 
policy has to run. You can get advice on which policy or combination of 
policies is best for you and your budget by using an independent adviser such as
Lifesearch <http://www.lifesearch.co.uk/>.

 