
fringe is the annual event that many theatre critics love to hate. Very few 
cover the fringe in its entirety these days, not least because accommodation 
costs are so high. The Guardian team will be staying in student accommodation 
this year.

But I love every minute of it, and the rewards of embedding yourself on the 
fringe for the month are considerable for critics, the art form we cover and 
readers too. Edinburgh is, after all, the biggest arts festival in the world 
and, during August, most of the UK theatre industry decamps there.


For about 48 weeks of the year, the theatrical calendar looks pretty much the 
same with shows premiering across the country in regional theatres, on the 
touring circuit in arts centres and villages halls, at the RSC in 
Stratford-on-Avon, at the National and in London’s West End and fringe. As a 
critic you get to know your seat on the aisle in any particular theatre pretty 
well. But Edinburgh shakes things up, confounding the expectation of critics 
and the way we do our job too.


Like most critics, I go to the theatre five or six times in an average week. 
But over the next month, with about 3,000 shows at the Edinburgh fringe, I will 
be going to the theatre five or six times a day.

Even then, I will barely scratch the surface of the mountain of shows 
available. I might see my first show of the day as early as 10am, and my final 
show could finish after midnight. It’s only possible to view so much because 
few shows last more than 90 minutes. In between, I will write and file reviews 
and blogs, and be active on social media.

I wouldn’t miss it. The Edinburgh fringe is where I stock my theatrical larder 
for the year ahead and beyond. One of the pleasures of Edinburgh for a critic 
is the rare thrill of the chase that it brings to the job. Many people think of 
theatre critics as jaded, but we would never make it out of the house and into 
the theatre every evening if we weren’t eternal optimists, believing that 
tonight will be the night we see something that makes us swoon and fall in love 
with theatre all over again. On the Edinburgh fringe, the extra lure is finding 
something totally brilliant and totally unexpected.


It was in Edinburgh that I first saw Bryony Kimmings inviting the audience to 
share their pubic hair with her in Sex Idiot, the show that put her on the 
radar. It’s where I got my first sighting of a student actor called Rachel 
Weisz. It was where I caught a first glimpse of 1927, the much in demand 
company that tours the world with its cunning mix of live performance and 
animation, and it was in Edinburgh that I saw a blistering first play by an 
unknown playwright called Gregory Burke, who went on to write the acclaimed and 
award-winning Black Watch. It was on the fringe I stumbled across a student 
production directed by a young, inexperienced director called Jamie Lloyd, now 
in the front rank of British theatre directors.


Outside of Edinburgh and during the rest of the year, few shows are a 
genuinely unknown quantity. Most come with some kind of pedigree and, with 
review space increasingly limited across all national newspapers, it’s often 
the already familiar, or artists with a track record, who get their productions 
covered.

I’ve always strongly believed that the choices you make as a critic about what 
you review are just as an important statement as the review you actually write, 
because what is reviewed is what is valued in the culture.


In Edinburgh, a very significant number of the productions are completely 
unknown quantities so the element of surprise is all the greater. It’s for 
these moments of discovery that Edinburgh is such a joy. But there is a 
problem, and it’s one I reckon gets to the nub of why so many of us critics 
find the fringe hard to negotiate and sometimes give up on it.

The fringe is an open-access festival, which means everyone is welcome, the 
professional and the amateur, the student company and the veteran performers, 
all sitting side by side. The more established companies may have the services 
of a PR company to try to persuade critics to see their shows, and some fringe 
venues – most notably the Traverse – offer a programme of such regular quality 
that any critic who eschewed it would be being contrary.

But it’s as likely that the gems that slowly emerge, often via word of mouth 
(which is why I always chat to those in front or behind me in any queue), will 
come from those with little track record and minimal profile. They may even be 
a school or student group.

Even with all my accumulated knowledge of theatre gathered over the years, 
looking for a hit in Edinburgh or a company who might be about to break through 
and produce thrilling work is like looking for a needle in a haystack. There 
are no short cuts other than putting in the legwork: hence the six shows a day.


I won’t write a review of every show I see, but will file them away in my mind 
and possibly make a note of ensuring I follow that writer or company or actor 
and see what they do next. It may be several years before I write a review of 
that company’s work, but they will be on my radar and, if I can, I might use 
the GuardianTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> blog and social 
media (nowadays as much the tools of any theatre critic as much as the 
traditional review) to do my small bit to help them on their way. And the only 
chance I have of spotting the talent is by seeing six shows a day. I can 
guarantee that by 27 August I will have a tic in my right eye and a bad cold. 
But sometimes even critics have to suffer for art.



• Help fund our journalism by becoming a Guardian supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=edfooter>.
 