Bake Off winner Candice Brown has just left her teaching job. What subject did 
she teach?  Food technology  Media studies  Physics  PE It was reported that 
Nick Gibb, schools minister, wanted to stop children doing what?  Picking their 
noses  Using exclamation marks  Swearing  Texting in class Former education 
secretary Nicky Morgan chastised the prime minister for wearing an expensive 
pair of leather trousers but she was soon in hot water over her own pricey 
leather goods. Which item came under fire?  A Mulberry handbag  Barbour gloves  
Manolo Blahnik shoes  Ted Baker jacket Michael Wilshaw said farewell to Ofsted 
this year. Who has he not compared his leadership style to?  Nelson Mandela  
Harry Redknapp  Mother Teresa  Clint Eastwood Sir Greg Martin stepped down as 
headteacher at Durand Academy in south London following concerns about the 
school’s use of public money. What side business had he registered at the 
school premises?  Pizza takeaway  Dating agency  Pop-up brewery  Cupcake 
business There were plenty of U-turns from the Department for Education this 
year. Which of the following is still going ahead?  Making children who fail 
their Sats sit them again in secondary school  Plans to force all of England’s 
schools to become academies  The abolition of parent governors  Diverting money 
from London schools to those elsewhere A headteacher in Darlington wrote to 
parents to ask them to refrain from:  Shouting at the opposition on sports days 
 Criticising the school on social media  Turning up in pyjamas  Putting 
chocolates in packed lunches Theresa May ignored decades of education policy 
research by ending the ban on grammar schools in a bid to restore 
“meritocracy”. Which author described his failure to pass his 11-plus exam as 
“confidence shattering”?  Alan Bennett  Michael Morpurgo  Michael Rosen  Frank 
Cottrell Boyce Which A-level was scrapped after being dismissed as a “soft 
subject” by Michael Gove and then brought back after public outcry?  History of 
art  General studies  Media studies  Classical civilisation In November, Jeremy 
Hunt proposed a ban on sexting for under-18s. How did he suggest this could be 
enforced?  Social media companies should use software that can detect when it 
is happening  Sex education classes should be made compulsory for all schools  
Teachers should check students’ messages  Mobile phones should be illegal for 
children  You got…  Bottom of the class  Bottom of the class  Satisfactory  
Satisfactory  A* – clearly you do your homework!  Challenge your friends Submit 
answers  