
I was in the first cohort of the Step Up to Social Work 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/step-up-to-social-work-information-for-applicants> 
training programme and qualified as a social worker in September 2012. I worked 
my way up to an advanced practitioner, before stepping into the practice 
development social worker (PDSW) role last December.

We are a small team of three. Our work focuses on empowering social workers to 
make changes and improve their practice in order to gain better outcomes for 
children and families. In a short period of time we’ve been able to see real 
evidence of the impact in Doncaster. And it has been praised by Ofsted during 
their monitoring visit and by the Local Government Association peer review team.

Building on existing strengths 

My role focuses on practice improvement; teaching, training, mentoring, 
quality assurance and supporting colleagues. Typically, I spend most of my time 
with social workers out in their offices delivering planned sessions. This can 
vary from joint assessment sessions, reflective supervision sessions, support 
around undertaking case work, and teaching or learning sessions.

'We work from the stance that people can change'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/doncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone/2016/nov/25/we-work-from-stance-that-people-can-change-domestic-abuse>
I work with a range of social workers, from students through to team managers, 
to give them support wherever they need it. Spending my time out in teams means 
that in between planned work social workers can just grab me to ask for 
one-to-one support on their daily practice or a specific piece of case work. 
Building on their existing strengths, I help them to improve their practice as 
well as build new skills.

I really love the teaching elements of my role and the way in which having a 
group reflection session can support social workers to identify what they are 
doing well and how they can continue to learn.

Continuous learning 

Every day there are new ideas and opportunities which present themselves. Some 
days I will be involved in undertaking specialist pieces of work, such as 
forensic risk assessments, quality assurance work looking at children’s case 
files, or themed audits. This work is shared throughout the trust and 
contributes to the organisation’s learning journey.

Developing practice 

 Our way of working supports social workers and engages them in a learning 
journey. It is very much something which is done “with social workers” as 
opposed to “to social workers”. This allows them to have time, space and to 
receive support from others in order to reflect upon their own practice and 
develop it.

This method also allows them to express their views on work and to 
self-evaluate their own practice. And it is also benefiting children and 
families. By having more reflective practitioners who make positive changes to 
their practice, we are able to support families to achieve better outcomes 
through interventions.

Expanding knowledge

Being a practice development social worker has enabled me to develop my own 
practice. I have learned lots of new skills; expanding on my own knowledge in a 
variety of service areas, undertaking further postgraduate studies and looking 
at social work from a new perspective. I have also been able to access more 
teaching and learning opportunities including linking in withthe South 
Yorkshire Partnership 
<http://www.shef.ac.uk/socstudies/scsnews/teachingpartnerships-1.482215> with 
the University of Sheffield.


Doncaster children’s services trust is improving – and staff are keen to reach 
outstanding rating
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/doncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone/2016/oct/06/doncaster-childrens-services-trust-improving-paul-moffat-interview>
It has also enabled me to develop existing skills, such as forensic risk 
assessments work. Now I have the opportunity to undertake more of these, and in 
a number of different service areas.

Learning culture 

The role has taught me how the areas of the trust work as a whole as opposed 
to just seeing things from the perspective of one team. Most of all I have seen 
the difference that individuals can make to the performance of this whole 
system.

If a learning culture is embedded into practice it not only supports social 
workers, but achieves better outcomes for children and families. And I’ve seen 
for myself the difference it makes when workers feel supported by their 
employer - they achieve more positive outcomes through their practice.

Doncaster children’s services trust is looking for practice development social 
workers <https://dcstrustjobs.co.uk/> to join Caroline. For more information 
about the rolevisit the trust’s website 
<http://www.doncasterchildrenstrust.co.uk/>. 


Content on this page is produced and paid for by Doncaster children’s services 
trust
 