
The England and Wales Cricket Board is likely to insist that Eoin Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan> reports for international duty 
by 1 May, limiting the England short-form captain’s chance of snaring a bumper 
contract in the Indian Premier League auction next month.

A number of England cricketers, including Jason Roy and Ben Stokes, are 
expected to put themselves forward for the auction on 4 February. According to 
a report from the Press Association only Morgan will do so with the requirement 
that he return in time for two early-season ODIs against Ireland, thereby 
limiting his time at theIPL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl> to three 
weeks.

Virat Kohli oozes charm as he prepares for ODI series against England | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/14/virat-kohli-one-day-international-england>
As a result Morgan may find himself a less desirable prospect in the auction, 
potentially attracting a lower bid price, and almost certainly earning less in 
a competition where players’ rewards are increased by appearances made.

The names of ECB‑contracted players entering the auction will be released next 
week. The suggestion in India is that the ECB is minded to insist that Morgan 
have his attendance restricted due to those early season commitments for the 
country of his choosing against the country of his birth.

The England hierarchy has been keen to offer as much experience as possible in 
high-level T20 cricket. Morgan’s case is perhaps a little different. The 
England captain has already been a regular in the IPL during his six years as 
an England player, boosting his annual earnings with stints at the Royal 
Challengers Bangalore, Kolkata Knight Riders and the Sunrisers Hyderabad, who 
released him last year.

The greater urgency would seem to lie in the home summer, with England due to 
host the ICC Champions Trophy and the captain not just a vital presence, but 
also a little short of his finest 50-over form.

Should he end up playing against Ireland, Morgan will lead a team without Jos 
Buttler and Sam Billings, who are excepted to be given the chance to play an 
entire season with Mumbai Indians and Delhi Daredevils, respectively. Roy and 
Stokes will hope to join them. Alex Hales may also put himself forward.
 