
Buying a home can be a long and complex process, but typically it involves 
going through these steps:

Find out how much you can borrow

Call a mortgage broker to get an idea of how much you can borrow. He or she 
will be able to search the market for the best available deal and to help you 
maximise your borrowing power. You will need to give details of how much you 
earn and all of the things that you spend money on each month.

When working out how much you can afford to put down as a deposit, remember to 
keep some savings aside to meet stamp duty and other fees, and to furnish your 
new home. Get information about the different mortgages on offer, and start 
thinking about whether you want to go for a fixed or variable-rate deal.

Define your criteria

Decide what you are looking for in a property – whether you need parking and a 
garden, how many bedrooms you need, if it’s a flat, whether you want it to be 
freehold or leasehold – and pick an area on which to focus your search.

Consider what you want out of the location: are local schools, transport links 
and shops important to you? How long are you planning to live in the property 
for? Here are10 things to think about before you rush into a property purchase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/apr/10/10-things-property-market>.

Beginning the search

Start scanning the internet and local newspapers and register with estate 
agents - some properties sell before they are advertised online, so it is worth 
being on the agents’ books. If you see a property you want to look at, call the 
agent and arrange a viewing.

Bear in mind there are lots of different property websites out there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/sep/24/property-websites-alternatives-rightmove>
 you can use for your search – you don’t just have to use the big ones.

Out and about

Visit some properties. You are unlikely to find the home you want straight 
away, so don’t despair and don’t be tempted into edging over your budget if you 
don’t like the first place you look at. This is probably going to be your 
biggest financial outlay, so it is worth waiting until you find the right place.

Don’t be shy about asking questions when you are looking around a property, or 
afterwards. The estate agent should be able to provide you with basic details 
about the property, and to pass on any other queries to the people who are 
selling.

Making an offer

When you find somewhere you like, make an offer. Before you do so, try to 
glean as much information from the estate agent as possible. Ask how long it’s 
been on the market and if the seller wants a quick sale. Some websites have 
details of when a property was first listed, although this won’t tell you if 
the seller has switched to a new agent.

Many buyers initially make an offer below the asking price, and often this is 
accepted. You may want to start low and negotiate with the agent to find a 
price that satisfies both parties. But if you want to be sure you get the 
property you like – and you think it is worth the asking price – you may want 
to offer the full amount straight away.

Acceptance

If your offer is accepted, ask the estate agent to take the property off the 
market. You now need to instruct a solicitor. If you need to find a solicitor, 
ask for a few quotes and follow up personal recommendations.

Getting a mortgage

Once your offer has been accepted, call your broker or a lender to sort out 
your mortgage application. At this point you will need to provide lots of 
paperwork showing your income and outgoings.

Paperwork

Instruct your solicitor to start working on a contract. They will also send 
the seller a list of questions to answer, including a questionnaire asking 
which fixtures and fittings they intend to leave when they move out.

Surveys

Your lender should arrange a surveyor to value the property within a few days 
of agreeing the mortgage in principle. Its valuation will be very simple and 
you should arrange your own survey to get an idea of what problems there may be 
with the property.

To save money, it can sometimes be worth asking the lender’s surveyor to also 
put together a survey for you, but this is not always the case. Ask for a quote 
and compare it with quotes from other surveyors - again, ask around for 
recommendations.

The most expensive and comprehensive option is to ask the surveyor for a full 
structural survey of the building, and this is particularly worth doing if you 
are buying a property that is very old, has been extensively renovated or 
clearly needs work. It is also a good idea if you are planning to build an 
extension or structural changes to the building. However, a cheaper – albeit 
less comprehensive – homebuyer’s report should highlight any major problems and 
is a good option in other circumstances.

A good surveyor will talk to you before the survey to find out if you have any 
particular concerns and afterwards to highlight and explain any issues.

Next steps

Read the survey when it arrives. If there are a lot of problems with the 
property and you are not happy to carry on with the purchase, then act quickly 
to let everyone know, before you incur any other costs.

If you do want to pursue the purchase, but the survey advises that you get 
quotes for work that needs doing, arrange for that to be done - you will need 
to talk to the estate agent to arrange access to the property.

If a lot of work needs doing, you may want to go back to the seller and 
renegotiate on the price you are paying for the property.

Exchange of contracts

After your solicitor or conveyancer has completed all the necessary checks 
you’ll be asked to sign a contract legally committing you to the purchase. At 
this point you will need to pay a deposit for the property – usually at least 
5% of the price but more typically 10%. At this point you will usually agree a 
date to complete the sale.

Book a removal van

When you know your moving date you can start organising how to get your 
possessions to your new home. This could involve hiring a van and doing it 
yourself or hiring professional removal men. Either way, you should act fast to 
give yourself the best chance of finding a company to help when you need at a 
good price. You may also want to hireprofessional packers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2014/aug/23/moving-pay-packing> to pack 
up your belongings.

Buy buildings insurance

Your lender will expect you to have buildings insurance in place for the date 
of completion. It will quote a rebuild cost in its valuation – this is the 
amount you need to cover.

Completion

This is when the property finally becomes yours. When your solicitor tells you 
that the sale is completed you can pick the keys up from the estate agent. This 
will probably be the day that you move in, unless you are having work done in 
advance. It is likely to be a stressful day, even if everything goes according 
to plan, but should feel worthwhile after your first night in your new home.
 