
“Traingate” seems to have developed as much from Guardian flaws as Guardian 
strengths.

The video of Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>
 sitting on the floor of a train, disclosed exclusively online on 16 August, 
was mistakenly treated by the Guardian more as freelance journalism than what 
it actually was: a kind of gonzo news release by two Corbyn supporters.

The pair did not deal deceitfully with the Guardian. In their terms, the 
campaigners initially succeeded handsomely in promoting Jeremy Corbyn and his 
argument for transport policy change.

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> was told at the 
outset that Corbyn had obtained a seat during his journey, but the information 
was not included in the news report which accompanied the video. Well after it 
had been established that Virgin Trains staff had organised a seat for Corbyn 
about 45 minutes into the journey, the original Guardian report still had the 
erroneous headline “Corbyn joins seatless commuters on floor for three-hour 
train journey”.

Although the Guardian did not intend to mislead readers, that was the effect 
for some time. Its pre-publication checks and balances failed in some respects. 
Post-publication, it was not quick enough to fix what it could, and to explain.

Had the Guardian done so, the episode may not have generated the controversy 
which acquired that exhausted suffix, -gate.

Had the news report not carried, unexplained, the pseudonymous byline of one 
of the campaigners, readers may not have felt the need to express concerns to 
me after reading in Private Eye of his past activism on Corbyn’s behalf.

These are my main conclusions after investigating how the initial story was 
handled. (I do not aim to settle the arguments about how crowded and pre-booked 
a train must be before it can fairly be called “ram-packed”.)

Let’s start at the beginning.

The freelance film-maker Yannis Mendez is highly regarded by Guardian staff 
who have worked with him. On 11 August he had a different client. He was being 
paid by the Jeremy for Labour campaign to make a video record of its work. In 
that role Mendez was part of the Corbyn entourage on the 11am Virgin Trains 
East Coast service from London toNewcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle>, where Corbyn was to debate 
challenger Owen Smith.

After walking through carriages without finding sufficient seats together, 
Corbyn sat down on the floor. Mendez described this to me later as “a 
completely impromptu moment”.

Mendez says he filmed while Corbyn delivered straight to camera his message 
that: many travellers faced this problem daily; the train was “ram-packed”; 
staff were working really hard; more trains were needed; fares were expensive; 
it was a good argument for public ownership.

It lasted less than 30 seconds. I have seen the version Mendez supplied to the 
Guardian and it is the same as the published version except for the addition by 
Guardian staff of subtitles to help readers discern Corbyn’s words from the 
background sound of the moving train.

Mendez tells me that it was he who decided to push the footage into the media. 
He says he told the Corbyn campaign of his intention. According to its 
co-director, Sam Tarry, the campaign was not given an opportunity to sign off 
on the package of video, still images and text which was later offered to the 
Guardian.

The video was prepared by Mendez and still images and text were compiled by 
his friend Anthony Casey, who writes under the name Charles B Anthony and is a 
passionate Corbyn supporter. Mendez calls him Bobby. Here, we’ll call him 
Anthony.

Anthony was not on the train. Mendez says he phoned Anthony during the journey 
and Anthony advised him to gather contact details for people also on the train. 
Anthony later obtained social media posts, two by women who had been 
photographed on the floor next to Corbyn. From Mendez he received still images 
of a young couple also sitting on the floor. He gathered screenshots of three 
tweets dating from 2015: two showed images of crowded trains and one combined 
an image of George Osborne in a train seat with one of Corbyn standing on a 
night bus.

Around the video and these images Anthony wove almost 500 words in praise of 
Corbyn, together with quotations from Corbyn. The style is sufficiently 
apparent from these excerpts:

“Overcrowded trains, we’ve all faced them. Crushed up against our fellow 
commuters, standing in the aisle with a person’s armpit in your face, sitting 
in the luggage compartment or pitched up next to an overflowing bin. It’s an 
everyday occurrence for many, but you don’t normally expect to see the leader 
of the opposition sitting on the floor of a carriage on your way to work.

“… Halfway through the journey the train emptied and Corbyn and his team 
managed to grab some seats, but before Corbyn could rest comfortably and 
prepare for his duel with Smith he offered a seat at his table to the gentleman 
next to him, also without a seat.

“… Jez, keeping it real.”

Anthony tells me he prepared the material this way because he had decided to 
pitch it to Buzzfeed first. When Buzzfeed declined, Mendez contacted the 
Guardian and offered exclusive use of the video on condition that Charles B 
Anthony’s article also be accepted.

Mendez did not seek payment for himself; he was being paid by the Corbyn 
campaign. He did raise the issue of a standard freelance payment for Anthony. 
I’m told by the relevant Guardian staff that no invoice has been received and 
no payment made. Anthony says he did not seek payment himself and is happy 
enough to have his byline in the Guardian. Tarry confirmed that the campaign 
paid Mendez but not Anthony.

The Guardian did not think carefully enough about the status of the material 
being offered, nor the condition attached. By the time the material reached the 
national news desk it seems to have been assumed that Anthony would get a 
byline. The acting editor that day, Paul Johnson, was not consulted. Coming 
from a trusted freelance (Mendez) and accompanied by images and words from a 
person known to that freelance (Anthony), the material seems to have been 
viewed more as unpolished journalism than untreated promotion.

The result was that the Guardian applied less scepticism and fewer checks than 
should normally be applied before a news story of this sort is published.

Guardian editorial standards necessarily treat differently:

• freelances, who when contracted are bound to the same standards as staff;

• sources, whose motives always need careful weighing, especially if they are 
to be anonymous;

• pseudonyms – to be used only exceptionally, with the permission of senior 
editors, and disclosed to readers;

• material known as “user-generated content”, often videos made by members of 
the public at newsworthy events and posted to social media or provided directly 
to mainstream media outlets.

The Guardian’s dealings with Mendez and Anthony can be fitted into several of 
these categories, but that feels strained. My conclusion is simpler: the pair 
were acting as unorthodox public relations operatives for a prominent, 
campaigning politician and their material should have been treated like that.

Staff who worked on the story say they did not know that “Charles B Anthony” 
was a pseudonym or that Buzzfeed had declined the material. Johnson tells me he 
is concerned the Guardian learns the right lessons from this episode. “We 
should always follow our editorial guidelines when considering the use of 
byline pseudonyms – if we have prior knowledge. Transparency for the reader is 
vitally important.”

As a freelance, Anthony was an unknown quantity. The desk editor that day, who 
received Anthony’s copy from Mendez at 11.51am, assigned a staff reporter to 
work on the material. Anthony and Mendez were contacted. One of the women who 
had sat with Corbyn and posted about it was interviewed by phone.

When the reporter learned that Anthony had not been on the train, doubt was 
raised with the newsdesk about relying on Anthony’s information. Participants’ 
recollections differ about how much concern was expressed. Johnson was not 
consulted. He reaffirmed to me later what the editorial guidelines also 
emphasise: staff should feel they can express any misgivings about a story.

I think the rush-to-publish, which is at once so wonderful and so perilous in 
journalism, ought to have been slowed. The material was exclusive, so the 
natural urge to beat the competition was not the factor it may otherwise have 
been.

The desk editor told the reporter to include in the story a disclosure about 
Mendez working for Corbyn. This was necessary and sensible, as far as it went. 
But the article was silent about the Charles B Anthony who shared the byline. 
Anthony’s raw material left no doubt he was a partisan for Corbyn. Readers 
ought to have been alerted to that fact. About 100 of his words made it into 
the rewritten article of about 360 words, and although Anthony’s strong 
promotional tone was reduced, more should have been done for this, a news story.

I have followed the Anthony text from its raw state, through the staff 
reporter’s rewrite, on into the editing stages and finally to its published 
form (online at 2.59pm on 16 August and on page 4 of the paper on 17 August). 
The information about Corbyn getting a seat was left out during the staff 
reporter’s rewrite. The reporter tells me the reasoning was that neither the 
reporter nor Anthony had been on the train, the aim was to report accurately 
with the information the reporter had been given, and the copy was focused as 
much as possible on what could be seen and heard on the video.

Even allowing for time pressure, this was a misjudgment. Anthony’s sentence 
about the Corbyn team getting seats was inaccurate in its reason, about the 
train emptying halfway, but that sentence put the Guardian on notice that 
Corbyn did get a seat. More should have been done to verify how and when it 
happened. Neither Corbyn nor Virgin Trains was contacted pre-publication to 
check.

The desk editor tells me he did not notice the omission.

So the online headline was wrong from the outset. It should have been frankly 
corrected straight after the significance of the omission was realised, which 
seems not to have occurred until a week later.

On 23 August Virgin Trains challenged Corbyn by releasing CCTV footage from 
the train. The Guardian’s original story was widely and prominently debated 
across mainstream and social media. Anthony tweeted that day that his original 
copy for the Guardian had included the fact that Corbyn had managed to get a 
seat.

Next day, online and in its front-page account in the paper, the Guardian 
reported one of the women who had sat on the floor and been photographed with 
Corbyn as saying that a seat had become available for him 45 minutes into the 
trip when staff shuffled people around. That straightened the record, but not 
as transparently as the Guardian’s role in the controversy required. It was a 
significant error and should have been expressly corrected as soon as possible, 
as the editorial guidelines state. Following this review,it has been corrected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/16/jeremy-corbyn-floor-three-hour-train-journey-london-newcastle>
.
 