
This is my final baking column in Cook. The past couple of years spent writing 
these recipes for the Guardian have been really special. I’ve been able to 
share with you the highs and lows, the triumphs and total flops, of my 
experiments in baking. It’s a constant challenge to come up with recipes that 
are inventive but still approachable, that don’t need a plethora of weird and 
wonderful ingredients, but which still take me out of my comfort zone, and 
teach me (and you, I hope) something new.

Ruby Tandoh's sweet dough recipe | Ruby bakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/dec/07/ruby-tandoh-sweet-dough-recipe-great-british-bake-off>
That challenge was always welcome, though, and the lessons I learned have made 
me a better baker for life. But more than that, I’ve rediscovered the joy in 
the food I eat: writing in praise of flavour, food and gluttony each week has 
reminded me of what it means to cook for pleasure and to eat with gusto. It’s 
taught me that every adventure in cooking should be as exuberantly carefree, as 
joyful and as fun as a One Direction chorus. Cook what you want, eat what you 
want, enjoy yourself.

Treacle ginger pancakes

There’s a scene in Little Miss Sunshine where the extended Hoover family, 
crowded self-consciously around a table in a diner, put in their breakfast 
orders. Dad, Richard, has the number five with coffee, uncle Frank the fruit 
plate with a camomile and honey, Dwayne the garden salad, and when it’s the 
turn of bespectacled, chubby-cheeked beauty queen wannabe Olive, she plumps for 
waffles à la mode, asking first what à la mode actually means, and stepping 
jubilantly into her choice once she hears that it means that she’ll be having 
ice-cream.

An argument flares between the adults in the family, either needling Olive 
over the dangers of fat and fatness, or empowering her to eat what she wants. 
Olive wavers, but soon tucks into her bowl of ice-cream with a greedy zeal.


Even if you don’t have to debate your breakfast choices with your 
dysfunctional family, there are still a million booming opinions flung at us 
every day: about good food, bad food, good bodies, bad bodies, things that will 
kill us and smoothies to save our souls. Some of these pressures are internal, 
as we fight for control over what we eat and how we look; others come from the 
outside, certain bodies valued and legitimised over others, and the food we eat 
– “real” versus “junk”, fast versus slow – held up for derision or praise all 
the while.

It’s not for me to tell you what you can or should eat, and maybe pancakes and 
ice-cream for breakfast isn’t something you want, or are ready for, or can be 
seen to indulge in. That’s OK. But as someone who struggled for so long to 
surrender to my appetite, I find so much joy in breakfast feasts like these: 
it’s about giving yourself whatever advice you’d give Olive, it’s about 
enjoying the food you love.

Makes 16
40g butter
175g plain flour
3 tbsp soft dark brown sugar
3 tsp baking powder
2 tsp ground ginger
½ tsp ground cinnamon
¼ tsp ground nutmeg
3 large eggs
2 tbsp black treacle
Zest ½ orange
175ml milk
5 tbsp glace ginger (or chopped stem ginger)
500ml vanilla ice-cream, to serve

1 Melt the butter in the pan that you’re going to fry the pancakes in, then 
decant into a small, clean bowl to cool slightly. Leave the butter residue in 
the pan.

2 Combine the flour, brown sugar, baking powder, ginger, cinnamon and nutmeg 
in a large mixing bowl. Add the eggs, then beat until smooth and sticky before 
stirring in the black treacle and orange zest. Slowly whisk in the milk, until 
the batter is just thick enough to hold in neat pancake shapes when poured into 
the pan. Add the melted butter.

3 Heat the greased pan over a low heat, then cook the pancakes in batches, 
adding just enough batter to give an 8-10cm diameter pancake each time. As soon 
as you’ve spooned the pancake mix into the pan, sprinkle 1 tsp of glace ginger 
on top of each. After 1-2 minutes, when the underside is lightly browned and 
the top is just beginning to set, flip the pancakes and cook for a further 1-2 
minutes to finish.

4 Serve with plenty of maple syrup, a sprinkling of orange zest and – most 
importantly – a couple of scoops of vanilla ice-cream.

Triple-chocolate cookies

In case you’re not familiar with your classic mid-1990s teen movies, here are 
the two take-home lessons from Clueless: being an all-round do-gooder needn’t 
come at the expense of being perfectly cute and impeccably styled; and when 
your crushes come over, you should always have something baking.

Alicia Silverstone’s Cher puts the latter into practice when (unattainable) 
dreamboat Christian comes round, prising a whole log of cookie dough from its 
packet, dropping it on to the oven tray and baking until smoke billows from the 
kitchen.


Here’s a foolproof cookie recipe that even the most clueless bakers can 
embrace, for when you need to prove your domestic prowess, even if that just 
means making a batch for yourself and eating them while you mastermind your 
next great outfit.

Makes 10-12
125g salted butter, well softened
150g soft light brown sugar
1 large egg
175g plain flour
30g cocoa powder
½ tsp bicarbonate of soda
50g milk chocolate, in chunks
50g dark chocolate, in chunks
50g white chocolate, in chunks

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Line a couple of large baking 
trays with baking parchment.

2 Beat the butter and sugar together in a large bowl until smooth, then add 
the egg, flour, cocoa powder, bicarbonate of soda and all the chocolate chunks 
– the milk chocolate, dark and white chocolate. Combine thoroughly, until 
you’ve got a thick, sticky dough, but don’t over-mix.

3 Spoon mounds of the cookie dough on to the prepared trays, leaving plenty of 
space between them (if you crowd the cookies, they’ll fuse in the oven and 
you’ll be left with a single mega-cookie). Bake for 12-14 minutes until the 
cookies are golden brown and well-spread, and the chocolate chunks molten and 
gooey. They’ll be really soft at this point, but will firm up as they cool, so 
leave them undisturbed on their baking trays until they’re at room temperature.
 