
Munster join their compatriots Leinster in the quarter-finals of the Champions 
Cup. After the washout of last season, the Pro12 teams continue to show the way 
in this. Here was another compelling fixture, won in the 72nd minute by a 
Francis Saili try, the only such score of the match. Glasgow are not quite out 
of the reckoning. They must win as well as they can at Welford Road next 
weekend, but they will be distraught that their feisty display, enlivened by 
more than a few flashes of skill, proved insufficient againstMunster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> for the third time this season.

After its unimaginable low in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/munster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report>
, what a season this is turning out to be for Munster. Rampant last week in 
Paris, this time they had to call upon their fabled powers of bloody-minded 
resilience to see off a home team who might have won at a canter in this form 
against many of the biggest names in Europe. Indeed, they already have.

Wasps stay on course as Dan Robson secures last-gasp win over Toulouse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/wasps-toulouse-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
They may have the pedigree of champions, winners of the Pro12 the season 
before last, but they are not yet as experienced in the art of winning crunch 
fixtures as their visitors. Munster withstood wave after wave of attack, 
Glasgow’s impish half-backs sending athletes into some painful places, 
sometimes even into some space, but Munster took all the blows. And every time 
Glasgow edged ahead, they found a way, somehow, to stay apace. Three times the 
hosts landed a penalty in the first hour, only to surrender it three minutes 
later.

Glasgow must have been maddened by their inability to shake the visitors off 
but Munster were maddened, too, by the ferocity of Glasgow’s work at close 
quarters. Neither side was shy of niggling the other. In a previous time – or 
in France – fisticuffs would have broken out on a couple of occasions but in 
our sanitised era the pushing and grappling kept us almost as enthralled as the 
intensity of the battle at close quarters and the glimmers and snuffing out of 
the sparks out wide.

The score was 6-6 at the break, a statistic that would have been more pleasing 
to Munster than Glasgow, but the Warriors’ dominance continued well into the 
second half. Finn Russell was far from perfect but when he was good he was 
sublime. A flourish worthy of a matador sent the tireless Tim Swinson galloping 
through in the third quarter to earn Glasgow their third converted penalty, but 
yet again Tyler Bleyendaal levelled on a rare Munster foray three minutes later.

Glasgow landed a fourth on the hour and held on to this lead until eight 
minutes from time, when Saili struck. A mistake by Tommy Seymour offered 
Munster their chance, a lineout that they drove deep into Glasgow’s 22. The 
attack and the furious defence shifted this way and that but Munster were now 
edging towards the tryline. Andrew Conway had a tilt at the line but was caught 
high by Stuart Hogg, who saw yellow. From the lineout, Munster went wide, and 
Saili looped round Keith Earls to dive into the corner.

Bleyendaal could not convert, so one final instalment of three points would 
have been enough for Glasgow. They had their chances, too, but composure 
deserted them. They do not yet have champion pedigree in this competition. 
Munster do.

Glasgow: Hogg; Seymour, Bennett (Grigg 62), Dunbar, Jones; Russell, Price; 
Reid (Allan 78), Brown (MacArthur 62), Z Fagerson (Rae 72), Swinson, Gray 
(capt), Harley, Wilson, Strauss (Fusaro 68).

Pens: Russell 3, Hogg. Sin-bin: Hogg 71.

Munster: Zebo (Keatley 72); Conway, Taute (Saili 56), R Scannell, Earls; 
Bleyendaal, Murray; Kilcoyne (Cronin 48), N Scannell (Marshall 67), J Ryan (Du 
Toit 61), Kleyn (Holland 54), D Ryan, O’Mahony (capt; Foley 72), O’Donoghue, 
Stander.

Try: Saili. Pens: Bleyendaal 3.

Referee: Luke Pearce (England)

Attendance: 7,351

Match rating: 7
 