
We all need to feel understood, recognised and affirmed by our friends, family 
and romantic partners. We all need to find our tribe. 

Research has shown that among the benefits that come with being in a 
relationship or group, a sense of belonging clocks in as the most important 
driver of meaning. When other people think you matter and treat you as if you 
matter, you believe you matter, too.

Though we all share a need to belong, in the first decades of the 20th century 
many influential psychologists and physicians – those guardians of the mind and 
body – did not acknowledge this fundamental aspect of human nature. The idea 
that children needed parental love and care to live a full and meaningful life 
was not only considered medically dangerous, it was dismissed as immoral and 
mawkish.

As behavioural psychology came into vogue and academic psychologists turned 
their attention to child-rearing, this view shifted and they began to examine 
and affirm the vital importance of attachment in early life. They discovered 
that people, whatever their age, needed more than food and shelter to live full 
and healthy lives.

People who are isolated feel their lives are less meaningful - and small 
moments of intimacy are highly valuable

The way we satisfy our need to belong transforms over the course of our lives. 
In our early years, the love of a caregiver is essential; as we grow older, we 
find belonging in other relationships. What remains the same, though, is the 
vital importance of these bonds.

But, sadly, many of us lack close ties. At a time when we are more connected 
digitally than ever before, rates of social isolation are rising. About 20% of 
people consider loneliness a “major source of unhappiness in their lives” and a 
third of Americans aged over 45 say they are lonely. Meanwhile, the results of 
anAge UK <http://www.ageuk.org.uk/> poll published recently suggests that half 
a million people over the age of 60 usually spend each day alone, and it’s not 
unusual for another half a million people to go five or six days without seeing 
or speaking to someone.

In 1985, when the General Social Survey <http://gss.norc.org/> asked Americans 
how many people they’d discussed important matters with over the past six 
months, the most common response was three. When the survey was repeated again 
in 2004, the most common response was zero.

All these figures reveal more than a rise in loneliness – they reveal a lack 
of meaning in people’s lives. In surveys, we list our close relationships as 
our most important sources of meaning. Research shows that people who are 
lonely and isolated feel their lives are less meaningful.

While close relationships are critical for living a meaningful life, they are 
not the only important social bonds we need to cultivate. Psychologists have 
also discovered the value of small moments of intimacy. “High-quality 
connections,” as one researcher calls them, are positive, short-term 
interactions between two people; when a couple holds hands on a walk or when 
two strangers have an empathetic conversation on a plane. High-quality 
connections have the potential to unlock meaning in our interactions with 
acquaintances, colleagues and strangers.

We can’t control whether someone will make a high-quality connection with us, 
but we can all choose to initiate or reciprocate one. We can say hello to a 
stranger on the street rather than avert our eyes. We can choose to value 
people rather than devalue them. We can invite people to belong.

The Power of Meaning: Crafting a Life That matters by Emily Esfahani Smith is 
published by Rider at £14.99. To order a copy for £11.99, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/power-of-meaning.html>
 