
Leading shares are on course for an eighth successive closing high, equalling 
the record set in 1997.

The FTSE 100 is currently up 17.83 points at 7227.88, as the slump in sterling 
following Theresa May’s latest hints at a hard Brexit boosted overseas 
earnings. Mining shares are among the gainers, withGlencore up 7.05p at 295.50p 
andAnglo American adding 24.5p at 1159.5p.

But Lloyds Banking Group is 0.5p lower at 65.4p after the UK government sold 
down another part of its shareholding, leaving Blackrock as the bank’s biggest 
investor. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/08/blackrock-biggest-lloyds-banking-group-shareholder>
Nicholas Hyett, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said:

Today’s announcement confirms that more shares have been sold to the 
institutions through the trading plan and the taxpayer is no longer the largest 
shareholder in Lloyds. The taxpayer stake has now fallen below 6%.

Retail investors had the disappointment of being denied involvement in a 
Lloyds share sale, although there is still time and plenty of opportunity to 
rectify this with the remaining [near] £2bn stake.

Engineering support and outsourcing group Babcock International has lost 14.5p 
to 925p as analysts at Deutsche Bank moved from buy to hold:

We like Babcock’s unique market position and high barriers to entry but 
downgrade to Hold as we do not see enough upside at this time. The stock is not 
expensive, leaving room for some price recovery on e.g. contract news, but in 
our view investors will need to see repeated strong reporting for a material 
and sustainable re-rating. While cash generation has been good, certain drags 
mean the valuation on cash metrics looks less attractive than on earnings 
multiples. Organic growth should improve next year, however we remain cautious 
on UK outsourcing as a whole and are not prepared to assume a return to 
previously seen growth levels.

Fellow outsourcer Capita has fallen13p to 502.5p and is leading the FTSE 100 
fallers.

Among the other losers William Hill is down 11.1p to 286.6p as the bookmaker 
warned annual profits would come in at the lower end of expectations at £260m. 
In November it said they would be at the higher end of a £260m to £280m range. 
The company, which is searching for a new chief executive, blamed “unfavourable 
football and horseracing results impacting the sector in December.”

Interim chief executive Philip Bowcock said the “customer friendly results at 
the back end of the year” meant profits were £20m below expectations. The 
company has been the subject of failed bids recently, and faces increased 
competition as rivals merge to gain critical mass. Numis analyst Richard Stuber 
said:

Whilst a profit warning on the back of a gross margin miss should not be 
overstated, this is the 3rd warning in 12 months and focuses us once again on 
William Hill’s near term shortcomings, including UK retail exposure, losing 
market share online and the lack of a permanent CEO.

Hargreaves Lansdown’s Hyett said:

We can forgive a run of poor sporting results. An unbroken run of Chelsea wins 
in the period covered by today’s announcement, for example, won’t have been 
enjoyable for any of the bookies and is clearly beyond William Hill’s control.

The bigger problem is that while performance in the online division is 
improving, it’s doing so at a snail’s pace. With the distracting merger talks 
of last year now behind it, the group seems to be knuckling down to the job of 
sorting out the core business. Hopefully, the renewed focus and improving 
trends will start to deliver some results.

Canaccord Genuity said:

Management pointed to an ongoing improvement in wagering in Online and also in 
its Australian business through its second half. So operationally, there are 
some signs of recovery.

But as expected, the group was hit by a particularly weak run of results 
through December across Football (not just the Premier League) and Racing. On 
Boxing Day, for example, the top 6 Premier League teams all won, as did the 
favourite in the King George V1 Chase. As a result, operating profit for 2016 
will come in at “around£260m”, right at the bottom of its guidance range,which 
compares with our £275.2m forecast.

Elsewhere Ashmore has dropped 7% to 277.9p as Barclays cut its target price on 
the emerging markets specialist from 325p to 270p, with an underweight rating. 
It said:

We remain cautious on EM-exposed names, given rising US yields and 
deteriorating EM sentiment after the US elections.
 