
The British 100m sprinter James Ellington is in hospital with career-ending 
injuries after being involved a head-on collision while riding a motorbike 
during a training camp in Spain.

David Weir ‘let down again’ as he attacks British Athletics before retiring
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/david-weir-let-down-again-british-athletics-retires-paralympics>
Ellington, who competed in the 100m and 4x100m relay at the Rio Olympics in 
August, was going around a bend in Tenerife with his team-mate Nigel Levine on 
Tuesday night when his motorbike crashed into a car that was being driven on 
the wrong side of the road. Unconfirmed reports suggest it was being driven by 
a tourist who was not used to driving on the right-hand side.

The 31-year-old Ellington has already had surgery to repair broken bones in 
his tibia and fibula and is also believed to have fractured his pelvis. His 
injuries are not life threatening but it is thought they are serious enough to 
suggest his chances of returning to top class athletics are slim.

Levine, a key member of Britain’s 4x400m relay team, was also taken to 
hospital and is being assessed, although his injuries are not thought to be as 
serious as Ellington’s.

A British Athletics spokesman said: “Regretfully we can confirm James 
Ellington and Nigel Levine have sustained injuries following a road accident in 
Tenerife. Both athletes are receiving medical treatment and are conscious and 
stable. BritishAthletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> medical 
staff are with the athletes and liaising with hospital staff over their 
treatment.

“We are in communication with their family members in the UK and will be 
keeping them informed of the situation. We will not be releasing further 
information on the severity of their injuries at the present time.”

Ellington, who helped Britain win 4x100m gold in the 2014 and 2016 European 
Championships and relay silver in the 2014 Commonwealth Games has a 100m 
personal best of 10.11sec.

The 27-year-old Levine has helped Britain win eight world and European relay 
medals, including gold at the 2014 European Championships and 2013 European 
Indoor Championships. He also won silver at the 2013 European Indoor 
Championships.
 