
The Netherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> will block any 
EU trade deal with the UK unless it signs up to tough tax avoidance regulations 
preventing it from becoming an attractive offshore haven for multinationals and 
the rich, the Dutch deputy prime minister has said.

Lodewijk Asscher, who was recently elected leader of the Dutch Labour party 
(PvdA), which is currently a partner in the ruling coalition government, has 
written to socialist leaders across the continent stipulating his party’s red 
lines in coming talks.

Last Sunday Theresa May suggested that the UK would leave the single market  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/brexit-may-single-market-scotland-fears>
when it leaves the EU in 2019, but seek to agree a trade deal with the 
remaining EU member states on triggering article 50 negotiations on the terms 
of Britain’s exit.

The vision of a low-tax Britain that enforces fewer regulations in terms of 
workers’ rights has been a motivating force for a number of high-profile 
supporters of Brexit. However, in a letter seen by theObserver, Asscher writes 
that it is in the interests of both the UK and the remaining 27 EU member 
states that May’s government is prevented from creating a low-tax “neoliberal” 
outpost.

In a sign of the complexity of the trade negotiations to come, Asscher writes: 
“If you and I pay taxes, so should the large enterprises. Let’s fight the race 
to the bottom for profits taxation together, which threatens to come into 
existence if it is up to the Conservative UK government.

“This will affect all Europeans, as it deteriorates our support for our social 
security system and leaves ordinary people to bear the costs. This is why I 
propose to come to a new trade agreement with Great Britain, but only if we can 
agree firmly upon tackling tax avoidance and stopping the fiscal race to the 
bottom.”

In his letter to all the leaders of the left-of-centre grouping in the 
European parliament, known as the Party of European Socialists, Asscher also 
calls for parties of the left to respond to the rise of “xenophobic politics” – 
which, he says, is gaining the “upper hand” – with a form of “progressive 
patriotism”.

The letter also calls for radical reform of the current rules on EU 
immigration. “Wage-lowering labour migration inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> nowadays leads to unequal 
competition between workers,” he says. “Migration leads to tension within and 
between communities. And this lack of control cannot be diminished by making 
forced efforts to emphasise a European identity. For this we need unity in 
diversity.” A spokesman said that Jeremy Corbyn’s response had been “very 
positive” on receiving the letter from Asscher.

Labour’s shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, said: “After six years of the 
Tories opposing every Labour proposal to clamp down on tax avoidance, this 
reveals what our European neighbours believe is the main priority for Theresa 
May’s government. It also gives an insight into what a Tory Brexit would truly 
look like – a tax haven off the coast of Europe.”
 