
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is urging GP 
surgeries to make more effort to provide a seven-day service as she seeks to 
deflect blame for the deepening crisis in the NHS.

With pressure mounting on the prime minister, amid growing evidence that 
hospitals are struggling to cope with surging winter demand, Downing Street 
issued a statement on Friday saying that surgeries should do more to ensure 
they offer appointments in the evening and at weekends. GP leaders reacted 
angrily to the announcement and accused May of trying to scapegoat family 
doctors for the unfoldingNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> crisis.

NHS crisis: 40% of hospitals issue alert in first week of new year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/13/nhs-crisis-hospitals-issue-alert-first-week-january>
A Downing Street source said: “Most GPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> do a fantastic job and have their 
patients’ interests firmly at heart. However, it is increasingly clear that a 
large number of surgeries are not providing access that patients need – and 
that patients are suffering as a result, because they are then forced to go to 
A&E to seek care. It’s also bad for hospitals, who then face additional 
pressure on their services.”

GPs working longer hours won’t ease the pressure on the NHS | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/15/gps-working-longer-hours-wont-ease-the-pressure-on-the-nhs>
Surgeries were told to extend their opening hours, to cover 8am to 8pm, seven 
days a week, as part of a five-year reform programme, but the government 
suggested that some GPs were failing to inform patients about the availability 
of out-of-hours appointments or to offer them at times the public wanted.

Extra funding for out-of-hours care will in future be linked to evidence that 
it is being tailored by doctors to their patients’ demands and making use of 
digital technology. Ministers are considering using the digital appointment 
system to monitor demand and ensure that doctors are responding.

Many doctors already feel they are struggling to meet demand with limited 
resources. Earlier this week, Simon Stevens, the NHS’s chief executive, 
suggested May was “stretching it” by claiming that the NHS was getting more 
than the minimum £8bn by 2020 it had asked for. He made the claim in a 
combative performance before MPs at the public accounts committee, where he 
contradicted several of the prime minister’s assertions.

Ministers are determined not to offer additional funding without evidence that 
the service is being more efficiently managed, and Stevens is pressing ahead 
with changes he has promised.

Philip Hammond, the chancellor, told the Economist earlier this week: “We 
don’t have any spare cash. There isn’t a pool of cash available. We’ve been 
asked to provide the NHS with a certain amount of funding by its own management 
through to 2020. We’ve done that and more and we expect the NHS to deliver 
within that envelope.”

NHS chief Simon Stevens refuses to buckle under No 10 pressure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/12/nhs-england-simon-stevens-refuses-to-buckle-theresa-may>
Dr Chaand Nagpaul, chair of the British Medical Association’s GPs committee, 
said: “This is not the time to deflect blame or scapegoat overstretched GP 
services, when the fundamental cause of this crisis is that funding is not 
keeping up with demand.

“This is evidenced by the fact the UK spends less on health and has fewer 
doctors and beds per head than other leading countries, as highlighted by the 
head of NHS England, Simon Stevens, only this week. Rather than trying to 
shamelessly shift the blame on to GPs, the government should take 
responsibility for a crisis of its own making and outline an emergency plan to 
get to grips with the underlying cause, which is the chronic under-resourcing 
of the NHS and social care.”

Nagpaul pointed out that GPs already provided care around the clock through 
their involvement in GP out-of-hours schemes and that many practices already 
offered evening and weekend appointments. “However, there are examples where 
extended opening has been abandoned due to lack of demand,” he said. 
“Government funding for extended opening has also been halved in some areas.”

The Royal College of GPs denounced the government’s move in unusually strong 
terms and described it as nonsensical. “It’s extremely unfortunate that the 
prime minister is being reported as pushing forward with a misguided scheme to 
force GP surgeries to offer routine services from eight to eight, seven days a 
week, regardless of patient demand or local resources,” said Prof Helen 
Stokes-Lampard, the college’s chair.

Ministers can’t silence NHS concerns because people can see it unravelling | 
Gaby Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/ministers-silence-brexit-fears-nhs-unravelling-simon-stevens>
“It is not the case that GP surgery routine opening hours are contributing to 
the pressures our colleagues in A&E departments are currently facing. GPs and 
our teams are also struggling to cope with increasing patient demand without 
enough investment and without nearly enough family doctors and practice staff 
to deal with it; this is a year-long problem for us, not just during the winter.

“It has never made sense to force GPs to offer services that there is little 
patient demand for. In many cases, practices have already had to actually stop 
offering extended opening hours because of a lack of patient demand for them. 
Blaming GPs for the crisis facing our NHS is not going to help anyone. Instead 
we need to start investing in our health service properly, so that there are 
adequate resources and clinical staff to deliver the care our patients need and 
deserve.”

The shadow health secretary, Jon Ashworth, said: “The Conservatives promised 
this in their manifesto six years ago. We don’t need more broken promises, but 
clear action, starting with facing up to social care needs that have been 
subjected to cuts of £4.6bn under the Tories. This is another example of 
Theresa May’s floundering in the response to the NHS crisis.”
 