
When it was launched by the coalition government in 2012, the Green Investment 
Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-investment-bank> seemed to 
be George Osborne’s sop to the Liberal Democrats and their heretical ideas 
about industrial strategies.

A state-funded bank that isn’t a bank – GIB is an investor in hard-to-finance 
green projects – didn’t sound like an adventure that would carry the long-term 
support of the former chancellor when he was straining to show fiscal 
discipline. Sure enough, Osborne started talking almost immediately about the 
need for GIB to stand on its own feet and attract private capital.

What’s wrong with that, it might be argued. GIB is supposed to invest only in 
commercially viable projects and, what’s more, seems to have stuck to its 
brief. There have been no spectacular blow-ups in a portfolio than runs from 
windfarms to street-lighting systems. While actual profits are tiny, as one 
would expect at a young institution investing in long-term assets, projected 
returns from £2.7bn of investments are pencilled in to be a tidy 10%. Why 
wouldn’t the private sector wish to put more capital behind GIB and its 140 
staff in London and Edinburgh?

That, at least, was the thinking and, by stealth, the government convinced 
itself that only a sale of a majority stake in GIB (or the whole lot) would do. 
But, don’t worry, the government added in a policy paper last March, the other 
objectives would be value for money for the public purse and an insistence that 
the new owner should honour GIB’s green purposes. The result is that, by the 
end of this month, a sale of GIB to Australian bank Macquarie is likely to be 
announced.

Green Investment Bank sale is 'deeply troubling', say Scottish ministers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/05/green-investment-bank-sale-scottish-ministers-nick-hurd>
We should be alarmed. That is not only because of weekend stories about 
Macquarie lining up buyers for GIB projects in an “asset stripping” exercise. 
Investments do not have to be held for infinity, of course, and GIB itself is 
sometimes a seller. But the real worry here is subtler and more serious: can 
Macquarie be made to recycle the proceeds of any disposals into GIB-style 
renewable infrastructure in the UK?

The short answer is: no. After a sale, the government is virtually powerless. 
“It is not open to the government to impose binding conditions on the future 
GIB requiring it to act in a particular way,” conceded the March paper. 
Instead, the government created a “special share” arrangement, and a panel of 
five experts to police it, to ensure that any investments meet the renewable 
criteria.

But what if Macquarie thinks GIB is worth more dead than alive? What if it 
pays £2bn for GIB, liquidates most of the assets at a handsome profit and then 
decides the capital is better deployed elsewhere?

The government seems to be grossly naive about this possibility. The March 
paper spoke cheerfully about how potential investors were interested in GIB 
because of its green specialism and declared: “It would make no sense to buy 
the company only to move it away from this focus.” Wake up. It would make 
perfect sense if a new owner could flip the assets for a large profit and then 
enjoy a completely free hand on how to spend the proceeds.

Macquarie, remember, is a vast financial conglomerate. Yes, it is happy to 
bore on about how many renewable energy projects it has backed but, in the end, 
the money flows to where its managers think the best returns will be made. That 
may not be green projects, or even the UK. It could prefer to pay its 
shareholders a special dividend. GIB could be lost within the greater Macquarie 
empire.

Theresa May should look at this privatisation afresh. She tells us she wants 
the UK to have an industrial policy but now she’s selling an institution that, 
against the odds and from scratch, has done a good job of attracting capital to 
UK infrastructure on commercial lines. The government says it “wants and 
expects GIB to continue to invest in green sectors following a sale” but, in 
the absence of clauses that are binding on Macquarie, that expectation is 
really just a hope that the Aussies will play nice.

Smart financial buyer runs rings around gullible government. It’s an old 
story, and likely to be repeated unless May intervenes at the 11th hour. She 
should call the whole thing off, or find a better buyer.

Bovis stonewalls over boss’s departure

David Ritchie, chief executive of Bovis Homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bovishomesgroup>, has told the board he 
plans to leave. You can’t blame him. He’s spent 18 years at the Kent-based 
housebuilder and he’s only 47, which leaves plenty of time to try something 
else.

Hold on, though, what’s this? “The contractual obligations are being met,” 
says a Bovis spokesman, using the usual shorthand for a pay-off. Why does 
Ritchie deserve a pay-off, though? If he has chosen to leave, which is what the 
announcement said, there should no obligation to pay him beyond his last day in 
the office, which is the last day of next month.

But perhaps Ritchie has “chosen” to leave because the board thought it needs a 
new chief executive in the wake ofthe profits warning a fortnight ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/28/bovis-profit-warning-investors-surprise-housebuilder-shares>
. That would be more of an ousting, in which case Ritchie might indeed be 
contractually entitled to a sum of up to a year’s salary, or £550,000.

So which is it? Did he jump or was he pushed? The deliberate ambiguity is 
silly, as is the brush-off that all will be revealed in the next annual report. 
It should not be hard to give shareholders a straight answer on the day that 
boss says he’s off.
 