
In a match bristling with nerves and uncertainty on either side of the net, 
Heather Watson and Sam Stosur engaged in two hours and 15 minutes of mutual 
suffering on day two of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> before the British player 
prevailed to go through to the second round in three sets.

There can hardly have been more fluctuations at the Melbourne Stock Exchange 
as their games meshed angrily on a hot but not oppressive afternoon on Margaret 
Court Arena. Watson beat the No18 seed 6-3, 3-6, 6-0 and retired to the shade 
of the locker room to await the result of the match between the American 
Jennifer Brady and Belgium’s Maryna Zanevska, which was due to start on Court 5.

Johanna Konta grinds out Australian Open win in valuable first-round outing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/johanna-konta-grinds-out-australian-open-win-in-valuable-first-round-outing>
This was Stosur’s third first-round loss in a row this year, after 
disappointments in Brisbane and Sydney. There is home pressure and there is 
outright phobia. Her record here suggests the latter might be her real problem.

Whoever Watson plays next, meanwhile, she will have benefited from what was a 
tough mirror image of herself.

They have different frailties. Where Watson’s problems accumulate in bunches 
of close, lost causes, Stosur explodes in bursts of rash shot-making, unable to 
control the vicious power that rolls through her muscular right arm. She struck 
47 unforced errors to cancel out 35 winners and disintegrated in the third set.

It made for an intriguing contest, with neither sure of dominance until Watson 
properly got going. But, even though she bagelled Stosur in the third, the set 
still ate up 48 minutes on the clock, as there were multiple deuce struggles 
all the way to the finish line.

Oddly, although possibly a megawatt short of the Australian’s hitting 
capacity, Watson took the first set with the second of her six aces, which she 
slapped with intent down the middle. It was a wind farm up against a nuclear 
power station, though, as Stosur regularly belted her first serve 20 miles an 
hour faster than Watson’s second.

Her challenge was to resist those lapses that have undone her in the past when 
in good positions. There was a smattering of British support to encourage her, 
but Stosur, naturally, was the crowd favourite – even though she was doomed to 
another losing effort on home soil.

Heather Watson defeats Stosur in Australian Open first round - as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/17/heather-watson-v-samantha-stosur-australian-open-2017-first-round-live>
At times, it is easy to see how she beat Serena Williams to win the US Open on 
the night of her life six years ago. When she wraps her racket around a 
top-spun forehand and gets her radar right, there isn’t a player on the Tour 
who could conjure a worthwhile return. Unfortunately, she mixes winners with 
horror shots too often to cash in.

She held through deuce at the start of the second, though, and remained calm 
to go 2-0 up, as Watson’s forehand, a model of consistency to that point, let 
her down on break point.

The set got away from Watson just past the hour when Stosur slotted her fourth 
ace down the T, at just 105 mph but swerving away from the British No2.

Stosur held through a tough deuce fight in the seventh game, Watson stayed in 
the set with her fifth ace but the Australian got over the line to force the 
decider

Stosur did not fold, but her wild ground strokes grew wilder by the rally, and 
Watson just had to remain patient in the exchanges to get the job done.
 