Between 1964 and 1966, Freddie Bulsara – later to become Freddie Mercury 
attended which higher education institution?  Brunel University  Isleworth 
Polytechnic ‘He dressed weirdly in drainpipe trousers what weren’t quite long 
enough,’ recalled a friend.  Imperial College London  South Bank Polytechnic 
Freddie made his debut as singer of Ibex at which gig?  A lunchtime performance 
in BoltonIt was at the Octagon Theatre. Ibex played a free festival in the town 
the next day  A free festival in Regents Park  A variety night in Todmorden  
Bottom of the bill at the London Palladium Which 1972 film was a crucial 
inspiration to Freddie?  The Godfather  The Poseidon Adventure  Deliverance  
Cabaret ‘I absolutely adore Liza Minelli. She’s a total wow,’ Freddie said. The 
first official Queen single was Keep Yourself Alive. However, it had been 
preceded by another record made by Freddie, with Roger Taylor and Brian May. 
What was it?  I Can Hear Music by Larry Lurex It climbed all the way to No 115 
in the US chart.  Whole Wide World by Tommy Tinsel  Add Some Music to Your Day 
by Fanny Fairy  Disney Girls by Danny Decals Queen made their debut Top of the 
Pops appearance on 21 February 1974 as a late replacement for which performer?  
Lena Zavaroni, performing Ma! (He’s Making Eyes at Me)  Diana Ross performing 
All of My Life  David Bowie performing Rebel Rebel Queen performed Seven Seas 
of Rhye, which had not yet been released  Ringo Starr performing You’re Sixteen 
Which DJ helped Bohemian Rhapsody become a hit by playing it 14 times over one 
weekend?  Tony Blackburn  John Peel  Kenny Everett The single hadn't even been 
pressed yet, let alone released.  David Hamilton Halfords rented bicycles to 
Queen for the Fat Bottomed Girls video in 1978. What did the company do after 
seeing the video?  Demand Queen pay for replacement saddles for all the bikes 
Queen had employed 65 naked women to sit on the bicycles  Hire Freddie to front 
a TV advertising campaign – ‘Halford, for saddles for all bottoms!’  Put 
lifesize cardboard figures of Freddie in all their stores  Run a competition in 
which the winner would have a cycle race against Freddie and three naked women 
Which was the last song Freddie ever performed live with Queen?  Bohemian 
Rhapsody  We Are the Champions It was the closing song when Queen played 
Knebworth on 9 August 1986  Radio Ga Ga  One Vision Which was Freddie’s 
highest-charting UK solo single?  The Great Pretender  Love Kills  I Was Born 
To Love You  Living on My Own The original release in 1985 reached only No 50, 
but a posthumous remix on 1993 topped the chart A star in memory of Freddie’s 
achievements was unveiled in 2009 – but where?  In Feltham, where Freddie lived 
with his family when they first moved to EnglandThere is also a blue plaque at 
his old home  The Hollywood Walk of Fame  Outside Wembley Stadium, where Queen 
triumphed at Live Aid  In Munich, where Queen frequently recorded  You got…  
You’re just waiting for the hammer to fall  You want to break free  You will 
rock us  You are the champion, my friend  Challenge your friends Submit answers  