
“I was stripped of all clothing with the exception of my underwear. My 
prescription eyeglasses were taken away from me and I was forced to sit in 
essential blindness.”

Those words were part of an 11-page letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/11/stripped-naked-bradley-manning-prison>
 written by Chelsea Manning and passed to the Guardian in March 2011 in which 
she outlined the harsh treatment to which she was being subjected in prolonged 
solitary confinement in the military brig at Quantico base in Virginia. She was 
then awaiting trial as the suspected source of the biggest leak of state 
secrets in US history, and going under the male name given to her at birth 
before her transition to living as a woman. The details of her detention were 
later denounced by the UN as aform of torture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/12/bradley-manning-cruel-inhuman-treatment-un>
.

But the letter did so much more than that. It established Manning as one of 
the more formidable forces to be reckoned with within the modern US military, a 
reputation that she has more than lived up to since then.

Physically tiny in frame, she has proven to be over the past seven years 
oversized in the intensity of her resistance to anything she sees as unjust in 
the world, or disrespectful in terms of her own treatment at the hands of her 
military captors. She has expressed those passionate emotions in her regular
Guardian columns <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chelsea-e-manning> and in 
a stream of legal documents aiming to secure her rights while incarcerated. 
More recently, in acts of distressing self-harming, she let it be known that 
she hadattempted suicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/11/chelsea-manning-confirms-suicide-attempt-hospitalized>
.

On Tuesday, that dogged persistence on the part of Manning and her team of 
lawyers – her trial lawyer David Coombs, followed by her appeal lawyer Nancy 
Hollander and the attorney handling her transgender lawsuit, Chase Strangio – 
was finally repaid with a happier outcome. In a move that is likely to go down 
in history as President Obama’s most contentious decision to commute a 
sentence, made in the dying days of his term in office, he has ordered that she 
should walk free from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 120 days’ time, on 17 May.

That date falls just 10 days short of the seventh anniversary of her arrest in 
Forward Operating Base Hammer, outside Baghdad, where she had been stationed as 
an intelligence analyst in late 2009. She had been brought to the attention of 
military police just days before, when a hacker with whom she had been having a 
private internet interaction, Adrian Lamo, informed on her as the source of the 
giant transfer of US state secrets to the open-information website WikiLeaks.

Though Manning had been relatively lowly in rank – she was an army private – 
she had enjoyed extraordinary access to millions of pages of military 
intelligence from all around the world. In her job researching military 
patterns in the area surrounding her base in late 2009 and early 2010 she had 
grown increasingly disturbed by what she had discovered in the databases about 
the unequal face of modern warfare and the at times callous and brutal way in 
which the US exerted its vast military superiority against civilian populations.

She was particularly unsettled by a video upon which she stumbled, showing an 
US Apache helicopter attack on a group of people on the ground who had been 
assumed to be insurgents but were in fact civilians including two Reuters 
journalists. The footage was later published with immense impact globally as the
“Collateral Murder” <https://collateralmurder.wikileaks.org/> video.

Other hugely impactful material among her leaks, many of which were published 
initially by the Guardian as part of an international consortium of news 
outlets, includedwar logs <https://www.theguardian.com/world/the-war-logs> from 
Afghanistan and Iraq and theUS embassy cables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/the-us-embassy-cables> that deeply 
embarrassed Hillary Clinton’s state department and helped propel popular 
uprisings in Tunisia and beyond.

Daniel Ellsberg, the source of the 1971 Pentagon Papers on the Vietnam war, 
responded to news of Manning’s release by saying that he had waited 39 years 
since his own public interest act for someone to carry out a leak of such 
proportions. “Chelsea put up a large enough mass of secret information that it 
could not be discounted or dismissed as partial or misleading.”

Ellsberg added: “She paid a very heavy price for it. It was a price she 
shouldn’t have had to pay at all as she didn’t have a fair trial – she was 
unable to make a public interest defense for what she had done.”

Though Manning’s deep discomfort at the state of warfare that she unearthed in 
the intelligence databases to which she had access was the prime motivator for 
her leak of 700,000 secret documents, at trial the military court was told by 
her defense team that she had also been personally troubled at the time of the 
action. She was born in 1987 in Oklahoma City to a Welsh mother, Susan Fox, and 
American father, Brian Manning.


 At around the age of 11 she endured the pain of her parents’ divorce and in 
the aftermath was present when her mother was rushed to hospital after her own 
suicide attempt. Following the divorce, Fox took Manning back to her native 
home in Haverfordwest in Wales where the young Chelsea spent most of her 
teenage years.

Returning to the US in 2005, Manning went on to join the US army in the hope 
of securing a college education through the GI Bill and of giving herself a 
purpose in life. By then she was already grappling with conflict in her gender 
identity: she had been assigned the male gender at birth but felt herself to be 
female, a condition known as gender dysphoria.

Most of the turmoil that lay within the soldier was obscured to those around 
her as Manning launched into a military career. A talented computer technician, 
she trained in intelligence analysis in Fort Drum, New York, before being sent 
out to Iraq to apply her skills in the war zone.

It was a challenging clash of temperaments: the strait-laced hierarchical 
order of the military at a time when the “Don’t ask don’t tell” policy was 
still in place butting up against Manning’s free spirit and her mounting 
distress over her gender struggles. The product was unpredictable and at times 
volatile – she quickly gained a reputation as an excellent and dependable 
intelligence expert, but she also got into trouble through outbursts of anger 
that led to disciplinary action against her.

Amid this whirlwind of conflicting impulses, she learnt about the free-data 
website WikiLeaks which was advertising its ability to accept secrets down an 
encrypted pipeline in which the identity of the source could be safeguarded. 
Pain-free whistleblowing, as it was billed.

It was into this pipeline that Manning shoveled her Everest-load of secret 
documents that she had copied on to a Lady Gaga CD on her laptop and then 
carried to the US on a camera SD card before uploading it to WikiLeaks. It has 
to be presumed that the US intelligence apparatus, with its omnipotent snooping 
devices, would have tracked her down eventually, but in the end she gave 
herself away by entering into an intimate online chat with Lamo.

The rest is history.


Over the almost seven years of her incarceration, the rollercoaster existence 
of Chelsea Manning has continued. In addition to the nine months of solitary 
she suffered in Quantico, she has also pursued anuphill battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/22/chelsea-manning-denied-gender-reassignment-treatment>
 to cajole and demand that the military allow her to live as a woman.

Held in a male military lock-up, she has been given gender realignment 
hormones and some cosmetics. But the army insists that she wears her hair at 
standard male length, and promises of surgery to complete her transition have 
so far failed to materialize.

Amid the ongoing trauma of her detention and gender issues, though, she has 
managed to perform an extraordinary public function, all the more striking for 
one held behind bars. In her Guardian columns, she has flown the flag for those 
she considers to be oppressed by the overweening nature of US government, while
writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/19/chelsea-manning-dont-ask-dont-tell-facing-my-fear-column>
 honestly and movingly about the difficulties of living as a woman.

As she walks out into the open air from Fort Leavenworth in May, Manning will 
face yet another strange twist in her extraordinary journey. She will have been 
freed by the very man who put her away: the leader who established a tougher 
regime for whistleblowers and official leakers than any in modern American 
history.

President Obama was the architect of Manning’s undoing; now he is her savior. 
He holds the record as the president who oversaw the prosecution of more 
leakers under the Espionage Act than all previous presidents combined; now he 
has spun on a dime, courting conservative and military outrage by setting her 
free.

It’s the story of her life. Chelsea Manning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chelsea-manning> has for years found 
herself at the center of powerful opposing forces, from those around her and in 
herself, and in May she’ll be able to tell the world all about it for herself.
 