The UN is currently responding to four "level-3" emergencies – the highest 
classification given for humanitarian crises. They are in Syria, Iraq, Yemen 
and where?  South Sudan Conflict has displaced 1.7 million people within South 
Sudan, and forced more than 648,000 people to flee the country. Source: UN 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs  Afghanistan  The Gambia In 
2015, the UN experienced the largest funding shortfall for humanitarian appeals 
in its history. What percentage of required funds did it fail to receive?  15%  
25%  45% Although the amount requested by the UN fell by $0.6bn from the 
previous year, the total donated dropped by $1.6bn. Source: Development 
Initiatives Which country contributed the largest amount of humanitarian aid in 
2015?  Japan  UK  US The US continues to be the largest donor, and in 2015 
provided 31.3% of all international humanitarian assistance from governments. 
Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Which country 
gave the most humanitarian aid as a percentage of its gross national income in 
2014?  Kuwait Kuwait gave 0.24% of its GNI in aid in 2014. Luxembourg gave 
0.17% and Sweden gave 0.15%. Source: Global humanitarian assistance report 2015 
 Australia  Canada In 2014, Saudi Arabia became the sixth largest aid donor in 
the world, contributing $755m. Which country was the largest recipient of Saudi 
aid?  Morocco  Iraq 68% of Saudi aid went to Iraq in 2014. Source: Global 
humanitarian assistance report 2015  Indonesia The UN is pushing for more 
funding to reduce the risk of devastation caused by natural disasters. What is 
the minimum percentage of national aid budgets the organisation would like 
spent on this?  1% In 2014, just 0.4% of the global aid budget of $135.2bn – 
roughly $540m – was spent on disaster risk reduction. The UN wants that 
proportion to rise to at least 1%. Source: UN  5%  10% Some EU countries, 
including Germany and the Netherlands, are the single biggest recipients of 
their own aid. True or false?  True Due to the increased costs associated with 
hosting refugees, many countries are now officially the single biggest 
recipients of their own aid. Five countries spend more than 20% of their aid 
budgets at home. Source: One campaign  False Which country hosts the greatest 
number of refugees?  Sweden  Turkey Turkey hosts more than 2.7 million 
refugees. Source: UN High Commissioner for Refugees  Greece According to the 
UN, 80% of which country’s population is in need of urgent humanitarian 
assistance?  Tanzania  Yemen Escalating violence in Yemen has displaced more 
than 2.5 million people. Source: UN  Philippines In 2014, the UK became the 
first G7 country to meet the UN's aid spending target. What is the target?  
0.7% of gross national incomeThe 0.7% commitment was established by the UN in 
1970. Source: UN  5.7% of gross national income  10.7% of gross national income 
According to Development Initiatives, South Africa received $12.6m in aid, and 
gave $2.2m.  You got…  This human welfare business – not really your forte, is 
it?  This human welfare business – not really your forte, is it?  This human 
welfare business – not really your forte, is it?  Don't imagine for one moment 
that you'll get away with blaming this woeful score on compassion fatigue  
Don't imagine for one moment that you'll get away with blaming this woeful 
score on compassion fatigue  When it comes to aid, you're mildly helpful at 
best. Must try harder  When it comes to aid, you're mildly helpful at best. 
Must try harder  Well done! You're clearly an industry insider. Now get back to 
work  Well done! You're clearly an industry insider. Now get back to work  Is 
that you, Ban? Perfect!  Challenge your friends Submit answers  