
In a landmark ruling in Switzerland, a man has been found guilty of raping a 
woman after he removed a condom without permission during what had, up until 
that point, been consensual sex. He has not been named, and of course nor has 
the victim, so currently there are no further details beyond the fact they met 
on Tinder. The Swiss federal supreme court handed down a suspended 12-month 
sentence. The case is a Swiss first, but has no direct bearing on the rest of 
Europe; rape law differs wildly across the continent. European human rights 
legislation has little to say on the crime except where it bifurcates a 
separate article; it can be a breach of privacy (article 8) or an act of 
torture (article 3), but you have no human right per se to sexual autonomy. 
Astonishingly, Germany only last year accepted the word “no” as the refusal of 
consent: previously, a victim would have to prove that they had fought back.

Nevertheless, any new territory chartered in rape law has an atmospheric 
impact on general perception. It’s worth considering how this case would play 
in an English court. Dr Sinead Ring of the University of Kent notes that 
removing a condom partway through sex without consent, “is not definitely an 
offence under English law. It has never been brought as a case. But there is a 
section in the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) guidance on conditional consent, 
and this would be an example of that.”

It’s puzzling to think of another example: if you were a sex worker and had 
consented to sex on condition of being paid, and weren’t, would that then be 
rape? “No,” says Ring, “breaking the contract doesn’t make it a criminal case. 
There’s space for a feminist critique of that, however.” The example Ring gives 
is that “people might say it’s conditional consent if a person is presenting as 
one gender and the appellant’s conception of their gender is different.” Ring 
refers here tothe McNally case 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Crim/2013/1051.html>, in which a teenage 
girl claimed her lover posed as male but was actually female. Ring notes 
however, that in her view, “to compare someone taking off a condom to a person 
expressing their conception of their gender is problematic”.

To return to the Swiss case, or as close as is possible: the condom/safe(ish) 
sex issue has come up explicitly only twice in English law, since the Sexual 
Offences Act was strengthened in 2003: once, in a judicial review process in 
2013: “She consented to sex on the clear understanding that her partner would 
not ejaculate inside her. He knew and understood that this was the only basis 
on which she would consent to have sex with him. [So when he did] she was 
deprived of her choice, and her consent was negated.” However, the director of 
public prosecutions’ decision not to prosecute was found incorrect:it was a 
rape and should have been prosecuted 
<https://www.kingsleynapley.co.uk/comment/blogs/regulatory-blog/case-update-r-on-the-application-of-f-v-the-director-of-public-prosecutions-and-a-2013-ewhc-945-admin>
. The case has not so far resulted in an actual prosecution.

The second is the more notorious Assange case, in which similar circumstances 
were seen as grounds for a rape charge by Swedish prosecutors, although they 
were not identical (the issue being that the alleged victim was deceived 
because she was asleep, not by sleight of hand). Since one was a judicial 
review and the other an extradition, neither of these cases was heard by a 
jury, which is salient, given that juror prejudice is often seen as the undoing 
of rape prosecutions. Ring advises against blaming juries too much, pointing 
out that once a rape case comes to court, the conviction rate is relatively 
high – 57% – and the woefully low conviction rates we see from reported rapes 
are due as much to obstacles further up the pipeline – that is, the police or 
the CPS.

The juror issue is key, though, since the law can say what it wants, in 
precedent or on the statute books, but a jury must still be persuaded; which 
naturally falls into a wider context of what we socially understand rape to be.

Many women would not, under the condom circumstances, press rape charges. Not 
necessarily because they were ignorant of the law (although the conditional 
consent element, section 76 of the Sexual Offences Act, is untested in open 
court and little known). But there is also, I think, huge anxiety about 
amplification; women don’t want to give ballast to the myth of “crying rape” – 
we don’t want to undermine, or muddy the waters for, women who have had more 
traumatic rapes. And so there is a tacit process of sub-division– call it for 
brevitythe “Ken Clarke” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/may/18/david-cameron-urged-sack-kenneth-clarke-rape>
 – where we stratify rapes into classic, serious, violent, marital, sort-of, 
technical and maybe. It’s unspoken because those are distinctions you would 
make for yourself, but you would never want to tell another woman how serious 
or unserious her experience had been. Silence militates against solidarity, so 
one perceives one’s own case to be in competition with another women’s rather 
than in concert with it.

There’s also an appalling flattening out of sexual abuse cases in the one-line 
summary (this is probably true of a lot of crimes). It’s a natural demand of 
the law, that the technical breach should be the headline; but it often gives 
no sense of the nature of the crime. Context is everything, and can be rendered 
in a ruling but rarely in a summary. By the time it hits the public domain, it 
has often been simplified to the point of incomprehensibility, whereupon it 
becomes evidence that sexual offence legislation has “gone too far”. It’s 
enough to put anybody off reporting anything.

The most positive transnational move towards international consistency, and 
stronger, more transparent law has been the Istanbul Convention, which 
aims to bring violence against women – including all non-consensual acts of a 
sexual nature – into a human rights framework. The UK signed in 2012, but has 
yet to ratify, opposed by the conservative MPs David Nuttall and Philip Davies; 
Davies derailed it at the end of last year with some 
warbling parliamentary obstructivism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/16/philip-davies-anti-feminist-tory-mp-filibuster-women-violence-bill>
. He, incidentally, was recentlyelected uncontested to the parliamentary women 
and equalities committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/anti-feminist-tory-mp-philip-davies-elected-to-equalities-committee>
.

There are politicians afoot who will make it their life’s work to tell you 
what isn’t rape; it’s a matter of civic duty to think deeply about what is.
 