
When my thriller Nomad <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nomad-473019.html> 
was first published, the questions I was asked most often revolved around 
inspiration. What drove me to tell this story? What made writing this book the 
thing I wanted to do?


There were a couple of obvious reasons: I wanted to test myself by writing 
something outside the wheelhouse of sci-fi and genre tales that has been my 
home for 30-odd books; and my mother is a big fan of techno-thrillers. On later 
reflection, however, what became clear to me was that the fuel for my book was 
a slow-burning anger.

If I dig deep, I think it’s true to say that it has always been so for me. My 
first books, a series of young-adult adventure tales set in a steampunk-infused 
old west, were born out of my earlier work as an entertainment journalist and 
critic. I’d read a YA novel so badly constructed that it stayed with me for 
weeks afterwards, to the point where a colleague had dared me to stop 
complaining about it and do better … so I did. I took the energy that annoyance 
gave me and channelled it into something creative.

So while Nomad grew out of a need to step outside my comfort zone as an 
author, what really put air under its wings was when it was met with resistance 
from publishers and agents. I wanted to write a thriller that harked back to 
those I had enjoyed reading in the 80s and 90s: high-octane plotlines with 
characters running the ragged edge, risking everything to stay alive. I wanted 
to project that through the lens of a post-9/11, post-Snowden, post-WikiLeaks 
world; as close as I could get to a “day after tomorrow” in the fractious, 
shadow realm of espionage.

I’ve written for video games including the Deus Ex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/aug/12/future-cities-deus-ex-universe-2029-in-pictures>
 series and No Man’s Sky and agents became fixated on that, sensing the edges 
of new creative territories, but uncertain of how to navigate them. I took what 
I had learned in games – mainly the ability to craft a narrative with velocity 
and excitement – and folded it back into my prose writing.

I was told to go back to sci-fi, where I had a solid, mid-list career writing 
Doctor Who, Star Trek and Warhammer novels. Worse, I was asked to make it more 
commercial or more “intersectional” by adding in fantastical elements: could 
the hero be a werewolf, perhaps? Or maybe find the lost city of Atlantis? What 
if the villain was actually a ghost, or an alien?

At the same time, I saw critics talking about the modern espionage thriller as 
a dead genre, a relic of the bad old days, fit now only as a setting for period 
fiction. It made me angry; it fuelled my book.

After the fact, I can see that Nomad’s protagonist, Marc Dane, expresses some 
of that frustration. He’s an MI6 field technician forced on to the frontline 
after surviving a devastating terrorist attack and, like me, he’s facing new 
and challenging problems. Dane is driven by the losing hand he’s been dealt by 
fate and the villains of the story. I think what propels him is defiance, 
similar to the defiance I felt when I was told: “You can’t write that here.”

When I found an agent and then a publisher who shared my enthusiasm for Nomad, 
it was a liberating experience. I had been on the verge of giving up, dogged by 
the horror of retreating to safer waters. When the book became a bestseller, it 
validated the effort. I’ve always written for myself, creating the kind of 
stories that I would enjoy as a reader, but it was good to know that there were 
others out there who felt the same – and wanted more.

But I’m not mellowing. I’ve always thought I would settle somewhat as the 
years pass by, but the truth is, that doesn’t seem to be happening. I look 
around at what is going on in the world and I can still find plenty to piss me 
off; so for now at least, I know I’m not going to be lacking for something to 
charge the pump for Marc Dane’s future adventures.

Extract

The boy tried to stop Noya, but his effort was weak and half-hearted, as if he 
couldn’t muster the energy to do it. He moaned as Noya pressed the disc of the 
stethoscope to his chest. Her other hand moved lightly over the youth’s torso, 
stubby fingers clad in blue latex probing at his flesh. Each touch got another 
pained reaction.

 The paramedic swore under her breath and bunched a handful of the boy’s 
T-shirt in her fist, and she bared his chest with another slice of the cutter.

 Pasco heard her partner gasp. He actually heard the sound of the Portuguese 
recoiling in that sharp breath, the man’s face twisting. He knew that 
expression too, of disgust and horror being swiftly shut away beneath a 
professional façade of detachment. One of the tourists watching the scene 
unfold made a gagging noise and went ashen.

 Pasco was compelled to take a look at the boy and he regretted it 
immediately, crossing himself as he realised what had been done to him. “Santa 
Maria … ”

 Suddenly he felt his age, right there in the marrow of his bones, heavy like 
lead. It disappointed him to think that someone could inflict such horrors as 
the young man had suffered.

A soft digital ping brought his attention back to the electronic gadget in his 
hand. Pasco had forgotten he was holding it in his thick fingers. The device 
offered a translation of the word he had given, and his blood ran cold.

 Shahiden (Arabic, Noun), it read. Martyr.

 Noya began to speak. ‘I think there’s something–’

The wet gasp the boy gave was the last thing Pasco Abello heard.

More about the book

James Swallow has been the unseen hand behind a mass of SF tie-in novels (for 
franchises such as Star Trek and Doctor Who) as well as audio dramas and video 
games. His latest, Nomad, is a globe-trotting espionage thriller, its hero Marc 
Dane a betrayed MI6 operative branded a traitor when he is the only survivor of 
a botched operation … It is superior hackwork, and very enjoyable.– John 
O’Connell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/12/the-best-recent-thriller-review-roundup>

Buy the book

Nomad is published by Zaffre at £7.99 and is available from the Guardian 
Bookshop for £6.79 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nomad-473013.html>.
 