
Jeremy Corbyn proposes a maximum income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-calls-for-maximum-wage-law>
, and the howls immediately begin. That is sad. While he and I may not agree on 
the details, seeking greater equality is not radical; it makes sense and it 
used to be the norm.

I founded the charity Reprieve <http://www.reprieve.org.uk/> in 1999. It 
employs some 35 people, many of them lawyers who work very hard, and could 
makes lots more money if they wanted to represent corporations. But at Reprieve 
we have a constitution that includes a provision that the highest paid person 
cannot make more than one-third more than the lowest paid. We are, to be sure, 
a charity, where we hold our funds in a trust to help people on death row. And 
we are a capital defence charity, not a capital acquisition one – one should 
want to do good rather than do well. That said, we pay a very reasonable 
salary, and we attract brilliant people from all walks of life – we just don’t 
pay them (or me) excessively, and we do it with a degree of equality.

I stole the salary idea long ago from (Lord) Richard Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jul/20/richard-rogers-architecture-80-royal-academy>
, who told me back then that his business had a maximum pay ratio of six to 
one. Thus the person running the architecture firm could not make more than six 
times what the person cleaning the toilets made.

When I was quite young, I read an American utopian novel published in 1888 – 
Looking Backward, by Edward Bellamy. It had a profound impact on me. Set in the 
year 2000, the “market” system worked the other way around: rather than 
everyone working a 40-hour week and the “market” dictating pay according to 
Adam Smith’s mythical equation, everyone worked for the same salary, and the 
hours were dictated by demand.

Thus, Lord Rogers would be paid £30,000 a year, just like everyone else, but 
he would have a number of vocations he might follow, two alternatives being as 
architect and janitor. My bet is that he would rather work eight hours a day as 
an architect than four hours a day as janitor, and thus the system would 
operate.

Utopian thinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/utopian-thinking> is 
frequently disparaged, largely because critics think a long-range evolutionary 
goal is being offered as next year’s reality. Yet one of the broad flaws in 
contemporary politics is that many politicians – from Theresa May to Hillary 
Clinton – would be hard pressed to enunciate their dream in a way that could 
inspire anyone.

At Reprieve, we had a test of our salary rule when Clare Algar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/clare-algar> came to run the charity. She 
had been with a corporate law firm, and was taking a massive cut no matter what 
the pay. The board suggested a salary of £60,000, but Clare elected to take 
just £40,000 to maintain the 33% rule. That was, after all, well above the 
average salary in London at the time, and she made herself very popular by 
dividing the rest into a pay rise for the others.

That was 2009, the same year that Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett published 
their influential bookThe Spirit Level: Why Equality is Better for Everyone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/09/society-unequal-the-spirit-level>
. One does not have to adopt it as one’s spiritual lodestar to recognise that 
fairness is much more likely to foster happiness than the brutal competition 
over money advocated by some. Indeed, I have not been wealthy but always very 
fortunate in life, and I have never understood why those born with a silver 
spoon think it should metamorphose into gold.

At the legal charity I ran in New Orleans in the 1990s – or, rather, in the 
pub nearby – we used to discuss which right was more important, greater 
equality or greater due process. Ultimately, everyone usually came around to 
equality. After all, if we are treated equally, it is in the interests of the 
privileged to ensure better treatment for the outliers of society. Yet when I 
suggested an equal pay policy there, I put it to a vote and found myself in a 
minority of one. That was odd and, again, a little sad. However rabid the 
response to Corbyn in Britain, it would be far more vitriolic in Donald Trump’s 
America.

Yet the idea of creeping equality is hardly new, either in Bellamy’s 
19th-century dream or even in 1950s reality. Americans forget – apparently – 
that when Dwight D Eisenhower, a Republican, was president the rich paid a 91% 
tax on anything over $200,000 (that would be roughly $2m today). That was 
deemed neither inequitable nor, save by a rather venal minority, a disincentive 
to inventiveness and hard work.

We have allowed the interests of the minority to drown out the disenfranchised 
majority. That is a passing historical phase, and we must redress the 
imbalance. After all, it is not written on the tablet Moses brought down from 
Mount Sinai that those of us lucky enough to have an exciting job, where our 
imagination may take flight, should also be encouraged to imagine an 
ever-expanding bank balance.
 