
England have increasing fitness concerns before next month’s Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> championship, with almost half 
their pack set to be worryingly short of match practice before the defending 
champions’ opening game against France at Twickenham on 4 February after 
confirmation that the loosehead Joe Marler is the squad’s latest casualty.

It had been hoped Marler would recover swiftly from a lower leg strain but a 
fracture has now been diagnosed. It means England are set to kick off against 
France without their two first-choice looseheads following a statement from 
Harlequins that Marler will be sidelined for four to five weeks. WithChris 
Robshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/england-chris-robshaw-12-weeks-six-nations>
, the Vunipola brothers and Manu Tuilagi already hors de combat it has also 
emerged that the lock forward George Kruis will not play any club rugby before 
the France Test, with James Haskell also set to miss Wasps’ weekend fixture 
against Toulouse in Coventry. GivenDylan Hartley is suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/14/dyland-hartley-banned-six-weeks-available-six-nations-rugby-union>
 for Northampton’s final two Champions Cup games, Eddie Jones will have his 
fingers crossed his squad are not further depleted over the next 10 days.

Rugby is ruled by the super coaches, but their reigns are short and sweet | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/10/rugby-super-coach-eddie-jones-ben-ryan>
Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> had been hoping Kruis 
would be available to feature in their final pool game against Toulon next week 
but that prospect now appears remote. Given England are due to spend most of 
the following week training in Portugal it means the second-row, sidelined with 
a fractured cheekbone, could be picked against France having not played a 
single minute of competitive rugby since Christmas Eve. “He’s going to be 100% 
fit for the Six Nations but he’s unlikely to play for us in the next two 
weeks,” said Mark McCall, the club’s director of rugby.

On the plus side Kruis demonstrated his ability last autumn to bounce straight 
back into Test action having missed a large chunk of club rugby in the weeks 
beforehand. Haskell, though, has played only 35 seconds since June and again 
looks set to sit out his club’s game this Saturday, havingtaken a blow to the 
head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/england-james-haskell-head-injury-wasps-comeback>
 shortly after coming on as a replacement in Sunday’s win over Leicester.

It was Haskell’s first appearance in more than six months since he suffered a 
toe injury playing for England against Australia in the summer and Wasps’ 
director of rugby, Dai Young, has admitted his flanker is struggling to face 
Toulouse. “He’s probably doubtful, he’s still with the medics today,” Young 
said. “I think he’d really have to tick all the boxes so it’s unlikely he’s 
going to be fit – although he’s not ruled out. We may decide later in the week 
that it is unwise for us to keep on waiting.”

Mako Vunipola is definitely out of the first half of the championship and may 
be ruled out of the tournament entirely next week. “Mako will see his surgeon 
next week,” McCall said. “He is going to be, best case scenario, the end of 
February.”

The full-back Alex Goode also picked up an ankle problem at the weekend but, 
as they prepare to face Scarlets at Parc y Scarlets on Sunday Saracens can at 
least call on Maro Itoje, back after fracturing his hand in the autumn.

With Robshaw out of the immediate equation, there is an obvious opportunity 
for England to shift Itoje to the blindside flank but Saracens have received no 
formal request from England to start their young talisman in the back row. 
“He’ll probably start this weekend in the second row but he played the last 30 
minutes of the game against Exeter at blindside for us when Will Skelton came 
on and he’ll get a couple more run-outs in the back row in the next two weeks,” 
said McCall, predicting Itoje will be an influential figure whatever number he 
wears.

“Maro is in very good form. Over the last four weeks, he’s been playing as 
well as ever. His contributions are enormous, with or without the ball. He 
makes a big impact, his energy is incredible, he makes things happen, he is 
really motivated. He’ll definitely play for England, just what position I’m not 
sure.”

Meanwhile, rugby union’s revised tackle directives are the subject of fresh 
controversy after a Rugby Football Union disciplinary panel ruled the Saracens 
prop Richard Barrington was sent off in erroragainst Exeter last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/saracens-exeter-premiership-match-report>
. Barrington has been cleared to resume playing with immediate effect, having 
had his case dismissed after Saracens complained their loosehead had been 
unfairly treated.

Sarries’ captain, Brad Barritt, has also been banned for three weeks despite 
initially avoiding any punishment for a dangerous high tackle on Geoff Parling. 
Barritt pleaded guilty and was banned for six weeks, reduced to three because 
of his contrition and good previous record. He will now miss Saracens’ final 
two European pool games against Scarlets and Toulon.

The topsy-turvy verdicts will add further to the sense of unease among players 
and coaches, with the three-man panel ruling the match referee, Ian Tempest, 
had dismissed the wrong man. “Following very careful analysis the panel found 
that Mr Barrington had not committed the act of foul play alleged,” read a 
statement. “The incident arose out of the specific dynamic of Mr Parling 
falling unconscious into what would have otherwise been a legitimate contact.”

Saracens will feel vindicated, with McCall having always insisted Barrington 
was innocent. “If you take the time to actually watch what he did in detail, 
he’s in a passive and crouched position,” said McCall. “Unfortunately, Geoff’s 
head came a long way to the side and down. It happened in 0.18 seconds, so 
Richard couldn’t have adjusted and avoided it. For me it was just an accident.”
 