
More than 200 judges whose pension entitlements were cut significantly have 
won their claims for age, sex and race discrimination against the Ministry of 
Justice.


The employment tribunal ruling, which may extend similar pension protections 
to employees in other parts of the public sector, could cost the government up 
to £118m if lost benefits are fully restored.

The case was brought by six high court judges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/15/younger-judges-take-government-to-court-over-pension-cuts>
 along with 204 crown court judges, district judges, sheriffs and tribunal 
judges.

The six high court claimants were Sir Nicholas Mostyn, 59, Sir Roderick 
Newton, 58, Sir Philip Moor, 57, Dame Lucy Theis, 55, Sir Richard Arnold, 55, 
and Sir Rabinder Singh, 52.

They alleged they were discriminated against on the basis of age following the 
2012 introduction ofnew judicial pensions  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/apr/27/pension-changes-deterring-would-be-judges-says-lord-chief-justice>
that required employee contributions. Theis and Singh additionally claim gender 
and race discrimination respectively.

The previous, generous judicial pensions provided an income of a 40th of a 
judge’s final pensionable pay multiplied by his or her length of service. It 
also gave a lump sum on retirement after the age of 65 of two-and-a-quarter 
times the annual rate.

The employment tribunal judgment found that the MoJ and the lord chancellor, 
who is now the justice secretary,Liz Truss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liz-truss>, had discriminated against 
younger judges by requiring them to leave the judicial pension scheme in April 
2015 while allowing older judges to remain in it. That discrimination could not 
be justified, the tribunal judge Stuart Williams concluded.


Shubha Banerjee, of the law firm Leigh Day who represented 204 of the judges, 
said: “This is a great victory for our clients, many of whom sit alongside 
older judges who were appointed some years after them but who are, in effect, 
paid more purely because they are older.


“The fact that there is a significant number of female and BME judges in the 
younger group simply compounds the unfairness of the changes that were made to 
judicial pensions.


“According to Judicial Office statistics, about one-third of all judges in 
England and Wales last year were female, and only 7% described themselves as 
from a black or other minority ethnic background.”


The tribunal found that the changes caused younger judges to suffer a 
disproportionate loss to their pensions purely because they were younger. The 
finding could affect other public sector groups, such as teachers, firefighters 
and prison officers, who have had their pension rights reduced.


Responding to the judgment, an MoJ spokesperson, said: “We are disappointed by 
the court’s findings and will be considering whether to appeal the judgment.”

The lord chief justice, Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd, has in the past said that 
cuts to pensions are deterring qualified lawyers from applying to be judges.

 In a note on the Judicial Appointments Commission’s website, attached to 
application details for the post of high court judge, Thomas wrote last week 
before the employment tribunal judgment was published: “I am very conscious 
that there is considerable concern about the remuneration available to the 
senior judiciary not least because of the changes introduced by the judicial 
pension scheme 2015 and the recent pensions taxation legislation.

“I hope that nobody will be put off applying because of concern about the 
remuneration or other terms and conditions.”

Shah Qureshi, of the law firm Bindmans LLP, who represented the six high court 
judges, said: “These reforms not only discriminate against younger judges but 
also disproportionately impact on women and ethnic minorities.

“The protection of those closest to retirement at the expense of younger 
judges was not a legitimate aim nor was it proportionate. Indeed the tribunal 
noted that younger judges compelled to join the new scheme are the worst 
affected by the reforms.”



 