
“A public official may not appoint, employ, promote, advance, or advocate for 
appointment, employment, promotion, or advancement, in or to a civilian 
position in the agency in which he is serving or over which he exercises 
jurisdiction or control any individual who is a relative of the public 
official.”

No need to dwell, perhaps, after a week of Trump sensurround, on how, or if, 
the US’s 1967 federal anti-nepotism statute can accommodate the incoming 
president’s advancement, into to key positions, of his daughter and son-in-law.

But either way, from the point of view of the special relationship, it must be 
promising, indeed, to find that the instincts of the US president and of 
British politicians from all parties are in such complete alignment. Family 
first.

True, Trump might strike some of our MPs as a bit of an ostentatious 
goody-goody, with his decision not to pay the talented Ivanka and Jared for all 
their hard work. Presumably worried that, if not properly cherished, their 
spouses, siblings and children might be, much like BBC stars and bankers, 
poached by jealous competitors, British MPs prefer to err on the side of 
generosity where these employees are concerned. Last year, a report from the 
Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (Ipsa), the body monitoring MP 
probity, found thatfamily members employed by MPs were paid on average £5,600 
more than other staff <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-36260573>. Alas, 
establishing the exact causes would involve “intrusive and potentially 
disproportionate work”.

Again, in contrast to Trump, with his arguably limited understanding of 
nepotism as applied to public life, British MPs have responded creatively to 
seismic changes in family structure with more informal definitions, better 
suited to contemporary mores. The latestregister of members’ financial 
interests, 
<http://www.parliament.uk/mps-lords-and-offices/standards-and-financial-interests/parliamentary-commissioner-for-standards/registers-of-interests/register-of-members-financial-interests/>
 a fantastic read for anyone interested in the history of the nuclear family, 
suggests that the scope for licensed parasitism now extends so far beyond 
partners and, occasionally, children, that Tinder users might want to focus on 
MPs, not only as legendary sexual partners, but for the wealth of employment 
opportunities they can offer. Ever fancied a stint as an MP’s researcher, 
case-worker, even office manager, on up to £41,748 a year, no qualifications, 
experience or references required? There is no evidence that Ipsa is troubled, 
overmuch, by candidate quality, in any MP’s office role, not even if they are 
virtually, otherwise, unemployable.

For the older, knighted MPs, the preference, when sharing out their £141,400 
(outside London) staffing expenditure, seems still to hand the choicer posts to 
wives. Thus, we find, say, Suzy Gale as office manager for Sir Roger after more 
than three decades in that role,the Kelly report having failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/nov/04/kelly-report-mps-expenses-summary>
, in 2009, to persuade members of the Commons that their nepotism tended – even 
if they couldn’t give a toss about the ethics – to make them look bad. In no 
other profession excepting GPs, Sir Christopher Kelly pointed out, can 
relatives be employed at public expense.

Instead, we find MPs, including MPs from Scotland (whose parliament banned 
similar nepotism) distributing their favours ever more widely, though not, 
obviously, outside the family. They embrace sons, daughters, brothers, sisters, 
fathers, mothers, stepchildren, nieces, nephews, brother-in-laws, son-in-laws 
and, in the case of Penny Mordaunt, “my then partner’s niece”.

Perhaps another reason for the enhanced pay that Ipsa reported for family 
members is the relative infrequency, these days, of the economies of scale 
involved when the MP’s office manager shared her or his employer’s bed. But 
without any formal scrutiny, it’s impossible to judge MPs’ claims of incredible 
value for money. We can only guess, from, say, Lincoln’s Karl McCartney MP, 
that, unless his wife, Cordelia, is an administrative genius, an office 
manager’s £38,617 can be relatively easily earned. Since Mrs McCartney seems to 
juggle the role with that of partner and designer in Lincoln-based Flourish: 
“stylish, innovative and creative designs for your garden or outdoor space”. An 
Angela Wrapson, wife and PA to George Kerevan MP, doubles, according to her 
online profile, as an “international art consultant”.

From the spouse’s perspective, admittedly, you can see the advisability of 
such a portfolio in what can be an unpredictable profession, MPs occasionally 
being so impressed by younger applicants that wives have reportedly found 
themselves redundant in bed, as well as in the register of interests.

It would be wrong, however, to conclude from the register’s heights of 
unapologetic self-interest, including Labour MPs ostensibly exercised by 
Britain’s stalled social mobility and by moralists deeply shocked by corruption 
in the developing world, that their constituents are equally trough-friendly. 
Regional journalists regularly interrogate MPs, such as, say, Nadine Dorries, 
who has employed two daughters, or her northern counterpart, the SNP’s Corri 
Wilson, whose daughter, Shannon Donoghue, has now seamlessly relieved son, 
Kieran, “Ayr’s only hipster”, as a case worker, on a salary of up to £24,727.

In fact, MPs’ salaried proteges themselves can be so coy about their 
advantages as to suggest, if not actual shame, some awareness of how a 
meritocracy might look. In contrast toHenry Conway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/henry-conway>, the Commons research 
assistant whose invisibility at work and “Fuck Off I’m Rich” party were once 
thought to inaugurate the decline and fall of parliamentary nepotism, we find, 
say, John Cunningham, a part-time law student introducing himself with a 
caution that is no longer an option for Trump’s children. “I’m a case worker,” 
he writes, “for an MP [dad, Alex, Labour] helping constituents with many issues 
and working with many government departments.”

Here’s Miles Elliott: “Since 2011 I have been working in the constituency 
office of our local MP [mum, Julie, Labour] while studying politics, philosophy 
and economics with the Open University.” And Fred Dowd, adult instructor and 
“parliamentary assistant”, listing his parliamentary duties, acquired just 
after graduation: “Ensure the member [uncle Jim, Labour] is fully briefed…”

In his farewell letter, written before he left to take over the V&A museum, 
Tristram Hunt, son of a Labour peer, mentioned, as a motivating factor, what he 
had learned in Stoke-on-Trent about “the harrowing effects of poverty and 
inequality upon social mobility”. Yet, as intractable as they are, at least 
those factors are not, like nepotism, a further obstacle to social mobility, 
proudly showcased by Westminster’s public servants. Even without an 
anti-nepotism statute, MPs could, yielding to Ipsa, have represented their 
submission as principled self-sacrifice. It would still leave one in 12 MPs 
related to another MP, past or present.

In 2015, a report for the Debrett’s Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/30/debretts-poll-privilege-internships-private-school>
 underlined what would already be obvious to anyone who follows emergent 
political dynasties – Benn, Straw, Gummer, Kinnock, Prescott, Johnson, Hurd, 
Gould, Hoyle, Miliband – the fatal impact on competition, where family 
connections are treasured. Not long after, Labour’s diversity candidate, Jeremy 
Corbyn, won the party’s leadership. Within two weeks, his son Seb, aged 25, had 
been appointed chief of staff to Corbyn’s shadow chancellor, John McDonnell. 
Which only, since blind favouritism cannot conceivably have been involved, 
proves what Trump also knows. Sometimes, however painful, nepotism is simply 
the right thing to do.
 