
Killer whales and humans would seem to have little in common. We inhabit very 
different ecosystems, after all. Yet the two species share one unexpected 
biological attribute. Females ofOrcinus orca and Homo sapiens both go through 
the menopause.

It an extraordinary aspect of our development. In contrast to the vast 
majority of animals on our planet, women and female killer whales stop 
reproducing halfway through their lives. Only one other species – the 
short-finned pilot whale (Globicephala macrorhynchus) – behaves this way.

The question is: why? For what reason do females of these three different 
species give up the critically important process of reproduction in middle age? 
According to Darren Croft of Exeter University, whose team has been studying 
killer whales for several years, there are many different theories. “Some have 
argued that it is an artefact that has appeared during our recent evolution and 
has simply persisted in our lineage,” he said. In other words, there is no 
specific reason for the menopause in humans. It is simply an evolutionary 
accident. However, Croft believes there is overwhelming evidence that the 
menopause is an evolved trait deep rooted in our past.

One idea to account for the deep-rooted evolution of this trait uses the 
concept of the “granny effect”: older females are programmed to close down 
their reproduction so they can devote themselves exclusively to the rearing of 
grandchildren. In doing so, they lose the ability to pass on their genes 
directly to one generation but gain because they can help the following 
generation to reach adulthood, thus promoting their genotype for the future, it 
is argued.

While not discounting the granny effect, Croft’s team – working with 
scientists at York University, Cambridge University, the US Center for Whale 
Research, and Fisheries and Oceans Canada – suggests the real explanation is 
more complex. “Our previous work shows older, post-reproductive females do help 
their offspring survive but that, on its own, does not explain why they stop 
reproducing,” said Croft. “Females of many species act as leaders in late life 
but still breed – elephants for example.”

Croft and his colleagues – whose recent research 
<http://www.cell.com/current-biology/fulltext/S0960-9822%2816%2931462-2> has 
just been published in the journalCurrent Biology – have been studying two 
populations of killer whales, which live off the north-west Pacific coast of 
Canada and the US. The populations included several pods, made up a several 
family groups. One of these pods – known as J pod, which currently consists of 
more than 20 individuals – was led by J2, or Granny, the killer whale 
matriarch. Granny was thought to be more than 100 years old –until her death, 
reported a few days ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/04/oldest-known-orca-presumed-dead-endangered-whales>
, made headlines across the world. She had stopped reproducing more than 40 
years ago, it is thought.

Killer whales normally start breeding around the age of 15 and then stop 
between the ages of 30 and 40 – although females often live until they are more 
than 80. In addition, it has been discovered that older female orcas play a 
particularly important leadership role in their family group. “They appear to 
be particularly good at pinpointing places to hunt salmon, the main source of 
food for the resident killer whales,” said Croft.

This point was backed by Deborah Giles, of the Center for Whale Research, who 
has been observing Granny and the J2 pod for years. “Granny was the ‘wise 
elder’ of that killer whale clan. She had an amazing ability to call the other 
whales to her by vigorously slapping her tail on the water. Even from miles 
away the other whales would turn around and come immediately to J2’s side,” she 
said.

However, it was the study’s observations of middle-aged orca mothers – those 
approaching menopause – that provided the real insights. It was found that 
these mother whales suffer much higher costs when competing to reproduce with 
younger mothers. These older mothers’ offspring were 1.7 times more likely to 
die than those of younger ones. “This new research shows that old females go 
through the menopause because they lose out in reproductive competition with 
their own daughters,” said Croft.

This point was backed by Daniel Franks from the University of York, a 
co-author of the study. “It’s easy to think that an older female will pass on 
their genes better by continuing to give birth in late life but our new work 
shows that if an old female killer whale reproduces, her late-life offspring 
suffer from being out-competed by her grandchildren. This, together with her 
investment in helping her grandchildren, can explain the evolution of 
menopause.”

This reproductive conflict hypothesis was originally proposed by Mike Cant of 
Exeter University and Rufus Johnstone of Cambridge University, who argued that 
conflict between generations was critical in explaining the appearance of the 
menopause in some species.

The new study was the first test of this hypothesis in non-human animals, 
added Cant. “Our theoretical predictions have turned out to be correct. We have 
captured a key piece of the puzzle of postreproductive life. Now we can explain 
not just why older females live so long after reproduction, but why they stop 
breeding in the first place.”
 