
The Cryptic puzzle for 17 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26288> by Qaos had a clue (21 
down) that read: 'Bear a left, then a right, then reverse (5)' for the solution 
KOALA [A/L then A/OK (all reversed)]. This issue has come up before, as of 
course we all know that the state emblem of Queensland, though it may look like 
a little bear, is in fact a little marsupial.

When it has come up before I have defended by quoting from the dictionaries on 
my desk: eg Collins – koala or koala bear, also called (Austral.) native bear; 
Chambers – koala, also called koala bear or native bear; Oxford Dictionary of 
English – koala, also called native bear in Australia. The basis of the defence 
has been that, though a koala is zoologically no kind of a bear, it is a kind 
of a bear, linguistically. (In the same way, since what Buffalo Bill killed in 
large numbers on the prairies were bison, not buffalo, zoologically he should 
have been called Bison Bill, but he wasn't.) As a crossword editor's plea 
bargain, that seemed to hold up, more of less.

But this time came a much more dangerously focused attack. It was from someone 
working for a multinational energy company in Perth, Western Australia and 
clearly sought to undermine the whole basis of my position. The dictionaries 
cited were admittedly English (or, in the case of Chambers, originally 
Scottish). The counterattack from Perth ran: 'According to local [ie 
Australian] experience, the terms you refer to [ie koala bear and native bear] 
are not commonly used. If they are used at all, the user is regarded as a 
drongo or numbat. [The first is an insect-eating bird and the second a 
termite-eating marsupial and, in this context, neither is presumably something 
you want to be called, even metaphorically.] Suggest your dictionaries get 
updated to reflect this.'

Feeling cornered, I looked for possible further evidence. The Australian 
Oxford Dictionary offered some welcome support. Its online version gives: 
'koala; also native bear in Australia', noting further that 'in non-technical 
contexts koala bear (as opposed to koala) is widely used'. But, for all its 
Australian consultants and expert editors, the AOD might still be seen as 
tainted by the Oxford connection.

So I turned to what is universally regarded as the national dictionary of 
Australian English, the Macquarie Dictionary. It was originally the creation of 
the Linguistics Department at Macquarie University in Sydney and the first 
edition was published in 1981. It has since been acquired by Macmillans and has 
move its editorial offices to Sydney University. The sixth edition was 
published in 2013. It says of the tailless, grey, furry arboreal diprotodont 
marsupial: koala, also koala bear (though it properly notes that 'there is no 
zoological justification of the expression koala bear').

To be honest, I am not entirely sure where this leaves us, Cryptic 
crossword-wise, though clearly 'kind of bear' would be totally wrong as a clue 
for KOALA in a Quick crossword.

Those who do the Guardian crosswords on line and make use of the facility for 
posting comments in the space below the clues may from time to time find that 
some comment or other has been removed without notice by the in-house 
moderators. I hasten to establish that I have no part of any kind in the 
process and am not involved in any disputes after the event about whether of 
not the removal was justified. Normally removals are triggered by 
considerations of taste and decency, or sometimes because the comments seem to 
have no relationship of any kind to the matter being commented on. But quite a 
few such comments were removed from below theQuick crossword for 25 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/13768> for a legal reason. Andy 
Coulson, the former editor of the News of the World and subsequently David 
Cameron's director of communications, had been found guilty of serious criminal 
charges related to phone hacking but had not been sentenced and the jury had 
still come to a verdict on some of the other charges against him. It seems that 
a thread of comments related to the case, which was still ongoing, and the 
Guardian's legal view was that these could have been construed as a contempt of 
court, if any of the jurors involved had been Guardian crossword enthusiasts 
and had been doing the Quick crossword online for relaxation that day.

The June Genius (No 132 by Paul) got a much lower than normal entry: only six 
on the first day and 301 by the deadline. This is either a good thing or a bad 
thing, depending on how you rate the pain factor in a Genius puzzle. The first 
three past the post were Dave H, Tony C and Jonny R (a newcomer to the frame, I 
think).

Congratulations to Linda Urquhart who is the winner of the June Genius puzzle.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> 
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 