
Surely the most worrying crisis in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is the threat to the only doctor most 
of the public ever meet, their GP.

General practice is the bedrock of the service, performing 90% of the work for 
just 8% of the budget. A succession of governments has made this once 
fascinating, challenging and rewarding profession so unattractive to newly 
qualified doctors that its demise and that of the NHS is virtually inevitable.

One-third of the GP workforce will retire within the next five years  
<http://www.gponline.com/third-gps-retire-within-five-years-bma-poll-warns/article/1418693>
but there are nowhere near enough young doctors to replace them, let alone 
increase their numbers sufficiently to cover a full seven-day service. My 
practice has seen one young GP resign and head to Canada with another highly 
promising candidate to follow him.

The remedy is simple: significantly increase the current risible £80 annual 
fee per patient, remove the huge mountain of unnecessary bureaucracy, treat 
these highly skilled professionals with the respect that they deserve and stop 
inept ministers’ incessant meddling.
Dr Richard Holman
Barnstaple, Devon

Theresa the Too-Timid?

I quite understand Andrew Rawnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-control-freak-brexit-queen-misrule>
’s problem in finding a positive historical template for Theresa May (“Could 
Mrs May the control freak become the Queen of Misrule?”, Comment); clearly 
looking at a capable ruler like Elizabeth I is barking up the wrong tree. Ivan 
Rogers’s picture of her preparation for Brexit brings Ethelred the Unready to 
mind, while her feeble handling of the NHS crisis appears to be a combination 
of Henry the Impotent of Castile and the last Carolingian king of France, Louis 
the Do-Nothing.

Of female rulers, the most striking comparison is the ill-fated Byzantine 
empress regent, Maria of Antioch. A woman who came to power unexpectedly and 
suddenly to a declining empire beset by powerful external enemies and internal 
rivals, she struggled to impose her authority from the outset, as ambitious 
relatives plotted against her, using xenophobic attacks on European immigrant 
communities as their calling card.

Her rule marked the start of a period of political instability and fierce 
decline for the empire, during which northern provinces were able to secede and 
become independent kingdoms; ultimately, the Latins got their own back by 
intervening in the internal squabbles, leading to the conquest of the empire 
for themselves. When you visit Venice today, you can see the quadriga stolen 
from Constantinople adorning St Mark’s itself.
Stephen Davies
Beckenham

Planning issues and Brexit

Lauren Ellis (“An alternative view of Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2017/jan/08/letters-female-victims-domestic-violence-help-men>
”; Letters) wrote about those who voted Remain “who are incapable or unwilling 
to see the issue from any point of view other than their own privileged and 
narrow-minded one”. I could equally throw back the same accusation to those who 
voted to leave.

I worked as a town planner in Teesside and then until retirement two years ago 
in Hartlepool, which voted so vehemently to leave the European Union. In my 
job, there only one purpose: economic development. Teesside was once a 
prosperous place but has suffered a long decline. Grants from the EU towards 
infrastructure, environmental improvements and training often overcame the 
government’s reluctance to invest. Hartlepool and other areas like it that 
voted to leave the EU will now suffer the most.


Peter Graves
Stockton on Tees, Cleveland

All roads lead to Stratford

Robert McCrum’s article on Heather Wolfe’s archive work (“How ‘Sherlock of the 
library’ cracked the case of Shakespeare’s identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/08/sherlock-holmes-of-the-library-cracks-shakespeare-identity>
”, In Focus) misrepresents the argument made against Shakespeare’s authorship 
of his plays. However well-intentioned, his misappropriation of Wolfe’s 
measured claims is in danger of buttressing the theories of the 
“anti-Stratfordians”.

Contrary to his assertion, while Baconians, Oxfordians and Marlovians disagree 
about much, they all accept that Shakespeare the player existed and that he 
came from Stratford. They merely state that someone else wrote the plays 
attributed to him. The family application for a coat of arms is not only 
accepted by them, it is embraced as evidence in support of their claims, their 
argument being that such a vainglorious act is incompatible with the sensitive 
disposition of a great poet.

Far from dismantling the anti-Stratfordian argument, Wolfe’s discovery is 
perhaps most notable for revealing that as late as 1602, Shakespeare was 
understood to be a player and not a playmaker. It is easy to imagine how this 
nugget could, and probably will, be integrated into anti-Stratfordian mythology.

To do so would, of course, be fallacious. Arcane references in ancient 
documents can be twisted and turned until they slot into the most obtuse 
reasoning. The answer to the authorship question is better drawn from an 
understanding of how the plays would have been written, rehearsed and performed 
and the straightforward and unambiguous testimony of his contemporaries. It is 
a route that quickly leads to a clear and obvious answer.

There are, in any case, already many good reasons for dismissing the claims 
made for alternative candidates, not least that by the timeMacbeth and The 
Tempestwere written two of them were dead. By purporting to have finally found 
proof, McCrum only dignifies and resuscitates a redundant debate.


David Vass
Diss, Norfolk
 