
More disturbing news in August for crossword editors. This time we found 
ourselves undermined by no less an authority than the Oxford English 
Dictionary, which used to be such a present help in trouble with setters as to 
whether or not a word was OK to use, or to be used in a particular sense. Of 
course, the OED has always moved with the linguistic times, but until recently 
it moved at a dignified pace in that direction, rather than bustling along in 
order to be up with the trendy set.

It was bad enough to learn that two years ago (and without telling us) it had 
cut the ground from under our pedantic feet, as we fought the good fight to 
maintain that 'literally' means 'in a literal manner or sense'. The 2005 
edition of the 1-volume Oxford Dictionary of English has a clear 'usage note' 
to the effect that the word was now commonly used in non-literal contexts (eg 
'we were literally killing ourselves with laughter'), but that this usage is 
'not acceptable in standard English, though it is widespread'. (This 2005 
injunction was despite the fact that Frances Brooke used the word in this 
'unacceptable' way in 1769, when writing The History of Emily Montague, as did 
Mark Twain in 1876 in Tom Sawyer.) Eight years is a long time in lexicography.

But now we learn that Oxford University Press, source by its own claim of 'The 
World's Most Trusted Dictionaries', last month gave its seal of approval to a 
whole slew of new words, including 'omnishambles' and 'selfie' (or should that 
be 'selfy'?). As a matter of fact, even before last month, I would have been 
inclined to let 'omnishambles' slip through, despite the fact that it was in no 
dictionary (though not selfie). Be that as it may, you can see how the 
foundations on which we try to build our house now feel more like sand than 
rock. And the effect of this process can only be that crossword editors will 
become more arbitrary in their judgements and behaviour, refusing to allow this 
word, even though someone has found it in some dictionary, and accepting 
another, though none has yet recognised it. Oh, what tension!
_____

Eric Westbrook is a registered blind member of the Royal National Institute of 
Blind People (RNIB), with a long involvement in developing IT applications to 
make crosswords available to the blind and partially sighted. He has also been 
the driving force behind the development of the three-dimensional crossword 
puzzle, where the solutions fit into a 3-D grid in three different directions 
(across, down and top to bottom). He has for some years organised and promoted 
for the RNIB an annual wall calendar, based on 3-D puzzles. Several Guardian 
setters have contributed puzzles to this venture. In 2011 he organised the 
first RNIB competition for solving a 3-D puzzle, which got substantial national 
publicity. This year the RNIB 3-D Crosswords Cup will be contested in Holborn, 
London on the afternoon of Saturday 12 October. Details and information on how 
to book tickets are to be found at http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/rnib.html . 
All the proceeds will go to the RNIB Pears Centre for Specialist Learning.
_____

While in charitable mode, you might like to know that Richard Cleaver has for 
some time been raising money for Macmillan Cancer Support by setting themed 
quizzes with prizes and cryptic-style clues, which he lets you have in return 
for a donation to Macmillan. He has so far raised over £9,000 towards his 
target of £10,000. Details can be seen at www.justgiving.com/FoodQuiz2013 and 
at macmillanquizzer.blogspot.com .
_____

And, with only about 110 shopping days to go until Christmas, I pass on to you 
details of a delightful stocking filler that could have been designed for 
crossword buffs. It is a book full of apt anagrams (many in poor taste, such as 
'a fresh one but he's stupid' for PRESIDENT BUSH OF THE USA and 'to copulate he 
finds interns' for PRESIDENT CLINTON OF THE USA; and oxymorons (or, if you 
prefer it, oxymora), not just the well-worn standards, like MILITARY 
INTELLIGENCE, but ones new to me, at least, like POSTAL SERVICE or YOUNG 
CONSERVATIVE; and all sorts of other word play besides. It is Tyrannosaurus Lex 
by Rod L. Evans.
_____

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 