
A man has admitted stabbing a couple to death outside a Matalan store in 
Cardiff where they worked.

Andrew Saunders, 20, pleaded guilty at Cardiff crown court to the murders of 
Zoe Morgan, 21, and Lee Simmons, 33.

Their bodies were found near the store in Queen Street in the city centre at 
about 5.50am on 28 September. Morgan and Simmons had been dating for four 
months.

Saunders, of no fixed address, spoke only to confirm his name before entering 
guilty pleas to two charges.

The judge, Eleri Rees, the recorder of Cardiff, remanded Saunders into 
custody. The defendant, who has short brown hair and a beard and wore a blue 
hooded top, will be sentenced next year by Mrs Justice Nicola Davies.

Rees said: “I do not anticipate it [the sentencing date] being before mid 
January.”

She ordered the Crown to produce for the court copies of the prosecution case, 
key evidence and submissions on the minimum term for what is thought to be an 
inevitable life sentence, before the hearing.

Michael Jones, prosecuting, said Davies would have to watch “disturbing” CCTV 
of the incident.

“The footage is disturbing, but it is important [for the] evidence [to] be 
seen by the judge,” he told the court.

Rees asked whether a psychiatric report would be of assistance to the court 
ahead of the sentencing.

Hilary Roberts, defending, said one had been produced for the defence. “It is 
a report that only looks backwards and I don’t think it will be of much 
assistance to the court,” he said.

The judge replied: “I would have thought that [Davies] would in any case like 
to have a psychiatric report. It is a matter for you.”

Morgan, who worked as a window dresser, had recently graduated from the 
University of South Wales with an honours degree in fashion marketing and 
retail design.

Her family said: “She was taken away from us tragically, too soon, and has 
left a massive hole in our lives that will never be filled. Zoe will always be 
in our hearts for ever and always. We are all broken hearted.”
 