
A man has cut his own throat in a courtroom dock as he was due to be sentenced 
for groping a shop assistant.

Lukasz Robert Pawlowski, 33, appeared in court on the sexual assault charge 
when he asked to leave the dock to go to the toilet. But when he returned he 
“slashed wildly” at his throat – and collapsed at Haverfordwest magistrates 
court in Pembrokeshire, with witnesses reporting that he bled heavily.

Ambulance workers and a helicopter were called to the court to treat 
Pawlowski, who was badly injured. He was airlifted 55 miles to hospital in 
Swansea.

One witness who was in the court told reporters: “He came into the dock, then 
asked to go to the toilet. He went out, came back, muttered something then 
started slashing at his throat.


“The courtroom was then cleared out, and first aid was given by paramedics in 
the dock. I’m not sure if he lost consciousness but he did lose a lot of blood.”

Pawlowski, of Pembroke Dock, pleaded guilty to sexual assault in December and 
was due to be sentenced. He had been banned from entering the shop, which 
cannot be named, after groping the female worker in October.

The court earlier heard Pawlowski gestured to the woman to kiss him when he 
walked into the shop where she worked on 30 October. After she declined he 
leant towards her, grabbed her wrists and kissed her on the cheek, then walked 
off into the store.

He later grabbed her from behind while she carried cans of lager across the 
store. The incident was captured on CCTV and he was arrested two days later. 
Pawlowski told police he had kissed her, but it was a question of “mixed 
messages” as he thought he had her consent.

A spokesman for Haverfordwest magistrates court said: “The ambulance service 
are still here working on him at the moment. We do not know yet how serious the 
injuries are or what the situation is regarding other cases listed for the day.”

The court was closed by officials as police investigate how Pawlowski managed 
to smuggle a blade into the courtroom.


A spokesman for Dyfed-Powys police said: “Officers attended and found an 
injured man at the scene, who was receiving treatment by paramedics. He has 
been conveyed to Morriston hospital by air ambulance.

 “The extent of his injuries are unknown at this time. The court has been 
closed in order for enquiries to take place.

“Police are not looking to speak to anyone else in connection with this 
incident at this time.”
 