
Even if you’re good at clearing the clutter out of your home, the sentimental 
stuff is always the hardest to shift: what do youdo with those daubings your 
now 15-year-old did aged three, or all the Mother’s Day cards you’ve ever 
received, or those boxes of bits and pieces retrieved from your parents’ home 
after their deaths?

The big fear we all have, says clutter-clearing guru Marie Kondo 
<https://konmari.com/>, is that if we throw away these objects we’ll somehow be 
losing the precious memories and legacy that goes with them. Not so, says the 
Japanese bestselling author: truly precious memories will never vanish even if 
you discard things associated with them.

Here she reveals the secrets to dealing effectively with the 
heartstring-tugging detritus of family life: the stuff we can’t bear to part 
with, but which we know we can’t keep stashing away.

1. Focus not on what to chuck, but on what to keep

When we have a clearout, most of us tend to focus on what we’re going to throw 
away. Kondo’s approach is the opposite: she says we should concentrate instead 
on what we’re going to keep. The reason is simple: there are so many items of 
sentimental value, from our own lives and from our children’s lives and from 
our parents’/grandparents’ lives that it’s too overwhelming a task to think 
about what to jettison.

2. Ask yourself of each object: does it spark joy in my heart?

This is the central message of Kondo’s creed: the litmus test to whether to 
keep it or not is to ask yourself, does this object (whatever it is) spark joy 
in my heart? To work this out, you have to touch the object, and see what 
response that elicits inside you.

“Hold each item in your hands, as close to your heart as possible,” she says. 
“And then, pay close attention to how your body responds. When something sparks 
joy, you should feel a little thrill running through your body, as if your body 
is somehow slowly rising up to meet the item, embracing it even.”

Any such object has a place in your life, says Kondo. And once you are 
convinced of the spark of joy, you should be able to hold on to an item with 
confidence. You don’t need to make excuses for keeping it any more: you’ve 
proved to yourself that it’s important to you. But most objects in your life 
will not spark this joy – and these are the ones you should part with, again 
with confidence because you know they don’t mean enough to hold on to.

3. Make sure you’re properly committed to having a tidy-out

It’s crucial, says Kondo, that you don’t begin to declutter until you’re 
properly committed to it.

“Unless you are truly committed, you will most likely become discouraged or 
distracted before finishing your tidying journey,” she says.

What’s more, sentimental items are in fact the last sort of clutter that you 
should clear out: Kondo recommends that you “train your tidying muscles by 
tidying in a specific order, and begin with the categories of items that are 
typically easier than sentimental items”. You must tidy, she says, by category, 
not by location or room. “Your tidying should be in this order: clothing, 
books, papers,komono (miscellany) and then – and only then – will you be ready 
for your sentimental items.”

4. Never leave stuff in boxes at your parents’ home, or send it to them

One thing you should never do, says Kondo, is send boxes of sentimental items 
to your parents’ home – and nor should you ignore items that languish there 
long after you’ve moved out. Why not? Because, quite simply, you’re cluttering 
up your parents’ lives – and that’s unfair. Having tons of your stuff around 
your parents’ home makes it much more difficult for them to put their own house 
in order; something many people have a desire to do as they get older. And 
what’s more, says Kondo, boxes sent home are never actually opened.

5. Make a plan for taking care of the precious early items from your 
children’s lives

That first babygrow; the artwork he brought home from his first term at 
nursery; the Mother’s Day and Father’s Day cards she made you when she was in 
primary school. These are the easy items to decide about. The trick, says 
Kondo, is not merely to keep them, but to display them in some way that they 
will bring you pleasure as you go about your daily life – and they will bring 
pleasure to others who visit your home, too. Baby clothes, she says, can be 
displayed as art, hung in a frame or displayed in a creative way. “If you 
bundle them into a drawer thinking, ‘maybe some day I’ll return to them,’ then 
I doubt they spark joy in you, and they are taking energy away from other items 
that do spark joy for you,” she says.

If your instinct is that you want to keep more of your children’s artworks 
than is viable, you can always take photos of it before you throw it away. 
Another tactic is to decide on how many items you will keep, and stick to that 
number. And of course, the ideal thing to do with your children’s art is to put 
it on show: hang it on the wall, frame pieces you hope will last for a while, 
share it with visitors. And when the time comes to discard it, says Kondo, you 
should thank it for helping your child to grow, and let it go without guilt.

6. Say farewell to precious items that belonged to your dead parents or 
grandparents

If an item no longer sparks joy, but it has a sentimental attachment connected 
to it, you should always bid it farewell in a way that respects what it has 
meant to someone in your family in the past. If it’s an item that you know was 
important and meaningful to a parent or grandparent, now dead, or if it 
represents them to you, Kondo says you should thank it for the service it has 
done and the role it has played in your family’s life. “Giving sincere thanks 
to an item will significantly reduce or even eliminate any guilt you may feel 
when you decide that you will no longer have it in your home,” she says. “I 
understand that for some people it may seem strange to thank items, but if you 
try it you’ll be surprised by its effectiveness. Keeping an item beyond the 
time it sparks joy for you will only diminish the care and appreciation you 
have for the other items in your life.”

7. Tidy photographs together as a family 

Tidying your family’s photos should be the final stage in your journey to 
clear the sentimental clutter in your home, says Kondo. She recommends that you 
collect all the photos you have around the house: remove them from their 
albums. Next, lay all the photos on the floor according to the year or period 
in which they were taken. The trick with photos is to be ready to let go of any 
that are similar, or are of scenes you don’t really remember. If you have 
several photos from the same day, choose only the best one. The basic approach 
to negatives, says Kondo, is simple: get rid of them all. Another good rule of 
thumb is: only hang on to pictures in which you, or the person you care about 
in them, is looking good.

With digital data the same principles apply: choose what you want to keep, not 
what you want to discard – you’ll never finish the job, says Kondo, if you try 
to decide which ones to erase when there are so many possibilities. She 
suggests you start by making a new folder in your computer, and then move all 
the images you choose to keep into this folder.

Sorting out photos is, Kondo believes, probably the happiest tidying job ever 
– especially if you do it altogether as a family, inter-generationally if 
possible. Laughing and talking together about your memories will make it fun – 
and seeing images of your family across many years, and perhaps across 
generations, will help you make sense of your story, as well as bringing a 
note of acknowledgement about what each generation has done for the next, all 
the special days, the ordinary days, the big occasions: the births, and the 
people who have died, and the different places where you all lived and 
holidayed. And what it gives is what all clutter-clearing should give: the 
chance to relive wonderful memories and to respect and honour your family 
history, while putting your life into order so you can fill the present with 
the things that matter, and that bring you happiness in the moment.

• Spark Joy by Marie Kondo is published by Vermilion, £10.99. To order a copy 
for £9.34, go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/spark-joy-461044.html> or call the Guardian 
Bookshop on 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone 
orders min. p&p of £1.99.
 