
Hometown: Brockley, south London.

The lineup: Ojerime (vocals).

The background: R&B is the dominant force in music right now, given albums of 
the year lists in 2016 were dominated by Frank Ocean, Beyoncé, Solange, 
Rihanna, etc – and the year’s bestselling records came from the likes of Drake 
and the Weeknd. Which makes Ojerime either very brave, or very foolish, 
stepping into such a thriving, competitive market. But she’s coming at it from 
an angle – a 1990s/00s angle. The 22-year-old fashion promotion graduate grew 
up loving Destiny’s Child, Brandy and SWV (her voice, the tone and cadence, is 
apparently modelled on Cheryl “Coko” Gamble’s) as well as Keith Sweat and 
Blackstreet – “all the 90s dons”, she says (although she insists she didn’t 
consciously listen to an Aaliyah record till 2014). And she claims to be 
offering a new take on that era’s R&B, with an attendant focus on old-school 
MTV Base-style music videos for her imagery and visuals.

But it’s also a British angle. Has there ever been a UK female exponent of 
this sort of retro/quasi/avant/neo-R&B?SZA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/08/sza>, Kelela, Jessy Lanza, Jhené 
Aiko, Syd tha Kyd and the rest are all American or Canadian. Ojerime – a south 
Londoner of Jamaican and Nigerian parentage – is doing something quite 
different; quite dark. Of her homegrown (female) peers,Nao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/28/new-band-of-the-week-nao-no-68-february-15-soul>
 is more poppy, twigs more arty. What Ojerime has done over her two EPs to date 
– Silhouette and Fang2001 – is conjure a sustained atmosphere of murky 
melancholia. She’s done it using beats found online, with a variety of 
producers, including the highly regardedEvans 
<http://dj.beatport.com/djdanielevans>. “I’m still waiting for my Boy-1da 
<https://noisey.vice.com/en_uk/article/boi-1da-producer-interview-drake-views-from-the-6-real-friends-interview>
,” she says of Drake’s regular studio wingman. “It would be so much easier to 
find someone I connect with in that way.” She’s not doing badly. There are 
doubtless details and depth missing from a more expensive set-up, but from 
where we’re listening – on the move, via a laptop, through bluetooth 
headphones, with the bass and treble turned up – the sound she and her team 
have come up with, from a bedroom in Brockley, is worthy of the finest studios 
in Toronto and New York.

You wouldn’t know this music wasn’t from Toronto and New York, such is its 
sophistication and matt sheen, and the immaculacy of Ojerime’s vocals, all 
parochial vestiges polished away. But there is the odd bit of vernacular and 
allusion to things local to remind you of its provenance. Take 56 Plate Corsa – 
Ojerime insists the title, and lyrical references to driving through the 
capital at night, feeling sad and lonely because everyone she sees is all 
“loved up”, weren’t deliberate attempts to make a Brit version of shiny urban 
music from North America. “It’s authentic,” she argues. The lyrics are riddled 
with such mild provocations: “Shouldn’t be fuckin’ with you this way,” she 
sings over muffled backwards-tape moans on R U Sure, while on Showing You Off 
she admits, “You can see that I have a taste for darkness.” “There was a lot of 
uncertainty in my life when I wrote those,” she explains of the songs on the 
Silhouette EP, “to do with guys in my life. A pattern emerged … Their 
intentions were not very clear … So I did a lot of writing.”

On Lights On/Lights Outro – featuring, somewhat disconcertingly, a sample from 
Jefferson Airplane’s White Rabbit – the melody creeps up on you like fog at 
night. On Standby she seems woozy, as though she’s singing in a narcotised 
state. Her second EP, Fang2001, another cohesive mood piece, is so-called 
because as a child she had “canine teeth – they were long and sharp, but I 
learned to embrace it. That’s my tagline now. I’m small but sharp, and people 
know that.” Creeplude is a fug of messed-up soul samples on which she sings in 
a low Mogadon mumble. Ojerime – who was involved in every aspect of her work, 
from the music and lyrics to the photography and videography (she even made 
sure the few hard copies available of her EPs came with a photo book, “like 
you’d get with an album from 2000”) – gives her murk a glamorous gloss. But 
it’s not as easy as it sounds. The track Kids With Depression is about her. 
“I’ve suffered from depression on and off since secondary school, and it can be 
overwhelming,” she reveals. “I can manage it more now: I read self-help books, 
and I’m also interested in Buddhism and meditation, and those things have 
really helped me.

“If I didn’t do music, I wouldn’t be as depressed,” she adds. “Being in the 
music industry at first made me feel like I had the weight of the world on my 
shoulders. The pressure … Your self-esteem can be lowered at any point. There 
are a lot of triggers, especially through social media. So I wrote that song 
based on being in the music industry: it brought out insecurities and anxieties 
I didn’t even know I had.”

In her own way, through her fractured downer sound (not downtempo – that 
suggests it’s mellow when it’s anything but), quietly stormy soul and lovers 
bass balladry, Ojerime is turning turning the idea of the together, confident 
R&B artist – even one confident of their neuroses and dark urges – on its head. 
“I’m not saying I don’t have those qualities,” she cautions. “But don’t envy me 
from what you see on the outside. Don’t believe I’m better than you or having a 
better time. It’s easy to be envious of someone and think they’re having a 
better life. But you actually never know.”

The buzz: “Ojerime is your new favourite 90s-inspired R&B star.” 
<https://www.thefourohfive.com/music/article/ojerime-is-simply-sensual-in-visuals-for-r-u-sure-56-plate-corsa-147>

The truth: She’s Aaliyah if she was from Brockley not Brooklyn.

Most likely to: Take you on a journey.

Least likely to: Drive a 56 Corsa. 

What to buy: Fang2001 is available on Bandcamp and SoundCloud. 

File next to: Jorja Smith, Aaliyah, Ray BLK, Drake. 

Link: soundcloud.com/ojerime <https://soundcloud.com/ojerime>.

Ones to watch: Lyves, Silent Riders, Drab Majesty, Idles, Magnus Bechmann. 
 