
Hometown: Sandvika, Norway.

The lineup: Magnus Bechmann (vocals, bass). 

The background: Magnus Bechmann is a solo artist based just outside Oslo in 
Norway, whose breezily sung songs are intricately put together – he calls them 
“collab-arrangements” – in the studio with his producer Erlend Mokkelbost. He 
plays bass, while a guitarist, synth whiz and drummer are employed when 
instrumental curlicues are required. The end results are captivating and 
catchy, but so melodically circuitous and complex you’d imagine they’d be 
near-impossible to replicate onstage. And yet! At last year’s By:Larm festival 
he was picked as one of the the Hottest Brand New Actsby the NME 
<http://www.nme.com/blogs/nme-radar/bylarm-roundup-770183>. “That was a 
surprising turn of events for me,” he says, “cos it was my debut concert.”

The advanced, accomplished nature of his material might suggest years of 
honing and perfecting but he is only 20. He left school in 2015, but he’s 
already back there, in a way – when he’s not crafting witty, sublimely 
infectious three-minute pop songs he works as a kindergarten teacher. That kind 
of figures. We put it to Bechmann that his music has the dynamic thrust and 
angular attack of rock, only it comes in a sugar coating – like a tougher 
Phoenix, or grunge designed for sweet-toothed tweens. It is, we venture, 
“bubble-grunge”… Incredibly, he doesn’t slam the phone down in disgust, but 
instead promises to use the term himself. Then he charts his trajectory.

“I grew up listening to jazz standards – my grandfather is a pianist and when 
we went to his house he’d play usthe Pink Panther theme 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HhHwnrlZRus>,” he relates. “I played trumpet 
in the school band, then I began playing bass cos I thought it was cooler than 
the trumpet. In 5th grade I was in bands doing covers of Led Zeppelin and 
AC/DC. Then at 10, I wrote my first song. It was called My Life It’s Going to 
an End.”
Come again?

“I know. Weird, right? But it’s true. I dunno. It just sort of happened, I 
don’t remember exactly why. I wasn’t a depressed child. I had a lot of friends 
and played every day so I don’t know how the heck I came up with that title.”

A decade on, there is still a miserablist quality to his writing. Take his 
debut EP, Loners Get Lonely Too. There are songs on it called The Vast Unknown 
and It Bothers Me. And the lyrics are peppered with poignancy and pathos. The 
music, by contrast, is punchy and perky, a pop fizz from start to finish, 
especially EP owner It Bothers Me, which is all hooks and handclaps. “It does 
sound kind of happy,” he agrees, “but the theme is a bit more sad – it’s about 
the masks we wear in different social events.” His first single, Keep on 
Playing Nice, is similarly cheerful, even if it is about “doing everything for 
other people even though you know they’re never gonna help you back.” The Vast 
Unknown explores “the fear of moving away from everything you know and love 
towards something completely different and new”. Second Chance (“You can get a 
new life if you call the number on your screen”) is about capitalism as an 
antidote to despair, or something. “It’s about buying into the self-help 
distributed through dishonest TV-shops, who promise a better life for just a 
few bucks,” he explains. “Generally, if it sounds too good to be true, then it 
usually isn’t true.” Then there’s the title track, the one where Bechmann 
momentarily slows down the frantic pace - until the lighters-aloft climax, that 
is. It’s apparently based on a 70s rock ballad, even if he can’t recall which 
one. At one point, he sings, “It’s OK to feel alone”. Is that the theme of the 
EP? “I think so, yes.”

What do the kids at school make of it all? 

“I haven’t told them much about it cos, you know, they’re three years old,” he 
points out. “But I told them I do music and brought my guitar in and played 
children’s songs like Father Jacob [Frère Jacques]. They liked that. But they 
preferred it when I drew a picture of Batman. I draw a really good Batman. That 
makes me super-proud. I draw Batman a lot. I even tried to draw SpongeBob at 
one point, but they didn’t fancy that.”

Did you feel at that moment like, My Life It’s Going to an End. 

“No,” he says, “definitely not.”

The buzz: “With the youthful naivety of Leisure-era Blur and catchy pop hooks 
ripped straight from Two Door Cinema Club 
<http://www.nme.com/blogs/nme-radar/bylarm-roundup-770183>.”

The truth: Cartoon art’s loss is pop music’s gain. 

Most likely to: Make you smile. 

Least likely to: Fight crime wearing a cowl. 

What to buy: The Loners Get Lonely Too EP is released on 20 January by 
Brilliance.

File next to: Jensen Sportag, Phoenix, Tahiti 80, Sondre Lerche. 

Link: facebook.com/magnusbechmann/ <https://www.facebook.com/magnusbechmann/>

Ones to watch: Oslo Parks, Billie Eilish, Cadenza, Kiiara, Nilufer Yanya.
 