
Japanese gaming company Nintendo has unveiled its new Nintendo Switch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo-switch> console at a 
presentation in Tokyo.

The device, a hybrid that can be used both handheld and with a TV when in a 
dock, will go on sale on 3 March priced $299.99 in the US and £279.99 in the 
UK. Other European prices will vary,Nintendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> said.

The pricing is higher than had been rumoured and makes the Switch more 
expensive than rivals Sony’s PlayStation 4 and Microsoft’s Xbox One S.

The new gaming platform wants to do everything at once, executives said, from 
the old-school fantasy of its flagship launch title, Zelda: Breath of the Wild, 
to party games played face-to-face rather than in front of a screen.

The Switch “inherited all of Nintendo’s entertainment DNA” across the 
company’s broad line of products, said Shinya Takahashi, Nintendo’s head of 
software development.

The presentation, which was streamed live, ended with a surprise revelation: 
the long-delayed Breath of the Wild, originally planned as an exclusive to the 
Wii U platform, will go on sale with the new console.

Nintendo Switch: is this hybrid console the future of gaming?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/12/nintendo-switch-is-this-hybrid-console-the-future-of-gaming>
The first Mario game for the platform will not debut until later in the year: 
Super Mario Odyssey, “a large Mario sandbox world,” in the words of producer 
Yoshiaki Koizumi, will exile Mario to an unknown world – our own. Footage from 
the game shown at the presentation featured Mario leaping through realistic 
forests and over yellow taxi cabs. Koizumi also produced the Mario Galaxy 
franchise for the company.

And Nintendo may be mending fences with third-party developers: Electronic 
Arts executive Patrick Soderland said the game company’s wildly popular Fifa 
football franchise would return to the Switch after years of refusing to make 
versions of its games for the Wii U. The hugely popular building game Minecraft 
will also be coming to the Switch, its makers confirmed


 Nintendo is also rolling back its digital rights-management protections 
slightly: the company will not region-lock its games, Kimishima told the 
audience, meaning that Switch games will be playable whether or not they were 
purchased in the same country as the console itself.

The company merged its living-room console and handheld device divisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/12/nintendo-switch-is-this-hybrid-console-the-future-of-gaming>
 to create the Switch: the machine has a built-in screen so it can function as 
a tablet-sized handheld gaming device, but it also plugs into a dock attached 
to a television. Its single complex controller splits into two simpler 
controllers for in-person multiplayer.


Nintendo has doubled down on its non-standard hardware design largely in the 
service of keeping users off the couch. Kouichi Kawamoto, general hardware 
director for Nintendo, introduced a game called 1, 2 Switch similar to the 
simple, sometimes acrobatic Wii Sports games that came with the company’s 
original Wii system. Players quick-draw their controllers like gunslingers in a 
western or battle with swords, among other activities. 1, 2 Switch “isn’t a 
game you play facing the screen, it is a game that is primarily played through 
face-to-face interaction,” Kawamoto said. The executive suggested bringing the 
game to parties and called it “an icebreaker for all kinds of fun 
communication.”

A new online multiplayer service debuts with the Switch, but like competitors 
Sony and Xbox, Nintendo’s service will be subscriber-only by the end of the 
year, with a grace period of a few months for early adopters.

Among other new game announcements: 


 * Nintendo will make a sequel to its Wii U paint-gun game Splatoon for the 
Switch 
 * Along the lines of popular 1980s title Punch-Out, Nintendo will release 
Arms, a boxing game starring creatures with long springs for arms, playable 
online against other Switchers 
 * The presentation solved a second missing-games case: Xenoblade Chronicles 
2, the long-rumored and now-confirmed sequel to the popular 2010 Wii 
action-RPG, will debut on the Switch 
 * Eccentric developer Suda51 did not quite say a new No More Heroes game was 
on its way, but he did say “Travis Touchdown is coming to the Nintendo Switch.” 
 * Toshiro Nagoshi of one-time Nintendo nemesis Sega said his company “will 
consider new games for the Nintendo Switch and present them soon.” 
• Is Nintendo’s Switch hybrid console the future of gaming? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/12/nintendo-switch-is-this-hybrid-console-the-future-of-gaming>
 