
Global warming obviously refers to temperature increases across the entire 
globe. We know the Earth is warming, we know it is human-caused, we have a 
pretty good idea about how much the warming will be in the future and what some 
of the consequences are. In fact, when it comes to the Earth’s average climate, 
scientists have a pretty good understanding.

On the other hand, no one lives in the average climate. We live spread out 
north, west, east, and south. On islands, large continents, inland or in 
coastal regions. Many of us want to know what’s going to happen to the climate 
where we live. How will my life be affected in the future?


This type of question is answered in a very recent study 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0168697> 
published by scientists from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. The 
team, which includes Dr. Raymond Bradley and researcher Dr. Ambarish Karmalkar 
looked specifically at the Northeastern United States. They found that this 
area will warm much more rapidly than the globe as a whole. In fact, it will 
warm faster than any other United States region. The authors expect the 
Northeast US will warm 50% faster than the planet as a whole. They also find 
that the United States will reach a 2 degree Celsius warming 10–20 years before 
the globe as a whole.

So why does this matter? Well first, it matters because some of the effects 
people will experience are directly tied to the temperature increase in their 
region. For instance, we know that warmer air leads to more intense 
precipitation. In fact, we are already observing increases in very heavy 
rainfall across the United States (especially in the Northeast). Based on this 
new research, that trend will only get worse. It means that winters in this 
region will get warmer and wetter – more winter precipitation will likely occur 
as rain rather than snow. This affects the availability of water into the 
spring months. It also means that summers will have more intense heat waves 
which will lead to more severe droughts.

However, there is another impact to this study. We often hear that it is 
important to avoid increasing the Earth’s temperature by 2°C if we want to 
prevent the worst risks of climate change. This 2-degree target is somewhat 
based on science and somewhat based on messaging and politics. There’s nothing 
magic about this number. It isn’t like everything will be fine so long as we 
stay below 2 degrees; similarly the world won’t end if we exceed 2 degrees.


It turns out that staying below a 2°C warming means we think we have a 
reasonable chance of avoiding some of the worst climate impacts and some of the 
potentially disastrous tipping points. But this is really just an educated 
guess. Some people have argued convincingly that our target should be lower, 
perhaps 1.5°C. Others argue that even 2°C is not achievable.


Regardless of the so-called temperature target, what this study shows is that 
even if we do keep the globe as a whole to a 2°C temperature increase, some 
regions, like the Northeast United States will far exceed this threshold. So, 
what is “safe” for the world is unsafe for certain regions.


Not to muddy the waters, but the whole issue of “safe” versus “unsafe” also 
depends on what climate effects we are concerned about and where we live. As an 
example, if you are concerned about heavy precipitation and flooding in your 
area, then local climate change (in your area) is pretty important to you. 
Conversely, if you are concerned about sea level rise (which is a global 
phenomenon), then the global temperature change is of most interest.


So really, what this latest paper does is provide sound evidence that we need 
to keep in mind BOTH the global and the regional climate effects. We need to 
think about which effects we care about most and how the global and regional 
temperature changes will cause those effects. Furthermore, we cannot simply be 
lulled into a sense of safety even if we reduce emissions dramatically and keep 
global temperature changes small. There still could be large effects in our 
neighborhood.
 