
Patrice Lumumba, the first legally elected prime minister of the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo> (DRC), was 
assassinated 50 years ago today, on 17 January, 1961. This heinous crime was a 
culmination of two inter-related assassination plots by American and Belgian 
governments, which used Congolese accomplices and a Belgian execution squad to 
carry out the deed.

Ludo De Witte, the Belgian author of the best book on this crime, qualifies it 
as "the most important assassination of the 20th century". The assassination's 
historical importance lies in a multitude of factors, the most pertinent being 
the global context in which it took place, its impact on Congolese politics 
since then and Lumumba's overall legacy as a nationalist leader.

For 126 years, the US and Belgium have played key roles in shaping Congo's 
destiny. In April 1884, seven months before the Berlin Congress, the US became 
the first country in the world to recognise the claims of King Leopold II of 
the Belgians to the territories of the Congo Basin.

When the atrocities related to brutal economic exploitation in Leopold's Congo 
Free State resulted in millions of fatalities, the US joined other world powers 
to force Belgium to take over the country as a regular colony. And it was 
during the colonial period that the US acquired a strategic stake in the 
enormous natural wealth of the Congo, following its use of the uranium from 
Congolese mines to manufacture the first atomic weapons, the Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki bombs.

With the outbreak of the cold war, it was inevitable that the US and its 
western allies would not be prepared to let Africans have effective control 
over strategic raw materials, lest these fall in the hands of their enemies in 
the Soviet camp. It is in this regard that Patrice Lumumba's determination to 
achieve genuine independence and to have full control over Congo's resources in 
order to utilise them to improve the living conditions of our people was 
perceived as a threat to western interests. To fight him, the US and Belgium 
used all the tools and resources at their disposal, including the United 
Nations secretariat, under Dag Hammarskjöld and Ralph Bunche, to buy the 
support of Lumumba's Congolese rivals , and hired killers.

In Congo, Lumumba's assassination is rightly viewed as the country's original 
sin. Coming less than seven months after independence (on 30 June, 1960), it 
was a stumbling block to the ideals of national unity, economic independence 
and pan-African solidarity that Lumumba had championed, as well as a shattering 
blow to the hopes of millions of Congolese for freedom and material prosperity.

The assassination took place at a time when the country had fallen under four 
separate governments: the central government in Kinshasa (then Léopoldville); a 
rival central government by Lumumba's followers in Kisangani (then 
Stanleyville); and the secessionist regimes in the mineral-rich provinces of 
Katanga and South Kasai. Since Lumumba's physical elimination had removed what 
the west saw as the major threat to their interests in the Congo, 
internationally-led efforts were undertaken to restore the authority of the 
moderate and pro-western regime in Kinshasa over the entire country. These 
resulted in ending the Lumumbist regime in Kisangani in August 1961, the 
secession of South Kasai in September 1962, and the Katanga secession in 
January 1963.

No sooner did this unification process end than a radical social movement for 
a "second independence" arose to challenge the neocolonial state and its 
pro-western leadership. This mass movement of peasants, workers, the urban 
unemployed, students and lower civil servants found an eager leadership among 
Lumumba's lieutenants, most of whom had regrouped to establish a National 
Liberation Council (CNL) in October 1963 in Brazzaville, across the Congo river 
from Kinshasa. The strengths and weaknesses of this movement may serve as a way 
of gauging the overall legacy ofPatrice Lumumba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/patrice-lumumba> for Congo and Africa as a 
whole.

The most positive aspect of this legacy was manifest in the selfless devotion 
of Pierre Mulele to radical change for purposes of meeting the deepest 
aspirations of the Congolese people for democracy and social progress. On the 
other hand, the CNL leadership, which included Christophe Gbenye and 
Laurent-Désiré Kabila, was more interested in power and its attendant 
privileges than in the people's welfare. This is Lumumbism in words rather than 
in deeds. As president three decades later, Laurent Kabila did little to move 
from words to deeds.

More importantly, the greatest legacy that Lumumba left for Congo is the ideal 
of national unity. Recently, a Congolese radio station asked me whether the 
independence of South Sudan should be a matter of concern with respect to 
national unity in the Congo. I responded that since Patrice Lumumba has died 
for Congo's unity, our people will remain utterly steadfast in their defence of 
our national unity.

• Georges Nzongola-Ntalaja is professor of African and Afro-American studies 
at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and author of The Congo from 
Leopold to Kabila: A People's History
 