
They remember the wins over Juventus, down in Florence. They remember them for 
the goals: for Gabriel Batistuta’s header beyond Angelo Peruzzi and the 
Giuseppe Rossi hat-trick that helped convert a 2-0 deficit into aglorious 4-2 
victory in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/oct/21/serie-a-fiorentina-juventus-giuseppe-rossi>
. They remember them because they hate Juventus, thoseentitled ‘thieves’ and 
‘hunchbacks’ from Turin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2017/jan/13/fiorentina-juventus-rivalry-theft-roberto-baggio-serie-a?CMP=share_btn_tw>
. Most of all, though, they remember the wins over Juventus for the simple 
reason that they don’t come along very often.

Heading into Sunday’s showdown at the Stadio Artemio Franchi, Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> had beaten the Bianconeri 
just once in their previous 17 league meetings. There’s a reason why this 
rivalry never generates the same heat up in Piedmont. As Leonardo Bonucci put 
it in the runup to kick-off: “For them it’s the match of the year. For us it’s 
just another match like all the others.”

Juventus unveil bold new club crest at ceremony in Turin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/juventus-unveil-new-crest-serie-a>
Paulo Sousa is familiar with that mindset. The Fiorentina manager lived the 
other side of this fixture as a player: a fact which his current team’s 
supporters have not forgotten.

His appointment in the summer of 2015 was met with open hostility, which has 
continued to bubble away ever since. As recently as November, signs were hung 
outside the stadium defining Sousa as “Gobbo di merda” – hunchback piece of 
shit – and calling for him to resign after he suggested that the club’s 
brilliant young No10, Federico Bernardeschi, would eventuallyjoin a club with 
greater ambitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/serie-a-fiorentina-napoli-federico-bernardeschi-anointed-heir-roberto-baggio>
.

Some have accused Sousa himself of simply biding his time in Florence as he 
waits for theJuventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> job to 
come open. At his pre-match press conference, he found himself fielding 
questions about whether he might become the Old Lady’s next Mister.

He sidestepped those and sought to play down the importance of any individual 
fixture, even while acknowledging that this one meant more than most. His 
eagerness not to put pressure on his players was apparent from his deeds even 
more than his words. Instead of having the team spend the night before the game 
together at the same hotel – as he had done on other big occasions – Sousa sent 
them home to relax.

Juventus lose to Fiorentina and Serie A momentum now lies with Roma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/juventus-roma-fiorentina-serie-a-roundup>
With hindsight, it seems obvious that he would prefer them to step away and 
recharge their batteries. Sousa knew that he would need every last ounce of 
energy at their disposal.

Three teams had beaten Juventus in Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> previously this season – 
Inter, Milan and Genoa – and their successes had certain key traits in common. 
Most obviously, those victorious teams had all been playing at home. In every 
instance, they also caught Juventus at a good time – coming off midweek 
involvement in cup competitions. Crucially, all three took advantage by setting 
a fierce tempo early on and pressing Juve’s players high up the pitch.

The schedule delivered the first two conditions for Fiorentina (though they, 
too, had played in the Coppa Italia on Thursday night), and Sousa made sure 
that his players came good on the third. Juventus were rocked immediately back 
on to their heels as the Viola tore into them. When Nikola Kalinic finally 
swept an elegant finish across Gigi Buffon in the 37th minute, it felt like the 
least they deserved.

Fiorentina had not only outmuscled Juventus, but outmaneouvred them as well, 
the champions repeatedly failing to pick up Matías Vecino’s runs from deep 
despite deploying a back three with only one opposing centre-forward to 
marshal. The champions ought to have been at their most solid, with the BBC 
finally back together after an injury-disrupted start to the season, but 
instead they found themselves in disarray.

Fiorentina v Juventus: a rivalry stoked by 'theft', Roberto Baggio and machine 
guns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2017/jan/13/fiorentina-juventus-rivalry-theft-roberto-baggio-serie-a>
Massimiliano Allegri’s choice of a 3-5-2 was, in fairness, partly borne out of 
necessity, with Stephan Lichtsteiner’s suspension, Dani Alves’s injury and 
Patrice Evra’s seemingly imminent departure depriving him of three out of four 
full-backs. Still, that alone cannot excuse such a meek performance from the 
champions.

Juventus did finally start to show signs of life just at the end of the first 
half, but Fiorentina struck again early in the second. Federico Chiesa insisted 
that this goal was his, but even with countless replays, it was hard to discern 
what contact he made on a Milan Badelj ball forwards from deep that hopped into 
the bottom corner of Buffon’s net.

Gonzalo Higuaín responded quickly with a goal to halve the deficit, and 
Juventus piled forwards as the clock ticked down. But an equaliser never 
arrived. On another day, they might have been awarded a penalty for the Marko 
Pjaca cross that was interrupted by Gonzalo’s hand, though the defender 
appeared to be pulling his arm into his chest when the ball struck, rather than 
deliberately extending it.

Fiorentina’s supporters would no doubt contend that they were due some fortune 
in this fixture regardless. Those inside the stadium erupted at full time with 
even greater enthusiasm than they had shown in celebrating the Giancarlo 
Antognoni, the “Only No10”, during their grand pre-match coreografia.

There was no one individual who stood out above the rest in this performance. 
Bernardeschi, the man who now wears that shirt, was typically lithe and lively 
in his role behind the attack, whilst Vecino was a menace stepping up from 
midfield and Kalinic struck his third goal in four matches against Juventus. 
This one might prove to be his last, with reports of a Chinese move getting 
louder.

But the real star of this victory was Sousa, who got every big decision spot 
on – right down to his deployment of Carlos Sánchez – typically a midfielder – 
on the right of a back three. The Colombian wound up winning more tackles and 
intercepting more passes than anybody else on his team.

Perhaps this will prove to be a turning point in the manager’s relationship 
with his team’s supporters. This result does not undo Fiorentina’s poor start 
to the season (the Viola remain eighth, 11 points outside the Champions League 
places) any more than it derails Juventus’s title charge (although the 
Bianconeri’s lead has been trimmed to one point, they retain a game in hand 
against Crotone), but league standings are not always the only thing that 
matter.

They will remember this win over Juventus, down in Florence. Just like they do 
all the others.

Talking points

• A telling comment from Giorgo Chiellini at the end of that Juventus defeat: 
“Last year we had Pogba, who was the LeBron James of football and who made an 
impression even when you did not notice it.”

• Cheesiest celebration of the week belonged to Dries Mertens, who blew steam 
on theTV camera and then drew a heart after scoring against Pescara 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Meg77q59kvU>. But Napoli’s more improbable new 
goalscoring star is centre-back Lorenzo Tonelli, who broke the deadlock here 
and now has two goals in as many games for the club – after having grabbed the 
winner against Samp last weekend.


• After his purple patch early this season, Edin Dzeko’s form has tailed off 
badly over the past month-and-a-half, and he made some astonishing misses on 
Sunday – not least among them a penaltywhich might still be on its way back 
down to earth <https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/820896413122957313>. 
Roma claimed a 1-0 win at Udinese regardless, but Luciano Spalletti’s remarks 
about the striker at full-time raised a few eyebrows. “I know what type he is,” 
said the manager. “Every now and then he is a soft player, and tell him as 
much.”

• Fourteen games. That is all Roberto Gagliardini had played in his senior 
career at Atalanta before Inter agreed to splash more than €25m on him (once 
all the bonuses are worked out) this January. And clearly it’ll take a while to 
know whether he’s truly worth it, but it has to be said that he looked good 
against Chievo this weekend. A long, rangy midfielder, he stepped right into 
Inter’s starting line-up and behaved as though he’d been there for years. He 
was paired with Geoffrey Kondogbia at the base of midfield in a 4-2-3-1 on 
Sunday, and if Stefano Pioli can strike the right balance between them, a lot 
of opponents are certainly going to struggle with their combined size and 
athleticism. Inter, by the way, have now won five league games in a row.

• Mauro Icardi extended his lead atop the Serie A scoring charts, and now has 
15 league goals on the season. Not since Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Christian Vieri 
have Inter had a striker who hit that mark for three consecutive seasons.

• Lazio are keeping right on up with what is becoming a compelling chase for 
the Champions League places as well. With a win over Atalanta on Sunday, Simone 
Inzaghi now has the best points-per-game return (1.925) of any Lazio manager in 
Serie A, and of any current manager in the division.

• Domenico Berardi is back at last from his almost five-month injury layoff, 
and not a moment too soon for Sassuolo. He set up a pair of goals in what 
became a 4-1 win over Palermo, putting 11 points between his team and the 
relegation zone.

Results: Cagliari 4-1 Genoa, Crotone 0-1 Bologna, Fiorentina 2-1 Juventus, 
Inter 3-1 Chievo, Lazio 2-1 Atalanta, Napoli 3-1 Pescara, Sampdoria 0-0 Empoli, 
Sassuolo 4-1 Palermo, Udinese 0-1 Roma.
 