
It’s not so long ago that newspapers were awash with horror stories of how 
payday loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/fca-high-cost-credit-catalogue-credit-payday-loans>
 were pushing people into dangerous cycles of debt and fuelling a raft of 
social problems. By helping thousands of people with payday loan problems, 
Citizens Advice saw at first hand thedevastation caused by extortionate 
interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/20/credit-score-catch-22-pushes-millennials-towards-payday-loans>
 and the harassment waged on borrowers.

Regulator targets high-cost credit deals on consumer goods, loans and 
overdrafts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/fca-high-cost-credit-catalogue-credit-payday-loans>
Concerned by the behaviour of payday lenders – whose presence became ominously 
familiar in many a high street – we, along with other organisations, campaigned 
for robust political pressure to be directed at the scourge of payday lending. 
The result was tougher regulation, including a cap on the total cost of credit 
that came into effecttwo years ago <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-30641877>
, meaning people can’t pay back more than twice what they borrowed.

The cap had an almost instant reaction – the number of people who contacted 
Citizens Advice with unmanageable payday loan debts halved within a year. The 
regulations also carried more stringent demands on lenders and the market is 
now working better for all – people can still get access to credit and fewer 
are having problems.

Not all problems have been solved. The majority of lenders still do not ask 
for proof of income and expenditure. But the initial success of theFinancial 
Conduct Authority <https://www.fca.org.uk/>’s intervention should not be 
understated. It is a handy reminder of the good work regulators can do when 
they are bold.

Yet while a lot of issues have been tackled in the payday market and consumers 
are better protected as a result, other forms of high-cost credit, which can be 
just as damaging, remain untouched. Doorstep lenders, who lend money to people 
in their homes, are not included in the cap but charge eye-watering interest 
rates of up to 1,500% to the 2.5 million customers who currently use them.

High-cost credit, however it is provided, can all too often lead to 
unmanageable debt

The rent-to-own market, which provides household goods on credit, is also not 
covered by the cap. Consumers face high interest rates and are also charged 
large fees for add-on costs such as insurance and aftercare, which can mean 
people end up paying two to three times as much for products as they would on 
the high street. One person we helped will repay £2,000 for a washing machine 
that originally cost £300. Customers are also hit with further penalties if 
they miss a repayment, and harsh debt-collection practices.

Other debt firms also continue to impose higher interest rates than their 
payday counterparts. Logbook loans, where loans are secured against personal 
belongings like a car, come with interest rates of more than 400%. A man who 
came to Citizens Advice for help borrowed £800 only to find he faced a £5,000 
final repayment bill.

A better known issue is one faced by millions every year: people using 
unarranged overdrafts face similar problems to those who take out high-cost 
credit. A person with a £50 unarranged overdraft for a month can pay back far 
more than twice that in total.

High-cost credit, however it is provided, can all too often lead to 
unmanageable debt. People can quickly fall into a debt trap, borrowing more to 
make repayments or falling behind on priority bills such as council tax or 
energy. Around a third ofrent-to-own customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/27/rent-to-own-debts-rise-citizens-advice-payday-loans>
, for instance, have fallen behind on payments. Half have taken out other debts 
to make repayments, and 25% have stopped paying other bills as a result of 
missing repayments.

Users of high-cost credit are also far more likely to be in insecure 
situations – and are more than twice as likely to have dependent children or 
have a disability than the general population. There is a moral case to protect 
those consumers who have little choice but to borrow from high-cost lenders.

Two years on from the cap, the FCA is looking at how effective the measure 
was, and alongside this it is examining other high-cost credit markets to see 
if action needs to be taken there. This is a clear opportunity for the FCA to 
protect more consumers by applying the cap on the total cost of credit to all 
forms of high-cost lending. That way people will know from the outset what they 
are in for and how much they will have to pay back.

The common argument against extending the price cap is that the market will 
collapse under tough regulation. The payday lending industry shows us that 
isn’t the case. Despite tough regulations and the introduction of the cap, 
responsible firms are still able to operate and make a profit without pushing 
people into unmanageable debt.

It is easy to forget that the current approach to consumer credit regulation 
is relatively new. Lenders have only been required by regulations to conduct 
affordability checks on borrowers since 2011. The FCA needs to build on the 
success of payday regulation and give consistent protection to people, no 
matter where they borrow money from.
 