
Millions of children in the UK are living in families trapped by debt. As 
charities and organisations who work with, and directly support, households 
struggling with problem debt, we see the impact this can have on the wellbeing 
and mental health of parents and children alike.

Too often people find themselves in the red because of unexpected life events 
like the loss of a job, an illness or the breakdown of a relationship. What 
they need is time and space to seek advice and get their finances back on 
track. Instead, they can face mounting interest, fees and charges and, in some 
cases, repeated phone calls and visits from intimidating bailiffs, all of which 
make it harder for them to pay off what they owe. While some lenders already 
help those in a vulnerable situation, many don’t; it is too often the case that 
those who do not act responsibly are those who are rewarded by being paid 
first. We now need to ensure that all creditors, including local authorities 
and other public sector organisations that collect debts, follow the lead of 
creditors that voluntarily offer protection to those households struggling with 
debts.

That’s why we are calling on the government to use next week’s autumn 
statement to introduce a legally binding breathing space scheme. This would 
ensure that people struggling with debts get protection from additional fees, 
charges and creditor enforcement action for a temporary 12-month period to stop 
worsening debts and recover control of their finances. As long as a debt 
repayment plan is in place, we want to see these protections continue to help 
people repay their debts in a safe and affordable way.

The provision of such a legal protection could have a hugely beneficial 
impact, not just on family finances but on the futures of some of the country’s 
most vulnerable children. We urge ministers to act.

Matthew Reed Chief executive, The Children’s Society, Steve Johnson Chief 
executive, AdviceUK,Natasha Finlayson Chief executive, Become, Damon Gibbons 
Director, Centre for Responsible Credit,Professor Sarah Banks Centre for Social 
Justice and Community Action, Durham University, Matt Barlow Chief executive, 
Christians Against Poverty, Heather Keates Chief executive, Community Money 
Advice, Joanna Elson Chief executive, Money Advice Trust, Polly Mackenzie 
Director, Money and Mental Health Institute, Martin Lewis founder, 
MoneySavingExpert.com, Kim Johnson President, National Association of Head 
Teachers,Judith Moran Director, Quaker Social Action, Professor Neena Modi 
President, Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health,Professor Simon Wessely
President, Royal College of Psychiatrists,Mike O’Connor Chief executive, 
StepChange debt charity, Michelle Highman Chief executive, The Money Charity, 
Sarah Brennan Chief executive, Young Minds.

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 