
First Direct has launched a new era of jumbo-sized personal loans, allowing 
customers to borrow as much as £50,000 without the need to secure it against 
property or jump through the hoops of a mortgage application process.

Previously, the bank’s maximum personal loan was £30,000, and the new ceiling 
leapfrogs the maximum at other lenders such as Sainsbury’s (£40,000) andTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> (£35,000). However the typical 
rate charged, at 6.7%, is significantly above typical mortgage interest, and 
double the 3.4% that First Direct charges on personal loans below £30,000.

For someone borrowing the full £50,000, the cost of repayments spread over the 
longest possible term, which is seven years, would be £743.45 a month.

Other lenders are now expected to follow suit in the increasingly competitive 
world of personal loans. “It could be that it is used by people who are 
renting, or by people who are happy to pay more so they don’t have to jump 
through the hoops to remortgage – however, you have to be one of their 
customers to apply, so they will know quite a lot about you,” says Andrew 
Hagger of Moneycomms.com.

Do a financial health check and midlife needn’t mean a crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/01/financial-health-check-midlife-debts-pensions-property>
Critics fear that the boom in personal loans, allied to personal contract 
plans for car purchase, will add to ballooning levels of personal debt.

Ikea’s finance arm, Ikano Bank, this week launched the cheapest generally 
available personal loan rate in the UK, at just 3.1% interest in an 
intensifying price war between loan providers.

The deal is on offer to customers who borrow between £7,500 and £15,000, and 
means repayments on £15,000 of borrowing over five years will cost just £269.91 
a month. Sainsbury’s Bank also offers loans at 3.1%, although only to Nectar 
card holders. For other customers, its lowest rate is 3.2%.

However, will would-be borrowers be granted loans at low best-buy rates, or be 
lured into far pricier loans instead? When lenders advertise interest rates, 
they are “representative” rates. To meet advertising rules, only 51% of 
applicants have to be offered the rate in the advert. So nearly half of 
applicants may end up with a much higher interest rate, or be rejected for a 
loan.

According to data provider Moneyfacts.co.uk, the best personal loan rate on 
offer to someone with a fair credit rating is 14.9%, while someone with a poor 
rating is unlikely to be offered a deal below 37.9%, compared with the 0.25% 
Bank of England base rate.

Nearly all the providers offer loan calculators to enable potential borrowers 
to estimate monthly costs, but in reality the only way borrowers will discover 
if they will obtain the lowest rate is by applying. Generally speaking, if you 
have any adverse marks on your credit file, then the chances of obtaining the 
low advertised rates are virtually zero.

Martin Lewis of Moneysavingexpert.com says that individuals should consider 
credit cards for borrowings below £5,000. “You can get up to 28 months 0% 
spending on a credit card, but this is only useful if you can budget to pay 
your debt off in that time, or you’re organised enough to balance transfer the 
debt to another card before the 0% period ends.”
 