
Proposals for a new world-class concert hall in London appear to be back on 
track after the City of London Corporation agreed to replace moneywithdrawn by 
the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/07/london-concert-hall-projects-loss-of-funding-disappoints-conductors>
.

The scheme, costed at £278m, appeared derailed in November when the government 
unexpectedly announced it was withdrawing money it had pledged for a detailed 
business case to be made.

On Thursday the City said it would be provide the money, up to £2.5m, needed 
to complete it.

The new building would be erected on a site next to the Barbican currently 
occupied by the Museum of London, which is moving to Smithfield market. The 
hall would become the new home of theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Symphony Orchestra under the artistic 
leadership of Sir Simon Rattle.

Mark Boleat, the City’s policy chairman, said: “This decision re-affirms our 
commitment to transform the area surrounding the Barbican into a world-leading 
cultural hub for the arts, heritage and learning. We have a long history as a 
leading investor in the arts and we recognise that culture – open and available 
to all – is what attracts people to visit, work and live in London and the UK.”

The hall’s supporters say London desperately needs a new concert hall or risks 
falling behind other cities, both inside and outside the UK.

It would also be more than a concert hall. Called the Centre for Music, it 
would have an ambitious educational dimension “to bring music-making to the 
widest possible audience”.

Neither the Barbican nor the Royal Festival Hall are considered acoustically 
to be in the top rank of world concert halls, but creating a new one does not 
come cheap or without risks.

Hamburg’s dazzling Elbphilharmonie opened this week  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/12/hamburg-elbphilharmonie-orchestra-hengelbrock-review-opening-concert>
seven years late and eye-spinningly over budget. Its cost was originally 
estimated at €77m (£67m). It finally cost €789m.

The new London hall’s detractors say there are better things to spend such 
vast amounts of money on and point to the first-rate halls in Gateshead, 
Birmingham and Edinburgh.

When the government announced it was pulling the £5.5m it had pledged – of 
which £1.25m had been spent – it said the scheme did not offer value for money 
for taxpayers and was not affordable.

The City decision is a sign that the hall’s supporters believe it can be 
built, even without government money.

In a statement, the project’s leading partners, the Barbican Centre, London 
Symphony Orchestra and Guildhall School of Music and Drama, said:“We are very 
pleased that the City of London Corporation has agreed to provide funding to 
complete a detailed business case for an outstanding Centre for Music in the 
Square Mile.

“Our vision and drive to deliver a world-class centre for the 21st century 
that provides access to great music to the widest possible audience remains 
unchanged, and we are looking forward to working with the City of London 
Corporation to explore how this vision could potentially become a reality.”
 