
Jake Jervis was an intrepid footballing nomad until he settled at Home Park. 
As he prepares to take on Liverpool withPlymouth Argyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/plymouthargyle>, his 11th club, in an 
FA Cup replay on Wednesday, the 25-year-old forward hopes to add a new 
highlight to a colourful career, ideally a win and goal to top the most 
satisfying – and most puzzling – he has scored to date.

That was in a 2-2 draw away against Fenerbahce, on his debut for Elazigspor, 
who in 2013 were in Turkey’s top flight. “It was a full house [in the 
50,000-capacity Sukru Saracoglu Stadium] and the atmosphere was crazy, 
absolutely deafening,” Jervis says. “But when I scored it went totally quiet. 
Our fans were just in a tiny little section in the top corner and I couldn’t 
hear them. I thought it must have been offside. It felt like a crazy experience 
and it’s been the highlight of my career so far.”

Anfield draw was my greatest experience as a Plymouth fan – but pure pain | 
Josh Widdicombe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/09/plymouth-argyle-liverpool-fa-cup-josh-widdicombe>
At that point a fascinating new vista seemed wide open for a player who, 
despite being only 20, had already played for eight English clubs on loan from 
his first professional employers, Birmingham City. Young English players are 
often accused of being too narrow-minded to develop fully but Jervis has always 
been open to travel in search of opportunities to improve.

“I wasn’t fully satisfied playing reserve-team football and always wanted to 
play first-team football and get as much experience as I could. One thing I 
learned when I was young is always do your best because you never know who’s 
watching, and, weirdly enough, the interest from Turkey came about when a 
representative of the club was in England looking at someone on the opposition 
[when Jervis was on loan at Portsmouth in 2013]. I played well and a few days 
later I got a call and it went from there.

“Football is very different in Turkey. When I went there I was into pressing 
and trying to get the ball back like you do in England but everyone was looking 
at me going: ‘Why are you running about? Calm down a bit.’ The pace of the game 
is a lot slower and it’s more technical.”

Unfortunately for Jervis his debut was as good as things got on the pitch for 
him, as after only four competitive matches he broke his foot in a friendly. 
Being injured made adapting to life in a small city in Eastern Anatolia even 
more difficult for a young man who had just arrived and had to “ring a fella to 
translate things to get anything done”. Not being paid, however, made staying 
there impossible. Jervis returned to England and got Fifa to intervene when 
Elazigspor defaulted on his wages but it took six months to get the clearance 
he needed to resume his career in England. Eventually Portsmouth were allowed 
to take him on until the end of the 2013-14 season, after which he moved to 
another country. Ross County took him to Scotland.

“That was another type of football, much faster than Turkey and even quite 
different to England,” he says. It was also where he first hooked up with Derek 
Adams, the manager who, after moving south, also signed Jervis for Plymouth, 
giving him a one-year contract that was extended last summer after the player 
finished his first season as Plymouth’s top scorer.

“He [Adams] is the one manager who’s really had the faith in me to let me go 
out and play,” says Jervis. “I did well for him last year and he’s let me go 
out and do the same again this year. This has been the most enjoyable period of 
my career so far, I can definitely say I feel at home here. And the match 
against Liverpool is massive, not only in terms of the revenue it brings to the 
club but also the buzz around the city.” One thing is for sure: if Jervis tops 
his goal against Fenerbahce by scoring againstLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, the stadium will not fall 
silent.

Home Park has had 1,800 temporary seats fitted for this match, bringing the 
capacity to 17,500, ensuring the highest attendance since the League Two side 
were in the Championship eight years ago. Plymouth threw up the barricades at 
Anfield andfought for a 0-0 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/liverpool-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-match-report>
. Jervis anticipates a different sort of contest in the replay. “We’ve done the 
tough part in getting Liverpool to come down here so now it’s about enjoying it 
and seeing what we can do. Whatever team they put out will be strong but this 
time they’ll probably put out more of the first team because they realise we’re 
not that easy to beat so it’ll be a good test for us.”

If Plymouth pulled off the greatest upset in their history, they would 
progress to a fourth-round tie against Wolverhampton Wanderers. “That’d be 
going back to where I was born and near where I grew up,” Jervis says. “I 
played for Wolves as a schoolboy, so to go back there as a professional would 
be a nice way to complete a circle.”

Jürgen Klopp does not regret Liverpool’s youngest lineup in Argyle FA Cup draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-plymouth-argyle-draw-fa-cup> 