
The number of clubs affected by British football’s historical child sexual 
abuse scandal has grown to 248, according to figures released on Wednesday by 
the National Police Chiefs’ Council.

This is an increase of 100 clubs, amateur and professional, since the last 
update four weeks ago.

Operation Hydrant, the coordination hub set up in 2014 to deal with historic 
abuse cases, has received 1,016 referrals from the NSPCC’s dedicated football 
hotline and police forces around the country,up from 819 before Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/police-confirm-83-potential-suspects-identified-in-child-sex-abuse-scandal>
.

These referrals have resulted in the identification of 184 suspects and 526 
potential victims, of whom 97% are male, with an age range from four to 20.

The majority of these referrals relate to football but Operation Hydrant has 
received 22 non-football referrals from several different sports including 
rugby, gymnastics, tennis, swimming and golf.

In a statement, the chief constable Simon Bailey, the NPCC lead for child 
protection, said: “Operation Hydrant is beginning to see a decrease in the 
number of referrals being received via the NSPCC helpline and directly to 
forces relating to allegations of abuse within football, and other sports.

“Allegations of non-recent child sexual abuse are complex, and often require 
specialist skills and knowledge, and can take time to progress. However, all 
allegations and information received by police forces across the country are 
being acted upon.

“We continue to urge anyone who may have been a victim of child sexual abuse 
to report it by dialling 101, or contacting the dedicated NSPCC helpline, 
regardless of how long ago the abuse may have taken place. We will listen and 
treat all reports sensitively and seriously. Anyone with any information 
regarding child sexual abuse is also urged to come forward.

“When allegations are reported it enables police to assess whether there are 
current safeguarding risks and ensure that appropriate action is being taken to 
prevent children being abused today.”

Funded by the Football Association, the NSPCC hotline was set up in early 
December and is available 24 hours a day on 0800 023 2642. The FA has also 
instigated an independent review, led by Clive Sheldon QC, into its handling of 
abuse allegations in the years before 2005.
 