
The latest figures for employment are as good as they are bad – and as 
intriguing. Unemployment continues to fall, now below 5%, a level not seen 
since before the 1970s recession. The Office for National Statistics has 
announced that average pay rose last year by 2.4%. Even the pay gap fell. 
“Income for the poorest fifth was up 5% and for the richest fifth was down.” 
Only the top 1% continued to soar away from the rest – to the impotent fury of 
Jeremy Corbyn. But the reason appears to be that poorer men, in particular, are 
being driven out of disappearing, once-secure full-time jobs intobooming, 
insecure, part-time ones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/13/low-paid-men-in-uk-four-times-more-likely-to-be-working-part-time-than-in-1990s>
. The much-vaunted “change in the nature of work” is happening fast, and 
hitting the poorest. Twenty years ago, according to the Institute for Fiscal 
Studies, only one man in 20 was in low-paid, part-time work. Now it is one in 
five, and worse in depressed parts of the country.

Employment figures are notoriously vulnerable to spin. Clearly the British 
figures are showing the benefits of a more deregulated, disruptive economy – 
compared with elsewhere in the EU. Weaker labour laws have flooded its dominant 
service economy with “McJobs”, “gig” labour and zero-hours contracts. This has 
driven down unemployment, but it has clearly affected the working lives of 
poorer people.

There is no going back on the economy. The hollowing out of the labour market 
is a widely accepted feature of the digital revolution. The decline in 
unionised jobs in fixed places of work is being replaced by a rising demand for 
personal services such as education and health, catering, leisure and tourism. 
Legal victories –as over holiday pay for “gig” workers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/06/courier-wins-holiday-pay-in-latest-key-tribunal-ruling-for-gig-economy>
– can promote fairness. But the flexible subcontract has replaced the job for 
life – unless Britain wants to strive after French or Italian levels of 
unemployment.

So where stands Theresa May’s “shared society” and her “just-about-managing” 
families? The answer must be that a disruptive economy requires a smarter 
welfare safety net. Minimum wages, once economic anathema, are now entrenched, 
and there is talk of a basic universal income, at least in concept a sensible 
Keynesian way of regulating demand.

More critical is the dire geographical imbalance revealed in the low-pay 
figures. For a decade every item of government policy – including state 
investment – has tipped growth into the south-east. This harms national 
productivity and wastes public investment as it clearly does human resources. 
The British economy cannot ride for ever on the prosperity of one region. 
Employment policy has been a success, but it is not yet smart.
 