
Authorities in Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia> are searching 
for a quokka that apparently escaped Rottnest Island in a rubbish bin and 
reemerged on the mainland, startling a recycling centre worker who thought it 
was a “large rat”.

Native to WA and famous for smiling happily in selfies, quokkas were largely 
eradicated on the mainland and survived thanks to a large, isolated population 
on Rottnest Island, a prison camp turned popular holiday destination off the 
coast ofPerth <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/perth-news>.

They roam free around the island, which is devoid of both cars and large 
predators, and authorities fear the escaped quokka will not survive an 
encounter with these new threats.

Quokka deaths on Rottnest Island spark police investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/25/quokka-deaths-on-rottnest-island-spark-police-investigation>
Reports of the escapee emerged on 10 January, when a WA man working at the 
recycling centre in Cannington, in Perth’s southern suburbs, realised the 
blurry photos of a “large rat” presented by his South African colleague were in 
fact a quokka.

It is a common mistake: Rottnest got its name from Dutch explorer Willem de 
Vlamingh who named itRotte nest, or rat’s nest, in 1696.

Penni Fletcher-Hughes, from Rottnest Island Authority, said it appeared the 
quokka had climbed into a garbage bin in search of food and was accidentally 
transferred on to the garbage barge, which took it to Cannington.

“Being as it has got itself in a very good place for food, the chances are it 
will be fine,” Fletcher-Hughes said. “It just depends where it goes from there.”

Quokka escape was “very unusual,” Fletcher-Hughes said, but finding quokkas in 
bins is not.

Basically, this quokka is now at large.

“I have seen them climb the walls; they are quite resourceful when it comes to 
searching for food,” she said. “We are not concerned in terms of him finding 
food … it’s other threats and just general stress. It’s a bit stressful to 
suddenly wake up in a recycling centre.”

The Department of Parks and Wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife>, which is leading efforts to 
find the rogue marsupial, set up a public hotline to report sightings. 
“Basically, this quokka is now at large,” wildlife officer Matt Swan said.

The recycling centre is fenced in and surrounded by bushland. It is not clear 
whether it remains in the centre and is hiding in one of the many piles of 
rubbish or whether it has slipped through a hole in the fence.

Swan said they could not lay traps, because traps were more likely to catch 
feral cats or foxes than a quokka. The best hope is someone spotting it. “It’s 
a needle-in-a-haystack type situation,” he said.

Quokka survives alleged attempt by French tourists to light it on fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/12/quokka-survives-alleged-attempt-by-french-tourists-to-light-it-on-fire>
If it is found it will not be returned to Rottnest Island because the risk of 
infecting the quokka population there with a foreign pathogen is too great. 
Instead it will be rehomed at either Perth Zoo or a wildlife park.

There have been other reports of animals being accidentally taken off Rottnest 
Island, usually King skinks, which climb into people’s bags.

Rottnest Island is the largest population of the vulnerable species, with 
between 8,000 and 12,000 individuals. The second largest population is on Bald 
Island Nature Reserve, with 1,000 quokkas.

There are estimated to be fewer than 1,000 wild quokkas on the mainland, and 
most of those localised populations are under threat of extinction.

Anyone who spots a quokka in an unusual place is asked to call the Wildcare 
Helpline on (08) 9474 9055.
 