
Brocco means “shoot” or “small protuberance”, and broccoli is the diminutive 
plural: little shoots. A member of the large and botanically puzzling brassica 
family, broccoli – like cauliflower – is a sort of cabbage that has started to 
flower, but then stopped growing while still in bud. These buds cluster 
together, in multiple fractal heads in the case of romanesco, which makes this 
extraordinary green vegetable sound even more like a band from the 1980s. As 
the name suggests, broccoli was developed in Italy, during the Roman Empire, 
and introduced to other European countries in the early 1700s. In her Vegetable 
book, Jane Grigson suggests it was a garden designer called Stephen Switzer who 
did most to popularise broccoli in England. He also ran a seed business for 
which he had a pamphlet printed to advise customers how to grow and cook 
“foreign kitchen vegetables” such as fennel, cardoons, celeriac and “sprout 
colli-flower” (broccoli). The best broccoli seeds, he noted, came from the 
coast of Naples and other Italian places.

Now is the season for broccoli: the familiar dark-green, tree-like Sicilian or 
Calabrese variety, lime-green fractal romanesco, and sprouting broccoletti, 
which are actually turnip tops. Or, rather, itwas the time for broccoli, up 
until the moment Rome and other Italian places were struck by uncharacteristic 
frost. Overnight temperatures dropped, the cascading water in Bernini’s 
fountain turned to icicles, my neighbour downstairs pulled out her moon-boots 
and, near the sea-coast of Naples, my vegetable man Filippo’s land was besieged 
by frost. On Wednesday morning, his stall was like a jigsaw with half its 
pieces missing. “Guarda,” he said, pinching his cigarette between his lips and 
telling me to look as he picked up a stem of broccoli, the tip of its fleshy 
stem frozen to translucent. He was lucky, having some crops semi-buried and 
others shaded by trees, he still had produce to bring to Testaccio market. 
Others were not so lucky. A few miles outside Rome, my friend Carla Tomasi and 
her now quietly famous garden were similarly stuck, artichokes with their great 
plumes of silvery leaves, fennel and brassicas all frozen until crisp, the ice 
forever changing their structure. “I could weep,” she wrote in a message, but 
then finished by saying: “at least I have lemons.”

I took some of Filippo’s frostbitten broccoli, a vegetable I never tire of. 
More often than not, I cook broccoli twice, first in boiling water, then again –
rippassati – in garlic and chilli-scented olive oil. Broccoli cooked in this 
lively and delicious way is good eaten as a vegetable side dish, topped with an 
egg, or stirred through pasta, in which case an anchovy or two makes a good 
addition to the olive oil.

I have written about pasta e broccoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/03/twice-cooked-broccoli-repassati-recipe-rachel-roddy>
before, and it remains one of my most trusted and dependable dishes – (almost) 
everyone likes it. Today’s recipe is a variation, one that would have pleased 
my one-time flatmate, whose answer to every savoury culinary dilemma was “put a 
sausage and a glass of wine in it”. He took this to an extreme, but it is 
actually a good bit of advice – many stews, ragus, sauces and people benefit 
from a crumbled sausage and glass of wine.

For pasta, broccoli and sausages, it is important you cook the broccoli until 
tender – possibly overcooked by some people’s standards – the reason being that 
you want it to transform from bouncy and resistant to tender and silky, the 
buds soft enough to collapse into the oil and create a sort of sauce. The food 
writer Laurie Colwin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laurie_Colwin>’s advice is 
appropriate here: the broccoli “should give, not fight back”.

Having boiled the broccoli and lifted it from the pan with a slotted spoon – 
keeping the green-tinted water for the pasta – you fry some garlic and chilli 
gently in lots of extra virgin olive oil. Alternatively, you could useguanciale 
(cheek bacon), which is how they do it in the Apennines – where they really do 
have reason to get out their moon boots. Once the garlic is fragrant, you add 
the sausage meat, then the wine, which will whoosh and sizzle away, before 
adding the broccoli, then the cooked pasta. The plentiful olive oil, wine and 
cooking water clinging to the pasta, and the soft edges of the broccoli and 
cheese, means that everything should come together into a creamy, unified 
whole, just the thing for a straightforward weeknight meal during these icy, 
fountain-freezing days.

Pasta con broccoli e salsicce (pasta with broccoli and sausage)

Serves 4
A large head of broccoli (around 1kg), trimmed and cut into florets
6 tbsp extra virgin olive oil or 60g guanciale
A small red chilli, or a pinch of red chilli flakes
2 garlic cloves
150-200g sausage meat, or sausages squeezed from their casings
100ml red or white wine
500g short pasta (orecchiette, cavatelli, fusilli or penne)
40g pecorino or parmesan, grated
Salt

Rachel Roddy’s recipe for fish poached in tomato and wine | A kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/10/pesce-all-acqua-pazza-fish-tomato-wine-broth-recipe-rachel-roddy-a-kitchen-in-rome>
1 Bring a large pan of water to the boil, add salt, stir and then add the 
broccoli and cook until tender. Lift the florets from the water with a slotted 
spoon and set aside. Keep the cooking water for the pasta.

2 In a large frying pan, warm the olive oil or guanciale over a medium-low 
flame and gently fry the chilli and garlic – peeled and crushed for a mild 
flavour, chopped for stronger flavour – until fragrant. At this point, you can 
discard the garlic if you want.

3 Crumble the sausage meat into the pan and stir until the meat is brown all 
over. Add the wine, raise the heat and let the pan bubble for few minutes until 
the wine has evaporated away. Add the cooked broccoli and stir.

4 Meanwhile, bring the water back to the boil, add the pasta and cook until al 
dente. Using a slotted spoon, lift the cooked pasta, and the residual water 
that clings to it, into the frying pan. Add the cheese and stir again, then 
serve, passing round more grated cheese for those who want it.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard) and winner of the André 
Simon food book award. 
This article was corrected on 17 January 2017: the correct name for the recipe 
is pasta con broccoli e salsicce, not ‘solstice ‘as an eagle-eyed reader 
pointed out.
 