
The number of people struggling with debts to rent-to-own firms and on 
guarantor loans rose by 16% in the second quarter, as borrowers no longer able 
to get payday loans move to other, less heavily regulated forms of borrowing.

Payday loan complaints to financial ombudsman nearly triple in a year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/payday-loan-complaints-to-financial-ombudsman-nearly-triple-in-a-year>
Citizens Advice said it had helped 7,500 people with rent-to-own debt problems 
over the last 12 months, a further 1,100 with guarantor debt problems, and 460 
struggling with logbook loans.


Rent-to-own firms offer furniture and other households goods to customers who 
pay for them on a weekly basis. Interest rates are typically higher than on 
mainstream forms of borrowing – for example, two of the best-known firms, 
Brighthouse and Perfect Home, charge annual interest rates of just less than 
70%.

Guarantor loans provide borrowing to people who can provide a friend or family 
member willing to step in if they are unable to repay, while logbook loans are 
secured on the borrower’s vehicle.

Problems with these types of borrowing accounted for 2,272 cases taken on by 
Citizens Advice between April and June, compared with 1,962 in the same period 
of the previous year.

The charity called on regulators to cap the cost of these forms of borrowing, 
similar to the one introduced on payday loans at the start of 2015.


Since the introduction of the price cap on payday loans, which limited the 
total costs lenders could apply to loans to 100% of the original borrowing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/02/payday-loans-caps-fca>, Citizens 
Advice said it had recorded a 53% fall in the number of people struggling with 
this type of debt.

However, problems with other types of sub-prime borrowing, where there is no 
cap on costs, have increased. As well as high interest rates, the charity said 
rent-to-own firms were applying compulsory service charges sometimes running 
into hundreds of pounds.

Gillian Guy, chief executive of Citizens Advice, said firms were causing 
misery through poor business practices and high interest rates.


“The cap has been effective in reducing the number of debt problems caused by 
payday loans – so it is worth considering if it should be extended to cover 
other types of high cost credit,” she said.
“It is important that loans are only offered to people who can afford to repay 
them. The FCA currently issues guidance to lenders saying they should perform 
rigorous financial checks on potential borrowers to make sure they can afford 
to pay back their loans, but the FCA should now consider making this into a 
compulsory rule for all lenders of high-cost credit.”

The payday loan cost cap only applies to agreements that are for 12 months or 
less, so guarantor lenders and rent-to-own shops escape this rule because the 
agreements they offer are typically for longer periods.

One borrower, a single mother with two children, went to Citizens Advice for 
help with loans from rent-to-own firms. When she moved house she used them to 
buy sofas, beds and washing machine, and she has so far spent around £6,000 on 
items that would be a fraction of that price if she could afford to buy them 
outright. “I couldn’t go to Curry’s or get them somewhere else because my 
credit rating is terrible,” she said. “They tell you the cost and it’s just £2 
or £3 a week so it seems manageable.” However, she said there was then a 
service charge to pay on top of that, and the loans stretched out over years. 
She fell behind one week and then faced extra charges. “I have four items and 
they were charging me a £5 fee for every one I was behind with. I couldn’t find 
£10 and now they were asking for £35, and the next week’s payment upfront.”

She added: “They do offer to rewrite loans, but then you are paying them back 
for even longer. You can see the goalposts and then they’re gone again.”
 