
Hundreds of Cubans who sold their homes and belongings in pursuit of an 
American dream that now lies in tatters have been stranded in Central America 
and Mexico on Friday after Washington abruptly ended a lenient immigration 
policy.

 Barack Obama on Thursday repealed a measure granting automatic residency to 
virtually every Cuban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/obama-ends-cuba-immigration-policy-wet-foot-dry-foot>
 who arrived in the US, whether or not they had visas, ending a longstanding 
exception to US policy.

 The end of the “wet foot, dry foot” policy, which allowed any Cuban who 
reached US soil to stay, but returned any picked up at sea, took effect 
immediately. Cuban officials had long sought the change, arguing it would 
discourage people-trafficking and dangerous journeys.

 José Enrique Manreza, who sold his house and possessions in Havana to embark 
on a epic trip by plane, bus and foot through the rainforests of French Guiana, 
Colombia and Panama, estimated he had spent about $10,000 on the journey.

 “Imagine how I feel, after I spent six days and six nights running through 
rivers and jungles in the humidity,” said Manreza, at a migrant shelter in the 
southern Mexican city of Tapachula, where he heard the news, along with 30 
other Cubans.

 In Honduras, 75 Cubans were waiting to move on to Mexico and the US border. 
In Panama, another 75 gathered in the tree-shaded patio of the Caritas shelter 
in the capital. Many had sold everything they owned to pay for the voyage of a 
lifetime. Some said hundreds more were still traversing the treacherous forests 
of the Darién region bordering Colombia.

Some expressed dismay that Obama, who is popular in Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> for punching holes in the US economic 
embargo and reinstating diplomatic relations, had taken a measure they saw as 
hurting ordinary Cubans.

 “Obama’s decision is killing our dreams,” said Yancys Riccart, 25, a teaching 
assistant, who said her journey took her through Guyana, Brazil, Ecuador and 
Colombia. She said she was worried she would be mistreated or not given work by 
Cuban authorities if she went back home.

 Víctor Berrios, a deacon for Roman Catholic charity Caritas, urged the 
migrants not to rush into the hands of people traffickers to reach the US, 
reminding them that President-elect Donald Trump could reinstate the law when 
he assumes the presidency on 20 January.

 “Be patient, we know that from the 20th there will be another government. Do 
not lose hope. Have faith,” Berrios said.

 Washington has unveiled a flurry of last-minute agreements to try to prevent 
Trump reversing the 2014 detente with Cuba, one of Obama’s flagship policies.

 Trump has said he would scrap Obama’s Cuba policy unless the Cubans presented 
a better deal, but it was not immediately clear if he would try to bring back 
“wet-foot, dry-foot”.

Cubans risking their lives en route to US as thaw triggers immigration policy 
fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/10/cuban-migrant-fears-us-immigration-policy>
 Anticipating the end of the policy, Cuban immigration has surged since the 
2014 normalization. Ben Rhodes, Obama’s deputy national security adviser, said 
some 40,000 Cubans arrived in the US in 2015 and about 54,000 in 2016.

 Thousands of Cubans gathered in Costa Rica and Panama last year as Central 
American countries struggled to cope with the influx. El Salvador welcomed the 
new policy, saying all immigrants should be treated equally.

 Honduras, a source of thousands of immigrants to the US each year, despite no 
Cuban-style special treatment, said it was waiting to see if the policy led to 
fewer Cubans traveling. Mexico’s foreign ministry had no immediate comment.

 Manreza said his wife, a nurse, was working in Venezuela as part of a Cuban 
oil-for-doctors program. Obama also rolled back a “medical parole” program 
dating back to 2006 that allowed Cuban doctors working in third countries to 
move to the US simply by walking into a US embassy.

 “She cried when I called her,” he said, without indicating whether she had 
intended to defect under the program.

 Manreza, who ran a soda warehouse in Havana before he left in December with 
his daughter, said he was deciding whether to return to Cuba, broke, or seek 
asylum in Mexico.

 Iván Díaz, 45, a health administrator, said he had no intention of turning 
back.

 He left Cuba three months ago with his wife. He said the dash for the US had 
cost about $25,000 for him, his wife and Miami family members who sent money to 
support them.

 “I’ve got $10 left in my pocket,” said Díaz at the Tapachula center. “We are 
going to carry on. We don’t lose anything by going to the Laredo border. We 
must be able to do something. Otherwise, let them deport me back to Cuba.”

 