
It would be premature and disrespectful to suggest another enforced lay-off is 
imminent for Roger Federer, but, going on his stiff movement towards the end of 
his three-set win over world No200 Noah Rubin, it is fair to say the prospects 
of the four-time champion reaching the second week of the 2017Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> are not great.

“I’ve played out here many, many times,” the 35-year-old Swiss said courtside 
after beating the US Open boys champion 7-5, 6-3, 7-6 (7-3) in his second Tour 
match after a six-month break to recover from knee surgery. “But he’s been 
around a couple of years and I’ve seen a little bit of him. I think my serve 
got me out of trouble today.

Angelique Kerber again fails to convince in latest Australian Open victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/18/angelique-kerber-again-fails-to-convince-in-latest-australian-open-victory>
“I wasn’t feeling as good as in the beginning, that’s for sure. I got lucky in 
the third set, but it was good to fight through. There were a lot of difficult 
moments out there and that’s what I need to progress in this tournament.”

Federer has always reached at least the third round, and this was his 82nd win 
in Melbourne in 95 matches. He next plays Tomas Berdych on Friday.

“It’s not an easy draw,” said Federer. “He [Berdych] has beaten me in New 
York, at Wimbledon and at the Olympics. He’s a great player, I like Tomáš’s 
game and I’m sure it’s going to be another tough one.”

In the third set on Wednesday, the American, 15 years Federer’s junior and 
playing with the wide-eyed freedom of youth, spotted a growing uncertainty in 
his opponent’s sideways movement on the forehand side and broke for 4-2. But 
Federer served his way out of trouble in the eighth game and, going for 
high-risk winners in nearly every exchange (which has long been his forte, 
obviously, but usually out of choice rather than necessity), he broke back when 
Rubin served nervously for the set, then levelled for 5-all.

A mix of desperation and an urgent desire to get the job done in three sets 
had lifted him above the fatigue that seemed to be invading his legs after just 
under two hours on a mild afternoon. Although his first-round win over Jürgen 
Melzer went four sets, that match lasted only a little over two hours, so this 
was not the most exacting return to tennis.

Federer told Lleyton Hewitt at a pre-tournament function, “I won’t know how my 
body holds up at least until Indian Wells and Miami [which are in March].” On 
day three, after a total of little more than four hours of tennis in the first 
week, it wasn’t holding up that well.

Kei Nishikori, who had a breezy three-set workout against Jeremy Chardy, is in 
the same quarter as Federer and Murray, and said the Scot and Novak Djokovic – 
who is in the other half – are the two obvious players blocking his path to a 
first slam title. “Those two guys are still dominating the Tour, like you saw 
last year,” he said after his 6-3, 6-4, 6-3 win. “But I hope I can sneak in 
there.”


The fourth seed Stan Wawrinka went into the third round for the ninth 
consecutive year after a 6-4, 6-4, 6-4 win over the American Steve Johnson 
having laboured through the first round. The win over Johnson was far more 
straightforward and he will now face Victor Troicki.
 