
The City had tended to be relaxed about Rolls-Royce’s run-in with the Serious 
Fraud Office’s bribery investigators. In part, that was because the inquiry was 
taking ages – it started in 2012 – and could be considered a problem for 
another day. It was also because the potential financial impact was almost 
impossible to assess from outside since both sides volunteered few details of 
the accusations.

Investors know better now. The deferred prosecution agreement (DPA) with the 
SFO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/16/rolls-royce-to-pay-671m-over-bribery-claims>
, plus separate agreements with authorities in the US and Brazil, is big, ugly 
and serious. Rolls will pay a total of £671m, which is roughly equivalent to 
its entire expected profits for 2016.

But cash and profit, as Rolls shareholders have learned painfully, are not the 
same thing. Even before yesterday, Rolls was predicted to suffer a cash outflow 
for 2016 as it ramps up production of new classes of engine. For 2017, the City 
expected only break-even at a cash level. This penalty for bribery and 
corruption in foreign markets – details to be revealed in court on Tuesday – 
has landed at a bad moment.

The US and Brazil authorities want their cash quickly but the good news for 
Rolls, relatively speaking, is that the SFO is prepared to wait. A five-year 
payment schedule has been agreed, which would take the company into years when 
it hopes to be generating cash again at a rate of £1bn. In that regard the SFO 
has been lenient, perhaps with half an eye on preventing collateral damage to 
employees and suppliers.

The damage to Rolls’ reputation is harder to quantify. If you’re an optimist, 
it’s possible to take comfort that Rolls has substantially reduced the number 
of sales agents and intermediaries it uses around the world. But a £671m 
financial penalty is a damning scar on a company that used to be regarded as 
the UK’s finest manufacturer.

As for the SFO, it must tell us why it chose not to pursue a criminal 
investigation against the company. DPAs have their use in complex cases – and 
Rolls may fit that description – but they are not meant to become a default 
tactic. After the court hearing, the SFO must explain its thinking.

Imperial should spark up a pay row 

Alison Cooper has been paid roughly £18m over the course of her six full years 
as chief executive of Imperial Brands, the cancer-stick company known as 
Imperial Tobacco until its diversionary change of name. Call it an average of 
£3m a year, or £1m every four months. Not bad, especially as the trend has been 
firmly upwards. Last year she got £5.5m.


Cooper would also appear to have a strong incentive to remain loyal to her 
employer of 17 years. She owns shares in Imperial worth £6.5m, accumulated in 
most part through the incentive-based components of her pay package. She also 
has unvested share awards worth £12m at current prices and, on recent form, 
could expect to scoop about two-thirds of that pot.

Is she loyal, though? David Haines, Imperial’s chairman, seems to doubt it. He 
worries that pay for Imperial executives is “significantly below the average 
for companies of our size” and thinks this creates “an unnecessary risk with 
regard to retaining our senior team”.

He proposes cranking up the maximum Cooper and others can receive in a given 
year. Three years ago this was £5.8m in Cooper’s case and has been increased 
annually. Haines now wants her to chase £8.5m. But, note, a bigger prize 
doesn’t imply meaningfully stiffer targets. “We would not wish to disguise the 
fact that our proposals allow us to pay more for the delivery of the levels of 
performance seen in recent years,” Haines concedes. There you have it: a pay 
increase to keep up with the Joneses, or other FTSE 30 companies.

Imperial has performed well for investors (though not as strongly as BAT, the 
other big London-listed gasper merchant). But has Cooper threatened to quit? 
Has any executive? And why does Haines think Imperial employs nobody capable of 
filling her or other executives’ shoes? Answers to these questions would be 
more useful than Haines’ pious bleat about how he is “sympathetic” – just not 
in Imperial’s case – to concerns about pay increases which do not reflect 
performance.

City fund managers, even once-shy BlackRock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/15/blackrock-demands-cuts-to-executive-pay-and-bonuses>
, tell us they want to clamp down on “benchmarking” awards for bosses already 
earning many millions. Imperial’s plan would seem to be a classic example of 
the ratchet factor at work. If its proposal passes next month, you’ll know the 
fund managers don’t really mean what they say.
 