
A promising 17-year-old player died in a “tragic accident” after he slipped 
during a tackle and hit his head on the ground, an inquest has heard.

Ronan Costello was playing for Huddersfield Under-19s against Salford on 11 
June when he suffered a severe traumatic brain injury after being tackled by 
two opposition players.

The tackle was not malicious and the teenager’s “devastated” family did not 
hold the Salford players responsible for his death, the inquest at Bradford 
coroner’s court heard.

Costello, from Huddersfield, had played rugby since the age of six and signed 
a professional contract with Huddersfield in July 2015, the inquest was told.

Witnesses at the match, at Huddersfield’s Dram Centre ground, described how 
there had been no fighting or aggression among the players before Costello was 
tackled by Salford’s Adam Jones and Aaron Moore.

Costello, who had the ball, appeared to slip or stumble as he was tackled, 
causing his head or chin to come into contact with Jones’ shoulder and 
resulting in him falling backwards, the inquest heard. The rear of his head hit 
the ground and he lost consciousness and began fitting.

Costello was given medical treatment on the pitch before being airlifted to 
Leeds General Infirmary, where he had brain surgery but was pronounced dead 
three days later, on 14 June.

The inquest heard that the tackle was classed as “high” but could not have 
been avoided because of Costello’s body position. A police investigation found 
that the death was not suspicious.

Recording a verdict of accidental death, assistant coroner Philip Holden said: 
“It’s clear that this was a tragic death of a really promising young rugby 
player who was doing what he loved at the time of his death.”

He continued: “I do find that this was an unforeseen and tragic accident. 
Ronan was playing for theHuddersfield Giants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/huddersfieldgiants> Under-19s side against 
Salford youth on 11 June this year.

“About 30 minutes into the game he received a pass, he leaned forward into the 
tackle, probably as a result of a loss of footing, and it’s likely that his 
head or chin came into contact with the shoulder of a Salford player.

“It did not set out to be a dangerous or malicious tackle and I find that, in 
all likelihood, the Salford players were already committed to the tackle.”

Jones described his tackle as “perfectly good” but said he had considered 
giving up rugby as a result of the “extremely traumatic” incident. He said in a 
statement: “Because I was involved in the tackle, I felt responsible. It was 
just a normal tackle in the spirit of the game but knowing I wasn’t responsible 
didn’t stop me feeling that way.

“I’m still upset about what happened and always will be. I wish I could change 
what happened that day.”

Costello’s father, Martin, said he did not blame Jones: “I would like the 
Salford players to know I do not hold them responsible and this was a tragic 
accident.”

In a statement after the inquest, Costello’s family added: “The family are 
absolutely devastated by the passing of Ronan.

“He loved playing rugby league and was proud to play for Huddersfield Giants. 
Ronan was much loved and will always be remembered.”
 