
Housing benefits in Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> will be 
paid out more frequently and more flexibly than the rest of the UK in the first 
phase of welfare reforms implemented by ministers in Edinburgh.


Tenants who receive help with rent through the universal credit system, 
including those in private rented housing, can opt for the payment to go 
directly to their landlord. In some areas, they will be allowed to claim it 
every fortnight rather than monthly.

The changes, announced by the Scottish social security minister, Jeane 
Freeman, marks the first use of welfare powers affecting about £2.7bn worth of 
housing, disability and carers benefits introduced after the 2014 independence 
referendum.

Those powers will also allow the Scottish parliament to create new benefits, 
eventually run by a new Scottish social security agency, and to top up existing 
payments still run by the UK Department for Work and Pensions (DWP).

Freeman disclosed in November that she had delayed taking full administrative 
control of welfare payments until as late as 2022 to allow enough time to 
design and commission a new IT system. The universal credit changes will use 
the DWP’sexisting social security payments system.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/devolution-scottish-welfare-being-used-political-football>

She told BBC Radio Scotland: “When you’re on a very tight budget as people on 
benefits are, then it is very hard to budget that amount over a whole month. 
Knowing that a payment is coming to you, for the benefit that you are entitled 
to every fortnight, makes that budgeting exercise easier for those households.”

Three large Scottish IT projects, including a payments system for EU 
agricultural subsidies, a new call-handling system for Police Scotland and one 
for the NHS24 patients’ helpline, have encountered costly difficulties, 
contract disputes and substantial delays.

Fortnightly payments will be made available to claimants in areas where a more 
sophisticated “full service” universal credit payment system operates. As of 
November 2016, 5,590 housing claimants, or 13% of the Scottish total, were in 
full service areas. In time, that will be extended across Scotland.

Freeman has asked the DWP to investigate measures to allow payments to be 
shared among different members of a household: women’s groups have lobbied hard 
to change the current system where a single family payment goes to only one 
family member.

Anti-poverty campaigners and opposition parties welcomed the measures but the 
ChildPoverty <https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> Action Group (CPAG) 
said Freeman could immediately use the new powers to top up child benefits by 
£5 a head, at a cost of £256m.

Scottish ministers worry about the cost of that measure, but John Dickie, the 
chief executive of CPAG Scotland, said it would lift about 30,000 children out 
of poverty.

“We would agree that you can’t rush the development of a new social security 
system but the top-up powers do allow for some significant action which could 
be taken much more quickly,” he said. “There is some urgency about that.”

The Scottish National party government committed in its election manifesto to 
increase the carer’s allowance to the level of jobseeker’s allowance, introduce 
a “best start” grant to cover maternity and early years payments, and a grant 
for young people at risk of long-term unemployment.

Alison Johnstone, the health spokeswoman for the Scottish Greens, said tenants 
receiving housing help in East Lothian experienced serious problems getting 
their universal credit payments, raising serious questions about the DWP’s 
handling.

That made the Scottish government reforms doubly welcome, she said, adding: 
“It’s becoming increasingly clear that the DWP remains unlikely to improve how 
it operates.”

Mark Griffin, Scottish Labour’s social security spokesman, said the party 
wanted to see the new Scottish agency legally obliged to ensure every citizen 
had all the payments they were due.

“More than 100,000 Scots miss out on tax credits they are entitled to. Making 
sure everyone gets what they deserve could make a huge difference to the 
families across Scotland,” he said.
 