
Like Grange Hill, the show he appeared in as a child, Simon Vaughan is 
renowned in television for his energy and pioneering spirit.

He set up his first production company at 17, and his current outfit Lookout 
Point has been involved in hits ranging from Andrew Davies’ adaptation of War 
and Peace to Parade’s End and Ripper Street.

Vaughan’s fond memories of Grange Hill – in which he played Freddie Mainwaring 
– and the BBC’s old Television Centre headquarters in London helped fuel his 
desire to work with the corporation.

Its commercial arm, BBC Worldwide, has a 49% stake in Lookout Point, and last 
week the company Vaughan founded announced a partnership with Worldwide and 
US-based Access Entertainment to create Benchmark Television – a venture that 
aims to help writers and producers get shows made without first securing a 
commission from a network or platform.

“We’ll fund it, we’ll simply be writing a cheque, we haven’t heard of that 
before. There are a few people, like Netflix and Amazon, Discovery perhaps, who 
will simply say: ‘We like it, let’s make it.’ But I don’t think anybody’s done 
it without a platform, which is exciting [and] a tiny little bit scary when 
you’re doing something new,” Vaughan says.

He doesn’t say how much money is available; only that “nobody’s using their 
last resources to green light it”. But the plan initially is “to find the right 
first thing that will define it, in the way House of Cards defined Netflix in 
their early stages. It could be a long time [until we find it], we really don’t 
know. But if we can make the right first choice, hopefully the rest will 
follow.”

The choice will be made by Benchmark’s board, which is chaired by Access 
Entertainment’s president, Danny Cohen, who is a former BBC director of 
television, and comprises Vaughan, his co-CEO at Lookout Point, Faith Penhale, 
and BBC Worldwide’s chief content officer, Helen Jackson. The venture came 
about after the four enjoyed working together on War and Peace.

“It started soon after Danny left the BBC as a ‘what if’ conversation between 
him and I. I had the notion it might be the way things were going, and it 
evolved. It’ll be for a few special things. We think the old business isn’t 
broken, it works and it’s great and we will continue that, but it’s just 
another way to skin the cat,” says Vaughan, chatting in a London members’ club 
the day Benchmark was announced.

“It’s a nice way to attract talent for an adventure which the industry can 
support right now. It might have been a bit risky a year or two ago, and it 
might be a bit more risky in a year or so, but right now I think it’s a solid 
bet as long as we bet on the right projects. People are watching more drama 
even on traditional commercial networks than before as well as going looking 
for it on their way to work or in the evening on iPads.”

The aim of Benchmark is to “give the creative team the space to dream their 
dream and know that it’s being made and properly resourced” without having to 
deal with filtering the “white noise” that surrounds getting a show financed 
and commissioned.

Once Benchmark gives the green light to its first show, “we still have to sell 
it … there are 20 or 30 platforms, one of which we would need to want this 
project. It still has to be viable, not a vanity project.” But Vaughan is 
promising “a long-term home rather than a stepping stone”.

That ethos is apparent at Lookout Point, too, which will continue. Penhale 
joined last year from the BBC and her reputation from working on shows 
including Spooks, Doctor Who and Sherlock helped move Lookout from being “a 
putter-togetherer of global drama to a maker and much closer to the creative 
community”, Vaughan says.

Lookout says it was behind £70m of production last year on shows including War 
and Peace, Ripper Street, the stylish new Amazon series The Collection (which 
may return) and To Walk Invisible, Happy Valley writer Sally Wainwright’s 
Brontë sisters drama for the BBC. The company was also involved as financiers 
in the BBC’s The Living and Dead and SS-GB, the forthcoming adaptation of Len 
Deighton’s parallel postwar novel.

To quote War and Peace, “nothing is so necessary for a young man as the 
company of intelligent women”, and Vaughan credits Penhale with enabling the 
“evolution from fixer to maker”.

“Faith runs the business creatively; I’m interested in what’s not in our 
business plan. I can do my bit, which is talking to the market. It works really 
well.”

Penhale is key to “Lookout 2.0”, as Vaughan calls it, as well as Benchmark. 
She says: “The appetite for quality drama series doesn’t seem to be waning: 
it’s loved, watched and talked about. I don’t see that dropping away – in fact, 
I think the opposite – but the key is quality.

“Our audience is super-sophisticated and discerning, so the challenge is for 
us to find the original and new. It comes back to the writer and that original 
voice and supporting them. That’s what matters most.” Lookout is sponsoring the 
National Theatre’s new writing in residence programme.

Vaughan’s creative streak stretches all the way back to when he was eight, 
making up stories and appearing in plays at school, thanks to a creative 
headteacher and supportive mother. He has had knocks, such as the winding down 
of a company he co-founded, and interesting diversions, such as producing 
fitness videos, but his enthusiasm for the business has driven him to success.

A case in point is the screenplay he wrote for a forthcoming film about AA 
Milne. Currently called Goodbye Christopher Robin, it stars Margot Robbie, 
Phoebe Waller-Bridge and Domhnall Gleeson. A “labour of love over the last 15 
years”, it arose after he “produced a film with Michael Fassbender called A 
Bear Named Winnie … I used to dabble with a bit of writing but not done 
anything for about five years. I was only an OK actor and writer, but I’m a 
good putting-bits-togetherer.”

He is renowned for making things happen and piecing together deals, but 
demurs, saying: “Good things sell themselves. All I do is turn up with the 
writer and the material – if it’s great, it’s done. We work hard. I think 
money’s there for great projects.”

A case in point is Press, the Doctor Foster writer Mike Bartlett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mike-bartlett>’s drama about British 
newspapers, which Lookout Point is co-producing. Set in a tabloid and a 
broadsheet newspaper, it looks at how the industry is changing. Despite being 
determinedly British, Vaughan says it was “the most bid-on project I’ve ever 
been involved with in America” and will be shown on PBS by Masterpiece.

Lookout’s other main focus this year is Davies’ adaptation of Les Mis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/08/war-and-peace-watched-by-57m-as-writer-signs-up-for-les-miserables>
érables <>, plus a couple of other projects that may get the green light.

The company is expanding and moving to new Soho offices but Vaughan says: 
“We’ve got a long way to go. I’m still hugely motivated but I still feel the 
same nerves and excitement. I never feel complacent in any way.”

Both Vaughan and Penhale say they are in this for the long term. 
“Relationships with writers are based on years of trust. It’s not a quick 
game,” says Penhale.

Vaughan says it feels “important to us and good to think about making things 
in the UK, with the best British people, but optimising those projects in a 
global way on our own terms.

“Another thing exciting to Faith and me is our biggest shareholder is the BBC. 
We are fiercely independent but we love the BBC. When I first started in the 
business I was in Grange Hill on the BBC. I care deeply about it.

“We could make more money doing it differently but this is a great home, a 
great partner. We don’t have to think about selling our company. We don’t have 
to think about stockmarket listings or whether our parent company’s going to be 
sold to Silvio Berlusconi. Faith and I have looked to put down really stable 
foundations so we can ignore that white noise and focus on creating a nice home 
for people to come and make good stories.”

CV

Age 47 

Education Danes Hill school, Surrey; Italia Conti Academy of Theatre Arts

1981-87 Child actor in productions including stage production of The Railway 
Children and BBC’s Grange Hill

1987-91 Formed and ran Wishful Thinking Productions

1991 Acquisitions manager, Pickwick Home Video

1992-97 Acquisitions director BMG Entertainment, London and New York

1997-2000 Alltime Entertainment

2000-02 Power Television 

2002-09 Alchemy Television

2009-present day Chair and co-CEO, Lookout Point
 