Floyd Mayweather has offered to fight Conor McGregor if he is guaranteed to be 
paid $100m. How much is he willing to pay McGregor?  $1m  $15m When asked about 
making a comeback to boxing, Mayweather said: 'The only thing I’m probably 
interested in is the Conor McGregor fight. I’m a businessman and it makes more 
business sense. But of course we’re the A-side. How can a guy talk about $20m 
or $30m if he’s never even made $8m or $9m?'  $50m  $100m Real Madrid set a new 
Spanish record by going 40 matches without a defeat this week. Which English 
club went unbeaten for 42 league games between November 1977 and December 1978? 
 Liverpool  Arsenal  Nottingham Forest They won the title in the 1977-78 season 
with four matches to spare.  Leeds United Graham Taylor played for two clubs in 
his career. Grimsby Town and which other side?  Watford  Lincoln City He 
started his managerial career at the club when he retired as a player  
Peterborough United  Aston Villa The Australian Open begins on Monday. Which 
two players won the singles titles last year?  Stan Wawrinka and Serena Williams
 Andy Murray and Venus Williams  Milos Raonic and Maria Sharapova  Novak 
Djokovic and Angelique KerberDjokovic reigns supreme in Melbourne, where he has 
won the Australian Open in 2008, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2015 and 2016. Which 
European Cup winner has joined Swansea City to work as Paul Clement's assistant 
coach?  Ian Rush  Nwankwo Kanu  Steve McManaman  Claude Makelele 'Paul is my 
mentor,' said Makelele. 'He has taught me a lot of things in my time working 
with him. When I heard he was back working in the Premier League, I phoned him 
and asked if I could help him at Swansea.' There were no Premier League players 
in Fifa's best XI of 2016. How many of the 11 players picked represent 
Barcelona or Real Madrid?  Four  Seven  Nine The full team: Manuel Neuer; Dani 
Alves, Gerard Piqué, Sergio Ramos, Marcelo; Luka Modric, Toni Kroos, Andrés 
Iniesta; Lionel Messi, Luis Suárez, Cristiano Ronaldo.  10 Morecambe manager 
Jim Bentley was sent to the stands and fined £1,000 for his reaction to a red 
card during his team's defeat against Cheltenham in December. Who stepped in 
and paid the fine on his behalf?  The referee, who admitted he had made a 
mistake  Busta Rhymes, who spent some of his teenage years in the town  The 
club's fansBentley welled up when presented with the money.  Cheltenham manager 
Gary Johnson Who did UFC president Dana White call an 'uppity 80-year-old lady' 
after she had criticised MMA at the Golden Globes?  Hillary Clinton  Sarah 
Jessica Parker  Meryl Streep Steep said that MMA is not one of the arts. White 
disagreed.  Cate Blanchett Wayne Rooney and Bobby Charlton have both scored 249 
goals for Manchester United. Which player holds the record for scoring the most 
goals at one club in English football (383)?  Jimmy Greaves  Dixie Dean Dean 
scored 383 goals in 433 appearances for Everton, racking up 37 hat-tricks in 
the process.  Alan Shearer  Thierry Henry Gabon are hosting the Africa Cup of 
Nations. What is their team's nickname?  The Desert Foxes  The Black Stars  The 
PanthersGabon play debutants Guinea-Bissau in the opening fixture on Saturday 
afternoon  The Pharoahs  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  