
Another commanding performance from Australian cycling star Amanda Spratt has 
given her a stranglehold on the Santos Women’s Tour. The four-day tour is 
Spratt’s to lose after the Orica-Scott captain won the tough opening stage in 
the Adelaide Hills.

The two-time Olympian has at least a one minute, one second lead over all her 
key rivals. Given Spratt’s imposing start to the season, and how well 
Orica-Scott are combining, that advantage will be plenty.

“I am really happy I could pull it off for the team today,” said Spratt. “We 
had a plan to attack a lot in the final and try to get a move away and that’s 
exactly what we did. We probably felt the pressure a little bit but we knew we 
had to make the race hard and we did that really well.”

Richie Porte: ‘I pinch myself most days. It wasn’t long ago that I was working 
9-5' | Kieran Pender
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/richie-porte-i-pinch-myself-most-days-it-wasnt-long-ago-that-i-was-working-9-5>
Spratt has started the year in blistering form, nearly lapping the field in 
race two of the Bay Classic series. She then combined with teammate Katrin 
Garfoot in a decisive two-rider breakaway at last Sunday’s road nationals, with 
Spratt finishing runner-up. 

Garfoot, the defending Tour champion, forecast the last 30km of Saturday’s 
opening stage from Hahndorf to Meadows would be decisive and Orica-Scott made 
sure that was the case. “The whole team had been attacking a lot on the hilly 
section, from about 18km to go,” Spratt said.

Eventually, Spratt broke clear with Dutch rider Janneke Ensing (Ale Cipollini) 
and New Zealander Rushlee Buchanan. “I didn’t want to take either of those two 
to the finish, because they’re good sprinters,” Spratt explained.

So after Buchanan dropped off the pace, Spratt attacked on the Queen Of The 
Mountain climb about 4km from the finish and was on her own. “Then it was a 
matter of giving it everything I had for the last 3km down to the finish,” she 
said.

Ensing finished second at 19 seconds and Buchanan’s American teammate 
Katherine Hall was third at 59 seconds, with the main bunch at 1:01. The race 
continues late on Sunday afternoon with the 32.2km street race, held before the 
People’s Choice Classic.

Meanwhile, the men’s Tour Down Under starts on Sunday with the one-off 
People’s Choice Classic street race, which gives riders  a chance to open up 
their legs after the off-season. The six-day Tour itself starts on Tuesday.



 