
The University of Sussex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofsussex> failed in its duty 
of care to a student who was assaulted by a lecturer, taking only the 
perpetrator’s account of their relationship into account when assessing the 
risk he posed, according to an independent inquiry.

The report comes after widespread criticism of the university’s decision not 
to suspend senior media lecturer Lee Salter, even after he was convicted of 
assaulting postgraduate student Allison Smith last June.

A report, published on Tuesday 
<https://www.sussex.ac.uk/webteam/gateway/file.php?name=westmarland-review.pdf&site=303>
, said the university only suspended Salter after themedia reported on the case 
in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/07/scale-of-sexual-abuse-in-uk-universities-likened-to-savile-and-catholic-scandals>
. He resigned the same day that the story became public.


The inquiry, commissioned by the university, criticised it for not starting 
disciplinary procedures against Salter until after his conviction, despite its 
own rules allowing this to happen separately to a police investigation.

The report particularly criticised the HR department for prioritising the 
protection of the university from legal action over policies covering the 
prevention and management of violence.

The report by Prof Nicole Westmarland of Durham University notes that Salter 
met Smith during induction week and they began a relationship. But in September 
2015, he punched her, knocked her out, stamped on her and threw salt at her 
face.

In the 10 months between his arrest and sentence, he continued to teach at the 
university, to Smith’s distress. Westmarland found that the academic charged 
with assessing what danger Salter posed to others only interviewed one person: 
Salter himself. Salter is appealing against his conviction.

“Managers failed to recognise that the way the senior lecturer acted towards 
them as male managers was not necessarily the way that he interacted with those 
with less power, including students, early career academics, and some 
administrators,” she added, noting that some other students felt vulnerable 
because Salter had retained individual teaching duties.

The professor also criticised the risk assessment for taking into account 
other students’ feedback about Salter’s teaching, which was “at best irrelevant 
and at worst inappropriate”. Westmarland said that this encouraged a perception 
that Salter’s behaviour was ‘out of character” and risked encouraging the 
victim to blame herself for the violence she suffered.

In contrast, the university failed to communicate with Smith as to how it was 
handling her complaint against Salter, causing her additional and unnecessary 
stress.

“There existed a complete wall of silence regarding the basic actions the 
university was taking or the policies it was following,” the report states. 
“The failure to let [Smith] know what actions the university was taking made 
[her] doubt whether her complaint was being taken seriously and whether she was 
being believed.”

It added that several other students and staff members had come forward to say 
that the university had been similarly dismissive of other complaints of abuse 
and harassment. These alleged victims said the university had made excuses for 
the alleged perpetrators, saying they were under stress or having a hard time.

The report made 11 recommendations, including making a public apology to Smith 
and drawing up a clear policy on staff-student relationships, which the 
university has pledged to implement.

Westmarland added: “The case should act as a warning to other universities to 
get their houses in order not just in relation to staff as well as students but 
also in relation to partner violence generally – many are treating sexual 
violence as a standalone problem unconnected to other forms of violence, abuse 
and harassment.”

The vice chancellor, Prof Adam Tickell, said the response to the case had been 
inadequate and praised Smith for sharing her story. He added: “I am very sorry 
for the failings identified in Prof Westmarland’s report. I am grateful to 
Allison for taking part in the review. We will continue to offer her whatever 
support she needs.”

Smith said the report had helped her healing process. She added: “That feeling 
of not being believed at the start, of being silenced and feeling very isolated 
and alone was the most difficult thing I’ve ever faced in my life. So for [the 
university] to come forward and to say we completely got this wrong ... that is 
healing for me.”
 