
Today’s best bets, by Chris Cook 

I’m delighted to see the news this morning that Cue Card has been committed to 
theCheltenham Gold Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham-gold-cup> 
by his owner, Jean Bishop. After his comprehensive defeat in the King George by 
Thistlecrack, it seemed that Colin Tizzard, who trains both, was minded to send 
Cue Card to the Ryanair, which the horse won four years ago.

Bishop, however, would rather take her chance in the race that matters most, 
while accepting that it will be very hard to turn the form around with 
Thistlecrack. It’s a sporting attitude that I admire and I also like the fact 
that the decision has been made now, whereas plans for so many horses will be 
left in the air until mid-March.

Anyway, this spares us the vexing possibility of Cue Card hosing up in the 
Ryanair and leaving us wondering if he might perhaps have finally won his Gold 
Cup. Victory in the latter is the crowning glory for any steeplechaser and Cue 
Card really might have achieved it last year, had he not fallen for the only 
time in his 27 races over fences.

It’s also worth remembering that his five runs in the King George include two 
defeats by 13 lengths or more, whereas his Cheltenham Festival record is more 
impressive:

 * 2010 WON Champion Bumper by 8 lengths 

 * 2011 4th Supreme Novice Hurdle (behind Al Ferof, Spirit Son, Sprinter Sacre)

 * 2012 2nd Arkle Trophy (behind Sprinter Sacre)

 * 2013 WON Ryanair by 9 lengths

 * 2016 Fell three-out in the Gold Cup when cruising 
Newbury has finally been passed fit to stage racing today after three 
inspections. There’s a disappointing consensus about the most likely outcome 
for most races there but I shall try the 11-4 aboutChampagne At Tara (2.20), 
even though he found disappointingly little at Ascot last month.


The grey travelled like the winner that day but was outfought by Red Devil 
Star and I wouldn’t be completely confident that a 4lb swing in the weights 
would make the necessary difference. But Jack Sherwood made a contribution to 
the winner’s effort that day, whereas this time Red Devil Star is partnered by 
Micheal Nolan, 1/55 over fences since June 2015. (Of course, that stat will 
have a lot to do with opportunity and Nolan will get his chance to prove that 
point here.)

Max Ward has looked a little doubtful about his fences since beating two 
rivals at Huntingdon, so this might be the kind of small-field race that falls 
into the lap of a talented-but-tricky beast like Champagne At Tara.

In Market Rasen’s opener, there might be some value in 10-1 about Land League 
(1.00), from the Stuart Edmunds yard that has quite a good record in novice 
hurdles (5/25) for a small stable. This one took nine goes to win a point in 
Ireland but finally did so in November and was sold about six weeks ago.

He’s a half-brother to Drumlee Sunset, who won three races for Philip Hobbs 
last year and has reportedly been working well, albeit the reports come from 
the ownership syndicate which still has shares to sell. Much of the market is 
taken up by Master Of Irony, who won his novice at Catterick last month but was 
beaten when trying the same course and distance under a penalty a fortnight ago 
and may again be vulnerable here. Monbeg Oscar is also popular, though I’d 
guess his future lies over fences.

At Lingfield, I’m putting my faith in Adam Kirby, who is back aboard Major Ben 
(2.30), having delivered him perfectly to score at Wolves last month. This 
chestnut didn’t have much of a pace to run at when sent here a fortnight later 
and today’s race could work out better for him. I think he’s well treated for 
just his third handicap and 3-1 is fair.
 