According to economic experts, Brexit could cost the world's poorest countries 
how much?  More than £3.5bn a year  More than £320m a year Writing in a series 
of essays published by the Overseas Development Institute and the UK Trade 
Policy Observatory, economists warned in September that low-income countries 
could lose more than £320m annually if existing trade agreements with the UK 
market are not maintained.  More than £675m a year  More than £5bn a year 
Women's rights activists fear Donald Trump's US election victory could lead to 
the reinstatement of the “global gag” rule. What does the rule stipulate?  That 
no US media outlet should be permitted to report on foreign affairs without 
official White House approval  That American women in overseas territories 
should not express views perceived as detrimental to the aims and values of the 
US government  That no one, anywhere in the world, should be allowed to mention 
Hillary Clinton  That federal funds cannot be used to support overseas family 
planning organisations that offer or provide information about abortions
Introduced under Ronald Reagan in 1984 and overturned in the early days of 
Barack Obama's presidency, the “global gag” rule is an executive order 
prohibiting the use of US foreign aid to support organisations providing 
abortion-related services. According to the UN, if the average family size were 
reduced by one child, projected global population growth would be reduced by 
how many people by 2030?  1 billion In March, Jagdish Upadhyay of the UN 
Population Fund said: “If by 2030 the average family size is just one child 
fewer, then by 2030 the world population is estimated to be approximately 8 
billion rather than 9 billion.”  1.1 billion  1.2 billion  1.3 billion In 
October, which fictional character became an honorary UN ambassador for the 
empowerment of women and girls?  Elsa from Frozen  Katniss Everdeen  Supergirl  
Wonder WomanIn October, to the dismay of women's rights activists and many UN 
staff, Wonder Woman became a UN honorary ambassador for the empowerment of 
women and girls. The Amazonian super heroine was dropped from the role less 
than two months later. Which of the following human rights activists was killed 
in 2016?  Berta Cáceres  Sikhosiphi “Bazooka” Rhadebe  Maricela Tombé  All of 
the aboveAlmost two decades on from the 20th anniversary of the UN Declaration 
on Human Rights Defenders, they face greater danger than ever. Tombé, a peasant 
leader in Colombia's Cauca province, was gunned down in February. The same fate 
befell South African activist Rhadebe the following month; also in March, 
Honduran environmental campaigner Cáceres was murdered for opposing a 
hydroelectric project. In October, who was named as the next secretary general 
of the UN?  Arnold Schwarzenegger  Helen Clark  Vuk Jeremić  António Guterres 
The former Portuguese prime minister, who was UN high commissioner for refugees 
for a decade, will replace Ban Ki-moon at the UN helm in January 2017. Which of 
the following countries was declared malaria-free by the World Health 
Organisation in September?  India  Sri Lanka By targeting the mosquito-borne 
parasite that causes malaria, rather than focusing solely on the insects 
themselves, Sri Lanka – once among the worst affected countries in the world – 
has effected a remarkable turnaround in its battle against the disease.  Myanmar
 Cambodia In January, a study said more people now die from air pollution than 
which of the following two factors combined?  Polio and malaria  Heart disease 
and stroke  Malaria and HIV A study in the journal Nature, led by Johannes 
Lelieveld, director of the Max Planck Institute for chemistry in Germany, said 
more people now die from air pollution than malaria and HIV combined. Among the 
countries found to be worst affected were China, where pollution claims 1.4m 
lives a year, and India, with 650,000 deaths annually.  Road traffic accidents 
and cancer In June, the UN reported that a record number of people were forced 
from their homes by war and persecution in 2015. What was the figure?  115 
million  35 million  48 million  65 million A record 65 million men, women and 
children were forced from their homes by war and persecution, leaving one in 
every 113 people a refugee, internally displaced or seeking asylum by the end 
of 2015, according to the UNHCR. In July, who replaced Justine Greening as 
British secretary of state for development?  Louise Mensch  Boris Johnson  
Priti PatelPatel became secretary of state for international development 
following Theresa May’s appointment as prime minister, with Greening given the 
role of education secretary.  Lynne Featherstone  You got…  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  