
I decided to try and read every new book with “Girl” in the title. Girls on 
trains, with tattoos, lost, trapped, forgotten, broken, beautiful. Complicated 
girls who may or may not be dead.

There are a lot to get through, and more being published every week. My Kindle 
looks like aSmash Hits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/feb/03/pressandpublishing.popandrock> 
lyric sheet, minus the “Ooh’s”.

There are so many “girl” thrillers on the shelves that they have become a rich 
sub-genre, a profitable slice of noir publishing with often unreliable, always 
female narrators, and embossed covers in shades of storm. There are so many 
that half the Amazon reviews ofGirl on a Train by AJ Waines come from puzzled 
people who’d read the whole thing before realising they’d bought the wrong 
book. The reviews said what it wasn’t, which wasThe Girl on The Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/09/the-girl-on-the-train-review-emily-blunt-paula-hawkins>
 by Paula Hawkins, now a Hollywood movie starring Emily Blunt.

Four books into this little project, which I’d started as a sort of 
investigation into my own discomfort, I noticed patterns emerging, but also a 
blurring.

A couple of the books have been a struggle, admittedly. You see reflections of 
better novels in them; after the first chapter you know exactly how it’s going 
to end. I think this was the thing that first irritated me into collecting 
them. I wanted to see what was different.

Sometimes reading them feels like walking against the wind, other stories’ 
deaths blown into your glasses, shoes sticking to gummy plot points. The girls 
in these less good titles are complicated only in that their nail varnish is 
chipped, or that they rarely wash their hair.

Despite this they are the radiant types we remember from makeover scenes in 
80s films: beautiful and good under their glasses, and destined for happiness. 
And these girls have become new clichés, wearing complication as a coat.

The best books are ones that dissect the messy traumas of femininity. 
Sometimes, reading, you can place yourself within them, in the dark bedrooms 
filled with wine bottles. The best ones are books I’ve devoured whole, with 
characters that surprise you and stories that shock. Despite the disturbance 
that comes with the title.

It took a while to pinpoint why so many of the “girls” books made me feel 
grubby before I’d even opened them. They have that dangerous pull, like the 
lure of cut-price sushi. It took a series of tube rides deep in murder, and 
then, adata set put together by author Emily St John Mandel 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/the-gone-girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo-on-the-train/>
 to work it out. She was curious about more than just how often these “girl” 
books appeared. “I wanted to understand who was writing these books,” she 
explains, “and the fate of the ‘girl’ in the title.” Two thirds of the time, 
she found, the “girl”, of course, was actually a woman. And in “girl” books 
written by male authors, the girl is significantly more likely to be dead. So 
there it was. That was where the smell was coming from.

The more I read these 'girl' books, the more I understood why I wanted to read 
them

The plots of these books don’t share much (though at least three I’ve read 
recently use not only the same font for the “girl” on the cover, but the same 
shade of red), but they do share this: “Girl” books, of which I’ve now on my 
10th, seemed initially to use the suggestion of a sweet and vulnerable object 
to titillate. And this was certainly the case with some of the thrillers, where 
it was hard to believe the heroine had managed to stay alive this long. But the 
more I read these “girl” books, the more I understood why I, and millions of 
other women,wanted to read.

Right there, embossed on the front, is the promise that this is a story about 
a girl who will not play like those who have come before. The promise of 
darkness and mystery – small scary stories in domestic settings, where the girl 
is a “girl” not because she’s weak, but because she is on the verge of changing 
into something else. She’s not simply a victim, or a wife. She will be asking 
questions of her place in the world.

I started reading with a mean sort of cynicism, but now I’m seeking more out 
with hunger bordering on lunchian. I’ve found a depth where I expected more 
surface. I’ve fallen happily into a disguised manhole. While few “girl” books 
have a truly happy ending, this is mine.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman 
<https://twitter.com/EvaWiseman?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 