
Eminent Victorians is often seen as an oedipal massacre of discredited father 
figures – an assault on the Victorian establishment from which Strachey, the 
son of a general, had sprung. But its chronology says that it was really 
inspired by the first world war, with the gestation of the manuscript, from 
1912-18, shaped by the apocalypse in Flanders.

Strachey originally planned a rogues’ gallery of many famous Victorians that 
included Darwin, Carlyle, John Stuart Mill and Ellen Terry. In the event, he 
settled on four brief lives – each chosen to illustrate the psychology of four 
neurotic careerists who typified a society tormented by sex and religion.

He began with Cardinal Manning, a miniature portrait of a Victorian divine at 
the heart of a complex discussion of the place of Rome in the church. This was 
followed by a study of Florence Nightingale during the crucial years of her 
service in Crimea. Similarly, with Thomas Arnold, the famous headmaster of 
Rugby, mythologised in the Victorian classicTom Brown’s School Days, he 
concentrated on his 14 years at the school, culminating in his premature death. 
Finally, his study of General Gordon focused on the general’s last dramatic 
days in Khartoum. Strachey implied in several brilliant passages that Gordon 
was unhinged, a suggestion that he had only hinted at in his previous portraits 
of his other Victorians:

“Gordon’s fatalism … led him to dally with omens, to search for prophetic 
texts, and to append, in brackets, the apotropaic initials DV [Deo volente – 
God willing] after every statement in his letters implying futurity, led him 
also to envisage his moods and his desires, his passing reckless whims and his 
deep unconscious instincts, as the mysterious manifestations of the indwelling 
God.”

As an acolyte of Bloomsbury, Strachey knew all about Freud. He was determined 
to find a sexual explanation for his chosen quartet’s monstrous ambitions.

Strachey’s biographer Michael Holroyd has suggested that the four portraits 
shadowed the movements of a symphony, or a string quartet. Cardinal Manning: 
allegro vivace; Florence Nightingale: andante; Dr Arnold: scherzo; and General 
Gordon: rondo.

What is not in doubt is that the four sections of Eminent Victorians 
correspond to the passage of the first world war. “Manning” was written in 
1912-14, the most exuberant phase of hostilities. “Nightingale” was completed 
in 1915, when the parallels between the Crimean hospitals and British military 
field hospitals were strongest. “Arnold” was done from 1915-16; and “Gordon” 
was completed in the worst year of the war, 1917. The whole book itself was 
published in May 1918, several months before the armistice, and caught the 
public mood of rejection of those who had in some way contributed to a national 
catastrophe.

Strachey was acclaimed and denounced in equal measure. The main thing, as he 
saw it, was that the book was discussed

Eminent Victorians would transform the art of biography, but it did not do so 
by force of content or integrity of method. Strachey was a great stylist. His 
inimitable tone is most in evidence in “The End of General Gordon”:

“The glare and the heat of that southern atmosphere, the movement of the 
crowded city, the dark-faced populace, the soldiers and the suppliants, the 
reawakened consciousness of power, the glamour and the mystery of the whole 
strange scene – these things seized upon him, engulfed him, and worked a new 
transformation on his intoxicated heart. England, with its complications and 
its policies, became an empty vision to him; Sir Evelyn Baring, with his 
cautions and sagacities, hardly more than a tiresome name. He was Gordon Pasha, 
he was the Governor-General, he was the ruler of the Sudan. He was among his 
people – his own people, and it was to them only that he was responsible – to 
them, and to God.”

Strachey would sacrifice anything for his art. His portraits of these 
19th-century imperial icons are brilliant but unreliable, coruscating but 
partisan, and enthralling but frequently derivative. As critics never cease 
from pointing out, Strachey worked exclusively from secondary sources. 
Moreover, he would sacrifice anything, especially facts, for effect. His 
character assassination of General Gordon, based on at least one known forgery, 
is particularly egregious. The first line of “Cardinal Manning” mistakes his 
birth date. Strachey did not care, declaring with grandeur that it is “as 
difficult to write a good life as to live one”.

On publication, Strachey was acclaimed and denounced in equal measure. The 
main thing, as he saw it, was thatEminent Victorians was discussed all over, 
from the prime minister downwards. Strachey went on to publishQueen Victoria in 
1921,Elizabeth and Essex in 1928, and died from cancer in 1932. But this 
remains the classic that brought down the curtain on the Victorian age. With
Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/05/100-best-nonfiction-books-no-45-a-room-of-ones-own-by-virginia-woolf-shakespeares-sister-seton-beton>
,Eliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/12/100-best-nonfiction-books-no-46-ts-eliot-the-waste-land-robert-mccrum>
 andKeynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/100-best-nonfiction-books-no-48-the-economic-consequences-of-the-peace-john-maynard-keynes-jm>
 (Nos 45, 46 and 48 in this series), Strachey had ushered in the 20th century.

A signature sentence 

“But General Gordon had always been a contradictious [sic] person – even a 
little off his head, perhaps, though a hero; and besides, he was no longer 
there to contradict…. At any rate, it all ended very happily – in a glorious 
slaughter of 20,000 Arabs, a vast addition to the British Empire, and a step in 
the Peerage for Sir Evelyn Baring.”

Three to compare 

TE Lawrence: Seven Pillars of Wisdom (1922) 
Virginia Woolf: To the Lighthouse (1927) 
Michael Holroyd: Lytton Strachey – A Critical Biography, 2 vols (1967, 1968)

• Eminent Victorians is available in Oxford World’s Classics (£8.99). To order 
a copy for £7.64 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/eminent-victorians.html> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99
 