
Music students at the University of Lincoln had the chance to learn from one 
of the best in the business when they were treated to a masterclass from 
renowned sound engineer and record producer, Tony Platt.

Throughout his long and successful career, Tony has worked with a range of 
high-profile artists, from Bob Marley and Paul McCartney to AC/DC and Iron 
Maiden, and is closely involved with the music industry accreditation body,
Joint Audio Media Education Support <http://www.jamesonline.org.uk/> (JAMES).

He joined students on the university’s BA (Hons) music degree to deliver a 
talk entitled The Art of Busking (or making it up as you go along), providing 
advice on producing and emphasising the importance of organisation in 
creativity. The students were then given the chance to perform, providing the 
opportunity to gain valuable feedback from the respected producer.

Tony Platt is the latest industry expert to work with Lincoln’s music 
students, with musician and audio engineer George Shilling and Belle & 
Sebastian’s Mick Cooke having delivered guest lectures so far this academic 
year.


Snapshots of life at the University of Lincoln
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/university-of-lincoln-partner-zone/gallery/2016/apr/20/snapshots-of-life-at-the-university-of-lincoln>
Elly Yeatman, a first year music student, attended the session. She said: 
“It’s really interesting to hear from different people who all embrace music in 
different ways, from young community performers to music producers who’ve 
worked in the industry for years like Tony. Listening to their stories has 
really opened my eyes to how the music industry works and the wide range of 
opportunities available to me.”

As a member of JAMES, Platt works to promote supportive links between industry 
and education. He said: “With the rise of programmes such as Britain’s Got 
Talent, many students believe that success is instant but it’s really not. They 
have to find and develop their own style, and make the most of being at 
university and the facilities on offer to build their portfolio.

 “Creative subjects are unique in that they require a completely different way 
of teaching to more traditional subjects. To develop their skills and 
understanding of music, students have to expose themselves to as many different 
viewpoints as possible, and that’s why it’s great to get involved in sessions 
like this.”
 