
The comments by the Department for Education that you quote in your front page 
story are somewhat selective in their interpretation of the higher education 
and research bill (“Lords revolt at Tory plans for ‘free-market’ universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/31/lords-revolt-tory-plans-free-market-universities>
”; News).

“The bill does not take away the royal charters of any of our higher education 
institutions,” says the DfE. Not directly, perhaps. But clause 43 creates the 
power to do so “by order” and gives it to the new regulator, the Office for 
Students, while part 3 of the bill deprives the research councils of their 
royal charter status and subjects them to ministerial control within a new 
agglomeration called United Kingdom Research and Innovation.

The DfE statement continues: “What it does do is protect and enshrine the 
autonomy and academic freedom of these institutions in law.” Well, only to the 
extent that it places certain specific limitations on the powers that ministers 
may exercise over the activities of universities.

The legal protection that the bill, as drafted, provides for academic freedom 
is certainly no stronger than the clauses introduced by the House of Lords into 
the 1988 Education Reform Act, and arguably a lot weaker.
Professor David Midgley
Cambridge

Chris Patten (“Leave state control of universities to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/01/leave-state-control-of-universities-to-china>
”; Comment) commiserates with Chinese universities on having to adhere to the 
party’s leadership. “Good luck to them,” he writes, “in… ” But in what? In 
furthering knowledge, perhaps? Or in helping their students towards an 
informed, critical understanding of their country and the world?

No. What the chancellor of Oxford University wishes them is “good luck… in the 
international league tables”. Has higher education, even in our ancient 
universities, really come to this?
Donald Mackinnon
Newport
Gwent

It is interesting to note that the Tories are using the same argument for 
their higher education bill as they used in the 1980s, when proposing the 
privatisation of the energy industry.

Clearly, the proposals “to increase choice and competition in the higher 
education sector” will no more raise standards than the energy sell-off lowered 
prices. This backdoor privatisation is another example of the government’s 
appallingly inept education policy.

While there is no denying universities should be made “more accountable to 
their students”, the Tory method of achieving this is crass.

Teaching quality is to be judged by the Teaching Excellence Framework, which 
takes into account student opinion, the number of students who leave prior to 
course completion and the number of graduates gaining appropriate jobs. Bearing 
in mind that good teaching will lead to increased tuition fees, how can anyone 
in government think that this is efficient or fair?

Government thinking on the teacher recruitment crisis in schools is no better 
(“Teaching shortages could worsen as Brexit takes effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/31/brexit-threat-to-teachers-from-eu>
”; News). With “more teachers leaving the job than joining”, the DfE failing 
“to hit necessary recruitment levels for a fifth year in a row” and May 
refusing to give EU nationals “any assurances that they will continue to be 
welcome” after Brexit, one would have thought the penny would have dropped by 
now: low pay for classroom teachers, an excessive workload and constant 
criticism from Ofsted are all problems in dire need of government attention.

The fact that schools have to rely on recruitment agencies “operating in 
places like Romania and Bulgaria” for their teachers is nothing less than a 
national disgrace.
Bernie Evans
Liverpool
 