
One year ago this week, the European Union, China, France, Germany, Russia, 
the UK, the US and Iran began to implement thejoint comprehensive plan of action
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/sanctions-against-iran-to-be-lifted-after-compliance-with-nuclear-deal>
 on Iran’s nuclear programme. This agreement was the result of brave choices, 
political leadership, collective determination and hard work. A year on, we can 
clearly say that the Iran deal is working and we need to maintain it.

To those critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/atomic-agency-leader-warns-disaster--donald-trump-tears-up-iran-deal-iaea>
 who have raised concerns, both about the terms of the agreement or about the 
very idea of having an agreement at all with Iran, I say: take a close look at 
the facts.

The agreement has already paid off by addressing a highly contentious and 
longstanding dispute in a peaceful manner. In its absence, today we might be 
facing one more military conflict, in a region that is already far too 
destabilised.

The deal, one year after its implementation, is delivering on its main 
purpose: ensuring the purely peaceful, civilian nature of Iran’s nuclear 
programme. The International Atomic Energy Agency – the United Nations’ nuclear 
watchdog – has issued four reports on the matter and has regularly verified that
Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> is complying with its 
nuclear-related obligations. This means that the Iranian nuclear programme has 
been significantly reformatted and downsized and is now subject to intense 
monitoring by the IAEA. The joint commission – which I coordinate – oversees 
constantly the implementation of the agreement, meeting regularly, which allows 
us to detect even minor possible deviations and to take necessary corrective 
measures if the need arises.

The deal is also working for Iran. Major companies are investing in the 
country: the oil sector, the automotive industry, commercial aircraft, just to 
give a few examples, are areas where significant contracts have been concluded. 
TheInternational Monetary Fund has forecast 
<https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2016/12/19/PR16569-Islamic-Republic-of-Iran-IMF-Staff-Completes-2016-Article-IV-Mission>
 real GDP growth in Iran to rebound to 6.6% in 2016-17.

More work is needed, for sure, including domestic economic reforms, to make 
these positive results trickle down to the Iranian population, especially its 
youth. But the trend is absolutely clear, and progress undeniable. Trade 
between the EU and Iran has risen by a staggering 63% over the first three 
quarters of last year. After more than 30 years of a diplomatic ice age, the EU 
and Iran are also discussing cooperation on matters as diverse as the economy, 
protection of the environment, migration, and culture – and the list could 
continue.

Therefore – and despite criticism that deceitfully stresses the deal’s 
perceived shortcomings and overlooks its proven benefits – it is important to 
state very clearly: the nuclear agreement with Iran is working.

There should be no doubt that the EU stands firmly by the deal, which is a 
multilateral endeavour. It was borne out of the efforts of the “E3/EU+3” – 
Britain, Germany, France plus the US, Russia and China – and Iran, but it now 
belongs to the entire international community, through its endorsement by the 
UN security council.

Without the agreement, the regional situation would be even more alarming. And 
we would be losing a historic opportunity if we missed the chance to build a 
more cooperative regional environment.

Against a dramatic regional background, the nuclear deal is a glimpse of what 
is possible in international relations, by tackling the conflicts affecting the 
region in a cooperative manner.

We can mark the first anniversary of the start of the implementation of the 
nuclear deal by clearly saying that it is working, thanks to the commitment and 
determination of all. And we can start 2017 by reaffirming our strong 
collective interest in living up to the commitments we have all made, building 
security not only for the region but for the entire world.
 