
In 1995, the Guardian had claimed that Jonathan Aitken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/aitken>, then minister for defence 
procurement, had violated the ministerial code by allowing the Saudis to pay 
his Ritz hotel bill in Paris. Aitken’s response had been to say his wife had 
paid the bill. He vowed to “cut out the cancer of bent and twisted journalism 
in our country with the simple sword of truth and the trusty shield of British 
fair play” by suing the Guardian for libel.


Like many journalists working at the Guardian in the mid-1990s, I followed the 
run-up to the libel case closely, with a growing sense of concern. Despite 
plenty of circumstantial evidence that Aitken was lying, there was no one 
obvious killer fact that could nail him. It began to look as if he would win. 
That all changed thanks to the efforts of one Guardian reporter.

Owen Bowcott had been sent to the Swiss town of Villars to see if he could 
turn up any evidence for the paper’s belief that Aitken’s wife, Lolicia, had 
been there, rather than in Paris, on the weekend in question. Even though he 
suspected he was being sent on a wild goose chase, as the Hotel Bristol was now 
boarded up, having by then gone out of business, Bowcott managed to talk his 
way into the building to start searching whatever archives were left in the 
basement.

Bowcott spent three days rifling through boxes of files. At first he turned up 
nothing. Among the registration cards, the only Aitken he could find was 
Jonathan, who had stayed at the hotel in November 1993. Most would have given 
up at that point, but Bowcott kept going and not only managed to establish that 
Lolicia had stayed at the Bristol on the weekend in question but had paid with 
her own American Express card – something she had denied owning in a previous 
court hearing.

When George Carman, the Guardian’s QC, presented this evidence to Aitken’s 
lawyers in court, his case quickly began to unravel and I can still remember 
the thrill of reading the front page, with its headline,He lied and lied and 
lied <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1997/jun/21/uk.davidpallister>, 
after the case collapsed.

Bowcott only got a passing mention in the reports, but for me he was – and 
always has been – the hero of the story. He was the simple sword of truth.

We are keen to hear from Members about the Guardian articles that changed 
their views on the world, politics, society or culture. If you would like to 
share your experience, please email sophie.zeldin-oneill@theguardian.com, with 
a brief outline of the article you’d choose and why.
 