
We write to you as 45 former directors of social services with many decades of 
senior management experience behind us, to express our grave concerns about the 
current underfunding of adult social care services. Not a day goes by without 
well-informed groups expressing their dismay at the outcomes for vulnerable 
adults. Yet despite this the chancellor made no mention of this issue in his 
autumn statement.

We know that £4.2bn has been taken from local authority budgets over the past 
five years. The appalling consequences are there for all to see. Rapidly rising 
levels of dementia, but cuts in home care support. Hospital beds full, but 
insufficient residential places for vulnerable adults to be discharged to. 
Increasing suicide levels among young people, but draconian cuts in mental 
health provision. Many more people living – and dying – in the streets, but 
inadequate support and a lack of hostel accommodation.

Some 500,000 older people are abused every year while cuts are being made in 
safeguarding provision. At the same time services for people with physical and 
learning difficulties have been drastically cut leaving many isolated and 
unsupported. The Care Quality Commission says the residential care service is 
at a “tipping point”. But should we really have to wait for more homes to go 
out of business before the necessary action is taken?

These are not the indicators of a caring and just society. We don’t need 
further reviews and promises. Thousands upon thousands of people are suffering 
and sometimes dying in misery. They need help now, and we call on the 
government to provide it, with urgency.
Rob Hutchinson, Dr John Beer, Hilary Simon, Chris Davies, Pauline Oliver, Anne 
Parker, Professor Ray Jones, Peter Westland, Ian White, Roy Taylor, Richard 
Jones, Andrew Cozens, Liz Railton, Brian Parrott, Jean Daintith, Jo Cleary, 
Julia Ross, Eileen Means, Gary Birch, Bill McKitterick, Mimi Konigsberg, Helen 
Taylor, Mary Robertson, Ann Windiate, Susan Richards, Robert Ward, James 
Reilly, Graham Gatehouse, Stephen Pitt, Lynn Hopkins, Derek Law, Ian Davey, Tim 
Brown, Stephen Sloss, Margaret Sheather, Matt Bukowski, Ian Winter, Colin 
Smart, Jonathan Phillips, David Mason, Peter Bye, Joyce Mosely, Teresa Bell, 
Jef Smith

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 