
Terms of reference of The Scott Trust review panel

The review panel (“the panel”) has been set up by The Scott Trust to ensure 
that complainants are not disadvantaged by the decision of Guardian News & 
Media (“GNM”) not to join the industry’s new self-regulator. It is therefore 
giving complainants whose complaints have not been resolved to their 
satisfaction after going through GNM’s internal complaints procedures the 
chance to have their complaint adjudicated by the panel, under the editors’ 
code of practice formerly used by the Press Complaints Commission (“the PCC 
code”). The panel’s role is not to regulate GNM, its journalists or the content 
of its newspapers or other media output. Nor does it replaceGNM’s own editorial 
guidelines <https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-editorial-code>, which 
GNM believes set the highest standards of professional conduct for its 
journalists.

The panel will appoint a complaints officer (“CO”), who will accept complaints 
from complainants whose complaints have not been resolved to their satisfaction 
following a final determination of their complaint from the readers’ editor 
(“RE”).

• The panel will only review complaints falling within the clauses set out in 
thePCC code. <http://www.pcc.org.uk/cop/practice.html>

• The panel will reject complaints which it believes have been resolved 
satisfactorily by the RE.

• Complaints that relate to concerns that fall outside the PCC code but within 
the broaderGNM editorial guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-editorial-code> may be referred 
outside the panel process to the existing GNM ombudsman for his consideration.

• The CO will investigate the complaint, and may liaise with the complainant. 
The CO will produce a report summarising the investigation for consideration by 
the panel (“the report”). The panel will communicate their recommendations to 
the managing editor (“ME”) and the editor-in-chief (“EiC”) for a written 
response. The panel will make a final determination after considering any 
response.

• The panel will meet at least once a month. However, the panel may meet more 
frequently or less than once a month according to the demands of caseload. When 
the panel meets will ultimately be at the discretion of the panel members.

• The panel will aim to consider the report of the CO within 28 days, but 
reserves the right to take longer to resolve the complaint where dealing with 
complex complaints or where there are unavoidable delays.

• The panel can recommend a range of remedies, including corrections, 
alteration or removal of content, deletion, apologies or providing a right of 
reply (“the recommendation”).

• The panel will keep a record of the number and nature of complaints that 
come before it, and will publish that information in an annual report made 
available on thereaders’ editor webpage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2013/sep/23/guardian-readers-editor>.

• Where the panel is split as to the recommendation, the chair of the panel 
will have the deciding vote.

• The panel will report concerns about identifiable patterns in complaints to 
the GNM ME and EiC.

• Any decision made by the Panel will be published on the Editorial Complaints 
Corrections section of the Guardian website.* The panel will have the 
discretion to recommend that prominence be given to panel recommendations where 
the panel considers there has been a serious breach of the PCC code.

Review panel members

The chair of the review panel is John Willis, the existing Guardian News & 
Media external ombudsman, Bafta deputy chairman and chief executive of Mentorn 
Media.

John is joined on the panel by: Geraldine Proudler, partner at Olswang and 
board member of the Guardian Foundation, and Elinor Goodman, former political 
editor of Channel 4 News, and one of six panel members at the Leveson inquiry.

Details of the Review Panel’s judgements can be viewed here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/complaints-and-corrections>.

*On 13th April the terms of reference were amended to make explicit that in 
the interests of openness and transparency, any decision of the review panel 
will be published on the Guardian website. This point will also be made 
explicit in correspondence with complainants.

 