
The general idea that labour-saving machinery is too expensive to be installed 
in ordinary houses calls for an investigation of the cost of running a house 
with and without a servant.


There are, broadly speaking, two classes of people without servants to-day – 
those who cannot afford to keep one on account of the present high wages and 
cost of living, and those who, while not well off in the common sense of the 
term, have enough money to keep at least one maid but who prefer not to do so. 
Whatever the cause, the servantless housewife is faced with the same problem of 
getting the work done as best she can.

In pre-war days the housekeeper, while perfectly aware of the time and labour 
involved in polishing brass, cleaning stair-rods, sweeping carpets, and other 
frequent tasks of housework, did not bother herself very much about these 
things so long as there were servants to do the work: but now with servants 
unaffordable, unobtainable, or considered undesirable a keen application has 
led to the provision and development of all sorts of labour-saving appliances. 
Moreover, it is obviously these labour-saving devices, in conjunction with 
well-planned work, that can make it possible to run a house successfully and 
conveniently without a maid.

Relative Costs
A comparison of the relative cost of a maid and of labour-saving machinery 
will prove that the latter is not such an extravagance as might appear at a 
first glance. It may be taken as a general rule that a good general servant 
cannot be obtained to-day for less than £35 to £45 a year, and at present 
prices it will probably cost £1 a week for her keep. To this must be added, if 
an accurate comparison is to be made, the cost in wear and tear, in breakages, 
and in lack of economy of fuel and light. The house not being hers it is only 
human that a maid, unless exceptionally conscientious, will not be always on 
the watch to prevent unnecessary use of gas, water, &c., and to economise in 
every possible way.

Considering all these points the cost of having a maid may be summed up as 
follows:—
Wages - £40 
Keep per year - £52
Breakages - £3 
Wear and tear, &c.- £3 
Total - £98 

This, it must be remembered, is an annual expenditure. An outlay of the most 
essential labour-saving devices can be estimated as follows:—

An electric vacuum cleaner - £16 
A fuelless cooker - £5 
A service waggon - £4 
Stainless knives- £5 
Gas fires or electric radiators - £15 
Anthracite stove - £8 
Small electrical equipment -£7 
Total - £60 

Thus for an outlay of £60 enough mechanical appliances and other labour-savers 
can be procured to lighten considerably the tasks of housewifery.

The fact that this is but an initial outlay expense must be emphasised, since 
a maid’s cost is continuous. After a year or two there is but a small 
proportion of expenditure as compared with what was formerly the case with a 
servant, and the housewife will find herself with a considerable balance in 
hand and will be able to add to her list of appliances, proving each to be a 
thoroughly good investment.

It is only when the cost of appliances is regarded without consideration or 
comparison that such equipment can be vetoed as exorbitant and only accessible 
to millionaires. Mechanical labour is more certain, less tiring and altogether 
more reliable than human labour, and the wise housewife will welcome it as the 
means of solving her household difficulties and giving her freedom for other 
interests.
 