
A good measure of the topsy-turviness of our political economy could be found 
at Davostoday. As the billionaires gathered for the World Economic Forum,the 
toast of the Alps was Xi Jinping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/17/davos-2017-wef-chinese-president-xi-trump-scaramucci-brexit-hsbc-live?page=with:block-587dfcd7e4b00b8fc2ae1566#block-587dfcd7e4b00b8fc2ae1566>
. The first Chinese president ever to address the summit, his speech this 
morning was bound to be a big moment. Just as striking, though, was what Mr Xi 
said. The general secretary of the Communist party of China launched into an 
eloquent defence of openness and free markets. It was, as several observers 
remarked, the kind of speech one might expect to come from an American 
president. Except the US president-elect, Donald Trump, will not be popping in 
to Switzerland this week and won his new job partly because of his 
protectionism.He was at it again this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/michael-gove-cheesy-puff-donald-trump-interview>
, threatening BMW with swingeing import tariffs if it followed plans to build a 
new plant in Mexico, rather than America. It did not sound like an empty threat.

What’s going on here? One answer lies in the inequality statistics published 
this week by Oxfam, which show that eight men, six of them American, own as 
much wealth as the 3.5 billion poorest people in the world. To quote Bernie 
Sanders: “If that’s not insanity I don’t know what is 
<https://twitter.com/SenSanders/status/821382794844766209>.” Extreme economics 
breeds extreme politics: the campaigns for Brexit and Mr Trump both harnessed 
anger at the vast gap between the super-rich and the rest of society. One of 
the ironies of this anti-elitist politics is that it has been spearheaded by 
people who would normally count as part of an elite. Mr Trump is a billionaire 
property developer, Nigel Farage is an alumnus of Dulwich college who worked in 
the City. These people are effectively squatting a space in forward-looking 
politics – a space that has gone almost unoccupied by the political mainstream.

Even after the fall of Lehman Brothers, mainstream politicians from Britain 
through continental Europe to America have continued to push the same old dead 
economics: a reliance on a bloated finance sector, a penchant for austerity 
(even when it is not working,as the Office for Budget Responsibility pointed out
 <http://cdn.budgetresponsibility.org.uk/FSR_Jan17.pdf> today about Britain’s 
budget position), and a hankering after the same failed economics. Consider: 
since the 1980s, the UK has taken the lead in slashing marginal tax rates and 
its corporation tax rate is in freefall. While ministers acknowledge the depth 
of anger against three decades of grotesque inequality, their attempts to do 
anything about it are sadly desultory. The promising idea of putting workers on 
company boards has been watered down, and even the plan to publish pay ratios, 
or how much more chief executives are earning than their average employee, has 
hit the buffers.

Such watery responses allow Mr Trump, Mr Farage and others to act as if they 
are the only ones who understand public anger. It is possible to pursue market 
economics while running major public investment programmes and protecting 
nascent industries: ask Davos’s new darling Mr Xi. Just as the Chinese have 
their form of capitalism (complete with heavy repression), so it is up to the 
UK and others to come up with their own. A progressive response would clamp 
down on super-sized pay and tax-dodging, while giving workers more rights and 
rewards and driving investment into infrastructure and research. Centrists and 
social democrats unite! You have nothing to lose but your unpopularity.
 