
Steve Berry could be forgiven for asking himself every day what it takes to 
make a book a global bestseller. Back in 2003, the former lawyer published a 
novel that placed well-known myths in a conspiracy web to create a page-turning 
thriller.

Sound familiar? It should, except you’re thinking of Dan Brown and his 
flagellating priests in the multimillion seller The Da Vinci Code – not Berry’s 
tale of Nazis hunting Russian treasure in the barely knownThe Amber Room 
<http://steveberry.org/books/the-amber-room/synopsis/>.

Published in the same year, with a male-female double act tracking down 
artefacts in a global conspiracy – why would one book sell so many copies and 
not the other? There is a cryptological tool that might help Berry find an 
answer: the list of books that have sold more than 250,000 copies since the 
turn of the century, produced for theSpecsavers bestseller awards 
<https://www.specsavers.co.uk/stores/banbridge-hearing/specsavers-bestseller-awards-recognise-remarkable-reads>
 later this week.

The data collated since 2000 by Nielsen BookScan, which monitors sales through 
bookshops, supermarkets and online, offers many clues to what makes a 
bestseller.
bestsellers table 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1sh1g56od6qpy5kESn6U1wOXw3mAeAhTLMprpOYRG_3Y>
A curious mix of unrelated titles, it ranges from bonking and bondage in EL 
James’s Fifty Shades of Grey – the only “sextuple platinum” bestseller, having 
sold 6.5m copies – to Eric Carle’s ravenous larva in The Very Hungry 
Caterpillar, placing Arthur Golden’s The Memoirs of a Geisha alongside Judith 
Kerr’s The Tiger Who Came to Tea. There are only two Booker prize winners – 
Hilary Mantel’s Wolf Hall and Yann Martel’s Life of Pi – sitting alongside the 
likes of Jeremy Clarkson, The Atkins Diet and Men Are from Mars, Women Are from 
Venus. All that unites them is that each has sold more than 250,000 copies, 
with those selling more than 1m honoured with the publishing world’s new 
equivalent of silver, gold and platinum discs.

Are there any trends among the top few? To sell a million, it helps to be a 
woman – with a man’s name. Though more men have sold more than 250,000 copies 
of their books, women dominate the biggest sellers: EL James’s debut whipped up 
sales of 6.5m, seeing off stiff competition from JK Rowling’s multimillion 
selling Harry Potter series. Not far behind are Twilight by Stephenie Meyer, 
The Hunger Games bySuzanne Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/suzanne-collins> and Gone Girl by Gillian 
Flynn.

It must be observed that James and Rowling both rendered their names 
gender-neutral – a lesson not lost on thriller writer Alex Marwood, who used to 
write under her real name Serena Mackesy.

Mackesy’s writing career had been grinding to a halt, and The Darkest Secret 
author faced the loss of her home. Drastic action was needed and that meant a 
name change. “Books by women get less coverage and fewer prizes than those by 
men and, as we all know, a lot of men won’t read books by women,” Mackesy 
explains. She needed a name that wouldn’t cause sniggers among snotty 
booksellers each time a customer asked for her books. “Booksellers were 
spending more time correcting people’s pronunciation of Mackesy than they were 
selling my books,” she adds.

Using her grandmother’s surname and an androgynous, classless first name, she 
moved publishers and unleashed The Wicked Girls. The book topped bestseller 
lists and earned a nod from Stephen King, who chose it as one of his books of 
the year.

There may be less speculative ways of earning a living than writing a novel, 
but it seems clear that those who make it to the top of the bestseller lists 
write because they have a passion for the story they are working on, not 
because it will make them rich.

Kate Mosse, whose breakout grail novel Labyrinth is among the Specsavers 
bestsellers, said that writing it felt as if “I put my hands on the keyboard 
and burned my fingers”. The founder of the Baileys women’s prize for fiction 
adds: “I really felt the story mattered and that I had to do it justice. I had 
no expectations for it, I just felt it had to be written.” She would wake in 
the middle of the night teasing over plot points in the novel, which slips 
between medieval Carcassonne and present day.

But Labyrinth was not powered solely by Mosse’s desire to write, it was aided 
by a large slice of luck, she admits. “I know that you can do everything right, 
but in the end there is that piece of luck that plays for or against you.” The 
novel arrived in time to pick up the insatiable appetite for Templar novels 
followingThe Da Vinci Code <https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-da-vinci-code>
, whereas Steve Berry broke cover too early.

But there is something more in the list waiting to be revealed: enthusiasm. 
Every book on the list was powered by an excitement that began in the 
imagination of the author and made evangelists of everyone who read it whether 
they were agents, editors, booksellers or readers.

“How do publishers know that they have a potential breakout bestseller from an 
author?” asks Jane Johnson, George RR Martin’s publisher at HarperCollins. 
“Experience and ‘editor’s itch’.”

This is a potentially infectious condition – the unique excitement that makes 
the hair on her neck stand on end when she reads a manuscript with the 
potential to go gangbusters.

So being a bestseller doesn’t come down to the quality of the writing alone, 
but more often when a writer hits on something in the air that signals the 
start of a trend. Agent Lizzy Kremer, who representsPaula Hawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/paula-hawkins> of The Girl on a Train fame, 
says she knows it when she finds it. “As soon as we started talking about the 
idea for The Girl on the Train, we both knew it had huge potential,” she says.

What would give Kremer a frisson of excitement now? Suburban noir: “It won’t 
be the first thriller set in the suburbs,” she says. “But it will somehow 
redefine the suburbs in our imagination, and hit the nail on the head harder 
than it has ever been hit before.”

So luck, timing and the eye of a keen agent are very useful things to acquire 
if you want to get rich. At least Steve Berry doesn’t need to adjust his name.
 