
The world of indoor horticulture can sometimes seem all about the big and 
blousy, with species sporting the brightest flowers and showiest foliage 
dominating the garden centre shelves. But look a little closer at some of the 
more mild-mannered foliage plants and they can be even more astonishing. To me 
nowhere is this more apparent in the world than spike mosses, which offer up 
two of the best examples of all.

The Resurrection Plant, Selaginella lepidophylla, hails from the deserts of 
Latin America and has the curious ability to enter an extreme form of dormancy 
where the whole plant desiccates almost entirely, withering to brown and 
rolling up into a tight ball. In this state plants can survive for months, even 
years, patiently waiting for rain – and indeed they are sold online like this 
as little brown, bare-rooted balls.

Pop one in a bowl of water and within hours it unfurls

Pop one in a bowl of water, however, and within hours it can swell to three or 
four times its size and unfurl to form a pretty rosette of green, lacy foliage, 
coming back to life as if by magic. I first did this when I was eight years old 
and still think it is one of the most miraculous transformations in all of 
horticulture.

Potted up in a bright place in gritty potting compost, resurrection plants 
form attractive, easy to grow, drought-tolerant houseplants. There is just one 
caveat: in my experience some suppliers stock specimens that have been kept in 
storage for so long they have used up their energy reserves and while they will 
open, they do not have the strength to grow new roots. This will be clear 
immediately as their unfurled foliage stays brown. It’s frustrating, but given 
the cost of most of these plants (just a couple of quid), they are worth the 
gamble, for novelty value if nothing else.

From the other side of the planet, Selaginella willdenowii is a little 
creeping, fern-like plant of the Malaysian rainforest whose frilly green 
foliage flashes iridescent pink, blue and purple when held up to the light, 
like a butterfly’s wing. In fact, the way they do this is actually quite 
similar, too, using special crystal-like structures called iridoplasts to 
reflect light into a dazzling array of colours. The function of these 
structures appears to be to improve the efficiency of photosynthesis under low 
light levels, meaning that plants grown under deeper shade will produce the 
best colouration.

Want to give them a go? Well, these plants can be hard to track down in the 
houseplant trade, but funnily enough are commonly sold as a submerged aquatic 
plant in aquarium shops, as they will happily grow both inside and outside 
water. These forest dwellers thrive best potted up in an all-purpose compost 
and housed in the warmth and high humidity of a terrarium or steamy bathroom, 
then treat just as you would any fern.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 