The two Johnson brothers hogged the headlines this year. But who did better at 
university?  Both BoJo and JoJo gained firsts  Both BoJo and JoJo gained thirds 
 JoJo gained a first and BoJo didn’t  BoJo gained a first and JoJo didn’t A 
Victorian guide to university life at St John’s College, Cambridge, published 
in 1893, went on display this year. What’s missing from this nugget of advice? 
“Don’t _______ all day, however accomplished you may be.”  List your academic 
achievements  Play piano  Throw pennies at paupers  Drink alcohol  Professor 
Louise Richardson chose a song from which musical icon in an appearance on 
Desert Island Discs in June?  Joni Mitchel  Joan Baez  Carole King  Taylor Swift
Staff and students at the University of Sydney were distraught in September 
when what died on campus?  A jacaranda tree  A crocodile  A cohort of mice used 
in research  The Ant and Dec fan club Which university used Tinder to entice 
students through Clearing this summer?  University of Durham  University of 
Exeter  Manchester Metropolitan University  University of Salford What are 
students threatening to boycott to scupper higher education reforms?  Ucas  
Lectures  Opinion surveys  Exams  Who did Mary Beard accuse of being a 
mansplainer of history?  Ukip donor Arron Banks  Labour party leader Jeremy 
Corbyn  Broadcaster Jeremy Paxman  Historian David Starkey How much did US 
president-elect Donald Trump pay out in settlements to students of his 
university in November?  $1m  $10m  $15m  $25m And, talking of Trump, why did 
Robert Gordon University strip him of his honorary degree?  For calling Hillary 
Clinton a “nasty woman”  For being caught on video boasting about grabbing 
women’s genitals  For demanding Muslims be banned from entering the US  For 
being buddies with Nigel Farage It’s been a difficult year for experts. Who 
said: “Suspicion of experts goes back into antiquity, and it’s a very healthy 
thing to have”?  Jacob Rees-Mogg  Michael Gove  Jeremy Clarkson  Theresa May  
You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  