
Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> remain outsiders to reach 
the Champions Cup quarter-finals, but Rob Baxter is refusing to give up hope of 
his team achieving what looked like the impossible before this victory. The 
Chiefs played some impressive rugby to record a bonus-point success over the 
Irish visitors, Thomas Waldrom and Michele Campagnaro scoring two tries apiece 
with the captain, Gareth Steenson, adding three conversions.

It leaves the Sandy Park team needing to take five points from their final 
pool fixture away to the already-qualified Clermont Auvergne while hoping other 
results go their way. It’s a tough ask but after seeing his team cross five 
times against Ulster, Baxter remained upbeat.

“You never know and we will go over there and have a bit of fun,” he said of 
Exeter’s chances of making the last eight. “We will wait and see what happens 
and hopefully the other teams can do the job for us. Collectively we were very 
good today and it’s no surprise to me that we’ve won as we’ve beaten some good 
Premiership sides recently. I’m enjoying what I’m seeing and we’ll turn our 
attentions to next week now.”

European Champions Cup roundup: Northampton take revenge on Castres
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/european-rugby-champions-cup-roundup-northampton-castres-connacht-zebre>
Exeter ended up as deserving winners but it had been Ulster who started this 
game with a bang. Stuart McCloskey powered through a gap off a lineout and Sean 
Reidy was in support to cross for a simple finish. Paddy Jackson shanked the 
conversion wide but after the captain, Andrew Trimble, breezed through more 
poor tackling, Exeter finally started to play.

A half-break from the England wing Jack Nowell lifted the home crowd and 
suddenly it was Baxter’s men on the front foot. And within nine minutes two 
tries had put them ahead for the first time.

First, a move down the blindside saw the Italian centre Campagnaro get on the 
outside of the Ulster defence and just make it to the line for what was an 
impressive finish. Steenson’s conversion drifted wide of the right-hand 
upright. Exeter’s pack had gained the advantage and a forward surge ended with 
Waldrom emerging from a mass of bodies for a trademark score. Romain Poite sent 
the score to the TMO but pictures clearly showed the No8 had made the line.

Steenson converted and at that stage it looked like Exeter would turn around 
ahead. But Charles Piutau had other ideas and the former All Black powered 
through a poor tackle from Nowell for a score which would have left Baxter 
disappointed.

Jackson had kicked the conversion to send the teams in level and the second 
half started with the Ulster centre Luke Marshall lucky to escape a yellow card 
for what looked like a high tackle on his opposite number, Campagnaro.

Saracens stay unbeaten as Chris Ashton secures late draw at Scarlets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/scarlets-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
Exeter could have had a man advantage but another pushover score from Waldrom 
soon saw them move back ahead. Steenson added the extras before 
man-of-the-match Campagnaro crossed for the score of the day. A flowing Exeter 
move started with Phil Dollman finding his back-three partner Nowell with a 
sublime flick.

The wing then passed inside for the Italian to fly over and send the home fans 
into raptures. Steenson’s conversion went wide and although Piutau added his 
second from a delightful Jackson chip, Exeter still had time for one more score.

It was one they deserved too as another blindside break saw Jackson knock the 
ball on with the line gaping and a number of home backs in space in the wide 
channels. Poite rightly went under the posts to award a penalty try and sent 
Jackson to the bin as Ulster finished the game with 14 men.

“We look like we’re accelerating through the season now,” said Baxter. “We’re 
hitting form but we’ll have to be on the money to win in Clermont.”

Exeter Dollman; Nowell, Campagnaro, Whitten (Devoto, 64), Woodburn; Steenson 
(capt), Lewis (Townsend, 68); Moon (Low, 59), Cowan-Dickie (Yeandle, 59), 
Holmes (Williams, 59), Lees, Hill (Dennis, 64), Johnson (Horstmann, 55), 
Armand, Waldrom.

Tries Campagnaro 2, Waldrom 2, Penalty. Cons Steenson 3.

Ulster Ludik; Piutau, L Marshall (Stockdale, 61), McCloskey, Trimble (capt, 
Herron, 73); Jackson, Shanahan; Black (Warwick, 46), Best (Andrew, 78), Kane 
(Simpson, 34), Treadwell (Van der Merwe, 64), Browne (Ross, 57), Henderson, 
Henry, Reidy.

Tries Reidy, Piutau 2. Cons Jackson 2.

Referee R Poite (Fr). Attendance 10,671
 