
Around 750,000 struggling mortgage borrowers could be due compensation after 
the City regulator found lenders had made mistakes in the way arrears were 
collected.

A review by the Financial Conduct Authority looked at how lenders were 
treating borrowers who had fallen behind with their loans and were repaying 
their arrears alongside their monthly mortgage repayments.

It found that some lenders had automatically included the arrears payments 
with normal mortgage repayments when making recalculations after interest rate 
changes. At the same time, they had also collected the arrears payments 
separately.


The two payments meant arrears were paid off more quickly than planned, but 
the FCA said households may have ended up unable to repay more expensive debts 
as a result of the mistake.

It said the automatic inclusion of arrears balances in customers’ mortgage 
payments lacked transparency and could have led to customers being charged 
inappropriate fees.

In a review of 10 lenders representing 66% of the mortgage market, the FCA 
identified around 750,000 customers who were affected, but it said the recent
cut in the Bank of England base rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 could have led to more cases of miscalculation. This is because lenders 
adjusted their standard variable rates and any deals linked to the base rate.


The City watchdog said borrowers could be due compensation “in the low 
hundreds of pounds”, and that lenders were expected to identify those affected 
and address the problem by June 2017.

Jonathan Davidson, director of supervision – retail and authorisations at the 
FCA, said: “Customers do not have to take any action at this stage as firms 
will contact them directly. Firms should start identifying affected customers 
immediately and not wait until the finalised guidance is published.

“To prevent similar issues in the future firms need to ensure that all systems 
are reviewed when considering the implications of a rule change.”

It said it did not expect there to be many cases where the calculation of 
repayments had resulted in a home being repossessed.

The Council of Mortgage Lenders (CML) said the lenders reviewed had been 
“fully transparent with the regulator on their arrears calculation and charging 
methods” and that these had been in line with longstanding industry practice.

Paul Smee, director-general of the CML, said: “Those lenders who used the 
arrears calculation methodology now identified as problematic did so in good 
faith, believing that they complied with the rules and were acting in customer 
interests.

“Once lenders have digested the regulator’s consultation and determined the 
most appropriate way to undertake the expected remediation, they will be in 
touch directly with affected customers.”
 