
Tim Ferriss is one of our age’s most influential self-help gurus. The 
39-year-old’s debut was the 2007 “life-hacking” bible,The 4-Hour Workweek: 
Escape 9-5, Live Anywhere and Join the New Rich 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/4-hour-work-week.html>, which was initially 
rejected by more than 20 publishers. He followed that withThe 4-Hour Body  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/4-hour-body.html>and The 4-Hour Chef and his 
new book is another bestseller,Tools of Titans 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tools-of-titans.html>. In it, Ferriss 
distills the wisdom of 200 interviews with “world-class performers” such as 
Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Foxx and Malcolm Gladwell that were originally 
conducted for his podcast (now at more than 100 million downloads). Away from 
books, he has made a fortune as an angel investor in tech startups and holds a 
world record in tango.

Why do you think your approach to self-help has caught the imagination of so 
many people?
Well, I’d say it’s because I’ve been more of an experimenter and human guinea 
pig than a writer. So I’m positioning myself as someone who is doing all of the 
heavy lifting in the messy reality of the real world to bring back the 
CliffsNotes of what actually works for my readers. I’m not the only person in 
the world who’s ever done this, of course – you have people such as Ben 
Franklin and more recentlyGeorge Plimpton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2003/oct/05/society> – but usually in 
writing and journalism it’s for comedic effect. I’m doing it because I want 
tactics and approaches that I can use. If I can find perhaps a non-obvious or 
less-known approach that saves people hundreds or thousands of hours then 
that’s my drug of choice.

The guinea-pig description is a good one: you have ended up in hospital with 
your self-experimentation and for a long time you weighed your own faeces. Are 
you open to anything that could improve yourself?
Just about, just about. I’m very often described as a “risk-taker” and 
“extreme”, and there are a few examples of that, certainly in the physical 
experimentation. But for the most part I’ve always viewed myself as a 
risk-mitigator first and foremost. Even if it’s, say, investing in early-stage 
technology and startups, which is really my main financial career or was for 10 
years, with Uber and Facebook and Twitter and about 50 other companies. People 
view that as very dangerous and speculative, but I’m always thinking about 
capping the downside. So I will consider everything but not do everything.

As an investor, you seem to have had phenomenal success predicting which 
companies were going to go huge. Why stop?
I’ve had a very good stretch with startup investing and I think it’s very 
important to know when to hold your chips. As poker players would say: I don’t 
make my money by playing my hand, I make my money by sitting. Also right now 
it’s very challenging, because there’s a surplus of fair-weather entrepreneurs 
and fair-weather investors, many of whom don’t really know how to play the game 
well. To be effective in that environment, I’d have had to effectively hire 
people to help or have become full time as a venture capitalist and that would 
have necessitated stopping doing other things such as writing.

You are now investing heavily in academic research into psychedelics. What do 
you hope to come out of that?
One of these studies looks at how psilocybin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/01/magic-mushroom-ingredient-psilocybin-can-lift-depression-studies-show>
 can be used to treat depression that has not responded to any conventional 
treatment. And, for instance, I had latent anger issues for decades that 
affected a lot of parts of my life. After a two-day, medically supervised 
experience with, in this case, ayahuasca, 90% of those issues just disappeared 
and have not returned even three years later. The best analogy is having a 
software program debugged. I can’t really describe it any other way.

If someone was looking for a quick, straightforward way to improve their life, 
what would you advise?
I’d recommend some type of very short meditation or mindfulness practice – 
neither term of which I’m in love with – on a daily basis. And the daily is 
more important than the duration. That came up repeatedly in the interviews for 
the podcast, across more than 80% of these world-class performers, whether it’s 
someone such as Arnold Schwarzenegger or an elite athlete or otherwise. You’re 
helping to train yourself when it doesn’t matter (ie, sitting on your couch or 
in bed in the morning for five to 20 minutes) to be less emotionally reactive. 
Throughout the day that helps you make better decisions or to respond with less 
anxiety or to be more effective when it does matter. When you’re in the middle 
of, say, a negotiation or a debate or an uncomfortable conversation.

Where would you start with it?
There are different ways you can do it: you could use an app such as Headspace 
<https://www.headspace.com/how-it-works>, or a guided meditation such as the 
2010 Smile Meditation byTara Brach 
<https://www.tarabrach.com/smile-guided-meditation/>; that specific audio came 
up a few times.

Sleep is also a recurring feature of the interviews. What would you suggest 
for improving that?
For sleep, I keep it pretty simple. Seth Roberts, who was a professor emeritus 
at UC Berkeley, recommended a cocktail before bed that is incredibly effective 
for about eight out of 10 people. I had insomnia my whole life and this is one 
of the things that helped fix it. Two tablespoons of apple cider vinegar, one 
tablespoon of raw honey and hot water, that’s it. About 15 minutes before you 
go to bed.

Ignore the headlines: a six-hour working day is the way forward | Daniel 
Bernmar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/ignore-headlines-six-hour-working-day-swedish>
You mention in the book that, despite your outward success, you suffered from 
depression in 2013. Why did you want to discuss that?
That’s very important. We’ve been talking about all these highlights and you 
guys have read my bio on the back of the book and it all sounds like rainbows 
and kittens 24/7 and high-fives riding unicorns. But let’s talk about what a 
bad day really looks like, or a bad week or a bad month, because it’s not all 
just a trailer for a Disney movie. There’s a stigma very often with discussing 
these things and people feel unsuccessful or they think they will be 
unsuccessful or they will always be depressed and unhappy because it’s not 
discussed openly.

You made your name with The 4-Hour Workweek, but everyone says you work 
incredibly hard. Was that just an eye-catching title?
The objective is not to have everyone in the world work four hours a week. Of 
course I get my balls busted endlessly for the title of the book and rightly so 
– it sounds like an infomercial product that would be on at 3am – but the 
objective is to maximise your hourly output. Then if you do that you have quite 
a few options on the table. You can work four hours a week and get 40 hours of 
results. Or for many people, they simply want a huge competitive advantage, 
where they can continue to work 80 hours a week but now they’re getting 800 
hours of output per week versus their competition. And they can just lay waste 
to all of their competitors who are stopping to eat their lunch.

Who would be a dream guest on the podcast? Donald Trump?
Sure, I’d have Donald on the podcast. But there are other people I’d say that 
immediately come to mind: Neil Gaiman, Oprah Winfrey and Tina Fey would be high 
on the list.

You ask your interviewees to name their “spirit animal”. What’s yours?
Yeah, it was such a ludicrous conversation to have with everybody, but I got 
some great answers. My spirit animal is the coyote. If you take a look at 
“trickster” mythology, Native American traditions, the coyote is a merry 
prankster who is a go-between between worlds. That is grossly simplified, but I 
feel in a lot of respects that is my job. The coyote creates a lot of things, 
but he also makes mistakes and gets caught in traps. With all of my physical 
experimentation and adventures and misadventures that’s a pretty accurate 
portrayal of what I’m up to a lot of the time.

• Tools of Titans <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tools-of-titans.html> by 
Tim Ferriss is published by Vermillion (£14.99). To order a copy for £12.74 go 
to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online 
orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99
 