
Solvers were unable for the last few days of April to submit entries for 
Genius No 130 and the same applied to the May Genius No 131 between Monday 5 
May and Tuesday 6 May. We thought, at first, that it was a problem caused by 
the latest version of Java but it became clear that it was more serious than 
that. Over the long bank holiday weekend we were unable to identify what was 
causing it. This was obviously infuriating to Genius fans. (I have had so many 
emails on the point that, I fear, I cannot reply to each one individually.) A 
fix is now in place and Genius grids are working once again. I encourage you to 
enter the May puzzle Genius No 131.
_____

In the last month we have had a volume of complaints that the Quick puzzle has 
overnight become much too difficult. The complainants usually assumed that we 
must have taken on a new setter, demanding that we get rid of her/him as soon 
as possible. In fact the setting arrangements have not changed for a long time, 
nor has there been any change of policy about them. I inherited in 1997 from my 
predecessor John Perkin an administratively simple procedure: all the Quicks 
are set it batches of 18 (three weeks) by three people in turn. Then they were 
Araucaria, Mercury and Rufus. Over the years the cast list has changed and 
today it is Paul, Chifonie and Orlando.

The complaints that the Quicks have become too hard are matched by comments, 
particularly online, that they are now much too easy. A pub quizzer once 
explained to me that the difference between a hard quiz and an easy one 
depended mainly on whether or not one knew the answers to the questions asked. 
I also recall a remark by a senior Conservative politician, John 
Boyd-Carpenter, long since dead, who was known affectionately as Spring-heel 
Jack for his idiosyncratic way of bouncing along as he walked. He once said 
that, as a politician, if the angry noise in his left ear and the angry noise 
in his right ear were of approximately the same volume, he tended to conclude 
that he must be facing in roughly the right direction. Am I safe in taking 
comfort from Spring-heel Jack's words in relation to the current too hard/too 
easy debate about the Quicks, or do you detect of late a change that has 
slipped past me unwittingly?
_____

The Easter jumbo puzzle was themed on Under Milk Wood by Dylan Thomas. Nine of 
the solutions were characters in the play, one being A. Rees. There seems to be 
some dispute as to the correct spelling of Rees's first name. We wanted Attila 
but it seems that some editions, including the one published by the Folio 
Society, has him as Atilla. Certainly my J.M. Dent and Sons edition (1954), 
which seems to have been the first in book form, has him as Attila. But this 
was prepared for publication after Dylan died, so he never had a chance to 
check the proofs, which were based on the script for the original radio 
broadcast. By then, in any case, he was almost certainly in no state at all to 
correct proofs carefully. So we can never know what the great man originally 
intended.
_____

For legal reasons a winner for the April prize has been selected from the 
entrants that solved the puzzle before the technical problems emerged. The 
winner has been notified and will be announced shortly.
_____

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 