
The Tunisian minister of tourism reportedly sent a letter to all hotels in his 
country demanding an upgrade in security in the wake of the Bardo museum terror 
attack and before the mass shooting in Sousse, an inquest has heard.

A 23-year-old extremist, Seifeddine Rezgui, opened fire on the beach outside 
the Imperial Marhaba hotel in Sousse on 26 June 2015, killing 38 tourists, 
including 30 Britons.

The inquests in London into the British deaths heard claims that the tourism 
minister, Selma Rekik, sent a circular letter in May 2015 requiring hotels to 
guard beach entrances among other improved security measures.

Andrew Ritchie QC, who represents families of 20 victims of the Sousse attack, 
told the inquest the minister was reported to have sent the letter after the 
attack on the Bardo National Museum on 18 March, which saw three Islamist 
fundamentalists kill 21 people, mostly European tourists and including one 
Briton. Ritchie said the letter had been reported on in a French publication’s 
interview with the minister.


It emerged that a copy of the letter or article had not been formally 
disclosed to the inquest, prompting Howard Stevens QC, who represents the 
travel firm Tui, to object to what he called the “mystery letter” being 
referenced.

Questioning Venancio Lopez, a managing director for a Tui subsidiary in Tunisia
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia>, Ritchie said: “Were you aware 
after Bardo that the minister of tourism announced that the government had sent 
a circular letter to all hoteliers to upgrade security?

“Were you aware the circular letter required hotels to set up internal 
security gantries, metal detectors for checking under vehicles and the guarding 
of beach entrances?”

Lopez, during questioning by Stevens, said he was not aware of the existence 
of the letter. Lopez, whose role involved delivering holidays to tourists on 
the ground in Tunisia, told the inquest he was not responsible for “active 
security” such as guards and CCTV cameras.


However, Tui sent him as its sole representative to a number of meetings with 
ministers and embassy officials in the wake of the Bardo attack, which dealt 
with security issues.

“Why did Tui send you to all these meetings on terrorist risk? You’re not 
trained in terrorist risk,” Ritchie asked.

“I am the person dealing with problems with clients,” Lopez replied.

Questioning Lopez, Ritchie asked: “At any time between the end of March and 
the 26 June were you asked by Tui UK to go round the Imperial Marhaba hotel to 
see if improvements had been made in security?”

Lopez said: “No.”

In relation to security guards, Ritchie read an extract from Lopez’s statement 
which said: “In my experience not all hotels we used had their own security 
guards. The four- and five-star hotels tended to.”

Lopez also said the guards were never armed and that he believed it was 
against the law for the guards to be armed.

But Ritchie said the coroner had obtained advice from a legal firm, which 
suggested that there was indeed a route for hotels to arm their guards.

The inquest heard that out of nine hotels, the Imperial Marhaba had the fewest 
cameras, with six in total, while other hotels had up to 49.

Tui, which owns Thomson Holidays, through which all 30 of the Britons booked 
their trips, is expected to come under significant scrutiny over its handling 
of travel advice for Tunisia from the Foreign Office (FCO).

Lawyers representing families of 20 of the deceased Britons are to accuse Tui 
of “practically hiding and keeping out of the limelight” FCO warnings about 
terrorism in Tunisia, according to papers submitted in advance of the 
resumption of inquests.
 