
Inquests are about to resume into the deaths of 30 Britons killed in a mass 
shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/26/tunisia-tourist-hotel-reportedly-attacked>
 in a Tunisian holiday resort in the biggest loss of British life to terrorism 
since the 2005 London bombings.

Families who lost relatives hope the inquiry, resuming on Monday, will uncover 
whether more could have been done to prevent the tragedy on the beach outside 
the Imperial Marhaba hotel in Sousse on 26 June 2015.

Hundreds of tourists were sunbathing in 30C heat when jihadi Seifeddine Rezgui 
opened fire with a Kalashnikov assault rifle, killing 38 tourists, 30 of whom 
were British, in arampage that lasted nearly 40 minutes. Rezgui was shot dead 
by Tunisian authorities as he ran from the hotel.

The Guardian view on the Sousse beach massacre: Tunisian lessons in courage | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/28/the-guardian-view-on-the-sousse-beach-massacre-tunisian-lessons-in-courage>
The attack came three months after Islamist militants attacked the Bardo 
National Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/18/eight-people-killed-in-attack-on-tunisia-bardo-museum>
 in the Tunisian capital city of Tunis. They killed 21 people – mostly European 
tourists – on the spot, and another victim died 10 days later.

Travel company Tui, which owns Thomson holidays, through which all 30 of the 
Britons booked their trip, is expected to come under significant scrutiny over 
its handling of travel advice forTunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> from the Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office.

Lawyers representing families of 20 of the deceased Britons are to accuse Tui 
of “practically hiding and keeping out of the limelight” FCO warnings about 
terrorism in Tunisia, according to papers submitted in advance of the 
resumption of inquests.

The travel firm, which in the year to September made an underlying profit of 
€1bn (£866m), is also said to have sold customers travel insurance that 
excluded cancellation cover caused by terrorism risks. Before the Sousse 
attack, Tui is said in submissions by the families to have discouraged 
cancellation by penalising customers up to the full cost of their booked 
holidays if they chose to cancel as a result of learning of terrorist 
activities or risks.

Tui is to argue that the measures it had in place at the time for forwarding 
travel advice were appropriate but the Sousse attack changed the climate and 
they responded accordingly.

The coroner, Nicholas Loraine-Smith, is to hear evidence on these issues, as 
well as details on the events of the day, the security in the hotel and 
Rezgui’s background.

Andrew Ritchie QC, who has been appointed by Irwin Mitchell to represent 20 
families at the inquests, said: “These inquests will seek to answer important 
questions for the families, in particular: how their loved ones came to be 
exposed to terrorism at the five-star hotel; whether Tui communicated Foreign 
and Commonwealth Office terrorism warnings to their customers before or after 
bookings; the security arrangements – if any – in place at the Imperial Hotel; 
and whether the holiday insurance sold by Tui to customers covered terrorism.

“The families seek the truth and respect the coronial system and the hard work 
put into the preparation of the evidence by the UK police. They wish to see a 
better warning system in place to prevent future deaths and so that 
holidaymakers can make better-informed decisions when purchasing holidays 
abroad.”

Some evidence may be considered behind closed doors due to its sensitivity in 
preventing future terrorist attacks, following an application by the FCO.

Rezgui was a 23-year-old electrical engineering student at the University of 
Kairouan, from Gaafour in north-west Tunisia. It emerged he had received 
military training in Libya. Some of his associates went on to launch the Bardo 
Museum attack.

The ringleader behind the Sousse and Bardo attack – and Rezgui’s recruiter – 
was identified by a BBC Panorama investigation broadcast on Tuesday as 
Chamseddine al-Sandi. Panorama said Sandi was believed to be on the run in 
Libya. The Guardian has not been able to verify his role.

Two weeks after the Sousse attack, the FCO altered its travel advice to advise 
against all travel to four areas of Tunisia and advise against all but 
essential travel to the rest of the country. This adviceremains in place 
<https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/tunisia>. 

Tourism in Tunisia, which had accounted for 8% in gross domestic product – a 
broad measure for the size of a country’s economy – has suffered considerably 
since the attacks. According to the Tunisian ministry of tourism, tourist 
receipts plunged 50% year-on-year in 2016, while the number of border arrivals 
was down 18%.


A Tui spokeswoman said: “Tui UK is taking a full and active role in the 
inquests into the deaths of the 30 British nationals killed during the 
terrorist attack in Sousse, Tunisia in June 2015.

“Like others, we want to understand the specific circumstances that led to 
this atrocity. We are cooperating with the coroner and will continue to do so, 
in order to help ensure that the tragic deaths of those killed can be 
thoroughly investigated, the relevant facts determined and any lessons learned. 
With the inquests about to be heard, we consider that it would be inappropriate 
for us to comment further.”
 