
Dilemma 1 I’m 19 and have always had a difficult time making friends. I make 
small talk with people in class, but it never goes anywhere from there. I’m a 
good person and I’ve been told that I’m pretty good looking. Why wouldn’t 
people want to be my friend? I have been feeling so alone in this world.

Dilemma 2 I’m 18 and off to college. I’m quite well off, have a loving family 
and all the gadgets I could possibly want, but I am deeply unhappy. I feel very 
lonely, which I know is common at this age. I want a romantic relationship, but 
I’ve been single all my life, not through lack of trying. I’ve asked girls out 
on dates, yet they have all turned me down. I’ve bought them gifts, and 
generally acted like a true gent but it’s not enough, apparently. I’m not one 
of those guys who just wants sex and nothing else. I want to be loved and 
cherished. I’m doing a very male-orientated course and I fear my existing 
opportunities to interact with young women will disappear. Any advice?

Mariella replies Harry meet Sally! Pardon me for showing my age by referencing 
a movie that predates your conception. As you can see I’ve broken with our 
usual format and used excerpts from both your missives, not with any 
matchmaking ambitions but to highlight how many people your age feel similarly 
alone.

I say “your age”, but loneliness is definitely not the preserve of youth and 
it’s a subject addressed in correspondence flooding in from all generations. 
Only the hard-pressed, time-challenged mid-lifers seem to escape the epidemic 
and in their case perhaps only because they don’t have the time to dwell on 
their own emotional needs.

Let go of your inhibitions, stop casting yourselves as the lonely hearted and 
get on with the business of living

This year I went to a sensational 1970s-inspired New Year’s Eve party boasting 
a revolving circular dancefloor that proved a huge draw with revellers, yours 
truly aside. The novelty for me failed to assuage the nausea that overcame me 
the minute I stepped on board, the likely result of unrestrained imbibing of 
vodka cocktails combined with gyrating in circles at speed. Anyway, I found 
myself dancing on the sidelines while my friends whizzed by in their rotating 
dancefloor universe. It was an unsettling feeling, isolated from the pack, as 
though a giant glass bubble was separating me from my companions, allowing me 
to watch, but not join in.

I’ve never been particularly prone to loneliness, having learned at an early 
age that my own company could be a place of refuge and solace, but I 
experienced it quite viscerally as my friends danced by in their bell jar.

Less literal sensations of separation, of watching life pass by at a distance, 
appear to be an expanding 21st -century affliction judging by the growth rate 
in my weekly mailbox. It’s an uncomfortable sensation, that feeling of an 
invisible wall separating you from the hurly-burly of other people’s busy 
lives. It may feel tangible, but loneliness is a state of mind that is possible 
to alleviate. It’s not easy, but with determination, the will to reset your 
sense of yourself and the strength to soldier on until the changes you want 
begin to manifest themselves in your daily life, it is definitely achievable.

The first step is to learn to shrug off the restraints of self-awareness 
before trying to communicate with others. Our impression of how we come across 
to other people is generally a far cry from the reality. Playing out your part 
as the loner can become a self-fulfilling prophecy.

Like many young people you both seem prone to introspection and excessive 
self-examination. I’m all for self-knowledge, but too much thought about how 
you come across can blind you to those trying to enter into your sphere. You 
both need to focus your efforts on developing the confidence to be utterly 
yourselves, without trying to identify your USP.

Others are attracted by those who are happy in themselves and exude that ease 
of existence. Resilience is important, too, as dallying with toads is an 
important part of the dance.

Some people have an easier affinity with their fellow humans, attract friends 
and lovers effortlessly and make the struggles of others seem particularly 
frustrating. It doesn’t mean their friendships are deeper or their 
relationships more enduring. Have faith and remember that as we mature we 
change.

The lonely kid in the playground is not who you are: it’s who you were and the 
future is for who you will become. I’ve no doubt that you’ll both meet partners 
and make good friends but you’ll hasten the process if you let go of your 
inhibitions, stop casting yourselves as the lonely hearted and get on with the 
business of living.

Like so many of life’s pleasures, friendship and love surface when you stop 
trying to hunt them down. So revel in your great opportunity to go to college, 
enjoy the luxury of learning and the presence around you of like-minded people. 
The exuberance with which you live your life is what will attract others to 
you, not the time you spend worrying about what you have to offer.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 