Which one of these pianistic partners did Martha Argerich not play duets with 
in London this year?  Daniel Barenboim  Stephen Kovacevich Argerich duetted 
with Barenboim at the Proms in August (read our review - http://bit.ly/2bix4As) 
and Portugheis at the Wigmore Hall in December (read our review - 
http://bit.ly/2i7KMGO)  Alberto Portugheis Which mezzo-soprano lost her head as 
Holofernes in a staggering concert performance of Vivaldi's Juditha Triumphans 
at the Barbican?  Ann Hallenberg  Magdalena Kozena  Delphine Galou Read our 
review - http://bit.ly/2foyhc3 ‘A civilisation that conserves is one that will 
decay’ said which composer, whose life and music nonetheless were celebrated 
throughout the year?  Pierre Boulez The composer and conductor died on 5 
January 2016 https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/06/pierre-boulez  John 
Cage  Peter Maxwell Davies Which operatic anti-hero came to an unfortunate end 
in a disused sewer in Vienna in English Touring Opera’s new production?  Don 
GiovanniRead our review - http://bit.ly/2hNeEeY  Rigoletto  Harry Lime Which 
one of these conductors pulled out of an engagement to conduct in the Bayreuth 
Festival this year in as yet unexplained circumstances?  Christian Thielemann  
Andris NelsonsRead the story - http://nyti.ms/2i23Slp  Kirill Petrenko Which of 
these UK opera companies did not welcome a new music director or artistic 
director (or both) this year?  Royal Opera House Director of Opera Kasper 
Holten announced his departure this year, but he only leaves his role at the 
ROH in spring 2017.  Glyndebourne  English National Opera Whose music was 
performed in a Peckham car park as one of this year’s Proms?  David Bowie  
Benedict Mason  Steve Reich Read our review - http://bit.ly/2bQMn6m 
Thirty-year-old Latvian Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla is the newly appointed chief 
conductor of which British orchestra?  City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra 
Her appointment was announced in February - http://bit.ly/2hASGvh  London 
Symphony Orchestra  Philharmonia Orchestra Whose opera debut, Pleasure, was set 
in the toilets of a gay nightclub?  Colin Matthews  Mark Simpson Read our 
review - http://bit.ly/2hNim8x  Anna Meredith Soprano Sarah Tynan sang 
Britten’s Les Illuminations at the Aldeburgh festival. Who did she perform 
alongside?  A group of acrobats, clowns and aerialists Read about the 
production that mixed circus with the song cycle - http://bit.ly/1TXeRVn  An 
elephant and a camel  A virtual reality projection of Britten accompanying her 
on the piano In May, Sheku Kanneh-Mason won the BBC Young Musician competition. 
Which cello concerto did the 17-year-old perform to take the title?  Elgar's 
Cello Concerto in E minor  Shostakovich's Cello Concerto No 1 in E flat major  
Witold Lutosławski's Cello Concerto Sofia Coppola directed an opera - her first 
- at Rome's Teatro dell'Opera. Which one?  Verdi's La Traviata Read our review 
- http://bit.ly/2h6S1B2  Wagner's Tristan und Isolde  Mark-Anthony Turnage's 
Anna Nicole Who threatened strike action at English National Opera?  The board  
The stagehands  The chorus Why was Philip Glass's music featured at this year's 
Glastonbury festival?  There was an open-air screening of Godfrey Reggio's 
Koyaanisqatsi with Glass's soundtrack  English National Opera took the opening 
act of Akhnaten to the Pyramid stage for a Sunday early afternoon performance  
Charles Hazlewood and his Army of Generals performed Glass's Heroes Symphony, 
inspired by David Bowie's 1977 album. This year's Festival of Nine Lessons and 
Carols at Kings College Chapel features - as it does every year - a specially 
commissioned carol. By who?  Kanye West  Michael Berkeley  Judith Weir  You got…
 Challenge your friends Submit answers  