
Tim Martin, founder of the JD Wetherspoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jdwetherspoon> pub chain, does not do 
Davos – which is neat. The annual boondoggle in the Swiss Alps, which convenes 
again this week, is unlikely to deprive him of many of his regulars.

Still, while the pub landlord will be in the UK and concentrating on preparing 
for Wednesday, when the group will give its trading statement, it seems likely 
a similar topic might dominate both events.

Martin was one of the highest-profile businesspeople calling time on the UK’s 
membership of the European Union, and used his 800-odd boozers and the chain’s 
magazine to make his points. (“All the thousands ofDavos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> men and women who have their jaws 
firmly clamped around the euro-teat,” as he once put it).

That made him even more unpopular with that particular set (they can 
occasionally be quite sniffy about his pubs) while his euro rivals rejoiced 
when the Brexit vote knocked the Wetherspoon shares.

Still, might Martin be about to have the last laugh? There are challenges in 
the sector, but last week All Bar One owner Mitchells & Butlers reported a 
“particularly strong” Christmas trading period, seemingly providing another 
riposte to the doom and gloom predicted by many Remainers. If Wetherspoon’s 
trading follows suit this week, expect some gloating.

A merry little retail Christmas


While the British drinker seems to be heroically buoying the pubs’ figures, 
their counterparts sashaying along our high streets have been performing a 
similar service for our shops.

Marks & Spencer has reported its best Christmas  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/m-and-s-christmas-clothing-sales-rise-marks-spencer>
in six years, Morrisons its best in seven and Majestic Wine its “biggest ever”, 
while even dreary old Debenhams did better than expected.

This week we get a host more retailers reporting results, including Greggs, 
Pets at Home, Halfords and N Brown. There’ll also be data in the form of 
December’s retail sales from the Office for National Statistics, which 
curiously might show a slight slip.

Howard Archer of IHS Global Insight says the seasonally adjusted figures are 
expected to show that retail sales volumes dipped 0.4% month-on-month in 
December, although this would still see them up 6.6% year-on-year. Still, he 
cautions: “The serious concern for the economy – and retailers in particular – 
is that it looks inevitable that the fundamentals for consumers will weaken 
markedly over the coming months, with purchasing power being increasingly 
squeezed and the labour market probably weakening.” Developing.

Is Royal Mail pension still first class?

You might have missed last year’s Pension Scheme of the Year Awards, so here’s 
a recap: theRoyal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> 
scooped a hat-trick of gongs for: defined benefit scheme of the year (asset 
value of over £2.5bn); defined benefit communications (private sector); and 
best administration.

“Don’t worry, we’re not letting it go to our heads,” the Royal Mail Pension 
Plan gushed at the time. “While we’re thrilled to win these awards, our focus 
remains on continuing to improve member outcomes through improving our 
performance.”

Royal Mail staff will no doubt be soothed by those words as they study the 
group’s trading statement this week, which comes against the backdrop of a 
potential strike. The company has said it’s considering shutting its final 
salary pension scheme as, despite a huge surplus, the fund is supposedly 
running out of cash. So while the trustees might be dedicated to enhancing 
“member outcomes”, the firm is targeting the opposite.

Or as Terry Pullinger, deputy general secretary for postal at the CWU, puts 
it: “So we move from shadow boxing to the ring, and negotiations will now begin 
in earnest ... However, any attempt to introduce any unagreed change by the 
business would be met with an industrial action ballot.”

 * This article was amended on 15 January 2017 to remove a typo from the 
headline.  