
Theresa May has said that Britain will leave the single market as part of its 
exit from theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> but that the 
country would push for the “greatest possible” access to tariff-free trade with 
Europe as part of a deal.

The comments from the prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-pound-steadies-ahead-of-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-politics-live>
 – who also said there would be a phased implementation of the new agreement 
between Britain and Europe – bring clarity about the shape of the country’s 
exit from the European Union but will also spark fresh concerns. This is how 
the major business representatives have reacted.

Prime minister vows to put final Brexit deal before parliament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
CBI

Britain’s largest business group, which supported the country remaining in the 
European Union, said Theresa May’s speech had “changed the landscape”.

Carolyn Fairbairn, director-general of the CBI, said: “Ruling out membership 
of the single market has reduced options for maintaining a barrier-free trading 
relationship between the UK and the EU. But businesses will welcome the greater 
clarity and the ambition to create a more prosperous, open and global Britain, 
with the freest possible trade between the UK and the EU.

“The pressure is now on to deliver these objectives and achieve a smooth and 
orderly exit. Businesses want to make a success of Brexit but will be concerned 
about falling back on damaging WTO rules.”

British Chambers of Commerce

Adam Marshall, the director general of the BCC, warned that what “really 
matters” to businesses is what May secures from the negotiations with the EU, 
not what she bids for.

He said: “While businesses now have a clearer sense of the prime minister’s 
top-line priorities, they will come away from her speech knowing little more 
about the likely outcome of the Brexit negotiations than they did yesterday. 
The simple fact is that businesses all across the UK are carrying on. Directly 
affected companies are being pragmatic, and are preparing for a range of 
possible outcomes.”

Marshall said it was vital that Brexit “must not become all-consuming” and 
urged the government to focus on “having the right skills, infrastructure and 
business environment across the UK”.

Chartered Management Institute

The prime minister’s speech makes it “inevitable” that the number of foreign 
workers coming to the UK will fall, according to Ann Francke, the chief 
executive of the CMI.

She said: “With the prime minister signalling today that the UK will make a 
clean break from the EU, it is inevitable that the number of foreign workers 
coming to the UK will fall after Brexit, so we need to invest heavily in 
homegrown talent now to ensure that we have the skilled workers capable of 
plugging the gaps.”

Key points from May's Brexit speech: what have we learned?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors 

The housing shortage in Britain could worsen without access to workers in 
Europe, RICS warned. Jeremy Blackburn, head of policy at RICS, said: “While 
this clarity is undoubtedly welcome, one thing is clear, a loss of access to 
the EU’s skilled workforce has the potential to slowly bring the UK’s property 
and construction sector to a standstill. That means unless alternative plans 
are put in place, we won’t be able to deliver the thousands of homes needed to 
solve our housing crisis or create the infrastructure needed to enable our 
cities to compete on a global stage. Potentially, an embarrassing situation for 
a government set to publish both its housing white paper and industrial 
strategy.”

CIPD

The professional body which represents human resources and people development 
welcomed the pledges to protect existing employment legislation, but expressed 
its disappointment that there was no confirmation that EU nationals already 
residing in the UK will be allowed to stay.

Peter Cheese, the chief executive of the CIPD, said: “The prime minister has 
made it clear that she wants the UK to be able to control its borders. However, 
it should still be possible to design a flexible, managed immigration system 
that allows businesses to access the skilled and unskilled labour they need 
from both EU and non-EU countries. If we are to use Brexit to deliver a global 
Britain as the prime minister wishes, then British business must be able to 
continue to attract and access global talent.

“It is particularly welcome that the prime minister confirmed that the 
protections afforded to workers through current employment legislation will 
continue. Many EU-derived regulations provide vital workplace protections and 
workers up and down the country will be reassured by the news that their rights 
will not be sacrificed as part of any deal. However, it is disappointing that 
the prime minister is currently unable to confirm that EU nationals already 
residing in the UK will be allowed to stay. This needs to be an immediate 
priority in the negotiations to come.”

Society of Motor Manufactures and Traders

Car manufacturers believe that May’s comments about the importance of single 
market arrangements for the industry is “critical”. Carmakers have previously 
warned they could pull operations out of Britain without a free-trade 
arrangement with the rest of Europe, although Nissan last year pledged to 
expand its operations in Sunderland.


Mike Hawes, chief executive of the SMMT, said: “We need government to deliver 
a deal which includes participation in the customs union to help safeguard EU 
trade, trade that is tariff-free and avoids the non-tariff and regulatory 
barriers that would jeopardise investment, growth and consumer choice. 
Achieving this will not be easy and we must, at all costs, avoid a cliff-edge 
and reversion to WTO tariffs, which would threaten the viability of the 
industry.”

BBA


The banking industry welcomed the “important clarity” and “commitment to free 
trade” in May’s speech.

Anthony Browne, chief executive of the BBA, said: “The prime minister has 
provided important clarity today on the kind of relationship the UK will seek 
with the EU and we welcome the government’s commitment to free trade with the 
EU and the rest of the world.

“All existing EU member states have a mutual interest in ensuring that there’s 
a smooth exit. The government’s support for interim arrangements is essential 
to ensure there are no cliff-edge effects when the UK leaves the EU.

“We will continue to work with government and regulators to support its 
negotiation strategy to agree a new partnership with the EU.”

TheCityUK


The trade body for Britain’s financial services industry praised the prime 
minister for highlighting the need for a “bespoke agreement” between Britain 
and the EU.

In comments that could soothe fears that financial services firms will leave 
the City of London, Miles Celic, chief executive of TheCityUK, said: “There is 
no existing off-the-shelf solution which can deliver the right deal for the UK, 
the EU and the global economy. The UK-based financial and related professional 
services industry has consistently called for an ambitious deal with mutual 
market access between the UK and the EU on terms similar to those currently in 
place. The prime minister’s intention to see that the UK gets the highest 
possible access to EU markets supports this objective.

“The prime minister recognised the important role the UK plays as Europe’s 
financial centre. Her assertion that the industry must be able to provide its 
services cross-border post-Brexit will benefit firms and customers in the UK 
and the EU.

“The prime minister’s commitment to ensuring the UK will be able to continue 
to attract the best domestic, EU and global talent is welcome. Global 
businesses must be able to continue to move their staff or operations into the 
UK to ensure it maintains its global attractiveness into the future.”

NFU

Farmers still have “legitimate and important concerns” about Brexit despite 
May bringing some much-needed clarity about the negotiations with the EU, the 
NFU has warned. The agriculture industry exports 72% of its products to the EU, 
with £290m out of the £300m annual lamb exports being sold to Europe. The NFU, 
which is seeking urgent talks with the government, said it was vital that 
Britain has the best possible access to trade with Europe and access to a 
“competent and reliable workforce”. It also wants the government to confirm 
that it sees agriculture as a key industry and ensure that there is a period of 
transition if there are changes to the trading relationship.

The NFU added: “The prime minister has ruled out the UK’s continuing 
participation in the European single market or the EU customs union and instead 
has stated her intention to pursue a free trade agreement with the EU. We hope 
the prime minister’s ambition can be achieved, but as we know these kind of 
deals normally take years to conclude and do not cover all products.”

Federation of Small Businesses

Mike Cherry, the national chairman of the FSB, said small businesses wanted a 
“bold and ambitious” free trade agreement with the EU and that it was vital the 
prime minister met her pledge to have a period of transition to the new 
arrangement, thereby avoiding a “cliff-edge”.

He said: “One in five FSB members export. This could be doubled with the right 
tailored small business support from the Department for International Trade 
along with new free trade agreements with the fastest growing markets in the 
world. Global trade will only flourish if the free trade agreements prevent 
additional barriers, such as cost and paperwork.

“Small employers will welcome the pledge to maintain the UK as a true magnet 
for international talent. We have pressed the government hard to guarantee the 
right to remain for non-UK EU nationals in existing workforces, and no early 
cut-off date. Any future system must help small firms to easily recruit the 
right person, for the right job, at the right time.”


Institute of Directors

Some business leaders will “regret” the prime minister’s pledge to leave the 
single market, according to theInstitute of Directors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/institute-of-directors>, which welcomed 
the “level of detail” provided in May’s speech.

Allie Renison, the head of Europe and trade policy at the IoD, said: “Whatever 
the shape of the final trade deal, a smooth and orderly departure is in the 
whole country’s interests, so businesses will support the commitment to a 
phased process of implementation. While we do not expect a running commentary, 
firms hope to get periodic updates to maintain confidence as we make our way 
towards the exit.

“We now know that we will be leaving the single market, and while there will 
be firms who regret this, they will at least be able to plan on that basis. 
Business leaders will be heartened by the prime minister’s strong argument for 
the value of free trade, an argument currently being made by all too few global 
leaders.

“We would urge the EU to match the government’s approach in taking a 
long-term, big-picture view about the need for cooperation and partnership in 
future.”


British Retail Consortium

May must ensure that a new deal with the EU does not lead to higher shop 
prices for consumers, according to leading retailers.

Helen Dickinson, chief executive of the BRC, said: “The prime minister has an 
ambitious plan with the right priorities. It is crucial that Britain gets a new 
deal that works for ordinary British consumers, which doesn’t hit them with the 
costs of new import tariffs at a time when the pound is already weakened. The 
government has an opportunity to secure a win-win deal that works for the UK 
economy, by keeping prices down for consumers while allowing the EU to continue 
benefiting from its open-trade relationship with the UK.”

TUC

Trade unions echoed the warning from retailers that consumers must not foot 
the bill for Britain leaving the single market.

Frances O’Grady, the TUC general secretary, said: “Working people are worried 
they will end up paying the price of leaving the single market. There is real 
concern that it will be bad for jobs, bad for rights at work, and bad for the 
living standards of British people.

“The commitment to protect workers’ existing rights and to build on them is 
welcome. The best way to do this is for the prime minister to agree that UK 
workers’ rights will always be as good as, or better, than workers’ rights in 
the rest of the EU.”

Business for Scotland

The government’s economic strategy is being driven by “old fashioned, 
isolationist, British nationalism” and May’s negotiating tactics for Brexit 
“amount to nothing more than sticking her fingers in her ears and humming Rule 
Britannia”, according to Business for Scotland.


Gordon MacIntyre-Kemp, the chief executive of Business for Scotland, said: 
“Scotland now has a choice between being dragged under with an isolationist, 
self destructing, distant, disinterested and dysfunctional UK government or 
planning a route to greater shared prosperity with a fully empowered, 
independent Scottish government focused on an international, inclusive, civic 
national identity and economy policy. A second independence referendum is now 
inevitable and most likely will take place in May 2018.”

JCB

Lord Bamford, the chairman of JCB and a supporter of Brexit, said: “I am very 
encouraged by the vision set out by the prime minister today. The UK voted to 
leave the EU and she is determined to make this happen in a way that restores 
our sovereignty but which ensures the UK becomes a global leader in free trade.

“British business now needs to get behind the government as it sets out to 
secure the best deal for our country’s future. As the prime minister said, we 
are leaving the EU but we are not leaving Europe – it will remain an important 
market for British business but we need to be able to trade freely with the 
rest of the world as well.”



 