
When people start to think about fostering, it can be easy for them to feel 
overwhelmed with the choice of agencies and breadth of information to take in. 
Fostering with a charity might not seem that different from fostering with a 
local authority, but it affects everything from the type of children people 
look after to the level of support available.


St Christopher’s is a charity set up in 1870 that runs residential and 
fostering services for young people in the UK and Isle of Man. Its carers often 
say that its charitable status was one of the reasons they chose to foster with 
St Christopher’s rather than another agency.

Dean Parker* fostered with his local authority before transferring to St 
Christopher’s. He says: “The fact that St Christopher’s is a charity was the 
main pull for me. We care who we foster with because despite appearing to be 
the same there is a clear distinction between agencies – charities have no 
motive to make profit or pay shareholders. Instead they can focus on providing 
excellent services.”

Local authorities are often the first place people turn to when they start to 
think about fostering. So what are the differences between a charity and a 
local authority?

Linda Smith fosters a group of young siblings. She says: “I know some people 
who foster for a local authority and they are impressed by how much training we 
are offered, how many activities are put on for the children and how as foster 
carers we are genuinely treated as part of the team.”

Kevin Lane transferred to St Christopher’s from an independent for-profit 
fostering organisation: “We were horrified to hear of children as ‘financial 
heads’ – money had become their priority and it didn’t sit well with us.

“Since moving to St Christopher’s we’ve been very happy,” he says. “Obviously 
an organisation needs to be run efficiently but with a charity you know that 
children are central to the decision-making process – just as they should be.”

Putting young people first has always been a key part of St Christopher’s 
ethos. It runs a successful participation programme and goes the extra mile so 
children can have their say. Without this high level of support, many young 
people would lack the confidence to speak up.

Top level support is offered to carers too. Jo Richards has been fostering 
with St Christopher’s for four years, after initially looking into becoming a 
carer with her local authority. She says: “Charities seemed to offer so much 
more support. When you’re a new carer they’re with you for every step of the 
way – the application process, when a child moves in with you and when new 
situations arise that you aren’t sure how to manage yet.”

It’s not only with the professionals that carers can find support. Unlike most 
local authorities and larger agencies, St Christopher’s has a proper fostering 
community – carers can attend monthly group sessions to build friendships and 
share their experiences. There’s a family feel to everything it does – staff, 
carers and children all know each other and enjoy spending time together.

Smith says: “The family feel is crucial because it means the children feel at 
home and they become confident enough to get involved with activities.

“Without realising, they learn to start trusting again – it’s a really 
important part of their healing process.”

Richards agrees: “Staff take the time to understand you, your family and the 
young person in your care. Children aren’t just a case number and because it’s 
a smaller team everyone knows each foster family’s dynamics. The personal touch 
makes a huge difference when you’re phoning someone in the early hours of the 
morning looking for some extra support.”

Being family-oriented plays a role in the long-term. As all staff know each 
carer and child, there’s continuity – something that is vital for children in 
care. They’ve often been let down by adults in the past and need people they 
can rely on. St Christopher’s unique combination of brilliant foster carers and 
experienced staff means it can get better outcomes for the young people it 
looks after.

“I love being a part of St Christopher’s long tradition of creating brighter 
futures for one of the most vulnerable groups in society,” says Parker. 
“Especially when the only ones who profit are the young people in need.”

If you’re thinking about fostering, visit St Christopher’s website 
<http://stchris.org.uk/fostering>.

*All names have been changed

Content on this page is paid for and produced by St Christopher’s
 