
I give nipples three years. Five tops. Even as I write I’m getting that 
familiar dissonance, like when you repeat a word so many times, “nipple, 
nipple, nipple,” that it loses all meaning, instead becoming an abstract song 
that threatens to unravel the concept of language itself. I’m forgetting what 
they’re for, where they live, why. “Nipples.” Finished. Their decline began on
Instagram <https://www.instagram.com>, where, while breasts are fine, nipples 
must be blurred out. Which is helpful in a way, in that it clarifies the 
boundaries of sexiness, like a butcher drawing lines on a cow. Any photos which 
feature a female nipple are promptly removed, leading to a smoothness of image, 
an idealisation of the empty chest, treasureless. If you learned about what 
people looked like from the photos on your phone, you’d be forgiven for 
thinking they were all hills with no peaks.

Which surely was one of the factors that prompted this, from the Plastic 
Surgery Group <http://theplasticsurgerygroup.com/>, in their round-up of 
cosmetic trend predictions for 2017: “We have seen a 30% rise in women 
requesting a smaller nipple size in the last year.” The new fashionable body 
look, they say, is “the ultra-toned, shredded athletic type… ” Like a snazzy 
tie compliments a suit, or a simple up-do sets off your massive diamond 
necklace, little Smartie-like nipples will make your muscles sing.

Smaller nipples and implants compliment this new trend of lean body
Plastic Surgery Group 
So this year Britain will see, they promise, thousands of stuck-on tiny 
nipples. Which means it’s surely only a matter of time before women decide it’s 
easier, cleaner, to just do away with them altogether. Especially in a country 
with one of the lowest breastfeeding rates in the world, today’s mothers having 
chosen bottles and maternal guilt over pain, exhaustion and side-eyes from 
strangers. What’s the point?

I do wonder what would happen if we all followed these annual “body trends” 
properly, swelling and smoothing like the evolution of man chart except with 
tits. Arses rising, thighs dwindling, breasts running ahead, then retreating as 
though they’d encountered rain. The “natural look” dragging everything closer 
to the ground, skin sparkling with botulism from beneath.

We would all look 19 forever, our insides covered with moss and knowledge, our 
foreheads tight as cling film. RecentlyVogue declared the cleavage was “over”, 
noting that celebrities were binning off their deep V gowns, choosing fashion 
that showcased their clavicles instead. Bonfires of big bouncing boobs still 
smoulder across the country, as women emerge from surgery with their new perky 
B cups, just a suggestion of drawing-pin nipple bothering the silk of their 
soft-cup bralette.

Cleavage appears now in another form, having sunk some inches towards the hips 
where it’s been rebranded as an “ab crack” and thus deemed far less vulgar than 
the previous tit crack – after all, with the right bra, anybody can achieve one 
of those.

Few would have guessed that nipples would become the new battleground

Still, few would have guessed that nipples would become the new battleground 
on which to play out our insecurities with the judgment of sharp scalpels. And, 
honestly, who has the energy to defend them? After all these tiny wars about 
what a body is for, all these debates about hair and weight and the point of 
lives. Who of us has the breath left in them to stand up for nipples that stand 
up, for the suckled, chewed on, plate-like or swollen? For nipples with a 
wrestler’s BMI, so ponderous and large that they’re visible through a stab 
vest? For wry nipples, cynical nipples, nipples whittled from discounted 
Peperami sticks or those like hard-boiled eggs with eyebrows drawn on?

Who today doesn’t read about cosmetic surgery trends and see the high street 
fill with crop tops, smell that new season’s stench of anxiety and feel their 
whole beings glaze over with an apathy last experienced watching Jools Holland’s
Hootenanny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/31/new-years-eves-best-tv-jools-annual-hootenanny-peter-cook-dudley-moore-the-missing-sketches>
? Isn’t it easier, now, to let ourselves slide, either into the invisibility 
cloaks of deeply unfashionable bodies or indeed into the Plastic Surgery 
Group’s recommended chairs, where our nipples will fall to the floor with a 
muffled clang, along with last year’s tits and tomorrow’s crows feet, and just… 
play nice?

I can see the end of nipples, and with it the end of trying and caring, and 
the end. The very end.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman 
<https://twitter.com/EvaWiseman?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>

 