
Andrew Whittington, Jordan Thompson and Daria Gavrilova provided bright points 
on an otherwise disappointing day for local hopes at theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

Wildcard Whittington claimed the biggest victory of his tennis career, downing 
Czech Adam Pavlásek in the opening round, while Sydneysider Thompson broke 
through for a maiden Australian Open win, defeating João Sousa in a gutsy 
five-set triumph.

In the night session, Daria Gavrilova scrambled into the second round with a 
hard-fought win over Britain’s Naomi Broady.

Hot property Alex De Minaur a breath of fresh air at Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/hot-property-alex-de-minaur-a-breath-of-fresh-air-at-australian-open>
But there were defeats for seven other local players on day two at Melbourne 
Park.

The 23-year-old Whittington posted a 6-4, 4-6, 6-2, 6-3 triumph in a match 
lasting two hours and 25 minutes, during which he frequently pressured his 
opponent into wayward passing shots.


Up two-sets-to-one, Whittington delighted the boisterous home crowd when he 
ran down a drop shot in the fourth set to force Pavlásek into playing another 
forehand from the net.

The Czech’s tense effort went long and handed the hometown hero the 
match-winning break. Pavlásek’s frustration was on display for all including 
umpire Katarzyna Radwan, who immediately warned the world No86 for smashing his 
racquet into the service box.

Whittington, who rose from the 500s into the top-200 last year, had never 
played a main draw grand slam match until Tuesday. The world No194 has 
guaranteed himself a cheque of $80,000, almost a third of his total career 
earnings before this week.

Thompson was down two sets to love against the world No37 Sousa but triumphed 
6-7 (2-7), 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, 6-1 in three hours and 21 minutes in hot conditions 
as the Portuguese complained of dizziness.


The win was the 22-year-old’s first in four outings at Melbourne Park and 
earned him a match-up with eighth seed Dominic Thiem in the second round.

Gavrilova fought back against Broady to take the match 3-6, 6-4, 7-5 on 
Margaret Court Arena on Tuesday night. The Australian will next face Croatian 
Ana Konjuh.

Elsewhere though, there was heartache for local players, as more than half a 
dozen other players failed to make it past the first round before the start of 
the evening session at Melbourne Park.


Heather Watson dumps Samantha Stosur out of Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/heather-watson-dumps-samantha-stosur-out-of-australian-open>
Sam Stosur’s dismal losing streak continued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/heather-watson-dumps-samantha-stosur-out-of-australian-open>
 in a 6-2, 3-6, 6-0 defeat to Britain’s Heather Waatson while wildcard Lizette 
Cabrera lost in straight sets to Croatian Donna Vekic on her grand slam debut.

 The 19-year-old Queenslander went down 7-5, 6-2 to Vekic, who at No99 is is 
nearly 100 spots above Cabrera in the world rankings.

Vekic’s second-round opponent will be former world No1 Caroline Wozniacki 
after the Dane beat another Australian wildcard, Arina Rodionova. The 17th-seed 
made short work of Rodionova and needed just 67 minutes to oust the 27-year-old 
6-1, 6-2.

In the men’s draw, there was little else to celebrate as Spanish veteran David 
Ferrer gave Omar Jasika a tennis lesson with a straight-sets victory.

Seeded 21st, Ferrer steamrolled the 19-year-old Jasika 6-3, 6-0, 6-2 in their 
Hisense Arena match. The 34-year-old Ferrer, who has made the semi-finals twice 
at Melbourne Park, is making his 15th successive appearance.

Chris O’Connell was ousted in straight sets by Bulgarian 15th seed Grigor 
Dimitrov later in the day. Dimitrov was untouchable on serve against the grand 
slam debutant, winning 7-6 (7-2), 6-3, 6-3 in two hours and one minute.

O’Connell stared down five break points to take the first set to a tiebreak 
but the 22-year-old wasn’t able to maintain that level as the match continued.


Alex Bolt’s grand slam main draw debut ended at the first hurdle with the 
qualifier going down in four sets. The 24-year-old, who gave the sport away 
last year only to make a comeback, hit 54 winners in the clash but was unable 
to win the points that mattered.


He broke back at 3-5 in the fourth set but was unable to push Yoshihito 
Nishioka much further, losing 6-4, 1-6, 6-2, 6-4 in two hours and 30 minutes.

Meanwhile, Blake Mott had a tough introduction to grand slam tennis after 
being crushed by 18th seed Richard Gasquet in straight sets. Mott, 20, lost 
6-4, 6-4, 6-2 against the experienced Frenchman in one hour and 53 minutes on 
Tuesday at Melbourne Park.

 The Australian wildcard saved two match points but was eventually overhauled 
by the consistent baseliner.
 