
It’s all about the wow moments. “When you teach a child something that they 
didn’t know … and then you see the light bulb moment,” describes newly 
qualified teacher (NQT) Arnold Worton-Geer. Capturing children’s imaginations 
is similarly memorable for fellow NQT, Caroline Derriman: “When they say to you 
in lessons, ‘I had so much fun in that lesson, I don’t want to go out to play, 
I just want to carry on doing this.’”


Such moments are easy to forget when four in 10 new teachers quit within a year
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/31/four-in-10-new-teachers-quit-within-a-year>
 – a sobering statistic. “Yes it’s hard, yes you work more hours than the ‘9 to 
3’ that everyone thinks that you work,” Worton-Geer admits, “but actually you 
make a difference to someone’s life.”

That’s not to say that teaching is all sunshine and rainbows. “Teaching is a 
challenging and complex activity,” acknowledges Gareth Honeyford, strategic 
lead for primary school initial teacher training atEssex Teacher Training 
<http://www.essexteachertraining.co.uk/> (ETT). Candidates for ETT’s one-year 
training programmes must have “high quality subject knowledge and an 
appropriate personality to fit in, inspire and motivate,” he adds.

After all, ETT has some impressive stats to maintain – 100% of its trainees 
are graded as good or outstanding at the end of the training, and 100% that 
wanted employment at the end of the programme have gained it, Honeyford says. 
Data indicates that after five years, a high percentage of its trainees are 
still teaching – often in middle leadership roles. “We think that’s because 
they are immersed and trained in schools,” Honeyford says, “so they know what 
they are getting into, right from the beginning.”

So, what’s on offer? Trainees on the school-centred initial teacher training 
<https://getintoteaching.education.gov.uk/explore-my-options/teacher-training-routes/school-led-training/scitt>
 (SCITT) andSchool Direct 
<https://getintoteaching.education.gov.uk/explore-my-options/teacher-training-routes/school-led-training/school-direct>
 unsalaried routes pay £8,900 in tuition fees, while a school employs those on 
the salaried School Direct programme for the duration of the training, with 
salaries up to £21,000. The latter route is open to those with at least three 
years’ work experience and is designed for career changes, says Honeyford. Past 
applicants include lab workers, hotel managers and police officers.

Whether in age, gender or background, applicants are diverse, notes Chris 
Fluskey, lead for Harlow Teacher Training Partnership – one of ETT’s School 
Direct partners. Derriman, for example, made the career leap after a 17 year 
stint in media sales. “I was at university nearly 20 years ago. I toyed with 
the idea of training as a teacher and I never did.” The hands-on approach, 
coupled with the income, made the salaried School Direct a better training 
route for her.

Worton-Geer, who also trained on the School Direct programme in Essex, agrees. 
“For me, the best way to learn is in the classroom. You could read a thousand 
books but never know how it truly is in a classroom until you’re in it.”

Essex’s trainees enjoy certain advantages of school-led training – as opposed 
to university-led teacher training – like being interviewed by the school that 
they will be placed at prior to starting. “There is an absolute understanding 
right from day one that this trainee is going to fit into our school and be 
part of our staff,” explains Honeyford. “The school is already expecting them 
to complete the programme successfully because they’ve met them and done the 
induction programme.”


Trainees are well supported, with help only “an email away,” as Worton-Geer 
puts it. Mentors track trainees’ progress, give feedback and ensure that 
they’re getting all the right experiences and offered the right opportunities 
to learn, Fluskey says.

Weekly training courses provide ideas for lessons and build subject knowledge. 
The rest of the training is in class, and by the end of the year you’re taking 
over about 75% of the timetable, Derriman says. “Slowly over time, the class 
becomes yours.”

But while that 75% is part of the training specifications, it’s important for 
trainees to be treated as, well, trainees. “We never turn their trainee year 
into cheap labour – which is what some schools somewhere do, I’m afraid,” says 
Fluskey.

Trainees also spend a term within a different key stage at a different school, 
says Derriman. “This helps provide a greater knowledge of the different year 
groups and key stages as well as giving you experience of different schools and 
their practices”.

Derriman now works at Harlowbury Primary School in Old Harlow, where she did a 
six-week placement during her training. So, what’s life like as a fully-fledged 
NQT? “The staff are very supportive, really helpful,” she says. “The class I 
teach are really lovely children and the school community is a really nice one.

“Essex has given me that opportunity to do something that I always wanted to 
do.”

Continuing in the same school means the NQT year is fairly “seamless”, says 
Fluskey. “We continue to give additional support to them as NQTs.”

Similarly, Worton-Geer is working at the school he spent his six-week 
placement in – Tany’s Dell Community Primary School. He describes the training 
as a “rollercoaster” but ultimately “the biggest job satisfaction you will ever 
get.”

After all, working at a school makes you part of an extended family, says 
Fluskey. “The kind of relationships you develop with people is very 
significant, and the kind of influence that you can have – sometimes you’re not 
even aware of it.”

Find out more about becoming a teacher in Essex here 
<http://www.essexteachertraining.co.uk/>.

This article was produced and funded by Essex Education Services.
 