
The British parliament now has two Tory parties and two Labour parties. But 
the Conservatives will find it far easier to heal the breach thanLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>.

That’s because the Tory split is mainly about personalities and partially 
about strategy. By contrast, the Labour split is structural and ideological.

Back in December, I wrote that Labour was in the process of falling apart  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/dec/07/labour-is-falling-apart-but-dont-blame-jeremy-corbyn-for-its-collapse>
and that its famous “broad church” could not possibly hold together for much 
longer. Now it is coming to pass.

Given that the overwhelming majority of MPs did not support Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> it was inevitable that, at 
some stage, they would engineer a coup. The Brexit vote provided them with an 
opportunity.

Replacing a leader is, however, entirely to miss the point. The chasm in the 
Labour party cannot be bridged by some kind of political fix at Westminster.

MPs who believe Corbyn to be the main problem, and his replacement to be the 
beginning of a cure for the party’s ills, are fooling themselves. Their 
newspaper voice, the Daily Mirror, is also wasting newsprint withits call for 
Corbyn to “go now”. 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/jeremy-corbyn-must-quit-now-8298423>
 The Mirror’s front page Photograph: Clipshare 
They misunderstand the profound problem across the country among people who 
are regarded as “traditional” Labour voters (and traditional Mirror readers).


It is an understatement to say there is a disconnect between the bulk of the 
party’s members in parliament, whether in the Commons or the Lords, and the 
electorate.

Gradually, older Labour voters are peeling away from the party they used to 
support as a matter of course. That was clear from the numbers willing to 
switch to Ukip at the last general election.

It was clearer still from the EU referendum vote, where so many Labour voters 
refused to answer the party’s remain call. Their opinions about immigration are 
wholly at odds with those held by the MPs who represent them.

Nor is immigration the only difference between them. Voters do not share the 
social sensibilities and liberal values of Labour’s MPs, whom they regard as 
middle - rather than working - class.

If Labour politicians want to analyse how their party got where it is today, 
they would do well to begin with the modernising project led byTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>. Its initial electoral success 
masked the fact that it increased the distance between the party in parliament 
and the people.

It cannot be denied that Blair’s governments pursued policies with the 
intention of helping the poorer elements in British society, providing 
substantial investment in public services, such as education and health, 
alongside the introduction of the minimum wage.

To an extent, those governments sought to re-establish upward social mobility, 
which had stalled during the Thatcher era. His trick, so to speak, was to 
borrow from her an enthusiasm for the free market.

So the positive aspects of the Blairite years were offset by a lack of 
appreciation at the grassroots, where there was also a widespread perception of 
a professional political class acting in a paternalistic fashion.

Running in parallel, union membership - and union effectiveness - declined as 
Labour kept its paymasters at arm’s length. Meanwhile, the old left, 
personified by Corbyn, was sidelined. It kept its counsel, but it did not go 
away.

At the 2005 general election, the fracture between party and country was 
becoming more obvious. But the fall in Labour’s vote, and the severe reduction 
in its majority, was attributed solely to the Iraq war.

By the time Gordon Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> 
assumed the leadership, having obtained it incidentally through years of 
back-biting, morale-sapping splitist activities, the modernising project was 
already running into the ground.

Internal opposition to it helped gain Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> the leadership in 2010, after 
Brown’s defeat, in what was supposed to be a shift back to the left. In fact, 
it was an imperceptible adjustment, noted inside Westminster and among 
political journalists, but little felt among Labour supporters.

And then came the radical revolt that resulted in Corbyn’s victory. Two major 
elements were involved: the reawakened old left and the newly enfranchised 
left-liberal youth who had flocked to join the party with the specific aim of 
instituting change.

Here were groups without any mainstream media backing. No national newspaper 
supported them, not least because they didn’t see them coming.

Although “Corbyn’s army” appeared to spring spontaneously to prominence, they 
were a manifestation of the rumbling discontent for the party’s move to the 
right and the Westminsterisation of politics generally.

What they were not, however, was representative of the vast majority of people 
who had been voting Labour steadily since the second world war. The die was 
cast for a yet another deep division.

There is a now mismatch between what Corbyn and his supporters believe; what 
the majority of Labour MPs believe; and what the wider community of traditional 
Labour voters believe.


Nor, of course, are the Labour MPs of one mind. There are still Blairite and 
Brownite factions amid the newish intake who are not aligned to either side.

In the light of all that, I thought it touching that the Mirror, in its 
heartfelt front page editorial 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/jeremy-corbyn-must-quit-now-8298423>, 
appears to believe Corbyn’s resignation would be the precursor to Labour 
regaining power.

“He doesn’t connect with the Labour heartlands outside the south east,” said 
the paper, which overlooks the reality that few, if any, Labour MPs connect 
with those “heartlands”.

Those heartlands are full of long-time Mirror readers. White working class, 
they are drawn from either a background of union membership or simply a long 
family tradition of Labour voting, and are very probably a good example of the 
party’s increasingly disaffected supporters.
 