
No tables overturned, no brawls, no knuckle-headed bombast about taking 
matters outside: Anthony Joshua andWladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> were always going to be 
too classy to follow the shabby lead of Dereck Chisora, Tony Bellew and David 
Haye, whose recent behaviour at press conferences raked boxing through the mud 
once again. But underneath the respect they showed when they met at Wembley 
Stadium to promote their WBA and IBF heavyweight title fight next April, there 
were stealthy attempts at early psychological power plays.

Klitschko, who looked fit and excited about the prospect of becoming a 
three-time heavyweight champion, got the ball rolling by calling his opponent 
“Little Bro”. True, it was a term he had used to describe Joshua when they 
first several met years ago – and it was intended as a compliment because both 
are of similar heights and were Olympic gold medallists. Yet to do it yesterday 
was a subtle reminder of just who the big brother was.

Anthony Joshua accepts he must raise his game to beat Wladimir Klitschko
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/anthony-joshua-wladimir-klitschko-ibf-world-heavyweight-champion>
Not that Joshua appeared fussed.

“I let it go over my head,” he said later when up close with the media 
underneath the bowels of the stadium. “He can call me little bro and all these 
things until the cows come home, and then I go and spank him out in a round 
it’s kind of irrelevant.”

Many fighters would be daunted by Klitschko’s reputation and record, but 
Joshua cheekily described him as his “next project”.

“You know when someone has a passion for building cars, and they have an old 
classic car they need to build – well, this is my next project so I am looking 
forward to it,” he added.

‘Did that make Klitschko an old banger?’ one wag asked – much to Joshua’s 
amusement.

Not that he is taking his opponent lightly. The Ukrainian will be 41 on fight 
night but Joshua is expecting the version that dominated the heavyweight 
division for over a decade – ram-rod jab, punishing right hand, difficult to 
get tagged – to turn up.

“The reason I say that is because when I do win, I will have faced the best 
Klitschko,” explained Joshua. “I don’t want it to be he had a year and a half 
out. I like facing the best people.”

Joshua intends his first mega-fight, for which promoter Eddie Hearn hopes to 
attract 90,000 through Wembley’s doors, to begin to establish him as a legend. 
“It’s about longevity,” he said. “I like Cristiano Ronaldo because of how long 
he has been around at the top level. You can’t do it once, you have to do it 
more.

“You want to get the respect so when it is asked ‘how many times have you done 
it?’ You can say ‘years’. That is cement. You can’t break that. That is what 
legendary is about.”

But Klitschko believes he is not finished yet – and that his shock defeat to 
Tyson Fury 13 months ago was actually a blessing which has relighted his fire. 
And, despite appearances to the contrary against Fury, he insists his powers 
have not waned.

“Actually the opposite,” he promised. “With age I’ve got faster. And my 
endurance got better, my anticipation. I always ask my team ‘you guys better 
tell me before I slow down, because maybe I won’t feel it. Just tell me if it’s 
there.’ So it’s not just my opinion.”

The pair have sparred before, two years ago, when Klitschko was preparing to 
defend his heavyweight titles against Kubrat Pulev. “We did about 20 rounds,” 
said Klitschko. “And definitely I could feel his athleticism. As much as I 
remember, there was no dominance from each of us. It was pretty equal.”

But that was then. And this is now. But while Klitschko appeared to take 
strength from the fact that his younger rival is yet to go more than seven 
rounds, or to face a real top-level opponent, he conceded that he would be the 
underdog on April 29.

Joshua wasn’t going to dispute that. “Klitschko will be different, but I’m not 
worried about losing,” he said. “It’s not like ‘Oh my God, there’s Klitschko’. 
No way. I’m past that stage.” And with that he began to smile.
 