
The Times’s front page story on Tuesday, about an opinion poll underlining 
Jeremy Corbyn’s popularity 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/corbyn-defies-his-critics-with-boost-in-grassroots-support-svmvc338s>
, was a rare example of a good news story about the Labour leader.

It reported the results of a YouGov survey showing that 55% of Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> members believed Corbyn was doing 
well, up four points over a fortnight, compared to 41% who thought he was doing 
badly, down seven points.

And 54% of the members said he would get their vote to remain as leader , 
compared with 21% who backed Angela Eagle and 15% who favoured Owen Smith.

But the informal agreement between Eagle and Smith means that one will drop 
out to avoid a three-way contest. In that event, according to the poll results, 
Corbyn would beat Eagle by 24 points (58% to 34%) and he would beat Smith by 22 
points (56% to 34%).


It is doubtful if the story will do much to influence Times readers. But the 
page 1 placement of a positive article about Corbyn was significant on a day 
where most of the headlines were imbued with further criticism of him because 
he voted against Trident.

Among them was the Daily Telegraph’s front page piece about Corbyn being 
heckled by his own MPs during the Trident debate.

A page lead in the Daily Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> headlined the accusation by 
prime minister Theresa May that Corbyn was helping Britain’s enemies by backing 
nuclear disarmament. And a page lead in Metro said Corbyn had been “blasted by 
his own MPs.”

The Sun’s editorial referred to Corbyn as “the hard-left terror sympathiser 
who wouldn’t fight back in a nuclear assault.”

And John Crace, in his Guardian parliamentary sketch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/trident-is-no-deterrent-to-labour-self-destructing>
, wrote of Corbyn:

“You can only admire the way in which he is turning the Labour party into a 
piece of dadaist performance art. However sincerely his views on nuclear 
weapons are held, there are few things more absurd in Westminster than a party 
leader who openly speaks against his own party policy.”

This portrayal of Corbyn comes amid the party’s two-day window in which new 
members must register to vote and against the background of research by the 
London School of Economics showing that Corbyn was “systematically attacked” by 
newspapers after his election last September.

The LSE study, Journalistic representations of Jeremy Corbyn in the British 
press: from watchdog to attack dog 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/media@lse/research/pdf/JeremyCorbyn/Cobyn-Report-FINAL.pdf>
, was based on an analysis of the editorial content of eight titles over a 
two-month period in 2015: Guardian, Telegraph, Mail, Express, Sun, Independent, 
Mirror and London Evening Standard.

Researchers concluded that the papers had been guilty of vilifying Corbyn 
through character assassination, ridicule of his personality, and the 
delegitimisation of his politics.

Although they conceded that other leftwing Labour leaders had suffered at the 
hands of the press - naming Neil Kinnock and Ed Miliband (why not Michael 
Foot?) - they argued that “the degree of antagonism and hatred from part of the 
media has arguably reached new heights.”

They were unsurprised by the “negative and acerbic” coverage exhibited by the 
five rightwing papers, but argued that the left/liberal-leaning trio were 
guilty of anti-Corbyn reporting through “the amplification of internal 
struggles and tensions within the Labour party.”

This negativity was manifested by the trio having provided “an extensive and 
enthusiastic platform to those forces in the Labour party that aggressively 
contested Corbyn.”

Overall, their analysis found that more than 50% of the news coverage of 
Corbyn was “critical or blatantly antagonistic” with no “distinction between 
comment, conjecture and fact.”

Many articles mocked Corbyn’s ideas, policies, history and even his looks. 
Often portrayed as a clown-like figure, he was derided as the comic political 
equivalent of the TV character Mr Bean (Mr Corbean).

The study’s four authors also wrote an article on the OpenDemocracy website 
<https://opendemocracy.net/uk/bart-cammaerts-brooks-decillia-joa-o-magalha-es-and-ce-sar-jimenez-marti-nez/when-our-watchdog-be>
 in which they contended that “Corbyn was clobbered by the British mainstream 
media in quite astonishing ways.”

Conceding that Corbyn is “a political maverick, a political transgressor and 
deviator who refuses to align himself with the mores and quirkiness of the 
British political establishment”, they thought press reaction to him was 
“transgressive and highly problematic from a democratic perspective.” They 
wrote:

“What the UK newspapers have done – and continue to do – to the Labour leader 
has grown beyond a political question. It now also raises ethical and 
democratic ones.

A healthy democracy, to be sure, requires a strong watchdog in its press – but 
not an attack dog, snarling and barking at a different looking and distinctive 
talking politician that happens to challenge the status quo and advocate for a 
different kind of politics.

In view of the results of our study, the British people also deserve a 
different kind of political journalism, critical yes, but also respectful of 
difference and civic.”

But I wonder if that really is what the British people want? Do they hunger 
for unbiased political coverage? Do they want politicians treated with respect?

I am not in the least bit surprised by the coverage of Corbyn. With something 
like 80% of his parliamentary party against him, would democracy benefit from a 
failure to reflect that reality?

I think we can presume that Labour MPs are not susceptible to press spin. 
Similarly, the fact that there is - according to that Times/YouGov poll - a 
healthy majority in favour of Corbyn among Labour members, they are not being 
influenced by the coverage. So where’s the proof of harm?


As for the readers of the eight titles, can anyone demonstrate that the 
negative coverage of Corbyn has unduly influenced their readerships?
 