
Katmai national park, Alaska

Katmai, in southern Alaska, is for the bears: it’s home to the world’s largest 
population of Alaskan brown bears, a subspecies of the grizzly. Over 2,000 
bears live in Katmai and thanks to their salmon-rich diet, they are some of the 
largest bears in the world, with mature males routinely reaching over 1,000 
pounds (453kg), more than twice the size of the average Yellowstone grizzly. 
With the backcountry full of bears, people usually stay within a small section 
of the four-million-acre park. The most popular area is Brooks Camp, at the 
mouth of the Brooks river, on the shore of Nanak lake.


Here hundreds of bears congregate in summer and autumn to feast on salmon, 
which pass through in July and September on their seasonal breeding migrations. 
From June to September, visitors can view the bears from wooden platforms along 
the river. Katmai national park is also home to some of the most active 
volcanoes in the world. The Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes is an ash-filled 
valley devastated by the largest volcanic eruption in the 20th century, which 
took place in June of 1912, when Mount Katmai and Novarupta erupted 
simultaneously, expelling an estimated 13-15 cubic kilometres of ash.

Top tip After viewing the brown bear feast at Brooks Camp, board one of the 
park buses for a tour through the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. More than 100 
years since the 1912 eruption, the smoking fumaroles are quiet, but creeks and 
rivers have carved canyons into the ash hundreds of feet deep and only a few 
feet wide, giving visitors a dramatic glimpse into the geologic layers of the 
eruption.
• Park website <https://www.nps.gov/katm/index.htm>

Gates of the Arctic national park and preserve, Alaska
 Photograph: Alamy 
Sitting above the Arctic Circle, Gates of the Arctic is the most northerly US 
national park and its second-largest, being slightly bigger than Belgium. With 
no roads and little development, the park tends to attract only the hardiest 
and most adventurous of travellers. The stunning, glacier-carved Brooks Range 
straddles the park, running east to west, along the Continental Divide. Water 
running down the southern slopes of the range flows to the Pacific, while water 
running off the northern side flows to the Arctic Ocean.

Access is by way of the Dalton Highway, a primitive, sometimes unpaved road 
that runs from Fairbanks up to Prudhoe Bay on the Arctic Ocean, skimming the 
eastern border of the park. Entrance from the road means crossing the deep, 
cold, fast waters of the Middle Fork of the Koyukuk river without a bridge. 
Because of this natural barrier, most visitors are content with viewing the 
park from the road, on their way north.

More determined visitors can arrange to be dropped off on one of the park’s 
many lakes by a small seaplane. Another option is to fly to the airstrip at 
Anaktuvuk Pass, a Nunamiut village in the north-east of the park, home to 
around 350 people. Anaktuvuk Pass boasts the most remote post office in the US 
and itsSimon Paneak Memorial Museum 
<http://www.north-slope.org/departments/inupiat-history-language-and-culture/simon-paneak-memorial-museum>
 celebrates Nunamiut culture and displays artefacts related to the tribe’s 
history of semi-nomadic caribou hunting.

Top tip The best strategy is to start at the park headquarters in Fairbanks 
and drive to the ranger station in Bettles, just south of the park. From there 
you can arrange for a plane to drop you off in the backcountry. Be sure to 
arrange for pick-up before your supplies run out. Summers are short and 
snowstorms can sweep in any month of the year.
• Park website <https://www.nps.gov/gaar/index.htm>

North Cascades national park, Washington state

 Photograph: Cultura/Rex 
Most of the least-visited parks are remote and hard to reach. But North 
Cascades is within 100 miles of Seattle and yet, in 2015 it had just under 
27,000 visitors. The low numbers are probably due to limited road access. 
Highway 20 bisects it at Ross Lake, but the park, most of which is within the 
Stephen Mather Wilderness, has few other maintained roads.

However, the lack of roads is part of what makes North Cascades special: this 
rugged expanse is virtually untouched, extending north into Canada, where it 
becomes the Skagit Valley provincial park. The promise of native wilderness 
lures experienced backpackers and mountaineers, who tramp the 18 miles of the 
Pacific Crest Trail that run through the park and seek out North Cascades’ 
remote peaks, which have names like Mount Terror and Inspiration Peak.

Most visitors come to Ross Lake national recreation area, a 12,000-acre 
manmade reservoir that bisects the park and provides power to Seattle through a 
series of hydroelectric dams. Fishing, canoeing, camping and kayaking are 
popular.

Top tip Cascade Pass was once an important trade route for Native Americans 
travelling between the coast and the interior. To retrace their historic 
footsteps, leave from the town of Marblemount and drive to the end of the 
Cascade river road. From there hike a moderate 3½ miles to the pass, which at 
1,643 metres is above the tree line, affording spectacular views.
• Park website <https://www.nps.gov/noca/index.htm>

Great Basin national park, Nevada
 Photograph: Alamy 
Highway 50, running east to west through central Nevada’s high desert, is 
nicknamed the Loneliest Road in America. So it’s no surprise that one of the 
country’s least-visited national parks lies along this road.

Great Basin, in eastern Nevada, protects a small pocket of this state’s famous 
“basin and range” topography – created by deep-rooted forces pulling apart the 
continental crust, forming a series of parallel basins and mountain ranges 
across the state. Great Basin national park near the town of Baker, was created 
in part to protect a stand of bristlecone pine trees that are among the oldest 
living organisms on Earth, up to 5,000 years old.

Key sights are Wheeler Peak, at 3,982 metres the second-tallest mountain in 
Nevada, and the Lehman caves, a complex of deep caverns known for their 
beautiful flowstone formations of stalactites, stalagmites, and helictites. 
Tours are offered several times a day by park rangers, covering the geology, 
ecology and history of the caves. The park also has two campsites and is known 
for its exceptionally dark night skies, perfect for stargazing.

Top tip The Grand Palace cave tour is 90 minutes long and explores underground 
treasures such as the Gothic Palace, the Music Room, the Lodge Room, 
Inscription Room, and the Grand Palace sections of Lehman Caves.
• Park website <https://www.nps.gov/grba/index.htm>

Black Canyon of the Gunnison national park, Colorado
 Photograph: Alamy 
This is not the deepest canyon in North America but it is the steepest, with 
the Gunnison river falling more than 10 metres per mile as it plunges through 
this narrow national park in south-west Colorado (in comparison, the Colorado 
river drops an average of 2.3 metres per mile through the Grand Canyon).

The name refers to the limited sunlight that reaches its depths, which are 
made even darker by the black Precambrian gneiss and schist rock of the canyon 
walls. This 1.7-billion-year-old rock is extremely hard and good for rock 
climbing, though scaling the steep, sheer walls should only be attempted by 
experts.

Hiking from the rim into the canyon is not for the faint of heart, either. A 
number of routes descend from north and south rims, but the trails are unmarked 
and unmaintained, requiring route finding and Class 3 scrambling skills. Poison 
ivy also grows abundantly in the canyon, deterring even the most agile hikers.

Top tip The best views of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison are from 
Exclamation Point, an easy-to-moderate three-mile round trip hike on the north 
rim that leads to an overlook.
• Park website <https://www.nps.gov/blca/index.htm>

Organ Pipe Cactus national monument, Arizona
 Photograph: Alamy 
This slice of the Sonoran desert biome is a vibrant desert habitat and the 
only place where the rare and stunning organ pipe cactus grows wild. Pollinated 
primarily by bats, this cactus has the heft and presence of the iconic saguaro 
cactus, but with many more arms snaking upwards from its central trunk. Many 
other species of cactus and plant also thrive here, with flowering cactuses 
making for stunning spring colours.

One reason visitor numbers are low is because the park is on the border with 
Mexico, where drug smuggling and immigration issues are rampant. Incidents 
involving visitors are rare, but people are advised to stay on marked trails, 
not pick up hitchhikers and report suspicious activities to rangers or border 
patrol agents. The park has two campsites, one for RVs, the other for tents 
only.

Top tip Drive or cycle the 21-mile Ajo Mountain drive to the Arch Canyon 
trailhead. From here an easy 1.2-mile roundtrip trail leads to views of a 
25-metre wide natural arch.
• Park website <https://www.nps.gov/orpi/index.htm>

Isle Royale national park, Michigan
 Photograph: Rolf Peterson/AP 
At 45 miles long and nine wide, Isle Royale is the largest island in Lake 
Superior. That hardly seems enough room to support several hundred moose and a 
few dozen wolves, yet this island is home to one of the most thoroughly studied 
predator-prey interactions in the world.

Since 1980, the animals have been tracked by biologists interested in how the 
rise and fall of moose on the island impacts the number of wolves. In harsh 
winters, the moose population dwindles to a few hundred, with the wolves 
dropping to around a dozen. In lush summers, as many as 1,000 moose and three 
dozen wolves have been counted. The island is considered a closed population, 
but both animals have been known to come and go, swimming across Lake Superior 
or crossing on the ice in winter.

With such a rare and delicate predator-prey dynamic, the number of human 
visitors is limited. Wolves are shy: sightings are rare and interactions rarer. 
In the north-west corner of Lake Superior, the island can only be reached by 
boat or seaplane. Seasonal ferries operated by the national park service run 
from Houghton and Copper Harbor, Michigan, and Grand Portage, Minnesota. 
Camping is allowed in 36 backcountry sites, reachable by foot or boat. No 
vehicles are allowed on the island.

Top tip For a true wilderness backpacking experience, hike the Greenstone 
Ridge Trail, which runs for 40 miles from one end of the island to the other. 
It usually takes four to five days and hikers can arrange to be picked up by 
shuttle boat at the other end of the island.
• Park website <https://www.nps.gov/isro/index.htm>

Congaree national park, South Carolina
 Photograph: Alamy 
Deep in the swamps of southern South Carolina is one of the largest intact 
stands of old-growth hardwood trees in North America. In the late 1960s, 
private landowners were considering selling off tracts for timber development 
until the Sierra Club campaigned to have over 20,000 acres just south-east of 
Columbia declared a national monument in 1976. In 2003, the area was upgraded 
to national park status.

The trees in Congaree are some of the tallest hardwoods in the world and the 
park is nicknamed the Redwoods of the East. The canopy height averages 30 
metres and the park is home to at least 15 “champion trees”, a title bestowed 
on the tallest known specimens of a species. These include a 49-metre sweet 
gum, a 47-metre cherry bark oak, a 41-metre American elm and a 38-metre laurel 
oak. These trees stand in a swampy flood plain forest that floods a few times 
of year.

Because much of Congaree is swampy, the best way to explore it is by canoe. 
The Congaree River Blue Trail starts in the state capital, Columbia, and runs 
for 50 miles downstream. Paddlers may catch a glimpse of the park’s abundant 
wildlife, including bobcats, river otters and a variety of bird species, many 
of which are unique to this forest.

Top tip Visitors can walk through the Congaree swamp without getting their 
feet wet on the 2.4-mile elevated Boardwalk Loop starting from the Harry 
Hampton Visitor Center in the north of the park.
• Park website <https://www.nps.gov/cong/index.htm>

Dry Tortugas national park, Florida
 Photograph: Alamy 
One way to keep a park from being overrun by visitors is to make it accessible 
only by boat. Dry Tortugas is 68 miles off the main Florida Keys. Named for an 
abundance of turtles (tortugas in Spanish) and lack of potable surface water, 
these westernmost and most isolated of the Keys have healthy populations of 
birds and sea turtles, who see only around 60,000 people a year.

Dry Tortugas may belong to the turtles, but it’s dominated by Fort Jefferson, 
a massive but unfinished fortress built in the late 1800. The fort is the 
largest masonry building in the western hemisphere and the cost of building and 
maintaining it in the face of hurricanes and harsh salty conditions could not 
be justified for long. After being used as a prison and medical quarantine 
facility, it was turned into a National Monument in 1935 and a national park in 
1992.

Dry Tortugas is reached by ferry, boat or seaplane from Key West. Most people 
come to snorkel or dive in the clear blue waters around the thriving coral 
reefs. Others come with food, water and supplies to camp under the stars in the 
primitive campsite near the fort.

Top tip In April and May, migrating sea birds fly over Dry Tortugas, often 
landing for a rest on the island. Species counts during these flyovers are 
legendary, with 100 or more species sometimes spotted in a single day.
• Park website <https://www.nps.gov/drto/index.htm>

National Park of American Samoa

 Photograph: Alamy 
This park, in the South Pacific, nearly 5,000 miles from the California coast, 
has long been a strategic military outpost for the US. Three of the islands – 
Tutuila, Ofy and Ta’u – were declared a national park in 1988. Only around 
10,000 visitors make their way here each year.

American Samoa is made up of overlapping shield volcanoes erupted from an 
underwater hot spot that has been active for at least 1.5 million years. As the 
Pacific plate moved over this hot spot, it created an island chain, much like 
the islands of Hawaii. The volcanoes are not currently erupting, but are still 
considered active. Periodic collapses of parts of the shield volcanoes can set 
off tsunamis and leave behind sea cliff scars over 900 metres high, forming 
some of the highest sea cliff escarpments in the world.

Visitors come to American Samoa mainly for snorkelling and whale watching. The 
waters are rich in marine life, including sea turtles, humpback whales, over 
900 species of fish and 250 species of coral. Some of the largest living coral 
colonies are found in the waters around Ta’u Island.

Related: Where to stay in the 10 most popular US national parks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/aug/25/10-best-places-to-stay-us-national-parks>

Top tip The Samoan culture is one of the oldest in Polynesia and still 
thriving on American Samoa. The park operates ahomestay programme 
<https://www.nps.gov/npsa/learn/historyculture/upload/Homestay-Program-Contacts_Revised2015.pdf>
, where visitors can stay in a traditional village, eat home-cooked food and 
participate in customs and crafts, such as ceremonial mat-weaving.
• Park website <https://www.nps.gov/npsa/index.htm>

Mary Caperton Morton is a freelance science and travel writer based in Big 
Sky, Montana. Follow her travels attheblondecoyote.com 
<https://theblondecoyote.com/> 
 