
If Secret Santa, Black Friday and Elf on the Shelf already feel like three 
modern festive rituals too many, be warned – there is a newChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> activity gaining traction 
in a street near you this year.

The 12 Pubs <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pubs> Of Christmas is 
said to have started in Ireland about 10 years ago, but now it appears to be 
taking over the UK. The idea is simple: wear the most garish Christmas jumper 
or festive outfit you can find, join a large group of people – perhaps 100 or 
so – then try to drink in 12 pubs on the same day.

And as if that liver-shocking prospect isn’t bad enough, there are generally 
rules of conduct for each pub – for example, everyone in the group must talk 
like James Bond, or all participants have to call each other Frank, or – 
perhaps better for fellow pubgoers – every member has to remain entirely silent 
for half an hour.

This weekend alone hundreds of people were signed up to head out on a 12 
Pubs-style bar crawl, with events in Guildford, Crawley, Glasgow, Oxford, 
Cambridge, Reading, St Albans, London, Faversham, Bournemouth, Manchester, 
Bristol and Portsmouth. On Facebook, 40 events billed as 12 Pubs of Christmas 
have been advertised for this weekend or next, and many more happened last week 
too.

If it all feels too early, the people arranging the events probably agree. 
Aoife Conway was one of the organisers of a 50-person 12 Pubs event in Clapham, 
south-west London last night. “Everything seems so early,” she said. “I had my 
Christmas party on 8 December. But people have other places to go, especially 
in London, so they have a lot to squeeze in.”

Conway and her fellow organisers used whistles and a megaphone to marshal the 
revellers, some of whom were unfamiliar with the 12 Pubs requirements. In 
Camden, north-west London, a group of Canadians were trying out 12 Pubs, 
British style, led last night by Lindsay Laur, a teacher. “In Canada we used to 
sing ‘In the first bar of Christmas, the barman gave to me…’,” Laur said. “I 
don’t know if they do that in England.”

Conway said: “Karaoke is always a fun one. Someone starts singing Fairytale of 
New York and everyone has to join in. Or there’s the buddy system, where you 
have to hold your buddy’s hand and feed them their drink.”

The reaction from other pubgoers on previous events had been positive, she 
said. “They want to join in, and sometimes they come along too – it’s all in 
good spirits. It’s not rowdy.”

All the 12 Pubs organisers that the Observer spoke to said they checked 
beforehand to make sure pubs would be happy to have scores of people all 
turning up at once. Steve Dobbs has been arranging a 12 Pubs group in 
Colchester, Essex, for several years now, after taking part in an event in 
Australia with some Irish friends.

For Dobbs, a former bar worker who asks 12 Pubbers to donate to the Evelina 
Charity at Guys and St Thomas’s Children’s Hospital, it’s the “best night of 
the year”.

“I always make sure I tell people to respect the bar staff and respect the 
landlord,” he said.

“We’ve never had any problems before and I don’t plan to have any in the next 
couple of weeks. I’ve got friends who are door staff, and people who own the 
pubs who can help out.”

Not every group plans ahead though, and for every pub that welcomes groups, 
there are small ones that prefer to create a haven from the Christmas chaos. 
Alan Murphy is one, although he was labelled “Scrooge” for banning Christmas 
jumpers from the Lion and Key, his pub in Hull, East Yorkshire, last week.

“If you’re a group of 15 or 20 lads all dressed in Christmas jumpers, or 
Bananaman or whatever, do you want to be in a quiet pub with no loud music, 
candles on the table and couples drinking mulled wine and real ale?” he asked. 
“We just don’t have space.

“There’s miles better places for them to go. And we’ll take them in up to 8pm 
anyway.”

In Dublin there is now a semi-official list of pubs that don’t allow 12 Pubs 
groups. Ronan Lynch, whose family has owned the Swan in the city for decades, 
was the first to ban 12 Pubs groups. “We stopped it about eight years ago 
because it had just gone bananas, crazy,” he said. “When 20 or 30 people walk 
into a bar it’s very hard to assess what condition they’re in, and we have a 
duty not to serve people if they’ve had too much to drink. The games got out of 
hand – they might have a rule that you had to take something from the premises, 
so you had to keep an eye on them otherwise they’d walk out with chairs or pull 
your decorations down. Or you could have a group of 20 people who would all 
drop their glasses at the same time.”

He said the regular customers “who support us 52 weeks a year” were 
uncomfortable with “the Christmas jumpers with flashing lights, and fellas 
blowing whistles and horns”.

“It has paid off for us,” Lynch said. “People actually come to our pub because 
it’s a sanctuary.”
 