
My kitchen is … clean and serene, until you look in the cupboards. I recently 
moved into a converted warehouse in Hackney. It’s a huge open space – kitchen, 
living room and dining room all in one – very minimal and very white. My 
pickles on the wooden shelves bring some colour, and the cupboards are full of 
all my bottles, jars, and spices. I’d always lived in busier, darker places, so 
moving here was amazing. I feel quite lucky.

My favourite kitchen tool is …  my measuring cups and spoons, I find it easier 
to grab them than getting out my scales. Recently, I got a NutriBullet, and it 
has changed my life. I got a bit overexcited the first time I used it and made 
five different green sauces for one meal. And then there’s my stereo. I never 
really cook without music.

My store-cupboard staple is … vinegar. For pickling, I use mainly rice wine 
vinegar, but I also love cider vinegar and Chinese black vinegar.

When I’m starving I … have avocado sourdough toast with a poached egg and my 
F.A.T kimchi hot sauce. At work it’s a running joke that I’m always surrounded 
by snacks. At the moment I’m really into Sichuan peanuts and dried mango with 
chilli flavouring, or crackers with roe spread.

My culinary inspiration comes from … two meals I had on a trip to the US: a 
blue cheese and kimchi croissant at Momofuku Milk Bar in New York, which was 
mindblowing, and a meal at A-Frame in California. I felt really sick when I 
arrived, but then I had a blue-cheese dip with pickles and hurricane popcorn: a 
snack that kids eat at the cinema in Hawaii – kettle corn, bits of bacon, fried 
pineapple, furikake, shiso and corn pops. It had so much going on, but it was 
the most moreish and fun thing I’ve ever eaten. I came home, quit my job in 
advertising and decided to work in food.

My kitchen, my obsession: Chika Yoshizaki | Kitchen encounters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/28/she-who-eats-blogger-chika-yoshizaki-my-kitchen-encounters>
My best-kept kitchen secret is … something James Lowe at Lyle’s taught me. 
When I first started working in food, James gave me a recipe for a duck liver 
parfait, with a full list of the ingredients and equipment I’d need to get it 
right. It took me three attempts because I thought I could just wing it. 
Eventually, I invested in the right kit and ingredients and it worked. So my 
advice is to always push yourself, to try things again and again until you get 
it right and – most of all – to do things properly.

My current obsession is … Magnus Reid’s new restaurant in Hackney, Legs. It’s 
such a fun place, serving really simple, good food. And it has an incredible 
wine list.

Everything tastes better with … pickles. Kimchi is my favourite. I eat it with 
everything I make at home. I always make sure I have a bunch of different 
pickles on the go: pickled sweet onions, chipotle pickled eggs, homemade 
ketchup.

When I go shopping I … am very organised. If I’m doing a dinner party, I will 
set up a spreadsheet and list all the ingredients and prices, so I know how 
much I’m going to spend. My friends are the same. I recently went to Cornwall 
with a few girlfriends, and we have a big spreadsheet to plan every meal.

For dinner tonight … dan dan noodles. I think of it as an Asian spag bol. It’s 
my ultimate comfort food. I’ve researched it thoroughly, trying all of Fuchsia 
Dunlop’s recipes and spending a day in Chinatown eating it in five different 
places, just to figure it out.

• Freddie Janssen is a purveyor of pickles and the author of Pickled (Hardie 
Grant).@Freddielookatme <https://twitter.com/freddielookatme?lang=en>
 