
Rising mortality rates, an increase in life-threatening infections and a 
shortage of staff and medical equipment are crippling Greece’s health system as 
the country’s doggedpursuit of austerity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/08/rioters-take-to-the-streets-ahead-of-greek-austerity-vote>
 hammers the weakest in society.

Data and anecdote, backed up by doctors and trade unions, suggest the EU’s 
most chaotic state is in the midst of a public health meltdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/09/greek-debt-crisis-damage-healthcare-hospital-austerity>
. “In the name of tough fiscal targets, people who might otherwise survive are 
dying,” said Michalis Giannakos who heads the Panhellenic Federation of Public 
Hospital Employees. “Our hospitals have become danger zones.”

Figures released by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control 
recently revealed that about 10% of patients inGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> were at risk of developing 
potentially fatal hospital infections, with an estimated 3,000 deaths 
attributed to them.

Eurozone ministers won't budge an inch on Greek finance measures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/dec/14/eurozone-ministers-wont-budge-an-inch-on-greek-finance-measures>
The occurrence rate was dramatically higher in intensive care units and 
neonatal wards, the body said. Although the data referred to outbreaks between 
2011 and 2012 – the last official figures available – Giannakos said the 
problem had only got worse.

Like other medics who have worked in the Greek national health system since 
its establishment in 1983, the union chief blamed lack of personnel, inadequate 
sanitation and absence of cleaning products for the problems. Cutbacks had been 
exacerbated by overuse of antibiotics, he said.

“For every 40 patients there is just one nurse,” he said, mentioning the case 
of an otherwise healthy woman who died last month after a routine leg operation 
in a public hospital on Zakynthos. “Cuts are such that even in intensive care 
units we have lost 150 beds.”

“Frequently, patients are placed on beds that have not been disinfected. Staff 
are so overworked they don’t have time to wash their hands and often there is 
no antiseptic soap anyway.”

No other sector has been affected to the same extent by Greece’s economic 
crisis. Bloated, profligate and corrupt, for many healthcare was indicative of 
all that was wrong with the country and, as such, badly in need of reform.

Acknowledging the shortfalls, the government announced last month that it 
planned to appoint more than 8,000 doctors and nurses in 2017.

Since 2009, per capita spending on public health has been cut by nearly a 
third – more than €5bn (£4.3bn) – according to the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development. By 2014, public expenditure had fallen to 4.7% of 
GDP, from a pre-crisis high of 9.9%. More than 25,000 staff have been laid off, 
with supplies so scarce that hospitals often run out of medicines, gloves, 
gauze and sheets.

In early December Giannakos, a nurse by training, led a protest march, which 
started at the grimy building housing the health ministry and ended outside the 
neoclassical office of the prime minister,Alexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>. At the ministry, hospital 
technicians erected a breeze-block wall and from it hung a placard with the 
words: “The ministry has moved to Brussels.”

Few advanced western economies have enacted fiscal adjustment on the scale of 
Greece. In the six years since it receivedthe first of three bailouts to keep 
bankruptcy at bay, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/13/greece-bailout-agreement-key-points-grexit>
 the country has enforced draconian belt-tightening in return for more than 
€300bn in emergency loans. The loss of more than 25% of national output – and a 
recession that has seen ever more people resorting to primary health care – has 
compounded the corrosive effects of cuts that in the case of public hospitals 
have often been as indiscriminate as they are deep.

Pressure to meet creditor-mandated budget targets means that in 2016 alone, 
expenditure on the sector has declined by €350m under the stewardship ofSyriza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/20/syriza-set-to-return-to-power-in-greek-general-election>
, the leftist party that had once railed against austerity, said Giannakos, 
citing government figures.

More than 2.5 million Greeks have been left without any healthcare coverage. 
Shortages of spare parts are such that scanning machines and other 
sophisticated diagnostic equipment have become increasingly faulty. Basic blood 
tests are no longer conducted at most hospitals because laboratory expenditure 
has been pared back. Wage cuts have worsened the low morale.

“The biggest problem is shortage of staff because people are retired and never 
replaced,” said Dr Yiannis Papadatos, who runs the intensive care unit of one 
of the three paediatric hospitals in Athens. “Then there’s the problem of 
equipment and, periodically, lack of supplies like gloves, catheters, and 
cleaning tissues.”

Small acts of heroism have done much to keep the broken system afloat: doctors 
and nurses work overtime, with donors and philanthropists also helping.

Papadatos said: “I was brought up partly in Kenya by parents who emphasised 
the virtues of helping others. These days I spend a lot of time going round 
asking friends, or the private sector, for help when our hospital runs out of 
supplies. The monitors we use to track heart rhythms, blood pressure, that sort 
of thing, were all donated. People like to give. It makes them feel good.”

Unionists argue that healthcare is an easy target because successive 
governments have refused to properly tackle tax evasion, the biggest drain on 
public coffers. In a rare public admission, the International Monetary Fund 
recently conceded that cuts had been so brutal “basic public services such as 
transport and healthcare are being compromised”.

EU and IMF auditors to visit Athens as Greece's agony continues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/eu-and-imf-auditors-to-visit-athens-as-greeces-agony-continues>
But at a time when the Greek debt crisis has flared again, after Tsipras’s 
controversial announcement of a series of welfare benefits, there are many who 
fear worse is to come.

One of them is British-trained Dr Michalis Samarakos, who believes that while 
the health system is in need of further reform it also runs the risk of running 
out of specialists and clinical trainees. Already there has been a massive 
exodus of doctors abroad, mostly to Germany and the UK, as a result of lack of 
opportunity.

“The best are leaving because their potential cannot be developed here,” he 
said. “I can see it teaching sixth-year students at Athens University, everyone 
wants a reference, everyone wants to go.

“It’s become a growing problem. We don’t have nephrologists, for example, 
because there are no prospects for specialists, either in or out of the system 
[in private practice].

“Trainee doctors are the backbone of any hospital – without them hospitals 
can’t function. Unless there is a big change, I worry greatly that things can 
only become worse.”
 