
Having tackled Sun editor Tony Gallagher over his dislike of the university 
route into journalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/mar/07/memo-to-tony-gallagher-why-journalism-degrees-really-do-matter>
 a City University London colleague pointed out that Observer columnist Nick 
Cohen has come up with a similar argument.

In fact, he is far less sympathetic than Gallagher to the university teaching 
of journalism in his polemic in the March issue of Standpoint,Flogging a dead 
degree <http://www.standpointmag.co.uk/node/6383/full>.

Cohen argues that universities are taking money from journalism students under 
false pretences because they are failing to tell them that there are no jobs 
available once they graduate.

Evidently, we who teach, not to mention the vice-chancellors at 77 
“disgraceful” universities with journalism courses, are no better than 
snake-oil salesmen who are guilty of fraud.

We are guilty of misselling because our “propaganda” to attract students fails 
to inform them about the reality of vanishing jobs.

Cohen writes: “Without boring you with the gruesome details, no news 
organisation in the western world has found a sustainable business model. Jobs 
are disappearing everywhere, and every journalist views the future with alarm.”

He names three major culprits: City, where I teach; Cardiff university and 
Westminster university: “Nowhere, in all of academia’s exhortations to sign up 
and pay up, could I find warnings of the risks ahead.”


City, for example, did not inform students that their “money may well be 
wasted.” Cardiff might do as it promises, by equipping young journalists with 
the necessary skills to start their careers, but how useful, asks Cohen, will 
those skills be “as newsrooms shrink and close?”

He follows this with an anecdote about a former colleague now teaching 
journalism who told him he was not allowed to “depress” his students by telling 
them that “journalism is now about as reliable a career as blacksmithing or 
coal mining.”

To be frank, there are so many errors amid the obvious bias in his argument 
that it is hard to know where to start.

But let’s deal first with two major mistakes: the overwhelming majority of 
people who graduate with an MA in journalism from City obtain jobs in 
journalism. Fact. I understand that the same is true for Cardiff’s 
post-graduate alumni.

They find jobs in an expanding journalistic universe because the contraction 
Cohen refers to relates to “old media”. His newsprint prejudice shows through 
in his failure to recognise the changes wrought by the digital revolution.

He, and I, might lament the passing of the newspaper where he began his career 
- following his Oxford PPE degree - but a new generation is moving into new 
media. Fact.

Given that reality, it would be strange to issue warnings to would-be 
students. But none of us among the City faculty are as blind as Cohen appears 
to be about the changed media environment.

We do not conceal the decline of newsprint. Indeed, that would not even be 
true in the magazine sector.


Notice also Cohen, in referring to City, claims there is no warning that 
students’ time and money “may well be wasted.” Nick, you are experienced enough 
to recognise weasel phrases, so why use one? “May well be wasted” could as 
easily be “may well not be wasted”, could it not?

Modern students are not ignorant of reality in this internet age. They can 
Google the facts about the decline of print newspapers. They can assess their 
chances of turning their vocational training at university into a full-time 
position. There is no question of vice-chancellors obsessed by the need to 
attract revenue luring them into an educational trap.

In conclusion, let’s consider the prejudice that underlies this meretricious 
article because Cohen, like so many other veterans of our trade, really doesn’t 
believe journalism can be taught.

He reveals that by beginning with an anecdote about the novelist Stephen King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking> who scorned the notion of being 
able to teach writing.

That’s Cohen’s real message, is it not? He learned “on the job” so that must 
be the only way to do it. This, I’m afraid, is one of those constant refrains 
from old reporters and subs.

But look around the media, Nick. Get the facts. You’ll discover that thousands 
- yes, thousands - of journalists at all levels of our trade in newspapers, 
magazines, radio stations, TV channels and a wide variety of online outlets 
have journalism degrees.

We did not mislead them. We didn’t sell them snake oil. We provided them with 
a journalistic education that enabled them to secure media jobs. In so doing, 
we sold them a future, which is now their present. And they are very thankful 
that we did.
 