
Entrepreneur James Davis* secured £100,000 in venture capital finance to start 
an IT business, in exchange for a 50% stake in his company. He was assigned a 
“handler” to talk to, but says there was “very little engagement or 
involvement” and “none of the dialogue” he expected.

“Nine months later we were growing but not at the rate required by the VC, so 
I went to a meeting with the handler to discuss next steps,” he says. “After an 
hour looking at spreadsheets he said it was time to wind the business up. I 
assumed I’d have a month to implement that but he said: ‘We’re going to do this 
right now’. I almost threw up in his office.

“I was immediately on the phone to customers closing projects, then I went 
home to tell my wife, and into the office the next morning to let our employees 
go. Within 24 hours, literally, the whole thing was over.”

Davis feels he started the company without adequate experience or support, and 
believes his backer had no real interest in the business. “That’s why VCs are 
very good at doing what they do; there’s no point burning a single pound more 
once you’ve made that decision [to close a business]. It makes sense not to 
delay things but at the time it felt very brutal,” he says.

Funding businesses by avoiding the gatekeepers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/aug/11/growing-businesses-crowdfunding-indiegogo>
“Securing venture capital is a top priority for many small businesses, but I 
don’t see it that way,” says Jean Salha, CEO of IT networks companyTeneno 
<http://teneno.com>, which is currently seeking £150,000 
<http://seedrs.com/teneno>, via the equity crowdfunding platform, Seedrs. Salha 
believes other small businesses should “stop chasing the VC dream, which very 
rarely works out for all parties” and instead consider alternative finance 
options.

“Small business owners tend to bend over backwards to please their backers, 
but end up sacrificing a lot of time pursuing VC funding, and failing,” he 
says. “In reality all that matters to venture capitalists is the bottom line. 
Most need to get their money back within a short timeframe, earning a 10-fold 
return on that investment.”

It’s a risk that entrepreneur Andrew Michael feels is often misaligned with 
the interests of those who start small businesses. Michael launched web hosting 
firm Fasthosts, which reported a turnover of £20m and a profit of £5m before 
its sale in 2006, and later founded cloud storage business Livedrive. He now 
runsbark.com <http://bark.com/> with co-founder Kai Feller and has repeatedly 
shunned venture capital opportunities.

“I think these guys are often vultures dressed up as cool, caring, supportive, 
people,” he says. “Even the most successful VCs typically only see one in 10 
investments work. Most people who start a small business have absolutely 
everything riding on its success, yet a VC wants it to make £100m a year with 
strategies that bet the whole company and might only offer a 20% chance of 
success.”

That’s not a risk Michael was prepared to take. “I’d rather be a cockroach [a 
robust, sustainable business] than a unicorn [one which reaches a $1bn 
valuation very quickly],” he says. “Building a business one step at a time 
might take longer but you have a higher chance of success, retain a bigger 
shareholding and stand to make more money.”

Finding the right VC

Matt Fox, CEO of holiday booking marketplace Snaptrip <http://snaptrip.com/>, 
believes the “vulture capital” moniker is misleading. Snaptrip has raised £2m+ 
of investment to date, including via VC firmsForward Partners 
<http://forwardpartners.com/> and Bestport Capital <http://bestport.co.uk/>. 
Fox says it’s important to distinguish between “top-tier super-aggressive 
growth funding” and other VC institutions that can be of benefit to small 
businesses in need of startup cash.


“If it weren’t for Forward Partners, Snaptrip wouldn’t exist. They allowed me 
to get it going and validated, and gave me a good grounding to go on and get 
further investment,” Fox says. “What’s disappointing about the VC ecosystem is 
that so many entrepreneurs want to shoot for the stars – chasing the ridiculous 
dream of top-tier VC backing – without understanding that there are other VC 
options for funding a small business.

“It’s too narrow-minded to say all VCs are vultures. They can be very 
controlling because they typically take serious presence on a company’s board 
and can integrate ‘nasty’ terms such as having their money covered in the event 
of a distressed sale but they have incredible investment mandates and very 
clever people making good companies, so they absolutely have their place,”he 
says. “If you look at it from their perspective they’re putting up all the risk 
... why shouldn’t a VC who offers you £3m want some kind of protection?”

I would have felt I was poisoning my own company by allowing external 
investors into an intimate consulting practice
Philip Storey 
Resisting venture capital is as much about retaining control as it is about 
risk-avoidance, says Philip Storey, founder and managing director of customer 
lifecycle marketing agencythisisenchant.com <http://thisisenchant.com/>. He has 
been offered “all sorts of funding options”, including venture capital, but 
hasn’t been tempted.

“I would have felt like I was poisoning my own company by allowing external 
investors into an intimate consulting practice,” he says. “VC backing would 
have compromised our culture; something I am not willing to risk, ever.”

Storey admits that running a business which relies on its own cashflow to stay 
afloat can be “scary” compared to the “easy route” of VC backing, but urges 
SMEs to consider the hidden cost of venture capital investment.

“You’re potentially diluting the dream you had when you started out,” he says. 
“There are so many unicorns cropping up but many are land-grabs rather than 
investments, with VCs pretty much buying their way into businesses and kicking 
out the people that started them. Instead, we’ve grown organically and 
gracefully, and it’s happened on our terms.

“There’s a lot of talk in the startup world about the benefits of failure – 
fail hard, fail fast, that kind of idea – but I don’t really buy it,” Storey 
adds. “I think there is a lot to be said for just trying to get your idea right 
in the first place. That’s not easy with somebody leaning over your shoulder 
trying to get their money back. I just don’t think that is conducive to 
creating a great business.”

Davis has recently launched a new successful venture, which has reached the 
point where external funding could enable upscaling. “But at the back of my 
mind there is always that meeting where someone else was able to shut the 
business on a dime, and I couldn’t do a thing about it,” he says. “I don’t want 
to retain full control of an enterprise but I do want a say in whether or not 
it continues, and when – or if – we pull the plug.”

*James Davis’s name has been changed at the entrepreneur’s request

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 