
To all incredible women who strive for excellence,

When I was growing up, I had a dream. I’m sure you did, too. My dream wasn’t 
like that of an average kid, my dream was to be the best tennis player in the 
world. Not the best “female” tennis player in the world.

I was fortunate to have a family that supported my dream and encouraged me to 
follow it. I learned not to be afraid. I learned how important it is to fight 
for a dream and, most importantly, to dream big. My fight began when I was 
three and I haven’t taken a break since.

But as we know, too often women are not supported enough or are discouraged 
from choosing their path. I hope together we can change that. For me, it was a 
question of resilience. What others marked as flaws or disadvantages about 
myself – my race, my gender – I embraced as fuel for my success. I never let 
anything or anyone define me or my potential. I controlled my future.

So when the subject of equal pay comes up, it frustrates me because I know 
firsthand that I, like you, have done the same work and made the same 
sacrifices as our male counterparts. I would never want my daughter to be paid 
less than my son for the same work. Nor would you.

As we know, women have to break down many barriers on the road to success. One 
of those barriers is the way we are constantly reminded we are not men, as if 
it is a flaw. People call me one of the “world’s greatest female athletes”. Do 
they say LeBron is one of the world’s best male athletes? Is Tiger? Federer? 
Why not? They are certainly not female. We should never let this go 
unchallenged. We should always be judged by our achievements, not by our gender.

For everything I’ve achieved in my life, I am profoundly grateful to have 
experienced the highs and lows that come with success. It is my hope that my 
story, and yours, will inspire all young women out there to push for greatness 
and follow their dreams with steadfast resilience. We must continue to dream 
big, and in doing so, we empower the next generation of women to be just as 
bold in their pursuits.

Serena Williams 
 