
Along Coney Island’s boardwalk, in between hotdog and nacho stands and White 
Castle burger restaurants, standsConey’s Cones 
<https://www.yelp.com/biz/coneys-cones-brooklyn>, a colorful gelato shop where 
for the last two seasons, under the supervision of a young Italian gelato 
master, hundreds of secret recipes are used to produce fresh, old-fashioned 
handcrafted iced delicacies for thousands of passersby.

Daniele Dal Sasso, a chef and former co-owner of two family gelato stores in 
the small northern Italian town of Vicenza, helped open the shop in 2015 after 
CAI, a large Italian conglomerate which owns much of Coney Island’s amusement 
park, flew the young chef to Brooklyn and asked whether he might consider 
opening a version of his Vicenza shops on the boardwalk.

Heatwave leads to ice-cream theft, flying cockroaches and exploding manure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/15/north-east-heatwave-ice-cream-theft>
He remembers arriving at Coney’s Cones, which was an American ice-cream shop 
at the time, and finding (much to his horror) bottles of corn syrup, artificial 
taste and coloring products, including a bottle containing orange liquid that 
read “mango base”.

“For me there is only one kind of mango,” Dal Sasso says. “It is the mango 
that comes from the tree, that I can touch, taste. It is the same with egg 
yolks. If I am going to use egg yolks, I want to separate them by hand. You can 
taste the difference.”

After some consideration, the then 28-year-old chef agreed he would sell part 
of his businesses in Italy and give the Coney Island project a chance, 
providing he was able to make gelato the same way he did at his stores in 
Italy: where lemons are squeezed by hand, and the frozen delicacy is consumed 
on the same day it was made. For Dal Sasso, making gelato is a careful art.

“In a kitchen if the main ingredients are good, you can taste along the way, 
and the final product will be good. With gelato, it’s more scientific. If you 
make one mistake the whole thing is over.”

Dal Sasso appears to be on trend. Over the last few years, Americans have been 
flocking to buy gelato in unprecedented numbers. According to market research 
firm Mintel, gelato consumption in the United States has exploded in recent 
years. Gelato sales went from just $9m in 2010 to $131m in 2015.

Despite being the exact translation of “ice-cream” in Italian, gelato has 
three main differences to its American counterpart: far less fat, less air, and 
a warmer serving temperature, helping it attain its signature silky texture. 
But those aren’t the only rules Dal Sasso follows in making his gelato.

“There are so many things to consider. Ingredients behave in different ways. 
If you put a banana in a freezer, it doesn’t harden much, if you put a 
strawberry or yoghurt in, they become like stone. Rum won’t freeze,” he says.

“It’s like playing music. Like a guitar. You touch a string and it will do one 
thing. Another will do another.”

Dal Sasso, now nearly 31, says that at the end of the day, what matters is 
loving what he creates – something he sees as a very Italian mentality.

“In Italy, what arrives on the plate is the passion of the chef. In Italy, the 
person who makes your daily coffee is passionate about the coffee, the beans, 
taking care and cleaning the machines. For me, with gelato, it is the same. 
Recipes were born when I sat down, in love with the ingredients in front of me, 
and wanting them to taste the best.”

Once you do that, Dal Sasso says – with ice-cream or gelato – there is no 
longer a wrong way of doing it.
 