
Paprika Gifts is an independent retail store based in the Wiltshire market 
town of Chippenham. Located in the Borough Parade shopping centre just off the 
high street, it rubs shoulders with some well-known retail brands – Waitrose, 
Argos, The Body Shop, WHSmith and Boots to name a few. For owner Anne Anderson, 
who has a second smaller store on Chelsea Road in nearby Bath, this represents 
both a challenge and an opportunity.


While all these chains are classed as competitors they also bring footfall, 
but she doesn’t know how much because the data is not released by the centre 
management. Anderson understands that the names bring in the shoppers but she 
also sees the “hundreds of boxes” delivered to Waitrose as part of the John 
Lewis click and collect online scheme.

“There is competition everywhere. All the major stores bring out Christmas 
gift ranges,” Anderson says, adding that it is her and her staff’s intuition 
for products and local knowledge of customers that enables the business to 
succeed. There is no data, no analytics, just good old-fashioned smelling 
what’s selling, as Lord Sugar would put it.

Utilising big data 

In contrast, the large retailers are increasingly driven by big data – 
information harvested from a mix of product sales receipts, online browsing 
records, loyalty cards, open data, location-based data and, of course, social 
media data. This data is helping to drive decision making – where to locate a 
new store, which products to stock, how to market to different age groups and 
so on.

“The more we know about our customers – the way they shop and when, their 
preferred methods of communication, their buying patterns and habits – the more 
that allows us to tailor our client proposition,” Andrew Ware, chief financial 
offer at Keyhaven Capital, said in an Economist Intelligence Unitstudy 
<http://www.wipro.com/documents/the-big-data-revolution-in-retail.pdf> by 
consultancy firm Wipro.

The study is revealing: 54% of retailers said big data had brought gains in 
multichannel sales, and 62% said they would make further investments in big 
data analytics in the next two years. Of course it makes sense if you are a 
retailer and can afford it or even find the required skills in the market. 
Retail data analysts are in demand and can command salaries from £30-75k and 
above, according to James Milligan, director of Hays Digital Technology.

So what does this get you? The John Lewis retail report 
<http://johnlewis.scene7.com/is/content/JohnLewis/jl_retail_report_2015_151015pdf>
, a detailed analysis of customer habits, best-selling products and fashion 
trends is a good example of what customer data can do for a retailer with all 
the right data tools in place. So are smaller independents missing out? Can 
they get access to data or is the accepted pattern an ever-widening gulf 
between large chains and independents?

Emile Naus, partner and technical director at supply chain and operations 
specialist LCP Consulting, says there are advantages to big data but equally 
pitfalls. Data, he says, is a starting point and needs meaning to enable 
decision making.

“Over the last few years large retailers have invested heavily in big data 
with varied results,” he says. “There is a risk of over reliance. Retailers can 
get boring. Local retailers have an advantage in that they have to be more 
creative. They should play to their strengths.”

Tapping into local knowledge 

Naus adds that if smaller independent retailers get the data bit right, they 
could in fact put themselves in a strong position by combining it with their 
local knowledge. Clare Bailey, retail expert and chair of The Retail 
Conference, agrees.

“Large retailers are at risk of losing the local detail through data 
aggregation,” says Bailey, adding that small independents “don’t need big data 
they just need data”. Combine this data with local expertise and you have a 
tasty recipe for success, well at least the potential for an advantage over the 
bigger retailers.

“At the top end of the independent market, those that are doing really well 
are investing in EPOS systems, for example, that provide data and reporting,” 
says Bailey. “Most of the independents, though, are just getting by so they 
need to embrace technology.”

Bailey is right, of course. It’s something Anderson at Paprika Gifts is well 
aware of as she embarks on a major website upgrade and digital marketing and 
data strategy. But Anderson is typical, not just of independent retailers but 
small business owners when she says finding time is the biggest challenge.

It’s something that hasn’t escaped the attention of software providers. While 
IBM and SAP have already released “lite” versions of data software for small 
retailers, specialist startups such as Statement Retail are gaining traction.

Investing time and money innovating

“I think data analysis is a big challenge for small retailers,” says Dan 
Conboy, managing director at digital retail firm Statement Retail. “This is 
partly because many smaller independents don’t have any EPOS solutions in place 
and have often not embraced the multichannel world where consumers like to 
browse before they visit a store. We often find that smaller independents say 
they haven’t innovated in this way because they perceive it to be complex, 
expensive or they don’t have time.”

Statement Retail, adds Conboy, aims to change this. It has partnered with 
Shopify, a global e-commerce platform, opening up the possibility for data 
analytics, regardless of size of business.

“This can transform a small retail business because they can easily see what 
is and isn’t selling, thereby having the knowledge to improve both their sales 
and cash flow,” adds Conboy. “In today’s volatile and fast-paced retail 
landscape, having this level of intelligence can be critical to the business 
success for an independent retailer.”

Certainly the future is a challenging one for any retailer. Figures 
<http://blog.localdatacompany.com/infographic-in-the-balance-h1-2016-retail-and-leisure-report>
 from retail data firm the Local Data Company recently revealed that shop 
closures are currently outstripping shop openings and as a result, high-street 
vacancy rates are up for the first time since 2012.

The figures suggest Brexit is having an impact but as we head towards the 
Christmas shopping period, may be this will change, at least for the short 
term. For the longer term, technology – or more specifically data – will 
increasingly drive change so the figures will continue to fluctuate and with 
them hopefully, so will the fortunes of our independent high-street shops.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Brought to you by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2016/jan/25/content-funding>.
 