
It was just after three in the morning when the ticker at the bottom of the 
BBC’s results programme revealed that the vote count stood at exactly 50/50. 
When the final tally came in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
, the Outs had prevailed over the Ins by a nose, but it is that image of a dead 
heat that still burns at the back of my retina. The outcome of the referendum 
was not the most significant moment of the British political year. For this 
country, it was the most significant moment of the century. With the subsequent 
election ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
, the Brexit vote has also been invested with a prophetic quality.

The shock was amplified because barely any of the politicians on either side 
had seen it coming. Nigel Farage had popped up earlier toconcede defeat 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/eu-referendum-nigel-farage-remain-edge-it-brexit-ukip-a7098526.html>
. Michael Gove had decided that it was going to be such a tedious night thathe 
took himself off to bed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/how-michael-gove-woke-to-shock-news-of-brexit-sarah-vine>
 and an aide had to wake him to tell him that his side had prevailed. David 
Cameron expected to be celebrating this Christmas in continued possession of 
the keys to Number 10. Theresa May heard about his resignation from the TV news.

If the outcome was stunning even to many who willed it, the details in the 
numbers were even more unsettling. They should trouble anyone, on either side 
of the argument, who cares about Britain. For it revealed a 50/50 nation. In 
June, Britain made up its mind about Europe – and turned out to be in two of 
them. Britain was also making a choice about how we saw ourselves and our place 
in the world. But there was no “we” about that either. On that deeper question, 
the people spoke with two voices. Britain was exposed as a country divided 
between the metropolitan and the provincial, the old and the young, the more 
affluent and those who have felt left behind, a Britain essentially comfortable 
with itself in the second decade of the 21st century and a Britain frustrated 
and discontented.

Six months on, that divide is as vivid as ever. There has been no catharsis, 
no healing. The losers remain sore, which is usual. Stranger is the behaviour 
of the winners. If anything, some of them are even angrier with the world and 
swell in their paranoia that there is a conspiracy to steal the spoils of their 
victory. The Outers press the argument that we must all bow before the demos 
and “respect the will of the British people”. To be fair, the In crowd would 
surely have said exactly the same had won. But what was not resolved by the 
result, and continues to be a swirl of contention, is how you show “respect” to 
a referendum result that answered one big question, only to raise many more 
questions almost as large. The conundrum is made all the more acute because the 
result was on such a knife-edge. If the government sought an outcome that aimed 
to represent the aggregate will of all those who voted, then it would try to 
negotiate a position that put Britain half in and half out of the EU. To 
respect the 52-48 margin by which Leave prevailed, they’d aim to be just a 
little bit more out than in.

It is a stupendous, and underappreciated, irony that the task of extricating 
Britain from the EU without irretrievably damaging the economy and further 
shredding our national cohesion has fallen onTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>. Go back to the chronicles of 
the Tory civil wars in the years running up to the referendum. Read those 
horrible histories and you will struggle to find her name. In the ferocious 
battles that convulsed her party for decades, Mrs May was a non-combatant. She 
had been so mute on Europe that it was an unknown which way she would jump 
until shortly before the campaign started. This was true even among the small 
club of people with a genuine claim to call themselves a friend of Theresa. 
They would express uncertainty about whether she was a closet Leaver or a 
reluctant Remainer.

Some believed that she would declare for Out because that would win credits 
within the Tory party and optimise her chances of getting to Number 10. As it 
turned out, she had an even smarter strategy, though it only looks like a 
cunning plan with the benefit of hindsight. She took the Remain side, not least 
because she assumed that it would win. But it was not a position that she held 
with any evident conviction. She surfaced only once during the campaign. Her 
speech in favour of continued membership was argued mainly on security grounds. 
It was regarded as so unhelpful for their cause by Remainers that people around 
David Cameron wondered if she was working for the enemy. It certainly worked 
for her. Mr Cameron quit to spend more time with his grouse shoot. Kamikaze 
Gove made his suicidal dive on to the bridge of HMS Boris. The invisible 
Remainer found herself in Downing Street. Even then, she was reluctant to 
embrace the task that time and chance had handed to her. As the full weight of 
the challenge began to descend on her shoulders, she tried to shrug off the 
burden. In her first speech from Number 10, she told the nation that she did 
not want her government to be defined by Brexit. Her first half year in office 
has been an education for the prime minister about the immensity of what faces 
her. What else have the past six months been about? Grammar schools? Oh, 
please. Brexit is the super-massive body dominating the political galaxy. 
Everything else is sucked into its irresistible gravitational field.

Sometimes it pulls her out of shape. The pressure to appease the hardline 
Brexiters bends a naturally cautious, pragmatic politician into something more 
demagogic and reckless. Her party conference speech, which alarmed moderate 
Tories, rattled business opinion and aggravated the EU leaders with whom she is 
going to negotiate, spoke as if the 48% didn’t exist. It is notable that her 
tone has since moderated.

More usually, she has erected walls of opacity around herself. The tautology 
of “Brexit means Brexit”; the cliche of “a red, white and blue Brexit”. One 
explanation for her refusal to say what form of Brexit she will seek (this the 
explanation preferred by Number 10) is that it would be foolish to expose her 
hand too early. Another (this the explanation offered by many civil servants) 
is that her government is profoundly divided about what it hopes to achieve. 
There’s truth in both, but I add a third element of explanation. The PM 
understands that the negotiation will involve compromises and is not willing to 
face the furies that will unleash from hard Brexiters until it is strictly 
necessary. Because the Brexiters are the most noisy, it tends to get forgotten 
that Mrs May appointed a cabinet with a Remainer majority. One reason she 
retrieved HMS Boris from the seabed and made him foreign secretary was that she 
had to have one prominent Leaver in a top job. By far the largest cabinet 
grouping is the Pragmatics, which includes both Leavers and Remainers. They 
know they have to deliver Brexit, but are rightly nervous about ending up with 
a disastrous version. To have a chance of success, there will need to be 
trade-offs. It will also need time.

Sir Ivan Rogers, our man in Brussels, has received a ritual roasting from the 
Brextremist press for warning that it could take up to 10 years to negotiate a 
new trading relationship. Sir Ivan was being obedient to Mrs May’s injunction 
to officials that she doesn’t want them to tell her what they think she wants 
to hear; she wants “the best possible advice”. A decade sounds like a 
reasonable guess to me. To see why, join me on a short excursion to Greenland. 
The chilly island joined the EU along with Denmark. Then, in the early 1980s, 
the Greenlanders decided they wanted out. That divorce took three years to 
negotiate and the main bone of contention was custody of fish.

If it took Greenland – population about the size of Canterbury – 36 months to 
negotiate its divorce, a decade for Britain to reset its relationship with 
continental Europe sounds optimistic.

As the daunting scale of the task has sunk in around Whitehall, the concept of 
a “transitional” arrangement is gaining traction. There is growing talk about 
trying to broker bespoke deals on trade and immigration rules sector by sector, 
which would make complex negotiations even more intricate. A transitional 
arrangement is acquiring a nickname: Smooth Brexit, also known as Smexit. Or 
Long Brexit – Lexit. It is also attracting suspicion from the usual suspects 
that it is a Remainer scheme to defy the referendum result. Anything that falls 
short of the most Brextremist terms of withdrawal will be greeted with cries of 
betrayal from that direction.

A long transition would leave Britain half in and half out of the EU. That 
would be devilishly difficult to negotiate, but it wouldn’t be inconsistent 
with the will of a people almost evenly divided by the referendum. A 50/50 deal 
is the sort of compromise that a pragmatic leader, who has always been 
essentially agnostic about Europe, would naturally be looking for. Theresa May 
probably intuits already that is where she will end up. She just doesn’t dare 
say so yet.
 