
My four-year-old daughter, Ruby, is perched on Father Christmas's capacious 
knee, listing the things she would like: "… and then perhaps a Barbie, or maybe 
a horse, or a book …"

Father Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> smiles, 
lifts her down and says, in a strong Cajun accent: "Well, if you've been a good 
girl, then sure the presents will come."

Outside the window a horse thunders past the winning post. Father Christmas 
turns to his elves: "Did anyone think to have money on that?"

Welcome to Christmas New Orleans-style. We're at the City's Fair Grounds Race 
Course, one of the oldest racetracks in America, for its family Christmas Day, 
an entertaining if chaotic mixture of arts projects, cake decorating and – for 
adults only, of course – gambling. While the kids race from table to table, 
making beaded necklaces and listening to a Cajun version of The Night Before 
Christmas, I watch local boy and triple Kentucky Derby winner Calvin Borel ease 
his horse home and wonder if I've been in a more incongruous situation all year.

New Orleans probably isn't the first place you think as a family Christmas 
destination. It's a city best known for its laid-back charm and partying ways, 
a place you go to have a good time without small voices telling you that 
they're tired and need food. American friends were horrified when they learned 
of our plan: "Why would you take your kids to New Orleans? People don't take 
their kids to New Orleans… They go there to have a great weekend away from 
them."

I didn't listen because I had a dream. Ever since we moved to New York, four 
years ago, I've been secretly disappointed by the city's attitude to Christmas. 
Yes, the light displays in midtown Manhattan are gloriously over-the-top and, 
yes, the Fifth Avenue shop windows rivalled those in London, but where we live 
in Brooklyn there is more brouhaha about Halloween, and the bone-deep 
pragmatism of the native New Yorker means it's not uncommon to see Christmas 
trees tossed into the gutter at 8am on Boxing Day as everyone returns to work.
 Ruby and Oisin with a Mardi Gras Indian. Photograph: Sarah Hughes 
This year I wanted something different. Something more celebratory, with bells 
and lights and carols: the full over-the-top Christmas deal. And in gaudy, 
glorious New Orleans, that most catholic (and Catholic) of American cities, I 
had an inkling I'd find it.

It's 7pm on 16 December and my family and I are surrounded by the largest, 
most intricate Christmas light display we have ever seen. There are Spanish oak 
trees decorated to look like falling snow, crocodiles made from thousands of 
green lights and an entire Who Dat? tree given over to local American football 
team the New Orleans Saints. This is Celebration in the Oaks (
celebrationintheoaks.com <http://celebrationintheoaks.com/cito10/>) at New 
Orleans City Park, an annual extravaganza of music, songs and, most importantly 
as far as my two children are concerned, fairground rides. While my husband and 
I listen to Cajun and Zydeco versions of Christmas carols, the kids have 
annexed the monkey drop ride and are repeatedly shooting up into the air before 
plummeting back down yelling, "More, more! Again, again!"

Chaotic, exhilarating and ever so slightly kitsch, Celebration in the Oaks 
sums up everything that's most wonderful about New Orleans. Six years after 
Hurricane Katrina wrecked this city, the scars are still visible – as we walk 
from the Fair Grounds to City Park through the seventh and fifth wards it is 
impossible to ignore the still-abandoned houses, the uprooted trees, the 
graffiti commemorating the dead. Yet it's also impossible not to celebrate the 
city's resilience, and its unexpected moments of beauty.

Rounding a corner near Fair Grounds we glimpse a Mardi Gras Indian in full 
costume talking intently to a group of friends: it's like some lost scene from 
the Treme TV series. As we walk through the French Quarter on a quiet Sunday, a 
car squeals to a halt and the driver yells "Heads up kid" at Ruby before 
showering her with Christmassy coloured beads; and on Pirates Alley, near the 
Faulkner House bookshop, my son Oisin was entranced by an eight-piece jazz band 
in Santa hats and tinsel.

We spend Saturday strolling through the French Quarter. With all the talk of 
New Orleans as party town people rarely consider it as a child-friendly 
destination, yet it is one of the most welcoming US cities we've visited. 
Restaurant staff, whether in high-end joints or dimly lit po-boy shacks, fall 
over themselves to accommodate us; museums, from the lovely Louisiana 
Children's Museum (lcm.org <http://lcm.org>) on Julia Street to the enjoyably 
creepy Insectarium (auduboninstitute.org <http://www.auduboninstitute.org>) on 
Canal Street are easy to navigate and wonderful to waste time in; and, best of 
all, the streets are full of free music. Our two- and four-year-olds dance 
exuberantly to everything from mournful blues to wild jazz.

It helps, too, that we have an expert guide. Before we flew out my husband 
asked actor Wendell Pierce, of Treme and The Wire fame, on Twitter if he had 
any recommendations. Pierce, a passionate advocate for his hometown, answered 
instantly with a stream of recommendations, almost all of them geared at a 
family with young kids.
 Preservation Hall Photograph: Alamy 
He was insistent that we get tickets for the Preservation Hall's Creole 
Christmas (preservationhall.com <http://www.preservationhall.com>), and from 
the moment we enter the dark, cosy venue and squat on the floor in front of the 
band we know Pierce was right. For an hour-and-a-half we lose ourselves as old 
standards like Santa Claus is Coming to Town and Silent Night are rendered 
fresh and newly appealing by the venue's famous St Peter Street All-Stars. It's 
a rollicking yet intimate show: our two-year-old goes from attempting to escape 
to swaying gently, lulled by the trumpet's purity and power.

Then there's the food: oysters in absinthe at Commander's Palace (+1 504 899 
8221,commanderspalace.com <http://www.commanderspalace.com>) in the historic 
Garden District; a surprisingly lovely gumbo in a French Quarter tourist trap. 
New Orleans is a food lovers' paradise. We eat simply fried fish near Treme, 
devour po-boy sandwiches dripping with meat and gravy in the Marigny 
neighbourhood, and are blown away by the adventurous menu at the tiny Green 
Goddess (+1 504 301 3347,greengoddessnola.com <http://www.greengoddessnola.com/>
) on Exchange Place, in the French Quarter.
 Oisin and Ruby eating beignets. Photograph: Sarah Hughes 
Best of all as far as the children are concerned are the beignets. These warm 
doughnuts dusted with sugar are the biggest hit of the holiday. We eat them 
sitting outsideCafé Beignet <http://www.cafebeignet.com/> on Royal Street 
listening to a man in a wolf mask playing the violin. With the sounds of last 
night's carols faintly echoing in my ears, I gaze at the pretty, painted houses 
bowed down by tinsel and glittering fairy lights and feel my Christmas dream 
come true.
 