
You were always the parents my friends all wanted to have and they envied our 
relationship. We used to meet at our house before going out at the weekends. 
Mum, you sat with us, bought us drinks and laughed at our jokes and stories, 
and were never judgmental. You gave me my first pack of cigarettes. We used to 
smoke together, drink coffee, talk for hours and hide our smoking from Dad. You 
were cool. I could talk to you about anything.

But I was also the one you came crying to when you found out Dad was cheating 
on you. You told me there was nothing left between the two of you and that you 
decided to stay in this marriage because of me. I was 12. We had that 
conversation many times during the following years. And I understood … what 
were you supposed to do? You were closer to Dad’s family than you were to your 
own. Dad was away a lot, while you made your life at home. His habits and yours 
became increasingly different but you stepped aside when he came home, and then 
you got your life back when he left. Yes, you still knew how to have fun 
together. I remember watching you dance in the kitchen one night; Dad couldn’t 
sleep, so he made a pot of strong coffee at half past midnight. His head was 
full of ideas and he needed a listener, so you got up, put on some music, 
smoked and listened. And then you danced. Often he would convince you to get 
dressed and visit some friends – never minding that it was a workday and not 
everyone had the next day off like he did.

Oh, Dad, your ideas really were something … I loved listening to you too. 
Until one day, when you told me that you were having an affair and asked me if 
I could clean up your second apartment because you had to leave and you didn’t 
want Mum to find out. As I grew older, you began relying on me to keep things 
together at home while you were away – which meant controlling how much Mum 
spent and reporting it to you. To this day, I still pay your bills because you 
never learned to use online banking. Your bags were and are always full of 
expensive gifts for me when you returned.

I got married and moved away but not much has changed. You still attend my 
birthday parties and my friends still think you are incredibly cool. You danced 
the night away at my wedding. Mum, we still spend hours and hours together 
talking, smoking and drinking coffee. You rented an apartment in my town and 
when you visit, you make the most of it. I make sure your fridge is full, I 
cook lunch for all of us or you join my husband’s family when we dine with 
them. I make sure your rent is paid and your troubles are heard. I am your 
entire social life. You have no need for others. You leave my house when my 
husband returns home in the evening and you’re back the next day when I return 
from work. You play with my daughter and nurse her when she’s ill and I have to 
work.

And yet, I feel guilty … that both of you had to stay in a loveless marriage. 
I feel guilty for keeping your secrets from the other one; I feel like an 
accomplice in all that cheating. Mum, I also feel responsible for leaving you 
alone and spending some time with my friends when you visit. I know you would 
have been lonely without me, you have no friends in this town.

But lately, my husband has been telling me that you’re suffocating him with 
your presence, suffocating me; he is demanding I do something about it, 
otherwise our marriage will crash. How can I do that? I know I’m strong enough 
to keep you both afloat, but I don’t think I’m strong enough to leave you to 
each other.

Sincerely, your drowning daughter
 