
I pulled up at the barrier and handed my documents to the man in the car-hire 
booth. He looked at my seven-seater, five-metre-long Dodge Caravan, empty but 
for me, my bright yellow suitcase and a violin. "Have you lost your friends?" 
he asked, peering into the cavernous interior. "Oh no," I replied. "I just 
haven't met them yet."

It was only when I was describing the incident to someone later, and 
remembering the car-hire guy's pitying look, that I realised how this must have 
sounded: like a lonely hippy hoping to pick up hitch-hikers. In reality, I was 
about to transport three musicians, a music writer and a banjo-maker between
Nashville, Tennessee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/jul/15/country-music-nashville-tennessee-us-america>
, andDenver, Colorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/jul/20/top-10-music-venues-denver-colorado>
, 1,700 miles away. We had three days to make the trip (we were shuttling 
between festivals), at an average of 10 hours' driving per day. With that much 
in-car time – not to mention two banjos, a fiddle and a ukelele – I figured we 
would need our space.

The shortest route between Tennessee and Colorado is the I-70 through Missouri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/missouri> and Kansas. But the I-40 would 
take us via Jackson and Amarillo, and our first stop would be Memphis. Think of 
the playlist opportunities! And while we hadn't time to visit Graceland, we had 
heard a whisper of a joint that served the best barbecue in the city.

With a tight schedule, we called ahead to reserve a table – which was 
embarrassing when the Interstate BBQ turned out to be, as the name suggested, a 
truck stop by the freeway. But it lived up to the hype: our plates were soon 
full of sticky ribs the length of our forearms, not to mention the house 
speciality, BBQ spaghetti – sweet and rich, concealing huge hunks of meat in 
its wriggly depths. We returned to the car with four hours still to travel and 
a pact that we would keep the windows open.

The glory of an American road trip is its evolving landscape. Tennessee 
offered its lush green hills and, at night, the dark immensity of the 
Mississippi, so black that no one could say for sure when we had finally 
crossed it. Arkansas lightened the mood with its pentecostal churches – tiered 
like wedding cakes and lit up like Vegas casinos – and its signs directing us 
toward theClinton Presidential Library  <http://www.clintonlibrary.gov/>one 
moment, and an Adult Superstore the next. Oklahoma's cornfields, splayed out 
either side of the freeway, seemed benign in the next day's sunlight – until we 
saw the mangled billboards and trees sheared by June's tornado and, later, 
passed a ruin of a trailer park, the upturned metal cabins flung like toys 
after a toddler's tantrum.
 Tuning up: Ben and Ashley perform a duet in the Dodge Caravan. 
With so many musicians in the car, two things were inevitable. One, that we 
would sing our way throughOklahoma! (after all, there was a bright golden haze 
on the meadow). The other, that we would stop in Oklahoma City to visit the
American Banjo Museum <http://www.americanbanjomuseum.com/>. The instrument 
still gives many the screaming heebie jeebies, but its history is fascinatingly 
intertwined with that of the United States, and many of the exhibits, 
decorated, inlaid and veneered, are pure artworks in themselves.

The I-40 crosses north Texas at the panhandle, its narrowest point, although 
its extraordinary ranchland rolls out, people-free, to horizons that seem 
further away than you've ever travelled. By the roadside, the Big Texan, a 
shamelessly imitation wild-west steak house, advertises its "free 72oz steak" 
for many miles and only reveals the catch on arrival: you have to eat the 
entire thing, and multiple accompanying dishes, within an hour. We paled at the 
challenge, although not at the generous helpings of beer, served in plastic 
cowboy boots that they let us take as souvenirs.

Unfortunately, only one of our group had remained sober to drive us to our 
hotel, several hours away, and it was the one whose other car is a Mustang. 
Around midnight, I woke to hear this driver declaring that she would try a 
shortcut down an old, unpopulated country road. She also announced that our 
fuel was running dangerously low, and that she hadn't seen a gas station in a 
long while. As we lurched off the freeway, cutting up exactly the kind of lorry 
that hunted down Dennis Weaver inDuel <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0067023/>, I 
reached for my notebook and wrote, in a shaky hand: "We are going to die."

Travelling through New Mexico by night would have been eerie even if we hadn't 
been writing ourselves into a horror movie – a full moon picked out its rocky 
outcrops in spooky silhouettes and by the time we reached our hotel, a light 
hysteria had taken hold. Luckily, we had booked into a rather smart lodge 
rather than pitching up at a dodgy motel. If I had two pieces of advice for 
driving the States, they would be these – everywhere will take you three hours 
longer to drive than Google Maps suggests, and a junior suite that sleeps five 
can be surprisingly economical. You'll be thankful for it at 3am.

What else did I learn on the road trip? Well, the drive between New Mexico and 
Colorado is one of the most otherworldly experiences you can have without 
booking a flight to Mars. "Is this the way to Amarillo?" will bomb in a carful 
of Americans (it wasn't a hit over there). But you can, just, perform a 
banjo/ukulele/fiddle trio in a moving car. If you're careful where you aim your 
bow.

Essentials


Emma's flights and car hire were provided by netflights.com 
<http://netflights.com>, which offers return flights to Nashville from London 
with Delta Air Lines from £517 per person including taxes. Netflights.com also 
offers fully inclusive car hire in over 550 locations across the USA from £18 
per day.

A junior suite at the Lodge at Santa Fe starts from $123 (lodgeatsantafe.com 
<http://lodgeatsantafe.com>)

Interstate BBQ is at 2265 S Third Street, Memphis (interstatebarbecue.com 
<http://interstatebarbecue.com>)

The American Banjo Museum is at 9 E Sheridan Ave, Oklahoma City (
americanbanjomuseum.com <http://americanbanjomuseum.com>)
 