
A glass of chardonnay or a bottle of beer will be on the menu alongside the 
usual lattes, espressos, Frappuccinos and soft drinks at an experimental store 
revamped byStarbucks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/starbucks> as it 
strives to revive flagging sales.

The US coffee chain is rebranding at least three stores in its home town of 
Seattle under different, locally orientated, names in an initiative dubbed 
"stealth Starbucks" in the US media.

One of the outlets, named 15th Avenue Coffee and Tea, will reopen this week 
under a more bohemian guise featuring live music performances, poetry readings 
and sales of alcohol as well as hot drinks.

Tim Pfeiffer, Starbucks' senior vice president of global design, told the 
Seattle Times that the new stores are intended to have a more "community 
personality".

Starbucks, which has been badly hit by the recession over the past 18 months, 
will release quarterly earnings tomorrow which are expected to show a modest 
improvement in performance.

This follows a 9% slump in like-for-like sales in the three months to December 
last year and an 8% drop in the quarter to March.

"Sequentially, things will get better," said Howard Penney, an analyst at 
Research Edge.

He said chairman Howard Schultz's cost-cutting measures, store closures and 
eradication of peripheral activities were beginning to have an impact.

"They're on an upward track but there's still some way to go."

Schultz, the architect of Starbucks' expansion in the 1990s, resumed 
day-to-day management of the 16,000-strong chain early last year in an effort 
to reignite stalled growth.

He has cut more than 10,000 jobs, introduced new blends of coffee and has 
tried to reintroduce the "theatre" of stores by testing elaborate 
high-specification coffee machines and providing extra training for baristas.

David Tarantino, an analyst at Baird fund management in Milwaukee, recently 
upgraded Starbucks' shares to "outperform", citing evidence that consumers were 
returning to coffee shops.

"Recent contacts with private coffee-oriented chains suggested April-June 
industry traffic has improved from January-March," he said.

If the revamped Seattle coffee houses are successful, Starbucks could use 
ideas from the experiment for its outlets elsewhere in the world.

The chain has also been testing sales of coffee for as little as $1 (60p) a 
cup, and recently introduced sachets of powdered coffee under the brand name 
Via.

The company has come in for stiff competition from fast-food chains such as 
McDonald's and Dunkin' Donuts, which have upgraded their coffee offerings, 
while cash-strapped customers proved reluctant to pay premium prices at the 
height of the global financial crisis.
 