
The first goal of Sam Allardyce’s reign came so late – the final attack, five 
minutes into stoppage time, amid shrieking, plaintive whistles – there was only 
time forSlovakia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia> to take the 
kick-off before the referee blew for the end and the England players could 
savour a match that had strayed dangerously close to being remembered as 
another disappointment.

It was a tense, dramatic finale to the first game of the new era and having 
waited until his 27th cap to register his firstEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> goal, Adam Lallana certainly 
showed a neat sense of timing with the left-foot shot that squirmed through the 
legs of the Sloviakia goalkeeper, Matus Kozacik, to leave Allardyce pumping his 
fists on the touchline.

Wayne Rooney strives for impact but Adam Lallana looks like England’s creator 
| Michael Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/04/england-slovakia-tactics-wayne-rooney-adam-lallana>
Lallana had been the outstanding performer and that goal saved Allardyce from 
an old-fashioned tradition every England manager experiences at some point – a 
media mauling – given Slovakia had to play with 10 men from 12 minutes into the 
second half. England made hard work of it after Martin Skrtel’s dismissal and 
ultimately it needed a goalkeeping error to give them their break.

It was, however, a victory they merited and the standard of opposition in 
Group F is so moderate it does not feel wildly premature to imagine England’s 
participation in theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> is a near-certainty.

Not that England should be too pleased with themselves just yet. They came 
within seconds of a galling result – “you’ve got to beat 10 men,” a relieved 
Allardyce acknowledged – and for a long while the match felt like a reminder 
about why it was unrealistic to expect the team’s shortcomings would 
automatically be removed just because of the presence of a new manager.

Allardyce’s post-match eulogy for Wayne Rooney seemed like a manager trying to 
strike up chemistry with his captain rather than an entirely accurate 
assessment of the player’s performance.

Harry Kane is playing like the ordeal of Euro 2016 is still with him and there 
were only fleeting glimpses of Raheem Sterling’s improved form. Both were 
substituted, along with Jordan Henderson, in the second half, with Dele Alli, 
Theo Walcott and Daniel Sturridge brought on in a part of the match when 
Slovakia were under sustained pressure.

International clockwatch: Scotland, Northern Ireland, Norway v Germany and 
more – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/04/international-clockwatch-scotland-northern-ireland-norway-v-germany-and-more-live>
England pinned back the home side during those moments but they came up 
against obdurate opponents – “heroic”, to use the word of their coach, Jan 
Kozak – who gave everything in Skrtel’s absence. Lallana hit a post with 
another left-foot shot and the irony of Kozacik’s late, decisive mistake was 
that he had made a string of saves to keep the game goalless.

Walcott was denied a goal because of an offside flag and in the last five 
minutes Allardyce could be seen waving John Stones forward to leave his 
position in defence and play as an auxiliary midfielder. Then, finally, the 
ball dropped to Lallana, eight yards from goal, and the Liverpool player pulled 
back his left foot in a congested penalty area. The shot was straight at 
Kozacik but went beneath the goalkeeper, rolling over the line almost in slow 
motion.

For Allardyce, it was a euphoric moment against the team he had identified as 
England’s strongest opponent for the qualifying stages. Joe Hart did not have a 
meaningful save to make all night and there was only one occasion when his goal 
was seriously threatened, after Danny Rose lost the ball inside his own penalty 
area. “Slovakia were playing at home but they just never bothered coming out,” 
Allardyce reflected.

Instead the onus was on England to break them down, with Rooney operating in 
midfield even though Allardyce had stated beforehand he would use his captain 
in the same position where he operates for Manchester United. Rooney began the 
match alongside Henderson in the centre of a 4-1-4-1 formation that had 
Sterling and Lallana in the wide positions and Eric Dier as the holding player.

This was Rooney’s 116th game, making him the most capped outfield player in 
England’s history, but it was still fairly startling to hear Allardyce saying 
he had given him carte blanche to play where he wanted. “This is the most 
decorated outfield player in England,” the manager explained. “It’s not for me 
to say where he’s going to play. It’s up to me to ask whether he’s doing well 
in that position and contributing. If so, great.”

Slovakia 0-1 England: World Cup 2018 qualifying – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/04/slovakia-v-england-world-cup-2018-qualifying-live>
Rooney did occasionally stray forward to operate in the No10 role but he also 
dropped back to play as a holding midfielder during the final stages. Allardyce 
seemed delighted with the player’s contribution but it was unorthodox, to say 
the least. “He did play a lot deeper than I thought he would,” the manager 
added.

Rooney was prominently involved, though, and even if his passing was erratic 
sometimes he did at least try to move the ball forwards in those passages of 
play when England looked too cautious. Slovakia, nonetheless, looked 
comfortable until Skrtel, already booked for a first-half challenge on Kane, 
brought down his studs on the same player.

It was a senseless challenge, possibly meriting a red card on its own, and 
Lallana finally made it count with the last kick of any England player.
 