
Australians are the happiest they have been this century, but young and single 
house hunters are finding it hard to crack a smile.

Average life satisfaction reached a score of 76.7 out of 100 on the Australian 
Unity Wellbeing Index this year – the highest level since records began in 2000 
– with those aged over 76 reportedly the happiest in the country.

Nationwide happiness has been on the rise since 2006. 

The joint Australian Unity and Deakin University survey breaks personal 
wellbeing into seven areas and this year recorded peak satisfaction levels for 
safety, future security, community connection and standard of living.

Happiness depends on health and friends, not money, says new study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/12/happiness-depends-on-health-and-friends-not-money-says-new-study>
Senior research fellow Delyse Hutchinson said older Australians consistently 
report the highest sense of overall wellbeing because they are often retired 
and “have less stress on their plate”.

The survey of 1,000 Australians aged 18 and over found record high wellbeing 
levels among those living alone, with their partner or with other adults, and 
consistently higher than normal levels for married people.

But the same could not be said for adults living at home with their parents. 
Hutchinson said this group’s personal wellbeing had dipped to its lowest point 
in a decade, despite the belief young adults sponge off their parents because 
it’s easier than entering the property market.

“It’s almost like they’re forced to stay at home because they have no choice. 
They’re stuck,” she said.

Adults living with their parents also scored the lowest levels of satisfaction 
for personal relationships, community connectedness and achieving in life.

On the plus side, the survey found they were the most satisfied with safety.

Hutchinson said the “golden triangle of wellbeing” can be found through 
financial security, a sense of purpose in life and strong relationships.

Australia’s wellbeing report card for 2016 

* Average life satisfaction at 16-year high
* Happiest Australians are 76 or over, followed by those aged 18-25
* Married Australians scored highest satisfaction levels, separated or never 
married scored lowest
* Happiness of those living with their parents at 10-year low.
(Source: Australian Unity Wellbeing Index)
 