
AFC Wimbledon’s manager, Neal Ardley, could hardly move under the bear hugs 
that greeted his journey down from the royal box; the centre-forward Adebayo 
Akinfenwa, whose penalty capped their victory, celebrated by advertising his 
services to potential suitors live on television. It was not quite the Crazy 
Gang of 1988 but it felt at once like a throwback and a thrilling step forwards.

Now, more than ever, you sense that a club who had to rebuild from the very 
bottom 14 years ago have completed their rise and even if few of their 
supporters, not knowing whether to laugh or sob behind Wembley’s western end, 
were minded to spare MK Dons a thought, it defies belief that the pair will be 
meeting on equal terms next season. Perhaps, every now and again, history 
decides to right itself.

Sport picture of the day: Adebayo Akinfenwa in beast mode
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/may/30/sport-picture-of-the-day-adebayo-akinfenwa-in-beast-mode>
If that is your way of thinking, then order was brought 12 minutes from time. 
Wimbledon had been the better side in a scrappy, skittish final, their 
directness and athleticism nullifying a Plymouth team who never found any 
rhythm. Callum Kennedy’s half-cleared corner had been returned to him and, 
seeing Lyle Taylor dart towards the near post, he fizzed a low inswinger into 
the vacant space. Taylor, whose chances to add to his seasonal tally of 22 
goals had been limited, was perfectly in sync and sent the deftest of flicks 
across Luke McCormick, celebrating by removing his shirt and sprinting up the 
touchline towards Ardley.

The substitute Akinfenwa scored a generously awarded penalty, almost certainly 
his last kick as a Wimbledon player, as seven minutes of added time neared 
their conclusion – but the game already seemed well won by then. Wimbledon had 
grown stronger and stronger, as if spurred on by a sense of provenance, and it 
was not a feeling anyone was about to discourage.

Ardley, who made 301 appearances for Wimbledon as a player before the Milton 
Keynes schism and became manager of the phoenix club in 2012, was clearly 
emotional in his press conference, arriving with his shirt out and soaked in 
champagne. There was little need for the apology he offered.

“It’s what you dream of,” Ardley said. “To stand there in front of 20,000 
people who 14 years ago had their club ripped away from them, and stand there 
as one of their own who came through the ranks at the age of 11, it doesn’t get 
any better than that. You can write any story you want.”

Plymouth’s support, more than 30,000 of whom arrived in laudable voice, might 
have expected a different narrative against a side they finished six points 
ahead of in the league, but were outbattled and found it hard to cope with the 
6ft 4in striker Tom Elliott during the opening period. His knock-downs created 
a half-chance for Taylor and forced right-back Kelvin Mellor into a desperate 
intervention in front of goal. Clear chances, though, were few in the first 
half and it was a trend that continued into the second despite Wimbledon’s 
gradual turning of the screw.

“I thought the gameplan worked exceptionally well,” Ardley said. “I knew it 
would be tense in the first half. They wanted a free-flowing game but we wanted 
to keep things in check as we have unbelievable legs. As the game went on I 
thought only one team was going to win it.”

That is probably true although extra time seemed more likely before Taylor’s 
dab of the boot. A year ago Taylor was informed he was seventh-choice striker 
at Scunthorpe; it makes for a picture-book cup final story but the final word 
went to the unorthodox Akinfenwa, whose status as the nearest thing to a 
“box-office” player here was underlined by the number of autographs he signed 
by the tunnel at half-time.

AFC Wimbledon v Plymouth Argyle: League Two play-off final – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/30/afc-wimbledon-v-plymouth-argyle-league-two-play-off-final-live>
Akinfenwa had entered the pitch a minute before Taylor’s goal, assisting in 
the move that led to the corner and missing a decent chance before Adebayo 
Azeez was impeded in the dying seconds. He put the penalty away and, after 
full-time, asked prospective managers to “hit me up on Whatsapp”. His contract 
is up and Ardley has agreed that, at 34, he needs to be starting games; this 
was the “Beast” bowing out as only he could.

Ardley could not hang around for too long to take it all in; he had a taxi to 
catch, taking him to the airport for a family holiday in Dubai. His players are 
off to Las Vegas for a trip that will probably involve rather less relaxation.

“They’ve already said they’ll be sending me some pictures,” he said, but the 
image rooted in his mind during the seven-hour flight will be the disbelieving 
mass of blue and yellow upon which he looked as he lifted the winners’ trophy.

Call it salvation or call it a point emphatically proved; whatever the 
overriding feeling, Wimbledon’s dream is being realised at last.
 