
Tournament debutants Guinea-Bissau stunned the hosts, Gabon, with a 
90th-minute equaliser to earn a 1-1 draw in the opening game of theAfrica Cup 
of Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> in 
Libreville on Saturday. Gabon were primed to celebrate a winning start to the 
tournament until the defender Juary Soares headed home from a free-kick as the 
clock ticked round to 90 minutes, earning the rank outsiders a dramatic point 
from their first game at a major tournament. “We are very, very happy,” the 
Guinea-Bissau coach, Baciro Candé, said. “Now we have the motivation to go as 
far as possible.”

Gabon v Guinea-Bissau: Afcon 2017 – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/14/gabon-v-guinea-bissau-afcon-2017-live>
The late bombshell from Guinea-Bissau at Libreville’s Stade de l’Amitie 
silenced a Gabonese home crowd that began the game with thunderous applause for 
the country’s controversial president, Ali Bongo Ondimba. Gabon’s star man, 
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, lifted the noise level even higher with a goal early 
in the second half to put the hosts on course for an opening-day victory. 
Soares’ goal came from a free kick by Guinea-Bissau’s own star, Zezinho. As 
Soares’ header sneaked into the corner of the net, he whirled away to 
celebrate, pursued by his exuberant team-mates, and Gabon’s fans fell silent.

Earlier, the Gabonese fans at Stade de l’Amitie had gone through the full 
range of emotions at the start of an African championship they were not 
expecting to host but were awarded after Libya withdrew. There was a sense that 
the central African country – a co-host as recently as 2012 – may not have 
wanted the tournament this time following disputed and violent elections last 
year in which President Bongo retained power in the face of strong opposition. 
That political unease undermined the buildup to the tournament, but the 
appearance of Bongo was greeted with rapturous cheers by the Gabonese at the 
stadium. They then roared the words to La Concorde, the national anthem.

The passion and excitement quickly turned to exasperation as Gabon made little 
headway in the first half, with Guinea-Bissau comfortably holding their own. 
Gabon’s struggles were epitomised when the forward Malick Evouna, completely 
unmarked on the edge of the box, tripped over the ball. The former Spain coach 
José Antonio Camacho revived hisGabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gabon> team at half time, and they began 
the second half in far more promising fashion. Denis Bouanga hit a curling 
right-foot shot that was pushed away by the Guinea-Bissau goalkeeper just 
before he provided the pass for Aubameyang to score the tournament’s first goal 
in the 52nd minute.

As he celebrated, Aubameyang cupped his hand to his ear, as if to ask the 
crowd why they had stopped cheering in the first half. By the end, though, most 
of the Gabon fans had fallen silent again, while some booed.

“It’s very difficult to win the first match in these tournaments,” Camacho 
said. “For the next match we have to fight tooth and nail.”

In the other game on Saturday, also in Group A, Burkina Faso struck late to 
earn a fortunate draw with Cameroon.
 