
Men's doubles rarely attracts much of a crowd outside Wimbledon and the 
Australian, French and US Opens, but the marble steps of the Foro Italico's 
Pallacorda court, where Tim Henman had suffered the slowest and coldest of 
deaths against France's Julien Boutter late on Wednesday night, were brimming 
with tennis fans yesterday, so much so that the crowd was not far short of 
those watching the singles quarter-finals on the campo centrale.

The reason was the unlikely but highly entertaining pairing of Andre Agassi 
and Lleyton Hewitt. So few of the world's leading men play doubles these days 
that even finals are played in virtual silence in front of a smattering of 
spectators, but Agassi has the charisma to draw crowds even when he is 
practising, and the novelty of watching the American play doubles ensured a 
high turnout.

So well has Agassi been playing this year, starting with the Australian Open 
title, that there has been animated talk of the 31-year-old Las Vegan 
completing the near mythical calendar grand slam last achieved by Australia's 
Rod Laver in 1969. Agassi's response to such speculation has been to view the 
questioner with an "are you crazy?" look in his eyes, but there can be no doubt 
that the thought has flickered through his mind and that he is capable of 
achieving the seemingly impossible, which Laver managed twice and Don Budge of 
the United States once.

Since winning the Masters Series titles in Indian Wells and Key Biscayne back 
to back, Agassi has taken his playing life easy, losing in the first round of 
the Atlanta clay-court event and then being defeated in the Masters Series here 
at the same stage. For a player of lesser talents this might be regarded as a 
disaster, but Agassi is strictly a law unto himself when it comes to slam 
preparations.

The fact that he teamed up with Hewitt for the doubles gives a strong 
indication that he is taking the French Open, which he so famously won two 
years ago, pretty seriously.

After winning in Melbourne Agassi intimated that if he played his cards right 
this might be "a special year". Certainly Hewitt, who yesterday lost his 
held-over third-round match against Spain's Alex Corretja 7-6, 6-4, regards 
Agassi as a special player. "I've been practising with Andre nearly every day 
here and he's given me a lot of time," said the young Australian. "He's a great 
guy to be around because he's got so much class, and playing doubles with him 
I've learned a lot."

One of Agassi's main rivals at Roland Garros seems certain to be Spain's Juan 
Carlos Ferrero, beaten in the semi-finals in Paris last year by the eventual 
champion Gustavo Kuerten. Ferrero moved smoothly into today's semi-finals here 
against Nicolas Lapentti with a 6-0, 6-2 victory over South Africa's Wayne 
Ferreira, having earlier disposed of Boutter.
 