
That the government is now at last being forced to do more to reduce the 
dangerous levels of nitrogen dioxide air pollution is welcome news (Court 
defeat for government on air pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/high-court-rules-uk-government-plans-to-tackle-air-pollution-are-illegal>
, 3 November). More than a year on from the “dieselgate” revelations, ministers 
should have been in no doubt about the dishonest and illegal methods used by 
some manufacturers to cheat emissions tests. Not only has the government failed 
to update its pollution modelling based on realistic emissions figures, it has 
also done nothing to support the 1.2 million UK diesel vehicle owners caught up 
in this scandal.

If anything, the government seems to be going out of its way to protect 
manufacturers. Cars fitted with the defeat device software are still able to 
pass MOT emissions tests, so the Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency seems to 
have turned a blind eye to this.

Compare this with the situation in the US, where the Environmental Protection 
Agency has successfully prosecuted VW and arranged for diesel owners to be 
compensated. In the UK, it seems, Defra does nothing. Successful prosecution 
here would send a clear message to all manufacturers to be honest with their 
emissions and fuel economy figures. In addition, the introduction of 
on-the-road testing, rather than the static lab testing presently used, would 
provide more reliable figures.
Alan Beamish
Thirlby, North Yorkshire

• Your editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/the-guardian-view-on-air-pollution-ministers-must-act>
 (9 November) is right to call on government to address the UK’s dangerous 
problem of air pollution by reprioritising greener transport, but failed to 
mention in its proposed solutions the most environmentally friendly and cost 
effective modes of all: cycling and walking.

Cycling’s bang for its buck outstrips every other mode of transport, with 
conservative Department for Transport estimates showing that for every pound 
spent, the economy takes five back, particularly in terms of health and reduced 
congestion. We still await the government’s promisedCycling and Walking 
Investment Strategy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/draft-cycling-and-walking-investment-strategy>
 which currently allocates just 72p per person for cycling and walking in 2021. 
Our level of investment in motorways and A-roads at the same time will be £84 a 
head. If government wants to make a real difference to cleaning our air, then 
let’s rebalance this spend, and give everyone the opportunity to choose cycling 
for shorter every day journeys.
David Murray
Head of campaigns, Cycling UK

• George Monbiot (Cars don’t just choke our children. They tear a hole in our 
communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/cars-choke-communities-pollution-diesel>
, 9 November) is right that air pollution is a public health emergency. Yet our 
local council still proposes to build hundreds of homes on the wrong side of 
our town for commuter travel, thus putting up to a thousand extra cars on the 
streets of a medieval town. This is despite declaring anAir Quality Management 
Area <https://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/aqma/> across the whole town and despite its 
own highways assessments that predict an average 350% increase in traffic 
queues at peak times. It seems that no health emergency is severe enough to 
stop relentless development in the face of all the evidence. When the revised 
plan goes to the Planning Inspectorate we will see how seriously the government 
takes this issue.
Richard Gilyead
Saffron Walden, Essex 

• George Monbiot is right to draw attention to the need to reduce pollution 
from traffic. However, what he may not realise is that this is being used as a 
smokescreen to distract attention from the much more serious issue of indoor 
air pollution. According to the WorldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation and many other 
scientific bodies, hazardous chemicals found in indoor air are at least five 
times more damaging to health than external air pollution.

The government has told its committee on the medical effects of air pollutants 
to ignore internal air and concentrate on external. This means that the 
occupants of increasingly airtight buildings are at risk of asthma, respiratory 
problems and cancer from breathing in dangerous chemicals emitted inside 
buildings.
Dr Tom Woolley
Crossgar, County Down

• George Monbiot underestimates the damage to our communities from the motor 
car. Where roads are safe and children can play out in them as they have done 
for countless generations, then parents talk to each other and speak of 
“keeping an eye out for each other’s children”. The damage to feelings of 
community means that the neighbourhood feels full of strangers rather than 
friends and acquaintances. This explains the exponential rise in fear of 
“stranger danger” which has no basis in evidence. Children’s loss of freedom to 
play outside results in lack of exercise and consequential obesity.
Rob Wheway
Children’s Play Advisory Service

• Once again George Monbiot tells us what we need to – but often would rather 
not – hear. The car has given as many problems as solutions for mankind. And as 
regards the freedom it brings us, it comes in inverse proportion to that of 
other people, both locally and globally.
Barry O’Donovan
London

• When John Prescott as transport minister imposed the same duty on biodiesel 
as on ordinary diesel he stopped the development of the biodiesel industry. If 
you want to improve air quality in London and our other major cities quickly 
and effectively, cut the duty on biodiesel . Coach operators road hauliers and 
private motorists would all start using biodiesel again. Biodiesel does not 
contain the same harmful particulates one finds in ordinary diesel. If one 
stands on Highgate Hill and looks out across London one can see a cloud of smog 
over the city as if London was sitting in a bowl. Londoners are breathing that 
air. When I visit London after a day or so, if I wipe my nose, I find soot on 
my handkerchief.
Nigel Boddy
Darlington

• George Monbiot’s article on cars and pollution never mentioned the important 
role of free bus passes . My wife and I use our passes when ever we can , 
rather than our own transport. We have a small campervan that is our only 
transport. I believe that bus passes are an important way to cut back on car 
use, I always feel that we are making a sound evironmental choice. When 
visiting cities we use park and rides, or else purchase cheap rail tickets on 
line. We are both concerned about climate change, always looking for ways in 
which we can make a difference. Every little counts is my belief.
Brian Woods
Weymouth, Dorset

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 