
The government’s decision to greenlight aviation expansion (Chris Grayling: 
decision on airport expansion to be made on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/23/chris-grayling-decision-heathrow-gatwick-airport-expansion-tuesday>
, theguardian.com, 23 October) is a predictable failure, but not an acceptable 
one. With the scrapping of vital decarbonisation policies and funding, the UK 
is already way off-track to meet our climate change commitments. The impacts of 
any new runway will be devastating to people’s lives and to the planet. Locally 
it will see the demolition of hundreds of homes, result in increased noise 
pollution, and illegal levels of air pollution – already responsible for almost 
10,000 premature deaths in London every year.

But the biggest tragedy of the government’s failure is a global one. Only 
around 5% of the world’s population flies at all, yet the impacts of climate 
change – droughts, floods and heatwaves – are already hitting poorer 
communities in the global south, who are the least likely to ever set foot on a 
plane.

The push for more runway space is not about demand from business – that has 
been dropping for over a decade. Nor is it about people taking one or two 
annual holidays. Growth is being driven by the frequent leisure flyers taking 
weekend breaks and shopping trips by plane. Half of the UK population don’t fly 
in any given year, yet all of us subsidise the holidays of the rich.

The UK must not abandon our commitments under the Paris agreement and the 
Climate Change Act for the convenience of binge flyers. We will not allow our 
government to ignore the promises they have made to us and to the world.

Craig Bennett CEO, Friends of the Earth England, Wales and Northern Ireland, 
Nicky BullChair, Operation Noah, Amy Cameron Director, 10:10, Sarah Clayton 
Coordinator, AirportWatch,Peter Deane Biofuelwatch, Bill Hemmings Director, 
aviation and shipping, European Federation for Transport and Environment,Claire 
JamesCampaigns coordinator, Campaign Against Climate Change, Rosalie James 
Chair, Aircraft Noise 3 Villages (Lightwater, Windlesham & Bagshot), Tim Johnson
Director, Aviation Environment Federation,James MacColl Head of campaigns, 
Campaign for BetterTransport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport>, Kara 
MosesEnvironment editor, Red Pepper, Leo Murray Director, Fellow Travellers, 
Danielle PaffardUK divestment campaigner, 350.org, John Sauven Executive 
director, Greenpeace UK,Kia Trainor Director, CPRE Sussex, Anna Vickerstaff 
Co-director, UK Youth Climate Coalition,Vivienne Westwood Climate Revolution, 
Peter WillanChair, Richmond Heathrow Campaign

• Nigel Milton, director of external affairs at Heathrow, says the Airports 
Commission’s analysis “concluded that a third runway at Heathrow can be 
delivered in accordance with EU air-quality limit law, and would have less 
impact on health receptors (where people live and work) than a runway at 
Gatwick would have on the community in that area” (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/21/heathrow-expansion-will-boost-air-quality>
, 22 October).

It made no such conclusion at all. Quite the opposite, in fact; the 2015 
Business and Sustainability Assessment said of the Heathrow North West Runway 
that “against the Commission’s objective to improve air quality consistent with 
EU standards and local planning policy requirements the unmitigated impact of 
the Heathrow Northwest Runway scheme is SIGNIFICANTLY ADVERSE. Mitigations as 
above could limit this impact to ADVERSE if delivered with concerted effort 
from all parties including HAL but given the increases in pollutant 
concentrations at various health receptors and despite the fact that EU and 
local policy limits are not necessarily breached, the impact is unlikely to be 
able to reach a NEUTRAL level.

“The Heathrow Airport Northwest Runway scheme performs more poorly than 
Gatwick with respect to EU limit values as Gatwick has no monitoring stations 
predicted to be in breach of EU limit values, but more strongly than Heathrow 
Airport Extended Northern Runway”.

Since that was written, it has been verified that EU emissions limits around 
Heathrow are actually being breached now.

Mr Milton and others may be of the view that Heathrow expansion will be the 
best thing ever for the economy with £211bn in economic benefits, although 
without any explanation I suspect that figure may be plucked out of the air. 
Benefits or not, one thing is for certain – Heathrow is poisoning the residents 
around it now and will do so more if expanded. The Cambridge study is not worth 
the paper that it is written on. It is theoretical and modelled, and it depends 
on compliance with the Euro 6 engine emissions limits. Tests have shown that 
while vehicles may comply in laboratory situations, they are failing by up to 
1,500% when out on the road.
Neil Spurrier
Twickenham

• Nigel Milton appears to be living in a parallel universe. Under current EU 
legislation, it is impossible to give the go-ahead for a third runway without 
an avalanche of legal challenges. Heathrow breaches the EU air quality 
directive for a number of pollutants, but nitrogen dioxide is the most 
intractable as local traffic and congestion is bound to increase in line with 
passenger numbers. The strategy being adopted by Heathrow management depends 
upon new diesel engines emitting less pollutants than current models, but this 
strategy is doomed to failure as recent studies demonstrate that even Euro 6 
diesel engines emit much more NO2 on the road than they do in lab testing.

I suspect the reason that Theresa May has delayed a parliamentary vote on 
Heathrow (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/18/airport-expansion-vote-put-on-hold-for-more-than-a-year-by-theresa-may>
, 19 October) is to give the UK parliament time to invoke article 50, and 
repeal the relevant EU air quality directive. However, the chances of such a 
manoeuvre getting past the House of Lords is close to zero.
Dr Robin Russell-Jones
Chair, Help Rescue the Planet <https://helprescuetheplanet.com/>

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 