
Australia’s chief scientist, Alan Finkel, has tried to stay out of the fresh 
political row over emissions trading but says his review of the energy market 
will continue to analyse all the options to ensure future security of power 
supply and compliance with climate obligations.


Finkel’s comments follow a briefing he gave on Friday to the prime minister 
and state and territory leadersabout his preliminary report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/finkel-review-criticises-climate-policy-chaos-and-points-to-need-for-emissions-trading>
 about the state of Australia’s energy market. He warned that investment had 
stalled because of national policy uncertainty, and concluded current federal 
climate policy settings would not allow Australia to meet its emissions 
reduction targets under the Paris agreement.

Malcolm Turnbull rules out carbon tax or emissions trading
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/07/australia-malcolm-turnbull-rules-out-carbon-tax-or-emissions-trading>
The Finkel report has generated fresh embarrassment for the Turnbull 
government because it implicitly endorses an emissions intensity trading scheme 
for the electricity industry to help manage the necessary transition from 
high-emission energy sources to lower-emission technologies at least cost to 
households.

The energy and environment minister, Josh Frydenberg, signalled at the start 
of this week a review of the government’s Direct Action policy would consider 
whether an intensity scheme for electricity was an option – but the signal 
stirred a hornets’ nest inside the Coalition.

After a brief but noisy outbreak by backbench conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/malcolm-turnbull-direct-action-carbon-trading-climate-change>
 declaring the Coalition was, and would remain, fundamentally opposed to carbon 
pricing,Frydenberg folded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/josh-frydenberg-backtracks-on-emissions-trading-comments>
, saying the government would not contemplate either a carbon tax or carbon 
trading. His declaration pre-empted the findings of both the independent Finkel 
review and his own Direct Action review.

The South Australian premier, Jay Weatherill, who supports an emissions 
intensity scheme for the electricity market, used the opportunity of Friday’s 
Coag meeting in Canberra to publicly rebuke the prime minister for preemptively 
killing off the debate.

With Turnbull sitting at the table beside him at the post-Coag press 
conference, Weatherill quoted the prime minister’s comments when he took office 
that leaders should conduct policy debates that were evidence-based.

Australia's energy transmission industry calls for carbon trading
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/australias-energy-transmission-industry-calls-for-carbon-trading>
“That’s simply all we’re asking for here. This is complex public policy. It is 
easy to scare people,” Weatherill said Friday.

“But fundamentally I believe in the intelligence of the Australian community 
to actually grapple with these complex public policy issues and come up with 
good solutions.”

Turnbull was also peppered with questions from journalists about the 
government’s backdown at the Coag press conference on Friday.

The prime minister was asked about a number of credible studies that have 
found an intensity trading scheme would allow Australia to conform with our 
international emissions reduction commitments with the least impact on 
household power bills,including a study this week which found power bills could 
be $200 a year less 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/australias-energy-transmission-industry-calls-for-carbon-trading>
 than under the government’s existing policy.


The prime minister, in essence, dismissed the findings of a study that had 
been signed off by the CSIRO – which mirrors analysis from the Climate Change 
Authority and the Australian Energy Market Commission – claiming there were 
other studies available with different conclusions.

Turnbull said he was committed to reducing power prices.

Asked whether he would change his mind if the Finkel review and the Direct 
Action review produced yet more credible evidence that an emissions intensity 
scheme would produce abatement at least cost to households, Turnbull said 
emissions trading schemes increase the cost of electricity to households and 
businesses.

“We want to put downward pressure on, do all we can – and, of course, we have 
limited means to do so – but do all we can to ensure that this constant rise in 
the cost of energy for Australian households and Australian businesses that is 
so damaging to our international competitiveness, stops,” the prime minister 
said.

Finkel told Guardian Australia in an interview on Friday he would not comment 
on the political row but he said was pressing forward with the task he had been 
given by Frydenberg and the energy minister’s council. “My commitment is to 
thoroughly analyse all the options,” he said.

The chief scientist noted there was now “broad willingness for change” across 
the energy sector when it came to climate policy and energy regulation, and 
“the potential for change is huge”.

“The enthusiasm we’ve come across for constructive change is a wonderful thing 
to see,” he said.

Finkel said he expected through the course of the review that alternatives to 
an emissions intensity scheme may be brought forward by people making 
submissions to his inquiry, which will deliver a final report in 2017.

He said his review would make a priority of analysing why power prices had 
risen substantially in recent years.

 