
Leading health researchers from around the world including Australia have 
presented the strongest evidence to date that alcohol advertising is at times 
aggressive and reaching children, and is associated with youth drinking.

The National Alliance for Action on Alcohol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alcohol>, a coalition of more than 40 
Australian health and community organisations, say the findings prove that 
self-regulation by the alcohol industry has failed.

The alliance co-chair, Michael Moore, said the series of peer-reviewed studies 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/add.v112.S1/issuetoc> should 
provide enough evidence to federal, state and territory governments to 
legislate to ban alcohol marketing from public property and locations where 
young people are likely to see it.

Stop advertising alcohol on public transport, urges report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/10/stop-advertising-alcohol-on-public-transport-urges-report>
Moore said the commonwealth government should close a regulatory loophole that 
allows alcohol advertising to be shown during televised sport. Alcohol 
sponsorship of sport, music and cultural events should also be phased out, 
Moore said.

“The takeaway from this research is that marketing of alcohol is out of 
control and it’s time for us to recognise the harm that’s occurring and to take 
a sensible approach regarding alcohol marketing,” Moore said.

“That would start with excluding marketing from sporting venues and 
particularly huge sports events like the cricket, Formula One and the 
Australian Open.”

The banning of tobacco advertising from similar events had shown that it was 
possible to phase out a lucrative sponsor of sports, he added.

Among the papers published on Thursday in a special edition of the 
international journal Addiction, was a systemic review led by Curtin University 
in Perth on the use of social media to market alcohol products.

Researchers reviewed evidence from 47 scientific papers to examine whether 
digital media marketing messages influenced drinking behaviour, whether youth 
were being targeted by this advertising, and whether advertising codes were 
being violated.

“The literature indicated that marketing through digital media is likely to be 
having an impact upon drinking behaviour, that the marketing activities make 
use of materials and approaches that are attractive to young people, and that 
current marketing codes are likely to be undermined by digital media,” the 
authors concluded.

“Violations of the content guidelines within self-regulated alcohol marketing 
codes are highly prevalent in certain media.”

Current self-regulatory approaches by the alcohol industry was not protecting 
vulnerable populations, including children, from alcohol marketing, the paper 
also found.

The executive officer of the McCusker Centre for Action on Alcohol and Youth, 
Julia Stafford, said the papers together show that exposure to alcohol 
marketing impacts on young people’s drinking.

The alcohol industry could not be trusted to regulate their own advertising, 
and there were more effective options for governments to protect children from 
alcohol marketing, she said.

“The research confirms yet again that alcohol marketing impacts on young 
people drinking behaviours,” Stafford told Guardian Australia. “Young people 
who have higher exposure to alcohol marketing are more likely to start drinking 
and to drink at risky levels.”

Children see 'tsunami of alcohol ads', says eminent professor of public health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/18/children-see-tsunami-of-alcohol-ads-says-eminent-professor-of-public-health>
She said alcohol promoters used themes in their advertising campaigns that 
were attractive to young people, such as sport, celebrities and music. She 
described digital media as “the new frontier” for alcohol marketing.

“Australia’s weak and limited advertising codes were not designed to 
effectively deal with how alcohol advertisers are using digital media,” 
Stafford said.

“Regulation needs to catch up urgently. Governments continue to rely on 
hopelessly weak codes and processes designed and run by the alcohol industry 
whose primary interest is to maximise profit, not to protect public health.”

Polling of Australians by the Foundation for Alcohol Research and Education has
previously found 
<http://fare.org.au/2016/05/annual-alcohol-poll-2016-attitudes-and-behaviours/> 
70% of Australians support a ban on alcohol advertising on television before 
8.30pm, and 60% support removing alcohol sponsorship in sport.

“Governments that act to protect young people from alcohol marketing can feel 
confident that they are acting on the basis of mountains of high-quality 
evidence and with strong public support,” Stafford said.

However, Alcohol Beverages Australia executive director, Fergus Taylor, denied 
alcohol advertising was associated with underage drinking.

“Anti-alcohol activists have been trying for years to blame alcohol 
advertising as the cause of underage drinking, but the inconvenient truth for 
them is this claim is simply not supported by official data,” Taylor said.

“The suggestion current controls in place are ineffective and that further 
regulation is needed in Australia to curb underage drinking are wrong. Current 
regulations to protect children are highly effective, and there is compelling 
data to support this.”
 