
It was billed by the club as Judgment Day and, in the end, there was a certain 
inevitability about both the outcome and the verdict.

"We simply weren't good enough," said the Lincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> City manager, Steve Tilson, and 
nobody in the near‑8,000 crowd – the club's biggest of the season – could 
disagree.

The Imps had to match Barnet's result against Port Vale to avoid relegation 
but they just could not kick the losing habit. Nearly two months ago a 1-1 draw 
at Macclesfield left them in 14th place with 46 points but, as the club went 
into freefall, only a solitary draw was gained from the next nine games.

"The league table doesn't lie. It's over 46 games not one," said Tilson. "I 
knew Barnet would beat Port Vale and it was about us getting a result. Once we 
conceded, we crumbled – we've done it time and time again since the middle of 
March."

With both matches goalless at the break, Lincoln, having had the better of the 
first half, were on course to survive but the mood changed as news of Izale 
McLeod's 48th-minute penalty for Barnet spread round Sincil Bank. Eleven 
minutes into the second half Aldershot took the lead when Jamie Clapham brought 
down Jermaine McGlashan in the area and Danny Hylton put away the penalty.

With about 20 minutes left, Luke Guttridge scored the first of a brace of 
well-taken goals – firing home from just inside the area after being set up by 
Damian Spencer.

The biggest cheer of the afternoon arrived when the crowd thought, mistakenly, 
that Port Vale had equalised at Underhill, then Lincoln's lone striker Ashley 
Grimes fired over with 15 minutes left before the substitute Reece Connolly 
sent in Guttridge for another crisp finish – this time from 14 yards – four 
minutes from the end.

Tilson's appointment in October after the inexperienced Chris Sutton jumped 
ship appeared to have arrested Lincoln's decline. With the arrival of loanees 
like Grimes and Arsenal's Gavin Hoyte, results picked up and five successive 
wins had supporters dreaming of the play-offs.

"The loan players improved the attitude in the club," said Tilson, "but once 
they go back, it makes it more difficult because you're back with the existing 
squad.

"I'm devastated – and I just hope the players are going to hurt as much. This 
is the right time to start re-building the side. Lincoln have been down at the 
wrong end of the table for the last three or four years and it's caught up with 
us."

The chairman, Bob Dorrian, estimates that relegation will cost the Imps about 
£300,000 but has promised Tilson money to bring in new players. "Whilst we may 
not be able to bounce back straightaway next season as we did in 1987, give us 
two or three seasons and I think we'll be pretty much back on our way."

"If you'd asked me at the start of the season where we'd be," said the utility 
player Cian Hughton, "I'd have thought at the other end of the table so it's 
very disappointing. We're a young squad and this is such a low point in all our 
short careers."

Lincoln now join Darlington and Chester as the only clubs to have been 
relegated from the Football League twice while Barnet secured safety on the 
last day for the second succession season. The caretaker manager Guiliano 
Grazioli admitted he was still in the dressing room when the winning penalty 
was scored.

"Everyone's singing my name but it's on and off the pitch, the players and the 
staff, who deserve all this. And let's not forget Martin Allen – he left here 
under a cloud but he started the ball rolling with a three-match unbeaten run. 
This has surpassed everything I achieved here as a player. Nobody gave us a 
chance but I knew we'd win – it was a great performance."
 