
To complete the infamies of 2016, now comes Bashar al-Assad’s impending 
victory in Aleppo – today’s Guernica, even if there is no Picasso to depict it. 
Events inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> define the arrival of 
a new barbarism. Even in the most terrible days of 20th-century conflict, 
combatants would respect minimum rules. Civilians were not surrogates for the 
enemy. Organisations such as the Red Cross – independently and impartially 
alleviating suffering on either side on the basis of no other value than human 
need – were allowed to do their work.

No more. Aleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> completes a new, 
dark contemporary arc that trashes respect for humanitarian principles that 
once seemed inviolable. Assad has achieved his re-conquest of Syria’s second 
city by completely dropping the once iron-clad distinction made in the Geneva 
conventions between combatants, non-combatants and those “hors de combat”.

Bombs, even banned barrel bombs, must fall where they will; preventing 
non-combatants from getting food and medicine has been integral to the war 
effort; hospitals, even children’s hospitals, are routinely bombed. Assad has 
even legislated to define the provision of medical care in rebel areas as 
criminal. The braveWhite Helmets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/23/the-white-helmets-syria-volunteer-rescue-workers-heroes-hope-horror>
, the volunteers who try to relieve suffering in rebel and non-rebel areas 
alike, may be arrested and killed as surrogate terrorists. The scale of 
population displacement, death and suffering has reached unbelievable heights – 
but western powers have turned a blind eye.

Yet what is at stake goes beyond geopolitics and western interest. The west is 
turning its back on the concepts not only of a just war, but on the fashion in 
which wars should be fought – fundamental to western and, indeed, universal 
values. For centuries, humanity has come to accept that limitless war is 
bestial. There must be rules and protocols. Hence the just war doctrine that 
wars should be fought as a last resort in self-defence, proportionally, waged 
by lawful authority and have some reasonable chance of success.

In Aleppo's destroyed hospitals the dead lie with the living
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/aleppo-hospitals-wiped-out-by-bombings>
The Geneva conventions build on the just war philosophy. Signatory countries 
accept minimum rules for the treatment of not just prisoners and wounded 
combatants – but for civilians in war zones. The conventions create the 
critical division between combatants and non-combatants along with those hors 
de combat – who should not be included in the conflict and to whom basic 
humanitarian assistance is allowed. Hospitals, for example, should not be 
attacked. The first convention was signed in 1864, and offered the legal space 
for the Red Cross, which had been founded a year earlier by Swiss humanitarian 
Henry Dunant.

It is that entire structure that is now toppling. Assad – and Putin – justify 
their barbarism by insisting thatany action is justified to contest terrorism. 
If they were to argue in just war terms, they would say the nature of Islamic 
terrorism has transformed any conception of proportionality. Anything now goes. 
Thus in Aleppo, over the last four months,a hospital has been attacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/aleppo-hospitals-knocked-out-airstrikes>
 every day but one. This has to be condemned. If we are to accept that war and 
the way it is waged has no limits, that would be to take back civilisation to 
pre-history.

To bleat for peace talks or condemn both sides while doing nothing is a cop out

All this is not to underestimate how close to impossible it is to navigate the 
Syrian conflict with any ethical compass. There can be no justification in 
joining Russia to bolster Assad and create an Iranian-led Shia protectorate 
running from the Lebanon through Syria to Iran, confronting Israel and Saudi 
Arabia alike. Equally, backing the rebels, intensifying the civil war, is to 
open up Syria to become a base of operations for Islamic terrorist groups such 
as Isis. To attack Isis is perforce to strengthen Assad. Nor is it in the 
western interest to offer unqualified support to Saudi Arabia, which sponsors 
some of the most regressive Islamic religious ideologies. No option is 
attractive: any intervention is likely to be self-defeating.

And yet the west cannot allow the edifice of the just war and the Geneva 
conventions to fall. To bleat for peace talks or condemn both sides while doing 
nothing is a cop out. As an absolute minimum, we have to insist the Geneva 
conventions are upheld in the conduct of war in Syria. We cannot allow the 
argument that terrorism means the distinction between combatant and 
non-combatant is dropped. There must be accountability for attacks on 
hospitals, particularly children’s hospitals. It is not good enough to charge 
that terrorists were hiding there. The use of chemical weapons, barrel bombs 
and drones acting on probability algorithms in areas inhabited by civilians is 
prohibited.

Organisations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross 
<https://www.icrc.org/en>, Médecins Sans Frontières 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/medecins-sans-frontieres> or the White 
Helmets must be allowed to do their humanitarian work on the Dunantian 
principles on which they are founded. Food and medical supplies must be allowed 
to reach civilians. Russia and Assad’s Syria must understand that they are 
operating beyond the limit – and that any victory won in this way can only be 
pyrrhic. War crimes are being permitted and indulged: Russia must be required 
to investigate its military and so must Syria, otherwise they should be struck 
out of the Geneva conventions.

Here, of course, is the rub. Both will reply that double standards are being 
applied. The US has flouted the Geneva conventions in its treatment of 
prisoners in Guantánamo and its all-embracing definition of terrorism, allowing 
it to treat civilians as combatants if they are suspected terrorists. They also 
know that president-elect Donald Trump has said he would go further – and that 
he admires Putin’s ruthless disregard for soft, humanitarian international 
treaties. They know they can, like Franco in Guernica, act with impunity.

Britain could lobby for the EU to take a robust line – but that would only be 
explicit recognition that leaving the EU in today’s darkening environment is a 
cardinal error. Leavers are hardly plausible advocates for international 
co-operation. And within Britain, poor weak Labour, where we might have looked 
in the past for leadership, is a broken reed – confirmed again by events 
yesterday.

It is a dreadful landscape: a world governed by Trump and Putin with no 
countervailing forces will see yet more atrocities. All we can do is act from 
below. In the absence of any government help, a “people’s convoy” of medical 
supplies is being sent on Saturday to build a new children’s hospital in 
eastern Aleppo. You can contribute onpeoplesconvoy.com 
<http://www.peoplesconvoy.com/>. It needs money. Donate for a world that once 
was and a world that might yet be.

• This article was amended on 11 December. The link in the final paragraph was 
updated.
 