
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> believes 
Arsenal’s hopes of securing Alexis Sánchez to a new long‑term contract will 
depend more upon convincing the forward of the “values” and ambition of the 
club than the financial package on the table.

The manager is considering starting Sánchez, who has scored five goals in his 
past two appearances for the club, in Tuesday’s finalChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group game against Basel 
despite the striker’s onerous recent workload and Arsenal being braced to 
finish as runners-up in the section to Paris Saint-Germain. They must better 
the French side’s result to finish top and will seek to establish an advantage 
early before Wenger reassesses his approach at half-time once news filters 
through from Parc des Princes, where PSG will expect to defeat Ludogorets 
Razgrad.

Sánchez’s deal expires in the summer of 2018 with negotiations ongoing with 
his representative, Fernando Felicevich, over an extension. The Chilean, a £30m 
signing from Barcelona in 2014, earns a weekly salary of around £130,000 and 
would expect that to rise to more than £200,000 if he commits to new terms.

Arsène Wenger unsure when Santi Cazorla will back from injury for Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/02/arsene-wenger-santi-cazorla-unsure-return-arsenal>
However, Wenger is unconvinced that money will be the 27-year-old’s principal 
motivation when it comes to deciding whether his stay is extended. “Well, I 
would like to say the luxury of the modern game should be it’s not only about 
the money, because the players make anyway wherever they play good money at 
this level,” Wenger said.

“I believe personally, and maybe I am a bit naive, that it’s more about 
getting to meet the player’s needs. That’s more about the way the club has 
values, the way the club has ambition, the way the club respects the players.

“So I think, for me, that is more important nowadays and an important 
ingredient for every player to consider. The money is good everywhere for 
everybody.

“You know, nowadays, you negotiate with the agents more than with the player. 
We are in negotiations, yes. The players [Sánchez and Mesut Özil] are 18 months 
away from the end of their contracts, so it’s normal to be talking. But the 
players always come in at the end, when it’s a renewal, because with the first 
contract you need the players present. But after that, when you renew, 90% of 
the contracts are negotiated with the agents.”

Sánchez has enjoyed a prolonged spell as Arsenal’s main striker this season, 
scoring 13 times in 19 appearances, but could start in a wider position behind 
Olivier Giroud at St Jakob Park. Wenger has brought a strong squad to 
Switzerland, with Giroud – recovered from a slight groin strain – replacing his 
suspended compatriot Francis Coquelin in the travelling party. Özil, who is 
close to signing a contract extension, may retain his place as the central 
playmaker, although his involvement could also be curtailed early if the game 
in Paris is veering away from Ludogorets at the interval.

The temptation is there to rest either Sánchez or Özil, so integral to this 
side’s prospects, from the start before the visit of Stoke City in the Premier 
League on Saturday. “I will make a decision on Tuesday as to who will start 
but, overall, the best way when a guy is in good success and confidence [is to 
continue picking him],” Wenger said. “It’s more dangerous to stop him than keep 
him going. It is always difficult to work out what is physical and what is 
mental [in terms of fatigue], and predicting who is tired and who is not can be 
hard. So I have kept them all together as a group. We have a squad that is 
united.

“All the players at the top want to play, and are keen to play. [Sánchez] is a 
bit more extroverted in how he shows it, but you do not get to his level if you 
don’t have a good passion to play the game. He just shows it in a different 
way. But I haven’t decided yet, honestly. I have a few more hours, but my main 
priority will be to win the game. Overall, it’s [about] stability. But we have 
to do our job, and continue to win the games we play. You never know what might 
be happening in Paris. We’ll see: PSG are favourites to beat Ludogorets at home 
and win the group, but we can assess that scoreline at half-time and see where 
we go.”

Wenger, who watched Héctor Bellerín train on his own back at London Colney 
after a hamstring problem, knows a tricky tie awaits in the last 16 whether 
Group A is won or not, but finishing second could prompt a collision with 
Napoli, Barcelona, Atlético Madrid, Monaco, Borussia Dortmund or Juventus, all 
of whom top their respective sections. Real Madrid and Bayern Munich are the 
most daunting second-placed teams at present.

Wenger will offer Granit Xhaka a start against his former club, with the 
Switzerland international having graduated through Basel’s youth ranks before 
joining Borussia Mönchengladbach in 2012. “I was born and raised here, and 
played in the youth team before going on to win the Swiss championship with the 
club,” theArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> midfielder 
said. “Being back home is great. But I hope I can take positive feelings back 
to England tomorrow.”
 