
The chief executive of Alliance & Leicester, Britain's eighth biggest bank, 
surprised the City by announcing his retirement yesterday as the former 
building society revealed a 4% rise in profits to £569m.

Richard Pym told analysts that he would stand down in two years' time when he 
reaches 60 and said the bank could remain independent despite persistent 
takeover speculation. Mr Pym has been at A&L for 15 years and was finance 
director when it floated on the stock market 10 years ago. He has been chief 
executive for five years and would say little about his future plans, other 
than a quip about selling programmes at Arsenal football club. He refused to 
give precise information about the timing of his departure. Headhunters have 
been appointed.

Shares were up by 83p - nearly 8% - to close at £11.49p after the bank 
announced a share buy-back of £300m and left analysts with the impression that 
new regulatory requirements might allow it to conduct buy-backs on a similar 
scale for another two years. It bought back £150m in 2005.

There was some speculation that Mr Pym's retirement might make A&L an easier 
takeover target. While Alex Potter, banks analyst at Collins Stewart, disputed 
that Mr Pym would have stood in the way of a deal, he noted US banks were more 
likely to be taken over when their chief executives were approaching retirement.

Possible internal candidates are head of retail, Chris Rhodes, head of 
commercial banking, Richard Banks, and the finance director, David Bennett.

Mr Pym, who refused an approach from French bank Credit Agricole last year, 
insisted that the bank had a strong independent future. Ever since A&L floated 
on April 21 1997 at 533p, it has been subjected to rumours of takeovers. In 
that time it failed to merge with the Bank of Ireland.

A&L, which made 350 people redundant last year, indicated that further job 
losses from the 8,500-strong workforce were likely. The bank incurred a £24m 
cost for the redundancy programme in 2006.

The bank is planning to launch a 125% loan-to-value mortage this year. The 
product will be structured in a similar way to Northern Rock's Together product 
which is a mortgage with a loan attached.

Mr Pym committed the bank to "free" banking in the face of intervention by the 
Office of Fair Trading into the bank charges. He also stressed the quality of 
the loans granted by the bank. Just 90 homes were repossessed last year out of 
almost 500,000 home loans. Its provision for bad debts was £105m, up 42%, but 
it expects improvements this year.

The bank set itself a new target of earnings per share growth of the retail 
price index plus 9% by 2009 and a minimum return on capital of 20%.

The final dividend is 86.5p, giving a total of 54.1p, up 5%.
 