
Slipping through rural Louisiana, with giant grain silos and water towers 
sliding silently past the window, my boyfriend and I were in the middle of a 
hand of cards. Then the whistle blew, the carriage jolted hard, and the massive 
silver train ground its brakes. As it squealed to a stop, the reason behind our 
sudden lurch came sliding into view on either side of the tracks. On one side 
sat the front of an articulated lorry, the bemused driver climbing out of his 
cab, cap in hand, scratching his head; on the other side of the train was the 
back half of the truck, grain spilling down the embankment. The lorry had been 
torn in two like a piece of tin foil. And people say that train travel in 
America is boring.

In fact, they tend to say a lot more than that. American friends we talked to 
before our epic rail trip around the west had generally one reaction — that we 
were certifiably insane. Rail transport, they told us, was prohibitively 
expensive and painfully slow. If we wanted to get somewhere, people said, 
domestic airlines were a cheaper and safer bet.

But we didn't listen. As travellers who wanted a journey more than a 
destination – and craved the room to work, read and relax on the way – the 
train seemed an obvious solution.

And it was surprisingly affordable: $389 covers you for two weeks of train 
riding. Or, more specifically, it covers you for eight separate segments of 
travel within 15 days.
 Anna Pickard in the waiting room at Los Angeles station. 
Careful planning meant we could make a loop that would take in 17 states, with 
stops along the way in cities as far flung as Seattle, Los Angeles, New Orleans 
and Chicago. It was a journey of 6,511 miles by rail, using four major lines; 
there would be six nights spent sleeping on trains, and 147 hours in all would 
be spent on the rails if everything went to plan (and everyone we spoke to 
about the trip assured us it wouldn't).

Many Americans suggest that the best way to see the heartland – a blank space 
between major cities – is through the bottom of a cocktail glass from 30,000 
feet, as if we were all George Clooney inUp in the Air. These are dismissively 
referred to as the "flyover states" that out-of-towners would only visit under 
duress or if you paid them enough.

And there's certainly some truth in that: there were times on the longer legs 
of the journey when I wanted to take a prairie, snap it into quarters and make 
it magically four times shorter and four times prettier. The one thing you 
couldn't do is make it four times flatter, but this is what you get for 
skirting the borders of the west.

The first leg had brought us from San Francisco down to Los Angeles – from the 
low suburbia and cities of industrial estates that lined the track as we 
skirted Silicon Valley through hundreds of miles of fields, where temporary 
workers under canopies picked fruits and nuts in the midday sun, and then out 
to the Pacific coast, alongside the beaches, dolphins and whales dancing in the 
ocean beside us.
 The Rio Grande, which forms part of the US-Mexico boarder, from the train 
window. 
After the jumbled chaos of Los Angeles, the chance to strike out across great 
desolate plains and untouched prairies was soul calming. Skimming the southern 
border of the US, we spent one whole day looking at Mexico some hundred yards 
away on the other side of the window. Once we cut through the swampy, sticky 
bayous of Louisiana's Gulf Shore – with a short delay to cope with our brief 
train crash, though thankfully nobody was hurt – we turned a corner at New 
Orleans and cut up to the rail hub of Chicago. Here the flatness remained, but 
the aspect changed. One day we were in 35C and 80% humidity, lying on the floor 
in our underwear in front of the air conditioning; a few days later we were 
trudging through the snow in Montana, watching hotels making preparations for 
the winter, shutters down and the fluorescent "Rooms" signs switched off for 
the season.

Riding a train through the west provides a feeling that the other more 
perfunctory routes in the east do not offer. You get a sense that you're 
cutting through a slice of American history. The idea of a transcontinental 
railroad was an engineering dream of early America – and in 1869, after a lot 
of politicking, land-finagling and hard business nous, the first route opened 
from New York to California.

Though we did not take the route that skims the original transcontinental 
railroad, it's hard not to feel like a pioneer sitting on board trains with 
wildly romantic names – the Empire Builder, the California Zephyr, the Sunset 
Limited – and striking out across land that looks untouched, even though you 
know how tightly guarded it all is now.

American criticisms of the service are, to some extent, well-founded. While 
America owes a huge historical debt to the train (the country's dramatic growth 
in the late 1800s was largely built on the back of rail expansion), the modern 
inheritor of US railroads, Amtrak, has long been pilloried. Set up in 1971, the 
service was intended to protect passenger rail from a collapse caused by the 
primacy of the car. Today, despite heavy subsidies, it's one of the least-used 
rail systems in the developed world and the network – around half the size it 
was at its peak – is used primarily for freight. Though there is a slight 
renaissance (Amtrak has posted record passenger numbers over the past few 
years), the vast majority of Americans consider train travel only for the 
aerophobic or the retired.
 The endless flatness of the North Dakota prairies. 
Riding in these great silver beasts, though, passing slowly across hotly 
contested lands and wildest wests, you gaze across the prairies and start to 
imagine the possibilities they hold and realise the drive of those pioneers.

Each of these expansive, sky-filled stretches was punctuated with the great 
palaces that are America's grand rail stations, empty these days but still 
impressive. Among the grandest was Chicago's Union Station, a huge vault filled 
with gilt lampposts and flags large enough to drape the coffin of a patriotic 
diplodocus. While not all America's stations retain their sense of history, the 
best are outstanding: elegant, classical halls with marble floors and hardwood, 
high-backed benches that smack of grand dreams and high drama. You can't escape 
the feeling that you're inside some classic film noir or a Raymond Chandler 
novel. Simply walking around makes you want to run across the floor (tears 
streaming, heels clacking, fur stole dragging) straight into the arms of your 
long-lost lover (who would, of course, be Don Draper fromMad Men).

Once you're on the silver trains, the sensation of passing through the pages 
of a novel is amplified by Amtrak's arcane eating arrangements. On one, 
passengers are instructed to make a timed reservation with the dining car 
steward and wait for their name to be called – generally either mispronounced 
or in a pitying tone of voice. Or, if you're lucky, both. "Pickuuuuurd! 
Pardy-of-one!" they shouted, just to ensure that everyone realised I was eating 
alone that particular evening. Except you never are: guests are expected to 
dine with strangers. If this was the UK, I would expect to be ushered to a 
table (probably grumbling inwardly about the empty tables I passed on the way), 
then, once seated, make a curt nod and "hullo" to my table mates before either 
engaging in quiet conversation with my companion or looking pensively out of 
the window, trying hard to look like I'm thinking of Very Important Things.

But not in America, where friendliness is a prized stereotype. We met a couple 
travelling from the 100th birthday party of a parent, a woman whose boyfriend 
makes telescopes for national parks as a hobby, and a man who teaches a poker 
masterclass.

At night the sleepers go back to their dormer carriages – if they've paid the 
sometimes extortionate price to upgrade. Everyone else, meanwhile, goes back to 
their seats which, since they are wide and deeply reclining, feel more first 
class than economy. Sleeping in a room might afford a sliver of privacy, but 
the sight of stars hanging in a perfectly clear sky above a prairie with no 
light pollution for 100 miles in any direction, or being woken up by the 
sunrise over new mountains, makes it all worth it.

An Amtrak Rail Pass is available for 15, 30 or 45 days. A 15-day pass that 
covers eight segments (ie eight single journeys) costs $389 (£260). Visit
amtrak.com <http://www.amtrak.com> or sites such as internationalrail.com 
<http://www.internationalrail.com>
 