
On Orcas Island the American beach fire comes into its own. It doesn't need 
the obsessive monitoring of the American barbecue - just occasional wood 
splitting. Even the rock circle forming our fire pit was already in place for 
us in front of our cabin. We just had to sit and watch the Pacific sunset 
developing in many layers in front of us.

Orcas Island in Washington state is one of 400 islands making up the San Juan 
Islands archipelago, and one of only four to offer accommodation. A mesmerising 
one-hour ferry ride takes you to Orcas, weaving through the other islands from 
the mainland at Anacortes - a 1.5-hour drive from Seattle.

The fact that the islands are accessible to visitors today is partly due to 
Franklin Roosevelt. As with President Obama's America, Roosevelt's citizens 
faced desperate levels of unemployment. Accepting the Democratic nomination in 
1932, Roosevelt announced that a key element of his New Deal would be the 
Civilian Conservation Corps. One year later, the members of 4768th Company of 
what was already known as Roosevelt's "Tree Army" were given a west coast 
posting. The unemployed men, from areas such as New York and Minnesota, were 
initially disappointed to realise that this did not mean California. Instead 
they arrived on Orcas Island to build roads and paths through remote areas.

One such road leads to the summit of Mount Constitution, at 735m the highest 
point in San Juan County. The road winds through dense forest, up a series of 
"switchbacks" (hairpin bends) to an incredible viewing point where you can see 
into Canada and, on a clear day, the snow-topped Mount Baker volcano visible in 
the distance.

Inside the small tower on top of Mount Constitution are black and white photos 
of the Tree Army clearing the trees of the Evergreen State, Washington's 
nickname. The "boys", ranging from 18 to 25 years old, worked under a 
semi-military regime, although exploring the island and the occasional 
community dance weren't off limits.

Our own exploration took us on a short hike to the island's largest waterfall, 
Cascade Falls, in the heart of Moran state park. Delicate moss seemed to drip 
from the branches of the firs and cedars, filling the air with a damp, earthy 
smell - some forests in the region are classed as "temperate rainforests". 
Crawling along massive fallen trees spanning the creek, we reached the falls. 
Our sons got the full benefit of the water's roar, being the only ones small 
enough to almost fit on the ledge behind it.

Moran state park was donated by and named after Robert Moran, a former Seattle 
mayor, shipbuilder and philanthropist. Like many of the Tree Army he was 
originally a New Yorker who arrived in Seattle penniless, generations earlier 
in 1875.

Returning along the Enchanted Forest Road, we headed back to our cabin - 
another legacy of the turbulent 30s. West Beach Resort is a small group of 
cabins (along with a few helpful amenities such as bike hire and an on-site 
smokehouse for the catch of the day) on a private beach. The cabins are largely 
unchanged in style since they were built in 1938 for the wealthier elite from 
nearby Seattle. Facilities for washing and cooking are all modern, and in the 
resort's tiny office you find luxuries such as Wi-Fi and lattes, as well as 
crab pots and logs for beach fires.

As the boys cast fishing rods endlessly into rock pools, I learned the art of 
clam digging from our neighbours. The earnest couple had a strange pointed 
shovel, shaped specifically for the purpose, and a battered bucket. The clam, 
which gives itself away by a small pinprick-shaped breathing hole in the sand, 
is dug up and cast into the bucket, and later steamed with garlic and butter.

Ours was a less sophisticated but still all-American treat for that evening's 
beach fire: s'mores, toasted marshmallows taken to another level by inserting a 
chocolate square into the molten marshmallow and sandwiching it between two 
biscuits. Our glowing beach fire was one of a chain in the dark, stretching 
along the bay.

During the day we watched the island's wildlife play right before our eyes. 
Over breakfast we saw a bald eagle swoop down, grab something from the water 
and then fly above our heads to join its partner in the trees. Although the 
display was impressive, the fish entrails hanging from the bird's claws were 
easy pickings, cast-offs from the fish-cleaning station halfway along the dock. 
We kept an eye on a family of goslings, with their protective parents, 
beachcombing for food. Some animals were less familiar. My husband sought 
advice from the friendly staff, and found that the mystery mammal seen running 
along the driftwood was a red mink.

To see Orcas Island's most famous wildlife you need to take a boat trip. The 
orcas (or killer whales) are a resident population but we were disappointed to 
hear that during our stay there was a limited possibility of seeing them; 
feeding patterns had taken them elsewhere. At least we were partly relieved to 
avoid a three-hour boat trip with a four-year-old. We were lucky enough to see 
a pair of speckled harbour seals from our ferry back to the mainland, but even 
a four-year-old knows that a seal is not a killer whale.

In addition to wildlife, hiking and beach fires, Orcas Island has a strong 
creative community. Just behind West Beach is Orcas Island Pottery (
orcasislandpottery.com <http://www.orcasislandpottery.com>), which declares 
itself the "oldest pottery in the north-west". The rambling garden has a large 
bronze eagle surveying the ocean, a tree house, shop and pottery displays 
inside and out. At the other end of the island, Orcas Island Artworks (
orcasartworks.com <http://www.orcasartworks.com>), claiming to be one of the 
country's oldest artistic cooperatives, is housed in a former 
strawberry-packing plant.

That evening we ate at an excellent seafood restaurant, the New Leaf Cafe, 
based in the Outlook Inn (outlookinn.com <http://www.outlookinn.com>), 
overlooking Eastsound Bay. The village of Eastsound, framed with white picket 
fences, allowed me to indulge in another north-west passion - the independent 
bookstore. Darvill's (darvillsbookstore.com <http://www.darvillsbookstore.com>) 
is friendly yet chic with an espresso machine tucked away at the back.

We picked up lattes, a seafood cookbook and more marshmallows, and headed back 
for our last beach fire.

Getting there

British Airways (0844 493 0787, ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) flies direct from 
Heathrow to Seattle from £421.20 rtn inc tax. Ferry crossing from Anacortes to 
Orcas Island with Washington State Ferries (wsdot.wa.gov/ferries 
<http://www.wsdot.wa.gov/ferries>) costs approx $100 return for a car and four 
passengers.

Where to stay

Beachside cabin at West Beach Resort (001 360 376 2240, westbeachresort.com 
<http://www.westbeachresort.com>), sleeping up to 6 people costs from $139-$239 
per night.

Further information

San Juan Islands Visitor's Bureau: visitsanjuans.com 
<http://www.visitsanjuans.com>. 

Flight time London-Seattle: 9hrs. 

£1 = 1.39 dollars.
 