
My name is Alissa Walker, better known as A Walker in LA 
<http://www.awalkerinla.com/> (and yes, Walker is my real name). I write about 
design and cities and am currently theUrbanism Editor at Gizmodo 
<http://gizmodo.com/tag/cities>. I’ve lived in LA for 13 years and half of that 
time I’ve done it without a car, which has transformed me into an enthusiastic 
advocate for walking, biking, and riding transit in the city. Our car-free
CicLAvias <http://www.ciclavia.org/> have become some of the largest open 
streets events in the world.

I live in a Dodger blue house on a big hill in the Silver Lake neighbourhood 
of LA, which is a few miles northwest of downtown. From my street I can see the 
Pacific Ocean, the tallest building west of Chicago, the Hollywood sign, and — 
at the right time of year — snowcapped mountains.
 The famous Hollywood sign. All photographs: Alissa Walker 

Los Angeles is probably the most misunderstood city on the planet, plagued by 
stereotypes that paint us as a frivolous teenager on the geopolitical stage. 
But it’s partially true: We’re a city of stark dichotomies.

To many we’re all about superficial style, fake flash, and the globally 
renowned glitz of creative industries. But we also have some of the largest 
homeless populations in the country, crushing poverty, and serious inequity 
when it comes to public health.

We’re blessed with environmental riches like glittering beaches and alpine 
forests but cars are choking our streets and we’re running out of water. I have 
no doubt that LA is the most exciting city for living and working in the world, 
but we must find ways to improve daily life and increase opportunities for all 
Angelenos.


What’s the best building? 
 A hand-painted store front on LA’s east side 

To me, the best buildings in LA are the tiny hand-painted storefronts that dot 
the streets, mostly on the east side of town. I love hopping on a random bus or 
train and heading out to explore new neighbourhoods and the independent 
businesses that make up their communities.

My favourites are always rotating, but I’ve recently fallen in love with a 
pink beauty parlour which I discovered in East LA. Everything about it is 
perfect, from the pastel-painted bricks to the freehand barber pole. LA 
certainly has some of the coolest and most cutting-edge architecture in the 
world, but the freedom and personality that’s evoked through our vernacular 
design is also something worth celebrating.

And the worst?
 Westin Bonaventure in Bunker Hill, once part of a grand utopian plan 

People love to hate the Westin Bonaventure 
<http://www.awalkerinla.com/2011/07/12/the-bonaventure-adventure/>, a 1974 
Brutalist wonderland on Downtown’s Bunker Hill. It’s probably one of the most 
bizarre structures in the city. But what makes this building so unique is not 
just the cylindrical smoky glass and bulky concrete interiors (which have made 
it a favorite location for many films).

The Bonaventure was part of an ambitious utopian plan to connect a whole 
section of downtown buildings via elevated pedways and underground malls. The 
idea was that you’d never have to step outside, or even onto the street, to 
fulfill your daily needs. As weird as it is, this is excellent place to explore 
the soaring skyways, climb the circular staircases, and have a drink at the 
rotating restaurant on the top floor.

How clean is the city? 
 Bougainvillea in bloom despite the odd smoggy day 
You may have heard that LA’s a smoggy, filthy hellhole (I read that once on 
the internet). Air quality is a big concern, but we no longer have the 
dangerous emissions levels that cancelled schools back in the 1970s althouh we 
have our brown days just like any industrial city, mostly in the summer heat.

We also have a “June Gloom” that settles over the city in the late spring, 
thanks to a creeping marine fog due to warming ocean temperatures. But most of 
the year the skies are blue, the breeze is constant, the bougainvillea is 
blooming, and the temperatures are absolutely perfect. Did I mention that it 
doesn’t rain from May to October?


What’s the best way to get around? 
 LA is not famous for its public transport – but it is excellent 
Most people will tell you that there only way to get around LA is by car. I’ve 
lived here seven years without driving and I’ve got to say, the public transit 
is excellent. We have the second-biggest transit system in the country, by 
ridership, and it’s growing at a far faster pace than any system in the US.

By next year we’ll have a light rail line from downtown to Santa Monica, and 
we’ll be making headway on another subway line to the sea. While we’re playing 
catch up with many other big cities when it comes to having a robust rail 
system, our buses are frequent and reliable (and affordable). I also think 
biking and walking are great ways to get around the city — without much weather 
to deal with, we really have no excuse to get outside and get some exercise on 
our way.


What does your city sound like?
 Barely a moment passes without a helicopter chopping at the forever blue sky 
Right now I hear two prominent sounds out my window: A flock of feral 
parakeets and a flock of helicopters. The parakeets are a squawky presence in 
our skies, colonies started by escapees from caged captivity who have thrived 
in our subtropical foliage. They sound like a chatty roving dinner party, 
relocating from palm to palm.

The helicopters are a more unfortunate presence. There isn’t an hour of the 
day that you can’t see a chopper on the horizon somewhere in the city, filing a 
traffic report or swinging a search light over a dark alley. The parakeets I 
can live with. My dream is that someone would invent a silent helicopter.

Where is the best place for a conversation?
 LA has over 300 public stairways and you can walk and talk on them during the 
Big Parade 
I prefer to take most of my meetings on foot, so I’d ask you to come along on 
a walk, preferably one that traverses some of the 300+ public stairways that 
lace through the city, an infrastructural remnant from a century ago when the 
city had the largest interurban railway system on the planet.

One of the best times to see the stairs and meet new friends is during the Big 
Parade <http://www.awalkerinla.com/2014/05/27/the-big-parade-you-can-do-it/>, a 
two-day walk from downtown to the Hollywood sign. This walk is part eye-opening 
history lesson, part nerd-making urban exploration, part calf-busting 
recreation. It’s an incredible adventure

What one thing is indispensable for life in your city? 
 Fantastic produce is abundant in California 

An appetite. Los Angeles has the best food of any city anywhere. Not only do 
we grow or raise pretty much any food you’d want to eat within a 200-mile 
radius — and celebrate our blessed logistics with thriving farmers markets and 
chefs who love to cook from them, year-round — we also are able to enjoy our 
meals, from the most humble carts to the most expensive restaurants, with zero 
pretension. Add to that the sheer diversity you’ll find on our streets thanks 
to the expatriate communities: we have the largest Korean population outside of 
Korea and the largest Thai population outside Thailand. You’ll never go hungry.

Are you optimistic about your city’s future? 
 Los Angeles faces a big water problem 
LA is one of the most exciting places to live at the moment. We’re truly at a 
crossroads, transitioning from this auto-centric city of the past into a 
thriving multi-modal metropolis of the future.

We’re expanding our transit at a rapid pace, working to improve our ecological 
welfare, and making neighbourhoods better for all residents.

What I’m worried about is water. Even as our mayor announced sweeping 
restrictions and reforms earlier this year, the drought and effects from 
climate change are going todramatically transform life 
<http://gizmodo.com/the-los-angeles-aqueduct-turns-100-or-the-mules-that-b-1459560479>
 for a city which has not learned the meaning of sacrifice. This is not going 
to be easy for many people who still seem to think they can water their lawns 
every morning. But I’m optimistic that we can adjust and our city will be 
better and more beautiful for it.
 