
It was framed as a question but it sounded more like a threat. Novak Djokovic 
was merrily destroying the hopelessly outmatched Kei Nishikori 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/19/novak-djokovic-v-kei-nishikori-atp-world-tour-finals-live>
 on Saturday night when a cry from the stands at the O2 Arena threw the 
narrative forward to the following evening: “Are you watching, Andy Murray?”

Andy Murray defeats Novak Djokovic to end year as world No1
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-atp-tour-finals>
The crowd chuckled nervously and it was difficult to find too many optimistic 
Murray fans before he faced Djokovic in the final match of the year. Murray had 
taken so long to win hisepic match against Milos Raonic at the ATP World Tour 
Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/andy-murray-atp-world-tour-finals>
 on Saturday afternoon that he was walking into his press conference around the 
same time that Djokovic began a clinical humiliation of Nishikori. That seemed 
to confirm the Serb was finally back to his fearsome best after a wretched few 
months that began with his shock defeat to Sam Querrey in the third round of 
Wimbledon and resulted in him dropping to No2 in the rankings after Paris two 
weeks ago.

With Roger Federer and Rafa Nadal injured, Murray was the man to capitalise on 
his oldest rival’s sudden slump, which featured fitness concerns, whispers of 
problems away from the court and defeats to players he normally eats for 
breakfast. The Scot secured his status as one of Britain’s greatest athletes by 
winning his second Wimbledon, defending his Olympic title and rising to world 
No1 for the first time in a career that has been defined by his staggering 
ability to fight until the very last ball.

Surely, though, holding off a rejuvenated Djokovic in the battle to finish the 
year as the world No1 would be beyond even his powers of resilience. Typically 
Murray had reached the final after choosing the long route, beating Raonic in a 
record three hours and 38 minutes, while Djokovic had cruised through an easy 
group before dismissing Nishikori in 66 minutes. Murray was weary. Djokovic was 
fresh. There could be only one outcome.

It was a routine victory in the end, just not the one that most people had 
anticipated. Fighting off the fatigue, willing himself over the line, Murray 
once again demonstrated why no one can dispute his new status as the world’s 
dominant player, capping off the year of his life by outplaying, outwitting and 
outlasting Djokovic in an hour and 42 minutes of superb tennis.

Murray’s 6-3, 6-4 win ensured he finished the year at the top of the rankings, 
a wonderful achievement by a man whose willingness to scrap and hustle and run 
as if his life depended on it sets the example for every rising star in his 
sport. The thought occurs that Murray’s young friend, Nick Kyrgios, who was 
recently banned by the ATP after one misdemeanour too many, should be watching 
and learning.

Murray has had to drag himself off the canvas more times than he probably 
cares to remember. The early years were defined by agonising defeats in big 
matches, usually at the hands of Djokovic, Federer or Nadal. Even after winning 
Wimbledon for the first time early retirement was a distinct possibility before 
he underwent back surgery three years ago. He struggled after that operation 
and he had to be patient as he watched Djokovic pull away from him.

Andy Murray humble in victory against a magnanimous Novak Djokovic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-world-no-1-tennis>
The stats pointed to a Djokovic victory before their 35th meeting. He had 
never lost an indoor match to Murray, had won 14 of their previous 15 
encounters on hard courts and often looks as though he knows precisely how to 
get inside the Scot’s head and unsettle him.

It nearly happened at the end of the second set. Trailing by a set and two 
breaks Djokovic converted his only break point to spread anxiety around the 
arena, heightening the tension to the point where the umpire was forced to ask 
the crowd to respect both players. He briefly appeared to have located the 
warrior spirit that has helped him win 12 majors when he raised his level to 
save two championship points.

When Murray earned a third opportunity he netted a first serve. On another day 
Djokovic might have pulverised his second serve. But he had already butchered 
two simple smashes. His backhand rarely convinced, he often looked unsteady and 
his final forehand drifted long. Murray stuck to his plan, took his chances and 
stayed cool in the key moments.

Hiding his exhaustion well, Murray’s performance showed how much he has 
progressed in these past six months. He has crumbled against Djokovic in the 
past. No one saw them as equals when Djokovic crushed Murray in the Australian 
and French Open finals earlier this year. But it takes guts to keep coming back 
for more. Murray has been rewarded for his persistence. This was his 25th 
consecutive victory and it was the sweetest of the lot.
 