
Time ran out for one brave finalist here on Sunday night but against all 
well-reasoned forecasts, it was not Andy Murray. In what was probably his most 
extraordinary win overNovak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> since he won the first of 
his three grand slam titles – in New York four years ago – the prince of 
perversity, riding a wave of adrenaline after one of the toughest weeks of his 
career, beat the man whose crown he had snatched away so impudently in Paris a 
fortnight ago.

In so doing Murray confirmed he is not only statistically the best player in 
the world, but is rightfully so in every way. He may remain there well into the 
summer of 2017.

Andy Murray fights fatigue with fire to end 2016 in blistering fashion | Jacob 
Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/20/andy-murray-fights-fatigue-with-fire-to-end-2016-in-blistering-fashion>
In beating Djokovic 6-3, 6-4 in an hour and 42 minutes to win his first ATP 
World Tour Finals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> 
title, the Scot secured the world No1 spot at the end of a long and glorious 
year, and confounded pessimists who predicted the rigours of the past week – 
not to mention the previous three months – would drain him of the will to win. 
“Obviously it’s a very special day,” Murray said. “I am happy to get the win 
today and finish the year as No1. I never expected it.”

There was some justification for the prognosis, given Murray had reached his 
fifth final in a row after spending nearly 10 hours on court in four matches 
over the past six days, compared to his opponent’s six hours and 33 minutes, 
the last 66 of those arriving against a washed-out Kei Nishikori on Saturday 
night, in the shortest match of the week. That followed Murray’s three hours 
and 38 minutes against Milos Raonic – the longest match of the tournament. But, 
as Macbeth said (apparently): “If it were done when ’tis done, then ’twere well 
it were done quickly.”

Whatever notions Djokovic had expressed beforehand about respecting Murray’s 
integrity and fitness, the Serb looked increasingly woebegone as he failed to 
break the resolve of an opponent over whom he held a 24‑10 career advantage.

Murray, who had sweated up beforehand, like a fighter getting ready for a 
world title shot, no doubt had a shaking hand on his racket, double-faulting 
twice in the first five minutes, although he also banged down his fastest serve 
of the tournament, a 132mph ace.

With the thought buried in his psyche that time was not on his side, it was 
clear he was going to throw a few haymakers. Djokovic, 19-0 against Murray when 
taking the first set, imposed his will early, and looked comfortable holding to 
love for the second time.

He was sharper and more hurtful with ball in hand in the early exchanges and 
Murray could not take a point off his serve in the first 20 minutes.

However, he got two good looks at it in the sixth game, and was delighted when 
Djokovic butchered the easiest smash of the week for a third deuce point. But 
Murray hit long twice and the moment passed.

Now, though, it was Djokovic who struggled more. Murray, peppering the 
backhand, cracked his defence with a teasing slice that Djokovic could not get 
over the high side of the net, and the break was his.

When he forced another anaemic, off-balance reply from Djokovic after 46 
minutes. Against most predictions, he could set about building on his lead.

Djokovic, of course, had scored five of his 24 wins over Murray in their 34 
matches after losing the first set, and he would have to do so again. He would 
not go away without a fight – he never does – but giving up four break points 
at the start of the second set was no way to launch a fightback. When Murray 
forced a limp backhand from him, the arena rose in anticipation of a famous 
victory.

The strategy, the predictions and expectations were all being turned upside 
down. The supposedly fresher Djokovic was heaving between points; the 
supposedly exhausted Murray was rejuvenated. By the time Djokovic belted a 
weary backhand long to hand Murray a second break for 4-1 after a mere hour and 
a quarter, Djokovic seemed to have lost his way.

However, one of the game’s enduring gladiators broke back in the sixth game 
then held to love to inject a measure of tension into the contest. A 33-shot 
rally lit up the eighth game, but Murray stayed solid and Djokovic had to hold 
to stay in the match. He did so, to 15, and handed the sword of fate back to 
Murray.

Murray stepped up to grab a little bit of history and could be excused for 
trembling, as he had done at the start – as he had done when stepping up to 
serve out against Djokovic to win Wimbledon in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/07/andy-murray-wimbledon-2013-novak-djokovic>
.

Djokovic saved two championship points but his own hand shook surely as he 
thrust his closing forehand long. The crowd were on the very edge of civility, 
but understandably so.
 