
For the seventh year in a row, Andy Murray is in the quarter-finals of the 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. As 
impressive as that number is, and as big a relief as was his dismissal of 
Bernard Tomic in three sets on Monday to get there, it was an uneven 
performance, gritty rather than fluent.

If Novak Djokovic’s perverse five-set struggle on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/novak-djokovic-toils-in-error-strewn-australian-open-win-over-gilles-simon>
 gave him heart – Murray said beforehand it would take a degradation of the 
Serb’s hitherto dominant tennis for a rival to take his title off him – the 
world No2 knows he has work of his own to do. He had served well in his first 
three matches but not so convincingly this time, his reliability on first visit 
to the baseline rarely getting over 60%, and sliding to 44% in the third set, 
as he won 6-4, 6-4, 7-6 in two and a half hours.

It should have and could have been easier, as he conceded afterwards.

Andy Murray beats Bernard Tomic: Australian Open – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/25/andy-murray-bernard-tomic-australian-open-live>
“It was a tough match,” he said courtside. “Both of us had our chances. He 
fought right to the end, but I just was able to make a few more balls. It was 
quite a scrappy match. Neither of us played our best tennis at the same time.”

The frustration and disappointment arising from failures in four previous 
finals here is not easily erased. And, although Murray’s fourth win of the draw 
should comfort him, he will have to serve better than he did against the world 
No17 Tomic if he is to beat his old sparring partner, David Ferrer, on 
Wednesday, and reach the semi-finals.

“David played a great match against Lleyton the other day,” Murray observed, 
“and he must have played well tonight to beat John Isner. He’s been at the top 
of the game for nearly 10 years now. It’s going to be tricky.”

If Murray beats Ferrer (which he has done 12 times out of 18) he will have to 
get past either Gaël Monfils or Milos Raonic for a shot at the defending 
champion – if Djokovic is waiting for him there again. That is probable but no 
longer certain. There are lingering doubts about his fitness.

Playing in Rod Laver Arena – where his father-in-law Nigel Sears collapsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/nigel-sears-given-green-light-to-fly-home-after-australian-open-collapse>
 on Saturday night while he was oblivious to the drama during his fretful 
four-set win over João Sousa – might have been an eerie experience for Murray, 
as he acknowledged later. “The last few days were very tough,” he said, “a lot 
of emotions, things changing in my mind, very stressful.”

But he could not afford to be distracted – and Murray must have been relieved 
that Sears, the father of his pregnant wife, Kim, was fit enough to fly out of 
Melbourne back to London as he was putting the finishing touches to his victory.

As good as Tomic is, Murray would seem to have his number, because their 
styles gel nicely – and the Australian is yet to take a set off him in four 
attempts, although he came close here.

Murray was again awake to his ever nuanced groundstrokes, of which there were 
many. It was a thinker’s match, not a street fight, and Murray seemed to enjoy 
it immensely, apart from a few wretched patches when his concentration deserted 
him.

He could not have started better, breaking in the first game. Would it be a 
procession? Not quite. As Murray threw the ball up to serve at the start of the 
third game, he stopped and complained to the chair umpire that the live video 
feed was still running on the big screen in his eyeline. The issue was quickly 
resolved. Murray held with an ace.

But his focus slipped in the fourth game and Tomic got the better of a long 
rally to get back on level terms when Murray shoved a backhand into the net.

Murray got two break points after a 32-shot rally in the sixth game with an 
angled drop shot that Tomic could only applaud – and then the Australian made a 
present of his serve with a loose forehand into the tramlines.

Johanna Konta beats Ekaterina Makarova to reach Australian Open last eight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/johanna-konta-beats-ekaterina-makarova-to-reach-australian-open-last-eight>
Tomic’s serve fell to pieces and Murray broke to love for 5-2. The 
free-hitting Queenslander found three stunning groundstrokes that left Murray 
standing in the eighth game, but he survived the dip and served out the set to 
15.

The second followed a similar pattern, Murray not quite putting the points to 
bed as quickly as he would like, but he toughed it out.

In the third, the contest got tighter. Tomic, so often accused of indifference 
on court but actually comfortable in his relaxed and potent style, pressed 
Murray all the way. His fastest serve of the evening, 127mph down the middle, 
got him out of deuce in the 11th game and a 10th ace helped him to a vital hold.

Murray forced the tie-break, and raised his first-serve percentage above 70, 
which applied unbearable pressure on Tomic. Murray swapped ends 4-2 up with the 
ball in his hand and thrashed his 17th ace. Tomic’s lassitude did the rest. 
Tired shots gifted Murray four match points. Tomic saved three of them, but 
could do little but belt a wide, away-swinging serve long to confirm Murray’s 
place in the last eight again.
 