
As Andy and Jamie Murray prepared for their assault on an unprecedented double 
here this weekend – No1 in the world in singles and doubles, respectively – the 
brothers reflected on one of the most remarkable journeys in British sport.

“We’re probably each other’s biggest fans,” Andy said of their relationship 
after making short work of an underdone Stan Wawrinka on Friday to book a sixth 
meeting this year against Milos Raonic in the first semi-final of the Barclays
ATP World Tour Finals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals>
. If he goes on to win his first title here in 10 attempts, he will also hold 
at bay the late charge by Novak Djokovic for the No1 spot he took from him in 
Paris 11 days ago. Djokovic plays Kei Nishikori in the other semi-final, and is 
looking dangerous again.

Andy Murray says era of tennis’s big four could be over
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/andy-murray-atp-tour-finals-tennis-big-four-rafael-nadal-roger-federer>
“It’s really special to get to watch what he’s achieved in the biggest 
competitions in the sport,” Murray said of the brother who is 15 months older 
than him and who has made his name in the less physical but no less artful 
discipline of doubles, adding two slams to his résumé with his Brazilian 
playing partner, Bruno Soares, this year. “Neither of us ever would have 
expected this when we were growing up. We need to try and enjoy it.”

Earlier, Jamie had it confirmed that he and Soares would finish the season as 
the best doubles team in the world after his former team‑mate John Peers and 
the Finn Henri Kontinen froze the Frenchman Pierre-Hugues Herbert and Nicolas 
Mahut out of the rankings equation with a 6-7, 6-4, 10-6 win. “It was a strange 
way to do it in the end,” Jamie said later. “We’ve had a great year. We didn’t 
win loads of tournaments but we won the right ones. We had a great start here 
winning our three group matches and it is really exciting to do it.”

The success of the Murray brothers began, as everyone knows, in Dunblane 
nearly 30 years ago, inspired by their mother, Judy, and cheered on loudly by 
the rest of their family, including their father, Willie, who remarries there 
in two weeks’ time.

“We used to play against each other all of the time pretty much until we were 
like 12 to 14,” Andy said. “That was when we went our separate paths, really. 
Jamie went down to Cambridge for, nine months or so, then he went off to Paris, 
and I went off to Spain when I was 15.

“Between 12 and say 17 and 18, we didn’t spend loads of time together. But 
before then, pretty much every time we went to practise or play tennis, it was 
together. We played probably four hours a week. It wasn’t like loads. But we 
did play golf together. We played squash together, table tennis. We were always 
competing against each other from a young age. Now we obviously don’t.”

Andy Murray v Stan Wawrinka: ATP World Tour Finals – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/18/andy-murray-v-stan-wawrinka-atp-world-tour-finals-live>
And who was better, who hurt more, who was more competitive? He paused, 
adding: “When we were really young, Jamie would have won most things we did. He 
was 15 months older, so he was bigger and stronger and better than me at most 
things. He was smarter than me. As we got older and physically were on more of 
a level playing field, we were pretty close at most things. Jamie is a really 
good golfer. He was better at that. Football, probably me. Squash and table 
tennis, more of the racket sports, it was pretty close between the two of us 
... Well, that’s my recollection of it. He might say something a bit different.”

Still scrapping brothers, after all these years.

As for the challenge ahead, Murray knows better than anyone inside or outside 
his world that Djokovic is as lethal now as at any time in his career, wounded 
but regathering the strength that ebbed from his body and spirit after ashock 
early exit at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/02/wimbledon-2016-novak-djokovic-on-the-brink-against-sam-querrey>
, and, if they meet in the final on Sunday for the 35th time, it is likely to 
be as intense an examination of their wills as the best of the other contests. 
The Serb was hugely impressive whendefeating the late substitute David Goffin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/novak-djokovic-beats-david-goffin-atp-world-tour-finals-tennis>
 on Thursday night.

Murray’s 6-4, 6-2 win in an hour and 26 minutes against Wawrinka was good but, 
apart from the first half-hour, it was not much of a contest. Murray broke once 
from four attempts in the first set and took two of three chances in the 
second, serving out untroubled, adding just his third ace and then forcing a 
final dreadful forehand from Wawrinka, who looked more relieved than devastated.

Wawrinka’s 29 winners just edged his unforced errors (27), but they were not 
all the result of adventurous tennis; there were a lot of what cricketers call 
“get out shots”‚ balls flying wildly from all parts of his uncontrolled racket.

Murray’s game was far more disciplined. He won 67 of the 118 points contested 
and did pretty much everything needed to put away a dangerous opponent who 
plainly was off his game.

As the Swiss said later: “He made me hesitate – when to go, when to stay back. 
That’s why he’s so good. That’s why he’s No1. He’s full of confidence.”
 