
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> capped a glorious 
year, in which he lifted the Wimbledon title, stormed to Olympic gold and 
became the first British tennis player to reach No 1 in the world, by winning 
Sports Personality of the Year for a record third time.

Murray, a massive 1-7 on favourite with bookmakers beforehand, beat the gold 
medal-winning triathlete Alistair Brownlee into second place, with 58-year-old 
showjumperNick Skelton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/veteran-showjumper-nick-skelton-olympic-gold-big-time>
, who became the oldest British gold medallist since 1908 in Rio, in third.

Speaking from his training camp in Miami after being presented with his award 
by former world heavyweight champion Lennox Lewis, Murray paid special tribute 
to his wife, Kim, and daughter, Sophia Olivia, but added: “I’ve got a bone to 
pick with my wife, who told me an hour ago she had voted for Nick Skelton! It’s 
not smart of her with Christmas coming up. But I appreciate everyone’s support. 
It’s been an amazing year for British sport and I’m proud to have played a part 
in it.”

Skelton said he was grateful for the support of Murray’s wife but added: “She 
didn’t vote enough!”

Murray, who won nine titles and reached the final of 13 of the 17 tournaments 
he entered in 2016, described it “as the best year of my career and a great 
year for British tennis”. He added: “Jo Konta finished in the top 10, my 
brother was No 1 in the doubles and Gordon Reid and Andy Lapthorne did well in 
the Paralympics, so I’m proud to be a part of that.”

Murray, who became a father for the first time this year, said his parenthood 
had been a big influence on his success. “I’ve loved it,” he said. “It was a 
challenge at the start but it made me realise there was more to life than just 
my sport. It’s obviously helped my performances on the court.”

He also revealed that top half of the trophy was broken – and he had been 
worried about it falling apart on TV. “They didn’t tell me how it got broken, 
but I was told that if I won I had to hold it close to my body so it didn’t 
fall over on the camera,” he said. “After the problems that Lennox and I the 
last time we did this [when there was botched handover in 2012, when he came 
third], I listened to them.”


It would have been entirely understandable if Murray had eased up after 
winning the Wimbledon final in July and Olympic gold a month later. Instead he 
raced around the world, racking up a series of titles in Beijing, Shanghai, 
Vienna and Paris before, finally, beating Novak Djokovic in the ATP Tour final 
to take his No 1 crown. But Murray warned it would be tough to remain on top in 
2017. “I’m going to give it my best shot but it’s going to be hard,” he added.

Sports Personality was once regarded as mildly diverting pre-Christmas froth 
but this year it was bigger than ever, with a record 16-strong shortlist and a 
running time of more than two hours. There were also 12,000 paying spectators 
at the Genting Arena – at one point the queue to get in snaked all the way back 
to Birmingham International train station.

Such was the strength of the shortlist, which included 13 Olympic and 
Paralympic gold medallists, that the triple Tour de France winner Chris Froome 
and Sir Bradley Wiggins, whose exploits in Rio made him the most decorated 
British athlete in Olympic history, missed out. The heavyweight champion 
Anthony Joshua also failed to make the grade, as did Alastair Cook, who became 
the first Englishman to hit 10,000 Test runs.

Murray got 247,419 votes – more than double that of Brownlee, who won 121,665 
votes, and Skelton who had 109,197. Mo Farah, who won Olympic 5,000m and 
10,000m gold, was fourth with 54,476 votes.

Meanwhile, the other big winners on the night were Leicester City, who were 
rewarded for their stunning Premier League title victory with two awards – team 
of the year and coach of the year forClaudio Ranieri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/claudio-ranieri>.


The US gymnast Simone Biles was named Overseas Sports Personality of the Year, 
while swimmerMichael Phelps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michaelphelps> 
was honoured with a Lifetime Achievement Award after taking his medal tally to 
23 gold medals – 28 overall – with a series of victories at the Rio Olympics. 
Ben Smith, who ran 401 marathons in 401 days to raise money for Kidscape and 
Stonewall after suffering years of mental and physical bullying, won the Helen 
Rollason Award.

 