
Andy Murray remains on course to defend his Madrid Open title after beating 
Rafael Nadal in straight sets in their semi-final but will have to overcome the 
world No1, Novak Djokovic, in Sunday’s final. Murray, whose only previous 
victory on clay against the nine-time French Open championcame in last year’s 
final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/10/andy-murray-clay-rafael-nadal-madrid>
, silenced the home fans inside the Caja Mágica with a 7-5, 6-4 win in two 
hours and 11 minutes.

The world No2 raced into a 4-1 lead in the opening set and although Nadal 
broke back and got on level terms at 5-5, Murray broke serve to love in the 
12th game, sealing the set with a thumping forehand return winner.

Rafael Nadal says he and his rivals are totally clean of drugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/07/rafael-nadal-rivals-totally-clean-drugs>
Nadal came out fighting in the second set and Murray had to save seven break 
points in his first four service games, before needing only one chance to break 
for a 4-2 lead. Murray served for the match at 5-3 but was unable to convert 
his first match point as Nadal broke back, only for the world No5 to tamely 
surrender his own serve in the next game.

“I think I used my forehand pretty good during the match and I was able to 
push him back behind the baseline,” Murray told Sky Sports. “I felt like I made 
a lot of returns in play so was able to make him work hard in his service games.

“Rafa doesn’t serve as hard as everyone else but he puts a lot of pressure on 
your return because if you don’t hit a good one he dictates the point straight 
away with the forehand. I was able to get some quite good direction on the 
returns and I think that helped me a lot today.”

Nadal had recovered from a set down to beat Murray in the Monte Carlo 
semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/16/rafael-nadal-andy-murray-monte-carlo>
 last month, which made saving three break points in the first game of the 
second set even more vital.

Murray added: “The beginning of the second set in Monte Carlo he came out 
having lost the first and really raised his intensity and I didn’t. Today that 
first game in the beginning of the second, again he raised the intensity and 
had a few break point chances but I felt like I raised my level as well.

“It’s easy after winning a tight first set to drop your intensity or your 
level and I really tried to stay on top at the beginning of the second and that 
was important.”

After beating Tomas Berdych in the quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/06/andy-murray-madrid-open-tomas-berdych-semi-final>
, Murray spoke about the improvements he had made to his serve recently and 
revealed that involved his own research as well as working with his brother 
Jamie’s coach, Louis Cayer.

“I spoke to a number of coaches who work with younger players to develop 
technique, just to understand different grips, different positions to stand on 
the court as well, the ideal spot to make contact with the serve,” Murray said.

“I spent a bit of time with Louis Cayer before Monte Carlo and watched a lot 
of videos. Sometimes you can get into bad habits over the years because when 
you become a professional you don’t do as much technical work, it’s more 
tactical and physical work.”

Djokovic needed just short of two hours to battle past Kei Nishikori 6-3, 7-6. 
The Serb withstood a blistering start from his opponent and appeared to be 
fully in control only to blow four match points at 5-4 in the second set.

But he regrouped and made no mistake on his fifth chance in the tie-break. 
Djokovic has won 11 of his last 12 matches against Murray, most recently in 
the final of the Australian Open in January.
 