
Andy Murray stands on the verge of tennis history yet again. He knows a win 
overStan Wawrinka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka> in the 
semi-finals of the French Open on Friday will put him in his first final here – 
completing the list for all four majors and becoming the first British player 
to get to the concluding day in Paris since Bunny Austin in 1937.

Andy Murray battles past Richard Gasquet in French Open quarter-finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/01/andy-murray-richard-gasquet-french-open-quarter-finals>
But Murray is not content just to arrive. He wants to leave with his third 
slam trophy, aware that will almost certainly mean beating Novak Djokovic in 
the final.

“I’m here to try to win the tournament, not to just make the final,” Murray 
said after coming from a set and 3-1 down in the second-set tie-break to beat 
the briefly inspired then ultimately bewildered FrenchmanRichard Gasquet 5-7, 
7-6 (7-3), 6-0, 6-2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/01/andy-murray-richard-gasquet-french-open-quarter-finals>
 in the quarter-finals on a cool, cloudy but generally dry Wednesday afternoon 
on Court Philippe Chatrier.

“The last two years here Stan has played great tennis. He’s been at the top of 
the game for a number of years and is still improving,” Murray said. “He’s been 
a little bit inconsistent this year, but won a tournament last week and has 
been playing better with each match here. It will be very tough. He plays well 
on that court. I’ll have to play great tennis to beat him.”

Earlier on Chatrier, Djokovic, the world No1 and still favourite to win the 
title, moved into the quarters after finishing his held-over match against the 
No14 seed, Roberto Bautista Agut, 3-6, 6-4, 6-1, 7-5.

If, as expected, Djokovic beats Tomas Berdych on Thursday, then either Dominic 
Thiem or David Goffin on Friday, he will have played four best-of-five matches 
in four days, with only Saturday off, to reach the final.

“I remember early in my career I played a match against [the former world No4 
Nicolas] Kiefer at Wimbledon for five days,” Djokovic said. “That was the 
longest I have played one match. This is probably the second longest. Same 
reason: raining.”

He added: “Once you accept the circumstances and the decision is that you 
play, then you have to go with it. It’s the same for you and your opponent. But 
it was a great mental test for all of us, yesterday the entire day. I’m, in a 
way, glad to have a match like this, because it’s a challenge that you need to 
overcome mentally.”

Serena Williams beats Elina Svitolina to reach French Open quarter-finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/01/serena-williams-beats-elina-svitolina-french-open>
Murray said he was obviously aware of the logjam on the other side of the 
draw, although it was not at the forefront of his thoughts. “The weather has 
been challenging the last few days for everyone involved. But right now, 
players have to be selfish and look at their own matches and try their best to 
get through them. It’s been a tough few days for everyone, but especially the 
players in the top half.”

Murray identified the turning point against Gasquet at a set down and 1-3 in 
the tie-break. “I was creating a lot of chances and wasn’t taking them,” he 
admitted. “But that stretch of five or six points was huge from 3-1 in the 
tie-break. I served double fault, 2-1, and then my next two serves were aces. I 
remember at 3-2, he hit a drop shot backhand which hit the tape. I got a good 
contact on a return at three-all. Those points there changed the match.”

It was then that Murray took a little of the zest out of an overwhelmingly and 
predictably one-sided crowd, who had cheered their player on through some of 
his best tennis to that point, but now began to worry that he would collapse on 
his first visit to the quarter-finals of his home tournament.

“I have played in worse atmospheres,” Murray said. “For sure, the crowd were 
behind him, but it wasn’t too bad.”

He added: “I think I played some really good stuff today. I do think I played 
well. Obviously the match could have been maybe more comfortable had I done a 
bit better serving out the first two sets.”
 