
I worked in a restaurant where the house speciality was mutton chops, so 
everything reeked of fat, penetrating every pore, follicle and piece of 
clothing, as if I’d been rolling around in sheep guts. It was the first thing I 
smelled in the morning and the last at night. But I didn’t have any friends 
outside the business. It’s one of the reasons chefs hang with each other – who 
else will love our smells?

As a youngster, in New Jersey, I was fed normal pedestrian American home 
cooking – meatloaf and hamburgers – although I do recall a copy ofJulia Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/us-news-blog/2012/aug/15/julia-child-100th-birthday-blog>
’sMastering the Art of French Cooking high up on the refrigerator and how on 
special nights, when guests visited and mysterious adult stuff went on 
downstairs, the powerful smell of scallops with mushrooms in white wine sauce 
(Coquilles St Jacques) drifted upstairs.

At the age of nine, I went on the Queen Mary – being served vichyssoise, a 
word I loved – for my first trip to France, where boys were allowed 
watered-down wine and cigarettes on Sundays. But our parents left me and my 
little brother in the car outside La Pyramide (in Vienne), while they dined 
inside. I reacted by requesting oysters and dishes they found repulsive and 
becoming increasingly adventurous in my tastes. It wasn’t about the food but 
about getting a reaction.

I only became happy – in fact, intensely satisfied – as a dishwasher at a 
restaurant in Provincetown in Cape Cod, my first job. I was a shy, goofy, 
awkward teenager. But in this blue collar, factory-like environment, there was 
no blurred line, no grey area, no philosophical question to fret over. Dishes 
had to go in the washer and come out taintless and doing this swiftly and 
competently meant I was acknowledged as a human being by colleagues I wanted to 
be like. The day they promoted me to dunking fries I was overjoyed.

It was watching chef Bobby screwing a bride over a barrel in the garbage area, 
while her wedding party dined inside, that made me want to be a chef. But it 
was awkward and didn’t make sense. It was the first time I’d seen anyone having 
sex and I didn’t understand the bride’s motivation. Although I understand it 
very well now.

The line cook I especially respected was Beth Aretsky, aka “The Grill Bitch”; 
a very sturdy, hard, capable, profane woman at a time when there weren’t many 
women in the kitchen. When a Moroccan chef felt her ass she grabbed and spun 
him, then dry-humped him brutally over a cutting board. Like many early women 
in the business she was twice as tough as the men. Despite how she bossed us, 
we’d go to her – often crying – for advice and support when having trouble with 
girlfriends. She wasn’t having any of that either.

The crew at Mario’s restaurant spoke in this fantastic polyglot language 
incorporating Portuguese fishing dialect, Elizabethan poetry and Marine Corp 
profanities. And it was with Mario’s Dmitri – such an influence on my career – 
that I formed ‘Moonlight Menus’ and created elaborate banquets for pizza 
magnates and drug dealers. When Dmitri designed tableaus on the sides of hams 
he did so with a dry, fantastic, acidic and self-punishing wit. He made fun of 
his propensity towards failure and disappointment, often, but he was a very 
creative, skilled and bright guy, who was different than anybody else I’d met 
and very inspiring. Some of it was impressive for its time. I mean, no one else 
was doing pâté en croute and huge galantines in aspic, elaborate chaud-froid 
presentations and Marie-Antoine Carême and Auguste Escoffier-era set pieces in 
1975. Nobody. (Although if Daniel Boulud, who’s since done these things, saw 
the quality I don’t think he would be dazzled or impressed by our technique, to 
put it kindly.)

The mafia were everywhere back then. But now you have to look for them. The 
Racketeering & Corrupt Organisation Act – which meant any member of an 
organisation could be prosecuted for the same crime as the leader of that 
organisation – restricted the crime families’ involvement in the fish and meat 
markets. And we’re reaching the shallow end of the gene pool in a lot of these 
families – the sons are all cokeheads and don’t have the same values as their 
dads’. The restaurant world ain’t what it used to be.

Steven Moore, my sous chef during the ‘90s, was the best one for practical 
jokes. If someone only put a potato in his shoe, he’d remove the door from 
their locker and fill it high with porn mags. (Sometimes he used to arrive at 
work with sperm on his shoes.) I still appreciate that he had no shame 
whatsoever – an admirable quality, of sorts. But I’ve no connection with him 
now, since it is my belief that he sold a dick pic of me to the gossip site TMZ.

I’m proud that in the last few years as a professional chef, however upset I 
was with staff, we’d still be able to have a beer together at the end of the 
night, without ill-will. I’d put aside my psychotic rage, after many years 
being awful to line cooks, abusive to waiters, bullying to dishwashers. It’s 
terrible – and counter-productive – to make people feel idiots for working hard 
for you. Nowadays I still have a rather withering ability to be sarcastic and 
displeased but I’m not screaming at anyone.

I was an unhappy soul, with a huge heroin and then crack problem. I hurt, 
disappointed and offended many, many, many people and I regret a lot. It’s a 
shame I have to live with.

I like to hear music while I cook, but nothing too headbangy any more. Curtis 
Mayfield, Marvin Gaye, pre-disco funk, Isaac Hayes and Brothers Johnson and I’m 
happy.


If I examine my body now, nude in the mirror, there’s not too much damage to 
be seen. The burns, flesh marks and knife scars prevalent 14 years ago, before 
I moved into TV, have mostly faded. The damage sustained from handling lobsters 
and shrimp – the inflammations and skin rashes – have improved with time. My 
hands are pretty soft. My right hand is mangled with arthritis, from holding a 
whisk improperly for so many years, causing calluses to push bones out of 
joint. But I’m in much better shape than I’ve probably ever been. I travel 250 
days a year. I’m lean, my alcohol bloat has gone and I do Brazilian jiu-jitsu 
every day.

As I get older my tastes become simpler. The foods that make me reliably 
happy, that have a real emotional appeal, are a simple bowl of regional pasta, 
spicy noodles sold in Vietnam, or anybody’s grandmother’s meatloaf.

It’s a lethal error to always critically evaluate meals. I’ve certainly learnt 
to take food less seriously and try whenever possible to experience it 
emotionally rather than as a professional or critic. I like nothing more than 
seeing my daughter Ariane eating and liking food.

When you’ve seen what I’ve seen on a regular basis it changes your world view. 
I’ve spent such a lot of time in the developing world, I was caught in a war in 
Beirut, been in Liberia, the Congo, Iraq and Libya and realised how fast things 
can get bad, how arbitrary good fortune and cruelty and death. I suppose I’ve 
learnt humility. Or something.

The great Warren Zevon was asked, close to death, whether he had any important 
words of wisdom to pass on and he said, “Enjoy every sandwich.” I definitely 
enjoy my sandwiches, given how low I fell and how likely it was that there was 
going to be a different and tragic outcome. I’m a pretty lucky man. I enjoy my 
food and presentingParts Unknown. I have the best job in the world.


• Appetites: A Cookbook by Anthony Bourdain is published by Bloomsbury (£26). 
To order a copy for £22.10 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/appetites-a-cookbook.html> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99

This article was taken from Observer Food Monthly on 15th January 2017. Click 
here 
<https://imvoucher.uk/Templates/register/go/4/register.aspx?INTCMP=gdnwb_mawns_editorial_newspapers_Jan-newspapers-editorialfoot_>
 to get the Observer for half price.

 