
A smartphone application enabling women to report incidents of harassment to 
police in Pakistan’s Punjab province went live this week as authorities step up 
efforts to promote women’s safety in one of the worst provinces for crimes 
against them.


 With a click of a button, users who feel threatened can call an emergency 
response police team who should be able to track their location via a built-in 
global positioning system (GPS).

Bangalore police chief: no evidence of 'mass molestation'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/bangalore-police-chief-no-evidence-of-mass-molestation>
 “Though the app primarily covers street harassment, it also has a feature for 
woman who is inside the house and is suffering physical violence to call for 
help,” said Fauzia Viqar, chair of the Punjab Commission on the Status of 
Women, a body promoting women’s rights, which was involved in the launch of the 
app on Thursday.

 She said users can also use the app to mark unsafe locations and access a 
toll-free helpline which provides information on laws to protect women’s rights 
among other services.

Domestic abuse, economic discrimination and acid attacks make Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> the world’s third-most-dangerous 
country for women, a 2011 Thomson Reuters Foundation expert poll showed.

 About 500 women are killed in Pakistan every year at the hands of relatives 
over perceived damage to family “honour” that can involve eloping, fraternising 
with men or any other infraction against conservative values.

 A study by the Aurat Foundation, a Pakistani women’s rights group, in 2013 
found that Punjab province alone accounted for 5,800 crimes against women - 74% 
of crimes against women in the whole of Pakistan.

 Women’s rights campaigners welcomed the launch of the app but expressed 
concern not all women would have access to it.

 “It can ensure timely rescue. But it may not be effective in rural areas 
where people are generally poor and do not have smartphone,” said Romana 
Bashir, who heads women’s rights organisation, the Peace and Development 
Foundation.

 She also said there was a need to raise awareness among police officers of 
violence against women.

 “We often have complaints of police themselves sometimes misbehaving with the 
complainants of harassment. They need to be educated on gender issues so that 
women trust them,” Bashir told the Thomson Reuters Foundation.

 Last year, the province of Punjab, Pakistan’s largest, passed a law giving 
legal protection to women from domestic, psychological and sexual violence.

 But since the law’s passage, many conservative clerics and religious leaders 
have denounced it as being in conflict with the Muslim holy book, the Koran, 
and the constitution.
 