
Chile's Marcelo Rios, who in 1998 was briefly world No1, faces a ban from 
forthcoming events, including the French Open, after allegedly assaulting a 
taxi driver and two policemen in Rome early yesterday.

Mark Miles, the Association of Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Professionals' chief executive, was 
quick to call for a review of the incident. "It is important we act immediately 
to get all the facts surrounding this issue so we can properly consider what 
further steps may be necessary," he said.

Charges of resisting arrest and injuring public officials have been lodged 
against Rios who, the police claim, was drunk. The incident is doubly 
embarrassing for Miles because an ATP official was apparently also involved, 
although no charges were brought against any of the four people with Rios.

All five had been in a nightclub, Rios having lost his second-round match at 
the Foro Italico on Wednesday against Spain's Juan Carlos Ferrero. The police 
became involved when a taxi driver complained he had been struck. At this point 
Rios is alleged to have attacked two officers.

After three years in the top 10, Rios struggled with injury last year and 
dropped to No37. He returned to winning form in January by taking the Qatar 
Open in Doha, the 17th title of his career, but since then the mercurial 
25-year-old has won only five of 15 tour matches and his growing frustration 
was in evidence against Ferrero.

Rios launched his career by reaching the Australian Open final in 1998, where 
he lost to the Czech Petr Korda, and that season won major titles in Indian 
Wells, Key Biscayne and Rome. But after that his career stalled.

His often surly attitude has not endeared him to his fellow professionals, and 
for three successive years he was voted the Prix citron (Lemon award) by 
journalists at the French Open for his sour manner.

On court in the Rome Masters Series yesterday, rain disrupted several 
third-round matches. South Africa's Wayne Ferreira, who knocked out Greg 
Rusedski in the previous round, reached the quarter-finals with a 7-6, 6-2 win 
over Switzerland's Roger Federer, and there were also wins for Israel's Harel 
Levy and Sweden's Andreas Vinciguerra.

France's Julien Boutter, who beat Tim Henman 2-6, 6-3, 6-4 on Wednesday night, 
was trailing Ferrero 5-2 when the rain came, and Spain's Alex Corretja led 
Lleyton Hewitt of Australia 7-6, 4-3.
 