
Before Arthur Ashe met Jimmy Connors in the South African final at 
Johannesburg in 1973, that match which meant so much to him, he wrote in his 
journal: "I have a fair right to be confident, my best strokes go to his 
weaknesses. My backhand is better than his forehand so I'll play him down the 
line a lot, or right down the middle and refuse to give him the angles. Also 
because he likes to work with speed, I'll try to vary the pace on my shots. I 
expect to attack his second serve and lob him because his overhead is lacking. 
I'll hit over the ball, too."

Connors won that match 6-1, 7-6, 6-3 after Ashe held a point for the second 
set. Never anything but tidy, studious and methodical, he afterward noted 
Connors' ground-strokes: "I was more impressed than I expected to be." But he 
found Connors' serve nothing special and when at last he worked in a few lobs 
he felt he could hit with him off the ground.

At Wimbledon, where Ashe at last beat him by 6-1, 6-1, 5-7, 6-3, Connors had 
left behind a trail of destruction on the way to the final. There had been 
explosions everywhere. His aggression had been like Hemingway's description of 
artillery: "You see the flash, then you hear the crack and at last the shell 
comes." Ashe, who had decided earlier in the year that he would meet him in the 
final, watched Connors against Raul Ramirez ("Ramirez had the right idea, but 
he changed his game") and in his devastating semi final against Roscoe Tanner 
("Watching Roscoe told me how not to play him. I knew that I had to be 
restrained in my game.") For Ashe, with the experience of South Africa and a 
week of close observation to draw upon, the final was an exercise in the art of 
taming a champion.

He approached it almost as though he was going to play Connors at chess, with 
a strategy deeply considered and carefully rehearsed. Connors' idea of 
preparation for the final was to go out to one of Wimbledon's distant courts 
watched by a large crowd and practice hilariously with Nastase who entertained 
himself by parodying Ashe's style. Funny certainly, but would the businesslike 
Mrs King have allowed Martina Navratilova and Julie Anthony, her sparring 
partners in the last hour before the women's final the amusement of imitating 
Mrs Cawley? "Connors didn't train for this Wimbledon like he did for his 
challenge matches at Las Vegas against Laver and Newcombe," said Ashe.

The beginning was important on Saturday. Connors might have exploded at the 
start, kicking over the chess board and breaking the pieces before Ashe could 
lay down the tactical lines. But he seemed to take the match too lightly. It is 
hard to be an odds-on favourite in an individual sport like boxing or tennis 
and maybe he had been too dominating in the early rounds. Or perhaps he was 
over confident because he had beaten Ashe in three previous matches. He won his 
first service game 40 love, slipped to 40-30 before Ashe returned a backhand 
into the net but then he did not win another service game until he held service 
for 1-3 in the second set. In the first game Ashe took charge immediately, 
winning his first service game comfortably. The first break was dramatic, 
Connors' lash of a smash was well out but the linesman did not call and the 
crowd, who had become so critical of umpiring standards in this country since 
that disastrous day at Bournemouth, roared and bellowed at him until he told 
the umpire that he had been unsighted and the point was rightly given to Ashe.

There had been a great deal of emotion before the match. The lawsuits and all 
the other rivalries had added to the tension and that incident enabled the 
partisans on both sides to show their allegiance. "Is this Wimbledon? I have 
been coming here for 20 years and have never heard the crowd like that," said a 
Turkish journalist. Connors played the next two points as though he was 
determined to be revenged on the whole pack of them, but then Ashe took command 
again, making everything as difficult as possible for him. The South African 
strategy was plain. Nothing to hit; variations of speed; a great deal of 
awkward slice, doubly effective on the dry court; lobs in plenty (which must 
have been a surprise because Ashe is famous for forgetting to use the lob); 
fine bowled smashes to counter Connors' lobs; accurate serves, particularly 
those kicks to the left-handers double handed backhand which were such a joke 
when Nastase counterfeited them. ("Playing Roche in the semi-finals gave me the 
practice I needed for serving a left-hander," said Ashe; and most surprising of 
all, brilliant volleying. He always seemed to be guessing right at the net. He 
was always in a position to put the ball away.

This was Ashe's eleventh Wimbledon and up to now the low forehand volley has 
always been his glaring weakness. Laver in particular profited from it on the 
centre court, but on Saturday against another left-hander he took total command 
of the set. "It wasn't difficult to volley well against a guy who just hit the 
ball at 100mph. If I put my racket there it went screaming back," he said. 
Everything else went according to plan. The lawn tennis thinker was in total 
control. Hamlet had spotted Laertes, was thrusting the poisoned cup down the 
king's throat and winning envenomed points everywhere. Against Roche he had 
hesitated but the last act was crammed with dynamic action.

As Connors struggled and Ashe ruled, the crowd became totally involved. Double 
faults were applauded passionately and there were so many cries from the 
galleries that the umpire angrily demanded silence. "Come on Connors," shouted 
one man at 0-3 in the second set. "I'm trying for Christ's sake," said the 
American. One romantic foreign journalist, who clearly had not been reading 
through the gossip columns, thought he said: "I'm trying for Chrissie's sake." 
"He likes all that stuff with the crowd," said Ashe afterwards.

He meditated between points shutting his eyes and sitting totally relaxed. 
Neither his friends nor opponents were able to do that. Bill Riordan, Connors' 
manager, kept bouncing up and down in the courtside box. Donald Dell, ATP's 
lawyer and Ashe's agent sat in front of him, almost biting off his own right 
hand with anxiety. Next to Riordan was an unidentified man who kept applauding 
loudly everything that Ashe did. Exasperated, Connors' manager asked him who he 
was, "I'm Arthur's personal physician," said the stranger. Mrs Connors made 
gestures of encouragement to the failing champion but the second set had gone 
before she showed signs of coming to terms with Ashe's shrewd attack. All those 
coaches who criticised the double handed backhand must have been delighted to 
see how Ashe exploited the vulnerabilities of the best double handed backhand 
in the world on Saturday.

He could have won in straight sets. He broke Connors for 3-2 in the third, 
then lost his service but had half a dozen points to break in other games. 
Connors had looked at the message of advice that he keeps in his sock but it 
had not done much good. Then, when Ashe was serving at 5-5 and 30 all, a pigeon 
flew low over the court. Was it carrying another message for Connors? Certainly 
he responded, by hitting two fierce forehands to take the set. He led 3-0 but 
Ashe counter-attacked immediately. "I expected him to break my serve a lot, 
maybe more than he did. At 0-3 in the fourth I didn't worry too much. It was 
only one break against me said Ashe.

After that, the rest was comparatively silent. The odds-on-favourite was 
lobbed, dinked, teased, passed, out-rallied, and frustrated. "Today I just 
lost. Everyone must realise that every time I go on the court I can lose. You 
guys in the press have to realise that as much as anyone. He played well and 
did everything well today. I don't reckon I had an off day. It was just that I 
was playing a better Arthur Ashe. I can't pinpoint any one thing that put me 
off. His forehand was good. His forehand volley is usually his weaker side but 
that was good. He returned well. He served and volleyed very well. That sort of 
thing is pretty hard to play against. I played hard but it was all in vain. If 
I could have won that fourth set I felt that I would have been in with a 
chance. I had a point for 4-1 and I saw the ball well but it came blistering by 
me. But I walked into this tournament with head held high and I go out with my 
head high.

The last shot was a smash as Ashe hammered the ball into an empty space with 
Connors yards away beyond the far sidelines, the first cheers coming from 
William Hill, the official bookmakers. Ashe may have criticised their presence 
at Wimbledon, but he helped more than anyone to make their experimental 
appearance at the Championships a huge success.
 