
Arts spending in England is weighted too heavily towards London at the expense 
of taxpayers and lottery players in other parts of the country, a group of MPs 
has said.

The Commons culture, media and sport select committee highlights a truth which 
has long been generally acknowledged: the capital gets a disproportionately 
high share of cash, whether lottery or grant-in-aid, fromArts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england> (ACE).

John Whittingdale, who chairs the committee, said: “There is a clear imbalance 
in arts funding in favour of London – which the Arts Council itself admits. 
This is unfair on taxpayers and lottery players in other parts of the country, 
as well as limiting access to cultural opportunities and enjoyment across the 
country.”

The report says ACE <http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/> must do more to redress 
the balance and supports the conclusions ofrecent reports on the subject 
written by Peter Stark, Christopher Gordon and David Powell 
<http://www.theroccreport.co.uk/>. They have published figures which show that 
combined Department for Culture, Media and Sport and ACE spending amounts to 
£68.99 per head of population in London and £4.58 in the rest of England. In 
terms of lottery spending on the arts between 1995 and 2013 the figure was £165 
per head in London and £46.77 in London.

It also points out that the population of Westminster has contributed £14.5m 
to the arts lottery and received a benefit of £408m; while people in County 
Durham have given £34m and the area has received just £12m.

The figures on who gets what have been disputed and most people involved in 
the debate recognise the valid reasons for the capital, where most national 
arts organisations are based, getting a bigger share of money.

But the select committee backed the Stark, Gordon and Powell proposal to begin 
redressing the balance by creating a national investment programme of £600m, 
over the five years of a parliament, which would be spent outside London. The 
money would come from reducing lottery spending in the capital.

London’s deputy mayor, Munira Mirza, called the report “shortsighted and 
extremely disappointing”. She added: “It says nothing that addresses the key 
issue affecting arts and culture: reduced arts spending across the board, which 
affects London as much as it does the regions.

“To propose further funding cuts to arts in the capital, with the aim of 
redistributing it amongst the regions, is simplistic at best and dangerous at 
worst. It would seriously undermine London’s status as one of the great world 
cities for culture, whilst bringing marginal benefits outside the capital.”

The select committee report has many warm words for the Arts Council and says 
it recognises the difficulties caused by a fall of a third in its grant in aid 
from the government. “The Arts Council generally does a good job in allocating 
limited resources between many competing demands,” said Whittingdale.

One of the biggest problems facing England’s arts organisations are cuts in 
local authority spending and the report calls on ACE to take “a far more robust 
stance than it already does” with councils such as Westminster, which has cut 
its arts budget by 100%.

Some of the report’s harshest words are directed towards the arts minister, Ed 
Vaizey, for not taking a stronger line against arts-cutting councils. “It 
should go without saying that the government minister with responsibility for 
the arts should use his position to champion the arts at every opportunity, not 
least by having conversations with local authorities. We were staggered to 
learn that such conversations are not commonplace, if they take place at all.”

The committee says it would be disappointed if the Treasury were to further 
reduce money to the ACE and believes it should be increased in the event of 
economic recovery with the cash earmarked for the regions.

ACE’s chairman, Sir Peter Bazalgette, called the report timely, adding: “The 
report suggests that greater urgency is required around the rebalancing debate 
and we are pleased that it has acknowledged that we are tackling this, and that 
there is ‘much to praise in the hard work of the Arts Council’.

“We share the committee’s desire for a speedy response to the historic 
challenges to rebalancing. It is difficult to act urgently when our income is 
shrinking and additional resource would certainly allow for greater flexibility 
in supporting our ambition to achieve this.”
 