
The British government continues to plod along without a Brexit strategy with 
the deadline for invoking article 50 fast approaching. SirIvan Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/brexit-ivan-rogers>, 
head of the British representation in Brussels, recently conceded as much in 
what has become a public resignation. “We do not yet know what the government 
will set as negotiating objectives for the UK’s relationship with the EU after 
exit,” Rogers wrote to staff as he departed.

Related: UK at risk of Brexit ‘catastrophe’ warns Canadian trade expert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/07/uk-at-risk-of-brexit-trade-catastrophe>

His letter makes clear that the UK representation to the EU in Brussels is 
being ignored by Downing Street. With just three months to go until perhaps the 
most important talks in Britain’s history, the negotiating team and the 
parameters for the discussions are still not in place.

“Serious multilateral negotiating experience is in short supply in Whitehall, 
and that is not the case in the Commission or in the Council,” Rogers writes.

This is shaping up to be a one-sided affair. Brexit is a paradox, an effort to 
return to the past and a vision for the future at the same time. After nearly 
45 years as a fully fledged member of the EU the UK wants out. And it has two 
years to cut a deal with the EU.

There is no mutually beneficial deal available between the UK and the EU in 
this time frame. Existing levels of trade and investment will not guarantee a 
positive outcome for the UK. The Brexiters who think they have the upper hand 
are wrong.

Then there are the more mundane aspects of international trade negotiations 
that evidently are not getting a hearing in Whitehall. I write from experience, 
having helped give birth to the Canada-EU Comprehensive Economic and Trade 
Agreement (Ceta).

Related: EU and Canada sign Ceta free trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/eu-canada-sign-ceta-free-trade-deal-trudeau-juncker>

Ceta is a very good agreement between two willing and flexible partners that 
approached negotiations with a positive spirit, seeking to realise the full 
potential of the relationship. It will stand the test of time once implemented. 
However, I certainly did not think that the scoping, negotiation and the 
ratification of the treaty would take more than 10 years. The politicisation of 
the European process of ratification has been most surprising and, at times, 
disconcerting. Rogers’s warning to Downing Street, outlining that the EU 
expects a full UK trade deal to take until the early to mid-2020s, seems a 
realistic timeframe. Undoing nearly 45 years of integration and shared law will 
not be a pleasant experience and represents a clear step backwards.

Why do these agreements take so long? The last generation of trade agreements 
was focused mainly on removing tariffs. Multilaterally, the single biggest 
recent event at the increasingly ineffectual World Trade Organisation has not 
been the conclusion of a successful round, but, rather, China’s accession in 
2001. The next generation of bilateral agreements, of which Ceta is the 
template, is complex. They reflect the realities of modern commerce and go 
beyond trade, touching upon behind-the-border issues such as standards, 
regulation and opening government contracts to competitive bidding. This 
complexity means that the deals take years to negotiate and conclude. In our 
amped up media environment, there are special interests making noise at each 
step in the process, ensuring that trade and investment deals are a marathon, 
not a sprint.

The EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, has stated that the ratification 
process alone for a UK-EU deal would take six months. Based on the experience 
of Ceta it will certainly be longer.

Related: The 'Canadian model': why Ceta isn't a blueprint for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/the-canadian-model-why-ceta-isnt-a-blueprint-for-brexit>

An interim deal is surely now the target – but it seems impossible to achieve 
without UK flexibility on freedom of movement and the role of the European 
courts. This means that a reversion toWTO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/wto> rules and the common tariff schedules 
is the most likely scenario for the UK. Estimates are that this will mean a 4% 
drop in UK GDP versus a 1% loss in the EU, due mainly to the relative sizes of 
their economies. While it would be diminished by the loss of one of its most 
dynamic members, the EU can take the hurt. It has no choice but to do so.

In addition to paving the way for similar deals across the Union which could 
lead to its fragmentation, a sweetheart deal with the UK would be a missed 
opportunity to extract industries back to the continent – banking, autos and 
aerospace to name a few. The Brexit camp seems to be divided into two groups – 
those who believe that an interim deal is possible and those who are not only 
resigned to a WTO outcome, but have actually convinced themselves that the UK 
will be as strong or stronger as a result. This view is held despite the higher 
tariffs, a loss of passporting rights for UK financial institutions and the 
disappearance of agricultural subsidies such an outcome will represent.

Yet a post-EU Britain would pitch itself as a country open for business – free 
of red tape and a great place to invest. Pay no mind the red tape represented 
by those customs barriers into the 450 million-person market that the UK used 
to be part of.

I have not formally advised the UK government but I have had a number of 
informal discussions with officials. While they have always been pleasant (and 
notably friendly towards Canada), my view is that they remain in campaign mode.

Were they willing to realistically discuss options for Brexit, as opposed to 
telling you what they intend to do in a very general sense while dismissing the 
obvious concerns, they may have a chance to minimise the damage from the 
potentially catastrophic decision to leave.

This seems increasingly unlikely. Let’s hope that the courts, parliament and, 
ultimately, the electorate do it for them.

Jason Langrish, the executive director of the Canada Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> Roundtable for Business, worked 
on the Canadian trade deal with the EU
 