
In a week's time all clean-up work will halt on the massive Exxon Valdez oil 
spill in Alaska. Even now,
 comprehension is strained by the immensity of the last March's disaster when 
the tanker hit a reef and
 shed 11 million tonnes of crude oil along 2400 miles of coastline. 

 Six months later the oil patch has spread not only further than the full 
length of Britain's east coast, but
 oozed onto more than 2,400 miles of convoluted Alaskan shoreline and islands. 
So far it is known to
 have killed 32,000 birds, 950 sea otters, nearly 150 bald eagles (America's 
national symbol), nine
 whales, and millions of fish. The final total of dead birds could reach three 
million, according to some
 ornithologists. Other animal victims are seals, deer, foxes, mink, mice, 
river otters, porcupines and
 bears. Even these are conservative figures because most creatures die 
unobserved.

 Exxon, the oil giant, says the weather is now too bad and it will resume in 
the spring, although there is
 no guarantee. Both state officials and fishermen claim useful work could be 
done on mild winter days,
 but after nearly six months and Dollars 650 million the company, which has 
sole responsibility, has had
 enough. 

 Superficially the clean-up statistics are impressive. Compensation to those 
directly suffering financially:
 Dollars 63 million. To wildlife rescue and rehabilitation: Dollars 20 
million. Total clean-up personnel
 employed, many on wages of Dollars 16 an hour: 11,000. Altogether 84 
aircraft, 1,297 vessels, and 32
 skimmers were deployed. 

 Of the 2,400 contaminated miles, 1,021 were 'treated'. Yet along vast 
stretches of coastline, locals say,
 one would not know the cleaners had been. The task is impossible. 

 Compensation payments are criticised as inadequate and Exxon faces 150 law 
suits. Clean-up wages
 were better than nothing for unemployed fishermen, but there was ineptitude, 
such as issuing cheques
 to eskimos living a plane ride from the nearest bank and who had no accounts 
anyway.

 The spill has disrupted lives and industry. In Valdez the population has 
quadrupled to 16,000, creating
 tent villages with accompanying drunkeness and crime. The 16-bed prison is 
full and 150 cases await
 the local court. The influx of people and boom town wages have distorted the 
economy. A stormy local
 election is expected next month. 

 Yet, and it is a difficult aspect to acknowledge, the Valdez oil disaster is 
widely regarded as the best
 thing to happen to US environmentalism since the publication of Rachel 
Carson's Silent Spring in 1963.

 The spill has spurred congressional action to keep oil drilling from the 
coasts of California, Florida, New
 England and Alaska's Bristol Bay, a total of 86 million acres. And the Senate 
has approved a Dollars 1
 billion general clean-up fund and simultaneously increased its liabilities. 

 An opinion poll in 1981 showed 45 per cent agreeing that the importance of 
environmental protection
 overrode its cost. Today the same statement meets with 80 per cent approval. 

 While green issues promise to be increasingly important, President Bush, who 
declared his passion for
 the environment during his election campaign, has failed to visit Valdez or 
declare a national
 emergency. Now, a planned presidential visit after Exxon's departure has been 
cancelled as a political
 'downer'. The choice of word shows how little the White House yet understands 
about ecology.
 