
Comeback kid Ash Barty showed there was plenty of life in her second tennis 
coming as she delivered a major scare to Australian Open champion Angelique 
Kerber at the Brisbane International.

The German world No1 was forced to dig deep to survive a second-round fright 
at Pat Rafter Arena, eventually winning 6-3, 2-6, 6-3 in one hour 44 minutes, 
after being on the ropes.

Serena Williams on shock loss: ‘I’m trying to think of a word that’s not 
obscene’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/serena-williams-shock-loss-word-not-obscene-tennis-results>
Barty defied her world ranking of 271 to rip through the second set in 33 
minutes and have all the momentum in front of a raucous crowd.

A state Twenty20 cricketer just 12 months ago with the Brisbane Heat, she 
slugged it out with the dual grand slam champion and made her look second-rate 
in the one-sided second set.

But Kerber lifted in the decider, breaking the local favourite immediately and 
then keeping her foot on the throat to book a quarter-final encounter with 
sixth-seeded Ukrainian Elina Svitolina.

While disappointed at the result but pleased with her display, Barty promises 
to propel herself back into the top 100, and lower, in quick time with her 
freewheeling style of play.

She hit winners from all parts of the court and it was just her consistency 
which let herself down at times during the first and third sets, as well as 
Kerber’s superior movement.

The 2011 Wimbledon junior champion only returned to the sport last autumn 
after a two-year break as she fought loneliness and depression as a teenager on 
the tour.

Rediscovering her love of the game under new coach Craig Tyzzer has put the 
20-year-old back on the path to being one of the country’s best players on the 
WTA.

Doubles partner Casey Dellacqua rated Barty the most talented Australian woman 
to emerge in the past decade and on her Brisbane form she showed she can also 
do damage as a wildcard at the Australian Open in less than a fortnight.

Barty rated the encounter the perfect start to the year for her, especially 
being forced to play aggressively to challenge Kerber.

“I’m really really pleased with the form, a bit disappointed we didn’t win but 
very good things came out of it,” she said.

“It’s the start of good things to come hopefully.

“I’m a more developed player this time around.”

Kerber was full of praise for the 20-year-old and expected her to quickly rise 
up the rankings if she stayed injury free.

“Working hard and playing like she did tonight I’m sure she will have great 
results,” she said.

“She played so well straight from the first point tonight.”
 