
Bernard Tomic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> conceded he 
would rather have slept on his tenuous match-winning lead after surviving a 
nerve-wracking one-set shootout to safely advance to the second round at 
Wimbledon.


Tomic overcame two more rain delays and Fernando Verdasco’s ferocious 
firepower to prevail 4-6, 6-3, 6-3, 3-6, 6-4 in a tense first-round battle 
continuing on from Tuesday.


Roger Federer sees Marcus Willis story at Wimbledon as Hollywood gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/marcus-willis-wimbledon-roger-federer-hollywood-gold>
The 19th seed joins fellow Australians Nick Kyrgios, John Millman, Daria 
Gavrilova and Samantha Stosur in the second round, but the bleak weather in 
London leftWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> debutant 
Matt Barton on tenterhooks for a second night running.


Barton was locked at two sets apiece and 3-3 in the decider when his 
first-round tussle with fellow qualifier Albano Olivetti was abandoned on 
Wednesday night.


Stosur didn’t even set foot on court, with the 14th seed’s second-round clash 
with former finalist Sabine Lisicki wiped entirely from the third-day schedule.


But Tomic made the confession that he would have preferred not to return to 
court after a second rain stoppage and instead gone to bed leading Verdasco 5-3 
in the fifth set.


“I was leaning on hopefully playing tomorrow and then not having to play [my] 
second [match] if I had have won,” he said. “Now I have to play tomorrow.”

The 19th seed will return on Thursday to face Moldovan qualifier Radu Albot 
for a likely crack at 14th seed Roberto Bautista-Agut.


Despite the apparent inconvenience of having to play three straight days – and 
backing up for a full match – Tomic said he fancied his chances of pushing into 
round three.


“Whoever won this match had a big chance of going further into the draw, for 
sure,” he said. “I’m pretty happy, probably with my results. [I’ve had] some of 
the best grasscourt results prior to Wimbledon. It’s pretty solid.”

His latest victory did not come without the usual dose of controversy, though. 
When asked about being made to wait for Verdasco to arrive on court, Tomic said 
in his post-match press conference: “Yeah, I did get to the court prior to him 
very early, and unfortunately I had to stand on court like a retard.”

Ciara Lawrence, who has a learning disability and is a campaigns support 
officer at Mencap, was critical of the language he used.

“I’d like the player to apologise and would encourage him to meet people with 
a learning disability so he can understand why the word is so damaging and 
offensive,” she said.

“Time and time again I hear this word used as if it has no effect. People 
clearly don’t understand how upsetting and offensive this is to people with a 
learning disability like me.

“It makes people with a learning disability seem not as people but as 
second-class citizens, and is no different to discriminating against someone 
who is gay or black.”

Tomic resumed against Verdasco with the match on a knife edge at two sets each 
after anxiously waiting another hour after the scheduled restart before the 
covers were removed from court three at the All England Club.

He gained the decisive break in the sixth game, much to the delight of 
Australian Davis Cup captain Lleyton Hewitt, who bellowed a signature “come 
onnnnn” from Tomic’s courtside box in celebration.


Tomic had to hold his nerve and serve from love-40 down to consolidate for 5-3 
after fighting off five break points, only for light drizzle to force the 
players off once more for another four hours.


He finally put Verdasco away after two hours and 45 minutes of on-court 
action, despite the one-time Australian Open semi-finalist firing down 28 aces 
to Tomic’s 11 and clubbing 69 winners to 51.
 