
The United States have taken a commanding 2-0 lead in their Fed Cup tie 
against Australia afterSamantha Stosur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> crumbled under pressure to 
lose to Christina McHale. 

Stosur looked well and truly in control for the first hour of the match but 
lost her bundle in the second set and then failed to hold her nerve at the 
death, falling 3-6 6-1 7-5 in an upset to the world No57 on the clay surface at 
Brisbane’s Pat Rafter Arena.

Andy Murray beats Milos Raonic in only 66 minutes at Monte Carlo Masters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/15/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-monte-carlo-masters>
McHale was a surprise singles nomination for the USA team ahead of the 
higher-ranked Coco Vandeweghe. But it proved a masterstroke move by captain 
Mary Joe Fernandez, as the 23-year-old turned the match on its head after 
losing the first set.

Stosur was her own worst enemy, making 44 unforced errors to McHale’s one, 
including 11 in the midst of her second-set meltdown. The 2011 US Open champion 
was 5-0 down before she even won a game in the second set, which lasted just 25 
minutes – at one stage conceding eight straight points against her own serve as 
McHale grabbed the ascendancy.

Stosur fought back in a tense deciding set, but concentration lapses at key 
moments gave McHale the chance to close out the victory. It is McHale’s first 
ever career win over Stosur, having failed against her four times previously. 
The most recent loss come only last month in another tight three-setter at the 
WTA event at Indian Wells.

Earlier, Daria Gavrilova was overpowered 6-4 6-2 by world No22 Madison Keys in 
the opening rubber. The reverse singles rubbers, as well as a doubles clash 
between Stosur and Casey Dellacqua and Vandeweghe and Bethanie Mattek-Sands, 
will be played on Sunday. Both nations are trying to win their way back into 
World Group I next year, which would give Australia a chance to win its first 
Fed Cup since 1974.



 