
Australia’s brightest hope at next week’s US Open has been dealt the toughest 
of draws.


Ranked No37 in the world, Nick Kyrgios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> has drawn in-form third seed 
Andy Murray, an opponent who has dispatched him in straight sets in all three 
of their prior meetings.

Andy Murray drawn against Nick Kyrgios in US Open first round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/27/andy-murray-us-open-tennis-nick-kyrgios>
The pair’s path to the first round match-up could not be more different, with 
Murray coming off a win over world No1 Novak Djokovic in the final of 
Montreal’s Rogers Cup and Kyrgios suffering a second round defeat while 
courting controversy for his mid-match sledge of Stan Wawrinka.

The draw has also been unkind to 19-year-old Thanasi Kokkinakis, who faces 
12th seed Richard Gasquet, and 21-year-old Daria Gavrilova, who will take on 
third seed Maria Sharapova.

Top-ranked Australian woman Sam Stosur fared better, drawing 73rd-ranked Timea 
Babos of Hungary. Seeded 22nd, Stosur lost to Babos last week in Cincinatti but 
is a past champion at Flushing Meadows and has a relatively forgiving draw 
until a potential fourth round meeting with fourth seed Caroline Wozniacki.

If she can make it past 26th seeded Flavia Panetta in the first round, 
compatriot Jarmila Gajdosova may lie in Stosur’s path, with the pair in the 
same quarter of the draw.

Of the other Australian women, Western Australia’s Casey Dellacqua is pitted 
against a qualifier, and world No62 Ajla Tomljanovic will play 28-year-old 
Italian Karin Knapp in the first round. Tomljanovic comes into the event in 
good form having made the quarterfinals in Stanford earlier this month, but 
lost to Knapp in a close contest in Hobart earlier this year.

Of the remaining men, big serving Sam Groth has drawn dangerman Alexandr 
Dolgopolov, who showed strong form to stretch Djokovic to three sets in 
Cincinnati and has been as high as No13 in the world.

How a new coach made Kei Nishikori a grand slam contender
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/27/kei-nishikori-tennis-michael-chang-us-open>
Up first for New South Welshman James Duckworth is Korea’s Hyeon Chung, while 
Queenslander John Millman, who’s raced back into the top 100 following strong 
showings at Wimbledon and on the Challenger circuit, will face Ukrainian 
veteran Sergiy Stakhovsky.

Top-ranked Aussie in the men’s draw, 24th seed Bernard Tomic, was placed 
against world number 94 Bosnian Damir Dzumhur, in one of the most favourable 
match ups for our male contingent. With several young players in, or just 
outside of, the ATP top 50, hopes for a strong men’s showing at the final Grand 
Slam of the year were high.

But with so much expectation resting on the shoulders of 19-year-old 
Kokkinakis and 20-year-old Kyrgios, the pairs’ horror draws have damaged those 
hopes.

Kokkinakis, who has wins this year over seeded players Jeremy Chardy, Fabio 
Fognini and Bernard Tomic, is considered a future top-10 player by many, but 
has been in Kyrgios’ shadow over the past few years thanks to his training 
mate’s high profile wins over the likes of Rafael Nadal, and more recently his 
vitriolic comments on court.

Kyrgios was docked a six-month suspended fine of US$25,000 and 28-day 
suspension by the ATP for “aggravated behaviour” after comments made during his 
second round match against Stan Wawrinka at the Rogers Cup.

Kyrgios’ results have suffered over the past six months, in the midst of a 
string of controversies, including allegations of tanking at Wimbledon and 
comments he made at a recent Davis Cup tie.

The Aussie has been the subject of widespread praise since beating Nadal at 
last year’s Wimbledon, including a recent assessment from Mats Wilander in 
which the legend predicted Kyrgios wouldwin Wimbledon and possibly be “the 
greatest player of all time once his career is over” 
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/tennis/mens-tour/tennis-legend-mats-wilander-says-theres-no-limit-to-nick-kyrgios-potential-and-he-can-win-wimbledon/story-fn2msdm4-1227430990256>
.

To stand any chance of upsetting Murray, whose strong returning game has 
nullified his younger opponent’s main weapon – a booming serve – in previous 
match-ups, Kyrgios will need to play the level of tennis which has seen him 
upset top 10 players, as well as maintain his composure.

The draw has also thrown up some tough challenges for the game’s biggest 
names, with Serena Williams pitted against one of the toughest fields of her 
Grand Slam career, Rafael Nadal on course for a potential quarterfinal show 
down with top seed Novak Djokovic, and five-time US Open champion Roger Federer 
set to meet 2012 winner Murray in the semifinals of the lower half of the draw.
 