
Australian firebrand Nick Kyrgios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> has told everyone to “relax” 
about his niggling knee injury, saying it’s nothing serious and won’t hinder 
his Australian Open campaign.

But Australia’s Hopman Cup title defence is over after they suffered a shock 
2-1 loss to the lowly Czech Republic on Tuesday night.

Kyrgios hobbled at times during his 7-5, 6-4 singles win over Czech Adam 
Pavlasek on Tuesday night.

Roger Federer completes smooth win in Hopman Cup as Swiss defeat GB
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/roger-federer-smooth-win-hopman-cup-return-from-injury>
The world No13 rushed through points in the first set to ensure he didn’t get 
stuck in any long rallies.

He even unleashed a series of monster second serves in a bid to make the 
points quick.

In one game, he served two double faults in a row attempting to go for a 
second-serve ace.

Kyrgios moved much better in the second set as his strapped left knee warmed 
up, and after the match he allayed fears about the injury.

“I was feeling it a little bit. But as the match went on and I got warmer (it 
was ok),” Kyrgios said.

“That’s the key to the knee – I’ve just got to get warm before I run out.

“I didn’t really have too much time to warm up before this match. I was in the 
physio getting it taped, and I ran out of time.

“So next match I’m going to do a better warm up and go out there with a bit of 
sweat and warm it up a little it.”

On Sunday, Kyrgios claimed he hurt his left leg in a minor basketball mishap 
just before the Hopman Cup.

But on Tuesday, the 21-year-old said he injured it while training a few weeks 
ago, and it was so minor that he didn’t even undergo scans on it.

Kyrgios laughed off the injury fears when probed further about his knee.

“Don’t overthink it guys. Just relax. Jesus Christ. Far out,” Kyrgios said.

Daria Gavrilova had the chance to give Australia an unassailable 2-0 lead in 
the tie against the Czech Republic.

But Gavrilova succumbed to world No166 Lucie Hradecka in an epic three-setter, 
going down 4-6, 6-4, 6-4 in a match that lasted 130 minutes.

It meant Australia, who lost their opening tie 2-1 to Spain, needed to win the 
Fast4 mixed doubles in order to stay in the hunt for a berth in Saturday’s 
final.

But Kyrgios and Gavrilova succumbed 4-3, 3-4, 2-4.

It means the US, who posted 3-0 wins over the Czech Republic and Spain, are 
guaranteed a spot in the final from group B.
 