
Asian players will be a compulsory feature of the A-League’s foreign 
contingent from 2018-19, Football Federation Australia has confirmed.

FFA chief executive David Gallop has flagged a significant change to the 
make-up of imports in Australia’s top tier, announcing the governing body will 
introduce what is known as the “4+1” quota rule that will move it in line with 
other top competitions in the Asian Football Confederation.

Vedran Janjetović repels abuse as Wanderers show signs of improvement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/vedran-janjetovic-repels-abuse-as-wanderers-show-signs-of-improvement>
The change will not impact clubs’ current quota of five foreigners, but means 
one of those players must come from an AFC members federation.

“FFA has determined to move to a 4+1 structure for the 2018-19 season but 
will prudently review the implementation to consider all relevant factors and 
impacts at the end of the 17-18 season,’” Gallop said.

“The 4+1 structure will strengthen the A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> by further integrating 
Australian football into the Asian community and still ensuring the development 
of talented Australian players.”

The move will force A-League clubs to more heavily scour the continent for 
talent.

Only two clubs currently have Asian players on their books – Newcastle have 
signed Chinese midfielder Ma Leilei since the franchise was sold to Chinese 
millionaire Martin Lee, while Western Sydney have Japanese winger Jumpei 
Kusukami.

As with the Wanderers this season, the change is likely to benefit clubs 
competing in the Asian Champions League, which operates the 3+1 rule.

While Wanderers coach Tony Popovic can include Jumpei plus three other 
foreigners in his squad, his Adelaide counterpart Guillermo Amor must omit two 
of his five imports, as was the case last season with Sydney FC and Melbourne 
Victory.

The news comes amid reports the Chinese Football Association is set to reduce 
to three the number of foreign players Chinese Super League teams are allowed 
to field in each match.

The pending rule change has already delayed James Holland’s transfer from the 
Reds to Liaoning Whowin and could threaten the careers of other Australian 
players in China.
 