
Andy Murray drawn against qualifier in first round of French Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/22/andy-murray-french-open-men-first-round-draw>
Australian tennis’s big guns won’t be lacking opportunities at the French Open 
after suffering a rough time at Friday’s draw in Paris. SpearheadsSamantha 
Stosur <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur>, Bernard Tomic and 
Nick Kyrgios were all guaranteed to avoid seeds until at least round three – 
but they won’t have to wait long before running head first into tournament 
heavyweights.

Stosur, Australia’s top-ranked player, former runner-up and two-time 
semi-finalist, opens against American Madison Brengle and is projected to meet 
defending champion and world No2 Maria Sharapova in round three.

Tomic, the 27th seed, faces a qualifier first up and could strike world No1 
and hot title favourite Novak Djokovic in the third round. Before that, Tomic 
must find a solution to his recent claycourt struggles and win a couple of 
matches – and he potentially faces a second-round showdown with in-form teenage 
countryman Thanasi Kokkinakis.

Kokkinakis also drew a qualifier, while Australian Open quarter-finalist Nick 
Kyrgios <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios>, seeded at a grand 
slam for the first time, takes on Denis Istomin in his opener. If he gets past 
Istomin, Kyrgios will play a qualifier for a likely third-round shot at third 
seed Andy Murray, with the Scot unbeaten in 10 matches on clay in 2015.

Of the other Australians, Sam Groth meets 21st seed Pablo Cuevas, James 
Duckworth has a qualifier and Marinko Matosevic plays Thomaz Bellucci. Casey 
Dellacqua will take on Ajla Tomljanovic in an all-Australian affair, with Daria 
Gavrilova up against Swede Johanna Larsson in the same quarter of the draw. 
Jarmila Gajdosova faces French wildcard Amandine Hesse and could run into 
Stosur in the second round.

As the draw was taking place at Roland Garros, Olivia Rogowska scored a 
fighting three-set comeback win over Brazilian Beatriz Haddad Maia to boost 
Australia’s representation to a dozen players in the singles.

Rogowska prevailed 3-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3 in two and a half hours, while 
Anastasia Rodionova was scheduled to play her final-round qualifying match 
later on Friday.
 