
Australia’s most senior public servant says the government needs to consider 
“redistributive” policies as part of rebuilding public consensus for open 
economies in an atmosphere of rising protectionism.

Martin Parkinson, Malcolm Turnbull’s department head, delivered a speech to 
the Lowy Institute on Thursday evening, saying three policy responses were 
required to deal with a developed world backlash against open markets and trade 
liberalisation that has intensified since the global financial crisis.

Parkinson said the first response was to resist the pressure.

“Rather than retreat to the failed policies of the past, we need to strengthen 
our engagement with the global economy and with the fast-growing nations in our 
region,” he said.

The second was to “better equip our workforce to participate in and prosper 
from the changes taking place in the global economy and the evolving nature of 
work.”

Don’t blame globalisation for poverty | Liam Fox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/30/globalisation-poverty-corruption-free-trade-liam-fox>
The third was to redistribute the benefits of globalisation, including through 
measures such as income assistance for people who, despite their best efforts, 
“aren’t able to rapidly re-skill or find reasonable paying work”.

“Rising inequality is not destiny or a necessary consequence of the forces of 
globalisation,” Parkinson said. “It is a choice made by individual countries.

“All governments have the policy apparatus at their disposal to build a more 
economically and socially equitable society that remains internationally 
competitive.

“And before the critics write me off as believing in big government, let me be 
clear: Australia’s problem is not the redistribution to the poorest, but the 
spread of welfare much further up the income distribution.”

New redistributive policies needed to support work incentives, not create 
disincentives to work.

“To this end, the new focus on the social investment approach to welfare is a 
profound structural reform – potentially one of the most important of recent 
decades,” he said.

Parkinson cited World Trade Organisation data to show G20 countries have 
increasingly applied measures to restrict trade since 2008. The WTO had 
identified 1,583 trade restrictive measures put in place by G20 countries since 
2008.

“There is also evidence that the pace of protectionism has recently 
accelerated,” he said.

“Between October 2015 and May 2016, G20 economies introduced new protectionist 
trade measures at the fastest pace seen since the global financial crisis, 
rolling out the equivalent of five each week.”

Steve Ciobo says many Australians alienated by globalisation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/01/steve-ciobo-australians-alienated-globalisation-nick-xenophon-pauline-hanson>
Australia has been complicit in the backsliding “although it surfaces under 
subtle guises”.

“A prominent example is the uptick in new anti-dumping investigations since 
the GFC, and in the number of new anti-dumping measures imposed each year,” he 
said.

Protectionist sentiment had taken hold in part because low- and middle-class 
people in the developed world had realised only limited gains in real incomes 
over the past three decades, and inequality within countries had risen.

“Rising protectionist pressures are in part a reaction to these growing income 
disparities, manifesting in renewed calls to protect or support local jobs and 
local industries,” he said.

Australia lacked the wide income disparities of a country like the United 
States, but income growth in this country was sluggish since the GFC, and this 
had been exacerbated by the decline in the terms of trade over the past five 
years.

He said Australia had been one of the most significant beneficiaries of 
globalisation in the world, with rising living standards linked to the 
productivity enhancing reforms of the 1980s and 90s.

But the gains would be squandered if a perception was allowed to develop that 
people were being left behind.

“It is important we build on these gains, avoiding calls for a return to the 
failed industry support and protectionist policies of the past and instead 
focus on equipping our current and future workforce to capitalise on the 
opportunities that globalisation presents and using our progressive tax and 
transfer system to ensure that nobody is left behind,” he said.
 