
The Socceroos slipped to third in their World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifying group 
after a shaky display allowed stragglers Thailand to hold Australia to a 2-2 
draw.

Despite two penalties from the captain, Mile Jedinak, Ange Postecoglou’s 
disjointed national team handed last-placed Thailand their first point in the 
final phase of qualifying at Bangkok’s Rajamangala National Stadium, in a 
result that could come back to bite them in next year’s crucial second set of 
fixtures.

Thailand v Australia: World Cup 2018 qualifying – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/15/thailand-v-australia-world-cup-2018-qualifying-live>
Japan’s 2-1 win over Group B leaders Saudi Arabia earlier on Tuesday night 
lifted the Samurai Blue to second and shuntedAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>, currently with nine points, 
out of the two automatic qualification spots.

The Socceroos did fulfil their desire for an early goal when a solid spell of 
pressure forced the Thailand defender Pratum Chuthong to commit a handball in 
the penalty area inside 10 minutes. Jedinak was calm from the spot, slotting a 
cool finish past the goalkeeper Kawin Thamsatchanan.

Opportunities galore gave early indications the scoreline could easily have 
blown out as the Socceroos scythed through their hosts’ leaky defence. But 
Thailand capitalised on the little possession they had and, out of nothing, 
drew level with worrying ease. They stroked the ball around before charging 
through the guts, exposing the otherwise well-performing Brad Smith with a 
through-ball that allowed Teerasil Dangda to slot home off a neat cross.

That changed the complexion of the game and Thailand started penetrating 
Australia’s defence with regularity, playmaker Chanathip “Messi J” Songkrasin 
forcing Mat Ryan into one of numerous close saves. The Socceroos, meanwhile, 
failed to whittle their possession into anything meaningful, their Jamie 
Maclaren-led line at times seemingly on different wavelengths while simple 
passes were miscontrolled and offsides were plentiful.

The way Postecoglou stormed off at the break signalled a half-time lashing was 
coming from the coach, yet it made little difference. It was all one-way 
traffic in favour of the winless hosts, and one foray forced Mathew Leckie into 
an unnecessary challenge on the Thai captain, Theeraton Bunmathan.

Almost as soon as Teerasil sent the subsequent penalty past Ryan for the lead, 
Postecoglou switched to a diamond formation, substituting Maclaren and Leckie 
for the veteran Mark Milligan and the forward Nathan Burns, whose long-range 
shot soon hit the bar.

The change brought an almost immediate effect as Siroch Chatthong fouled 
Jedinak and allowed him to restore parity with a penalty. But even after the 
in-form Jackson Irvine was brought on for an injured Matthew Spiranovic, there 
would be no winner.
 