
Novak Djokovic beat aching limbs, a briefly wavering spirit and one of the 
bravest fighters in the history of the game to hang on to hisAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title with his seventh 
successive victory over Rafael Nadal in surely the best performance of his 
career.

It was their third consecutive final in a major championship and lasted five 
hours and 53 minutes, longer by almost an hour than the previous longest match 
in a grand slam final, the four hours and 54 minutes Mats Wilander took to beat 
Ivan Lendl at the 1988 US Open.

It was also the longest match in the history of this tournament, beating 
Nadal's five hours and 14 minutes semi-final win over Fernando Verdasco three 
years ago. It will come to be regarded as one of the best.

The Serb won 5-7, 6-4, 6-2, 6-7, 7-5. Before this match Nadal was 133‑1 in 
grand slam matches after taking the first set, some record of getting on top 
and staying there, but not on Sunday night, not against Djokovic in this mood. 
But no string of numbers can do justice to what the eye can see. And what was 
witnessed was a match that went from poor to better to almost beyond 
credibility.

An enduring image was that of the finalists, seated and exhausted, stone-faced 
side by side sucking on bottles of water, as the presentation speeches droned 
on – protocol again intruding on the core beauty of sport.

"Good morning everybody," were Nadal's first words of whimsy at the 
microphone. "And congratulations to Novak. He deserved it. I will come back 
here a lot of years and will keep fighting."

Djokovic, shattered, kept it brief too. "First of all, Rafa, you are one of 
the best players ever, one of the most respected on the Tour. We made history 
tonight. Unfortunately there couldn't be two winners. I hope we will have many 
more matches like this, many more finals."

What a battle Djokovic had – against Nadal, his battered body and, sadly, 
those in the crowd who gave him little encouragement against their favourite, 
until they forgot their allegiances in the heat of an astonishing finish and 
cheered every shot.

Djokovic could not have done this without his dancing partner. Nadal confirmed 
Djokovic's greatness. He also did his own high standing no little harm. He has 
well and truly come out of his flickering low period. The Spaniard says he is 
taking February off to rest bones and mind. If he comes back better, we are in 
for some season.

There were suspicions that Djokovic had left his legs in the semi‑final, that 
four hours and 50 minutes marathon against Andy Murray two nights previously. 
Nadal, too, began nervously. Perhaps he was contemplating the awful prospect of 
yet another defeat by his tormentor. He had an edge to his game that ebbed 
appreciably before returning when it mattered more than five hours later. 
Either way, the mix of torpor and tension made for a ragged spectacle in the 
first set. As they warmed to the job, the level improved almost game by game.

Djokovic looked weary and out of sorts, as he had done before storming back 
against Lleyton Hewitt, David Ferrer and Murray. At the end of a long rally in 
the third game, which Nadal won with a smash, the Serb rolled his right ankle 
slightly. His right shoulder, too, did not seem to be functioning to full 
efficiency and, bar a couple of aces, his serving was underpowered and 
ill-directed.

On a muggy Melbourne night Djokovic went for a very early change of shirt, to 
black, after only half an hour. It matched his mood but, in synchronisation 
with the tennis, that swayed many times thereafter.

Nadal took the first set comfortably and there was a hint he would steamroller 
his nemesis. After an hour they had shanked, overhit or plain misjudged 30 
unforced errors (17 of them Djokovic's), which was symmetrically pleasing but 
not aesthetically so – and still they had not settled the first set.

As the match went from unimpressive to attritional – much as Murray‑Djokovic – 
Nadal timed an explosion perfectly, rattling a winner down the forehand side 
for another break opportunity. Djokovic obliged with an overhit reply.

When Nadal served out the set, 7-5, courtesy of Djokovic's 19th unforced 
error, after an hour and 20 minutes, the frame was eight minutes shorter than 
the third between Murray and Djokovic.

Djokovic, as against Murray, found a second wind and put pressure on Nadal, 
breaking him to go 4‑1 up and punishing him on his serve returns, before taking 
the second set.

He remained in charge in the third, pinning Nadal deep on service and bossing 
him in open play. Nadal could only hang his head and watch a withering forehand 
flash past him to settle the third set after 45 minutes.

The standard rose in the fourth. Nadal saved three break points in 
breathtaking style to level at 4-4 and the result was in doubt again. He was 
investing his tennis with high-risk ground strokes, skirting the white lines 
wide and deep, to stretch Djokovic as he had not been stretched previously.

Shortly before midnight the clouds spat on Melbourne Park and the roof rolled 
across a now engrossed audience. When the players returned after a brief 
interval the fans sensed the Nadal fightback was gathering strength. He did not 
let them down and they went to a tie-break, where Nadal held a 6-2 advantage 
over Djokovic. Make that 7-2. There were more astonishing shots in this 
tie-break than in some entire matches.

So on we went, into the early hours of Monday. When would it end and how? The 
first twist was in the sixth game, when Djokovic hit long and Nadal went 4-2 
up, his veins nearly bursting in exaltation. Then came another wicked turn, 
Djokovic breaking back when Nadal hit long. It was back on serve with the line 
a little closer.

There followed a rare sight: a standing ovation for a single point. When 
Djokovic hit long after a 32-shot rally of exquisite quality, he collapsed on 
his back and the Rod Laver Arena (including the man himself) rose to applaud 
both men. Nadal looked the other way. He smelt blood. There would be no pause 
for sentiment.

When he looked up he saw an opponent running on empty. It was time for the 
Spaniard to finish the Serbian bull – except the bull was still breathing and 
Nadal had to survive break point to hold.

Now Djokovic had to serve to survive. Much as the majority of the spectators 
wanted Nadal to win, not many wanted this to end. The champion wasted one break 
point in the 11th game, hitting long under pressure, but gladly accepted an 
unexpected gift when Nadal sliced a backhand into the net.

His body was shouting at him but mentally he was phenomenal – so relaxed that 
he paused in his chair at the changeover to watch the highlights on the big 
screen.

Serving for the match, he had to save a break point after botching a smash and 
a backhand return. Following a good serve down the middle, he put away Nadal's 
return with admirable coolness in such a fiery environment, threw down his 
sodden shirt and embraced his friends at courtside.

Djokovic and Nadal are said not to be close but they respect each other. Maybe 
they are just a little closer after this shared experience.
 