
Samantha Stosur <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> remains 
relaxed about her Wimbledon prospects despite her grasscourt troubles 
continuing with a straight-sets first-up loss at the Eastbourne International.

The Australian No1 will head to the All England Club – where she has a dire 
record in a dozen visits – without a win on the surface in more than a year 
after succumbing 7-5, 7-6 (7-0) to Bulgaria’s world No44 Tsvetana Pironkova.

But the former US Open champion insists it’s far from doom and gloom, noting 
that Pironkova, the champion in Sydney last year, had been to a quarter-final 
and semi-final on London’s hallowed lawns.

“She’s a good player, especially on grass. You’d have to say grass is where 
she’s had her best results,” Stosur told AAP. “So I actually played some pretty 
decent tennis out there. Overall I was actually quite pleased with the way I 
was hitting it. I was doing some things quite positively.”

Having only ventured beyond the second round just twice in 12 attempts, Stosur 
has opted for a less is more approach to Wimbledon this year. Her short-lived 
appearance at Eastbourne was the 31-year-old’s only grasscourt lead-up event, 
the classy claycourter instead choosing to contest two tournaments on dirt in 
Europe afterWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> to maximise 
opportunities.

“At the end of the day, only a small percentage of players would say that 
grass is their favourite surface and I’m not one of those,” said Stosur, the 
world No23. “I decided I was going to play those and if I didn’t take these 
last two weeks off, it would have been 15 weeks straight playing. I don’t think 
that’s a smart schedule.

“So instead of taking the two weeks off after Wimbledon like I usually do, 
I’ve taken them before. Sometimes we can tend to do the same things year in, 
year out and I’ve done that for 10 years. So why not try something different? 
Clay’s a surface that I really enjoy playing on.”

While her pragmatic approach has eased the pressure she once placed on herself 
to perform at tennis’s most revered venue, Stosur still feels capable of making 
an impact at SW19.

“You’ve obviously got to put it together in that first round, but I’m still 
confident I can play well and get some wins,” she said. “Who knows if that’s 
going to happen, but I’m at least confident that I can do that.”

Meanwhile, a hat-trick of wins on day two gave Australia a perfect 
five-from-five start to the Wimbledon men’s qualifying tournament.

John-Patrick Smith, Ben Mitchell and Jason Kubler all joined John Millman and 
former Wimbledon and Australian Open junior champion Luke Saville in the second 
round of men’s qualifying on Tuesday.


Smith outlasted Belgium’s Maxime Authom 7-6 (7-5), 6-7 (3-7), 6-2, Kubler beat 
Portugal’s Rui Machado 6-3, 6-4 and Mitchell, a one-time boys’ singles finalist 
at the All England Club, posted a 6-7 (5-7), 6-4, 6-0 comeback win over 
Frenchman Remi Boutillier.


All five Australians will be back on court on Wednesday, but Olivia Rogowska 
and Anastasia Rodionova have been eliminated from the women’s qualifying draw.
 