
Europe’s top banking regulator has warned banks they should not hand their 
staff top-up payments to avoid the EU bonus cap in a move that could have 
implications for dozens of banks and thousands of bankers.

The tougher than expected decision by the European Banking Authority (EBA) 
also risks putting the UK’s already strained relationship with the EU under 
further pressure and has rekindled the controversy over whether the bonus cap 
would actually lead to increases in the salaries of bankers. George Osborne,is 
already challenging the EU’s bonus rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/25/osborne-bankers-bonuses-eu-cap>
 in the European court of justice.

The EBA did not name any banks as it published  
<http://www.eba.europa.eu/-/eba-discloses-probe-into-eu-bankers-allowances>its 
analysis into the way the industry has implemented the cap on bonuses, which 
came into effect at the start of this year and restricts payouts to 100% of a 
bankers’ salary, rising to 200% if shareholders grant their approval.

But banks such as Barclays, HSBC and bailed-out Royal Bank of Scotland are 
expected to be hit, along with Wall Street firms with a major presence in the 
City, such as Goldman Sachs.The EBA found that 39 banks in six EU states 
started paying “allowances” or “role based” sums alongside traditional salaries 
and bonuses after the bonus cap was introduced this year. The banks have argued 
that these payouts are not standard pay and should be not be classified as 
bonuses because they are not linked to performance.

But the EBA contradicted this view and said that these extra payments should 
be regarded as “variable” components of pay, like a bonus, and that banks using 
them are breaching the ratio set out by the EU.

Among the bosses of UK banks receiving allowances are Stuart Gulliver, HSBC’s 
chief executive, who is being handed £1.7m while his counterparts at bailed-out 
Lloyds Banking Group, António Horta-Osório, at RBS, Ross McEwan, and at 
Barclays, Antony Jenkins, arereceiving around £1m each 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/05/lloyds-bank-boss-shares-eu-bonus-cap>
.

“It is reverse engineering. Nobody can deny this,” said Isabelle Vaillant, the 
director of regulation at the EBA.

The EBA called on national regulators to ensure the banks they regulate were 
compliant with the cap by the end of the year. However, this does not mean that 
changes will be made immediately as the EBA’s opinion is not legally binding 
and further guidelines on pay are expected from the EBA later this year.

The implications for UK banks will also depend on how the Bank of England 
reacts. Andrew Bailey, the top regulator at the Bank’s Prudential Regulation 
Authority, has described allowances as the “least bad outcome” of the cap. 
Given these previous remarks it is believed unlikely that Bailey, who sits on 
the board of the EBA, would have endorsed the latest opinion from the European 
regulator.

In the UK, the ratio between variable and fixed pay for the highest paid 
bankers in the City was 370% in 2012 – illustrating the impact that restricting 
bonuses to 100% or 200% would have on pay deals.

Tom Gosling, head of PricewaterhouseCoopers’ reward practice, said the EBA’s 
verdict was at the “severe end” of expectations. “As a result of these new 
rules the vast majority of major banks operating in the EU will need to change 
their remuneration policies,” said Gosling.

Banks in the UK put their remuneration policies to a shareholder vote at this 
year’s annual meetings. All received the support they asked for and Robert 
Talbut, the chief investment officer at Royal London Asset Management, warned 
the report from the EBA “was not a good outcome”.

He tweeted: “EU banning of allowance in banking pay is misguided and is only 
likely to inflate salaries and fixed costs further.”

Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the Treasury select committee, 
warned the cap “will encourage banks to increase fixed pay rather than embed 
incentive structures that improve standards”.

Osborne is challenging the original legislation in European courts and a 
Treasury spokesperson said: “We expect to receive the EBA’s guidelines on this 
issue in due course, which will then be subject to public consultation.”

Outgoing EU financial markets commissioner Michel Barnier had urged the EBA to 
review the allowances. He tweeted: “I welcome the EBA’s findings on bankers’ 
allowances. Existing rules must be implemented properly: important signal to 
the rest of society”.

However, Omar Ali, UK head of banking and capital markets at EY, said banks 
“will have already restructured their remuneration packages in accordance with 
the rules around fixed allowances” in anticipation of the EBA decision.

The EBA said allowances could be fixed remuneration – and therefore not be 
included in the ratio in calculating the bonus cap – if the payment was 
predetermined, permanent for the time of the individual holds the rule, and 
non-revocable.
 