
Some 410 employees of the fund-management arm of Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> will enjoy a £730m share 
windfall after a deal was struck in the early hours of yesterday morning to 
sell the business to BlackRock, creating the biggest asset manager in the world.

The sale of Barclays Global Investors for $13.5bn (£8.2bn) has triggered a 
share scheme pay-out. Barclays' presidentBob Diamond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bob-diamond> will receive about £22m for 
his shares and options. He paid about £6m to acquire the stake, which he 
accumulated between 2003 and 2009.

Diamond is the only individual whose personal gain needed to be disclosed 
because he sits on the main board of the bank. But Companies House filings show 
that as of last November Blake Grossman, BGI's chief executive, owned 573,234 
shares, which are thought to be worth more than £55m. Other senior colleagues 
with large stakes are Rich Ricci and Richard Grinold, who own 200,000 and 
248,067 shares respectively. Diamond owned 200,000 shares and 100,000 options.

The average gain for each of the employees who participated in the share and 
options scheme is just under £1m. The shares were valued at £730m, making the 
overall gain £380m as the staff paid £350m to buy the shares.

The share scheme was introduced in 2000 and would have run until 2010 if the 
deal had not gone ahead. It provides a rare illustration of how the City tries 
to motivate key employees. The BGI shares are not sold on any stockmarket but 
traded twice a year and valued independently.

The deal will require Barclays to call a general meeting of its shareholders 
and pay a break fee of $175m to CVC, the private equity firm that had planned 
to buy the iShares division of BGI. But CVC – which has five days to top the 
BlackRock offer – agreed to allow Barclays to shop for an offer for the whole 
of BGI by June 18.

BlackRock will pay $6.6bn in cash and the rest in stock to acquire the 
business, which was put up for sale shortly after Barclays passed the Financial 
Services Authority's "stress test".

Barclays said the sale price represents 28% of the stockmarket value of the 
entire bank – BGI contributed about 15% of the profits last year. The bank's 
shares dropped 12.5p to 282p amid some concern that Barclays could be left with 
too much focus on investment banking.

Barclays will make a net gain of $8.8bn from the sale, which it will use to 
bolster its capital cushion and put to rest any concerns that it will need to 
tap shareholders for fresh funds.

Barclays' chief executive, John Varley, will sit on the board of the new 
company, which will be known as BlackRock Global Investors. Diamond will also 
have a boardroom seat.

BlackRock, barely 20 years old, will become the largest publicly owned 
fund-management group in the world, after a rapid expansion overseen by 
Laurence Fink. "This is a transformational transaction" for the investment 
management industry, Fink said.

The deal may signal an upturn in the mergers and acquisitions market, which 
has dried up in the credit freeze. A number of investors, thought to be from 
the Middle East, are understood to be helping to finance the deal.

"The asset management industry is fragmented," Varley said. "In such 
circumstances the economies of scale created by a combination with this breadth 
of business offer considerable growth to shareholders over time.

"Meanwhile, of course, the capital ratios of Barclays would be further 
increased by this transaction."

Barclays is helping to finance the deal by providing BlackRock with a 364-day, 
revolving credit facility of up to $2bn on market terms. Of this, $800m has 
been committed by other banks.

Barclays is also locked into the new business. For the first year it can sell 
off any of its shares and in the second year is allowed to sell down more than 
half of its economic interest in BlackRock without BlackRock's consent.

The fine print also shows that the price received by Barclays can change. It 
can be adjusted based on changes in BGI's annualised run-rate revenues between 
30 April 2009 and completion.
 