
Footage of the disgraced wellness blogger Belle Gibson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/13/belle-gibson-fails-to-appear-in-court-over-allegations-she-made-up-cancer-claims>
 that emerged during a federal court case against her has attracted widespread 
condemnation, raising questions about why her publisher did not more rigorously 
fact check her cancer claims.

The video was submitted as evidence by Consumer Affairs Victoria and shows 
staff from her publisher, Penguin, preparing her for media interviews by asking 
her a series of questions she could expect to be asked by journalists.

Gibson’s wellness empire, which included a mobile phone app called The Whole 
Pantry and a website and recipe book of the same name,began to fall apart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/11/belle-gibson-book-publisher-never-verified-cancer-survivor-health-claims>
 last year when it was revealed that thousands of dollars promised to charities 
off the back of money raised through her success did not materialise and that 
she did not actually have cancer.

Belle Gibson's social media posts claiming cancer cure used against her in 
court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/13/belle-gibson-fails-to-appear-in-court-over-allegations-she-made-up-cancer-claims>
Gibson claimed to have cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/06/belle-gibson-facing-legal-action-over-deceptive-claims-lifestyle-changes-could-cure-cancer>
 in her blood, spleen, uterus and brain, to be terminally ill and to be 
successfully keeping her cancer at bay by shunning conventional medicine and 
instead eating whole, natural foods and using untested European treatments.


In the video played to the federal court in Melbourne on Tuesday, Penguin 
staff ask her before the publishing of The Whole Pantry cookbook in 2014 about 
the unconventional treatments.

“Um, I don’t know how I’m going to talk about this,” Gibson replies. “I might 
have to do some reading on this. It’s a machine that is like an electronic 
pulse pushes into the cells and I take medicine when that machine is operating 
on a program.

“The program ... I ... the computer and machine that I’m on runs this program 
based on my biology and the way that my body operates through my sleep.

“I take medicine and this program’s opening my cells so the medicine can get 
into them.”

A staff member suggests telling journalists that she is “following a 
non-conventional European cancer protocol”.

Gibson, whose full name is Annabelle Natalie Gibson, is also asked during the 
90- minute video: “Do you feel like you’re dying?”


Gibson replies: “Yeah. And I’m fine with that.”


She said she once saw a chemotherapy ward and was “baffled” that it existed. 

“That’s just crazy, who does that to their body? For me, it was just not a 
logical decision. I went to the Royal Women’s [hospital] and I saw the 
chemotherapy ward there and I was just baffled that it exists.”

She said instead she used Chinese medicine, naturopathy and multiple other 
therapies unproven for treating cancer, which she described as “modalities”.

Later in the interview, she said: “It’s hard to understand how I coped through 
so much”.

Penguin admitted that it had failed to fact check Gibson’s story when the lies 
were first exposed. At one point, a staffer tells Gibson; “I really think you 
need to get your story straight.”

The evidence has infuriated people, including those with experiences of 
cancer, who went on social media to question why Penguin staff didn’t press her 
further.

Belle Gibson on 60 Minutes: no remorse and the lies kept coming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/29/belle-gibson-tells-60-minutes-she-was-the-victim-after-her-lies-were-exposed>
Gibson did not show up to the court and judge Debbie Mortimer ­reserved her 
decision on the case to a later date yet to be announced.

Chris Del Mar, a professor of public health at Bond University in Queensland, 
an evidence-based medicine specialist, said while people had been quick to 
attack Gibson, “the publisher’s role in all this has not been criticised 
perhaps as much as it should have”.

“The real answer here is in health literacy,” he said. “We need to, as a 
public, be better educated about how information is created and what it 
consists of, what knowledge is and how it’s tested and how to verify that 
things are true.

“It’s very easy to go after Gibson and the publisher. At the same time, we 
have a responsibility not to be duped ourselves and to learn about what is 
sensible and what isn’t. People have extraordinarily naive ideas about medical 
science and they believe things because they’ve been said by people they trust 
the face of.

“But we need to teach them to subject claims to scrutiny and we really do need 
to address this if we are ever to have a population of people capable of making 
sensible choices about health issues.”

It was also revealed in the court that Gibson made in excess of $420,000 from 
sales of her app and received a $132,500 book ­advance. Company records 
tendered to the court show she made payments for a BMW and spent money on 
overseas travel.
 