
The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu>, has been forced to 
defend himself as a cascade of alleged leaks from two police investigations 
that saw him formally interviewed by detectives on two separate occasions in 
the last week hit Israeli media.

Netanyahu strongly denies any wrongdoing in relation to the two cases – 
including receiving tens of thousands of dollars’ worth of gifts from a 
billionaire Hollywood producer. However, the claims have led his supporters to 
rally round to insist that even if he were charged he could continue in office.


It comes amid reports that at least one key member of his coalition had 
already begun sounding out other political leaders 
<http://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/Report-Netanyahu-caught-on-tape-discussing-mutual-benefits-with-businessman-477762>
 in the event of Netanyahu’s resignation.

Speaking at a Likud meeting on Sunday morning, he told members of his party: 
“To my dismay I cannot provide details. What I can tell you today, now that I 
know what this is about, and I will tell you this with full confidence: nothing 
will be found because there is nothing.”

Netanyahu has been questioned under caution in relation to two separate 
investigations – the so-called Case 1000 and Case 2000. He was questioned by 
detectives for five hours at his official residence on Thursday, following 
questioning on Monday.

The first investigation – Case 1000 – concerns regular gifts of expensive 
cigars to Netanyahu and pink champagne for his wife Sara given over the years 
by Arnon Milchan, the wealthy producer behind the films Fight Club and Pretty 
Woman who also owns shares in the Israeli television company Channel 10.

Neither Netanyahu nor Milchan denies the gifts, with the Israeli prime 
minister’s lawyer, Yaakov Weinroth, insisting last week that “any reasonable 
person knows that there is nothing remotely criminal involved when a close 
friend gives his friend a gift of cigars”.

The second inquiry, however, had been kept under wraps in conditions of the 
tightest secrecy, although it had been saidto relate to Netanyahu’s 
relationship with another very wealthy Israeli businessman 
<http://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/Report-Netanyahu-caught-on-tape-discussing-mutual-benefits-with-businessman-477762>
 and allegations of influence trading.

Pressure has mounted on Netanyahu over the weekend with a series of new leaks 
from both cases, including the claim that he had intervened on Milchan’s behalf 
with the US secretary of state, John Kerry, to help Milchan acquire a 10-year 
visa.



His problems were compounded on Sunday by new revelations in the Israeli media 
regarding the second case, including reports it was prompted by the discovery 
by police ofa tape recording of Netanyahu discussing favours in return for 
political support. 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/newspaper-publisher-said-to-be-at-center-of-netanyahu-investigation/>
 The Guardian has not independently verified the existence of the tape.

Israeli television and papers named another wealthy media tycoon, Arnon Mozes, 
the owner of the Yedioth Ahronot newspaper 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/newspaper-publisher-said-to-be-at-center-of-netanyahu-investigation/>
, as being involved in the investigation.

Before Sunday’s new claims in the second case, Netanyahu’s lawyer said: “We’re 
not talking about money, we’re not talking about loans, we’re not talking about 
anything that constitutes a crime,” adding there was “no suspicion, no trace, 
of a criminal offence in all of this”.

Netanyahu’s ”nothing will be found because there is nothing” has become his 
mantra in recent weeks as he has suffered a serious political blow from the 
inquiries that have led some to speculate whether he can survive.


Addressing that question, David Bitan, the chairman of Netanyahu’s coalition, 
tried to insist that even if Netanyahu were to be indicted – which he insisted 
would not happen – Netanyahu would not need not to resign.

Figures in Israel’s opposition, however, called on Netanyahu to suspend 
himself in response both to the police inquiry and the emerging reports that 
they argue has cast a cloud over his office.

Former Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak led the charge, writing on Twitter: 
“Shock! Bibi can’t continue to serve as prime minister. Those with integrity 
among his ministers will be forced to lead him out or to lose their world as 
well. An end to the footdragging.”
 