
Now more than ever, Bernard Tomic’s best and perhaps only compelling virtue 
heading into anAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> campaign is how many 
fathoms below the radar he’s travelling. In a tennis sense, Australia’s 
narrow-eyed focus is directed at his countryman Nick Kyrgios. More broadly, now 
even federal politicians are behaving more ludicrously than Tomic on trips to 
the Gold Coast.

But let’s be blunt: Bernard Tomic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> is not winning the Australian 
Open, nor likely to go close. We now have enough evidence to say that it’s 
highly unlikely he will ever seriously challenge for a grand slam singles 
trophy at all, because he rarely beats higher-ranked opponents and especially 
not when the heat is on.
Tomic at the Australian Open 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=c8051ab6-df73-4670-9797-bb8981769495>
Tomic is a tennis nearly-man, a pursuit in which there is considerable 
financial riches and no real shame. For all of this we should be understanding. 
His life has been no picnic. We might even empathise, because his failure to 
extract optimal output from himself makes him more like the rest of us than 
almost any other person who is the 26th best in the world at something we watch 
as often as tennis.

I’m certainly no Red Smith. You’re probably reading this as you play around 
with your phone or waste time in an open plan cubicle. None of us is giving a 
commanding, Sorkinesque oratory to adoring minions from some lavish corner 
office. We all just muddle along. The difference with Tomic is he does this in 
public, on TV, earning a lot of money for being quite good at something, when 
we’d hoped he’d instead be spellbindingly brilliant.

To matters of practicality, Tomic’s lead-in to this Australian Open has leant 
further towards unspectacular than solid. Like Kyrgios, he’s tuned up most 
notably with an appearance at Sydney’s Fast4 tournament, which is less 
physically demanding than a normal match and has sexed up the tennis attendance 
experience by adding to the usual silent reverence a vague sense of confusion 
among players and spectators alike. It was basically made for Tomic.

One thing you’d hope is that Tomic’s fiercest critics were averting their eyes 
in the early stages of the Australian’s encounter with Dominic Thiem on Monday 
night, because their biases would have been emphatically confirmed – the 
biographical tidbit chosen by the local broadcaster for the Austrian’s 
on-screen player profile was the he’d enlisted for military service in 2014; 
Tomic’s that he’s quite partial to “pizza, lobster and sweets”.

Being that Thiem is a top 10 player, Tomic has never beaten him in a proper 
ATP match, but being that it was essentially meaningless fluff this time 
around, the Australian obviously prevailed. It’s at times like this his name is 
synonymous with frustration.

Here’s a prediction for Friday’s men’s singles draw: Tomic will get a tough 
one. They’re all tough ones when you’ve never progressed beyond the fourth 
round of your home grand slam, nor reached a quarter-final in any other since 
2011. So the Fanatics need to enjoy him while he lasts, and so do the rest of 
us. Being a Tomic fan is basically the tennis version of turning up for the 
support act.

In all of this he’s been his own worst enemy, to be completely truthful. Tomic 
does actually care about his tennis, but you could hardly tell the way he 
crashed out of his primary warm-up at the Brisbane International a little over 
a week ago, losing 6-3, 7-5 against Spanish cyborg David Ferrer. A semi-final 
appearance last year qualifies that as a pet event for Tomic.

As usual, the Australian was bluntly honest about the reasons for his loss, 
which came in just 83 minutes of unforced errors and crowd muttering. “I was 
sort of expecting it,” Tomic explained. “He’s a guy who has made his career 
based on being a machine and getting every ball back and he’s one of the top 
players in the world in the past six or seven years.”

Integrity unit hands out bans and fines in Nick Lindahl tennis match-fixing 
case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/integrity-unit-hands-out-bans-and-fines-in-nick-lindahl-tennis-match-fixing-case>
A week after that collapse Tomic admitted he’d gone into the match weighing 99 
kilograms, five more than normal, but that he’s since shed the weight with a 
more intensive approach to his training. Perhaps he’s also off the pizza and 
lobster. All top players experience brief injury spells; Tomic conjures 
fleeting periods of fitness.

In addition to his Fast4 appearance, Tomic will play exhibition matches in 
Melbourne, but nothing he has done in the past 12 months – nor intoned in the 
past fortnight – suggests he’ll go any deeper than his usual four-match run. 
It’s not the trophy-scattered path that was predicted of him, but it is at 
least consistent.
 