
Bernard Tomic is confident he will be ready for an assault on the Australian 
Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> despite falling in his 
Kooyong Classic opener in another straight-sets loss.


Following his round one exit at the Brisbane International, the 24-year-old 
suffered another setback in his preparation for next week’s Melbourne Park 
grand slam, losing easily to Belgian David Goffin, 6-2, 6-4.


Bernard Tomic's Australian Open campaign unburdened by expectation | Russell 
Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/bernard-tomics-australian-open-campaign-unburdened-by-expectation>
Tomic looked disinterested in the opening set but got back in the match in the 
second before a swag of errors proved costly. He was broken at 4-4, with world 
No11 Goffin wrapping up the match with an ace.

It was the world No27’s second straight opening round defeat after his early 
loss in Brisbane to Spaniard David Ferrer. But Tomic, who this week revealed he 
dropped five kilos in eight days in a bid to be fit for the Open, said he felt 
better for the Kooyong work-out.

“I was trying to work on a few things but he was playing good,” Tomic said. “I 
played well two days ago in an exhibition in Sydney and I’ve got another match 
here so I’m going to use this as much as I can as I have to be ready for Monday.

“If you’re not ready then you can play bad and you only have one shot at the 
Australian Open each year so you have to do the best you can.”


Tomic said both his opponents, world No21 Ferrer and defending Kooyong 
champion Goffin, were quality opponents.


“For me that match [against Ferrer] was a test and I wasn’t quite ready,” he 
said. “The last five days have gone pretty well and I’m feeling pretty good and 
I have one more match and will have to try and improve a little more before 
Monday.”

Meanwhile, Australian Open wildcard recipient Andrew Whittington is under an 
injury cloud after rolling his ankle in the early match at Kooyong. The 
23-year-old, fell as he reached for a forehand in the first set of his clash 
with Russian Mikhail Youzhny.

He returned for one and a half games before retiring at 4-4. 

At the Sydney International, Australian qualifier Matt Barton fell short of 
his maiden ATP quarter-final appearance, while compatriot Jordan Thompson was 
also eliminated.

Barton lost a sapping three-setter to Gilles Muller on Wednesday, when 
Thompson went down 7-5, 6-4 to Philipp Kohlschreiber as the temperature reached 
41C at Sydney Olympic Park.


The only Australian remaining in the main draw is 17-year-old sensation Alex 
De Minaur, who needs to defeat Andrey Kuznetsov on Wednesday night to reach the 
quarter-finals.


In the women’s draw, Caroline Wozniacki’s Sydney hoodoo continued with a 
marathon three-set loss in the stifling heat.

The former world No1 was attempting to end a run of seven Sydney visits 
without getting past the quarter-final stage, but eventually fell 7-5, 6-7 
(7-6), 6-4 to Barbora Strýcová.

Almost a third of the three-hour, 19-minute epic was played in over 40-degree 
heat. Both players were treated for foot injuries during a gruelling second set 
on Ken Rosewall Arena, where they also battled mental demons in heatwave.

Wozniacki looked on track to end her barren run at Homebush when she battled 
back from 5-2 down in the second set, and then 5-0 in the tiebreaker, to force 
a third set but the world No19 Strýcová denied the Dane.
 