
Bernard Tomic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> managed to 
spice up an otherwise desultory opening-round loss to Bosnia’s Damir Džumhur 
with a profane riposte to a heckler on Tuesday at the US Open.

On-court microphones on the Old Grandstand court where the 17th-seeded Tomic 
lost 6-4, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6 (0) caught his response to an animated crowd member as 
Džumhur served for the first set.

“Suck my balls,” the 23-year-old Australian chirped, forcing his opponent to 
stop his service motion. “I will put my balls in your mouth.”

After Džumhur missed on his first serve, Tomic pressed on toward the heckler: 
“I will give you some money to make you feel good.”

Nick Kyrgios v Aljaz Bedene: US Open tennis first round – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/31/nick-kyrgios-v-aljaz-bedene-us-open-tennis-first-round-live>
Within moments Džumhur, who is ranked 74th in the world, took the first set. 
When it was over after 2hr 39min, a composed Tomic, who could face a fine for 
unsportsmanlike conduct, did his best to smooth things over.

“I apologised to what I said to him,” he said. “He definitely baited me the 
whole set for me to say that. But I do apologise. If there were people around 
that heard, yeah, that’s all I can say.

“I think after he left the first set, I think the crowd got happy he left 
because he was a bit annoying. But it’s okay.”

“It was the same sort of voice. He was just sort of saying negative stuff. I 
didn’t know who it was because I was just focusing on the court. It was tough 
to figure out in the background. It’s passed and I don’t really care who this 
guy is.”

When asked whether the heckler had been forcibly removed by security, Tomic 
was uncertain.

“I have no idea,” he said. “I just saw he left and the crowd clapped a bit. 
But I have no idea who he is. I apologised for what I said to him. I just 
continued to play after the second, third set and fourth.”

Tomic, the son of a Croatian father and Bosnian mother who immigrated to 
Australia when he was a boy, said a different group of hecklers on the other 
end were needling him in his language of Serbian-Croatian, but the microphones 
didn’t pick it up. He suggested an enforcement of basic etiquette to help avert 
situations like these moving forward.

“Golf, tennis, I think we respect one another and the crowd,” he said. “If you 
see golf tournaments, as well, on the side, no one’s yelling, no one’s talking. 
There’s a lot of quiet there before someone is hitting the swing or stroke. So 
is tennis. It’s a very respectful sport. We’re not boxers or MMA fighters that 
we rip into each other’s throats before the fight. It’s a very respected sport. 
I think it should be that way.”

When asked whether he thought he’d crossed the line with his remarks, Tomic 
diverted responsibility.

“I’d like to see what the microphone picked up what he said,” he said. “But 
that might not be possible.”
 