
Bernard Tomic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> has suffered a 
deflating start to his Australian summer, crashing out of the Brisbane 
International in the opening round. Tomic lasted just 83 minutes on Monday as 
he went down to eighth-seeded Spaniard David Ferrer 6-3 7-5 in a hail of 
unforced errors on Pat Rafter Arena.

Nick Kyrgios brushes off basketball injury in Hopman Cup singles win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/nick-kyrgios-brushes-off-basketball-injury-in-hopman-cup-singles-win>
The Gold Coaster traditionally performs well at his home tournament but 
struggled badly on serve and could not get his forehand working against the far 
more consistent Ferrer.


His world No26 ranking will drop after failing to defend points achieved last 
year with his run to the semi-finals in Brisbane, before losing to eventual 
champion Milos Raonic. Tomic lost his opening two service games against Ferrer, 
the former world No3, and could only blame himself for producing a sixth double 
fault to lose the first set in 36 minutes.

He appeared to be troubled by a twinge early as he over-extended for a winning 
sliced backhand but managed to go shot for shot with Ferrer in the second set. 
Games went on serve but Tomic was made to work harder for each before falling 
short of taking the set into a tiebreaker.

Tomic saved two match points but again was let down by his serve with his 
eighth double fault, allowing world No21 Ferrer free passage into the second 
round where he’ll meet Australian wildcard Jordan Thompson.

Tomic praised the class and consistency of Ferrer but also blamed his 
first-serve inaccuracy and a heavy training load for his woes. The 24-year-old 
looked lethargic and admitted he “felt flat” after working extremely hard on 
his fitness in the off-season but denied he was carrying any injuries.

“That’s what cost me – I served terrible,” he said. “I was sort of expecting 
it. He’s a guy who has made his career based on being a machine and getting 
every ball back and he’s one of the top players in the world in the past six or 
seven years. It was a match that was always going to be tough and he was just 
playing too solid than I was.”

Tomic, who will play exhibition matches in Sydney and Melbourne, denied it was 
a dent to his confidence heading towards the Australian Open. French world No39 
Nicolas Mahut also won through to the second round after overcoming compatriot 
Stephane Robert 4-6, 6-3, 6-4.
 