
Bernard Tomic has set up an All-Australian clash in the last 32 at the 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, defeating 
Italian Simone Bolelli in four sets. Tomic will meet fellow Queenslander John 
Millman in a Saturday special at Melbourne Park after overcoming a mid-match 
wobble to win 6-4 6-2 6-7 (5-7) 7-5 in three hours and one minute.

The 16th seed began at his clinical best before inviting Bolelli back into the 
match. “It goes to show what can happen when you take your foot off the pedal,” 
Tomic said after his escape. “It was a very difficult moment serving for the 
match ... full credit to him.”

Lleyton Hewitt's Australian Open career ends with a loss to David Ferrer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/21/lleyton-hewitts-australian-open-career-ends-with-a-loss-to-david-ferrer>
For two-and-a-half sets, there was little drama and no fuss from Tomic on 
Margaret Court Arena. The world No17 made life extremely difficult for his 
opponent, minimising his errors and hitting high notes on serve. He didn’t 
offer up a single break point in his first 13 service games, equalling a 
personal-best 25 aces for the match.

The Australian No1 was patient and calculating when returning, triumphing in a 
12-minute marathon for the match’s opening break. But Bolelli, the world No58, 
found a rhythm against Tomic to force and win a third-set tiebreak. While Tomic 
has clearly added an improved athleticism to his disruptive style, little 
incidents appeared to derail his groove. He was twice cruelled by the net when 
serving to force the third-set tiebreak, where he pulled his punches.

Bolelli required on-court treatment for a back ailment that restricted his 
movement, but neither man could break the other in the fourth set until Tomic’s 
final blow in the 12th and last game of the match. Tomic’s father John 
struggled to contain himself in the player’s box after his son blew a match 
point at 5-4. But an hour after he should have ended the match, he did so on 
his second match point with a fine forehand down the line. Tomic’s passage 
ensures there will be at least one Australian in the last 16. 

The 23-year-old will have the chance to replicate his best Australian Open 
results and reach the fourth round, as he did 2012 and 2015. Millman won 
through to the last 32 in contrasting fashion, outlasting Luxembourger Gilles 
Simon in five hard-fought sets.



 