
He is still on the lookout for a full-time coach but Bernard Tomic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> believes he is primed to 
launch a bold quest to crack the ATP Tour top 10. The Australian is hoping to 
eventually find a full-time mentor next year despite enjoying a career-high 
world ranking of 17 in January, while flying solo.

He said finding a new coach would be a key step toward his 2017 goal of 
finally joining the top 10. “Hopefully in 2017 I can have someone there, a 
mentor – that is going to be important,” said world No26 Tomic. “I would like 
to reach the top 10 mark.”

Novak Djokovic splits with coach Boris Becker after three years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/novak-djokovic-splits-with-coach-boris-becker-after-three-years>
And Tomic believes the homecourt advantage this summer will provide an ideal 
launching pad for his plan. Tomic will start his preparation for the Australian 
Open at the Brisbane International, which begins on 1 January.

“I think Australia will push me forward so I have to be ready and step up 
here,” Tomic said. “Brisbane is a huge start for me. And I feel it could be a 
huge year for me.”

While 2016 featured Tomic in the headlines for some incidents off the court, 
including a spat with Australian Olympic Chef de Mission Kitty Chiller and a 
run-in with a heckler at the US Open, what haunted him most was blowing a big 
chance at Wimbledon.

His five-set, fourth round loss to Frenchman Louis Pouille, from 
two-sets-to-one up a major pain point. “I could have pushed for a quarter maybe 
a semi,” Tomic lamented.

Another was his see-sawing Acapulco Open final loss to rising star Dominic 
Thiem in February. A win would have catapulted him to world No13 and closer to 
the the top 10.

“I missed a few chances but I know what I need to do to progress in 2017,” 
Tomic said before elaborating that only he could help himself at times. “No one 
can help myself more than I can – that’s up to me. Mentality is the key. It’s 
why the top five, top 10 are so good – it’s something I lack.”

Tomic remains confident that despite the crushing pressure to do well at home, 
Australia is the best place for him to launch his season with a big Australian 
Open performance.

“It’s not easy. You have to try and put that aside and not get distracted,” he 
said. “It always gets to you that pressure. You just have to control it. But 
Australia is my favourite place to play.”
 