
Bernard Tomic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> has been 
knocked out of the French Open after a four-set defeat in which he complained 
of dizziness.

Watched by a strong Australian contingent, including the Davis Cup coach 
Lleyton Hewitt and 17th seed Nick Kyrgios, Tomic lost 3-6, 6-2, 7-6 (7-4), 7-6 
(8-6) to the Croatian teenager Borna Coric.

Tomic’s exit leaves Australia with just two representatives in the third round 
– Kyrgios, who faces the French ninth seed Richard Gasquet, and Samantha 
Stosur, who has a mighty challenge against last year’s runner-up, Lucie 
Safarova.

Tomic required medical assistance early in the third set, down 2-1, and 
complained of feeling “dizzy and unwell” to the match umpire.

After being given some medication, the 23-year-old recovered with a quick 
service game, levelling the set at 2-2.


Nick Kyrgios eager to renew acquaintance with Richard Gasquet at French Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/26/nick-kyrgios-eager-to-renew-acquaintance-with-richard-gasquet-at-french-open>
He battled on to force a tiebreak, but struggled to stay in long rallies and 
became heavily reliant on hitting winners – at one point shouting to himself “I 
hate this surface” during the 2hr 47min defeat.


He fell behind in the third set tiebreak, then rallied to save two set points, 
before Coric wrapped it up 7-4 to take a two-sets-to-one advantage.


Tomic continued to struggle with his movement in the fourth set and regularly 
found himself fighting to hold serve, but found ways to stay in the match, 
saving five break points in the fifth set and 10 for the match.


In the fourth-set tiebreak, Tomic twice earned a mini-break, but stumbled when 
serving for the set at 6-5 – first putting a backhand slice and then an 
attempted crosscourt forehand into the net to give Coric a second match point.


After a tense rally, Tomic again faltered, sending a big forehand too deep, 
prompting Coric to let out a mighty roar as he set up a third-round clash with 
14th seed Roberto Bautista Agut.


Tomic had the better of his young rival in the early stages of the match, 
breaking Coric in the second game before racing to a 4-1 lead as Hewitt and 
Kyrgios shouted encouragement from the stands.


The 20th seed looked initially comfortable on serve, saving the two break 
points he offered up, and closed out the set 6-3 in 27 minutes.


But momentum shifted early in the second set as Coric grabbed the early break 
– though Tomic immediately hit back to level the scores at 2-2.


Tomic was then cruelled by overconfidence as a missed drop shot, when serving 
down 2-3, proved crucial as Coric broke again to take a hold of the set.


Tomic sportingly overruled the umpire on a Coric winner which was called long 
in the following game but the good karma didn’t fall his way and Coric took the 
set 6-2 in 31 minutes with another break.
 