
Bernard Tomic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> has ruled 
himself out of the Rio Olympics, citing a busy playing schedule and personal 
circumstances. Tomic’s selection was under a cloud after he deliberately gave 
up a match point at a tournament in Madrid and said he didn’t care because he 
was worth $10m, leading Australian Olympic Committee chef de mission Kitty 
Chiller to describe his behaviour as “appalling”.

The 23-year-old Australian said although he has always given his all when 
wearing the green and gold his playing schedule is too busy to allow him to 
play at the Olympics this year and that the move was the best one for his 
career.

“With a heavy sense of regret, I have made the difficult decision to not play 
with the Australian tennis team as they pursue an Olympic medal in Rio,” Tomic 
said in a statement. “I have always proudly represented my country in Davis Cup 
and given my all when wearing the green and gold. But on the basis of my 
extremely busy playing schedule and my own personal circumstances, I am 
regrettably unable to commit to this years tournament.”

Tomic confirmed he would instead play at an ATP World Tour tournament in Los 
Cabos in Mexico during the Olympics. The event in Mexico has replaced a 
tournament in Bogota that Tomic has won the past two years, meaning he will be 
defending significant rankings points. Tomic represented Australia at the 2012 
London Games, losing to Japan’s Kei Nishikori in straight sets.

“It is extremely unfortunate that the date of the tournament has changed this 
year to clash with the Olympics in Rio,” Tomic said. “I had made a commitment 
to the tournaments organisers to defend my title before I knew that the date 
changed.”

Australian Davis Cup captain Lleyton Hewitt – who skipped the 2004 Athens 
Olympics to focus on the US Open where he subsequently made the final – said 
Tomic had not made the decision to bypass the Games lightly.


“Scheduling can always be difficult in these circumstances,” Hewitt said. 
“Bernie has always made himself available to play for Australia in the Davis 
Cup and he is very passionate about playing for his country.”
 