
Bertelsmann <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bertelsmann> has reported a 
4.7% rise in full-year core profit and reiterated its plan to raise its stake 
in Penguin Random House, the book publisher which helped to drive the earnings 
increase.


The German media group controls RTL entertainment company and owns about half 
ofPenguin <https://www.theguardian.com/books/penguin> Random House, publisher 
of bestselling authors such as John Grisham, Stephen King and Paula Hawkins, in 
a joint venture with Pearson.

 Pearson and Bertelsmann committed to holding their shares for at least three 
years when the Penguin Random House venture was announced in October 2012 and 
each partner has the right of first refusal thereafter.

 Bertelsmann’s chief executive, Thomas Rabe, said he did not expect anything 
to happen this year, but added that he would “feel comfortable” owning between 
70% and 75% of the publisher. Bertelsmann’s current stake is 53%.

 Rabe said Bertelsmann had been approached by a number of investors who would 
be interested in participating in a deal to buy Pearson’s stake should the UK 
company decide to sell.

 Pearson said its position had not changed since its chief executive, John 
Fallon, said in November that a sale or reduction in Pearson’s stake would be 
considered at some point, “but it’s more likely to be a 2017 than a 2016 issue”.

 Bertelsmann’s full-year earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and 
amortisation from continuing operations rose to €2.49bn (£1.96bn), the highest 
level since 2006. Revenues were up 2.8%.

This month RTL <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rtl> reported a rise in 2015 
earnings, helped by its German operations and favourable exchange rates.

 Bertelsmann said it continued to see growth in sales and core profit in 2016 
and expected to reach €20bn in sales by about 2020, up from €17.1bn in 2015.

 Rabe said the timing of reaching that target depended on investments, 
acquisitions and market dynamics. “We don’t really care when it happens. It 
could be 2020, it could be a year later. Our growth perspective is clear, but 
it depends on more factors,” he said.

 The main growth drivers in the future would be RTL, the service provider 
Arvato and the music rights company BMG, he said, adding: “All components are 
in place for growth.”
 