 If Bertie Ahern is serious about repairing the international damage inflicted 
on his government over last weekend's reappearance of the Three Amigos from 
Colombia, then the Taoiseach ought to reach Bogota before Jeffrey Donaldson 
does.
The Democratic Unionist MP is travelling to the Colombian capital where he 
will demonstrate his support for that country's government in its campaign to 
have the IRA trio extradited to South America. Donaldson will also express 
solidarity with the victims of Farc, the narco-terrorist, nominally Marxist 
guerrilla group that James Monaghan, Martin McAuley and Niall Connolly were 
found guilty of training in the black arts of bombing and mortar-making. The 
Lagan Valley MP's visit has the potential of turning the forgotten issue of 
Farc's terror into another depressing unionist/nationalist squabble. It is up 
to the Taoiseach and his ministers to ensure that doesn't happen.

Since Monaghan, McAuley and Connolly were arrested at Bogota's El Dorado 
airport four years ago, there has been one group almost singularly absent from 
the debate about their presence in the South American country: Farc and, by 
proxy, its victims.

Throughout the printed and electronic media in Ireland, there has been little 
or no coverage about those at the sharp end of Farc's technology-leap, brought 
about by the skills and expertise of the three fugitives. The Irish public has 
yet to see any interviews on paper or the airwaves with the relatives, loved 
ones or the survivors of Farc's recent attacks. The terror group is blithely 
described on the BBC and RTE as 'Marxist guerrillas', while no mention is made 
of the fact that the majority of its victims are the poor and dispossessed, 
such as those church-goers who died during a Farc mortar attack on a Catholic 
chapel three years ago. Nor is it widely explained that the mainstream, 
democratic Latin American left view Farc with an equal measure of suspicion and 
loathing. Democratic left-wing parties on that continent by and large regard 
Farc as a mixed bag of old-fashioned Marxist-Leninist totalitarians and 
opportunistic drug barons.

The drug link is crucial here, given the usual piety with which both Sinn Fein 
and the IRA approach the issue of narcotics. Ten years ago, the latter launched 
an armed crusade against a range of petty drug dealers in the Greater Belfast 
area, several of whom were shot dead. Since the 1980s, meanwhile, party 
activists in Dublin have been at the forefront of local struggles to drive out 
drug dealers from working-class areas of the capital. And yet four years ago, 
it emerged that the republican movement's military wing was colluding with one 
of the largest dealers of cocaine on the planet. Even if you swallow the 
explanation James Monaghan gave on his return for being in Colombia - that they 
were there to witness a peace process South American-style - there is still the 
question of Farc and the cocaine connection.

Leaving aside the misery the likes of Farc cause through the industrial 
production and supply of cocaine, there is also the terror group's record of 
killing civilians. The government could and should invite the relatives, 
families and loved ones of those who have died at Farc's hands to Ireland, 
particularly those slaughtered in recent mortar and bomb attacks. They should 
be able to meet all the Dail parties, visit President McAleese and, if they 
feel the urge, take a trip up to Parnell Square to ask Sinn Fein where the 
Three Amigos are currently residing.

Last Friday, the republican movement quite openly declared political war on 
Bertie Ahern and his government. They had quite cleverly painted the Taoiseach 
into a corner with the trick of pulling Monaghan out of the hat. Ireland now 
runs the risk of being labelled a safe haven for terrorists as well as 
alienating Washington. Some might argue it doesn't matter what the Americans, 
British or Colombians say, that it's none of their business interfering in 
Irish affairs.

There are, however, tens of thousands of Irish jobs reliant on American 
multinationals. You can imagine the impact on the average US corporate 
executive if he or she reads an editorial any time soon in the Wall Street 
Journal which happens to take the same view of the republic as Peter Robinson 
was articulating last weekend - that Ireland really is a terrorist haven. 
Business leaders thinking of future investments in Ireland might be more likely 
to locate their factories in one of the new EU states instead.

Clearly there is little or no chance of any Irish court extraditing the trio 
back to Bogota. Republican strategists knew all this when they gave the 
go-ahead for Monaghan to come out of hiding and reveal that he and his comrades 
were back on the oul sod. For the Taoiseach to do nothing has the potential to 
deepen the diplomatic debacle the government finds itself in. He has very few 
weapons in his arsenal to counter this audacious propaganda coup, which has the 
potential to destabilise the coalition. A few thousand euros from the 
Department of Foreign Affairs budget for a handful of grieving Colombians, 
though, might just be the best money Ahern spends between now and the next 
general election.

henry.mcdonald@observer.co.uk <mailto:henry.mcdonald@observer.co.uk>
 