
Tim Scott, the first black US senator from the deep south since 
Reconstruction, is proposing that the site where the civil war began be raised 
in status to that of a national park.

In age of Trump, Sidney Blumenthal's book on Lincoln illuminates party history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/14/sidney-blumenthal-lincoln-biography-hillary-clinton-trump>
The Republican has introduced a bill creating the Fort Sumter and Fort 
Moultrie national park as the nation’s60th national park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/28/national-parks-tourism-bad-behavior>
 and second in South Carolina.

Fort Sumter, on Charleston Harbor, was bombarded by Confederate guns on 12 
April 1861, a fight that started four years of civil war.

Moultrie, on nearby Sullivan’s Island, is where American patriots turned back 
a British fleet trying to capture Charleston days before the signing of the 
Declaration of Independence.

Both forts are part of the Fort Sumter national monument, one of 84 national 
monuments among 413 sites administered by the National Park Service. Scott said 
a national park designation would give the forts a higher profile among the 
array of other national park properties and should mean more visitors to sites 
that now draw about 1 million visitors a year.

“What we hope to do is bring more attention,” Scott said. “People know the 
first shots of the civil war but they don’t necessarily know the history dating 
back to the first years of our country and the significance Fort Moultrie 
played.”

It’s not the first effort to create a national park at the sites. Similar 
legislation was introduced by the late senator Strom Thurmond, a fellow 
Republican but a one-time staunch segregationist, in 2002. That bill died in 
committee.

Scott said he hadn’t given much thought to the significance of a black man 
working to raise the status of a key civil war site.

“South Carolina has a provocative history,” the former congressman said. 
“Perhaps part of that history is me representing in Congress the site where the 
civil war began and now, as a senator, hopefully making it into a park.”

He said the bill “resonates on both sides of the aisle and frankly I think it 
will resonate throughout the nation” and hopes it can pass this year.

Tim Stone, the superintendent of the Fort Sumter national monument, said a 
national park designation would not expand the park or mean more budget money.

“It just raises the profile and stature,” he said. “It gives the importance of 
Fort Sumter and Fort Moultrie and their role in American history their proper 
due.”

He said status as a national park is important because many people plan their 
travels around visiting national parks. If you search online for national parks 
inSouth Carolina <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/south-carolina>, the only 
thing that comes up is Congaree national park, near Columbia, he said.

Jim Thompson, director of the Fort Sumter-Fort Moultrie Historic Trust, a 
not-for-profit group that helps support projects at the forts, is pleased a new 
park would have Moultrie in the name.

The fort was only partially finished when troops under Col William Moultrie 
turned back a British fleet on 28 June 1776, six days before the signing of the 
Declaration of Independence.

“Word got back to Philadelphia, which gave courage to some of those who were 
on the fence to go ahead and sign the Declaration of Independence,” Thompson 
said.
 