
Bob Bradley had little reason to know how quickly he would be proved right 
when ruminating, at his first press conference asSwansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> manager, upon the modus operandi 
of his new bosses.

“I don’t think they’d have got where they are by making decisions with the 
heart,” Bradley said of the club’s owners, Steve Kaplan and Jason Levien. And 
while on this occasion he was second-guessing the logic of his own appointment, 
it would be less than three monthsbefore he discovered just how harsh the 
Premier League can be 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/bob-bradley-sacked-swansea-city-11-games>
.

Firing a manager carries inescapable connotations, none of which anyone 
involved would really wish to be levelled at Bradley. The duration of his 
tenure – the second-shortest of thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> era – is trivia quiz 
material, ripe for lampooning, and one reading would be that Bradley, who also 
had to wear the “American coach” tag from day one, was simply not equipped for 
the size of the job handed him. A spell like this can scar perceptions of a 
career irreversibly but nothing about his work at Swansea gives the 
overwhelming impression of Bradley as inadequate.

Bob Bradley had to go but blame for Swansea’s plight lies in the boardroom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/28/bob-bradley-swansea-chairman-huw-jenkins>
There simply was not the time for him to make a case either way, although that 
is not the same as suggesting he was the right man in the first place. Kaplan 
and Levien overestimated two things when throwing Bradley in at the deep end. 
First, the capability of a squad that had been grievously weakened across the 
previous four transfer windows; second, the goodwill of a fanbase whose pride 
in a club that had been a model for progressive, lucid ownership had taken a 
hit in the last 12 months.

Maybe they overestimated Bradley too, even though his appointment always 
seemed a shot in the dark. In hindsight, Swansea should have sought an 
experienced, unsexy Premier League head upon sacking Francisco Guidolin. They 
may not have brought back the old brand of stylish football the fans craved but 
they may have been better equipped for a relegation fight. If Bradley, or any 
similar mouldbreaking newcomer, was to be the choice then it needed to go hand 
in hand with an acceptance that long-term change might have to include 
considerable short-term pain.

Yet Kaplan and Levien clearly had neither approach in mind, which makes their 
recruitment and subsequent treatment of Bradley all the more difficult to 
understand. This was less the failure of an American manager in the Premier 
League than a failure of American owners – and that, in itself, has its place 
in a wider trend of remote, ill-considered decision making by foreign board 
members in British football rather than being a comment on their specific 
nationality.

Bradley is a bright man and was aware of the focus his arrival would attract 
in Britain, where some stigma still exists around the US game. So he gave the 
media little rope to hang him with and made a favourable impression, answering 
questions fully while making time to create one or two deeper professional 
connections. Yet when things are going wrong you are only a slip or two away 
from a change in mood and his use of “road game” and “PKs” when speaking after 
his penultimate match,a 3-0 defeat to a mediocre Middlesbrough side 
<http://www.bbc.com/sport/football/38273593>, prompted the kind of overblown 
derision that had never felt a million miles away.

At that point, Bradley was forced to defend himself for the first time. “It 
wouldn’t make sense if I sounded like everyone else,” he said before the West 
Ham match that would seal his fate. “I have come here to be myself. I am a 
football man. What counts is that what I say resonates with the players.”

But that did not happen to the extent required. Perhaps Swansea’s players 
simply lacked the aptitude or good grace to take in the words of a manager 
whose message during spells with Egypt, Stabaek, Le Havre and the US men’s 
national team was well respected for its clarity. The one time he picked the 
same team for consecutive games Swansea followed a respectable 1-1 draw at 
Everton witha chaotic 5-4 victory over relegation rivals Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/swansea-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
; the rest of the time Bradley chopped and changed a side painfully thin on 
quality at either end of the pitch. He needed to hit upon a consistent formula 
quickly but never gave the impression of knowing how best to set up a team that 
haemorrhaged goals.

That was not all his fault; not much of this sorry tale was but it is still 
hard to see Bradley getting another run at this level soon. Speculatively, his 
best hope for another crack at British football might be to work with a 
floundering Championship side in need of a longer-term run-up to a promotion 
campaign. It would still take tangible success in that scenario to escape guilt 
by association with a Swansea regime that risk alienating all around them.

Perhaps Bradley will reflect that, while he was batting away those early 
questions about his nationality and the motivations of Kaplan and Levien back 
in October, there was something else in the room that spoke of what would 
follow. As he held court at the Swansea Marriott, there to watch the early 
stages of his press conference was the looming figure of Guidolin, who had 
apparently stumbled across the event while waiting to meet an associate. 
Guidolin was ushered out soon enough, but Bradley still never managed to escape 
the ghosts of costly decisions that doomed his role to that of a historical 
oddity before it had even begun.
 