
David Moyes and Sean Dyche exchanged slightly resigned looks as they shook 
hands at the final whistle after watching their teams secure a thoroughly 
unwanted replay at Turf Moor on Tuesday week.

On Friday, Moyes had spoken enthusiastically about the possibility of his 
relegation-threatenedSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> side using the FA Cup as a 
chance to acquire that most coveted football commodity: “momentum”. Instead, 
they merely succeeded in almost boring their supporters to sleep while placing 
themselves in peril of needless fatigue.

“Sorry about that,” said the Scot, joking. “I’m disappointed with the 
performance and it was a poor game but I’m pleased to still be in the cup.”

Dyche, meanwhile, correctly pointed out that Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> should have won before 
emphasising that he, too, was happy to be in the fourth round draw.

Some managers are quite possibly thinking of how pleasant it might be to spend 
fourth-round weekend in the Dubai sunshine when they compose somewhat weakened 
third round teamsheets. While Moyes most definitely fails to fall into this 
camp. Sunderland’s Premier League position – third from bottom – would have 
given him a good excuse for resting a raft of players, Jermain Defoe included.

Instead he made two – enforced – changes, fielding his strongest available XI 
with Defoe, once again, leading the attacking line. Although enjoying the 
relative comfort of 12th place, Burnley have eight more points than Sunderland 
and, presumably mindful of potentially heavy weather ahead, Dyche duly indulged 
in a little rotation, making six changes from the side thatlost at Manchester 
City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-city-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
last Monday.

Steven Naismith rescues last-ditch draw for Norwich City against Southampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/norwich-city-southampton-fa-cup-match-report>
The new faces included the heavily booed Joey Barton, making his first 
appearance sincere-joining Burnley  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/burnley-sign-joey-barton-despite-suspension-threat>
after Rangers terminated his contract in November. Primarily up against Donald 
Love in central midfield, Barton seemed characteristically capable of holding 
his own and did not appear remotely as ring rusty as might have been imagined.

Even so, he was unable to raise the tone on an afternoon that swiftly 
descended into a shapeless scrap. Despite Vito Mannone being required to make a 
fabulous reflex save to deny Sam Vokes after Scott Arfield’s stellar through 
pass had left the striker clean through and one on one against the goalkeeper, 
neither defence was exactly overworked.

Admittedly, the impressively industrious Jack Rodwell twice shot marginally 
wide and Nick Pope has his fingers stung by a subsequent shot from Adnan 
Januzaj – operating in his new in-the-hole role just behind Defoe – but for all 
their dominance of possession Sunderland struggled to hurt Burnley.

Moyes had set his side up with a rather narrow midfield and while this 
arrangement offered them a sense of security it also limited scope for 
adventure. Indeed, with Fabio Borini and Seb Larsson less than dynamic wingers 
it was turning into the sort of stalemate that sometimes gives this stage of 
the competition a bad name.

Wayne Rooney equals record as Manchester United ease past Reading
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/manchester-united-reading-fa-cup-match-report>
A crowd of 17,632 in a stadium that rarely attracts less than 40,000 for 
league games did not help as the prospect of an unwanted replay in East 
Lancashire started coming into alarmingly sharp focus on the horizon.

As the second half ticked on even a man as big on integrity and honesty as 
Moyes must have had a measure of sympathy with the manager who was once 
discovered to have been booked on to a fourth-round weekend flight to Barbados 
with his wife before third round had began. No prizes for guessing his team’s 
result.

Although the generally underemployed Pope did well to tip Rodwell’s left-foot, 
long-range shot over his bar and Tendayi Darikwa hit a post with a header from 
Steven Defour’s corner, the impasse seemed increasingly unlikely to be broken.

There was still time for Moyes to introduce John O’Shea as Sunderland switched 
to three at the back, Barton to collect a surely inevitable booking for a foul 
on Januzaj and Defoe to see a slightly iffy penalty appeal turned down but not 
a goal.

Even though Burnley finished the match as much the stronger side these teams 
could probably have played until 9pm without scoring.
 