
It was the very essence of sporting challenge and McEnroe's superlative fight 
quite mesmerised me. His image will never be the same again to the British and 
in this four-hour epic he erased four years of the headline writers' billboard 
graffiti that had been lumbered around his neck.

Matching fire with fire, gut with gut, honesty with honesty. Never once the 
defensive option when cornered. I was amazed at myself at the very end: here I 
was, privileged witness to history as an incredible man wins for an 
unprecedented fifth time - and I only have eyes and tears and feeling for the 
loser. He sat with head in hands and doubtless cursed horrendous curses to 
himself as the first-ever volley of ungrudging cheers assailed him.

Then it becomes real life again and you are confronted with a sharp but shy 
young student millionaire. He pouts and pulls faces and twangs his red headband 
and scratches his wiry rust hair as he hopelessly attempts to get his public 
brain as fractionally articulated as his public tennis. And now he looks his 
age and so, more relevantly, does the world's press with our elderly manners 
and moods and our hair parted and grey and our traditional yawnworthy questions.

It is also relevant that his contemporaries call him "Junior". I interviewed 
him beforeWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> last year. "I 
suppose," he started resignedly, "it will be the usual dumb stuff - 'Why don't 
I ever smile' and 'Why am I rude to officials? and 'Why can't I be more 
British?' Well, let me say I don't smile when I'm concentrating on work - well, 
do you go around with a grin on your face when you're reading up some 
concentrated research? - and, as for being rude to linesmen, well I honestly 
say I've only ever queried what I genuinely know is a bad call and I just think 
my eyesight at 20 is better than some old man's of 70, however much he might 
love tennis. Anything else?"

And he looks at you, this pouting, freckled Just William who has been dressed 
up as Hiawatha in a Sunday school play, and you say: "No, John. Thank you, 
John. That just about covers it, John" - and you curse yourself for not daring 
to ask why he's so fixated about his plimsolls and the laces therein. Can a 
psychiatrist help?

As he leaves he suggests you look up the biographical guff in any magazine 
article, about being born in West Germany, where his father was a personnel 
officer in the US Air Force.

McEnroe Senior is a first-generation Irishman who now is a successful Wall 
Street lawyer. None of the family played tennis till Junior started whacking a 
plastic ball around at 18 months. Dad got him coached first by Harry Hopman and 
then Tony Palafox. Once, when his father was watching John play as a mite in 
Central Park, a lady approached and asked: "Is that a little boy or a midget?"

The helter-skelter welter of wordage since 1977 has stopped us noticing that 
John McEnroe <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/john-mcenroe> was neither boy 
nor midget. But after Saturday he is certainly a man.
 