
Burnley struck another blow for Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> clubs at the bottom end of 
the financial ladder as they followed their Carling Cup triumph at Chelsea by 
coming from behind to win 2-1 atQPR.

Their latest success in west London provided further evidence of the 
importance of their keeper Brian Jensen (pictured) this season. The big Dane - 
referred to as 'The Beast' because of his physical presence - believes he is 
producing the best form of his five-year Burnley career. Having certainly 
emphasised the point with his two penalty saves at Stamford Bridge, he was also 
in dominant mood yesterday. AnotherBurnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> star at Loftus Road was their 
substitute Alan Mahon, who scored their second goal with a superb shot after a 
Robbie Blake cross was deflected to him on the other side of the penalty area .

The result lifted Burnley into fourth place and is another blow to QPR's hopes 
of mounting the promotion challenge expected of them.

It was an unhappy afternoon for Charlton keeper Nicky Weaver, whose mistakes 
led to his team losing 3-2 atBirmingham. With Charlton having come from behind 
to lead 2-1, Weaver appeared to lose his footing in dealing with a Nigel 
Quashie cross, giving Kevin Phillips the perfect invitation to put the ball in 
the net by tipping it on to his head. He then spilled a Quashie shot, allowing 
Franck Queudrue to get Birmingham's winner. Birmingham were able to hold on to 
the lead despite having Quashie sent off - an important result for them in view 
ofWolves' 2-1 win at Southampton and Reading's 2-0 win at Sheffield United

Contrast Weaver's mood at the final whistle with that of Nottingham Forest 
keeper Lee Camp. With the score 2-2 atBristol City - after Forest had twice 
been ahead - he made sure it stayed that way with a stoppage-time penalty save 
from Michael McIndoe. It was not the best of kicks from McIndoe, who also 
failed to convert a penalty in the previous match againstSouthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton>. The good news for him, 
though, is that City will now hand the job to someone else.

Of the teams keeping Forest company in the relegation zone, Watford lost 2-1 at
Barnsley after being ahead but Doncaster overcame Ipswich 1-0. Barnsley's 
decisive goal came from defender Stephen Foster - the perfect way for him to 
mark his official appointment as the club's captain last week. Doncaster's run 
of 12 matches without a win - a stretch including 10 defeats - was brought to 
an end by a Shelton Martis header. Before that goal, Ipswich's David Norris, 
rightly under fire last week for his controversial goal celebration against 
Blackpool, missed a sitter from six yards.

Leeds were on the receiving end of one of the day's big surprises as the 
League One promotion favourites slumped to a 2-1 home defeat in their Yorkshire 
derby againstHuddersfield. Before an Elland Road crowd of 32,028, their biggest 
attendance of the season, Leeds were given the perfect start when young 
Scottish striker Robert Snodgrass put them ahead after four minutes. 
Huddersfield equalised through left-back Joe Skarz just after half-time and 
there was an even bigger shock for Leeds when two moments in which they could 
have regained the lead - through a Jermaine Beckford effort kept out by keeper 
Matt Glennon and a Luciano Becchio shot that hit the bar - were followed by 
Michael Collins scoring theHuddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> winner in stoppage time. 
Another League One surprise wasLeicester's 2-2 draw at Swindon, after they had 
been 2-0 ahead.

In League Two, Grimsby ended their long wait for a win with a 2-0 victory at 
Bury. Fortunately for them, they were reduced to 10 men through Jean-Paul 
Kalala's sending-off only after they had scored their goals.

Darlington, the leaders, also had a man sent off - their influential captain 
Stephen Foster - after 14 minutes at home toLincoln. However, this was offset 
by the form of striker Richie Foran. He provided the through pass from which 
Liam Hatch opened the scoring and got Darlington's other goal in a 2-0 win with 
a long-range shot.
 