
I wonder if the experimental psychology department at Oxford University is 
doing “Dry January”?

One assumes not, since they’ve just published a paper 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40750-016-0058-4> that shows regular 
pub visits make people happier and healthier.

Hmm. In my distant memory of Oxford University, regular pub visits certainly 
seemed to make thedons happier – I can’t speak as to healthier. I was amused to 
hear that these recent researchers conducted a rigorous “analysis of 
conversational behaviour in pubs”.

I can believe that.

“Ah, professor! What are you up to this afternoon?”

“I am continuing my analysis of conversational behaviour in pubs, professor! I 
shall be hard at work until gone nightfall.”

“Interesting work indeed, professor! Will you be analysing the conversational 
behaviour in the Kings Arms today or the Lamb & Flag?”

“As a matter of fact, professor, I thought I might analyse the conversational 
behaviour in the Turf Tavern. I hear they have a new craft beer, which might 
inspire some interesting conversational behaviour for me to analyse.”

“The Turf, professor? On a sunny day like this? Seems a shame. Wouldn’t it be 
more fruitful to analyse the conversational behaviour outdoors, by a river – 
say, the Trout at Wolvercote? I might join you for a quick spot of analysis 
myself. And a pickled egg.”

I imply nothing about the noble anthropologists of Oxford University. All I’m 
saying is that my tutors, back in the day, were always conducting detailed, 
time-consuming research into pub habits – and they were in the English 
department.

To be fair, the scientists did not base their findings entirely on analysis of 
conversational behaviour in pubs. They also factored in a 2015 survey 
commissioned by the Campaign for Real Ale and “a questionnaire-based study of 
the clientele in a number of pubs”.

So: going to the pub; asking pub-goers to fill in a form; and Camra 
<http://www.camra.org.uk/home/-/asset_publisher/UzG2SEmQMtPf/content/your-health-the-benefits-of-social-drinking?_101_INSTANCE_UzG2SEmQMtPf_redirect=%2F>
. Is it just me or was the result “You’re happier in the pub” a reasonably 
foregone conclusion?

Look, I don’t want to sound bitter. Or lager. (Happy new year!) But I hate 
going to the pub. The suspicious timing of this paper, hitting academic 
journals on 28 December and the popular press in January, is perfect for 
undermining the one month when people try to do something else with their 
evenings. Something wholesome and healthy! Something productive and useful! 
Like playing poker!

People really love the pub. I say people. I mean my husband. Nothing makes my 
husband happier than settling down in the corner of some reeky-carpeted local 
boozing house for a good old sit. Maybe a chat. And, obviously, a beer. A sit 
and a chat and a beer.Beer <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/beer> and 
a chat and a sit. Sit, chat, beer. Chat, sit, beer. Sit, sit, beer beer, chat 
chat chat, sit sit sit.

Sometimes no chat! Just a nice quiet beer. Nice quiet beer and a sit. A sit 
and a beer. A sit and a beer and a sit. Christ! As if we wereimmortal!

Beer is revolting, I think we can all agree on that? Foul, sour, fizzy, 
fermented concoction; it tastes like the liquid that gathers at the bottom of a 
wheelie bin (or so I imagine). And yet, not only do people drink it, they drink
pintsof it! Vast quantities of this yeasty bin-juice; pints and jugs and 
tankards sloshing down into poor, stretched, windy stomachs. All night, people 
sit there.

“Another?”

“Go on! Stick one in there!”

“My round!”

“Your round!”

Ugh.

And nothing else is happening! It’s a different matter if you’re having some 
lunch or playing a pub quiz; that makes sense. I’m happy if there are board 
games or a pool table.

But just sitting there, doing nothing, just slurping away at a beer and 
waiting for the occasional outbreak of chat: this is the pastime of choice for 
literally millions of people!

Nobody can possibly quibble with me if I point out that drinks parties are 
awful. Nobody likes those. Everyone stands there, self-conscious and 
embarrassed and shy, wondering what to do and what to say.

And yet people claim to like the pub, which is exactly the same except you 
have to queue for your drinks one by one at a counter like it’s the Soviet 
Union, then sit on a hard chair at an upright table with the same three friends 
for hours. You can’t even mingle. You’re trapped. Trapped like a whale at a 
theme park.

My husband says I can’t enjoy pubs because my sense of “an awkward silence” 
kicks in before everyone else’s.

So, just when the old schoolfriends/work colleagues/grizzled surrounding 
fishermen are reaching happily for their pints, I’m nervously shouting: 
“Brexit! What do we all think?”, or “What would you rather be, a piglet or a 
bookshelf?”, or “Let me tell you about my first sexual experience!” in the 
teeth of baffled, sympathetic onlookers.

Perhaps he’s right. That could be it. I just don’t see why anyone would 
voluntarily enter a situation where there’s so much pressure on conversation 
anyway. Nothing else to do, nowhere to hide. It’s not like I hatepeople or that 
I’ve never been lonely; I’d just go to casinos rather than pubs. Places of 
action, not contemplation.

Having said all that, I suppose I’ll be pleased if this academic paper tricks 
more people into using the pub.Pubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pubs> have faced an awful struggle, 
what with the recession and the smoking ban and cheap home-delivery alcohol; I 
don’t want them all to close down. They’re too established and historic; some 
of them too beautiful; and too nice on those days when you’re in there for a 
country lunch or a challenging quiz.

As for the daily grind of pub culture, I do want it to exist – I just don’t 
want to have to go myself. Now I come to think of it, I feel exactly the same 
about opera.
 