
When Donald Trump defeated Hillary Clinton in the US presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-concedes-election-donald-trump-speech>
,the market’s immediate negative response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/live/2016/nov/09/stock-markets-on-edge-as-us-presidential-election-heads-for-tense-climax>
 was to be expected. But by the next day,the market’s downward turn had already 
reversed itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/uncertainty-over-trump-policies-rattles-markets>
.

US equities and bond yields rallied after Trump delivered a victory speech 
that seemed to signal that he was tacking to the centre, which investors had 
originally expected him to do this summer, after he won the Republican 
nomination and entered the general election campaign.

In his speech, Trump promised to be a president for all Americans, praised 
Clinton for her past public service, and vowed to pursue massive 
fiscal-stimulus policies centred on infrastructure spending and tax cuts for 
corporations and the wealthy.

Markets will give Trump the benefit of the doubt, for now, but investors are 
now watching to see who he appoints to his administration, what shape his 
fiscal policies actually take, and what course he charts for monetary policy.

Joseph Stiglitz: what the US economy needs from Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/joseph-stiglitz-what-the-us-economy-needs-from-donald-trump>
They may be watching monetary policy most closely. During his campaign, Trump 
threatened the US Federal Reserve’s independence, and heaped criticism on Fed 
chairJanet Yellen <https://www.theguardian.com/business/janet-yellen>. But 
Trump is a real-estate mogul, so we cannot immediately assume that he is a true 
monetary policy hawk, and not a closet dove. His campaign rhetoric may have 
been directed at the Republican party base, which is full of Fed-bashing gold 
bugs.

Trump could appoint hawks to the two Fed board seats that are currently 
vacant, and he will certainly replace Yellen when her term expires in 2018. But 
it is unlikely that he will force her to resign before then, because markets 
would punish such an obvious violation of central bank independence.

Even if Trump does choose a hawk to replace Yellen, his appointee would be only
primus inter pares on the Federal Open Market Committee. Yellen’s successor 
would not be able to simply impose his or her view on the FOMC’s seven-member 
board of governors and five Reserve Bank presidents.

While the Fed did resemble an absolute monarchy under former chairman Alan 
Greenspan, it became more of a constitutional monarchy under Greenspan’s 
successor, Ben Bernanke. Under Yellen, it might best be described as a 
democratic republic. This transformation cannot be reversed: each FOMC member 
holds strong views about which direction monetary policy should take, and each 
is willing to dissent when needed.

This means that a radical hawk appointed by Trump could end up in the 
minority, and would be consistently outvoted by the FOMC’s dovish majority. Of 
course, Trump may be able to change the Fed board’s composition over time, by 
appointing new governors when Stanley Fischer, Lael Brainard, Daniel K Tarullo 
and Jerome H Powell’s terms end. But if he takes this route, the market will 
still police the Fed’s actions.

If continued low growth and low inflation do not justify rapid interest rate 
increases, a hawkish Fed that raises rates anyway will face harsh disciplining 
by the market – and, by extension, so will Trump.

Moreover, premature and excessive hawkishness would strengthen the US dollar 
and sharply increase the US trade deficit, undermining Trump’s stated goal of 
creating jobs and boosting incomes for his blue-collar, working-class electoral 
base. If Trump cares about his base – or if he at least wants to avoid a 
political backlash from it – he should appoint dovish Fed governors who will 
favor easy-money policies that weaken the dollar. Ironically, Barack Obama’s 
appointees, such as Brainard and Tarullo, are actually ideal for Trump’s agenda.

Dictators around the world will delight in Trump’s victory | Brian Klaas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/dictators-world-donald-trump-victory-russia-drc>
If Trump does choose a more hawkish monetary policy approach, it will have an 
ambiguous impact on the dollar, owing to his other proposals’ downstream 
effects. Looser fiscal policy and tighter monetary policy should, as in Ronald 
Reagan’s first term, strengthen the dollar, but if Trump pushes the US toward 
protectionism, he will generate economic and geopolitical tail risks that would 
weaken the dollar and increase US country risk.

Similarly, Trump’s fiscal policies would also weaken the dollar over time – 
after an initial significant appreciation – as the substantially higher deficit 
spending would be financed either with easy money or bond issues that increase 
US sovereign risk. The net impact of all these factors on the dollar will all 
depend on how loose fiscal policy becomes, and on how tight monetary policy 
becomes.

Trump’s proposed policy mix would also have an ambiguous – and modest – impact 
on growth, if he appoints hawks to the Fed. Looser fiscal policy would help 
short-term economic growth; but tighter monetary policy would undercut those 
gains. Similarly, if Trump really does want to redistribute some income from 
capital to labour, and from corporate profits to wages (admittedly a big “if”), 
his policies could boost consumption. But his populist, protectionist policies 
would undermine business confidence, and thus capital expenditures, while 
reducing consumers’ purchasing power through higher inflation.

Equity markets will undoubtedly favour Trump’s proposals to loosen fiscal 
policy, deregulate business and finance, and cut taxes. But investors will be 
on the lookout for protectionism, Wall Street – and immigrant-bashing, and 
overly aggressive monetary hawkishness. Only time – and the market – will tell 
if Trump has struck the right balance.

• Nouriel Roubini is a professor at NYU’s Stern School of Business, and was 
senior economist for international affairs in the White House’s council of 
economic advisers during the Clinton era. He has also worked for the IMF, the
Federal Reserve <https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve>, and the 
World Bank.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>
 