
Like many good ideas, Orderella <http://www.orderella.co.uk/> was conceived 
over a pint. The pub, in London, was very busy. “It was my turn to get the next 
round, and I had to wait 10 to 15 minutes,” recalls Dennis Collet, CEO and 
co-founder of the company. “That got us thinking, wouldn’t it be nice not to 
have to go through all that rigmarole to be served?”


Orderella’s proposition is simple: let your phone do the queuing. Its app (for 
Android and Apple mobiles) lets consumers order and pay for their drinks 
without leaving their table, so friends and colleagues can spend more time 
talking to each other. Users can also pre-order drinks in advance – from a 
taxi, for example. “If you lose half of your evening to queuing, that’s a lot 
of banter you’re missing,” Collet notes.

The lightbulb moment came in 2012. Collet was working at Ernst & Young, as a 
consultant specialising in mobile payments. “Hailo had just started – you could 
hail a cab from a few miles away, but in a bar you couldn’t order a drink to 
come across the room,” he says.

Collet and his four co-founders, who have backgrounds in finance, legal and 
IT, funded the launch themselves, with help from family, friends and business 
contacts. This paid for initial development of the app, by a German IT agency.

Consumers download the Orderella app for free – 70,000 have downloaded it to 
date – and more than 10,000 actively use it. In a typical venue offering the 
facility, 5 to 10% of customers will order their drinks this way, says Collet. 
There is no surcharge for using it: drinks cost the same as paying cash at the 
bar.

“At first we charged the venues a commission, and a lot of them were 
interested in trying the app,” he explains. But not everyone followed through, 
which meant the company had invested time getting them up and running for 
nothing. So in 2015, the business switched to a fixed monthly subscription fee.

'Show me the money!' – do you use logic or emotion to negotiate?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/aug/12/use-logic-emotion-negotiate-entrepreneurs>
Orderella covers all the transaction costs. “This encourages venues to promote 
the app, because they’re avoiding credit card fees,” explains Collet. Its 
primary market is bustling city pubs, sports bars, student unions and bars with 
large outdoor areas. “The app comes alive where it’s busy or there is a 
distance to the bar,” Collet says.

The real money-spinner for the business is in selling promotions to brands – 
for example, drinks companies like Diageo. Other commercial customers include 
PayPal who can run their own campaigns, perhaps offering a discount to 
customers who pay through its channel. Together, these commercial partners 
account for 70% of Orderella’s revenues.

Orderella isn’t the first app that aims to put an end to queuing. Kate 
Nicholls, CEO of theAssociation of Licensed Multiple Retailers 
<http://www.almr.org.uk/> warns that similar apps have failed to crack this 
market, perhaps due to a lack of take-up by venues, or apps not working as they 
should in practice. Nicholls says: “To succeed, apps like this need widespread 
functionality and reliability. If customers cannot use the app in their 
favourite bar or are struggling with reliability issues, they will abandon it 
pretty smartly.”

Michael Mann, owner of The Earl Spencer <http://theearlspencer.com/> in 
London, was an early adopter of Orderella. However, a family-orientated venue 
with a constantly changing menu, the pub found it added an extra layer of 
programming each day and so no longer uses it. Another complicating factor was 
that the app wasn’t integrated with the till system, so staff had to also enter 
orders into the till.

Mann sees Orderella’s appeal for venues that have fixed menus or just serve 
drinks. “They’ve had huge success in some pubs. If I had just a bar I’d be 
using it for sure, it’s a fantastic idea.”

Ben Perkins, head of consumer research at Deloitte, says one challenge for 
ordering apps is demonstrating that they improve efficiency.Pubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pubs> have a bar with staff behind it 
because this has traditionally been the most efficient way of serving a large 
volume of customers, says Perkins.

However there is a trend towards a more independent and empowered consumer. 
“What we may see with these apps is that traditional pubs or hotels need to 
adapt and change their environment.” For example, in the future pubs might not 
have a bar, says Perkins.

Collet says venues that use Orderella can process more orders as they handle 
fewer transactions – it typically saves staff 90 seconds per order, he says.

The doctor will see you online now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jul/15/the-doctor-will-see-you-online-now>
To date, around 150 venues across the UK and Ireland have come on board, 
including temporary venues at festivals, banquets and awards events, and 
corporate VIP locations.

 The startup has so far raised £2m in market funding in addition to the 
initial sums from existing contacts. Besides angel investors, the company has 
brought in strategic partners with a background in the hospitality industry. 
These include Genting Group, the Malaysian entertainment business which runs 
casinos, resorts, nightclubs and cruise ships.

Orderella has established franchises in New Zealand, which has a similar bar 
culture to the UK including a lot of outside venues, and now has its sights set 
on the far east where smartphone penetration is high and venues get very busy. 
It is due to launch in Singapore via Genting.

Other goals include adding new functionality, such as the ability to manage 
kitties and split bills between groups of friends at the end of a meal. The 
business is to turn over £500,000 by the end of 2016, breaking even by 2017. 
“We live in a ‘Now’ society. We’re not replacing traditional processes, just 
offering customers a new, convenient alternative,” says Collet.



Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 