
When Ed Caesar, author of Two Hours, The Quest to Run the Impossible Marathon, 
wrote in Wired magazine that Nike’s new project to crack the time will be “the 
most significant moment for running sinceRoger Bannister’s first sub-four-minute
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wTXoTnp_5sI>mile in 1954”, my initial 
reaction was that it could not match the romance of Bannister’s record. Imagine 
if the biggest sportswear firm in the 1940s had created a downhill mile race 
won in 3:59. That celebrated image of Bannister falling exhausted and 
Christ-like into the arms of onlookers would surely not have the fame it does 
today.


Related: The two-hour marathon: who is it for? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2016/oct/04/two-hour-marathon-sub2hr-yannis-pitsiladis-kenenisa-bekele>

The Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/adidas-like-nike-is-working-on-sub-2-hour-marathon-project-1481886001>
 describes the quest for the two-hour marathon as the “ultimate arms race” 
between “sportswear makers” and as the “last frontier” of running. But what is 
so significant about the two-hour marathon? Why does the two-minute kilometre 
not have the same draw?

The mile is four-and-a-bit laps, a messy 1,609 metres. The marathon is a 
completely arbitrary 26.2 miles, a distance arrived upon by chance to 
accommodate the British royal family’s viewing preferences in 1908. The 
attraction, then, seems to be to running uneven distances in nice even times, 
and the similarities between the four-minute mile and the two-hour marathon do 
not end there.


In fact, in spite of the romantic image we have of Bannister’s mile, which 
Chris Chataway (one of his pacemakers) referred to as the “last hurrah” of 
amateurism, there are many parallels between it and Nike’s more hi-tech 
approach.


Bannister's run provided ‘reassurance for the nation’ and ‘gave England hope 
for the future’.

A closer look at the historical context of Bannister’s run reveals that 
concerns about legitimacy were just as prevalent. In fact, Bannister recalls in 
his book, The First Four Minutes, that the British Amateur Athletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Board (BAAB) failed to ratify a 
British record 4:02 mile he ran in 1953 at Motspur Park on the grounds that it 
was run under “artificial conditions”. On that occasion, Chris Brasher 
practically walked the first half of the race, allowing Bannister to lap him 
after two-and-a-half laps and subsequently pacing him to the finish line. The 
record was not ratified on the grounds that the run was “uncompetitive”. A year 
later, however, when Bannister wrote himself into the history books at Iffley 
Road, Oxford, under similarly artificial circumstances, his time was allowed to 
stand.

Related: Fast times: what will it take to run the marathon in under two hours? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/27/sub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar> 

Why was this? According to Richard Holt’s Sport and the British: A Modern 
History, the run provided “reassurance for the nation” and “gave England hope 
for the future”. The nation’s press were hardly going to allow bureaucrats from 
the BAAB to take that away from them. During the 1950s. the quest for the 
four-minute mile was seen very much in nationalistic terms; Bannister’s 1953 
run was, in fact, hastily arranged to take place five hours before his American 
rival Wes Santee made his own attempt.

Much speculation has surrounded Nike’s announcement that its attempt on the 
two-hour marathon will not take place on a record-eligible course. While it has 
not yet released the details, this presumably means it will be run on a sprung 
track, on a point-to-point course or downhill. Again, this would seem at odds 
with Bannister’s run on the cinders of Iffley Road. Yet, in fact, Bannister had 
such a supportive infrastructure at Oxford that he was instrumental in 
redesigning the track to accommodate four laps to the mile rather than the 
awkward four laps and nine-and-a-bit metres.

So while it is tempting to see Bannister’s run as a low-tech triumph of sheer 
physical prowess and willpower, it certainly would not have been seen like that 
at the time. As sports geographer John Bale points out: “Several of Bannister’s 
rivals in the 1950s were trained by scientists. But Bannisterwas a scientist – 
one who was prepared to apply scientific principles to his own body.” In fact, 
he was not the only runner-scientist: Rudolf Harbig broke the 800m world record 
while doing the first research to measure the effects of exercise on the heart 
in the 1930s. Sections of Bannister’s book read like they could have been 
lifted from a science textbook. He was one of the first runners to use a 
treadmill, and worked alongside the maker of his running shoes to reduce their 
weight by 30%.

 Sir Roger Bannister’s shoes: hi-tech for their day? Photograph: Jonathan 
Brady/PA 
And yet even Bannister found that this scientific approach meant that “sooner 
or later, the moment came when [he] almost hated athletics” because, “it left 
[him] no freedom or joy to run as [he] pleased”. Many of the most compelling 
sections of his book come when he describes running amid nature, freed from the 
stopwatch, struggling against the elements. “I felt I was running back to all 
the primitive joy that my season had destroyed,” he writes of running on the 
coast at Kintyre, “the gulls were crying overhead and a herd of wild goats were 
silhouetted against the headland.”


In his book, Bannister is very conscious of the tensions between an 
overbearing scientific scrutiny and running “on feel”. It seems to me that a 
crucial difference between his sub-four attempt and the sub-two hour marathon 
is that Bannister was at least both scientistand subject, whereas the east 
Africans who will run as part of the various two-hour projects are presented 
rather as objects of innovation rather than innovators themselves.


In spite of the rhetoric of Nike’s project, of “unpacking performance at the 
molecular level”, the tension between running as scientific experiment and 
running as experiencing nature still very much exists over 60 years later.Ed 
Ceasar notes in his latest dispatch from Nike headquarters 
<https://www.wired.com/2017/01/think-exercise-hard-try-training-like-nike-super-athlete/>
 that the star of the Sub2 project, Eluid Kipchoge, still prefers to train 
without a watch. The assumption shared by all the rival attempts is that the 
two-hour marathon will be run as a result of innovative science and medicine, 
and yet it seems clear that all of the athletes involved are still spending the 
vast majority of their time doing notably low-tech training in Kenya, Eritrea 
and Ethiopia.


Related: Two Hours: The Quest to Run the Impossible Marathon by Ed Caesar – 
review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/18/two-hours-the-quest-to-run-the-impossible-marathon-ed-caesar-review>

 In Bannister’s day, innovations in training – even if they were sometimes 
made by athlete-scientists – were very much athlete led. We may assume that by 
the 21st century this trend would have been reversed; that the science is done 
in the lab andapplied to the athletes. This at least is how the various 
two-hour projects present their work.

Given Kipchoge’s “natural” approach to training, however, and my experience of 
living alongside Ethiopian runners for 15 months, perhaps we are looking in the 
wrong places for our innovations. Every runner is, in a sense, an 
athlete-scientist, carefully monitoring their body and altering their training 
accordingly, tinkering away with training plans and searching for their own 
frontiers.
 