
Asenior policeman horrified MPs earlier this week by alleging that banks are 
covering up the extent of online fraud, and that losses from schemes such as 
"phishing" are really far greater than the pounds 22.5m announced for the first 
six months of this year in the UK (Banks hiding online fraud, December 5).

Yet one would think avoiding such fraud should be easy. If an email claiming 
to be from your bank asks you to click on a link and fill in your password, do 
you? People do - and the UK banks' official report last month noted that the 
number of phishing attacks has risen in the past 12 months from a few hundred 
to thousands.

Those who fall for them are more likely to follow a link that looks like the 
name of their bank, since it is trivial to impersonate a bank's site by copying 
its images and layout. Online crooks pretending to be Barclays Bank couldn't 
use www. barclays.com; the bank already owns it. But what about 
Barclays-bankcard.co.uk? That domain name, which will look plausible to many, 
was on offer last weekend for pounds 200: it was for sale at Sedo, an online 
marketplace for people to sell domain names. You could also have picked up 
myvisacard.eu for euros 150 (pounds 101) and Lloyds-bank-tsb.co.uk for pounds 
200. Or how about hsbcgroupuk.com for a mere $100 (pounds 50)? We might guess 
that similar domain names will be used by phishers, but we can't prove that 
until it happens. Shouldn't there though be some checks to prevent the trade in 
phisher-friendly domain names?

"There are no safeguards whatsoever against someone registering a domain name 
and using it for nefarious purposes," says Richard Martin, a business security 
consultant at the UK clearing bank group Apacs. Barnaby Davis, director of 
electronic banking for Barclays, says: "We're well past the tipping point when 
something needs to be done that makes it harder to register URLs or makes the 
consequences for misuse harsher."

But domain registration has become easier, not harder. Websites using generic 
top-level domains such as .com, .net and .info are very easy to register thanks 
to the high level of automation involved.

Lost cause This approach has allowed online fraudsters to taint the most 
popular top-level domains beyond the point of no return, says Mikko Hypponen, 
chief research officer at anti-malware company F-Secure. ".com, .net and .uk 
are already a lost cause. We can't fix those any more," he shrugs.

The .com and .net top-level domains are well-known, but there are others that 
languish in obscurity. How often do you see a website with the .pro suffix, 
which is reserved for professionals with credentials? Or how about .name, which 
was designed for individuals to register their own names? .biz, originally 
intended for businesses, is now largely used by pornographers and scammers, 
while few companies use .jobs, originally meant for employment-related sites.

No wonder, then, that experts are calling for top-level domains such as .bank 
or .secure, which might actually have some use if properly administered. Among 
them is Hypponen, who says: "The only real way to fix this is to forget about 
those old domains and come up with a new one that can only be used by 
authorised organisations."

Stringent background checks could be run against organisations wanting to 
register, he says. This already happens for some other specially created 
top-level domains. Applicants for a .museum name must obtain an ID verifying 
their membership of the museum community, for example. Paul Twomey invites the 
financial sector to make its case. He is president of the Internet Corporation 
for Assigned Names and Numbers (Icann), which governs the net's domain naming 
system, and licenses domain registrars.

Further liberalisation "Icann's Generic Names Supporting Organisation is 
working out a policy for the further liberalisation of the market to enable the 
registration of new top-level domains," he says. Icann is meeting next month in 
Sao Paulo to discuss how the application process will be revised. "I expect 
that will come through in 2007. It would certainly give the financial services 
sector the opportunity to propose a '.bank', which they could run as a 
top-level domain for the financial services sector alone," he says.

Martin fears that politics could get in the way of the technology, arguing 
that moves to open up Europe's financial markets could muddy these waters. 
"What are the criteria under which an organisation could be accepted as a 
.bank?" he asks. Broaden it out to include non-bank e-commerce businesses, and 
the situation becomes even murkier.

Today, the alternatives are limited. Holders of trademarks must watch for 
infringing domain registrations or resales and raise the alarm themselves, says 
Jeremiah Johnston, general counsel for Sedo. "It's up to them to protect 
themselves and their consumers," he says.

Banks are doing the work. Barclays uses third-party services systematically to 
check for infringing domain names, responds Davis. But: "even with a 
significant external resource, it's an uphill battle and the volume is 
increasing."

Anyway, the law and the phishers oper ate at dramatically differing speeds. 
Both Icann and country-level registrars have dispute resolution processes to 
solve problems like these, but a complaint about domain ownership must be filed 
and legally resolved. Then the company hosting the domain has to be issued with 
a court order to take the domain down. This can all take months, while phishers 
need only hours to steal hundreds of credit card details via a crooked domain 
name - which can be set up in minutes.

"It's almost impossible to stop people registering different domains. It needs 
a different approach, with harder global policing around who can register what 
and how," Davis suggests. He sees potential in a database of suspicious words 
and predictable misspellings. Attempts to register these names could raise 
alarms with registrars and hosting companies.

"It's not that easy," says Johnston, arguing that trademark law, in 
combination with the number of permutations surrounding a trademarked name, is 
complex enough to make such an endeavour difficult. "Even with 'visa', for exam 
ple, if someone wanted to offer immigration services under visa.com, that 
wouldn't be a trademark infringement."

But wouldn't it be worth calling the person who buys myvisacard.eu, just to 
ensure that they're on the level? That would require manual intervention in a 
process driven towards automation - and that is the root of the problem.

Even combining proposals from the security and financial communities won't 
stop phishers altogether. There are always other techniques to help facilitate 
online fraud. A system file on a Windows PC - called the hosts file - can be 
altered using Trojan horse software to make the PC think that it is visiting a 
legitimate website while directing it to another. URL spoofing attacks have 
exploited browser security flaws in the past.

Bringing stakeholders and domain policymakers together could ease the problem 
and reduce the victim count. There will always those who don't heed 
anti-phishing advice. But once the community has done all it can, the rest 
could legitimately be considered triage.

· Don't get caught by phishermen

The modus operandi, and purpose, has changed little; only the rewards have 
grown. Phishers with access to a bank, Amazon, eBay or Paypal account - the 
most common targets - can cost the unwary owner thousands of pounds in a matter 
of hours.

As warnings about phishing proliferate, so do the scams. So be aware of the 
steps required to not fall victim.

· Don't give your username and password to anyone who emails you. They ought 
to have it already if they're authorised to. Email is an insecure medium: it is 
trivial to "spoof" the From: address, as spammers demonstrate millions of times 
a day.

· Get a mail program with anti-phishing systems built in. Thunderbird (
www.mozilla.com <http://www.mozilla.com>) is free. The latest version of Eudora 
(eudora.com <http://eudora.com>) does, but it will probably be merged into 
Thunderbird from next year.

· When you get a mail purporting to be about an eBay, Amazon, bank, or other 
transaction - including those saying, "Your order for a Sony VAIO has been 
processed" when you hadn't ordered one - hold your mouse over any URL in the 
message to see if it matches. If not, don't click.

· Get a browser that will alert you to phishing sites. On Windows, these are 
available for Internet Explorer 7 and Firefox 2, and expected in Opera 9.1. On 
Apple's OSX, only Firefox 2 presently offers this.

If you'd like to comment on any aspect of Technology Guardian, send your 
emails totech@theguardian.com <mailto:tech@theguardian.com>
 