
A few minutes after defending his Australian Open title, Andre Agassi turned 
his thoughts to his fellow AmericanJennifer Capriati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jennifer-capriati>, winner of the women's 
title. "I guess," he said, "that it's a story a lot of people can identify 
with, and one that is a credit to tennis and a credit to the human spirit." 
There is no doubting that.

Capriati was a professional at the age of 13 and hailed as a prodigy a year 
later, in 1990, when she reached the semi-finals at Roland Garros. Two further 
semi-finals, at Wimbledon and Flushing Meadows, came the next year and then in 
the 1992 Barcelona Olympics she startled the world by defeating Germany's 
Steffi Graf for the gold medal on red clay. It appeared there was nothing she 
might not achieve, but with a suddenness that shocked everybody involved her 
world fell apart.

She experienced depression, became unable to motivate herself and then 
suffered further problems in her private life, such as it was, being charged 
with shoplifting and later being found in possession of drugs.

Distraught, mixed up and unable to cope with the pressures of the sport and 
the expectations of her father Stefano, she turned her back on tennis for two 
years, before eventually making the first of a series of comebacks that were 
frequently painful, tearful and abortive.

She wanted to be back in the tennis limelight, and she also wanted to be left 
alone. It seemed, despite her best intentions and the continued support of 
many, that she was finished as a player. Then, in 1999 and still only 23, the 
first signs of the renaissance appeared with tournament wins in Strasbourg and 
Quebec City. That same year, in the US Open, she read a carefully prepared 
statement saying that all her problems had been her own fault and that she now 
hoped everybody would draw a line under the past and help her to move forward. 
It was both brave and cathartic, though even then it appeared the game had 
moved on too quickly for her to play catch-up.

And this is what made her 6-4, 6-3 victory over Switzerland's Martina Hingis 
on Saturday so very special, for it was a triumph of spirit over self-doubt and 
exemplified the enduring bond between father and daughter. Stefano Capriati, 
born in the Italian city of Brindisi, has been blamed for pushing his daughter 
too hard and too soon. His punishment, if such it was, was to lose control of 
the person he loved the most and watch in horror and sadness as she all but 
self-destructed. Now, as in those early and traumatic days, he is coaching her 
again, but this time the relationship is much different. For a start he cannot 
tell her when to go to bed.

Capriati was asked if she could compare her first grand slam win with the 
Olympic title. "That actually seems like another life. This is a new life, a 
different life. It's like winning something for the first time again."

This was Hingis's fourth successive grand slam final defeat and once again she 
was overpowered, wins over the Williams sisters taking their toll, perhaps 
mentally as much as physically. There was no doubting her fitness but Capriati 
was in equally good shape. Having raced to a 5-1 first-set lead, the American 
took only two points from the next two games and went on to miss two set points 
on the Hingis serve. The match appeared to be swinging in favour of the world 
No1 but these setbacks stiffened rather than weakened Capriati's resolve. In 
this respect it mirrored her recent life.
 