
Gonzalo Higuaín ended his scoring drought as Juventus defeated Dinamo Zagreb 
2-0 to win theirChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group.

Juventus had already qualified for the knock-out stage, but the victory 
secured top spot in Group H ahead ofSevilla, who also advanced following a 0-0 
draw withLyon.

Higuaín blasted a strike into the top left corner from the edge of the area 
after being set up by Mario Lemina early in the second half. It was Higuaín’s 
first goal since scoring on 2 November against Lyon.

Dele Alli breathes life into Tottenham to give them a Wembley win against CSKA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/tottenham-hotspur-cska-moscow-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
Higuain joined Juventus before the season from Napoli for an Italian-record 
€90m (£77m) after scoring 36 Italian league goals last season to break a 
66-year-old Serie A record.

The defender Daniele Rugani added another for Juventus with a header from a 
Miralem Pjanic corner. Juventus finished with 14 points, three ahead of 
Sevilla. Lyon have eight points and will play in the Europa League, while 
Dinamo lost all six matches.

The Juventus captain, Gianluigi Buffon, was rested, with Neto starting in goal 
for the Bianconeri. It made little difference, as Dinamo rarely threatened, 
exiting the tournament with no goals scored and 15 conceded – becoming the 
third team in competition history to go scoreless in the group stage.

Before the match, Dinamo fans were reportedly pushed back with water hoses 
after breaking through police lines outside the stadium. Several fans were 
injured, according to the Ansa news agency.

Sevilla will join Juve in the last 16 after holding Lyon to a goalless draw in 
France. Lyon needed to win the game by two clear goals to deny the Spaniards 
but were unable to find the breakthrough despite a host of chances.

Borussia Dortmund came from two goals down to secure a 2-2 draw with Real 
Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/real-dortmund-real-madrid-champions-league-group-f-match-report>
 and win Group F. The German club went into the match at the Bernabéu two 
points ahead of their rivals but two goals from Karim Benzema looked set to 
clinch top spot for Real. But Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang pulled one back in the 
61st minute and Marco Reus scored the equaliser two minutes from time.

Legia Warsaw, beaten 8-4 by Dortmund last time out, leapfrogged Sporting Lisbon
 to qualify for the Europa League thanks to a 1-0 win, Guilherme scoring the 
goal on the half‑hour.

Porto qualified from Group G with a thumping 5-0 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/porto-leicester-city-champions-league-match-report>
 against the pool winnersLeicester City. It was a chastening way for the Foxes 
to suffer their first Champions League defeat.

Copenhagen were relying on a Porto slip-up to go through but they at least 
finished their campaign with a win, with early goals from Brandon Mechele into 
his own net and Mathias Jorgensen earning them a 2-0 victory against pointless
Club Brugge.

In Group E, Tottenham Hotspur salvaged something from their campaign by beating
CSKA Moscow 3-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/tottenham-hotspur-cska-moscow-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 to qualify for the Europa League. Alan Dzagoev put CSKA ahead in the 33rd 
minute but Dele Alli equalised five minutes later and Harry Kane put Spurs 
ahead in first-half injury time. The game was settled in the 77th minute when 
Alli’s header went in off goalkeeper Igor Akinfeev.

Monaco were already guaranteed to win the group ahead of Bayer Leverkusen but 
the Germans secured their first win against the Ligue 1 side to finish in 
style. Vladlen Yurchenko had been out injured since April but marked his return 
in spectacular fashion with a long-range opener and Julian Brandt added a 
second three minutes after the break.

The 3-0 win was completed eight minutes from time. Technically it was a fifth 
consecutive missed penalty for the Germans, with Wendell hitting the underside 
of the bar and the ball then striking the goalkeeper Morgan De Sanctis and 
rolling in.
 