
Our friend Charles Boardman, who has died aged 89, was a bank manager, 
bibliophile and director of amateur dramatics in his home town of Edwalton, 
Nottinghamshire.

Charles was born in Warrington to Harry and Bertha Boardman. He attended Wade 
Deacon grammar school, Widnes, and gained a place to study medicine at the 
University of Liverpool, but left after the first year after failing some of 
the exams. He was called up for national service and became a sergeant 
instructor in the Royal Army Medical Corps, based in Aldershot.

In 1950 he joined the staff of the District Bank, which later became part of 
the National Westminster Bank. In 1951, he won the Charles Reeve memorial prize 
for English with the Institute of Bankers’ exams. Charles served at branches in 
St Helens, Manchester and London (city office and Oxford Street). He went to 
Cambridge for his first managership in 1968, then to West Bridgford, 
Nottingham, in 1976, and Arnold, Nottingham, in 1981. He retired in 1987.

Charles was a huge book-lover and made consistently thoughtful contributions 
to the Guardian’s readers’ books of the year.Last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/dec/26/readers-books-of-the-year-2015> 
he chose Kent Haruf’s Our Souls at Night as well as new books by Tessa Hadley 
and Robert Harris. Over the years he enthused about his favourites, including 
Lydia Davis, Helen Dunmore and Alice Munro.

He gave friends parcels of books regularly and generously. Each book was 
carefully chosen, and accompanied by a typed advice note. This could include 
encouragement to try a new author as well as requests for feedback.

He was an active member of the Anglican church, and served for many years, 
first as treasurer (when he was famed for his theatrical and very amusing 
presentations of the annual accounts), and then as churchwarden at the Church 
of the Holy Rood in Edwalton.

He also loved music, opera, and the theatre, as well as the Archers and 
Coronation Street – and his cairn terrier, Emily. He directed many ambitious 
amateur plays in Edwalton with remarkable success, and held vinyl evenings for 
friends, with music drawn from his huge collection of LPs.
 