
Chelsea’s potential redevelopment of Stamford Bridge could move a sizeable 
step closer on Wednesday as the planning application for a 60,000-seater 
stadium is presented to Hammersmith and Fulham Council.

The Premier League leaders have decided developing their current home, rather 
than relocating elsewhere, is their preferred option as they look to provide a 
stadium with a capacity similar in size to other top-flight clubs.

The history of Chelsea's Stamford Bridge - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2015/jul/04/history-of-chelseas-stamford-bridge-in-pictures>
The planning and development control committee of Hammersmith and Fulham 
Council has a meeting scheduled for 7pm on Wednesday, although the council has 
already recommended the application be approved.

The proximity of underground and overground railway lines are one of the 
biggest challenges for a project of its scale in an area of west London that 
offers little wiggle room.

The Chelsea owner, Roman Abramovich, would fund the project, which has an 
estimated cost of £500m. That figure could rise if the club remain at Stamford 
Bridge while the work takes place, although it would meanChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> would not need to find a 
temporary home for around three seasons.

Twickenham has been mooted as a contender for a part-time base for the 2012 
Champions League winners, although Wembley could also be a candidate.

That would again muddy the waters as Tottenham Hotspur will occupy the 
national stadium for at least the 2017-18 season as work finishes on their own 
new stadium in north London.

Chelsea manager claims Terry did not deserve red card for last-man tackle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/antonio-conte-john-terry-chelsea-peterborough-united>
Stamford Bridge’s capacity is 41,663, making it the seventh biggest in the 
Premier League. It falls well short of Manchester United’s 76,000-seater Old 
Trafford, while Arsenal, Manchester City, West Ham United, Sunderland and 
Liverpool boast bigger grounds.

Chelsea had previously looked at sites including Battersea Power Station for a 
new ground, but concluded their ideal arena could be created at their present 
location. The club believe the history of Stamford Bridge is with the site, 
rather than the stadium itself.

The build would be complex and involve excavation, with the plan to lower the 
arena into the ground to achieve the capacity on a 12-acre site.
 