
Antonio Conte has claimed defenders are targeting Diego Costa and seeking to 
provoke the Spain forward, with the Chelsea manager praising his player’s 
refusal to react in thefractious 2-2 draw at Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/11/swansea-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
.

Costa took his season’s tally to six goals in five appearances for club and 
country but his two here were not enough to prevent Conte shedding his first 
points as manager.Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> were 
further unnerved by the sight of the captain, John Terry, departing on crutches 
after sustaining an ankle injury in stoppage time. That will render him a major 
doubt for Friday’s visit of Liverpool to Stamford Bridge and will potentially 
hand David Luiz his second debut for the club.

Diego Costa seizes Chelsea a point after Swansea’s rapid turnaround
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/11/swansea-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
Yet, while Terry’s fitness will be a concern, it was Costa who dominated this 
occasion. A trio of Swansea players were booked for fouls on the forward, with 
Jordi Amat having set the tone two minutes in with an elbow to the small of the 
back that went unpunished. “The defenders know him and, sometimes, try to 
provoke him,” Conte said. “I was a footballer and this situation is normal. 
They know Diego is a player with passion and they tried to provoke him. The 
referee must see and allowDiego Costa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/diego-costa> to play his football.

“If you ask me if the defenders deserved a second yellow card [for fouls on 
the forward], I don’t want to reply on this. I want to say, only, that after 
every game the press ask me about the passion of Diego Costa. Today I can say 
Diego Costa showed fantastic behaviour to control the situation. He took a lot 
of kicks from the first minute until the end of the game. Today I’m pleased 
because he showed me, he showed his team-mates, he showed everyone that he has 
fantastic behaviour. Fantastic behaviour. It wasn’t easy, it wasn’t easy. It’s 
incredible the defender didn’t finish [get sent off] before the end of the 
match.”

That appeared to be a reference to Amat. Costa was booked for a foul on Leroy 
Fer, and Swansea players suggested he should have been shown a second after 
going to ground easily in a challenge with Lukasz Fabianski. Yet it was Chelsea 
who ended the more frustrated after the referee, Andre Marriner, failed to 
penalise Fer’s foul on Gary Cahill before squeezing the home side ahead just 
after the hour-mark.

“It’s a clear foul, so I’m frustrated,” Cahill said. “Come on, seriously … You 
could be sat on the moon and see it is a clear foul. I took the touch away from 
him, he came through the back of me. It was clear as day and seeing it back has 
made me even more angry. It’s all fun and games for the fans, isn’t it but it’s 
the players who suffer. That kills me and kills my team. We have dropped two 
points which is massive in this league. Look at my face. It’s incredible. I 
said to the referee there’s three of you that can see that. There were two 
fouls, and between the officials they have said that they couldn’t see it. For 
me that is incredible.”

Conte, who backed Cahill, reiterated Cahill’s assertion that the referee had 
made “a great mistake”, was just as infuriated his team did not capitalise on 
their dominance over the first hour, urging them to learn from their 
profligacy. “The players showed a fantastic reaction but we had the possibility 
to kill the game and, if you have that possibility, you must kill the game. We 
must learn from this.” On Terry, the manger will await the result of a scan. 
“He is a warrior, so I’m not worried,” he said.

The point, so unlikely while Swansea were outclassed for an hour, provided a 
welcome fillip for Francesco Guidolin who had been forced to abandon his team’s 
initial formation before the interval. That change came at the expense of Neil 
Taylor, who made his disappointment at being substituted very clear as he 
retreated four minutes before the break.

“I think it’s the first time in my career I’ve done that,” said the manager. 
“I made a mistake. I could … I can … I should have waited three minutes and 
made the change at half-time, but Mo Barrow had been ready to come on for five 
minutes and I decided to do it this way. I said sorry to him in the dressing 
room. There is no problem between me and Neil.”
 