
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> have been given the 
go-ahead to rebuild Stamford Bridge in plans that would expand the ground’s 
capacity to 60,000 seats.

A meeting of the planning and development committee of Hammersmith & Fulham 
council unanimously approved plans submitted by the club for a new stadium that 
would cost at least £500m and could be completed in time for the 2021-22 
season. In a further vote, the council agreed to revisit some concerns about 
the plans, including the ability to park near the ground and construction and 
demolition planning.

Design of the new stadium has been led by the Swiss architects Herzog & De 
Meuron, the company responsible forBeijing’s Bird’s Nest Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/22/birds-nest-empty-monument-china-magnificence>
 and Bayern Munich’s Allianz Arena. Apparently inspired by Westminster Abbey, 
its exterior will be defined by vast arches, or “brick piers”, made of London 
stock brick.

Hammersmith & Fulham councillors variously described the proposed design as “a 
significant, high quality design” and “a gorgeous building, absolutely 
gorgeous.”

With a pitch below ground level and underground entrances for home and away 
fans, it will be a very different stadium from that which Chelsea have called 
their home since 1905.

In order to maximise the scale of the new stadium, buildings that surround the 
current Stamford Bridge, known as the Chelsea Village, will be demolished. 
There will also be broad walkways built over the two rail lines that flank the 
stadium.

The new ground would have more than 13,000 extra seats for general admission, 
while corporate seating would double to 9,200. There would also be expanded 
provision for disabled supporters, but the seats afforded to visiting fans 
would remain the same, at 3,000.

Chelsea have been looking to build a stadium that competes in size with those 
of their Premier League rivals for a number of years. Plans to leave Stamford 
Bridge altogether, with Battersea Power Station a potential new site, were 
blocked in 2011 by Chelsea Pitch Owners, the group that holds the freehold on 
Stamford Bridge. It is understood CPO is now likely to approve the new stadium 
plans at its AGM later this month.

Chelsea currently have the seventh biggest ground in the Premier League and 
the third biggest in London, behind Arsenal and West Ham. Tottenham Hotspur 
will also move ahead of Chelsea when the new White Hart Lane is completed in 
2018. It is estimated however, that with the new Stamford Bridge, Chelsea could 
match Arsenal’s current matchday turnover of £100m a year from the Emirates 
Stadium which Arsenal moved to from Highbury in 2006.

Development will mean that the football club will be forced to find a 
temporary home for around three seasons. Wembley Stadium remains an option, 
though Tottenham already have a groundshare deal in place there for next 
season. Relocating to the national rugby stadium at Twickenham has also been 
mooted.
 