
Chelsea are determined to deflect interest in Diego Costa from Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> and Chinese Super League 
clubs after Antonio Conte emerged from talks with the Spain forward encouraged 
that he may be persuaded to remain at Stamford Bridge.

Conte, who was formally confirmed as the reigning champions’ next head coach 
on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/04/antonio-conte-chelsea-tough-task-diego-costa>
, will take up the reins in south-west London after his Italy side’s 
participation in Euro 2016 has concluded.

The 46-year-old is keen to make the Roma midfielder Radja Nainggolan his first 
signing and Chelsea held initial talks with the Serie A club’s sporting 
director, Walter Sabatini, on Friday. Roma want €35m for the Belgian withChelsea
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> hoping to pay nearer €25m. 
Conte is also keen to explore the possibility of bringing the Roma centre-back 
Kostas Manolas to Stamford Bridge.

Conte has just returned home after four days in London and, having briefly met 
the first-team squad after training on Tuesday, held lengthy talkswith a number 
of the senior players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/08/guus-hiddink-antonio-conte-chelsea-john-terry>
 in individual meetings the following day.

Guus Hiddink warns Antonio Conte of tough job without Chelsea’s old guard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/08/guus-hiddink-antonio-conte-chelsea-john-terry>
Those discussions took place at the club’s training ground in Cobham and at a 
central London hotel as Conte sought to assess the state of mind of the key 
performers he will inherit upon the start of pre-season training in July. 
Costa’s future had been his first concern, with the Brazil-born striker having 
previously made clear his frustration at life in England and, in particular, 
the scrutiny to which his on-field discipline has been held. He is serving his 
second three-match suspension of the season.

Atlético had hoped to capitalise on their former player’s perceived 
disenchantment, and clubs in China have mooted offering more than twice the 
£32m Chelsea paid in 2014 to secure the latest elite recruit for the Super 
League. Yet there is no mood within the hierarchy to part with a player who has 
three years to run on his contract and who, despite struggling over the first 
half of this campaign, is the team’s leading scorer.

Offers will apparently be knocked back in the belief that the 27-year-old has 
been convinced he has a major role to play under the new head coach. Conte has 
stressed he wants players who are fully committed to the club and that he will 
sanction the sales of those who are not. Yet he has also made clear he admires 
the forward’s style of play and would like to retain him. The striker will sit 
out the final match of his ban ashis team take on Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/08/swansea-city-chelsea-match-preview>
 at the Liberty Stadium on Saturday.

Players such as Thibaut Courtois, Nemanja Matic and Eden Hazard are also 
believed to have met one-on-one with Conte, the latter largely discussing the 
injury issues which have so nullified his impact this term, and talks also took 
place with John Terry. The Italian did not inform the 35-year-old captain – who 
will be sidelined for a further two to three weeks with an achilles complaint, 
much to his own frustration – whether he would be pushing for him to be 
retained beyond the expiry of his contract at the end of June. Regardless, 
Terry could take the meeting as a potentially positive sign even if he is 
unlikely to be able to feature again until the final few weeks of the season.

Conte will report back to the board with his thoughts before a final decision 
is made on the captain’s future and, while his focus at present is fixed firmly 
on theAzzurri and the summer’s European Championship, Chelsea do expect him to 
return to Cobham for further meetings before end of the campaign.

“Of course he will follow everything in this club,” said Guus Hiddink, who 
spent time with the Italian on Tuesday at the training ground discussing what 
he has learned from his five months in charge. “I’ve told him that if he’d like 
to come, he’s more than welcome. I like transparency.

“When you go into a new situation, if someone wants to gather some 
information, one can always get it. But I didn’t want too much information when 
I started here because you always have your own judgment. Every other judgment 
is influenced by personal views, maybe seen through coloured glasses.”

The interim manager is expected to rest Courtois, who had cast some doubt on 
his future at the club in an interview conducted while on international duty 
with Belgium, for the match at Swansea given the lack of game-time enjoyed of 
late by the experienced back-up, Asmir Begovic. Players such as Bertrand 
Traoré, Matt Miazga, Kenedy, Jake Clarke-Salter and Ruben Loftus-Cheek will 
continue to feature in the match-day squad in the absence, through injury, of a 
number of senior players.

Conte has submitted to the technical director, Michael Emenalo, a list of 
prospective signings he would like the club to pursue before his arrival, with 
the addition of a forward – Edinson Cavani, Gonzalo Higuaín and Romelu Lukaku 
have been mentioned – a priority even if Costa stays. Juan Cuadrado is expected 
to return from a year-long loan at Juventus, while Nainggolan and, most likely, 
two senior centre-halves are expected to be pursued. Emenalo’s duties will not 
change under the new regime.
 