
I don’t know how you set light to a golf course, but in 1897 a riot of several 
thousand ordinary citizens did just that. The location was One Tree Hill in 
Honor Oak, a southeastern suburb of London, and they were objecting to the 
enclosure of common land so that men could hit balls around it with sticks. 
They were repulsed, which ledGolf magazine to say: “We are not likely to hear 
anything more of the alleged right-of-way over One Tree Hill, which nature 
evidently intended for a golf course.”

Golf was wrong. In 1905 One Tree Hill became what it is now, one of thousands 
of green spaces across Britain, each with its own idiosyncrasies and history, 
that are kept at public expense for the benefit of absolutely anyone for 
whatever legal or sometimes slightly illegal activity they choose, as long as 
it doesn’t impede others’ enjoyment of the same place. It is part of what is, 
collectively, one of the great achievements of democracy, two centuries in the 
making, which crosses both classes and the Atlantic. It is the work of 
Mancunian communists and Republican US presidents, as well as philosophers, 
woodcutters, poets, bankers, factory workers and politicians.

This is the creation and preservation of parks and commons, both in cities 
and, in the form of National Parks, in the countryside, that run from the 
grandeur of Yosemite in California to the more genteel delights of Birkenhead 
Park in Merseyside, generally acknowledged to be the first publicly funded 
civic park in the world. They include the more obscure zones of grass and trees 
from which you are rarely far in British towns. Their different forms have a 
common principle, which is the availability of nature to all.

These areas are remarkably good at fulfilling their intended purpose, as 
places for refreshment and recovery, for play, for exercise as gentle or 
strenuous as you would like, in peaceful coexistence with other people whom you 
may not know and may be different from you, but are attracted by the same 
pleasures and freedoms of the open air – elderly bowls players both Anglo-Saxon 
and Asian, yummy mummies doing exercise classes with their Bugaboo pushchairs, 
Lebanese picnickers with shisha pipes, Caribbean barbecues, sub-continental 
kite-flyers. In a recentNew York Times article, Nicholas Kristof  
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/21/opinion/sunday/this-land-is-my-land-and-yours-too.html?_r=0>
wrote movingly of the American national park as “a rare spot where doctors 
mingle with construction workers”.

They feed the creativity, imagination and even economy of the country. The 
view from Hampstead Heath inspired not only John Keats and John Constable, but 
was also the place where the piratical Chicagoan entrepreneur Charles Tyson 
Yerkes had the idea of building many of the Underground lines on which London 
now depends.

The Danish architect and writer Steen Eiler Rasmussen called British parks 
“wonderlands of the unrestrained imagination” and saw them as part of the same 
national genius for escape and fantasy that gave us the literature of Lewis 
Carroll and Edward Lear.

These places are taken for granted, but they were not achieved without a long, 
slow struggle. Its origins go back at least to Wordsworth’s statement that the 
Lake District should be a “sort of national property, in which every man has a 
right and interest who has an eye to perceive and a heart to enjoy”. One of its 
main episodes was the campaign, which ran throughout the second half of the 
nineteenth century and beyond, to preserve common land threatened by 
development.

Led by the remarkable MP George Shaw-Lefevre, the Commons Preservation Society 
wielded the not entirely trusty weapon of ancient rights of access to common 
land, originally conceived for grazing livestock and gathering firewood and 
roof-thatching materials.

Landowners objected that these rights were now obsolete in urban areas and 
therefore they should be free to make money by building and quarrying, but 
Lefevre’s persistence eventually rescued places such as Epping Forest, the 
Forest of Dean and the Malvern Hills from destruction and enclosure, without 
which Britain would feel like a very different country.

Lefevre’s allies included John Stuart Mill, the original bookselling WH Smith, 
and people who made their living from lopping trees and, if the campaign’s 
methods were mostly legal, political force was sometimes wielded. There was the 
battle of the golf course, for instance. At Berkhamsted Common in Hertfordshire 
a radical MP and banker financed 120 navvies to tear down two miles of iron 
fence that had been erected to enclose common land. Separately from Lefevre’s 
efforts, there was theHyde Park Railings Affair of 1866 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/may/12/guardian190-hyde-park-riots>
 in which demonstrators forced down the park’s fence, and helped make what was 
once an aristocratic playground into the open and available place it is now.

There was an unsuccessful attempt, in 1884, at an act of parliament that would 
have created national parks, a concept which flourished better in the United 
States, where it was backed by Theodore Roosevelt. A hundred years ago this 
month the National Park Service was established. Back in Britain forcible 
action was again felt necessary, with the 1932mass trespass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/apr/17/kinder-scout-mass-trespass-anniversary>
 by ramblers of Kinder Scout in the Peak District, led by the 21-year-oldBenny 
Rothman <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/1382589/Benny-Rothman.html> 
of the Young Communist League of Manchester. The Attlee government, in 1949, 
finally passed the legislation that brought national parks to Britain.

A common quality of these campaigns is their bottom-up spontaneity. They came 
about less from the leadership of demagogues and visionaries than from a 
powerful sensation among disparate people in different places of the 
fundamental human importance of access to nature. They also continue into 
modern times. In the 1980s the London Wildlife Trust successfully fought to 
keep the wild places left by the retreat of industry.The Open Spaces Society 
<http://www.oss.org.uk>, as the Commons Preservation Society is now called, 
celebrated its 150th anniversary last year.

Like other things humane, civilised, inclusive and well-functioning, these 
concepts are under threat from vandals on the right. Republicans in Congress 
have for some time blocked adequate funding for the National Parks Service and 
the 2016 Republican platform includes the promise to remove the “economic 
burden” and “lost revenue” that comes from their management by Federal 
government.

This policy comes in the context of assaults on other allegedly 
business-killing environmental protections, such as limits on carbon dioxide 
emissions. The intent seems clear, to loosen controls on the parks to enhance 
their opportunities for profit. If so, the Republicans would unravel what has 
been called “America’s best idea” and one to which great figures in their own 
party have contributed.
 