
Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> who are given alcohol 
by their parents are more likely to be drinking full serves of alcohol by the 
time they are 15 or 16, a study published in the journal Psychological Medicine 
found.

But they were less likely to binge drink than children who got alcohol from 
other sources, such as siblings or older friends,the study 
<https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/psychological-medicine/article/parental-supply-of-alcohol-and-alcohol-consumption-in-adolescence-prospective-cohort-study/CE8903F9DD77A2143E2D2A85C20851AD>
 also found.

Researchers led by the University of NSW wanted to explore the impact on a 
child’s drinking habits when their parents adopted the so-called European model 
of introducing children to alcohol by allowing them sips of their alcoholic 
drinks.

“Parents are a major supplier of alcohol to adolescents, yet there is limited 
research examining the impact of this on adolescent alcohol use,” the paper, 
published on Thursday, said.

Half of Australians unaware excessive alcohol increases cancer risk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/08/half-of-australians-unaware-excessive-alcohol-increases-cancer-risk>
The researchers recruited 1,927 adolescents in year 7 from schools in Sydney, 
Perth and Hobart and followed them over four years, measuring their consumption 
of alcohol, including binge drinking which is considered having more than four 
drinks in one session.

The youths were also asked who supplied their alcohol, and one parent for each 
child was also surveyed annually.

After adjusting for factors known to influence adolescent drinking, including 
family structure, family conflict and personality traits, the researchers found 
parents supplying alcohol doubled the likelihood that teens would be drinking 
full serves of alcohol one year later.

But those who were supplied alcohol from sources other than their parents, 
such as by friends or siblings, were three times more likely to binge drink.

“These parentally-supplied children also consumed fewer drinks on a typical 
drinking occasion,” the study found.

However, the authors said: “Parents should be advised that supply of alcohol 
may increase children’s drinking.”

The executive officer of the McCusker centre for action on alcohol and youth, 
Julia Stafford, warned parents against drawing a conclusion that supplying 
their children with alcohol would protect against binge drinking.

Any level of drinking was harmful to teenagers, she said, because their brains 
were still developing.

“This paper confirms the National Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> and Medical Research 
Council advice that for children and young people under 18, not drinking 
alcohol is the safest option,” Stafford said. “The study shows that giving 
children alcohol increases their risk of drinking later, whether the alcohol is 
from parents or others.”

She said the children in the study were still quite young, when there would be 
less binge drinking occurring when compared with older teenagers or adults.

“The paper is very clear that no conclusions can be drawn about possible 
protective effects of parental alcohol supply,” she said.

Governments accused of failing to fully recognise role of alcohol in family 
violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/27/australian-governments-accused-of-failing-to-properly-acknowledge-role-of-alcohol-in-family-violence>
“While there has been discussion about the European model of drinking, 
Australia is very different from Europe, and the drinking patterns in Europe 
are also changing.

“The best advice is delaying drinking in young people is the safest approach.”

The director of the centre for health and social research at the Australian 
Catholic University, Prof Sandra Jones, agreed.

“This study answers a question that many parents ask: does the European model 
of providing alcohol to children work?,” she said. “The answer is no, and it 
doesn’t work in Europe either.”

The director of policy and research with the Foundation for Alcohol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alcohol> Research and Education, Amy 
Ferguson, said there had been a positive and significant shift in young 
people’s drinking patterns in recent years.

Binge drinking among 14- to 17-year-olds had dropped by half, and the number 
of abstainers had more than doubled in the same age group.

“The declining consumption rates among Australia’s adolescents would suggest 
parents are becoming increasingly aware that serving alcohol to young people 
comes with increased risks and are heeding the advice of health professionals 
not to serve alcohol to their children,” Ferguson said.
 