
Nick Kyrgios <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> is now in 
Australian Olympic team boss Kitty Chiller’s sights after Bernard Tomic’s Rio 
withdrawal. Tomic and Kyrgios were both warned by Chiller last week in response 
to behavioural issues on and off the court.

Chiller refused to speculate on whether Tomic had beaten selectors to the 
punch by ruling himself out of the Rio Games but made her views on Kyrgios 
clear, saying his “ill-advised” response to being put on notice by the AOC 
showed he did not know what it meant to be an Australian Olympian.

Bernard Tomic rules himself out of Rio Olympics Australian tennis team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/13/bernard-tomic-rules-himself-out-of-rio-olympics-australian-tennis-team>
Kyrgios made light of it via social media, referring to the chef de mission as 
“that Kitty Chiller”, and all but dared selectors to overlook him for Rio at a 
recent post-match press conference.


Chiller said she had not had any official correspondence from Kyrgios. “We 
have had nothing official except for some ill-advised, shall I say, comments 
about me and what it means to be an Olympian,” she said. “I think some of 
Nick’s comments in social media have shown that maybe he doesn’t understand 
what it means to be an Australian Olympian.”

“It is not just about winning on the court, it’s about how you go about it.”

Asked if there were no Rio guarantees for Kyrgios, Chiller said: “My stance 
hasn’t changed. Nick has just come off a suspended sentence from the 
InternationalTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Federation. Any 
athlete that has just had disciplinary action by an international federation 
clearly is on watch.”

Tomic’s selection was under a cloud after he deliberately gave up a match 
point at a tournament in Madrid, saying he didn’t care because he is 23 and 
worth $10 million. Chiller described his behaviour as “appalling”. Tomic said 
he based his decision to withdraw on what was best for his career.

“It’s his choice. We only want people in our team who want to be there and 
prepared to abide by what that team means,” Chiller said. Asked if Tomic had 
saved selectors the trouble of overlooking him, Chiller said: “That’s 
irrelevant now. Thousands of Australians would give anything, devote their 
whole lives to be an Olympics and adhere to what that means. If someone doesn’t 
see the value in that then that’s their loss.”

Tomic confirmed he would instead play at an ATP World Tour tournament in 
Mexico during the Olympics. “With a heavy sense of regret, I have made the 
difficult decision to not play with the Australian tennis team as they pursue 
an Olympic medal in Rio,” Tomic said in a statement.

“I have always proudly represented my country in Davis Cup and given my all 
when wearing the green and gold. But on the basis of my extremely busy playing 
schedule and my own personal circumstances, I am regrettably unable to commit 
to this year’s tournament.”



 