
In one of the more entertaining moments of COP22, the global climate 
conference held in Marrakech last week, the Chinese vice-foreign minister Liu 
Zhenmin, gave the absent US president-elect a short lesson in the history of 
climate diplomacy. Climate change, he explained, was not aChinese hoax 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/265895292191248385?lang=en>. In 
fact, long before the issue had been discussed behind the high vermillion walls 
of Zhongnanhai, China’s contemporary Forbidden City, it had been put on the 
global agenda by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in the 1980s, 
supported by Ronald Reagan and George Bush (senior).

Mounting international concern led eventually to the Kyoto Protocol, the first 
global agreement to try to limit climate change, signed by President Bill 
Clinton subsequently rejected by the US Congress. When President Obama’s 
administration formally entered the successor Paris Agreement in September this 
year, the president knew better than to try to seek endorsement from a hostile 
Congress. Yet the US has been present throughout, as the world grappled with 
how to distribute the burden of global action to ward off climate catastrophe, 
although its leadership has been, at best, intermittent. It has tended to 
resemble a temperamental adolescent, periodically playing the game, but 
intermittently flouncing off the field, its ball firmly under its arm.

This time, rather than seeing the announced US departure from the climate 
stage under a Trump administration as an excuse for others to slacken their 
efforts, Chinese officials made clear that this latest act of US self-harm 
would not deterChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> from pursuing 
its own interests, and that those interests lie firmly in a vision of a 
low-carbon future. As Liu Zhenmin said in Marrakech, any change in US policy 
“won’t affect China’s commitment to support climate negotiations and also the 
implementation of the Paris Agreement”.

It is a view that is widely shared in China’s circles of experts and 
policymakers. While this latest turn in the US administration’s climate policy 
might be disappointing for the global effort, China’s policy at this point has 
a standalone logic and an internal coherence that makes a change of direction 
highly unlikely. China plans to be the supplier of low-carbon goods to a 
carbon-constrained world: It already boasts the world’s biggest installed 
capacity of wind and solar power, and its climate policies are built in to its 
current five-year economic plan.

The departure of the US, far from crippling that effort, could further 
stimulate it: When the news of Donald Trump’s electoral college victory set 
cell phones beeping at a private climate change discussion in Beijing, one of 
China’s leading climate policy experts observed that China should now expect to 
assume climate leadership.

As recently as 2009, in the wake of the failed Copenhagen climate conference, 
such a response from China to the election of a man who held Trump’s views 
would have been unimaginable. At the time, the US and China were locked into a 
toxic opposition created by the structure of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, the 
international agreement that made climate action obligatory for rich countries, 
but only advisory for emerging economies, even those as large as China. The 
world’s two biggest emitters of greenhouse gases seemed bound into a negative 
relationship in which the climate policy of one was conditioned by the 
willingness of the other to do as much, if not more. Since neither was willing, 
this dysfunctional pairing acted as dispiriting drag on global efforts.

But between Copenhagen and Paris, China’s global climate policy underwent a 
sea change, driven by domestic factors and assisted by the end of the Kyoto 
Protocol. When the Kyoto Protocol was negotiated in 1997, China had 21% of the 
world’s population, but was responsible for only 14% of global CO2 emissions. 
By 2009, China was producing 26% of the world’s emissions and had begun 
publicly to articulate a climate policy. Its first public goal was to reduce 
its carbon intensity by 40% to 45% by 2020, and as the 2015 Paris conference 
approached, China, then by far the world’s biggest emitter, announced that its 
emissions would peak by 2030 or earlier. It is a target most experts judge to 
be well within China’s reach; some believe that the peak could come in the 
early 2020s.

The architecture of the Paris Agreement, ratified and brought into force in 
record time, played a significant role in the breakthrough. It does not impose 
mandatory action on its signatories; nor does it distinguish between the 
obligations of the rich and the less rich countries. Each nation, instead, is 
invited to volunteer its offer on reducing emissions, on the understanding that 
all will be encouraged to increase their efforts over time, in order to fulfill 
the common ambition of keeping the global average temperature rise below 2C 
above pre-industrial levels. This would, in practice, demand that net zero 
emissions be in effect by mid-century. Meeting that goal will demand much 
greater efforts than are currently on the table.

The news announced in Marrakech that the world had already experienced1.2 
degrees of warming 
<http://e360.yale.edu/digest/2016_hottest_year_on_record_wmo_12_degrees_c/4843/>
 only underlined the urgency of the effort to put the architecture of the Paris 
Agreement’s implementation in place. Ironically, the US and Mexico were among 
the first to present long-term carbon reduction plans, with the US offering to 
reduce emissions by 2050 by 80% from the 2005 level, and Mexico proposing a 
reduction of 50% by 2050 on a 2000 baseline. By way of comparison, Germany has 
plans to reduce its emissions by up to 95% by 2050.

How has China, the country that had been seen as the bad boy of climate 
policy, transformed itself into a potential global climate leader? And why, if 
Trump is correct in his assertion that efforts to mitigate climate change would 
cripple the US economy, do China’s leaders see it instead as the key to the 
next phase of China’s growth?

For China, multiple factors came together between Copenhagen and Paris: 
China’s growth was slowing and its leaders understood, from the examples of 
South Korea and Japan, that their economy needed to be more efficient in its 
use of energy and resources, and that it needed to upgrade its capacity to 
produce advanced, higher value technologies, preferably with China owning the 
patents, if it was to avoid stagnation.

By the time the 13th Five Year Plan was published in 2015, it was clear that 
China’s leadership had identified low-carbon technologies as the technologies 
of the future, and, since these were new technological frontiers, there was an 
opportunity for China to establish its dominance as an innovator as well as a 
manufacturer and exporter. For China, the opportunities that tackling climate 
offered began to be seen as the engine of the next phase of prosperity. Last 
year, China invested $102.9bn in renewable energy and installed half of the 
world’s new wind power. It is still highly dependent on coal, but its coal 
consumption has peaked and begun to decline, to be replaced over time by 
renewables, hydro, and nuclear power.

China, like any other country, has vested interests that resist its energy 
transformation: the giant traditional energy companies defend their interests 
in China as elsewhere. But the environmental effects of three decades of 
high-carbon growth — the choking smog that blights China’s major cities, the 
water crisis andsoil pollution 
<http://e360.yale.edu/feature/chinas_dirty_pollution_secret_the_boom_poisoned_its_soil_and_crops/2782/>
, the mounting health and social impacts that threatened the standing of the 
Communist Party — also created a political space for action.

Xi Jinping’s administration adopted “ecological civilisation” as its slogan 
and floated a raft of policies that included the restoration of decimated 
forests, efforts to reverse desertification, the promotion of electric mobility 
and eco-friendly urbanisation, as well as important investments in new 
technologies. Given the state of the air that China’s citizens were breathing, 
there was unlikely to be any popular opposition to a government that wanted to 
clean up. On top of that, China’s leadership had a clear understanding of the 
potential impacts of climate change on China, affecting its food security, 
exacerbating the threat of extreme weather events, ratcheting up its water 
crisis, and threatening to drown its most prosperous cities as sea levels rise.

China’s role at the Paris conference in December 2015 was constructive. A 
US-China pledge to cooperate on climate change in 2013 had held firm, despite 
many other tensions in the US-China relationship. A climate-literate US 
president and a Chinese leadership that saw the low-carbon economy as its next 
major opportunity together created a positive synergy that stimulated an 
extensive program of cooperation, despite the hostility of the US Congress.

Nevertheless, like the rest of the world, China’s leadership will be watching 
and waiting to seehow much of Trump’s extreme rhetoric 
<http://e360.yale.edu/feature/obama_environmental_legacy_donald_trump_undo/3054/>
 on climate survives the encounter with reality: He has threatened to “destroy” 
the Paris agreement and abolish the Environmental Protection Agency, Obama’s 
key regulatory instrument. A more likely approach is strangulation: The head of 
Trump’s EPA transition team is a prominent climate denier, Myron Ebell.

The US cannot leave the Paris Agreement quickly: The agreement came into force 
on 4 November, and it would take nearly four years for the US to withdraw. But 
the US could simply withdraw from the United Nations Framework on Climate 
Change, the overarching international climate agreement, within a year.

Trump’s ascension to the presidency signals an end to American leadership on 
international climate policy. With the withdrawal of US support, efforts to 
implement the Paris agreement and avoid the most devastating consequences of 
global warming have suffered a huge blow.

It could also cut off funding, refusing to contribute to funds that are 
intended to support poor and vulnerable countries to mitigate and adapt.

All of this would weaken the global effort, but it would not destroy it. China 
is poised to assume the role of steady, reliable climate ally, in sharp 
contrast to Trump’s US. Assuming leadership on climate has many attractions for 
China. As well as the economic opportunity, it is one of the few issues on 
which China could make a claim for the moral high ground.

In terms of industrial strategy, the case seems clear: China still has 
relatively deep pockets and can finance the dissemination of technologies — 
from solar panels to nuclear power plants — across the developing world, 
consolidating trade and diplomatic links at a time when clean energy, according 
to the International Energy Agency, is projected to grow exponentially, 
creating millions of jobs and stimulating trillions of dollars in annual 
investment. That is where China sees its future.
 