
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> will declare war on pollution, 
as part of a commitment to overhauling its unsustainable economic model, the 
country's premier said.

Li Keqiang said reform was the top priority as he set out his first annual 
policy report since becoming premier of the world's second largest economy, but 
soothed anxieties about the impact by maintaining a 7.5% growth target.

He described pollution as "nature's red-light warning against the model of 
inefficient and blind development", underscoring the broader message that China 
must not only shut down coal-fired furnaces, but shift to a different kind of 
development.

Li was addressing the opening session of the National People's Congress (NPC), 
the largely rubber-stamp parliament that meets annually in Beijing. Amost 3,000 
delegates at the Great Hall of the People observed a minute's silence for 
victims of Saturday's terrorist attack in Kunming as the meeting began.

Years of double-digit growth, driven by exports and investment, helped 
millions climb out of poverty but has led to social and environmental problems.

While the meeting opened under blue skies in Beijing, official statistics 
showed that much of the year has been blighted by smog 
<http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/846219.shtml%C2%A3.UxcQrBbGLoY>.

Under President Xi Jinping, the leadership has been bolder in setting out a 
reform agenda after years of slow progress on promises to set the economy on a 
sustainable path.

Yao Wei, China economist for Societe Generale, cautioned: "They have promised 
to do all these things – speed up reform, fight pollution and manage debt risk 
– yet at the same time want to reach the same growth target as last year.

"Although the reforms are good in the long run, in the short term they're more 
likely to be negative for growth, so this target creates even more uncertainty."

She said if the government decided to shore up slowing growth it would resort 
to the old methods: infrastructure investment and faster credit growth. "That 
means the debt risk is only going to rise," she added.

China recorded 7.7% growth last year, but analysts say that level will be 
harder to achieve this year.

Li Wei and Stephen Green of Standard Chartered said some reformers had pushed 
for a target of 7%-7.5%.

"The ultimate decision appears to have been that Beijing cannot reform without 
a certain level of growth," they wrote.

But this year's report sets out the difficulties of reaching the target more 
clearly, warning that "deep-seated problems are surfacing; painful structural 
adjustments need to be made; the pace of economic growth is changing".

Arthur Kroeber, head of research at Gavekal Dragonomics, said the government 
had made it clear that stimulus was not part of its programme.

"On the one hand they want to shore up confidence – 'we are not just going to 
let things crumble' – but on the other [they are saying] 'Watch out, because in 
coming years, we may have to bring down growth together' … If people are 
convinced the government will support growth at X level regardless of anything, 
it becomes very hard to implement structural reforms."

A separate budget report promised another double-digit rise for China's 
military, with expenditure increasing 12.2% to 808.23bn yuan (£79bn). The 
increase is the largest since 2011, but in line with rises over the last two 
decades.

Military experts say the true level of expenditure is substantially higher 
than stated, though still below that of the US.

Tensions in the region have risen, particularly over disputed territory in the 
South and East China Seas.

In a pointed reference to recent frictions with Japan over a series of 
historical issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/05/rows-japan-china-historical-grievances>
, Li told delegates: "We will safeguard the victory of World War II and the 
post-war international order, and will not allow anyone to reverse the course 
of history."

On Tuesday, NPC spokesperson Fu Ying said China followed a peaceful path but 
would respond effectively to provocations.

The government did not publish the overall domestic security budget, which has 
outstripped military spending in recent years. This year's figure did not 
include provincial and regional expenditure.

The leadership also promised its austerity campaign for officials would 
continue, saying that central government spending on hospitality dropped by 
just over a third last year, with local governments cutting expenditure by more 
than a quarter.
 