
China’s manufacturing sector expanded for a fifth month in December but growth 
was slightly less than expected, with government measures to curb soaring asset 
prices beginning to have an effect on the broader economy.

The grim truth of Chinese factories producing the west’s Christmas toys
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/04/the-grim-truth-of-chinese-factories-producing-the-wests-christmas-toys>
The official purchasing managers’ index slipped from 51.7 in November to 51.4 
last month, compared to forecasts in a Reuters poll of a figure of 51.5. A 
reading above 50 indicates that the economy is growing. A year ago the index 
was at 49.7, and the start of 2016 saw global markets spooked by worries of a 
severe slowdown in the world’s second largest economy, but since then it has 
been slowly recovering.

A housing boom in the second half of 2016 and a government spending spree on 
infrastructure have helped boost prices for commodities, from cement to steel, 
giving the country’s manufacturing sector a much-needed lift.

But the government is cracking down on speculative property buying, and 
signals from policymakers that more will be done to contain asset bubbles and 
rising debt – even at the expense of slower growth – suggest extra stimulus 
measures could be limited.

“[These] PMI figures suggest that the change of policy tone has taken its 
toll, as the authorities are seriously concerned about the asset bubbles,” said 
Zhou Hao, senior economist at Commerzbank.

Factory output slowed in December, with the sub-index hitting 53.3 compared 
with 53.9 the previous month. Total new orders were flat at 53.2, logging the 
same as in November, while new export orders fell to 50.1 from 50.3.

Jobs were again lost, with the employment sub-index sitting at 48.9, compared 
to 49.2 in November, as the country pledged to cut excess capacity over a range 
of industries.

The Markit/Caixin PMI, a private gauge of manufacturing activity which focuses 
more on small- and mid-sized firms, is due on 3 January.

A separate reading on the services sector showed the pace of growth slowed in 
December.

The official non-manufacturing PMI stood at 54.5 in December, down from 54.7 
in November, but still well above the 50-point mark.
 