
Cycling groups and MPs have called for Chris Grayling, the transport 
secretary, to be investigated forknocking over a passing cyclist in Westminster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/chris-grayling-sent-cyclist-flying-with-his-car-door-video-shows>
 when he opened the door of his ministerial car in traffic.

A cycling organisation has offered the cyclist legal assistance, while MPs on 
the all-party parliamentary cycling group have called on the prime minister and 
Metropolitan police to investigate.

Although the transport secretary stopped to apologise and check on the injured 
man, he left about 90 seconds after the incident, without leaving his details. 
The cyclist, Jaiqi Liu, was left dazed and injured, with a damaged bike and 
unaware of the identity of Grayling or the other ministers and aides in the car.


Chris Grayling sent cyclist flying with his car door, video shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/chris-grayling-sent-cyclist-flying-with-his-car-door-video-shows>
Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> UK said “dooring” 
was a criminal offence and that if police did not prosecute, it was prepared to 
use its cyclists’ defence fund (CDF) to assist Liu in considering a possible 
claim against Grayling.

However, Liu has since said he does not wish to discuss the incident further.

Duncan Dollimore, Cycling UK’s senior road safety and legal campaigns officer, 
said: “Mr Grayling, as a former justice secretary and the current transport 
secretary, should know it’s a criminal offence to open any door of a vehicle on 
a road so as to injure or endanger anyone.”


A regulation under section 42 of the Road Traffic Act 1988, which designates 
criminal motoring offences, states: “No person shall open, or cause or permit 
to be opened, any door of a vehicle on a road so as to injure or endanger any 
person.”


The charity has recently lobbied the government to review this law, believing 
it is not adequately enforced. Dollimore said: “Currently it’s treated as a 
minor offence with a maximum £1,000 fine, despite the fact that people havebeen 
killed 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/merseyside-woman-who-caused-cyclist-7729343>
 and seriously injured by car dooring.”


In one case where a cyclist was killed, a prosecution was brought for 
manslaughter, although no conviction was secured. Dollimore said there was a 
“huge gap between a slap on the wrist and manslaughter”.


He said: “Cycling UK spoke to Justice [Department] officials in September 
suggesting that a review of the offence and penalties of the car dooring 
offence is needed. Disappointingly, Grayling’s former department rejected our 
suggestions and omitted them from their review of offences they announced two 
weeks ago. Hopefully the Ministry of Justice will now listen to us, and 
reconsider the entire remit of what is a very limited review.”


Footage obtained by the Guardian shows Grayling knocking the cyclist off his 
bike on 12 October. The cyclist reported the incident to police without knowing 
who the minister was. Liu said he was in shock and became aware of the pain 
later, and was angered by the minister accusing him of cycling too fast and 
being at fault.


The 35-year-old, a regular cyclist in London who has not had an accident 
before or since, said he suffered pain to his back, legs and head after the 
incident, and had to take in his damaged bike for repairs.


Neither Grayling, who was accompanied by a fellow transport minister and an 
aide, nor the driver stayed to provide details to Liu. Details of the crash 
emerged after another cyclist who had a camera on his bike later recognised 
Grayling in a news interview.


Dollimore said: “Cycling UK is keen to speak to Mr Liu to see if our cyclists’ 
defence fund is able to provide legal assistance. There are questions about why 
Mr Grayling was not prosecuted for what appears to be an offence, and CDF has 
in the past been prepared to commence private prosecutions on behalf of injured 
cyclists.”


A spokesperson for Grayling said it was “an unfortunate accident. Mr Grayling 
got out of the car, checked the cyclist was OK and waited until he was back on 
his feet. Mr Grayling spoke to the cyclist and apologised; they shook hands 
before he left”.

Members of parliament’s all-party cycling group have demanded an investigation 
into the incident. Chair Ruth Cadbury MP said: “Chris Grayling as much as 
anyone should understand the risks of opening a car door. If anyone is expected 
to understand live by the rules of the road, it’s the secretary of state for 
transport.”

Ian Austin MP, a patron of the group, has written to Theresa May and the chief 
of the Metropolitan police, Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, asking for details of any 
investigation or sanction. The MP said he believed Grayling had committed at 
least one offence, including failing to swap details or report an accident.


In his letter, Austin said: “Opening a car door in a way that injures someone 
is an offence and can result in serious injury and even death. Despite this, Mr 
Grayling didn’t even provide his details so he could pay for the damage, [and 
rail minister Paul] Maynard couldn’t get away quick enough.

“Anyone can make a mistake, but I don’t think you can have a secretary of 
state who has injured another road user, could have committed an offence and 
failed even to provide his details afterwards.”

Shadow transport minister Daniel Zeichner said the crash showed why a change 
in cycling policy was needed, with a promised cycling and walking investment 
strategy yet to materialise. He said: “If we want to see cycling safety 
improve, we need to see sustained investment in infrastructure, and they need 
to take collisions like this seriously.

“The transport secretary is clearly embarrassed by this incident, but taken 
with his recent careless comments about cycling, it reveals what he really 
thinks about cyclists as road users.”
 