
In Washington DC, the Democrats are still in trauma. With all branches of 
government, from the White House to the Congress, in Republican hands, 
thousands of staffers are being let go. “It’s like the local steel mill has 
closed,” moped one Senate aide. Meanwhile, they watch in slack-jawed shock as 
president-elect Trump’s transition teammix humiliation with farce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/donald-trump-cabinet-republican-appointments-campaign>
, corruption, bluster and incompetence. No wonder the Chinese president has 
decided 2017 is the time toturn up to Davos 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/douglasbulloch/2016/12/06/xi-jinping-will-make-history-as-first-chinese-president-to-attend-davos/#51433d431754>
 and pronounce the end of Pax Americana.

Amid the gloom, it is America’s cities on the hill that still provide the 
glimmering light. From Los Angeles to New York city, progressive mayors have 
badged their metropolises “sanctuary cities”, determined to resist Trump’s 
hard-right Republicanism. Just as Sadiq Khan announced “Open London” after the 
Brexit vote, so when it comes to immigrant rights, minimum wage legislation and 
the abolition of Obamacare, the cities are set to take a stand.

On Friday morning, Rahm Emanuel, the brilliantly pugnacious mayor of Chicago, 
and former White House chief of staff, told me that, as the grandson of a 
migrant, he would not assist Trump’s attempts to entrap undocumented children, 
but instead continue to support them through his community college programme. 
“Administrations may change but our values and principles when it comes to 
inclusion do not.” Rahm has reduced poverty and rebuilt Chicago’s riverside, 
and he’s not going to let Trump tear that down. On climate change, he has 
already struck a deal with eight Chinese cities to work together to bring down 
emissions.

It is leadership needed now more than ever as, on both sides of the Atlantic, 
the centre-left coalition is fracturing. Thursday’sSleaford by-election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/stark-warning-for-labour-sleaford-byelection-eu-referendum>
 only confirmed the fact that progressive politics is being rent asunder by a 
growing divide between metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas – and 
post-Brexit Labour, like Clinton’s Democrats, doesn’t have the language or 
politics to speak to rural, small-town England.

In Britain and America, it is cities with higher levels of educational 
attainment, standards of living, employable skills and open, cosmopolitan 
cultures which voted to remain in Europe and for Hillary Clinton as president. 
In contrast, non-metropolitan areas with historic manufacturing economies, poor 
school results, low incomes, high levels of manual jobs (easily subject to 
automation) and a more hostile attitude towards immigration voted Republican 
and out of the EU. In the words of the Brookings Institution think tank, 
victory by Trump, the quintessential New Yorker, “would not have been possible 
without the influence of rural areas and smaller metropolitan areas”.

Since ancient Rome, large cities – with their experts, elites and foreigners – 
have been the object of populist fury. In Britain, the Brexit vote was closely 
connected to a broader sense of hostility towards London. In America, the big 
cities’ disregard for the flyover states and middle-America norms drove the 
Trump vote. Globalisation has exacerbated these cultural divides, with the 
urban embrace of technological disruption and immigration often at odds with a 
non-metropolitan respect for stability and less obvious admiration for the pace 
of change. The US presidential election proved as much a battle between 
communitarian and cosmopolitan identities as a traditional left v right 
struggle.

Yet, at the same time, the American public also gave a huge vote of confidence 
to US cities. In Columbus in Ohio, Seattle and Los Angeles, residents approved 
more than $180bn in additional taxes to spur ambitious transit plans and 
regeneration schemes. In fact, there is a lot of interest in the British 
experience of “city deals”, with their block allocation of central funding to 
metropolitan areas. For this is the conundrum that Trump faces: if he wants to 
deliver 4% growth, then he will have to engage with Democrat cities. The United 
States’s 388 metropolitan areas generate 91% of its gross domestic product and 
hold the key to “make America great again”.

Where Trump and the city bosses might agree is on the need for more 
infrastructure expenditure. For Rahm Emanuel, urban infrastructure spend is the 
most effective tool to promote equity and productivity. Similarly, the mayors 
are not against a reform of the tax code to promote innovative forms of 
metropolitan finance and urban bonds.

But, in truth, the space for consensus is small. Quite rightly, sanctuary 
cities are gearing up to battle Trump’s coming assault on social housing, clean 
air, public schooling, minority rights, affordable health care, and economic 
justice. But if metropolitan America is going to win the broader war, then it 
will need to look to its own sense of cultural superiority. Perhaps only when 
Beltway insiders can understand the loss of a real steel mill to communities in 
the midwest will the Democrats enjoy a national revival.

Tristram Hunt is the Labour MP for Stoke-on-Trent Central
 