
I love that oranges, in all their many varieties, come into season in the dead 
of winter. Not only are they healthy, but they keep boredom at bay in the cold, 
sometimes bleak January kitchen. There are valencia oranges, navel oranges, 
pink navel oranges, moro blood oranges, tarocco blood oranges and, of course, 
their cousins the satsumas, clementines and tangelos. Their sherbet palette is 
as varied as the acidity of their fruit: voluptuous tumbles of bright orange, 
blood red, deep purple and blushed pink fill my fruit bowl.

The best way to showcase them is to supreme (see tip) and slice them to parade 
their pretty tones.

I never tire of a good upside-down cake and this one is a prime example. The 
key to getting them right is to have a good amount of fruit with a syrupy 
topping (which becomes the base) so that it isn’t dry once inverted. Here, the 
contrast of treacle-dark spicy sponge beneath bright circles of citrus is 
rather gorgeous. The rye flour has a nutty flavour, making it a good companion 
to the fruit. It’s also a whole grain and lower in gluten, which in January 
seems a little more virtuous than a refined white flour, even if we are going 
for it with the sugar!

Now, I know this is not baking per se, but an orange salad is an inspired way 
to finish a meal. I like to sprinkle supremed segments with the tiniest amount 
of orange blossom water (a nod to their origins) and drown them in good honey. 
Try different honeys: a blossom variety would be my choice over a chestnut or 
forest honey to keep the flavours bright, but see what you like best. For the 
dates, I like a big fat medjool here, but barhi from California or the Iranian 
dates found in the UK are also good options. Sea salt balances the sweetness 
and adds a delightful crunch, while pomegranates add colour and bite.

Tip: how to supreme an orange

Use a small serrated knife to supreme your oranges. Supreming is the culinary 
term for trimming the peel and pith from the outside of a citrus while keeping 
the citrus intact. Trim the top and bottom and set the orange cut-side down. 
Working away from you, cut the peel and pith away from top to bottom, rotating 
the orange after each cut. The serrated knife gives you more control allowing 
you to trim away less of the flesh and keep the round shape of the orange.

Related: Claire Ptak’s recipes for two light desserts free from refined sugar 
| Baking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/07/chocolate-avocado-mousse-recipe-claire-ptak-baking>

Orange, ginger and rye upside-down cake

Serve this with plain yoghurt to keep it light, or a little creme fraiche if 
you’re feeling naughty.

Serves 8-10
For the tin
50g unsalted butter
125g demerara sugar
1 vanilla pod, split
6-8 oranges of any type in any combination, supremed

For the sponge
300g dark rye flour
½ tsp fine salt
1 tsp ground ginger
1 tsp ground cinnamon
1 tsp mixed spice
½ tsp ground cloves
200g unsalted butter
200g light brown sugar
200g black treacle
160g whole milk
2 eggs

 1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Have ready a 25cm solid-bottomed 
cake tin or skillet that can go into the oven.

2 Melt 50g butter and demerara sugar in the pan and swirl around to coat. 
Split the vanilla pod, scrape the seeds into the butter and break up with a 
fork. Lay the split vanilla pod in the bottom and remove from the heat.

3 Take the supremed oranges (see tip) and slice them crossways into 1.5cm 
slices. Arrange the slices in the bottom of the pan on top of the vanilla pod.

4 Put the flour, salt and spices into a bowl and whisk them together well. Set 
aside.

5 In a small saucepan, melt 200g unsalted butter, the sugar and treacle. Whisk 
together until smooth. Carefully mix this into the dry flour mix.

6 Whisk in the milk and finally the eggs. Pour the cake mixture over the 
oranges and bake in the oven for 45-55 minutes or until springy and a skewer 
inserted comes out clean.

7 Let the cake cool for 15 minutes in the tin. Then use a knife to release the 
cake from the edge of the tin. Put a plate over the cake and turn it upside 
down so that the bottom becomes the top.
 An inspired way to finish a meal … Claire Ptak’s orange and date salad. 
Photograph: Kristin Perers for the Guardian 
Orange and orange-blossom salad with dates

Serves 4-6
6 oranges
6 medjool dates, halved and pitted
A few drops orange blossom water
A generous drizzle of good runny honey
½ pomegranate, seeded
A pinch of flaky sea salt

1 Supreme the oranges and cut into 1cm slices. Arrange them on a pretty 
serving dish and dot with the date halves. Sprinkle over a few drops (no more) 
of the orange blossom water and drizzle with a generous amount of honey.

2 Scatter over the pomegranate seeds, crush a pinch of sea salt over the top, 
and serve.

 * Claire Ptak is a pastry chef, author and food stylist and owns Violet 
Bakery in London. She is the author of the Violet Bakery Cookbook (Square Peg);
@violetcakeslondon <https://www.instagram.com/violetcakeslondon/>  