
All aid workers have been there. Stepping off the plane, squinting into 
unfamiliar light, a freshly signed contract clutched in our jet-lagged hands – 
freshly minted aid workers arriving on our first ever mission. Just as at home 
– whether you’re national or international staff – you’re desperate to impress. 
But forget getting stuck in the lift or spilling coffee down your new shirt, 
aid environments provide entirely new ways to screw up on your first day. Even 
when knee-deep in post-typhoon mud, first impressions are everything. So here’s 
our toolkit for not putting your newly-sandalled foot in your mouth.

The seven sins of humanitarian douchery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/16/humanitarian-douchery-volunteering-voluntourism-endhumanitariandouchery>
Getting ready to go

The eternal question is what to pack? The art of second-guessing what you’ll 
need in three weeks time takes on a different dimension when, by then, you 
might be halfway up the Congo river. You need to be extra careful with your 
baggage allowance. I’d suggest not, for example, panic-buying a child’s 
mattress, especially one in Barbie doll print, just because you heard en-route 
to post-tsunami Aceh in Indonesia that colleagues were sleeping on the floor. 
How my colleagues laughed when they showed me to my room, complete with a bed, 
in an actual house.

All I suffered was piss-taking, unlike my ecoconscious friend who took organic 
bug repellent to Sierra Leone. “Needless to say, I was down with malaria within 
a few weeks,” she remembers. But at least we did some research, unlike the 
American friend who, deployed to Russia, packed shot glasses. Or another headed 
for Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of Congo who packed a tin of sweet 
potatoes. “I always cook Thanksgiving dinner wherever I am,” she says, in her 
defence. “I was worried about getting the ingredients.”

Oh, and one more thing: do actually sign the contract before you leave. Don’t 
just believe the nice man who tells you over the phone that they’ll sort it 
when you get to Haiti/Nepal/complete-as-applicable, or you could end up in a 
crisis zone with no medical insurance, no allowances, a salary half that of 
your colleagues – and a six-month fight to rectify it all.

Packing clothes

Humanitarian Star Wars: 15 signs your mission belongs in a galaxy far, far away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/feb/13/humanitarian-star-wars-15-signs-your-mission-belongs-in-another-galaxy>
Wrongly guessing the look at your destination is a classic error and easily 
done, no matter how hard you try. “Trying to be culturally appropriate my first 
day in Sudan, I wore what I thought were tasteful billowy clothes for a 50C 
summer day,” remembers one friend. “The head of human resources asked me if I 
was Amish.” On the other hand, blending in too well is also an issue. Another 
friend recalls landing in a remote area, jumping out of the helicopter, “and 
realising that, from a distance, my trousers and top looked exactly like the 
uniform of the militias that had been harassing people in the same area.”

Whatever you wear, though, do remember to bring more than one outfit. One 
friend – not even a rookie – was deployed to Aceh after the 2004 tsunami with 
only one pair of trousers packed. When, after two weeks of constant wear in the 
heat, he finally got a new pair, his long-suffering colleagues were so relieved 
they included it in the UN daily situation report, in bright pink, 24-point 
type. As proofreading was not a top priority at that point in the response, it 
wasn’t removed and landed up on desks from Downing Street to Canberra.

The moral of the story? Ask in advance. And always pack spare trousers.

Settling in

Once arrived, get settled in. “On my first night in Kosovo, I had just got 
into the shower at the hotel when gunshots went off right outside my window,” 
remembers one colleague. “I turned off the lights, hit the deck, shimmied along 
the floor to get some clothes and went immediately down to the bar – where no 
one else had even noticed … My introduction tohappy fire 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-14616491>.” 

Guesthouses can also be traps for the unwary. One colleague, who had never 
seen a generator, confesses: “I had to be told what the ‘roaring’ sound was.” 
Another, deployed to Myanmar after cyclone Nargis, came unstuck when she tried 
to do a little tidying up using some outsized rubbish bags she found. “It was 
only when I asked why the binbags were too big that a colleague told me they 
were actually bodybags,” she remembers.

All offices have their quirks, but field stations in particular can be more 
Heart of Darkness than David Brent and, generally speaking, challenging the 
boss never ends well. “In Gabon, in my first two weeks, I sat at the head of 
the table at the first all-staff meeting without thinking about it. It was the 
only empty chair left. You could almost hear the gasps, as if I, the only white 
westerner in the place, was deliberately trying to usurp ‘Madame’, the resident 
representative. It was downhill from there.”


Another useful tip: If you’re working in communications, as I was in my first 
posting, it’s best not to tell the head of the UNDP that they can’t put 
‘capacity building’ into a press release because “it doesn’t mean anything”.

Confessions of a humanitarian: My New Year’s resolution? Saving the world of 
course
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/30/confessions-of-a-humanitarian-my-new-years-resolution-saving-the-world-of-course>
And finally, you might want to note that the requirement for everyone to have 
VHF radios and communicate with a central radio room basically means the end of 
privacy. To take another colleague’s experience: if you inform the radio 
operator – as per protocol – that you are going to a bar with the rest of the 
office and everyone checks back in when they are home except you and the 
logistician who reports his position as being in a hotel “with guest”, everyone 
– including all the drivers – will know what you were up to by the morning.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 