
Britain's unfeasibly slow system for transferring money electronically has 
long been a thorn in the side of small business, causing cashflow problems and 
no little gnashing of teeth. Now banks have been forced to overhaul the process 
and cut clearing times to one day.

It currently takes three days to transfer money between accounts, or to pay a 
bill following a transaction made by telephone or internet. But that is all to 
change. The Office of Fair Trading payments systems task force has announced an 
agreement between the big banks - who control the clearing system - which will 
allow direct debits and standing orders to be transferred overnight. It is 
hoped this will be in place by November 2007.

Our clearing process has long trailed other European countries. Belgium, 
Denmark, Greece, Spain, Finland and the Netherlands all enjoy same-day 
transactions. In Sweden, the process can take just a couple of hours. The 
Cruikshank Report of 2000 was highly critical of the fact that banks control 
the networks that channel money around the economy.

The task force comprises, among others, the big banks, the OFT and the 
Association of Payment Clearing Services, and was set up in Gordon Brown's 2003 
pre-budget report as a result of Don Cruikshank's findings.

Now that agreement has been reached, the priority is to decide on a robust, 
secure and efficient platform, and to seek agreement with the participating 
banks, who will need to make their own systems compatible. Apacs is looking at 
how the new service will work, and will report back to the task force within 
six months. The industry expects to introduce the new service within two years 
from that date.

The OFT's Jonathan May, who chairs the task force, said: "This is good news 
for bank customers. Telephone and internet payments and standing orders should 
all be speeded up and money could be available to the recipient on the same 
day."

Apacs chief executive Paul Smee says: "Despite the fact that research tells us 
that for most customers speed is less important than cost, certainty and 
security, the advent of the internet has brought with it a growing expectation 
that online payments should move speedily.

"This service will not only impact internet payments but also phone and 
standing order payments. These accounted for 7% of all automated payments last 
year."

The Task Force expects to set up a working group to examine issues relating to 
cheques, starting in October 2005. Other payment methods to come under scrutiny 
include MasterCard, Visa, Maestro and Switch - significant for small businesses 
as many are now using credit cards as sources of finance - as well as the Chaps 
clearing scheme.

So why is clearing so sluggish? With cheques, there is a physical transfer as 
well as an electronic exchange of funds. More than 10m cheques are written 
every day, and about two-thirds pass through the inter-bank clearing. Given 
this volume and the physical element of the transaction, a delay is inevitable.

But surely electronic payments should be faster? David Bishop of the 
Federation of Small Business says: "When you press a button on your PC and the 
money leaves your account, you expect it to arrive in the recipient's account 
on the same day. But it actually takes three days - five if the payment is made 
over the weekend. This is because electronic payments are based on a clearing 
system that existed before computers were invented."

Until the new system comes into force, there are simple steps businesses can 
take to avoid cashflow problems. Firstly, allow yourself seven working days and 
ensure you have extra to cover a temporary shortfall. Secondly, talk to your 
bank. An agreed overdraft facility will absorb any debits caused by a 
short-term funding gap. And finally, use online banking to keep an eye on your 
accounts.
 