
The Turnbull government has dumped the $1.7bn child and adult public dental 
scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/06/department-tells-parents-dental-scheme-is-ending-but-legislation-has-not-passed>
 (CAPDS) proposed in its pre-election budget after it failed to get agreement 
from the states.

Instead the government has moved to cut the maximum benefits for children in 
the existing scheme by $300 over two years.

However the cut could be blocked in the Senate when parliament returns as 
Labor and the Greens have already committed to vote to disallow the changes. 
The opposing parties would need four crossbenchers to prevent the move.

The CAPDS was due to replace the $2.7bn child dental benefits schedule – set 
up in 2010 under the minority Labor government. It would have merged adults and 
children into one program. The CDBS was budgeted at $1.7bn over the following 
four years in the pre-election budget.


Poor dental health becoming 'a badge of poverty' for low-income families, says 
Ncoss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/12/poor-dental-health-becoming-a-badge-of-poverty-for-low-income-families-says-ncoss>
But the legislation has never been presented to the Senate – despite passing 
the House – due to lack of support.

Before the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook statement on Monday and 10 
days before Christmas, the health minister,Sussan Ley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sussan-ley>, announced new federal 
funding arrangements for dental services from 1 January.


The changes mean the maximum benefits available to eligible children under the 
CDBS will be cut from $1,000 to $700 over two years after the current two-year 
allocation runs out.

The minister said it reflected usage by families because most children were 
not claiming the full $1,000.


“The changes to the CDBS better reflect utilisation patterns, which indicate 
that most children are claiming well below the $1,000 cap,” Ley said.


For adult dental funding, the federal government will provide $320m over the 
next three years through the national partnership agreement.

The Royal Flying Doctor Service will receive $11m over two years to provide 
dental outreach services to rural and remote communities.

The shadow health minister, Catherine King, said the decision meant 
disadvantaged and vulnerable Australians would lose access to life-changing 
dental services and waiting lists would grow across the country.

“The funding allocated to the states and territories for public adult services 
is an insult when the Liberal government have ripped hundreds of millions out 
of adult public dental since 2013,” King said.

“Three million children will lose up to $300 in essential dental care due to 
Malcolm Turnbull’s decision today to rip hundreds of millions of dollars out of 
the children’s dental benefits schedule.”

The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, said it was just another way to balance 
the budget off the back of the most vulnerable.


“The decision to reduce commonwealth funding to the states for the provision 
of essential dental services to the most vulnerable in the community means that 
wait times at public dental clinics, which are already running into years, will 
only get longer and leave more patients at risk,” Di Natale said.


“The is another attempt by this government to balance the budget off the back 
of healthcare for the most vulnerable people in our society. Cutting the value 
of the child dental benefits schedule by $300 per child will significantly 
reduce the amount of dental care that Aussie kids can access.


“The Greens worked together with Labor to make this scheme a reality and now 
it is going to be up to the Greens and Labor to save it.”
 