
The federal government has backed away from its proposed bank victims’ 
tribunal after an independent review recommended combining two financial 
ombudsmen instead.

On Tuesday the Ramsay review of dispute resolution mechanisms released an 
interim report recommending one ombudsman for financial, credit and investment 
disputes and another for superannuation, with a view to join the two in future.

In October, Malcolm Turnbull announced the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/07/malcolm-turnbull-commits-to-bank-victims-tribunal-but-labor-calls-it-a-stitch-up>
 was “working towards one tribunal that deals with consumer claims in a 
cost-effective and speedy way”.

A bank tribunal was first proposed by a Senate committee in May and was seized 
on by the Liberal MP Warren Entsch as an alternative to a royal commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/bank-royal-commission-labor-to-use-tight-election-result-to-push-policies>
 as a quicker means to compensate victims of banks.

On Tuesday the financial services minister, Kelly O’Dwyer, welcomed the Ramsay 
report, which rejected a new statutory tribunal, finding that it was not 
required because financial ombudsmen services would “address many of the 
problems that led to the debate about a tribunal”.

On the ABC’s The World Today, O’Dwyer explained Turnbull’s earlier backing of 
a “tribunal” was a “catch-all for having a one-stop consumer complaints shop”.

She said a “big-T” tribunal was “far more legalistic, which means it is 
probably less consumer friendly” than the “little-t” tribunal Turnbull and the 
government proposed.

O’Dwyer denied opting for an ombudsman was inconsistent with Turnbull’s 
undertaking in October.

“The government is committed to a one-stop shop for consumer complaints 
handling that provides consumers with access to justice, the independent 
determination of disputes, timely reviews and a robust compensation scheme,” 
she said.

O’Dwyer’s explanation comes just two weeks after the House of Representatives 
economics committee recommended a new “banking tribunal” be established by 
July, following its grilling of the big four bank bosses in October.

Responding to O’Dwyer’s remarks, the opposition leader, Bill Shorten, said the 
government deserved a “capital-F fail” for the backdown.

The Ramsay review recommended a redesign of the current financial dispute 
system, which includes a financial ombudsman service, credit and investments 
ombudsman (CIO) and superannuation complaints tribunal (SCT).

It found found that the monetary limits and compensation caps for consumers 
and small businesses – which have the effect of excluding some disputes from 
the dispute resolution system – are outdated and impeding access to justice and 
recommended that these be increased.

The committee recommended a six-monthly review into banking competition by the 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission.
 