 'Betrayed...' 'shocked...' 'saddened...': our recent editorial on why we 
believe force might ultimately be necessary in Iraq brought an avalanche of 
comments from around the world from a readership which, in some part, expected 
the paper to say the exact opposite.
Hundreds echoed one reader who wrote that 'for a newspaper with your long 
liberal tradition to try and justify the coming war withIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> is both unforgiveable and an insult to 
the intelligence'. Indeed, such was the weight of the outcry we devoted an 
extra page of letters to reflect your concerns.

I am not here to justify the arguments in that leader, but I can tell you a 
little about the process that goes on here in deciding the editorial line.

Perhaps one fundamental thing to remember is that a newspaper is not a 
democracy: editors listen carefully to staff and to readers, but ultimately 
they make the final decision. It's a lonely tightrope walk: too many faulty 
decisions and they will start to teeter. If circulation falls too far they, 
too, will fall.

All other Sunday newspaper editors in this country have one other person to 
listen to: their proprietor, but The Observer has been free from proprietorial 
interference for nearly 10 years now. We are owned by a trust which guarantees 
the independence of the editor: no shadowy figure steers the editorial line 
from the other end of a telephone; no wider commercial interest can muddy the 
waters. That's hugely important. Readers with not-so-long memories can remember 
the scrapes this newspaper found itself in at the behest of earlier owners.

Even worse then, some would say, that such a liberal newspaper should come to 
the same conclusion as the conservative press: 'As a long time Observer reader, 
I find myself suddenly and completely disillusioned with my Sunday paper. I am 
one of the 60 per cent-plus of people who opposes military action, yet my views 
are not being represented.

'The fact that it is now down to the Mirror and the Independent on Sunday to 
represent the views of more than half the population is a sad indictment on the 
state of our media.

'Editors seem to be jumping through bigger and bigger Government hoops and 
abandoning the views of their readers in order to stay within the establishment 
loop. For as long as you continue to tow your pro-war line I will not be buying 
your paper.'

'Opinion is as split in this office as it is in any other,' says the editor, 
'but we think that military intervention may be the least-bad option. No one 
wants war, but we have to remember that Saddam has defied 16 UN resolutions.

'The Observer does not have to be a pacifist paper: it was one of the first to 
endorse the use of force against Hitler in the 1930s; more recently we 
supported intervention in Kosovo. And it's important to remember that our 
overall package of reporting on this subject is resolutely dispassionate, and 
that our comment pages are, and have been, open to all shades of opinion.'

Editorial conferences are held throughout the week. Heads of the various 
sections of the paper gather in the editor's office and any staffer who wants 
to can attend.

On Tuesday, the editor chairs a post-mortem on the previous Sunday's paper, 
and a review of the week ahead; Wednesday's conference is given over to 
politics, with correspondents and columnists coming in to the office to discuss 
the major issues that are likely to shape the paper on Sunday. News gets an 
airing on Thursday, and again on Friday and Saturday mornings, but it is the 
Friday afternoon leader conferences, attended by senior editors, columnists 
and, of course, the leader writers, where the heart of the paper is most 
closely debated.

This conference is often passionate: voices are raised, positions defended; 
the temperature rises and falls dramatically. All newspapers have their hawks 
and doves; mostly the doveish factions at The Observer carry the day, but on 
this occasion the hawks pressed their case and won.

The long tradition of argument and debate on this paper reaches back to the 
days of David Astor, who admitted to running the paper like 'a Cliveden talking 
shop' - a reference to the Buckinghamshire country home of his parents, Nancy 
and Waldorf Astor, where politicians, journalists, writers and thinkers would 
gather on the terrace to argue away long summer afternoons.

The memory of Astor has been invoked many times in the past few weeks. His 
brave stand against Anthony Eden's Suez invasion in 1956 still burns bright for 
many readers. 'We had not realised our government was capable of such folly and 
such crookedness,' thundered the leader.

But it is not quite fair to make the comparison. The Suez invasion was planned 
in secret and sprung upon an unwitting public. 'We wish to make an apology,' 
began Astor's (and Dingle Foot's) leader. 'Five weeks ago we remarked that, 
although we knew our government would not make a military attack in defiance of 
its solemn international obligations, people abroad might think otherwise. The 
events of last week have proved us completely wrong.'

The Observer, alone with The Guardian, was outraged that Eden broke his word 
and invaded, but we can hardly pretend that any military action in Iraq will 
come as a surprise. And there's another myth surrounding The Observer and Suez: 
that its stand hastened the paper's decline, but in 1957, circulation stood at 
641,000 - 40,000 up on Suez.

Yes, some cancelled their subscriptions, including newlyweds Margaret and 
Denis Thatcher, of Chelsea. Just think how different life might have been if we 
had kept them as readers...
 