
If you want to generate more cash flow for your business or break even faster, 
a basic understanding of business maths is going to really help you.

However, getting to grips with the numbers can be one of the biggest pain 
points when running a business – particularly if you feel it’s not your forte. 
As well as the dreaded figures, there’s also the jargon that accountants, tax 
officials and “useful” software packages delight in using.

To understand how your business is doing and how you can better steer it to 
profitability, you just need to know three things:

 * Income and expenses 
 * Cashflow 
 * What the business owns and owes 
This information is contained in three reports – the profit and loss, the 
cashflow forecast and the balance sheet – all of which can be created via 
accounting software using your transaction history.

The good news is modern generation accounting packages such as Xero, 
QuickBooks and FreeAgent are much easier to use than the desktop software they 
replace. If you can use MailChimp or Eventbrite, you will be well placed to 
tackle online accounting software.

Once you have your numbers, what are you looking for? Rather than being 
reassured that sales and profit are increasing, you should look for trends to 
reveal what’s really going on with your business.

The power of trends
 Tracking the numbers. 
Most eyes will naturally be drawn to the gross profit figure. This is profit 
after cost of sales (basically after the cost of your raw materials) but before 
your overheads like rent, marketing and accounting. In this example, we can see 
that sales and gross profit are rising. However, if you express gross profit as 
a percentage of sales – or gross profit margin – what is the trend?

To calculate this figure, take the gross profit for the period and divide that 
number by sales over the same timeframe. Then multiply by 100 to make it a 
percentage.

In the case of the above example, the gross profit of year three is 60% 
(£120,000/£200,000 x 100 = 60%). Now do the same for years one and two so that 
you can compare.
 Adding gross profit margin percentage. 
We can see that although gross profit is rising in money terms, gross profit 
margin is falling each year. That means the business is making less gross 
profit per sale. While sales are rising, the cost of sale is rising faster.

Being aware of such a downward trend is the first step towards identifying 
whether or not your business has a problem that needs to be solved. Investigate 
– ask yourself, why is this? Do these numbers make sense? Maybe you decided to 
reduce the price to boost sales or you gave an important client a significant 
discount; maybe the ingredients are costing more, or there are portion control 
issues, or instances of fraud.

Tracking the gross profit margin is crucial if you are to understand how much 
value you have retained in the business. It is this gross profit that goes 
towards covering your overheads.

You can also track net profit (profit after all costs including overheads), or 
particular expenses in the same way to reveal other issues within the business. 
For example, if you track labour costs as a percentage of sales across a number 
of months, this will show you if your team are becoming more or less efficient.

Mastering business maths and tracking trends will help you to drill down to 
the nuts and bolts of the business and make informed decisions about pricing, 
costs and revenue.

The challenge is setting time aside to review your business numbers. My best 
advice for this is to create a financial routine. Make every Friday a finance 
day and spend it reviewing the numbers. Time spent on the business maths side 
of your business will pay dividends – literally.

 * Johnny Martin is the author of Understanding your Business Finances 
Workbook and runsregular workshops 
<http://www.johnnymartin.co.uk/workshops-events> at the Business & IP Centre at 
the British Library. 
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 