
The sending of bogus emails asking unsuspecting recipients for personal 
details - a practice known as phishing - has replaced spam as the biggest 
threat to internet users after soaring by 44 per cent in six months.

Phishing is increasingly the confidence trick of choice for gangs in eastern 
Europe, the Middle East and Africa, often to fund drugs crime or, according to 
Interpol, terrorism. Emails are sent out to try to make people enter personal 
details on fake web pages made to resemble real sites, often those of banks. 
The details are then used to spend the user's money without their knowledge.

'Three years ago most people would be complaining about the amount of spam,' 
said Neil Holloway, president of Microsoft Europe, Middle East and Africa. 'Now 
phishing has become the next wave of cyber crime. Some will put a site on the 
web for two or four hours then take it down again, making it hard to track. The 
challenge is that the internet has no borders. There is no silver bullet.'

Microsoft has launched 53 legal actions against individuals suspected of 
committing online fraud. The figure will rise to 100 by the end of June. It 
said most of the phishers are males aged 16 to 20. The cases follow 
investigative work by Microsoft, national police forces and Interpol.

Microsoft is taking four unnamed individuals to the High Court after 
discovering 10 phishing sites made to look almost identical to the login page 
of its web-based email, Hotmail. It is pursuing civil rather than criminal 
action in the first British cases of this kind partly because the law has not 
yet caught up with the phishing phenomenon.

Of the 53 legal actions already under way, Turkey has the highest number, 20, 
followed by France, with 10, and Spain, which has seven. Microsoft said 
phishers tend to host their site in a country with a historical link to their 
own. For example, phishing sites hosted in France could be traced back to 
Morocco and Algeria. There was a similar relationship between German-speaking 
countries and Turkey, and the UK and the Middle East.

Bernhard Otupal, crime intelligence officer for Interpol's financial and 
hi-tech crime unit, said: 'Phishers are able to steal your whole identity. They 
steal your credit card information and spend your money on goods. It's even 
financing terrorism, which makes it even more interesting for law enforcement.

'We are dealing with quite a new form of crime with an old law. In raising 
awareness in some countries, for example Romania, it's getting easier to 
develop legislation, but there are still some places in the world criminals 
move to, to use ISPs [internet service providers] or launder their money. We 
had one phisher who moved through 25 countries, which means 25 police and 25 
legislations.'

Britain is under pressure to pass laws to protect victims of phishing. Sarah 
Wright, intellectual property solicitor at Olswang, lawyers for Microsoft in 
the UK, said: 'There is no specific law for phishing at the moment, although 
the Fraud Bill before the House of Lords will go some way to correcting that. 
Until then we have to rely on civil actions for trademark or copyright 
infringement.

'It's always the case that legislation takes time to catch up with technology 
and deal with new offences like phishing. It can be frustrating for businesses 
like Microsoft who want to act but have to deal with the current legislation 
and be creative to get cases before the courts.'
 