
Crowds have packed out Melbourne’s St Paul’s Cathedral despite it being the 
target of an allegedChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> Day bombing plot.

The dean of St Paul’s, Dr Andreas Loewe, who led the midnight service, said 
1,500 churchgoers had filled the cathedral, forcing latecomers into the 
forecourt.


“There was a steady stream of people coming in and out of the cathedral and in 
the end I had to come out and give the final blessing to people on the 
forecourt,” Loewe said on Sunday.

But they didn’t want to leave so the 90-strong gospel choir gave another 
performance at 1.50am.

Crowded services on Christmas Eve ended up as multi-faith celebrations, Loewe 
said. “Three imams came through the course of the night, which was certainly a 
new experience for us,” he said. “To have actual leaders ofIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> with us in solidarity was wonderful.”

One man released and four charged in Melbourne terror plot case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/24/one-man-released-and-four-charged-in-melbourne-terror-plot-case>
Four men have been charged with preparing or planning a terrorist act over the 
alleged plot targeting Flinders Street Station, Federation Square and the 
cathedral.


Loewe said security had been beefed-up. “The cathedral has its own internal 
security in place, but Victoria police is also providing additional, both 
visible and invisible security around the cathedral precinct,” he said on 
Saturday.

The president of the Islamic Council of Victoria, Mohamed Mohideen, was at a 
Saturday afternoon service and called for the community to be united and work 
towards peace. “There is a diverse community [in Victoria], we live together, 
we live in harmony, and we live for the betterment of Australia,” Mohideen said.

Four men – Hamza Abbas, 21, of Flemington, Ahmed Mohamed, 24, from Meadow 
Heights, 22-year-old Ibrahim Abbas and 26-year-old Abdullah Chaarani – were 
each charged with one count of preparing or planning a terrorist attack.

All four have been remanded into custody after heavily armed police raided 
homes in Melbourne’s northern suburbs on Friday morning.

Victoria police’s chief commissioner, Graham Ashton, said any threat linked to 
the men’s alleged activities had been dealt with.

“I can certainly indicate to the community that through yesterday’s 
investigation … there is no additional information or criminal intelligence 
that suggests there is any ongoing threat,” he told reporters at Federation 
Square on Saturday.

“You should feel confident about coming down here as this is a great place 
this time of year, and people are going around enjoying themselves as they 
should.”

But there will be an increased police presence over the Christmas holiday 
period, with extra security at the MCG for the Boxing Day cricket Test. “That’s 
not because we have specific intelligence we’re concerned about, we just want 
to make sure that we are playing it safe and keeping the community safe,” 
Ashton said.

The premier, Daniel Andrews, said it was important the community felt 
reassured that authorities were doing everything they could to help them enjoy 
the holidays. “Every Victorian can be confident that police and their partners 
are doing everything they can to keep us safe,” Andrews said.
 