
As if today being Monday wasn’t bad enough, it’s also the longest day of the 
year. Now, if you’ve spent the last nine months shuttling between your office 
and your apartment glimpsing only a smidgeon of sunshine in between, all this 
extra daytime can come as a shock. Suddenly it’s not quite so acceptable to 
spend your free time in a dark room watching Netflix ignoring everyone except 
the delivery person. You have to go outside and do outside stuff. You have to, 
you know, have fun in the sun.

So, how should you use today’s extra daylight? If you’re a Druid, Pagan, 
Wiccan or Swede you’ve probably got your plans sorted and have a nice maypole 
or prehistoric monument to convene around. If you don’t have any rituals 
planned, however, here are a few ways you can use the longest day of the year 
to its full advantage.

Win friends and influence people with fun summer solstice facts

For example: did you know that today is a once in a lifetime event? It’s the 
first time since 1948 when the first day of summer occurs with a full 
“strawberry” moon. Why is it called a strawberry moon? I’m so glad you asked. 
According toNasa 
<http://sservi.nasa.gov/articles/space-station-astronaut-captures-aprils-pink-moon/>
, it’s because it’s a full moon that signals the start of strawberry-picking 
season. The next time the strawberry moon and summer will align will be 21 June 
2062. By then, the world will have suffered the Trumpocalypse, Brexit and 
several morePeter Thiel-funded lawsuits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/26/paypal-co-founder-peter-thiel-admits-bankrolling-hulk-hogan-gawker-lawsuit>
. We will all be dead or broke. So start picking your strawberries while 
there’s time.

Sip cocktails with fellow millennials at a trendy urban roof terrace

Arrive at the rooftop and exclaim how nice it is. Wow, you can almost see your 
house from here! Then realize there’s nowhere to sit, and because you are on a 
roof, leaving is going to be a hassle. Decide to grin and bear it or, more 
accurately, drink and bear it. Spend $16 on a frozen Strawberry Moon cocktail 
in a mason jar; tastes disgusting but looks great on Instagram. Put a photo of 
said cocktail on Instagram. #rooftop #summer #cocktails #friends #blessed. Once 
you have amassed a sufficient number of likes and have demonstrated to the 
world that you occasionally leave your apartment, flee from the venue and head 
home to watchOrange is the New Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/15/orange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review>
 in your living room in the dark, ignoring everyone except the delivery person.

Get yourself beach body ready

Find a beach and a way to get your body there. Planes, trains and automobiles 
are all good options.Voilà, you are beach body ready.

Do not underestimate the amount of time it takes to perfect beach feet selfie

Get yourself Instagrammed-beach-feet ready 

Do not underestimate the amount of time it takes to perfect beach feet selfie. 
Feet are gross and there is only so much gross Valencia can fix. The optimal 
beach shot involves a delicate sand/foot ratio that takes dedicated practice to 
achieve. Start early.

Explore nature with an outdoor SoulCycle class

So apparently there are bikes where, if you pedal, you go somewhere. It’s like 
SoulCycle but outside. While you may not have an instructor yelling 
motivational phrases at you feel free to whisper them to yourself as you pedal 
off into the latest sunset of the year. If you get a taste for this outdoor 
exercise stuff you can also swap your gym for an outdoor gym. These are 
sometimes known as “roads”. You can run on them and you don’t have to pay a 
membership fee. Cool, huh?

Have a meaningless summer fling

There’s an app for that <https://www.gotinder.com/>. In fact, thanks to the 
wonders of modern technology you can find someone to have a meaningless fling 
with before your outdoor SoulCycle class and then Uber to your trendy urban 
roofterrace gathering while playing this year’s song of the summer on Spotify. 
Talk about getting the most out of your extra hours. The Druids have nothing on 
you!
 