
Dan Evans has a first ATP Tour title in sight after he reached the final of 
the Sydney International with a three-set victory against Andrey Kuznetsov on 
Friday.

The British world No67 had stunned the top seed and world No8 Dominic Thiem in 
the quarter-finals and made the most of Kuznetsov’s misfiring first serve to 
win a first set that was interrupted briefly by rain.

Johanna Konta wins Sydney title after brushing Agnieszka Radwanska aside
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-agnieszka-radwanska-sydney>
Kuznetsov got his serve functioning to even up the match in the second set but 
it faltered again in the third and Evans grabbed a key break for 3-1 before 
serving out the match to love after another rain break to reach his first main 
tour final, where he will meet Gilles Müller.

Evans’s victory in the final match of the evening made it a good day for 
Britain in Sydney withJohanna Konta taking the women’s title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-agnieszka-radwanska-sydney>
 and Jamie Murray reaching the men’s doubles final with his Brazilian partner 
Bruno Soares.

“I’m excited, I’m happy with how I played, to come back in the third set and 
get the job done,” the 26-year-old British No3 said. Evans is already 
guaranteed to climb to a new career-high ranking, just outside the top 50.

“It was a good match. I feel pretty tired to be honest but I might not get 
this opportunity in a final for a while. It’s great that Jo won. Hopefully 
Jamie wins, and hopefully I do.”

Evans’s opponent in the final will be Müller, who rode his big serve to a 6-3, 
7-6 victory against Viktor Troicki in the other semi-final to end the Serb’s 
hopes of an unprecedented third successive title.

The 33-year-old left-hander from Luxembourg had reached the last four for a 
third year in a row, started well despite the afternoon heat and wrapped up the 
opening set in half an hour with an uncompromising forehand smash.

Troicki stepped up his game and the second set was a much tighter affair but 
Müller saved the two break points he faced to take it to a tiebreak. The Serb 
saved the first match point when Müller hit a return into the net but the world 
No34 would not be denied on his second, firing his 16th ace to reach the final.

“When I came here I wasn’t expecting very much because I didn’t play very well 
in Brisbane, I wasn’t feeling great,” said the sixth seed, who has been 
enduring a virus.

“I was expecting to have one or two more matches before the Aussie Open and 
I’m in the final so it’s a great feeling.”
 