
Dan Evans, ranked 333 in the world a year ago, came within a point beating the 
two-time grad slam champion and world No3 Stan Wawrinka in five thrilling sets 
in the third round of the US Open here on Saturday night.

Evans, now 64 in the world and likely to edge inside the top 50 soon, played 
without fear and, as he has done in the past on a big stage, relished every 
raucous moment.

For much of the four hours and two minutes of their match on a packed Louis 
Armstrong court, the 26-year-old Birmingham rebel out-hit and, until the tired 
ending, out-thought his illustrious Swiss opponent. But 31-year-old Wawrinka, 
who has survived several of these long matches in his career, saved match point 
in the fourth-set tie-break and stuck it out to win 4-6, 6-3, 6-7 (6), 7-6 (8), 
6-2.

This was the sort of tennis Evans never doubted he could produce, although it 
has been a long time coming.

Wawrinka said, “It was a great fight. I’m lucky to get through that match. He 
was playing really great, he’s really talented. I’ve had a lot of pressure 
before, but I just stayed in the match. There were some good points to savour. 
I’m really happy with that. It was a mental challenge against a player like 
that, so talented.”

Evans bossed his formidable Swiss opponent in nearly every department, serving 
with power and precision, out-hitting him with his iron-wristed forehand and 
showing deftness and intelligence at the net. Evans, sure to rocket inside the 
top 50 when the tournament is done, had never beaten a top 10 player in a long 
and some times ill-disciplined career, but he has found form and confidence at 
precisely the right time.

He broke Wawrinka three times in open play and held his nerve in the first 
tie-break. In the fourth set, he had break point at 3-all and 5-all, but could 
not seal the deal, Wawrinka saving the second break with an ace. In the 
shoot-out, a suitably exciting climax to a great match, Evans crossed at 4-2, 
three points from a potentially life-changing score.

He watched a Wawrinka lob inch long and stared at victory, but Wawrinka 
rescued with a superb volley at the net. Evans failed to kill a smash and put a 
forehand wide: set point again to Wawrinka – with ball in hand. He netted for 
8-all and landed his second second-serve ace of the match for another set 
point. Evans put his final forehand into the tramlines.

By the time Wawrinka had raced to 4-0 in the deciding fifth, fatigue and 
frustration had invaded Evans’s bones. He got back to 4-1 but then was refused 
a medical timeout when the physio ruled he had cramp, which is not treatable 
during a longer break.

“I know when I’m cramping,” Evans shouted at the chair umpire. “It’s not 
cramp. I went over on my ankle. It’s crap. You’re all good friends, aren’t you.”

Clearly angered (and moving without hindrance, it must be said), he broke 
back, but again Wawrinka pulled clear for 5-2, then served out for the match.
 