


Inside, the rows of red velvet seats were empty. But outside, huddling in the 
cold and dark, thousands of people had come to hear the Milanese opera house La 
Scala say goodbye to one of its most admired and beloved sons. A week after the 
death of Claudio Abbado, the Italian maestro who many considered one of the 
greatest of all conductors, his old friend and colleagueDaniel Barenboim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/daniel-barenboim> led the philharmonic 
orchestra of La Scala in an emotionally charged performance of the funeral 
march from Beethoven's third symphony, the Eroica.

Broadcast live on Italian state television and streamed on the internet, the 
concert was a tribute to the man who was the world-famous opera house's music 
director from 1968 until 1986 – "a figure", it said in a statement, "celebrated 
globally as one of the most significant and popular musicians of the last 50 
years".

As a small group of Abbado's relatives, including two of his children, looked 
on, Barenboim, La Scala's current music director, appeared quietly moved as the 
commemorative performance ended after about 20 minutes to dignified applause 
from the piazza.

The two appeared on the celebrated Milan stage together as recently as 2012 
when, after a 26-year absence, Abbado returned to the theatre to conduct 
Mahler's Sixth symphony.

When, at the age of 80, the conductor died in Bologna on 20 January, Barenboim 
said that the world had lost "one of the world's greatest musicians of the past 
50 years and one of the very few musicians who had a very strong connection 
with the spirit of music across the different genres".

In an interview, Abbado once said that it was during a performance of 
Debussy's Three Nocturnes at La Scala, in his home town, that he decided to 
become a conductor. He was seven years old at the time. Twenty-five years 
later, he made his debut there, leading a performance of Mahler's Second 
symphony.

Among the thousands of people who filled Milan's Piazza della Scala on Monday, 
thronging around a statue of Leonardo da Vinci and pressing against the 
barriers to get a look through the open doors, was Stéphane Lissner, the 
general manager. The theatre had earlier described the concert as a chance for 
people to pay a "final silent homage".

A statement on its website read: "Claudio Abbado has left us. But he will 
remain at La Scala forever. This is his theatre: the place that will retain, 
concretely and tangibly, the mark of the conductor without boundaries, the 
musician without preconceptions, the man of the theatre who was ready to take 
risks and the human being whose mind reached out to the world."

The opera house's orchestra has been playing funeral marches to an empty 
theatre in honour of its most significant figures since the death of Arturo 
Toscanini, the great Italian maestro, in 1957.

But this was the first to have been live-streamed on the internet, on both 
YouTube andLa Scala's official website 
<http://www.teatroallascala.org/en/index.html>. It was also shown live on Rai 
5, which interspersed live coverage with clips of Abbado conducting and whose 
presenter introduced the performance with the words: "Viva Claudio Abbado."

Writing in the Milan-based newspaper Corriere della Sera, Riccardo Chailly, 
the Italian conductor who is to succeed Barenboim as La Scala's music director 
next year, said he had been recalling his early days when, as a young man, he 
was assistant conductor to Abbado at La Scala. "I would like, above all, to 
recall the technique of his right hand," wrote Chailly, praising what he said 
were its peculiar powers.
 