
It was seconds after Raheem Sterling had put Manchester City 2-1 up against 
Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
in the 71st minute that the White Hart Lane scoreboard coordinator decided it 
was time for a score-flash from the Etihad Stadium.

Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> had 
needed a lift. They were the dominant team in this entertaining tussle but it 
was locked at 1-1 and they were struggling to prise apart Burnley, to create 
the moment for the knock-out blow. Perhaps the news that their north London 
neighbours were down might spark them? The home support roared.

Raheem Sterling completes Manchester City turnaround against Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
Shortly afterwards, whether by coincidence or not, the game’s outstanding 
performer, Danny Rose, fashioned the winner. It came with a sledgehammer swing 
of his left boot after the substitute Moussa Sissoko had put him through on a 
quick break. Tom Heaton was beaten at his near post but it was no goalkeeping 
error. The power of the shot was too much.

The Burnley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> manager, Sean 
Dyche, was devastated afterwards and not only because he felt that a gritty and 
aggressive performance from his team had deserved reward. To him, Sissoko 
should not have been on the field after he had been guilty of an ugly high kick 
on Stephen Ward one minute before the goal.

Sissoko lunged in on Ward with his studs up as he chased a bouncing ball, and 
he raked them down the front of the full‑back’s leg. He was only booked. “It 
was a head-scratcher,” Dyche said. “It was not a close one, it’s a sending-off. 
You cannot go in blind, with your hands over your face and do a high foot like 
that, and stay on the pitch.”

Dyche said the decision of the referee, Kevin Friend, had been the “sixth 
game‑changer of the season” against Burnley and he wondered aloud whether the 
lack of a reaction from Ward had saved Sissoko. Had he writhed about on the 
floor, Dyche suggested, and his players then moved to surround Friend, perhaps 
the colour of the card would have been darker. Then again, Dyche said he and 
the club’s supporters did not want to see their players engaged in what he 
diplomatically called “simulation”.

Jay Rodriguez’s stunning shot seals Southampton victory at Bournemouth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/bournemouth-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
Tottenham had most of the game, certainly in terms of shots on goal and the 
territorial advantage, but Burnley were stubborn opponents who had their 
moments. Andre Gray, for example, was denied at close range in the early 
running by Hugo Lloris after Ward had robbed Kyle Walker and crossed. Lloris’s 
save with his feet was an excellent one.

Burnley’s record on their travels remains dismal but they fashioned a sight 
for the sorest of eyes midway through the first half – an away goal, only their 
second of the season. Once again the inroads came up the Tottenham right after 
Harry Winks had sold Walker short and Scott Arfield nipped in to win 
possession. His flick hit Winks and broke for George Boyd and when his cross 
ricocheted off Mousa Dembélé, Ashley Barnes was on hand to poke past Lloris.

From a Tottenham point of view it was a mess and Mauricio Pochettino fumed on 
the touchline. By then his team had created the openings to have “killed the 
game” in his words, and none of the chances had been clearer than the one that 
Dele Alli botched in the second minute.

Harry Kane’s pass had set him through on Heaton’s goal, from an angle on the 
left, but he ballooned the attempted curler high. Kane and Christian Eriksen 
went close while Alli found the angle was against him after a Victor Wanyama 
headed flick. There had also been pain for Alli after Matthew Lowton caught him 
with a nasty tackle. The Burnley full-back was not booked for that one.

Spurs found a swift response to Barnes’s goal and it came from Alli. Wanyama 
rolled the ball wide to Walker and, from his low cross, Alli darted across some 
static Burnley defending to sidefoot low into the near corner.

Tottenham pressed on to the front foot, with Walker and Rose catching the eye 
with their forward thrusts from the full‑back positions. Pochettino said Rose’s 
performance had been arguably his best of the manager’s time at the club.

The soundtrack to the game was provided by the guttural noises from Pochettino 
and Dyche in the technical areas, which threatened to summon previously 
unsighted wildlife to N17. Who knew what either manager was barking but the 
sense of urgency was palpable.

Dyche was beside himself at a number of Friend’s decisions and there was also 
the moment on 54 minutes when Eric Dier lunged into a penalty-box challenge on 
Gray. Dier just about got a piece of the ball, together with other bits of the 
Burnley striker. “I thought that was a good foot in,” Dyche said.

Spurs, who missed Toby Alderweireld because of a back spasm, threatened but 
without creating too much of clear-cut note. Kane had worked Heaton from Alli’s 
lovely through-ball in the 42nd minute while, in the second half, Eriksen 
headed at Heaton after good work from Rose; Alli curled narrowly wide and 
Eriksen was again denied by Heaton. Rose, though, cut through the tension.
 