
Mozart symphonies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/09/mozart-at-250-talent-for-all-time>
 from one of the most important periods of his composing life have been wrongly 
dated, a British scholar has discovered.

John Arthur believes he has made what is arguably the most important Mozart 
discovery of the last 30 years: that the accepted composition dates are wrong 
for five symphonies written by a 17- and 18-year-old Mozart in 1773 and 1774.

“I was absolutely stunned, gobsmacked really,” Arthur said. “It completely 
changes our understanding of the works he composed in that period.”

The works are part of a collection of nine handwritten symphonies that were 
bound in a single volume by Mozart’s father, Leopold, and include some of his 
most celebrated early instrumental work, including K 183, often called the 
“little G minor”, which was used inthe opening music for Milos Foreman’s film 
Amadeus, accompanying the attempted suicide of Salieri 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qrAIDtyLlw0>.


Symphony guide: Mozart's 29th
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/may/06/symphony-guide-mozart-29th-tom-service>
The mistakes range from a couple of days to nine months. The five wrongly 
dated symphonies, according to Arthur, are:


• Symphony 24 K182 in B flat, which should be 1 October 1773, not 3 October;

• Symphony 26 K184 in E flat, which should be November 1773, not March;

• Symphony 27 K199 in G, should be January 1774, not April 1773;

• Symphony 28 K200 in C, should be February 1774, not November;

• Symphony 30 K202 in D, should be 16 May 1774 not 5 May 1774.

They may not sound like huge discrepancies but they are important considering 
how young and prolific Mozart was – a week was an awfully long time in the 
teenage genius’s life.

“It was the time he was becoming the Mozart we know, when Mozart became 
Mozart,” said Arthur. “Mozart is coming under new influences every month and 
this completely changes the biography of that period.”

For example: “In the summer of 1773 we know Mozart was in Vienna and two of 
the symphonies had been thought to predate that visit,” said Arthur.

“Now it is clear they were written after Vienna, in November and January. If 
you look in the music of these symphonies you can see influences and things 
that Mozart learned during his Vienna trip.”

The discovery allows scholars to fill in puzzling gaps in our knowledge of 
Mozart. For example, before the discovery there were no known works from the 
first three months of 1774.

“It has been completely blank,” said Arthur. “We now know what Mozart was 
doing in those first two months of 1774. It is very exciting.”

The two best-known works from the nine are K183 and K201, a symphony that the 
Guardian’s Tom Service said changed his life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/may/06/symphony-guide-mozart-29th-tom-service>
. He wrote of first hearing it: “It was an experience that had the immediacy of 
an epiphany, a revelation of a new world of feeling and being … This music 
symbolises, for me, the potential power of the musical experience and the start 
of a never-ending journey of discovery.”

Arthur said both these works were correctly dated, but the redating of the 
other symphonies before and after was of huge importance.

“183 and 201 contain genuine Mozart miracles and they can be explained and 
understood better if one has got the dates of the surrounding symphonies 
correct … they can be put in context, you can understand how Mozart has got 
there.”

The mystery of when Mozart wrote the symphonies arose because someone crudely 
crossed out the dates on the original manuscripts, possibly because they wanted 
to pass them off as later works and not the works of a teenage boy.

“There has always been a problem with the dates of the symphonies,” said 
Arthur. “Someone, we don’t know who, cancelled the dating inscriptions on the 
symphonies so for the past 200 years they have always been a puzzle and a 
problem.”

For the 19th and most of the 20th century the manuscripts were in private 
hands and not easily accessible to scholars. One man who did attempt to read 
them was the Swiss musicologist Franz Giegling in the late 1950s and early 
1960s. His incorrect conclusions were incorporated into the 1964 edition of the 
definitive Köchel catalogue, which lists and dates all Mozart’s works.

“It has been one of those things,” said Arthur, “that people have thought ‘if 
it’s in Köchel, it must be right’.”

The manuscripts are now a crown jewel of the Morgan Library in New York, on a 
long-term loan as part of the Robert Owen Lehman collection 
<http://www.themorgan.org/collection/music-manuscripts-and-printed-music>.


Arthur, a Mozart scholar and consultant to the books and manuscripts 
department at Sotheby’s in London, discovered Giegling had got five dates wrong 
by examining the crossed-out dates over the course of three days.

“They are very difficult to read and I only had a magnifying glass, but if you 
spend long enough you can actually see them so it is rather surprising that, 
for example, someone read April 73 when it is January 74.”

 