
Shortly after the final whistle blew at Stamford Bridge on Saturday, Antonio 
Conte and Diego Costa could be seen walking backtowards the tunnel together 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>. Manager appeared to be sharing 
a joke with player, one he declined to expand on later, but their body language 
said it all. Smiles, a warm embrace, mutual bonhomie, and with regard to Costa 
the concrete sense that he is entering 2017 in a far happier mood than he did 
2016.

Willian double sinks brave Stoke and extends Chelsea run to 13 straight wins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/chelsea-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
This time last year the forward was in the midst of a personal crisis, having 
scored just six times for a Chelsea side making a mockery of their status as 
league champions, and was spending more time picking fights with opposition 
players than terrorising them with his talents. Now he is the key figure of the 
team that sitsix points clear at the top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague/table> of the Premier 
League on the back of a record‑equalling 13-game winning run. Costa has 14 
goals, making him the division’s top scorer, with hislatest against Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/chelsea-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 typifying the 28‑year‑old at his barnstorming, ruthless best, the man who 
spearheaded Chelsea’s title success of 2014-15 and appears ready to do so again.

“The team has changed, not just me,” he said. “Last season we felt a 
frustration. We didn’t give the account of ourselves we should have done. We 
weren’t the team we should be. I wasn’t the player I should be. There were 
various issues but this season it has changed. The manager has come and applied 
his ideas. Things are going well.”

Of that there is no doubt. Conte has revitalised Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, tactically and in terms of 
their spirit, which could be seen at the weekend in what the Italian described 
as the toughest challenge his team have faced during their winning sequence. 
Stoke played with aggression and assurance and twice pegged back the hosts. But 
those in blue kept on believing, kept on driving forward, and eventually 
triumphed 4-2.

It was fitting that Costa sealed the three points with the fourth goal, having 
delivered another fine front-man display. He was a constant menace and did not 
react to the rugged manner in which those in the visitors’ ranks, Ryan 
Shawcross in particular, looked to keep him at bay. Last season Costa would 
have lashed out – or accused Shawcross of smelling rotten, as he did when the 
pair clashed at the Britannia Stadium 14 months ago – but here he kept his 
calm, something he says is the result of accepting referees in this country are 
“against me” and: “If they’re not going to change, I had to change.”

Football transfer rumours: Diego Costa to Chinese Super League for £80m?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/chelseas-diego-costa-to-move-to-chinese-super-league-for-80m>
Eyebrows may well be raised at that statement and it’s worth noting that for 
all his “changes”, Costa has already served a one-match suspension this season. 
But he definitely seems calmer and he delivered the perfect response to Stoke’s 
attentions with a vicious strike past Lee Grant on 85 minutes having floored 
Bruno Martins Indi with brute strength and persistence.

Costa has now been involved in 19 goals this season – more than any other 
player across Europe’s top five divisions. “Things are coming out well for me 
this season,” he said. “The truth is that the manager is good with the players, 
every time making jokes and that’s good for us, to have a manager who is not 
just a boss but a person we can talk to, someone whose support we can count on. 
We love him more all the time.”

That love is clearly mutual – Conte describes Costa as an “important player”, 
and Chelsea fans may well shudder upon being reminded that the pair came close 
to not working together at Stamford Bridge. “Yes, yes, I was about to leave [in 
the summer],” said Costa. “I had the possibility of going back to Atlético 
[Madrid] because of a few things; the family, the life I have there. I wanted 
to change for family reasons but, well, it wasn’t to be and I continue to be 
happy here.

“It was important that the manager from the very first minute said he counted 
on me.”

Costa’s importance to Chelsea can be further seen in the fact his 14 league 
goals have come in 13 games. He has failed to score in only seven appearances 
in all competitions, and in only three of those did he complete 90 minutes. 
When Costa has played this season, he has tended to score.

It should come as no surprise, then, that he is the latest figure to be linked 
with a move to China, with reports on Sunday claiming that Tianjin Quanjian are 
planning to make an £80m bid for the Brazil-born Spain international. Despite 
the size of the fee, it seems inconceivable Chelsea would sanction the move, 
and for Costa there must surely be the desire to see out a campaign in which he 
is on course to secure another Premier League winner’s medal and be named 
player of the year. As he said himself: “I am very happy, very content.”

Chelsea’s collective focus now turns to visiting Tottenham Hotspur on 
Wednesday and making history: no English club has won 14 successive top-flight 
games during a single campaign.

Conte described the match as “the biggest challenge” Chelsea have faced since 
the first of their 13 victories – at Hull on 1 October – while from Costa came 
the insistence that the leaders are fully aware of what awaits them at White 
Hart Lane, a venue where they have not won since 2012.

“It’s a London derby so the match is played a bit stronger,” he said. “But 
that’s no problem. We go there looking to do the best we can.”
 