
Was The Observer right last week to publish a front-page photograph of two 
children - victims of the Iranian earthquake - being carried to their graves by 
their grieving father? These were not the casualties of war. They had been 
caught up in the random savagery of nature as the ancient city of Bam collapsed 
around them. In our photograph, the father, his back to the camera, clutched 
his children, one slumped over his shoulder, the other cradled in his arm, his 
lifeless face clearly visible.

The suffering of those trapped and those left behind to bury the dead is 
almost impossible for us to comprehend. Newspapers seek to help readers imagine 
the unimaginable, but does that give us the right to display the graphic 
reality of suffering in such a shocking yet moving picture?

In war, The Observer has often been congratulated for its use of stark 
imagery, but this was no war, and readers were quick to register their 
distress. 'Shame on your paper for its sensationalist voyeurism,' wrote one. 
'To take, let alone publish on the front page, a photo of a man carrying his 
two sons for burial displays a staggering lack of empathy for a parent's grief 
as well as a cultural insensitivity that borders on racism.'

Another reader said she felt unable to buy The Observer because of the 
picture. 'I put the paper back because I was shopping with my four-year-old 
daughter and just could not have shown her that picture. I feel that it is 
disrespectful to the children photographed and their family. Did the father 
give permission for the photograph to be taken or used? Would you have 
published a photograph of dead British children?'

I put these questions to our deputy picture editor, who told me the picture 
was one of a series taken by an AFP photographer. They showed the father 
walking to the graveyard, laying the boys on a blanket prior to burial and 
placing them in their shallow graves. The agency had supplied the names of the 
children, which suggested that the father had given this information, and his 
consent, to the photographer.

'As a new father, I found the picture we used terribly moving. I hoped it 
would show what a personal tragedy this was for so many people, and that it 
would generate support for the charities working in Bam,' he said.

On the question of whether we would use pictures of dead British children, he 
felt that it comes down to the matter of identification. The paper would 
hesitate to use pictures of British children because they could be identified 
by relatives who might, at that early stage in a story, be unaware of their 
deaths. The likelihood of the two Iranian boys being identifiable to any of our 
readers was thought to be tiny.

I am not convinced by this argument. Surely, we have a duty to respect the 
dead of any nation; do we really need to show pictures of bodies to tell a 
terrible story? 'You have demeaned the subjects by removing the dignity which 
they should be afforded in such an appalling circumstance,' wrote another 
reader.

The editor of The Observer makes the final decision on the front-page picture. 
'It was the subject of a great deal of discussion among senior staff in the 
office on Saturday,' he said. 'I felt that the figures of the dead coming out 
of Bam last Saturday were so huge as to be almost unimaginable. I wanted to say 
that behind those figures lay a personal tragedy for so many people, so many 
parents, but I'm willing to accept I might have been wrong to choose that 
picture, and I apologise to all who were upset by it.'
 