
Dimitri Payet held emotional talks with Slaven Bilic on Tuesday in which he 
told the manager of his wish to leaveWest Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> for Marseille during the 
January transfer window, partly because of his family’s unhappiness with life 
in London.

Payet, who joined West Ham from Marseille in the summer of 2015 for £10.7m and 
signed a new contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/dimitri-payet-west-ham-china> 
to 2021 in February of last year, is so determined to force the move back to 
Marseille he has effectively gone on strike.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in Europe's top five leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
The France winger is refusing to train or play for West Ham and he is not 
hiding behind any injury, as can sometimes happen in these sort of situations. 
As such, West Ham will fine the 29-year-old, even though there is the 
acknowledgement it would make things more messy. Bilic has said he will not 
allow Payet to feature until the player’s attitude changes.

Bilic talked about feeling “angry” and “let down” by Payet and outlined the 
club’s position, which is to dig in for the rest of January, refuse to sell and 
hope the player can be reintegrated after the closure of the transfer window. 
After Palace, the team have only one more game this month – at Middlesbrough on 
Saturday week. It feels like a case of who blinks first but West Ham are not 
about to make any rash concessions.

Bilic made it plain at his press conference on Thursday, which was ostensibly 
to preview the home game against Crystal Palace on Saturday, that he thought 
Payet had been “tapped up”, although he did not say by whom. It is unclear 
whether there has been an offer, as yet, from Marseille but no one at West Ham 
is under any illusions it is on the way.

The French club are now under the ownership of the American businessman Frank 
McCourt and he has ambitious plans for them but there is still astonishment at 
West Ham that Payet should push so hard for the chance to rejoin them. 
Marseille are not, in West Ham’s opinion, a member of the European elite like, 
say, Real Madrid.

Payet has retained strong links to the coaching staff at Marseille and the 
prospect of moving his family back to the city is another major factor for him. 
His wife and three children have failed to settle in London – and there is 
sympathy for that at West Ham.

“We have said we don’t want to sell our best players but Payet does not want 
to play for us; he wants to leave,” Bilic said. “He’s definitely our best 
player and that’s why we gave him a long contract. We are not going to sell 
him. This team, the staff – we gave him everything, we were always there for 
him. I feel let down. I feel angry.

Brentford turn down £12.5m from West Ham United for striker Scott Hogan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/west-ham-united-scott-hogan-brentford-striker>
“I spoke to the chairman and this is not a money issue. We gave him a long 
contract because we want him to stay. We aren’t going to sell him, not 
whatsoever. It’s not a money issue or anything. We want to keep our best 
players.”

There is the feeling at boardroom level that the honourable thing for Payet to 
do would be to give everything until the end of the season and then his 
departure could be discussed. Bilic said: “I expect him to come back and show 
commitment and determination to the team, like the team has shown to him. He’s 
probably been tapped up by some clubs or whatever. That is usual at this time 
of year, but until he changes his attitude he is out of the team and he’s not 
going to train with us. I have a team to manage. We are not going to sell him, 
not whatsoever.”

Payet is not considered to be one of the boys in the dressing room, which is 
not a complete surprise given he does not speak much English. His 
dissatisfaction has been bubbling for a while but no one at West Ham thought 
that things would kick off so dramatically.

There has been the feeling within the hierarchy that if a club such as Real 
Madrid were to have declared an interest in Payet it would have been 
problematic but, as that has not happened, they would probably be able to 
maintain the status quo with him – despite him not being entirely happy.

Bilic was advised to tackle the issue at his press conference, largely because 
there would have been questions asked when Payet was not in the squad for the 
Palace game.
Transfers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/atoms/2016/12/transfer-window/transfers/embed/index.html?limit=6&league=all&currency=pounds>
Asked if this was his toughest time as a manager, he said: “I was asked that a 
few weeks ago. Don’t get me wrong, I’d rather be up there with Chelsea but I 
was thinking yesterday by myself that this is, including the new situation, 
this is an unbelievably great challenge for me personally. I feel so strong and 
I don’t like it, but I want that challenge and I want to try to solve this 
puzzle. I don’t know how to tell you that. It’s not enjoyable but when you have 
such a big challenge in front of you, it motivates you even more and it gets 
the best out of you and that’s how I feel.”
 