
According to the socialist academic Walter Benn Michaels, the reason that rich 
western liberals talk so much about racism and sexism is so they don’t have to 
talk so much about economic inequality. He publishedThe Trouble with Diversity 
<http://us.macmillan.com/thetroublewithdiversity/walterbennmichaels> exactly a 
decade ago, but it feels like a tract for our times, perfectly suited as a 
provocation to thought as we approach the summing up of liberalism’s great 
annus horribilis.

Rich western liberals, Michaels argues 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-k-I4kaLlwc>, don’t want to challenge the 
economic structures that produce inequality because that might seriously impact 
on their own standing and wealth. Instead they insist on the elite being as 
diverse as the poor, as a way to justify the very existence of the elite. So, 
as long as the top class at Harvard shows a proportionate distribution of 
social diversity, one can happily ignore the fact that all the students come 
from money. Moreover, it’s not just that this focus on diversity distracts from 
the deeper issue of economic inequality. It’s worse, because the very diversity 
of the elite is asserted as justification for the non-discriminatory nature of 
capitalism. Diversity has become the moral alibi of neoliberal economics.

It’s not that Michaels is against diversity per se. He absolutely isn’t. But 
he thinks it misses the bigger picture when the struggle to achieve wage 
equality between men and women at some warehouse job is touted as a major 
victory when neither the men nor the women can actually live off what the 
warehouse is paying them. Likewise, when a battle is won for women at some 
merchant bank to earn the same squillions as the men, yes, it’s a victory. But 
both victories leave the most fundamental injustice perfectly intact: 
inequality.

Since the civil rights movement in the 1960s, the US has become a much fairer 
society in terms of race and gender. No doubt there is a way to go, in some 
places a very long way to go, but the progress has been considerable 
nonetheless. But during this exact same period, the US has also, steadily and 
continuously, become more and more unequal, the gap between rich and poor 
widening to a level that now threatens the very stability of these disunited 
states. And it’s in this gap thatDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has turned his knife.

The issue, of course, is capitalism. And that the mainstream of both political 
parties refused to pull at the thread of its failures. Clinton Democrats and 
Bush Republicans subscribed to the view that global neoliberalism was a good 
thing, with Democrats combining this commitment with a (roughly speaking) civil 
rights/affirmative action tradition andRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> with a (roughly speaking) 
socially conservative/evangelical Christian tradition.

Interestingly, of the two, it is the Democratic pairing that makes the more 
natural fit – for neoliberal capitalism may produce winner-take-all winners and 
lose-it-all losers, but it is nevertheless an economic system that is 
indifferent to colour, gender or creed. Which is why capitalism is sometimes 
held up as a means of affirmative action – eg the pink pound. If a Muslim woman 
is better at doing the job than a white man, the logic of capitalism is 
entirely non-discriminatory. She rightly gets the job. Thus capitalism is 
applauded as an agent of social progress. And yet the poor get poorer and the 
rich get richer.

It took two political outsiders to say this: Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/bernie-sanders-our-job-oppose-trumps-bigotry-vigorously>
 and Trump. The former said it responsibly, respectful of the many moral gains 
that the era of liberalism brought about. The latter saw a gap and viciously 
exploited it, turning the resentful white poor against other poor minorities 
who are themselves as much a victim of the machinery of capitalism. A decade 
ago, the critics of Walter Benn Michaels thought he was doing something 
similar, playing women and people of colour off against poor white middle 
America. Why can’t social justice mean a commitment to both social diversity 
and economic equality? Yes, it can and it should. But only when wealthy 
liberals appreciate that, in and of itself, the struggle for diversity does 
little to benefit the poor.
 