
It is accepted wisdom that would-be winners of vast fortunes should be careful 
what they wish for. As the story goes, a family wins the lottery and then finds 
that far from attaining nirvana, the most precious aspects of their lives fall 
apart.

Recent developments in the Victorian family violence and community legal 
sectors give pause for thought. Those sectors fought long and hard for a 
systemic government policy focus on family violence. Combined with the 
emergence of Rosie Batty as a public advocate, and the timing of a state 
election, it led to the establishment of the first royal commission into family 
violence in Australia.

Janine Wilson: 'My door's always open to help women'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/26/janine-wilson-my-doors-always-open-to-help-women>
The ensuing report and its associated raft of recommendations was 
enthusiastically received by the Labor government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/02/family-violence-former-victorian-police-officer-to-implement-royal-commission-recommendations>
. The Victorian budget, on the back of a healthy surplus, delivered an 
unprecedented $572m family violence package. Work on implementing the royal 
commission recommendations began.

But six months later, nine key staff from three of the leading non-profit 
organisations in the community sector are gone, their positions made redundant 
via restructuring. Collectively, those staff took with them around a century of 
experience from the ongoing task of building a genuinely effective and 
accountable family violence system.

There is a long history of significant under-resourcing in both the family 
violence and community legal sector. Funding is both state and federal business 
but Victoria has long carried more than its share. The starkest illustration is 
the crisis faced by community legal centres, CLCs.

Under the past two federal governments, CLCs experienced a growing shortfall 
in the funds required just to meet the legal needs of people turned away. 
Family violence is Victorian CLCs’ leading legal problem.

In 2014 the Productivity Commission recommended a first-step injection of 
$200m into the public legal assistance sector. Yet the commonwealth government 
not only failed to adequately respond, itwill soon cut funding to CLCs by 30% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/25/community-legal-centres-accept-federal-funding-cuts-with-gun-at-their-heads>
.

At the same time, under the federal attorney general, George Brandis – who 
simultaneously championed free speech – federal funding for CLCs became tied to 
a gag on systemic advocacy.Environment Defenders Offices lost their federal 
funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/31/environmental-defenders-office-lashes-out-at-george-brandis-over-funding-cuts>
, and remain subject to regular federal efforts to deny them charity status and 
other financial advantages.

But what about Victoria under Labor? CLCs were not the main beneficiaries of 
the family violence largesse. And as with previously unknown relatives and 
friends of lottery winners, new organisations emerged to tender and apply for 
grants to treat family violence as their core business. Collaboration between 
established partners in family violence advocacy has become unwieldy as 
competition for funds increases. It is no coincidence that spokespeople have 
grown more cautious in their criticism of government.

CLCs have traditionally been expected, in the words of former attorney 
general, Rob Hulls, to be a thorn in the side of government. A more recent 
attorney general, Martin Pakula said they should hold the feet of government to 
the fire. In this spirit, CLCs regularly unmask the appeals to law and order 
beloved of both major political parties, and relentlessly call for police 
accountability, prisoners’ rights, and justice for the bereaved in the coronial 
system.

Independent advocacy distinguishes non-profits from government and statutory 
entities. It makes CLCs a valued ally of those too intimidated or disempowered 
to speak up on their own behalf. But it can also make organisations unpopular, 
at a time of increasing pressure on disadvantaged communities and non-profits 
to quietly maintain the status quo, and in exchange, accept whatever limited 
tolerance they are given.

The Australian legal centre taking law into its own hands for asylum seekers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/21/nsw-legal-centre-takes-the-law-into-its-own-hands-for-asylum-seekers>
Victoria’s non-profits, like the self-sacrificing mother who always gives 
herself the burnt chop, tend to put their own staff last. But a new 
managerialism – already familiar in universities and post-Kennett reforms – has 
infected the community sector, with weasel words its most obvious symptom.

Don Watson, Paul Keating’s former speechwriter, describes weasel words as 
“words from which life has gone”. They are used “to hide truth and slew or 
complicate meaning” in order “to exercise and maintain power”.

The recent restructures – only the tip of the iceberg – have gutted those 
community organisations of their strong and independent advocacy capacity, and 
particularly targeted those staff attempting to defend against significant 
incursions by new management.

Liberal federal governments eroded independent advocacy when they forced 
non-profit organisations to become leaner. But the bigger conservative victory 
is that many of those same organisations are also becoming meaner.

Dr Chris Atmore was senior policy adviser at the Federation of Community Legal 
Centres from July 2007 to November 2016.

 