
In the small hours of Friday morning, a former member of the shadow cabinet, 
well known as an opponent ofJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> and usually unafraid to 
deliver criticisms of his leadership into any microphone on offer, was invited 
on to theToday programme to respond to Labour’s dismal, wooden spoon 
performance in the Sleaford byelection. Much as he was tempted by the 
invitation, he turned down a slot in prime time.

He was far from the only Labour MP to decline the chance to articulate despair 
about the party’s prospects. The interesting thing about the two months since 
the Labour conference is not how many of its MPs are to be heard talking about 
their party’s plight, but how few currently want to voice an opinion in public. 
Where once every reverse saw the airwaves crackle withLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs attacking the leadership, now 
there is largely silence.

This needs some explaining. Is it because Labour’s position has so improved 
that the parliamentary party no longer feels that criticism is warranted? No, 
it is hardly that. The party’s poll ratings remain dire. If anything, they are 
getting worse. Thelatest poll from You Gov 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2016/12/09/voting-intention-labour-voting-intention-lowest-le/>
 gives a 42%-25% lead to the Conservatives over Labour. This pollster suggests 
that barely more than half of the people who supported Labour at the last 
election (which it lost) would support the party at an election tomorrow. Other 
polling organisations tell a similarly bleak story. Translated into 
parliamentary seats at an election, these numbers suggest a crushing Tory 
landslide and a devastating Labour defeat.

Our most recent Opinium poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/19/tories-trusted-by-twice-as-many-voters-with-economy-than-labour-poll>
 had equally terrible findings for Labour when two key drivers of voter 
behaviour were tested. On the economy, just 18% of voters thought Labour was 
the best bet against 44% preferring to trust the Tories with the national 
finances. Forty-five per cent said Mrs May was the better choice for prime 
minister; just 17% favoured Mr Corbyn in Number 10. So if satisfaction with the 
party’s current prospects can’t be the reason for the curious silence of Labour 
MPs, can it be explained by a belief among them that things are going to get 
better? No, it is not that either. Jeremy Corbyn’s reputation with his MPs has 
not improved since more than 80% of them declared that they had no confidence 
in the leader back in June. Their agonies have only been increased by the 
aftermath of the Brexit referendum. There is a vast chasm between pro-Remain 
supporters in metropolitan areas and pro-Brexit folk in Labour’s traditional 
heartlands in northern England, the Midlands and Wales. Worse, there is little 
sign of any consensus about how to resolve this existential dilemma for the 
party. “Our position is cataclysmically depressing, obviously,” says one Labour 
MP, in a matter-of-fact sort of way. Another Labour MP, not a person normally 
given to defeatism, forecasts, “I really do believe it will be the end of the 
party” if something does not happen to improve their prospects before the next 
election.

Sheer resignation comes into the explanation for the silence of Labour MPs. 
When Mr Corbyn was re-elected as leader in the summer, and by a handsome 
margin, it confounded the idea that he could be quickly removed through the 
mechanism of a challenge launched by the parliamentary party. Talk of repeated 
bids to unseat him – the so-called “attrition strategy”– has evaporated.

In the case of a lot of Labour MPs, the silence is more than a product of 
despair. It is a conscious choice, a considered decision to pursue what I am 
going to describe as a Shut Up Strategy. Owen Smith’s failed leadership 
challenge taught them some valuable lessons. One was about themselves and how 
they looked to many of Labour’s members and registered supporters. One former 
shadow cabinet member explains: “The PLP – capital letters – is a swear word. 
Among many members, it means careerist, failure, disloyal.” In his first year 
as leader, Mr Corbyn was repeatedly attacked by his MPs. Even when the 
criticisms were richly merited, the overall effect of the hostility of his 
parliamentary party was to sanctify him in the eyes of activists who saw him 
not as the source of their party’s tribulations, but the victim of them. It 
helped him enormously that the leadership challenge was framed as a “coup”; 
that it was seen as a struggle that pitched MPs against members, Westminster 
versus the grassroots.

Labour parliamentarians are now keeping stumm so they can’t be blamed for 
dividing the party and culpability for its unpopularity will be landed on the 
leadership. Says one: “The ownership of failure has to be hung around the necks 
of Corbyn and (John) McDonnell.” Allied with this is a recognition that it is 
not sufficient for the centre-left to keep saying that Corbynism is an 
electorally suicidal dead end. The moderate left needs to look to its own 
failings and respond with a lot of intellectual reinvention and policy renewal.

An election now would be crushing for Labour – and for Jeremy Corbyn | Tim Bale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/election-labour-jeremy-corbyn>
This silence in the national media should not be confused with inactivity. 
Their constituencies have become the prime focus of the energies of many Labour 
MPs. If the first chapter of the battle for the soul of the party was played 
out on the Westminster stage, the next one is being waged at a local level. 
Around 300,000 new members have joined Labour during the Corbyn era. The result 
has been a dramatic transformation of many local Labour parties, especially in 
metropolitan areas. There are Labour constituency parties that have quadrupled 
in size over the past 18 months. This influx has brought with it the menace of 
deselection in areas where Momentum, the leftwing group set up to back Jeremy 
Corbyn, has been recruiting heavily. A wave of attempts to unseat Labour MPs 
has been widely expected.

As it turns out, the centre-left is doing much better in these local struggles 
than many anticipated at the time of Mr Corbyn’s re-election. They remain under 
siege in Merseyside, where the militant left has been historically strong, but 
the moderates are doing remarkably well elsewhere.

At the height of the viciousness over the leadership during the summer, the 
party was forced to take the extraordinary step of suspending all local party 
meetings. Since that suspension was lifted, many constituencies have been 
conducting their annual general meetings. Boring name; significant purpose. The 
most important thing that the AGM does is to elect key local officers: the 
chair, the secretary and the treasurer. The chair controls the agenda of 
meetings. The secretary and the treasurer have access to membership lists. Who 
wins these roles is a good litmus test of the state of play within Labour 
because these posts are the first line of defence against deselection.

In the London constituency of Walthamstow, Stella Creasy had been under severe 
pressure from Momentum activists, but at the recent AGM the tide was turned. 
All the officer positions were secured by moderates. They have also prevailed 
at recent AGMs in Bermondsey, Camberwell, Dulwich and Lewisham.

This is especially significant because south-east London is an area of 
historic strength for the hard left where Momentum has been extremely active. 
There was a potently symbolic outcome in Chesterfield, once represented in 
parliament by Tony Benn, the spiritual godfather of Corbynism. There, the 
moderates made a clean sweep. These victories have drawn a rare compliment from 
the Trotskyists at theSocialist Worker 
<https://socialistworker.co.uk/art/43721/As+the+Labour+right+holds+its+ground%2C+the+left+has+to+look+beyond+the+bureaucracy>
 where it was recently lamented: “The left’s defeats show that the right has 
stronger organisation inside Labour.”

As the old leftists liked to say, the struggle takes many forms

There was another boost for the centre-left at last month’s conference of the 
London Labour party, when the election for the position of vice-chair saw the 
moderate candidate win 85% of the constituency votes. Some of this is the 
result of well-organised Labour MPs waking up and mobilising the party’s more 
mainstream supporters. Shrewd MPs have also made a serious effort to connect 
with their new members by running “training sessions”.

“I’m doing a hell of a lot of work with local party members to make sure 
there’s no issue with me,” says one MP from the north-west. “I am taking my new 
members out knocking on doors and taking them to places where I know they will 
hear some home truths from voters.”

Momentum has made tactical errors. In some constituencies, hard left activists 
have gone after Labour councillors. Realising that they were more vulnerable to 
deselection than MPs, these councillors are fighting back. Momentum has a 
massive data base, but that has proved a less powerful weapon for rallying 
members against Labour MPs than many originally anticipated. The so-called 
“clicktivists” appear to behave as their name suggests they might behave: they 
aren’t terribly keen to turn up for meetings, and it is at meetings that these 
local power struggles are being played out.

It is a further encouragement to Labour MPs that Momentum is now descending 
into a poisonous internal faction fight between rival flavours of far leftists.

Do not mistake the sound of silence in the national media for an absence of 
battle. The war for Labour’s soul goes on. As the old leftists liked to say, 
the struggle takes many forms. The one that counts at the moment is at the 
grassroots. Rather against expectations, the moderates are prevailing.
 