 Donald Trump’s controversial tweet. 
After insulting and demeaning Mexican people for months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
 andthreatening to build an even bigger wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/06/vicente-fox-attacks-donald-trumps-racist-ideas>
 along their border with the US, Trump has come to realize that in order to 
defeat Hillary Clinton in November, he has to get Hispanic people to at least 
consider the possibility that he doesn’t despise them.


This led him to disreputable pandering – such as his recent decision to pose 
for a photo-op with a taco bowl. It’s a truly tall order, but this picture, 
co-starring a fried tortilla bowl filled with stuff (which Mr Trump probably 
thinks is the national dish of Mexico) is sure to go a long way toward bridging 
the divide.

The picture raises important questions as the undecided voter begins to weigh 
his or her options for the next president of the US. Join me as I try to answer 
some of these questions through a combination of blatant conjecture and 
schoolyard bullying, a method I like to call the Art of the Deal.

What other minority groups must Trump apologize to through ritual consumption 
of Americanized versions of their food?

Trump has upset a lot of different people besides Hispanic people. African 
Americans, LGBTQ voters, women, Ted Cruz’s wife, prisoners of war, Muslims and 
mortified hairstylists across the nation. It’s going to take a concerted effort 
for Trump to repair those relationships. I suggest the following equally 
ridiculous, patronizing Hail Mary passes:


African Americans: Pose for a photo with a bottle of Dirty Sprite on your 
desk. Promise to rename the White House the Trap House.

LGBTQ: Choose Lisa Vanderpump as your running mate.

Women: Write a think piece about Beyoncé.

Prisoners of war: Renounce all forms of torture. JUST KIDDING. YOU’LL NEVER DO 
THAT.

Muslims: Snapchat video co-starring DJ Khaled.

Hairstylists: You already know what to do. Don’t make me say it out loud.

What’s actually inside the taco bowl?

Through very scientific methods of photographic enhancement, AKA squinting, I 
have identified the ingredients. What a man eats tells us so much about what is 
inside of him. I see sour cream, beef, cheddar cheese, a rather skimpy helping 
of salsa, and refried beans. That’s fine, I suppose, but I must ask yet another 
question …

Where’s the lettuce?

What Trump has put inside his bowl is the devil’s melange of fat, grease and 
artery-clogging dairy products. Don’t we want, nay, demand a fit leader? I must 
ask again, sir, where is the lettuce? Do you not value your own body? Do you 
not care about cholesterol, high blood pressure, and other ailments that could 
severely limit your ability to govern?

This is such a simple fix, sir. Add some lettuce. It’s a fine treat for any 
and all meals. In fact, all one needs to do to make a meal healthy is to throw 
lettuce on it. The cobb salad is so popular because it too adds green 
vegetables into a mash of delicious junk. The next time you want to order 
Domino’s pizza at 3am, consider asking for a sprinkling of the leafy stuff.

My God, is that really his ex-wife?
Benny (@bennyjohnson) 
Donald Trump is eating a taco salad on top of a bikini-clad photo of his 
ex-wife, Marla Maples.pic.twitter.com/sW2itGBAOK <https://t.co/sW2itGBAOK>
 <https://twitter.com/bennyjohnson/status/728309799667044352> May 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bennyjohnson/status/728309799667044352> 
Benny Johnson, creative director for the website Independent Journal, tweeted 
the discovery that Trump had a photo of his ex-wife, Marla Maples, in a bikini 
on his desk when the infamous taco bowl photo was taken.

I cannot verify or dismiss this claim, but I can say that it’s perfectly 
normal behavior to have pictures of your ex-wife in a state of undress in your 
office. I heard a rumor that Charles de Gaulle did the same thing during the 
second world war.

Does Trump have enough trophies?

The one on the left looks like a fake Oscar you get on Hollywood Boulevard.

Are all those rolled-up blueprints plans for the Mexican wall or for a new 
golf course?

Actually, why not combine the two? I’m sure plenty of supporters will want to 
visit the wall to pay respects to this exorbitantly expensive monument to your 
unchecked ego. How about letting them get in a round of 18 during their 
pilgrimage? Throw a Jimmy Buffett’s Margaritaville on the last hole and 
America’s budget deficit will be a thing of the past.


Why isn’t the napkin on your lap while you eat?

What are you, some kinda savage? Do you even care about keeping your pants 
clean? How will you keep that fork steady with those tiny raptor hands?

Do you think we’re all stupid?

You must, if you truly believe that all it takes to atone for your vile 
rhetoric is to get an official endorsement from some food. You’re probably up 
in Trump Tower, patting yourself on the back with your hummingbird claw hand 
for the genius of this move. In reality – you know, the world you don’t live in 
– this sort of stunt is transparent, opportunistic, and obviously tacky.

But this isn’t reality, it’s American politics in the year 2016. Clinton can 
compare herself to yourabuela, and Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio can yell about who 
speaks better Spanish.

These tricks are an unfortunate part of the electoral process now, and in a 
sense, speak to the power Hispanic voters now hold over candidates for national 
office. It’s just that Trump’s version of this tactic is even less interested 
in subtlety or authenticity. It’s not simply that he’s pathetically groveling 
for forgiveness from an ethnic group he’s opportunistically maligned in order 
to stoke the passions of the Republican base. It’s that he’s doing it without 
any hint of irony or remorse.

In Trump World, the last year never happened. It all vanished with the wave of 
a fork and the flashing of a grin.
 