
A few blocks from the glitzy hotel where Prince Harry cavorted in Las Vegas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/series/las-vegas-city-guide?INTCMP=SRCH> last 
year, doing his bit for its party-town image, the neon-lit strip of casinos, 
bars, restaurants and malls greys into a landscape he almost certainly did not 
see: broken pavements, empty lots, boarded-up facades. This urban wasteland is 
the real downtown Las Vegas, the product of decades of dysfunction and neglect, 
home to poverty, unemployment and foreclosures, a dystopian hangover to the 
strip's excesses ina town hit harder than most by the recession 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2009/jun/26/las-vegas-citycenter-recession?INTCMP=SRCH>
. Ocean's Eleven feels far away.

Yet it is here an enigmatic tycoon is spending $350m (£230m) in a unique 
experiment at urban regeneration and, as he puts it, human happiness.Tony Hsieh 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sustainable-business/zappos-ceo-tony-hsieh?INTCMP=SRCH>
 (pronounced Shay) is luring poets, artists, inventors, investors, geeks, a 
motley band of British entrepreneurs and 1,500 ferociously cheerful employees 
known as Zapponians into an attempt to turn downtown Las Vegas into a hub of 
culture and innovation.

Hsieh, 39, a Silicon Valley wunderkind with a Midas touch, has become an 
improbable aristocrat of Sin City. In the past year he has bought swathes of 
real estate, including the former city hall, as part of an ambitious plan to 
jumble together business, arts and architecture in a way that fosters 
"serendipity", connections between people that fuel creativity and fulfilment. 
"Evolution has proven that we're more intelligent and better off when we 
collaborate socially," he says, overlooking the city. "It's our genetics."

Downtown Project <http://downtownproject.com/>, as it is formally known, is 
one of Las Vegas's boldest gambles. Success, says Hsieh, will show that any 
city, no matter how decayed, can be rescued. "We want to build the most 
community-minded city in the world. If we can do this in Las Vegas, the place 
you would least expect, where can't it be done?" If it fails the experiment 
will be branded utopianism and could leave Hsieh ruing a very expensive roll of 
the dice.

Young entrepreneurs from Silicon Valley, London and New York have flocked to 
the desert on the promise of tabula rasa, that its urban and civic failure 
offers a clean slate for transformation. "Las Vegas is the last big city that's 
still being invented," says Paul Carr, 33, a British writer turned entrepreneur 
who has moved here. "Other big cities are already established but Vegas is not 
even slightly finished yet. There's a sense you can make a difference here."

Andrew Crump, 27, the co-founder of Bluefields <http://bluefields.com>, a 
social platform for sports teams and players, is so impressed he's moving the 
company from London later this year. "We were blown away by what's happening. 
It's real. The town feels like a start-up." Another British company,Teamly 
<http://teamly.com>, which develops workplace collaboration tools, is already 
installed. "This is one of the most interesting things happening in the US 
right now," says co-founder Scott Allison.

Everyone is asking two questions: who exactly is Tony Hsieh? And will his idea 
work?

U2 - I Still Haven't Found What I'm Looking For 
<http://www.muzu.tv/u2/i-still-havent-found-what-im-looking-for-music-video/234487/>
 onMUZU.TV <http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
He has made his headquarters near Fremont Street, where U2 filmed the video 
for I Still Haven't Found What I'm Looking For. It is a historic quarter of 
sorts. Bars and brothels sprang up in the 1920s to service workers from the 
Hoover dam, a seedy heyday. Once the strip started attracting mega-casinos and 
acts likes Elvis Presley and Frank Sinatra, all the money and attention 
migrated toLas Vegas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/las-vegas> Boulevard, 
which formed a dividing line. To the west, the razzamatazz that is a magnet for 
39m tourists annually; to the east, the dilapidation locals call home. The 2008 
economic crisis hit particularly hard – Nevada had the US's highest rate of 
foreclosure.

Towering over the grim concrete wilderness is the Ogden, a 25-storey luxury 
apartment complex. Hsieh has leased dozens of rooms in top floors where he and 
collaborators live and work. The views are spectacular, especially at sunset: a 
carnival of lights – the strip – and then Mojave desert, a scorched plain 
ending in a mountain horizon. Aides speak of Tony – everyone calls him by his 
first name – with awe. "A visionary," says one. "A genius," says another. "And 
so sweet!" Wherever he goes people flap around him. He is assumed to be the 
smartest, richest guy in the room.

We meet for brunch on one of the top floors. Shy and soft-spoken, Hsieh wears 
jeans, a grey hoodie and black suede slippers. An antithesis to the blowdried 
Donald Trump, whose tower rises in the distance. Downtown Project, says Hsieh, 
is all about getting people to interact, because therein lie success and 
happiness. "We're trying to get people to run into each other, to collide on 
the street, in cafes, bars, offices, galleries. The idea is to create as many 
walkable collisions as possible."

He has been inspired by Edward Glaeser's book Triumph of the City 
<http://www.triumphofthecity.com/> (subtitle: how our greatest invention makes 
us richer, smarter, greener, healthier and happier) and its idea of cafes, 
parks or squares anchoring communities. "You need to cluster anchors but they 
should be not too close, not too far. The idea is people walk and collide, it's 
not just about the destination." The target for downtown, which feels ghostly 
in places, is to have more than 100 people per acre. Hsieh envisages a 
community where a software developer, a painter and a waiter could bump into 
each other, hang out and maybe come up with a brilliant idea. "Most innovations 
come from something outside your industry."

The $350m is broken into $100m for land, $100m for residential development, 
$50m for small businesses, $50m for education, $50m for tech start-ups. Many 
ideas have come from post-it notes, which people are encouraged to leave on a 
wall in Hsieh's apartment.

The son of Taiwanese immigrants, Hsieh grew up in California, earned a Harvard 
computer science degree, co-founded the internet advertising network 
LinkExchange and sold it to Microsoft in 1999 for $265m. He was 26. With 
business parter Alfred Lin he co-founded an investment firm, Venture Frogs, and 
in 2000 took over Zappos, a small company that sold shoes online. In 2009 he 
sold it to Amazon for $1.2bn.

Hsieh remained as CEO of Zappos (a name coined from zapato, Spanish for shoe) 
because to him it was not just a company but a vehicle to develop ideas from 
his 2010 book,Delivering Happiness <http://www.deliveringhappiness.com/>. He 
wrote it in two and a half weeks, barely sleeping, swigging vodka with coffee 
beans. Subtitled A Path to Profits, Passion and Purpose, it debuted at No 1 on 
the New York Times bestseller list.

Hsieh drilled fanatical customer service into a 2,000-strong workforce of 
"Zapponians" selected, it seems, for their bubbliness and cheer that they 
direct at customers and each other. As the company grew he considered 
converting its headquarters in Henderson, a suburban sprawl outside Las Vegas, 
into a Facebook or Google-style campus. Instead, prompted by a bar-owner 
friend, Hsieh moved the operation downtown to try to apply Triumph of the City.

City and state authorities, delighted that someone is taking responsibility 
for downtown blight, are giving Hsieh's team largely a free rein. A few trendy 
bars and cafes have already sprouted to serve the self-styled "pioneers". Low 
taxes and living costs are also big attractions.

Frank Gruber, 34, recently moved his media networking company Tech Cocktail 
<http://tech.co/> to Vegas because he considers it a new frontier. "You look 
over the landscape and see all these empty lots. There's so much to do here." 
He cites nightly events such as "poetry slams, jamming, art openings, 
cocktails, you name it" as proof the experiment is already working.

Not all are convinced. At Macworld/iWorld, a technology show in San Francisco, 
opinions range from cautious to dismissive. "It's fascinating but I think the 
jury's out on whether they'll persuade top talent to move out there," says 
Brian David Johnson, a futurist with Intel. "I hate Vegas, there's nothing real 
there. I don't think they'll get the talent. A rock star developer earns enough 
to live in a place that's already livable," said Seth Weintraub, a blogger with
9to5mac.com <http://9to5mac.com/>.

Carr is bullish. "For a while I felt like the only Brit in the village but I 
wander around now and it's like an invasion," he says. "Silicon Valley is so 
crowded it can take two years to get a meeting with an investor but in Vegas 
you could get to meet Tony straight away." He cautions, however, that settlers 
should not expect handouts. "If you think this is Tony town and I'm on the Tony 
train, you need to realise that investors don't work for you, you work for 
them. And you better know what you're doing."
 