
With its new report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/01/trees-may-increase-air-pollution-on-city-streets>
 suggesting the removal of speed bumps, among various proposals for reducing 
lethal levels of air pollution, Nice (the National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence) finds itself, possibly for the first time, the toast of 
British motorists. Finally, the health experts have realised what speed 
enthusiasts have known all along – that being knocked down by an overkeen 
motorist is a vastly superior way to die than slow extinction by particulates. 
At last, someone out there comprehends the level of suffering when speeding 
drivers, presumably to advertise disdain for bumps, as opposed to cognitive 
impairment, refuse to slow down to 20mph and must then pay for the 
self-generated repairs.

“Hooray,” writes a bump-hater in the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/12/02/lettersgood-riddance-speed-bumps-bigger-causes-pollution/>
. “They have for years been damaging car springs, tyres and headlights.” It has 
long been a token of faith, among members of theTop Gear community, that such 
damage is quite unconnected with speeding drivers, but entirely the fault of 
council busybodies determined to restrain all drivers, not just the sociopaths 
to whom all rival traffic must yield.

As so often, no one puts it better than the current foreign secretary, and 
self-styled “speed freak”, Boris Johnson. InLife in the Fast Lane, composed 
around the second time he wassacked for lying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/25/boris-johnson-michael-gove-eu-liars>
, he expatiates, much in the vein of his soulmates, Mr Toad and the late Alan 
Clark, on the revolutionary significance of car use for a person identifying as 
a “king of the road” (despite being then on the brink of losing his licence). 
He writes: “The more widespread a liberty becomes, the more necessary it seems 
for government to regulate, trammel and constrain.” In an ideal world, no 
government, no bump, parking ticket or “evil, money-grubbing Gatso” would dare 
come between Johnson and his freedom to accelerate to 130mph in a borrowed 
Nissan Skyline. Of driving the Ferrari F430, he reported: “It was as though the 
whole county of Hampshire was lying back and opening her well-bred legs to be 
ravished by the Italian stallion.”

Although, where delusions about vehicular speed and sexual potency are 
concerned, Johnson’s is clearly an extreme case (the word stallion appears 24 
times in a short book), his attitude is sufficiently commonplace to explain why 
speed calming and restrictions will never represent anything other, to millions 
of his fellow pound-shop libertarians, than outrageous persecution. Nothing, 
from road casualty statistics to the fixed horror of their passengers, upon 
realising that their driver imagines himself to be a rutting horse, will 
convince such individuals that they do not deserve special treatment, special 
respect, special exemptions from punishments that would, in any other 
circumstances, be imposed on the aggressive use of a lethal weapon.

Drivers and carmakers being powerful, noisy lobbies, policymakers have needed 
no encouragement from Johnson to collude with all the above. A charity such as
Brake <http://www.brake.org.uk> would not need to exist if the current 
punishment fora man who kills two younger men 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-hampshire-38183712>, while using his 
phone at the wheel of a 38-tonne HGV, were not six years, with a seven-year 
driving ban. Spiralling cycling injuries have yet to bring about a law 
enforcing minimum passing distances.

The risks of being intimidated, injured or killed by an aggressive or culpably 
careless driver are ones British authorities have normalised for so many years 
that motoring bodies confidently denounce evidence-based safety measures, such 
as 20mph zones, the only possible rationale being that the right to speed 
trumps the one to life. Campaigning, recently, against the introduction of a
20mph limit in Croydon <https://eastcroydon.org.uk/20mph-speed-limit/>, the 
Alliance of British Drivers depicted a potential 21% reduction in collisions as 
“minimal” and complained “there are no other real benefits”.

Possibly because technology has for so long been their friend, supporters of 
libertarian driving have been uncharacteristically muted, so far, on the 
potential threat to their world that – we can only hope – is represented by 
driverless cars. Though aTop Gear writer, while acknowledging their safety, 
regretted that they would take the “fun” (illegal speeding) out of driving, the
impact on the culture 
<https://www.motoringresearch.com/car-news/honda-slammed-by-asa-for-irresponsible-advert>
 celebrated by car advertising,Autocar 
<http://www.autocar.co.uk/car-news/industry/fastest-cars-in-the-world> and the 
lads <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dujGJ8E7mVU> mags could surely be still 
greater than that. If enough of the country’s worst drivers reluctantly 
conclude that protection from human error, along with time saved and reduced 
insurance, outweigh the surrender of their road mastery to a law-abiding 
machine, driving will not only be safer, the whole activity could ultimately be 
separated from the performance delusions of the average Johnson.

Given the still heavily gendered driver behaviour that makes male under-25s 
the most dangerous motorists, and menalmost twice as likely as women to crash 
<http://www.roadsafetygb.org.uk/news/1639.html> because of poor driving habits, 
there are reasons for women, in particular, to welcome the coming deliverance 
from tailgating and speeding road-users and the cessation of driving, 
orienteering and parking hints from male passengers. Not forgetting, with 
driverless cabs, permanent escape from the often dismaying conduct of taxi 
drivers in the little kingdoms that are their front seats.

Although some women even dream of liberation from garage mechanics, when 
manufacturers bear insurance costs, that may be utopian. And, to be realistic, 
monarchs of the road will presumably be those most resistant to what can only 
amount, according to their world view, to mass emasculation. Among the chief 
obstacles to driverless cars, it is predicted, will be bullying by drivers who 
refuse to let autonomous vehicles into traffic or who repeatedly cut in, 
knowing that the machines will timidly give way. In other words: business as 
usual.

For Johnson, being 'overtaken by a lady driver in a little car' brings on 'a 
crisis of virility'

For some speed freaks, it emerges, their misgivings are based on principle. 
The imminent arrival of machines that will have to make ethical choices in an 
emergency, such as whether to save, say, two blameless occupants or five 
pedestrians crossing at a red sign, has moved theGrand Tour savant, Jeremy 
Clarkson, to wrangle over the moral case for relying on these devices as 
opposed, say, to a driver who knows exactly when it is right, or not, to punch 
a co-worker in the face.

In a recent survey <https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.03346>, enthusiasm for 
autonomous vehicles was outweighed by the participants’ reluctance to buy 
self-driving cars with a utilitarian mindset, ie, one that might not put the 
owner’s survival first. That’s supposing they’re not taken over by evil powers. 
Then again, it is already rare to go any distance without encountering a 
vehicle that has fallen victim to a malign force, maybe one such as Johnson, 
for whom being “overtaken by a lady driver in a little car” brings on “a crisis 
of virility”.

Perhaps the one real downside to self-driving cars is, perversely, that 
drivers such as Johnson will one day abandon a form of self-expression that 
serves, I have found, as a supremely reliable measure of gittishness. If 
Theresa May was unacquainted with Johnson’s GBH-plotting past, just a horrified 
skim throughLife in the Fast Lane would have told her everything she needed to 
know about his fitness for office.
 