
Dylan Alcott says he is humbled and honoured to have been accepted as an 
“elite athlete” after carving his name in sports history as the first 
wheelchair star to win the Newcombe medal, the highest accolade in Australian 
tennis.


The world No1 and triple Paralympic gold medallist joined grand slam champions 
Lleyton Hewitt and Samantha Stosur, among others, on the honour roll after 
receiving his award from tennis great John Newcombe at Melbourne’s Crown 
Palladium on Monday night.


Rio gold medallist Dylan Alcott named Australia's Paralympian of 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/olympic-gold-medallist-dylan-alcott-named-australias-paralympian-of-2016>
Snubbed for a nomination last year despite two grand slam triumphs, Alcott 
would not be denied again after a dominant 2016 in which he successfully 
defended his Australian Open title, won singles and doubles gold in Rio and was 
crowned as Australia’s Paralympian of the Year.


The 25- year-old – who won Paralympic gold in wheelchair basketball in 2008 – 
also partnered with fellow Victorian Heath Davidson to win the World Team Cup 
in Tokyo and collected other titles in Brisbane, Sydney, South Africa, Japan 
Open, France and Britain.


“It’s just unbelievable. It’s been the best year of my life, bar none,” Alcott 
said. “I’m so proud to be a Paralympian and to have theParalympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics> on everyone’s TV this year. It 
was massive for me to be given this award in honour of ‘Newk’, who is such a 
tennis legend. He’s someone who I looked up to when I was young watching videos 
of him play.”

Alcott, who also took home the most outstanding athlete with a disability 
award with his doubles partner Heath Davidson, was overwhelmed to receive the 
top gong in Australian tennis.


“I’m not going to lie, I really wanted to win this award,” he said. “We have 
an athlete with a disability category and that’s a huge honour but I see myself 
as an elite athlete first and foremost who just happens to have a disability 
who uses a wheelchair to play. To be recognised with the highest honour means 
so much to me and for people with a disability, especially kids.

“We’re often seen as second-class citizens. And even though you win the elite 
athlete with disability award, we weren’t actually good enough to win the 
able-bodied award and this absolutely smashes that glass ceiling for elite 
athletes with a disability everywhere.”


Alcott is the fourth different winner in as many years following 2015 
recipient Sam Groth, 2014 winner Nick Kyrgios, Hewitt in 2013 and Stosur, a 
three-time Newcombe medallist. Stosur was again shortlisted after reaching the 
French Open semi-finals for a fourth time, with Daria Gavrilova, John Millman, 
Jordan Thompson and doubles specialist John Peers the other 2016 nominees.

Despite successful years on court, Kyrgios and Bernard Tomic – who were both 
conspicuous no-shows from the awards ceremony – were overlooked contenders for 
Australia’s “most outstanding elite tennis player and ambassador for the sport”.
 