
It is not a typical Dylan Thomas subject – murder, mystery and intrigue in the 
South Pacific – and the script he wrote, despite being bought by the actor
Richard Burton <https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-burton>, never 
developed into the film he was hoping for.

But now at least it will be performed on the airwaves. Radio 3 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio3> has said it will broadcast the world premiere of 
the all but forgotten work The Beach of Falesa.

The drama will be broadcast in May to mark the centenary of Thomas's birth and 
will be the first production of the little-known piece.

Matthew Dodd, head of Radio 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3> 
speech programmes, called the production a "fantastic thing" for the station 
and said it continued a relationship with Thomas that went back 50 years – it 
was the Third Programme, Radio 3's predecessor, that first broadcast Under Milk 
Wood. The Beach of Falesa is "a very dark story, very tense", Dodd said. "I 
can't imagine why film producers didn't take it up."

The screenplay is based on a late 19th century short story by Robert Louis 
Stevenson. Whether it was a film producer's idea or Thomas's is not known, but 
the writer undoubtedly harboured big hopes of its reaching the big screen, said 
Alison Hindell, the BBC's head of audio drama. It went through the hands of two 
now defunct film companies, and after Thomas's death, in 1953, the rights were 
bought by Burton.

"I'm fairly sure he was imagining himself in the central role," said Hindell. 
"It is a very Burtonesque role."

For whatever reason the actor could not get the project going, even after 
enlistingChristopher Isherwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/christopher-isherwood> to work on it in the 
late 1960s. The script was published posthumously in 1963 and it came to 
Hindell's attention by a bizarre and serendipitous coincidence.

"My stepdaughter moved into a new house in Sydney and the only thing the 
previous owner had left was the published edition of this screenplay.

"I realised that, with some cutting down, it was a gift for a radio production 
because the narrative voice is very much the voice ofDylan Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dylanthomas>. You can really hear his 
intonations, his imagery, his vocal mellifluousness. That itself is going to be 
a plum role for somebody, I hope."

There are very few subsequent references to the script and if anyone does hold 
the rights, it is not known who.

Quite why it never made it to the big screen is a mystery. "Maybe it was just 
too expensive to make," said Hindell. "They would have had to go somewhere that 
looked like Tahiti. It is a great story … a murder mystery. Maybe someone will 
make a film of it now."

The broadcast will be a highlight of the station's spring season, announced by 
the Radio 3 controller Roger Wright. He noted that some people were still 
surprised that Radio 3 broadcast drama. "The range of what we do is often 
either not known about or is taken for granted," he said.

Another spoken highlight will be Kenneth Branagh and Alex Kingston starring in 
a new production of Antony and Cleopatra, on 20 April.

There will also, of course, be plenty of classical music with the schedules 
cleared on 7 March for a Ravel day between 6.30am and midnight. This 
celebration follows similar days devoted to the music of composers including 
Mozart, Schubert and Webern.

Other highlights announced on Wednesday include a 25-part series of 
conversations with living composers about their workspaces, entitled Composers' 
Rooms, plus a three-part series exploring music and Jewish identity presented 
by Norman Lebrecht.

There will be live concert broadcasts every night, including, this Sunday, the 
London Symphony Orchestra premieringSir Peter Maxwell Davies's 10th Symphony 
<http://www.maxopus.com/resources.aspx>.
 