
Charlton's chances of pulling off the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> equivalent of The Great 
Escape (especially without a Steve McQueen in their line-up) became more 
improbable than ever as they fell to a 2-1 defeat atWolves.

After Chris Iwelumo had marked his first match against his former Charlton 
colleagues by giving Wolves the lead – his first goal in 17 matches – the 
visitors did get back on level terms through Zheng Zhi. They had a further 
boost when their keeper, Robert Elliot, saved a Sylvan Ebanks-Blake penalty, 
but Ebanks-Blake made amends for his miss by heading Wolves' second goal. It 
took his total for the season to 24 – one more than the tally that earned him 
last season's Golden Boot award.

The most significant change at the bottom was that Norwich were replaced in 
the relegation zone by Barnsley afterNorwich's 1-0 win over Plymouth and the 
South Yorkshire club's 1-0 defeat toBlackpool. Wade Small, on his Blackpool 
debut after his move from Barnsley's neighboursSheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> on Friday, scored 
their goal with a superb volley.

Even more impressive was the audacious bicycle kick by Jonathan Stead that gave
Ipswich their 1-0 win at Reading. How Southampton could have done with 
finishing like that in their goalless draw withQPR. Their best chance fell to 
Jason Euell, who took the ball around the keeper but shot wide.

No Championship team are displaying greater scoring power that Burnley. They 
followed their 4-2 win over Crystal Palace at Turf Moor on Wednesday by 
thrashingNottingham Forest 5-0 there. The inspiration for their latest success 
came from Robbie Blake, a former Forest loanee. He put Burnley ahead with a 
free-kick – his first goal in 13 matches – and then set up their second for 
Wade Elliott. This was Burnley's 50th match of the season and the confidence 
underpinning their present form was well illustrated by the shots from outside 
the penalty area that brought Jay Rodriguez and Joey Gudjohnsson the team's 
final two goals.

Forest can only hope they can recover from the mauling in the way that Crystal 
Palace did in surprisingly winning 3-1 at Swansea – the Welsh club's first 
defeat in 14 matches and only their second at home.

The day's highest scorers were in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>, where MK Dons beat 
Oldham 6-2. Such a defeat was the last thing Oldham needed following the 
fall-out from the alleged drunken behaviour by members of their squad at the 
Belle Vue dog track two weeks ago. The game provided another example of why 
Jason Puncheon, on loan from Plymouth, is regarded as the most influential 
borrowed player in England this season.

In view of Plymouth's low Championship position, it seems strange Puncheon has 
not been required at Home Park. But the Plymouth manager, Paul Sturrock, who 
signed him from Barnet last summer, explains: "It's a big gap betweenLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> and the Championship, 
and getting plenty of League One games can only help him. He did well for us as 
a substitute, but not so well when he started games. The more games he starts, 
the more he is going to improve in that respect." Puncheon, an ingenious wide 
midfielder, caused numerous problems for Oldham with his skill on the ball, and 
it was his lobbed goal that brought the Dons level from 2-1 down.

Another Dons star was striker Sam Baldock. The first player to graduate to the 
club's first team from their academy, Baldock, who celebrates his 20th birthday 
today, scored twice .

Two loan players stood out in Brentford's thrilling League Two 
top-of-the-table clash withWycombe. John Akinde, on his Wycombe debut on loan 
from Bristol City, scored their first and third goals. But Wycombe, 3-2 ahead, 
had Tommy Doherty sent off and Brentford's Sam Williams, on loan from Aston 
Villa, came off the bench to make the final score 3-3.

Macclesfield manager Keith Alexander, who once suffered a brain aneurysm, was 
taken to hospital for a precautionary brain scan after compaining of feeling 
unwell before the match at home toBournemouth. The Cherries, with their 2-0 
win, were the only team at the foot of the League Two table to secure maximum 
points. 
 