
Eddie McGuire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-mcguire> has defended 
his comments about drowning the journalist Caroline Wilson, saying his comments 
were a joke and should not be made into a “red herring”.

The murders of women through domestic violence were a much more serious issue 
and should not be linked to his comments, theCollingwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood> president and broadcaster told 
3AW host Neil Mitchell on Monday morning.

“We’ve got to be careful this doesn’t become the red herring,” McGuire said. 
“One woman a week gets murdered in a domestic violence situation.” He added 
that Wilson, the chiefAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> writer at the 
Age in Melbourne, was a high profile person and that it was normal for such 
people to be joked about.


Eddie McGuire's 'banter' exposes the rank hypocrisy of AFL football | Russell 
Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/eddie-mcguires-banter-exposes-the-rank-hypocrisy-of-afl-football>
“It’s humour,” he said. “I pick up the paper every day and there’s a cartoon 
giving it to me. She’s a big figure in the football world. It was solely a 
joke. Nobody at any stage had any malice or intent in their heart other than 
joking about a fellow commentator.”

No action would be taken against him for the comments, McGuire insisted, which 
were made on his radio program last Monday during the Big Freeze at the G 
event, where celebrities slide into icy water to raise money for motor neurone 
disease. McGuire said he would pay$50,000 to see Wilson held under the iced 
water and 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/eddie-mcguire-under-fire-over-comments-about-afl-writer-caroline-wilson>
charge an extra $10,000 for “everyone to stand around the outside and bomb her”.

“What action is there [to take]?” McGuire asked Mitchell.

“I don’t see that anyone’s fighting back on this. Everyone is saying: ‘Right, 
OK we have to be careful in the community to take your point. It’s humour’.”

Writing on Fairfax Media websites 
<http://www.theage.com.au/afl/afl-news/caroline-wilson-eddie-mcguires-ice-pool-attack-took-me-back-to-the-bad-old-days-20160620-gpn1kv.html>
 on Monday, Wilson said letting McGuire’s “so-called jokey banter” pass would 
be would be “letting down true victims of violence”.

His comments were “laced with venom”, she said.

“I do not relish being a part of a story like this. Again,” she wrote.

“This sort of sexist nonsense has long been an acceptable part of his 
occasionally violent vernacular but I don’t accept that it’s jokey or banter.

“No journalist no commentator, male or female, should have to put up with 
personal attacks for doing so. McGuire avoided the issue at hand. He played the 
woman and engaged a couple of willing blokes only too happy to do his bidding.”

Wilson said McGuire’s response was part of a pattern of behaviour, and his 
Triple M colleagues had joined him in a “casual violent” attack.

“It took me back to the old days of The Footy Show when the former host and 
Collingwood president would line me up in an occasionally vile and foul-mouthed 
way and enlist his colleagues in a series of sexist gang tackles.”

In a media conference later on Monday, AFL chief executive Gillon McLachlan 
said it was a concern it had taken a week for the comments to be called out.

“It’s not good enough, we can’t say that we as an industry have a commitment 
to making change if we don’t step up and call it out,” McLachlan said.

But he said McGuire’s eventual apology was “legitimate and acceptable”.

Speaking on ABC News 24 the deputy Labor leader, Tanya Plibersek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tanya-plibersek>, described 
McGuire’s comments as “medieval”.

Eddie McGuire is the poster boy for an era we should have waved goodbye to | 
Catharine Lumby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/eddie-mcguire-is-the-poster-boy-for-an-era-we-should-have-waved-goodbye-to>
“It reminds me of the witch dunking that used to go on in the middle ages,” 
she said. “In the context, joking about drowning someone doesn’t cut it as 
humour. I’d like the people making the jokes to examine their consciences and 
ask themselves why they think it’s funny to make jokes about drowning a woman,” 
Plibersek said.

The chief executive of Domestic Violence NSW, Moo Baulch, said disrespect 
towards women, including negative comments towards them, created a culture that 
led to violence against women.

“We’re having an incredibly sophisticated conversation about the causes and 
drivers of violence against women in Australia at the moment, and then for this 
sort of thing to be said by a senior sporting figure just shows how far we have 
to go,” Baulch said.

“We have such a good and positive push around changing attitudes in sports and 
recognising that sporting and cultural heroes are the ones that are key to 
changing attitudes to women, and it’s very disappointing he would use this 
language.

“His comments sounded pretty violent to me,” Baulch said.

The vice president of the Western Bulldogs, Susan Alberti, said she was “sick 
of” McGuire.


“I heard the comments and I turned to my husband and said: ‘Oh no, not 
again’,” she told Guardian Australia. “He’s got to stop saying these things, 
he’s offensive.

“I thought we’d moved on, I thought we were much more mature now about respect 
and responsibility, but people sometimes in high places think they can do and 
say what they want. McGuire did cross the line and he should never have said 
what he did.”

She said Wilson was a “wonderful journalist and she’s very good at her job, a 
job she does in a tough environment”.

McGuire should donate the money he suggested be used to humiliate Wilson 
towards motor neurone research instead, Alberti said. Alberti was made a 
companion of the order of Australia this year for her philanthropic and 
fundraising work in support of medical research, and for her role mentoring 
young women.

“Apart from the fact that they degraded a wonderful journalist on the program, 
motor neurone is a dreadful disease and it can kill you rather quickly,” she 
said.

“Put your money where your mouth is, that’s what I say to him.”

The anti-violence campaigner, Rosie Batty, said on Monday she did not believe 
McGuire meant to cause harm but highlighted the need to be aware of sexist and 
derogatory language.

“I think we’ve moved past understanding racist jokes but clearly we haven’t 
moved past sexist jokes and recognising they are harmful,” Batty told reporters.

Mary Barry, chief execuitve of Our Watch, a group established to drive a 
change in the culture and attitudes that underpin and create violence against 
women, said the issue was not a joke.

“It should not be the topic of banter and the fact that public figures are 
laughing about, it is vile,” she said.

 