
The appointment by the Minister of Health and the Minister of Agriculture and 
Fisheries of a representative Joint Advisory Committee under the chairmanship 
of Sir Horace Monro “to consider and from time to time report” upon the 
pollution of rivers and streams and suggest appropriate legislative or 
administrative measures to reduce what is admittedly a growing evil is welcome, 
though tardy, news.

Such administrative bodies as the Mersey and Irwell Joint Committee, the West 
Riding of YorkshireRivers <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/rivers> 
Board, the Ribble Joint Committee, the Thames Conservancy Board, and other 
similar bodies have long been doing excellent work. But the problem is a 
national one. A strong deputation, representing numerous interests, recently 
urged upon the Government the immediate need for “a central authority to 
control inland waters.” It was able to support this demand by quotations from 
Royal Commissions, Select Committees, Departmental Committees, and scientific 
authorities for a period of more than half a century.


All these were agreed upon the immediate necessity of national control with 
local administration in the interests of health, cleanliness, and natural 
beauty – apart from the special interest of fishermen everywhere. In agreeing 
to set up a Committee, Lord Balfour, replying in the House of Lords on July 19, 
1927, remarked on the urgent need of scientific research upon pollution, and 
added that though “all were agreed as to the magnitude of the evil” it might 
happen “that we had to choose between destroying manufactures and maintaining 
the purity of the rivers, and in many cases it was quite impossible to give a 
decision in favour of the purity of the rivers and against the continuance of 
the manufactures by which the people lived.”

We, for our part, do not believe that the Committee will find itself in any 
such dilemma. There are ways of retaining the beauty of the countryside without 
killing manufactures. Take a case quoted by the Committee of the British Water 
Works and Salmon and Trout Associations. The River Leith flows for about nine 
miles through Edinburgh. “At one time it was an elongated cesspool, defiled by 
the sewage and waste from the paper mills and tanneries. Now “it is a 
clean-flowing stream supporting trout and other fish life with which the river 
is stocked, flowing through miles of city habitations.”

Such cases will be the exception and Lord Balfour’s dilemma will seem a real 
one as long as the matter is dealt with in a purely local manner. But if the 
whole question is resolutely faced by scientists and by a central authority, 
working with local authorities, is it necessarily absurd to look forward to the 
day when the Irwell also will be the resort of trout-fishers and bathing in the 
Mersey be our summer joy!
 