
To take young children for long distances by car is almost an act of cruelty, 
but one which in these days has constantly to be committed. Scenery means 
little or nothing to them, and a car which is taking the family on holiday is 
likely to be so loaded as to make it physically impossible for a child to do 
[anything] other than sit still. One tells stories, one sings songs, one plays 
the game of counting the black cattle or the white cats. But even when a proper 
repertory of such alleviations has been properly prepared beforehand, as it 
should be, the time must come in a full day’s travel when they no longer 
entertain.

We had got to that stage the other day, and were wondering what we could do to 
make the last twenty miles tolerable both to our six-year-old daughter and to 
ourselves, when she suddenly discovered a new game all her own. We were passing 
Dalwhinnie, in the Highlands. “I wonder,” she said suddenly, “how that place 
got its name.” Then, after a moment’s pause, “I know. Once upon a time there 
was a man who came here to buy a doll for his little girl, and she called her 
doll Winnie, and ever after that the place was called Doll Winnie.”


Auchterarder Explained
That, of course, was no specially striking flight of fancy, but it gave us an 
idea. Dalnaspidal was the next place, and that was easily turned into Doll’s 
Hospital. After that all references to dolls were barred. I then tried her on a 
hard one. A few days before we had gone through Auchterarder. How about that? 
But she wasn’t stumped. “Ever so long ago a man went to a place riding a white 
pony. He didn’t know its name because it hadn’t got a name then. But he noticed 
that the people couldn’t talk quite properly. Instead of saying oh, they said 
ach; perhaps that’s Scotch for oh. But they did like the pony, which trotted 
down the street beautifully, and when they saw it they said ach, how well your 
little horse terotters, and ever after that it was called Acterotter, and when 
they had gone to school and learned fancy spelling they called it 
Auchterarder.” After that outrageous pun, references to people who couldn’t 
pronounce things properly were also barred.

Then my wife scored good marks with a highly improbable story about a man who 
tried to gatecrash a walled city but could never get more than his head in the 
borough owing to the vigilance of the gatekeeper. My own effort was so feeble 
that it shall not be related, but it would puzzle most people to find a good 
and convincing explanation of a nasty, one syllable name like Perth.


Playing this game is not, of course, eternally diverting, but it entertains 
longer than most others, and is worth keeping in mind and in reserve for the 
next time that an unfortunate child has to spend more than half an hour at a 
stretch in a motor-car.

 