
It was obvious within weeks of starting my first job in tech in 2010 that this 
sector would be different to any other I had worked in – as a woman, I would 
consistently be in the minority.

The first time I ever attended an IT event, the repercussions of this came 
clear. I got into a heated debate with a male colleague about whether it was 
appropriate to entertain clients in strip clubs to seal a deal. I was staggered 
that this was even up for discussion in the 21st century.

Before moving into tech, I’d worked as a mental health lawyer and a researcher 
at the Institute of Psychiatry, where the workplace was full of women.

It was a steep learning curve. I worried whether I would be able to challenge 
tech’s misogyny while still building strategic relationships that would be 
critical to the success of my business, an IT services provider.

Over time, I’ve learned to play to my audience, but it’s always a balance 
between staying true to my authentic, feminist self and joining in the male 
banter.

‘Businesses should look at how they bring women back into the workforce’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/sep/13/nora-senior-business-should-bring-women-back-workforce>
I remember one instance of this at a conference. A business was giving away 
water bottles with a plastic filter tube inside. A male peer told me the 
distributor had said if he didn’t want to use it as a bottle it could double as 
a sex toy. I pointed out that this wasn’t an appropriate comment at a 
professional event. But the group I was standing with immediately dismissed my 
outrage. I followed up by writing a blog post about it. It can be tough to 
articulate in the moment why those sorts of comments are uncomfortable for me 
as a woman.

I knew other women in the tech sector experienced similar challenges, so I 
looked for a way to bring more attention to this, and, in turn, promote gender 
diversity.

In January, I began interviewing women in the tech industry about their 
experience, and publishing their experiences on ablog 
<https://www.ideal.co.uk/blog/topic/women-in-it>. So far, I’ve talked to 12. 
Here are five things I’ve learned:

Role models matter 

Kristina Wu, a project co-ordinator at my business, followed the lead of her 
mum, who also worked in IT. Kristina’s mum made her feel that it’s normal for 
women to work in tech, and that she should feel confident in her abilities when 
surrounded by male faces.

Meanwhile, Rosa Fox, a developer at the government digital service, started in 
the tech sector as a project manager, but then pursued an interest in software 
development. She started taking coding courses outside of work, where she met 
other women coders. While learning this new skill, she realised tech developers 
aren’t geniuses, the career just requires time and commitment to learn the 
necessary skills.

Tech needs a broad range of skills

You definitely don’t need an IT degree to have a successful tech career. Only 
three of the 12 women I interviewed had studied an IT-related subject at 
university. As the internet boomed in the noughties, many of the women I spoke 
to stumbled into tech roles, then became a success. When advertising tech 
roles, showing the variety of skills needed, from communication to attention to 
detail, will help businesses attract talented women. As one interviewee, Amy 
Evans, suggested: “think less techy”.

Bias exists

Like me, many of the women have experienced implicit pressure to conform to, 
and accept, a tone of humour that’s tinged with sexism. It feels necessary in 
order to be accepted into a group of predominantly male peers.

Off-hand sexism, or accidental sexism, has a big impact. For example, men in 
tech have often assumed I work in marketing because I’m female. And throwaway 
phrases used in so-called banter can have a strong sexist undertone.Rachel Gray 
<https://www.ideal.co.uk/blog/women-in-it-rachel-gray-cisco-uk>, sales director 
at Cisco, and another of my interviewees, talked about her personal pet hate – 
“big girl’s blouse”. It’s one of many phrases that are used to poke fun at men 
while undermining women.

If men are inadvertently alienating women, we can only stop them by 
challenging the smallest instances, as I did with the sex toy comment. I also 
always challenge a colleague if I hear them describing a woman as a girl.


Diverse companies are better companies 

To make real progress in closing the gender gap, both men and women in the 
industry must force the change – I don’t believe this is happening yet. Tech is 
not unique: women are woefully underrepresented in senior roles in most 
industries. And the average pay of women is still18.1% lower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/economics-blog/2016/dec/09/gender-pay-gap-tool-reveals-the-good-the-bad-and-the-scandalous>
 than that of men.

Yet companies with diversity at the top make the most money 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/is-there-a-payoff-from-top-team-diversity>
. The underrepresentation of women in tech is a major problem not just for 
women, but for the sector itself.

A better gender balance would bring a broader spread of experience, 
perspective and emotional intelligence and help tech businesses gain a better 
understanding of what female consumers want.

We need to seek methods, including those I’ve outlined, to tackle bias and 
implicit (and direct) sexism to ensure the industry is attractive to women.

Support matters 

It is challenging working in an industry where you are in a minority. All of 
the women interviewed stressed the importance of joining networks of other 
women to develop skills and share successes. Organisations likeSheSays Brighton 
<https://twitter.com/shesaysbrighton> and Women of Meraki 
<https://twitter.com/womenofmeraki> mentor and inspire women, and challenge 
bias and sexism.

Claire Hopkins is founder and managing director at Ideal 
<https://www.ideal.co.uk/>, a Brighton based IT services provider.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 