
Some of Russia's best-known companies, including arms-maker Kalashnikov and 
energy firms Rosneft and Gazprom, have been targeted in the latest round of EU 
sanctions over theUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> crisis.

Under the sanctions, published on Friday in the EU's official journal, 
Rosneft, Transneft and Gazprom Neft will be prevented from raising long-term 
debt on European capital markets.

There are also travel bans and asset freezes against leading members of 
Vladimir Putin's inner circle, including the businessman Sergei Chemezov, 
chairman of defence and industrial group Rostec and a close associate of Putin 
from his KGB days in East Germany.

Others targeted are Igor Lebedev, deputy speaker of the Russian lower house of 
parliament, and Vladimir Zhirinovsky, an outspoken nationalist politician, as 
well as a number of leaders of pro-Russia separatists in eastern Ukraine.

The US is understood to be planning to limit access to Russian banks, 
including Sberbank, later on Friday as part of a concerted western effort to 
penalise what it sees as Russian attempts to destablise Ukraine by backing 
pro-Russia separatists with troops and weapons.
 Sergey Chemezov, CEO of Rostec Corp, one Putin's inner circle that has also 
been targeted. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
Last week, Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and Ukraine 
agreed to a ceasefire that remains in place despite repeated violations. As 
part of the agreement, on Friday the Ukrainian government and rebel forces 
exchanged dozens of prisoners captured during fighting.

The transfer took place in early hours outside the main rebel stronghold of 
Donetsk under the watch of international observers. Ukraine's president, Petro 
Poroshenko, said 36 Ukrainian servicemen were released after negotiations. He 
said a further 21 soldiers were freed the day before. Ukrainian forces handed 
over 31 pro-Russia rebels detained over the course of the five-month conflict.

Shortly after the prisoner exchange, a volley of rocket fire was heard from 
central Donetsk. Hundreds of prisoners are believed to be held by both sides, 
although no firm figure has been provided by either.

The latest sanctions are designed to keep up pressure on Russia, which denies 
sending troops into eastern Ukraine and arming the separatists.

In July, the US effectively cut off five Russian financial groups – VTB Bank, 
Gazprombank, Bank of Moscow VEB and Russian Agriculture Bank – from US equity 
and debt markets.

Sources told Reuters that Washington planned to apply the same sanction to 
Sberbank, Russia's largest bank by assets, and to tighten the restriction for 
all six financial institutions.

The White House said the sanctions would be unveiled on Friday. They are also 
expected to include targeting Russian defence companies and arms manufacturers.

Barack Obama hailed the additional EU sanctions but stressed that the US 
remained open to a diplomatic solution over Ukraine.

"We are implementing these new measures in light of Russia's actions to 
further destabilise Ukraine over the last month, including through the presence 
of heavily armed Russian forces in eastern Ukraine," Obama said. "If Russia 
fully implements its commitments, these sanctions can be rolled back. If, 
instead, Russia continues its aggressive actions and violations of 
international law, the costs will continue to rise."
 