
The EU’s chief negotiator in the Brexit talks has shown the first signs of 
backing away from his hardline, no-compromise approach after admitting he wants 
a deal with Britain that will guarantee the other 27 member states continued 
easy access to the City.

Michel Barnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/27/jean-claude-juncker-puts-michel-barnier-in-charge-brexit-talks>
 wants a “special” relationship with the City of London after Britain has left 
the bloc, according to unpublished minutes seen by the Guardian that hint at 
unease about the costs of Brexit on continental Europe.

Barnier told a private meeting of MEPs this week that special work was needed 
to avoid financial instability, according to a European parliament summary of 
the session. “Some very specific work has to be done in this area,” he said, 
according to the minutes. “There will be a special/specific relationship. There 
will need to be work outside of the negotiation box … in order to avoid 
financial instability.”

Barnier later moved to clarify his comments, claiming on Twitter that he 
referred to a “special vigilance” required to ensure the EU remained 
financially stable after Brexit.

The remarks hint at concern among senior Brussels policymakers about the 
damaging consequences of Brexit for the continent if Europe’s biggest financial 
centre is cut adrift.

A spokesman for the European commission insisted that the minutes, which were 
drawn up by European parliament officials, did not “correctly reflect what Mr 
Barnier said”. A source present at the meeting, however, described the minutes 
as “more or less accurate”. Barnier discussed the problems of financial 
services, the source said, although the negotiator’s preferred options were not 
clear.

The suggestion recorded in the minutes does mirror the view of the governor of 
theBank of England <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>
, Mark Carney. He told MPs on Tuesday “there are greater financial stability 
risks on the continent in the short term, for the transition, than there are 
for the UK”.

Carney said other EU nations relied heavily on the City for their financial 
needs and could face serious problems if international banks based in London 
were no longer able to gain easy access to European countries and corporations. 
“If you rely on a jurisdiction [the UK] for three-quarters of your hedging 
activities, three-quarters of your foreign exchange activity, half your lending 
and half your securities transactions, you should think very carefully about 
the transition from where you are today to where the new equilibrium will be,” 
he said.

The fear is that European governments and companies would find it harder and 
more expensive to raise capital if they were denied access to the City, which 
acts as Europe’s investment bank. Countries such as Italy, with very large 
national debt, are concerned that their economies would become even more 
fragile if financing costs rose.

The minutes indicate that Barnier repeated during Thursday’s meeting the 
well-worn mantra that the UK should not be allowed to cherry-pick the bits of 
the EU it likes. But his apparent concern about financial instability contrasts 
with bullish statements by EU leaders about swooping on London’s financial 
sector business.

Related: UK to begin talks with New Zealand on post-Brexit trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/uk-to-begin-talks-with-new-zealand-on-post-brexit-trade-deal>

In the days after the EU referendum, French president François Hollande said 
London should no longer be allowed to handle any transactions denominated in 
euros. These “euro clearing operations” are worth about $150tn a year. Some 
cities, including Paris and Frankfurt, have launched glossy marketing campaigns 
aimed at persuading bankers to leave the City of London.

Behind the scenes, EU officials are maintaining that the UK will be hardest 
hit by Brexit, but they are concerned about the costs facing continentalEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.


One senior source recently told the Guardian that closing London as a euro 
clearing centre was likely to increase costs for EU banks and companies. 
Another source has voiced concern that there would be limited gains for rival 
financial centres as a result of a smaller European single market.

On Friday, one the City’s most senior bankers welcomed growing recognition of 
the risk to the global financial system. “The industry and the regulatory 
community, and the political community, are fully aware of the importance of 
maintaining financial stability,” said Douglas Flint, chairman of HSBC, 
Europe’s largest bank.

“There are clearly negotiating positions that will evolve over the next 
several months and years but the importance of preserving the functionality of 
the markets that exist today … is seen by everybody,” he said, following 
similar warnings tothe Treasury select committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/hard-brexit-threatens-global-financial-system-city-chiefs-tell-mps>
.

Flint suggested a new special relationship with the City could be achieved 
with a treaty guaranteeing “mutual recognition” of regulations. City firms are 
able to do business across the EU by using a “passport”, which will disappear 
when the UK quits the EU.

Barnier, a former EU commissioner in charge of financial services who led the 
post-crisis crackdown on bankers’ bonuses, is well placed to understand the 
financial risks of Brexit.


Related: Theresa May to deliver long-awaited Brexit speech on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/12/theresa-may-to-deliver-long-awaited-brexit-speech-on-tuesday>

According to TheCityUK, the lobby group representing the the City, London is 
Europe’s biggest financial centre: 75 EU banks have major branches in the 
capital, holding £1.2tn of assets, almost one fifth of all UK bank assets. 
Twice as many euros are traded in London than in the 19 countries of the single 
currency combined.


Carney is increasingly becoming embroiled in a war of words with his 
continental colleagues over who faces the biggest Brexit risks.

Earlier this week, Malta’s finance minister, Edward Scicluna, said that the UK 
would suffer greater damage, although the rest of the EU would also suffer.

Barnier, according to the minutes of the meeting with MEPs, described Brexit 
as a “unique and extraordinary negotiation” that had to result in a outcome 
that showed the best option was being an EU member. He stressed there would be 
“no aggressiveness, no revenge, no punishment” but also no naivety.

Both lines are consistent with his only public statement on Brexit, when he 
stressed the interests of the rest of the EU were his top priority.

The European parliament must give its consent to the final Brexit deal and 
Barnier, who briefly served as an MEP, promised to involve them throughout the 
process.

In a sign of ambivalence about a transition deal, he told MEPs it was not part 
of the remit of the EU exit talks and they were waiting to see what the UK 
would ask for. This is consistent with earlier remarks, when he said it was
“difficult to imagine” a transition deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/uk-will-have-under-18-months-to-negotiate-deal-says-eus-brexit-broker>
 because the UK did not know where it was heading after Brexit.


He made clear that the UK would have to follow EU law if it wished to remain a 
member of the single market during the transition period. This reinforces 
comments by Malta’s prime minister, Joseph Muscat, who said this week that the 
European court of justice would be“dishing out judgements” to the UK during any 
transition period. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/12/eu-law-will-continue-to-apply-in-uk-during-transition-deal>



Some MEPs’ mistrust of the UK comes through in the minutes of Barnier’s 
meeting with the MEPs who chair the European parliament’s main committees, 
including foreign affairs, trade, single market and budget.

Elmar Brok, the German centre-right chair of the foreign affairs committee, 
reportedly voiced concern the UK would become “a Trojan horse of the US” – 
echoing fears that date back to the time of Charles de Gaulle.

Werner Langen, a German centre-right MEP who is leading the investigation into 
thePanama Papers <https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, wants 
to ensure the UK accepts international rules to clamp down on tax avoidance. 
Some EU politicians are worried the UK will embark on “a race to the bottom”, 
by slashing corporate taxes, to compensate for Brexit.


Barnier, however, said he expected the UK to stick to existing commitments to 
enact more than three dozen laws to combat money laundering and tax avoidance.


Additional reporting by Dan Roberts
 