
Eve Online is making the biggest change in its 13-year history, by going 
free-to-play <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zQciMy_Pr0Q>.

In its latest update, called Ascension, it is introducing an innovative new 
system for opening up the world to non-paying users. A new class of player, 
dubbed “Alpha Clones”, will be able to sign-up without paying the monthly 
subscription fee, currently £9.99.

In exchange, these players receive a more limited account than the paying 
players, rechristened “Omega Clones”.

The move is in part a response to changes in the gaming market, where free to 
play games are dominating mobile gaming and subscription-based gaming revenue 
has all but dried up.

The space-based sim, often jokingly described as “spreadsheets and 
spaceships”, has a unique set of problems compared to most of its competitors. 
Eve is almost entirely player-driven, with huge player-led “corporations” 
providing the driving force of the game’s intrigue and excitement.

That’s partially because, unlike competitors such as World of Warcraft, every 
single player exists in the same shared universe. That means the most connected 
players in the game world have the power to reshape the entire economy – so 
much so that CCPGames <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>, the 
Icelandic-based company that develops Eve, has an in-house economist to make 
sure that nothing goes awry.

The shared universe meant that Eve didn’t feel like it was safe to offer the 
same sort of accounts that other free-to-play games provide, since the in-game 
economy could be wrecked if the balance was wrong.

Instead, unlike many free-to-play games, the full scope of Eve’s universe is 
open to every player, paying or not. An Alpha Clone can go anywhere in the 
world, join any group, and achieve any objective. Instead, the limitations are 
focused on speed and efficiency: the clones take longer to learn skills, and 
don’t have access to some of the higher-powered ships in the game.

“Access to trading, industry, and exploration skills will allow Alpha pilots 
to explore the vast, mysterious universe, harvest its raw materials, fulfil 
their shrewd economic dreams, and construct the war machines that make Eve 
battles famous,” CCP says.

Thanks to the sheer scale of Eve’s player-run corporations, open 
conflagrations are rare. But when they occur, a major tactic is to oppose the 
enormous Titan spaceships captained by the most prominent players with swarms 
of smaller, cheaper ships – something new players will be able to join in with 
from day one.

The new clone states are launching alongside a second major change to Eve: the 
first full story-mode the game has seen, a 10-hour fully voice-acted journey 
that takes the player on an extensive trip through all the game’s major 
playstyles. It’s a big reversal of the previous approach Eve took towards new 
players, which was to throw them in the deep-end after a brief tutorial 
explaining how to navigate the user interface.

It’s not the first time CCP has lowered the cost of playing Eve. An earlier 
update introduced the concept of PLEX, which allowed users to pay for game time 
using in-game currency and use real money to buy cash in Eve’s universe. But 
that update, while perfect for long-term users wanting to play for less, did 
little for new players, who would have to spend the 14-day trial period 
grinding relentlessly in order to earn enough cash to pay for their first month.

 * Eve Online: how a virtual world went to the edge of apocalypse and back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/12/how-virtual-world-edge-of-apocalypse-and-back-again> 