
Mansfield's striker Ben Hutchinson marvels at the possibility of facing 
Liverpool in the FA Cup third round but the former Celtic player knows they 
"have a job to do" at home toLincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> in Wednesday evening's 
second-round replay before they can think of welcoming the Premier League team 
to Field Mill.

The tie will have added spice for Hutchinson as he spent a season on loan at 
Lincoln from Celtic two years ago. It is a different scenario to four years 
ago, when he came on as a substitute for the Scottish club against Manchester 
United in the Champions League. But the 25-year-old Englishman, who also had a 
spell at Middlesbrough, is relishing the prospect of a meeting with Brendan 
Rodgers's side. "Wednesday is a massive game," Hutchinson said. "To play 
against Liverpool would be amazing. There is a great incentive there to go 
through. But first we have to do a job against Lincoln."

Only three points separate Mansfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> and Lincoln – who drew 3-3 in 
the first meeting 10 days ago – in the Blue Square Bet Premier Division.

Hutchinson, who scored in Saturday's 4-1 win over Ebbsfleet, added: "I have 
some history there at Lincoln, so bring it on. We can't wait. The fans can be 
the 12th man on Wednesday. We all know what is at stake."

Lincoln will also go into the game on the back of an impressive win, 4-2 at 
Dartford with Colin Larkin scoring a hat-trick. They will also be boosted by 
the return after suspension of the leading scorer Jamie Taylor.

Oxford entertain Accrington in tomorrow's other second-round replay, with the 
winners facing a tie away to Sheffield United.

"It's a big game," Chris Wilder, the Oxford manager, said. "It's a big game 
for the players to get into the third round – and it's a big game financially 
for both clubs. Hopefully progression in theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> will give me a little bit of 
leeway to progress the squad.

"I'm looking in January to improve. This is money we can potentially use to 
improve and strengthen the squad. We have to make sure our recruitment is 
right, and make sure we get players in positions to kick us on into the second 
half of the season, and that all helps with a decent cup run."

The winner would pocket £27,000 plus a sizeable chunk of revenue from the tie 
with the Blades. Accrington's defender Dean Winnard said: "We are not the 
richest of clubs so they are important games for a club like ours."
 