
At 4pm yesterday, it was still possible to imagine that the eyes of every true 
sports fan were on Old Trafford. The Premiership football season had, 
apparently, begun. But nobody, you could convince yourself, really wanted to be 
interested in that. Rather, the sporting nation was willing the Manchester rain 
to stop, the covers to come off and England to continue the dramatic work of 
prising the Ashes from Australian hands.

When the schedule for this season's test matches was announced there were 
plenty who believed that it was folly for England to play so late in the 
summer, that to put Test matches up against the Premiership meant that 
excitement would inevitably dwindle, and that normal, football, service on the 
back pages would be resumed. With hindsight, even taking into account the 
Manchester weather, to encroach into football's seasonal 'territory', just as 
football has long encroached on cricket's summers, might prove a stroke every 
bit as daring as those sixes hit by Freddie Flintoff at Edgbaston, each one 
played in the apparent knowledge that he could at any time dislocate a dodgy 
shoulder. As the vast commercial operation of the Barclays Premiership hypes 
back into action, cricket has been reminding us that sport can still be 
performed in a style and with a spirit that should embarrass the collective 
hierarchy of the 'national game'.

There was a time, of course, when the two sports respected each other's space, 
when they perhaps reflected two sides of a national character, and when the 
greatest national heroes, Compton and Fry, managed to do both, effortlessly. 
But by the time of Botham's Ashes, even, the game was already up. Football was 
everywhere, and cricket, it seemed, going nowhere.

It was about that time, 25 years ago, that I bought my first football season 
ticket. It cost £14 - I'd saved up - and it allowed me admission into the Holte 
End at Aston Villa's ground for every home match of the season. In the event, 
it proved a sound investment. Against all expectation, Aston Villa went on to 
win the First Division that season, their first title for 70 years, and quite 
probably their last for another 70. At about 50p a match - it included cup 
games - the ticket represented excellent value for money.

Being a football fan then was a manageable occupation. It took up a couple of 
hours, door to door, on a Saturday afternoon or a Wednesday evening, and an 
hour in front of the telly for Match of the Day. The clubs were built to match 
these expectations. Clearing out some stuff from the attic recently, I came 
across my collection of old programmes. Aston Villa's success that season was 
down to a granitic manager, Ron Saunders, who lived by the maxim that 'if each 
and every one of the players gives 110 per cent, I'm sure we can get the right 
result'. It was a simple philosophy; it seemed to help that two or three of the 
players lived up the road, or had gone to a local school; and you didn't mind 
that a couple of them couldn't really play. In contrast to the vast 
international staff now required in the Premiership, that title-winning side 
employed 14 players, seven of whom played in every game. Squad rotation meant 
you brought your dodgy sub on for the last 10 minutes - Villa had a bloke 
called Eamonn Deacy who had written in for a trial - and held your breath.

The saturation coverage of football, the besuited seriousness of it, arrived 
with the Premiership. It was created in the image of a corporation, and any 
football fan now watching, mesmerised, the 24-hour ticker on Sky Sports News 
could be forgiven for thinking that they are watching a business rather than a 
sports programme. The big stories of recent months - the Glazer takeover at 
Manchester United, the Ashley Cole tapping up nonsense, and drug-test cheat Rio 
Ferdinand refusing to sign a contract that will guarantee him more than £5.5 
million a year because it 'undervalues him' - have nothing to do with the game 
itself.

One of the effects of all this business, all this cash, is to invite boredom 
before the season has begun, a fact that cricket has exploited spectacularly. 
The ennui is catching. Roman Abramovich's billions in particular have tipped 
the playing field to the point where the rest hardly seem minded to turn up; 
managers are more intent on managing expectation than players. (Imagine Brian 
Clough, say, starting a season by announcing that his team had no chance of 
finishing in the top six.) Listening to pundits, clubs should simply publish 
their bank balances and divvie up the league places accordingly.

'The point about football in Britain,' declared Arthur Hopcraft in his 
indelible 1968 account of the domestic game, The Football Man, 'is that it is 
not just a sport people take to, like cricket or tennis, it is built into the 
urban psyche, as much a common experience to our children as are uncles and 
school.'

I'm not sure what that urban psyche would be now, but if football has always 
had a tendency to reflect British society, it now mostly represents its vast 
inequalities. That people are still prepared to pay ill-affordable sums to 
furnish the country seats of disaffected full-backs says a lot for ingrained 
deference. The cheapest ticket available to young fans of Chelsea, or their 
parents, is £43; at Tottenham this season, where supporters will contribute to 
the twilight fund of Edgar Davids, one of football's wealthiest mercenaries, 
seats are available for £70. If, as a father of two, you have shelled out close 
on £250 to watch a football match then, I suppose, it has to be taken seriously.

We will be reminded, as a result, by whining managers and players and fans, 
every day of this season that the big decisions in football are too important 
to be decided by simple referees since millions of pounds might be riding on 
them; football, we are told, is a global product (and where's the fun in that?).

One of the wonderful things about this cricketing summer is that such 
seriousness, such ill-temper, has never once entered into it. We have never 
been told that cricket is much more than a game these days. Instead we are 
invited - particularly in Channel 4's tragically valedictory coverage - to 
relish the marvels of Shane Warne's bowling, the power of Flintoff's hitting.

Sitting in the crowd at Edgbaston last week, having snaffled some tickets on 
eBay - and hung around the Finsbury Park sorting office at 5am to receive them 
- I was struck by the palpable sense that the players were out there simply 
because this was the best imaginable way of spending an afternoon. This sense 
transmitted to the supporters, admittedly rather too many of whom had used it 
as an occasion for cross-dressing, who seemed to be there, unlike any football 
crowd I have been in, just for the fun of it.

One effect of this perspective is that, for all the machinations of Hawk-Eye 
and the snickometer, and the brilliance of Simon Hughes in his analyst's box, a 
bad umpire's decision is never ever a subject for comment by players after a 
match. The most memorable aspect of the Edgbaston test was the magnanimity of 
both sets of players in victory and defeat. Flintoff's handshake to Brett Lee 
was matched by Australian captain Ricky Ponting's refusal to mention the 
contentious match-winning dismissal of Michael Kasprowicz and instead to 
describe the thrill of having taken part in one of the greatest matches ever. 
(Imagine in the same circumstances the graceless Alex Ferguson or the 
narcissistic Jose Mourinho suggesting how, in the end, they weren't too 
bothered about the result, but what a great day.)

When the Australian fitness coach toured the other Old Trafford earlier this 
week ,Alex Ferguson regaled him with a story of the young Phil Neville, who had 
excelled at both cricket and football and who had been torn about whether to 
pursue a career with Manchester United or Lancashire. How absurd, Ferguson had 
suggested, that Neville should even have given a second thought to a decision 
'between a football contract and a cricket one'. Certainly, if money was the 
only motivation. But you couldn't help thinking that this week Neville, 
summarily discarded by United, and watching his Lancashire contemporary Andrew 
Flintoff express himself with such consummate power and pleasure on the cricket 
field, might have been wondering whether he made the right call.
 