
Feuding Davis Cup teammates Bernard Tomic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> and Nick Kyrgios have been 
seeded into the same quarter of the draw at the Indian Wells Masters. It makes 
for an interesting clash if they should meet in the quarter-finals after Tomic 
declared he would lose some respect for Kyrgios if he played the tournament in 
California after missing Australia’s Davis Cup defeat by the United States last 
weekend due to illness.

Tomic is seeded 17th for the tournament and Kyrgios is seeded 24, meaning both 
get a bye through the first round. Action in the men’s main draw gets underway 
on Thursday (Friday AEDT).

Nick Kyrgios tells Bernard Tomic: don't expect me to have your back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/07/nick-kyrgios-tells-bernard-tomic-dont-expect-me-to-have-your-back>
Young guns Tomic and Kyrgios were involved in a long distance spat on Sunday 
after Tomic complained about Kyrgios’ absence midway through his reverse 
singles loss to John Isner in the World Group first round ties at Kooyong. “Two 
times Nick has faked it. Twice. While I’m here, Nick’s sitting down in 
Canberra. Bullshit he’s sick,” Tomic muttered to Cup captain Lleyton Hewitt 
Hewitt during a change of ends.

The Australian No1 later told reporters a similar situation happened last 
February when Kyrgios withdrew from the Davis Cup tie against the Czech 
Republic. “He didn’t come to Czech and had stress fractures and somehow played 
Indian Wells and felt good,” Tomic said. “He said he’s ‘still sick but I’m 
going to be better tomorrow’ - so it’s just weird for me. If he plays Indian 
Wells, then he’s definitely lost a little bit of my respect.”

In response Kyrgios taunted Tomic on Twitter, referencing the Queenslander’s 
6-0 6-1 loss to Jarkko Nieminen in Miami two years ago. “Let’s not forget who 
holds the quickest loss on the ATP Tour lol,” Kyrgios posted. 
“#howmanyminutesagain”

Kyrgios followed up with: “Heat of the moment, not gonna take it personally. 
Indian wells a week away, plenty of time”. He then tweeted a more cutting: 
“Just don’t expect me to have your back anytime soon”.



 