
Half of today’s car owners will not want to own a vehicle and more and more 
will want self-driving and electric cars in future, a survey of car 
manufacturing bosses has found.

As fewer people see the need to buy a car, a majority of automotive executives 
believe the industry will increasingly focus on making money from peripheral 
digital services to be used with their vehicles.

The results suggest that producing driverless, electric vehicles to sell to 
tech firms, such as Google or Apple, that consumers would then pay to use could 
be a growth area in the industry in the coming years, according to an analyst.

“I believe robot taxis will revolutionise UK urban transportation in the 
second half of the next decade,” said John Leech, UK Head of Automotive at 
KPMG, which produced the report.


“The UK is particularly suited to the early adoption of self-driving cars 
consumed as a service. Our greenbelt policy has created a relatively dense 
urban population which, when coupled with our high fuel prices, means that 
so-called robot taxis offer a greater cost saving to the UK public, compared to 
European or North American markets.”


However, manufacturers thought it was more likely that the prevailing business 
model in 2025 would be centred on producing a vehicle with technological 
add-ons.

They placed the more traditional production of cars and sale through 
dealerships second, while selling a connected car then maintaining a 
relationship with the driver using the vehicle’s connectivity was third.

About 20% of executives, among them many from India, China and south-east 
Asia, felt the industry would focus more on selling vehicles directly to tech 
firms – in particular, those whose brand image is not as strong with the public.

Moreover, the report said 74% of executives thought more than half of car 
owners today would not want to own a vehicle in the future. And 85% of the 
executives surveyed were convinced their company might make more money by 
providing the new digital services than by selling cars alone.


“Carmakers plan to sell a myriad of new digital services to vehicle users. 
Today, carmakers already make substantial profits from the sale of consumer 
finance and annual vehicle insurance but this will grow in the future as 
innovative services such as remote vehicle monitoring and the integration of 
the car as a focal point in people’s ever more connected lifestyles are 
demanded by consumers,” said Leech.


“For the auto industry this implies that pure product profitability is 
outdated. Carmakers’ success will not be evaluated solely on the quantity of 
vehicles sold, but on the customer value over the whole lifecycle – especially 
when the digital ecosystem will be ready for the market.”

The report also found that executives expect diesel technology to become a 
thing of the past. More than 90% of them plan to invest in the technology 
needed for battery electric vehicles over the next five years, while 62% felt 
that diesel was losing its importance for manufacturers.


Figures from the annual global automotive executive survey also showed that 
90% of bosses expect battery electric vehicles to dominate the marketplace by 
2025.


Leech said: “Improvements in the cost and range of battery technology, coupled 
with growing concern over the emission of both carbon dioxide and nitrogen 
oxides from diesel engines, means that almost the whole automotive industry 
believes that the mass adoption of electric cars will happen during the next 
decade.”

The survey was taken of 800 executives in 38 countries. People working for 
vehicle manufacturers, suppliers, dealers, financial and mobility service 
providers – as well as car users – took part in it.
 