
Gianni Infantino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gianni-infantino> has 
suggested having 16 three-team groups if the World Cup expands to 48 countries. 
Members of the Fifa Council received a recommendation from world football’s 
governing body setting out five proposed formats for its showpiece event from 
2026: two 48-team team options, two 40-team options and sticking with 32.

Infantino first advocated a new, opening playoff round for 32 of the 48 
finalists. Before a meeting of Asian soccer nations in Singapore this week, he 
drew up a new configuration for a 48-teamWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> that Fifa hopes is 
easier to understand.

All qualifying nations would start out in 16 groups of three teams. The top 
two teams advance to a new round of 32, with the bottom-place team going home 
after two matches. The finalists would still play a total of seven games, 
limiting potential opposition from clubs who send their players on 
international duty.

But only having three games in each group raises the possibility of teams 
being hard to separate on points, goals scored or goal difference.Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> is exploring how to determine which 
teams advance in that scenario, with administrators weighing up if penalty 
shootouts could be used for bonus points.

Infantino championed a mathematically-clunky 40-team World Cup before being 
elected in February.

Although Sepp Blatter’s successor no longer backs this plan, two options will 
still be on the table when the Fifa Council meets in January. There could be 
eight groups of five teams or 10 groups of four.

For the World Cup in Russia in 2018 and Qatar in 2022, there will be no change 
to the 32-team format that has existed since 1998.

However, with Infantino’s term ending in 2019, giving more countries a chance 
to play on world soccer’s biggest stage would be a popular move among many 
federations.

“Everyone sees that the increase of the participation for the World Cup is 
really a tool to promote football in more countries,” Infantino said last month.
 