
The Fifa president, Gianni Infantino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gianni-infantino>, has robustly defended 
the decision to expand the World Cup from 32 competing national teams to 48, 
which will begin with the 2026 tournament, in the face of immediate criticism 
from top European clubs. At a meeting in Zurich, Fifa’s rule-making council 
unanimously passed the new format, which will create a first round of 16 
groups, from which two of three teams will qualify and proceed to a knockout 
competition beginning with 32 countries.

Fifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> has projected that the 
increase to 48 countries will generate around $1bn more income, and $640m 
profit, from greater television rights and sponsorship. Infantino said the 
money will be reinvested in football; he has promised all Fifa’s 211 member 
countries’ associations $5m a year to aid development.
Explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=3d69dcc8-d1de-41a4-b9ec-4d791dd23be1>
Speaking after the meeting, Infantino argued that the expanded tournament will 
increase interest in football worldwide by involving more countries, while not 
burdening players with more matches.

Responding robustly to criticism from the German football association (DFB) 
and European Club Association (ECA), which derided Fifa’s decision as having 
been taken for “political reasons rather than sporting ones,” Infantino said: 
“We are in the 21st century, and we should shape theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> for the 21st century. 
Football is more than Europe and South America; football is global.”

Fifa’s football associations, particularly in Africa and Asia, have 
historically been in favour of the tournament’s expansion, which Infantino said 
will give them all more places in the finals. Precise numbers are yet to be 
decided, as are some of the format’s details, including whether drawn 
first-round group matches could all be decided on penalties. The host for the 
2026 tournament is due to be considered in 2020, with a bid featuring the US, 
either on its own or in conjunction with one or both of Canada and Mexico, the 
overwhelming favourite.

Arguing that qualification for the World Cup provides a key boost to football 
development in smaller countries, Infantino pointed to the advances of Iceland, 
Wales and Hungary in last year’s European Championship as examples of 
“beautiful stories”. European football’s governing body, Uefa, decided in 2008 
to expand its tournament from 16 countries to 24, and Europe’s representatives 
on Fifa’s council supported the World Cup increase, despite the opposition from 
leading clubs.

In a statement the ECA 
<http://www.ecaeurope.com/news/eca-statement-on-world-cup-expansion>, which has 
220 member clubs in 53 European countries, said that the 32 team format is “a 
perfect formula” and suggested that Infantino had in mind electoral support 
from Fifa’s member associations, which each vote for for the president. 
Questioning the “urgency” with which so historic a decision was taken, less 
than a year since Infantino was elected, the ECA said “stakeholders” who will 
be “impacted” had not been properly involved.

“We understand that this decision has been taken based on political reasons 
rather than sporting ones and under considerable political pressure, something 
ECA believes is regrettable,” the statement said.

Infantino declined to respond to reports immediately after Fifa’s announcement 
that the Spanish football league, La Liga, which claimed it was not consulted 
at all, is considering a lawsuit. Last week the DFB president, Reinhard 
Grindel, expressed “immense reservations” about the proposed expansion, arguing 
that allowing 16 more countries to qualify would reduce the quality of the 
football.

Referring to his election last February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/26/gianni-infantino-elected-fifa-president-election>
 on a proposal to expand the World Cup to 40 teams, Infantino said the prime 
objection from European clubs had been to increasing the number of matches 
played, and the tournament’s length. He said Fifa administrators had since 
examined four different formats and found that the 48-team expansion could 
address those concerns.

Money makes the World Cup go round: more teams means more cash | David Conn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/10/world-cup-48-teams-gianni-infantino-fifa-money>
The immediate move to a 32-team knockout competition after the two matches 
played by each country in the first round of 16 groups, means the finalists 
will have played seven games, the same as in the current format. The tournament 
can still be played over 32 days, as it is now. Infantino pointed out that 
Uefa’s expansion lengthened the European Championship by a week, and 
incorporated one more match for the finalists.

Arguing that the quality of football is improving around the world, and 
pointing to the elimination of both England and Italy by Costa Rica in the last 
World Cup in 2014, Infantino said: “Increasing the size of teams which can 
participate will increase the investment in football development, to make sure 
that the teams can qualify.”

The FA’s chief executive, Martin Glenn, had said his preference was “to keep 
the tournament smaller,” but he acknowledged that “smaller countries 
understandably want to be part of the tournament.” The English representative 
on the Fifa council, David Gill, did not attend the meeting because of a 
previously arranged visit to Australia, but given the strength of support for 
the expansion, he had been expected to vote in favour.

In a statement after the decision, the FA said: “We will work with Uefa, Fifa 
and the other European associations to understand how the 48-team Fifa World 
Cup will work. The priority has to be consideration of the potential impact on 
fans, players, teams and leagues, and also recognition of the importance of 
sporting integrity and commercial viability.”
 