
The Fifa executive committee member Michel D’Hooghe has described the £16,000 
watches given to officials at theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> by the Brazilian FA 
as the most “poisonous present” he has ever received.

The world governing body’s medical head was the recipient of one of 65 gift 
bags, each containing a Parmigiani watch, distributed to all 28 members of 
Fifa’s executive committee in Brazil.

Fifa’s ethics committee last month said that accepting such valuable gifts 
contravened its rules and has demanded that all the watches be returned by 24 
October, otherwise it will launch disciplinary proceedings.

D’Hooghe, speaking at the Leaders in Sport conference in London, said: “We 
[Fifa’s executive committee] are absolutely angry on that situation. All my 
colleagues on the executive committee, not one of them needs that watch. I have 
been in football 42 years and received many watches in my career. It is a 
classical present in football, so I did not need that watch.

“They say I received that watch. It is not true. I found that watch in a bag 
that was placed in our room. It’s only after one week that I opened it, I saw 
there was a watch with plastic bracelet and the mark ‘Parmigiano’ (sic). For me 
Parmigiano is a cheese that you put on spaghetti. I thought it was a kind of 
Swatch.”

The 68-year-old Belgian, a member of Fifa’s executive committee since 1988, 
did not appreciate the gift, insisted there was nothing untoward in its 
intentions, but was happy to return it.

“The Brazilians gave a present for their centenary,” he added. “There was 
nothing asked in return. It was not a matter of corrupting. It was a pure 
present. What I did not like is that they gave a present of such value. Please 
never give me such presents again.”

D’Hooghe gave his watch to an acquaintance at the World Cup and has had to ask 
for its return.

“I am to be humiliated towards that person to ask for that watch back,” he 
added. “I asked the person to whom I gave it to give it back.”
 