
'Is that a gun? Are you insane?"

"Give me the purse."

"You wouldn't have the gumption to use it. Besides, I'm your wife."

"I'm going on a road movie. I have to do something to kickstart the drama."

That's the first thing – and the hardest. Nothing like sin to kick off a 
proper road movie holiday. But then you could just lie when US immigration 
asks: "Do you plan to commit gross moral turpitude while on US territory?"

"I'll bet you don't even know what gross moral turpitude is."

"That's true, but this sure ain't family entertainment, honey."

"Why are you talking like that?"

"Jus' gettin' into archetype. I'm the mysterious stranger in blue jeans and 
white T-shirt at a dusty road side."

"I'm definitely coming too. Maybe I could travel out separately, dress like 
Geena Davis, get a car, and you could be waiting …"

"Well ma'am, you'll want the perfect road movie vehicle. We can offer a white 
Dodge Sedan with radio at $50 per day, or there's a black one with a CD player 
for just $5 more."
 Road classic … Monument Vally, Utah. Photograph: Andreas Stirnberg/Getty 
Images 
That choice should be obvious. Take the white sedan and listen to the radio. 
Spend the five bucks on hard liquor. Be unpredictable – except in matters of 
direction. You must Go West. That is a standard operating procedure since the 
original road movie, Homer's Odyssey. And avoid the interstates – motorways, we 
call them. The chances of seeing a hitchhiker are slim, but if you do pick one 
up, watch your back. And never pick up John Goodman – George Clooney's mistake. 
The best routes are through cities with great music clubs, so loop north for 
Chicago or south via New Orleans. Do not go middle – that's banjoes and 
Deliverance.

"Where are we now?"

"This is a mortgage brokers' annual banquet in Texas."

"Huh?"

"Got to be done. This is the middle eight. The bizarre events in the 
mid-section that will catapult our drama forwards to a satisfying climactic 
scene. We have to do something totally off the wall. Now where is the Amish 
weirdo with a bad haircut? Hallelujah! Here he is, needing a lift to Reno."

Does it have to be America? Well, ever since The Grapes of Wrath, the US has 
been the true home of the road movie, but I suppose any old continent will do. 
In India you canbuy a Royal Enfield motorbike <http://lallisingh.com/home.htm>, 
or you could try Buenos Aires to Caracas on a Norton 500. Even Europe has 
managed some action: didn't Matt Damon and Franka Potente drive from Zurich to 
Paris in ... ?

"Do me a favour!"

"OK, you're right. America, here we come."

Hell, this is the Golden Gate Bridge already. What now? If not a death leap, 
then traditionally you must be fundamentally changed and ready to face the 
inner conflicts of your previous existence, or abandon everything and start a 
new life.

"With the bad haircut loon?"

"You'll get a green card."

"Gimme the purse, schmuck."
 