
If Germany beat Brazil tomorrow, three of their players may refuse to 
celebrate until they have checked with Fifa that they cannot be stripped of the 
title. Oliver Neuville, Carsten Ramelow and Bernd Schneider have suffered 
enough last-moment heartbreak in the past couple of months to take nothing for 
granted.

At Bayer Leverkusen that trio saw their dreams die in the cruellest fashion. 
In three devastating weeks they fell from the brink of a treble to a season 
that ended empty-handed. As if throwing away the Bundesliga title was not bad 
enough, they lost the finals of the German Cup and Champions League. Tomorrow 
is their chance finally to gain the winners' medals they so fiercely desire.

Leverkusen are known as the eternal runners-up, but at least someone is bound 
return to the club happy whatever happens tomorrow. The club's central defender 
Lucio will be playing for Brazil and not even Bayer could manufacture a 
scenario where both teams lose.

Michael Ballack, another of their stars last season, managed a pained smile as 
he reflected on the suspension that rules him out of this final. "Maybe it's a 
good omen that I won't be there," the midfielder said wrily. The fewer jinxed 
players in Germany's ranks the more chance they might have.

Parallels between this German team and Leverkusen are not difficult to find. 
Klaus Toppmöller's club exceeded all expectations by reaching the Champions 
League final and found themselves facing the team synonymous with that 
competition, Real Madrid. Now the national side have caused a stir by surviving 
this long and must take on the team that symbolises theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>. They just hope for a 
happier ending.

It is a credit to the Bayer contingent that they have reached this stage after 
ending the season mentally and physically shattered. Leverkusen squandered a 
five-point lead in the championship with three games remaining, lost 4-2 to 
Schalke in the cup final and then went down to Zinedine Zidane's brilliant 
volley in the European Cup. It may not delight them to be opposed again by 
Roberto Carlos, whose cross set up the Frenchman's decisive strike in Glasgow.

But perhaps an ability to react strongly to adversity comes with the 
territory. When Ballack was booked in the semi-final here against South Korea 
and ruled out of the biggest game of his life, he did not wallow in self-pity 
but provided the winning goal.

Rudi Völler's man-management appears also to have played a part. At this 
tournament his thrust has been to remind his players of their strengths. If 
what he said yesterday was anything to go by, his comments to the Bayer bunch 
when they joined the squad in May will have accentuated the positive.

"The Bayer Leverkusen players have had a fantastic, sensational season," he 
stressed. "No other team has been given so much praise and applause on the 
European football scene. That includes in England because they put out both 
Liverpool and Manchester United.

"The way they played was very impressive and earned them deserved plaudits. 
The end of the season was very unfortunate. For the players, needless to say, 
there was initial disappointment. But immediately after that they looked to 
what the future could bring. It was not so difficult for me as coach to focus 
their minds and make them think new thoughts."

As a former player and sports director at Leverkusen, Völler well knows the 
club's tendency to choke at the last minute, a habit that has earned them the 
nickname Bayer Neverkusen. Völler was their technical director in 2000 when a 
squad that included Neuville, Ramelow, Schneider and Ballack blew up 
spectacularly on the final day of the Bundesliga season.

A draw at unfancied Unterhaching would have clinched the championship but 
Leverkusen lost 2-0 and Ballack chipped in with an own-goal. "The first title 
in the 96-year history of the club could be there," Völler had said beforehand, 
but it was not to be.

The former West Germany striker is hardly new to such blows. In the 1986 World 
Cup final he bravely headed an 82nd-minute equaliser against Argentina only to 
see the South Americans recover to win through Jorge Burruchaga.

Four years later, though, Völler got his revenge. Against Argentina in Rome he 
went down in a tackle by Roberto Sensini, allowing Andreas Brehme to score the 
late penalty that won West Germany the title.

If Germany are successful, Schneider, Ramelow, Neuville and Ballack will 
surely spare a thought for their club-mate Jens Nowotny, who sustained an 
injury that ruled him out of the World Cup. The team's goalkeeper Hans-Jörg 
Butt is also in the squad.

Taunted in Germany as bottlers, Leverkusen's players would love to rewrite the 
story tomorrow. Motivation hardly seems necessary for a World Cup final but for 
them there is an added incentive. "You are worth nothing in this society 
without a title," Leverkusen's general manager Reiner Calmund noted recently. 
They could not bear another case of so near and yet so far.

Leverkusen's losses in full

The Bundesliga:  Leverkusen topped the German league from mid-November, but 
fell apart with three games to go. Two defeats left them needing a win plus a 
draw or defeat for Borussia Dortmund on the last day. Leverkusen got their 
victory - but so did Dortmund, winning the league title by a single point.

The German cup: A week later Leverkusen lost the German cup final, 4-2 to 
Schalke. The game saw eight yellow cards, one red and both coaches sent off.

The European Cup: Bad things come in threes and four days later Leverkusen 
lost their first European Cup final 2-1 to Real Madrid, the Brazilian Lucio 
scoring for the losers. Jesus loves you, as his vest revealed - but not quite 
enough, it seems.
 