Who put the festive fixture list into perspective by saying: 'You think about 
soldiers out in Afghanistan or Iraq and they are not with their families and 
they are getting bullets fired at them whereas we are playing in the Premier 
League. It is hard if you have got family and kids and you have to leave them 
on Christmas Day to go and train but listen, we are a small minority of lucky 
players. We have a good life and playing football over Christmas is not the 
worst thing in the world'?  Jamie Carragher  Micah Richards  Mark Noble  John 
Terry Who tweeted this on 25 December 2014: 'Christmas is underrated. Best day 
of the year by far. #Family'?  Jermain Defoe  Michael Owen  Ashley Cole  Victor 
Wanyama Who blamed his wife when it was pointed out to him that he had no blue 
decorations on his Christmas tree but plenty of red ones. 'It was a big mistake 
of my wife,' he said. 'Put her under pressure! Of course I'm blue – I will do 
everything to be successful in this great club, but I like a glass of red wine 
and I don't need to shout that I'm a blue if I drink one.'  Ronald Koeman  Pep 
Guardiola  Roberto Mancini  Roberto Martínez Who said this: 'Presents are 
really for the kids but the best one for me is always to get three points. This 
is the first festive period I have been at Fulham so at training on Christmas 
Day morning I don't know if anyone will be wearing silly party hats or throwing 
around any of the banter but there are plenty of crazy people there. Maybe 
Martin Jol will have a Christmas hat on'?  Steve Marlet  Scott Parker  Danny 
Murphy  John Arne Riise Which Premier League manager had this routine last 
Christmas: 'I always let the families come in and if they want to bring their 
grandchildren or uncle or whoever, they can come in and watch training. We will 
literally come in and have a five-a-side in the morning, go over a couple of 
little bits – nothing is too serious because no one concentrates on Christmas 
Day anyway. Then the players will go home for Christmas lunch with their 
families. It's a nice Christmas Day if you're a footballer, particularly the 
way I do it, because you want to get out of the house at 8.30am to get away 
from the mayhem'?  Alan Pardew  Manuel Pellegrini  Rémi Garde  Mark Hughes Who 
had this to say about the festive calendar in England: 'There is no winter 
break and I think that is the most evil thing of this culture. It is not good 
for English football. It is not good for the clubs or the national team. 
England haven't won anything for how many years? Because all the players are 
exhausted at the end of the season'?  Louis van Gaal  Roberto Mancini  José 
Mourinho  Sven-Göran Eriksson Which referee made this claim earlier this year: 
'A couple of times around about Christmas time in the Premier League players 
will want the time off. They will say a yellow card might suit my purpose. It's 
not what fans want to hear really'?  Steve Bennett  Howard Webb  Mark 
Clattenburg  Mike Dean Who has no time for Christmas dos: 'I’ve always said I 
have no time for Christmas dos. It’s a busy time of year. I don’t know what 
players are thinking of going out on dos at this time. But they went for Sunday 
lunch, not a Christmas party. It was just a few lads having lunch. That’s it'?  
Harry Redknapp  Iain Dowie  Steve Bruce  Tim Sherwood Which Premier League 
manager splashed out on his players last year, saying: 'From the beginning when 
something was wrong I've been saying: "Dilly-ding, dilly-dong, wake up, wake 
up!" So on Christmas Day I bought for all the players and all the staff a 
little bell. It was just a joke'?  Kevin Keegan  Ian Holloway  Alan Pardew  
Claudio Ranieri Who was full of good cheer last Christmas, saying: 'Has anybody 
in this room not a feeling to apologise to me? That's what I am wondering. I 
think I was already sacked. Do you think I want to talk with the media now? I 
am here only because of the Premier League rules. I have to talk with you. 
Merry Christmas. Enjoy the wine and a mince pie. Goodbye'?  Nigel Pearson  Mick 
McCarthy  Paul Lambert  Louis van Gaal Who expressed his love of the busy 
Christmas schedule by saying: 'At Christmas, nobody works in the world and 
everybody watches the Premier League. I would cry if you changed that. It is 
part of English tradition and English football'?  Arsène Wenger  David Moyes  
Alex Ferguson  Tony Pulis Who says he has a lot of love for Sam Allardyce at 
Christmas: 'To Big Sam the Christmas card is not big enough because I really 
enjoy writing a message to a good guy'?  Tony Pulis  José Mourinho  Neil Warnock
 Alex Ferguson  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  