
It has already been a good year for Chelsea. The opening days of 2017 have 
seen both Arsenal and Liverpool unexpectedly drop points in away games they 
might have expected to win comfortably, leaving the Blues basking in the luxury 
of both a game in hand and a five-point lead at the table’s summit. All of this 
has given Antonio Conte a little space in which to relax and perhaps be a 
little bit more imaginative with his January transfer dealings, in an effort to 
ensure that any arrivals will absolutely certainly carry his side heroically 
over the finish line come May. And after all the deep thought, the name 
currently nestling Costa-shot-like in the top corner of his shopping list is 
West Ham’s versatile right-sided sometime-forwardMichail Antonio, seen as just 
the man to improve the side’s energy levels in the second half of the season. 
Though they might just sign Bayern Munich’sArturo Vidal for £36m instead.

Transfer window January 2017: all the latest moves and news – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Everton consider themselves favourites to sign Morgan Schneiderlin, with the 
player apparently keen to move to Merseyside, partly to rejoin his former 
manager Ronald Koeman and partly because they would pay him £115,000 a week. But
Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> are also determined to 
add defensive reinforcements this month, and though Southampton’s Virgil van 
Dijk remains their top choice, he might cost as much as £50m and seems likely 
to join a title-chasing side, and alternatives must thus be found. Chief among 
them, it seems, is Middlesbrough’sBen Gibson, tough-tackling Teessider and 
chairman’s nephew, who the Mirror previously reported had been valued by Uncle 
Steve at as much as £35m. Also on the list is Burnley’sMichael Keane, though 
convincing his current club to sell him may prove troublesome. Talking of 
defences,Manchester City have identified Atlético Madrid’s Lucas Hernández as 
the man to make theirs look halfway competent, and are willing to put up with 
their current rabble until the Frenchman can be tempted over from Spain in the 
summer.

Leicester City’s £7.5m summer signing Bartosz Kapustka turned 20 two days 
before Christmas – the first thing he has had to celebrate in a season in which 
his undoubted footballing highlight was that time he was named as a substitute 
but didn’t get a kick, and that was in the defeat at Hull on the opening day 
back in August. It is the only time he has been in a Premier League matchday 
squad and, though he was also on the bench for an EFL Cup tie againstChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> in September, he has yet to make 
his competitive debut. And now they want to sell him, or at the very least loan 
him out, and replace him with Norwich’sRobbie Brady.

Talking of wingers, Crystal Palace’s Bakary Sako seems certain to be on the 
move, withBirmingham and Derby ready to battle over the £4m-rated wideman. And 
talking of expensive failed summer transfers, Swansea’sBorja Bastón, signed 
from Atlético for £15.5m, could leave on loan, withSevilla interested. And 
Chelsea’s £33m frontman Michy Batshuayi is wanted, also on loan, by Lille.

West Ham have offered £5m for 34-year-old goal machine Jermain Defoe, but 
Sunderland have decided not to let 63.2% of this season’s Premier League 
goals-for tally leave the club so cheaply. Still, the Hammers and Crystal 
Palace could yet return with a more generous offer – Slaven Bilic’s next effort 
is expected to be around £7m – and it would certainly be 
entertaining/depressing/horrific (delete as appropriate) to see how the Black 
Cats fare without him. The Hammers will raise a bit of that money by selling
Ashley Fletcherto Leeds – who are also ready to spend £3.6m on Torino’s Pontus 
Janssen – for £1.5m

Cash by name, cash by nature: Championship-loving German side RB Leipzig are 
apparently ready to spend £6m onNottingham Forest’s 19-year-old midfielder 
Matty Cash, previously linked with Chelsea. Talking of Forest, their captain, 
Henri Lansbury, also seems to be on the move, with his contract being only six 
months from expiry.Aston Villa are the latest side to be linked with a move for 
the former Arsenal midfielder, though Derby and Watford are also sniffing 
hungrily around like so many truffle-hunting hogs.

 * Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window withour Facebook Messenger alerts 
<https://www.messenger.com/login.php?next=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.messenger.com%2Ft%2Ftheguardian%2F%3Fref%3Dfootball_transfers>
. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at the bottom of the screen to receive the latest 
alerts.  