
Some debates will go on and on, arguments that live through the ages and may 
never be solved. Is there life beyond this planet? How did we all get here? 
Where are we all going? Who is Jack the Ripper? How are kicks caused in 
snooker? You might be able to add ‘IsRomelu Lukaku really that good?’ to the 
list.

On the one hand you’ll have people pointing to the healthy chunk of goals he’s 
scored in the last few seasons, achievements augmented by his youth, but others 
might cite his form when he’s not scoring those goals, wandering around like a 
disinterested child pushing some food around their plate that they don’t really 
want. Plenty are in the former camp, though, namely current club Everton and 
former/possibly future club Chelsea. Apparently the Ev are somewhat miffed that 
Antonio Conte’s boys are trying to unsettle the Lukaku despite not actually 
making a bid to take him back to Stamford Bridge yet, and will talk to his 
agent Mino Raiola (whomight be in the north-west for some reason 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/paul-pogba-manchester-united-medical-juventus>
) to get things resolved. Chelsea will apparently throwAsmir Begovic and Loïc 
Remy into any bid to grease the wheels a bit.

José Mourinho: Manchester United can help Paul Pogba become best in world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/paul-pogba-manchester-united-medical-juventus>
Of course Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> will have to 
make some room for Lukaku, and according to your old Currant Bun they’ll do 
this by offeringDiego Costa around to whoever fancies him. The first targets 
are Napoli and Internazionale, both flush with cash after the sale of Gonzalo 
Higuaín and a Chinese takeover, respectively. As an aside, they might want to 
wait until Inter’s new manager is confirmed: word is thatRoberto Mancini has 
been binned, andFrank de Boer is all set to sashay in and take the job. That 
managerial shift might mean a potential Inter move forSamir Nasri, mooted at 
the weekend, will be put on the back burner. And speaking of money washing 
around Milan, AC are in the process of their own Chinese takeover, and will 
reportedly celebrate by splashing £300m cash around the place, starting with a 
£37m move for Real Madrid imp and supposed Arsenal targetIsco.

Back on the ‘big Belgian striker leaving Merseyside’ tip, apparently Christian 
Benteke has agreed personal terms with Besiktas as Liverpool look to get their 
money back on the centre-forward. Jürgen Klopp noted this weekend that they 
weren’t going to just give Benteke away, and whoever wants him will have to 
stump up. Crystal Palace are still lurking, although his agent toldyour old 
pals the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/liverpool-christian-benteke-no-offers?>
 that nothing has been agreed just yet.

As for incomings at Liverpool, they are among a lengthy queue of clubs 
interested in Charlton flyerAdemola Lookman, the winger/forward who should be 
sold by south London’s premier basket case club in the coming weeks. Arsenal, 
Tottenham and Southampton are all also sniffing around, and will have to stump 
up north of £2million to get the 18-year-old. Remember when £2m was a lot of 
money? Remember when things cost less than they do now? Good times. Another 
incomer at Southampton might well beManolo Gabbiadini, the Napoli forward who 
sadly appears not be related to Marco.

Other stuff? Leicester will up their bid for Burnley defender Michael Keane to 
something like...bloody hell...£17m; West Ham are close to bagging Swansea 
strikerAndré Ayew and Olympiakos left-back Arthur Masuaku; West Ham are also 
exploring a loan deal for Real Madrid childMartin Ødegaard; Swansea could spend 
£15m onBorja Bastón, the Atlético Madrid forward. 

Finally, if you’re in the market for an expensive underperforming striker and 
a very expensive underperforming central defender, then Manchester City is the 
place for you. The Manchester Evening News seems to think that bothWilfried Bony
 andEliaquim Mangala are very much not in Pep Guardiola’s plans, and will be 
allowed to move should anyone think to take them. “Bony is a really nice guy 
and he trained really good so I don’t have complaints about him,” said 
Guardiola this weekend. Ouch.
 