
Dimitri Payet is either unavailable or up for sale, depending on which paper 
you read. Slaven Bilic insists, “We’re not going to sell him, not whatsoever,” 
but the Mirror says “it could take £30m to persuade the Hammers to sell” their 
wantaway forward, while the Times seems pretty sure they would let him go for a 
figure between £35m and £40m, well over three times the priceWest Ham paid 
Marseillein 2015. The French side, whom Payet would like to rejoin, have 
already got in touch and suggested they would pay no more than £9m, a 
ludicrously mean pittance for a player of such bountiful gifts (though the 
Telegraph insists Marseille have “bid just under £20m”, still far from 
sufficient), with Chelsea rumoured to be ready to get involved. Coincidentally, 
a similar bid has come in from France for Manchester United outcastMemphis Depay
, fromLyon this time, and they too have been told to go away and think of a 
more serious number, ideally around £15m if you’d be so kind.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in Europe's top five leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Burnley, Crystal Palace and Sunderland are all after Norwich’s Robbie Brady, 
with the Eagles having a £10m bid rejected and the Clarets hoping for better 
with their offer, described in the Mirror as being “worth £13m” and thus 
presumably including a variety of clauses, sub-clauses, addenda and appendices.

It’s just one of several bids flying about from Palace, who are taking a 
scattergun approach to their search for slightly better footballers, notably 
spraying offers for a variety of left-backs around Europe with madcap abandon. 
After Patrick van Aanholt – an initial offer of £6m plus a further £2m in 
add-ons was turned down but a second is expected – and Jeffrey Schlupp – still 
likely to sign, apparently, for £12m –Patrice Evra is their latest target, with 
talks between the 35-year-old and the club already under way. They also want 
Arsenal’sCarl Jenkinson, with Sam Allardyce declaring that “defensively we need 
to secure more players”. But they’re not going to stop there, with club scouts 
in attendance for Senegal’s 2-0 win over Congo on Wednesday to cast their eyes 
over the midfielderPapa N’Diaye. They were presumably impressed, N’Diaye 
scoring the second goal and being named man of the match, though they might 
have competition in the race for the £6m-rated Osmanlispor midfielder: Everton 
were also represented at the game.

And then there’s Stewart Downing, who is expected to be on his way to Selhurst 
Park as soon asBojan Krkic joins Middlesbrough. The England winger has become 
disgruntled by his lack of game time at Boro, and Aitor Karanka has declared 
the rather Bilic-contrasting belief that “any player who is not happy here can 
leave”, though Mark Hughes’s subsequent declaration that Stoke won’t be selling 
anyone for the time being might scupper his plans.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in Europe's top five leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Jack Wilshere is apparently likely to leave Arsenal in the summer, with his 
contract 18 months from expiry and the Gunners having made no effort to extend 
it. Arsène Wenger has possibly been distracted by the chase for Freiburg forward
Maximilian Philipp, aged only 22 and available for as little as £3.4m. 
Meanwhile, in news that doesn’t really fit anywhere else but should probably be 
squeezed in somewhere,Hull are in talks with Porto over 30-year-old midfielder 
Evandro Goebel. 

George Hirst, current Sheffield Wednesday striker and 17-year-old son of 
former Sheffield Wednesday striker David, is wanted by January busybodiesEverton
, who must have found his first and so far only league appearance, for the 
final 13 minutes of a 2-1 defeat at Reading last month, extremely impressive. 
The Toffees are also one of the clubs monitoring theNottingham Forest forward 
Ben Brereton, also 17 and being scouted by Liverpool, Arsenal and Manchester 
United.

Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window with ourFacebook Messenger alerts 
<https://m.me/theguardian?ref=football_transfers>. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at 
the bottom of the screen to receive the latest alerts.
 