
Granit Xhaka, Fernando and Guardian subeditors let out knowing sighs of 
frustration on Wednesday morning after rumours emerged that both Arsenal and 
Manchester City are interested in PSG’s defensive midfielderGrzegorz Krychowiak
. The Poland international only moved into his swish Paris Pad in the summer, 
following his €30m move from Sevilla, but both Pep Guardiola and Arsène Wenger 
are already eager to travel first-class on the Eurostar with a leather-bound 
briefcase full of bread and honey to see what happens, according to the Sun.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in Europe's top five leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Krychowiak hasn’t started a league game in a month for PSG, with oil tanker 
Thiago Motta clogging up the first XI with his dodgy knees and deceptively 
wand-like left foot. Krychowiak would have so such obstacles at Manchester 
City, where Fernandinho is their only world-class defensive midfielder (when 
he’s not suspended) and at Arsenal, where everyone is either injured or at the 
Africa Cup of Nations. Apart from Xhaka. £35m should do it, and for anyone else 
out there (West Ham), PSG’sJese is yours for just another £20m.

You might think that Liverpool are in the market for a left-back, or a 
centre-back, or somebody to finally give Lucas Leiva the conviction to sling 
his hook, but nope, Liverpool are interested in a summer move for an attacking 
midfielder from Germany.Julian Brandt is the latest name to pass these pages – 
the 20-year-old already a veteran of four seasons of Champions League at 
Wolfsburg and now Bayer Leverkusen. This year he has been in modest form, 
scoring thrice in 24 games for club and country, but is well known to Jürgen 
Klopp as well as Bayern Munich, who are also said to be monitoring both the 
£20m-rated Brandt and Liverpool’s lingering gaze.

One might expect Sam Allardyce to take Christian Benteke off penalty kicks 
rather than sell him, or perhaps work on Christian Benteke’s defending from 
corners rather than sell him, but sell Crystal Palace’s most important striker 
is apparently what Big Sam is prepared to do if a big-money move comes in from 
China. Reports in Belgium reveal five of their native players have been subject 
to an offer from the East, which also number Manchester United’sMarouane 
Fellainiand Napoli’s Dries Mertens, and Benteke’s sale could be used to fund 
Allardyce’s moves for Leicester City’sJeffrey Schlupp, Norwich’s Robbie Brady 
and Southampton wantawayJosé Fonte. Palace saw a bid of £9.5m for Schlupp 
rejected, but are expected to return with £12m in a wheelbarrow.

Swansea want Mamadou Sakho on loan, but Liverpool seem to think that they can 
secure a permanent £20m transfer for a player who hasn’t played first-team 
football in nine months. Paul Clement will be hoping that the lure of a 
relegation battle and nights out on Wind Street can tempt the former PSG 
captain, now 26, to convince his current employers otherwise. They may have to 
fight off interest from Sevilla, Southampton and Galatasaray.

More Turkish whispers now, with Manchester City’s Wilfried Bony, who is on 
loan at Stoke, reportedly lined up as Besiktas’s No1 target, after a move for
Samuel Eto’ofell through. Bony has struggled for consistent form and is 
currently out at the Africa Cup of Nations with Ivory Coast.

News: Brentford have signed Garrincha’s grandson, the Swedish youth 
internationalHenke Johansson. Wild speculation: Johansson’s father may or may 
not have been conceived at the 1958 World Cup.

• Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window with ourFacebook Messenger alerts 
<https://www.messenger.com/login.php?next=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.messenger.com%2Ft%2Ftheguardian%2F%3Fref%3Dfootball_transfers>
. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at the bottom of the screen to receive the latest 
alerts.
 