 A technical error last week led to the Review section losing the last line of 
text on each leg of the spy feature 'From Finchley With Love'. Apologies. The 
full text of the piece is available on our website,www.observer.co.uk 
<http://www.observer.co.uk> including the information that David Burke's book, 
The Spy Who Came in From the Co-op, will be published by Bloomsbury early next 
year.
Heavy editing and an unfortunate choice of headline caused an item on how 
couples work together to convey a misleading and negative impression of the 
lifestyle of architects Patrick Theis and Soraya Khan. The heading 'We are 
quite foul to each other sometimes' (News, 19 June) related to a unique 
situation last year where the couple resigned from a particular project to 
protect their relationship and not, as we maintained, because of the strains of 
buying and renovating their house, which, in any case, was 16 years ago. The 
article was also incorrect to state that the couple work from home; they have 
had an office in Shoreditch for the past five years. Apologies.

Our Ethical Living feature 'Shoal searching' (Observer Magazine, 19 June) said 
the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) produced The Good Fish Guide. The guide is 
actually produced by the Marine Conservation Society in book, booklet and 
internet form and provides guidance to consumers on which items they should 
purchase or avoid. The Good Fish Guide is available atwww.fishonline.org 
<http://www.fishonline.org> The website for the Marine Conservation Society is 
www.mcsuk.org <http://www.mcsuk.org/>

Printing difficulties last week meant that a larger than normal area of the 
country received early editions of the paper. These lacked some later sports 
results. Apologies to disappointed readers.

It is our policy to correct mistakes as soon as possible. Write to Stephen 
Pritchard, Readers' Editor, The Observer, 3-7 Herbal Hill, London EC1R 5EJ, tel 
020 7713 4656 or emailreader@observer.co.uk <mailto:reader@observer.co.uk>
 