
Freddie Gibbs, On tour

Freddie Gibbs sounds like the name of someone who used to do over post offices 
in the 50s – and indeed his approach is very much old school gangster. Angelic 
of appearance, on record Gary, Indiana’s Gibbs is all street. Not for him 
relaxing in a hot tub with a gold telephone and a nice car. With Gibbs (as to a 
degree is true of fellow LA resident Schoolboy Q), his records suggest 
drug-dealing and violence provide their own satisfaction. A big hit when one of 
its songs appeared on Grand Theft Auto, his 2014 album Piñata finds him 
intelligently paired with Stones Throw producer Madlib. Gibbs’s flow is gruff 
but agile and Madlib’s soulful productions provide a great contrast to his 
subject and delivery.

O2 ABC2, Glasgow, Sat; XOYO, EC2, Sun; Komedia, Brighton, Mon; The Institute, 
Birmingham, Tue; Deaf Institute, Manchester, Wed; Twisted Pepper, Dublin, Thu

JR

Gruff Rhys, On tour

As great as he obviously is performing with regular collaborators (Neon Neon 
or Super Furry Animals, say), singerGruff Rhys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gruff-rhys> is probably best on his own. 
Rhys has historically devised interesting ways to work solo – such as sampling 
his voice – but on this occasion we’ll be witnessing the fruits of his 
“investigative concert tour” of America, during which he researched his 
ancestor John Evans, who left Wales for Baltimore in search of a Welsh-speaking 
Native American tribe. The resulting multi-platform project (film, app, album, 
show) is called American Interior and is growing cumulatively.

End Of The Road Festival, Salisbury, Sat; Mareel, Lerwick, Thu; O2 ABC, 
Glasgow, Fri; touring to 21 Sep

JR

Festival No 6, Portmeirion

Much like the character from the cult 60s TV show The Prisoner (who gives his 
name to this quirky addition to the calendar), this event can’t escape its 
idyllic Portmeirion environment. However, rather than any sinister overtones, 
here that means an event in which music is important, but in which the location 
is also a crucial part of the delights on offer. In one strand of festival 
activity there’s a tribute to the poet Dylan Thomas with contributions from 
Rhys Ifans, talks by such musical dignitaries as Julian Cope and Joe Boyd (who 
also DJs). On the music stages, meanwhile, there are headlining turns from 
traditional broadsheet favourites Pet Shop Boys and Beck, while Peter Hook’s 
band The Light perform the New Order albums Brotherhood and Low-Life. The 
dancier elements – provided by James Holden, Jon Hopkins and Todd Terje – may 
be where the fun ultimately lies.

Portmeirion, Fri to 7 Sep

JR

St John Sessions, London

African-American artist Lonnie Holley has played a handful of shows in the UK 
in the past few years following two releases on curio-heavy label Dust To 
Digital, and this week he performs under the vaulted ceilings of St John at 
Hackney, where his emotive sociopolitical songs and found poetry will resonate 
that little bit more. Also playing, and in sharp contrast to Holley, who builds 
sculptures from collaged rubbish and household objects, is Holly Herndon (who 
also plays at Wysing Arts Centre’s Space-Time: The Future festival). Herndon 
conjures a vision of a future that’s already here in our cloud drives and 
fibre-optic networks, using the internal sounds of her laptop, the data it 
collects and processed voice. Also in support is Astor, AKA Penultimate Press 
label head Mark Harwood, weaving together field recordings, electronics and 
piano.

St John At Hackney Church, E5, Wed

JA

John Etheridge’s Presents, London

Observer critic Dave Gelly once said that if the guitarist John Etheridge 
weren’t so brilliant, he might be more famous. Etheridge’s bewildering multiple 
talents have made him virtually unbrandable over the years, all the way back to 
his emergence in the 70s with two utterly contrasting bands: iconic British 
art-rockers Soft Machine, and French violinist Stéphane Grappelli’s urbanely 
swinging tribute group celebrating Django Reinhardt. His two dates with 
open-minded classical guitarist John Williams at the festival he curates every 
year stand out, but other highlights include soul-steeped singer Liane Carroll 
(Thu) and the Soft Machine Legacy band (Fri).

Pizza Express Jazz Club, W1, Tue to 6 Sep

JF

Proms Saturday Matinee 3, London

The last two Prom Saturday matinees are 80th-birthday celebrations for this 
country’s greatest living composers:Peter Maxwell Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/peter-maxwell-davies> and Harrison 
Birtwistle. Davies has devised the programme – his tribute from the London 
Sinfonietta – which is conducted by Sian Edwards and includes two of his 
greatest works. The 1966 monodrama Revelation And Fall, a setting of texts by 
the German poet Georg Trakl, was Davies’s breakthrough work of the decade. It 
was the piece that made his music-theatre masterpieces such as Eight Songs For 
A Mad King possible later in the 60s, the key that unlocked a whole world of 
expressionist extremes that were latent in his music up to that point. And A 
Mirror Of Whitening Light, composed for the London Sinfonietta 11 years later, 
was one of the pieces that defined his later iridescent sound world. 

Cadogan Hall, SW1, Sat

AC
 