
BBC Proms 2016: Verdi Requiem 
7.30pm, BBC4

Anyone who doesn’t already know about the screaming heavy metal that is the 
Dies Irae section of this Proms staple would be well advised to check it out. 
Scholars who knew about it before hearing it on film trailers can learn more 
from a chat with conductor Marin Alsop. The Orchestra of the Age of 
Enlightenment perform with the BBCProms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms> Youth Choir and soloists Tamara 
Wilson, Alisa Kolosova, Michael Fabiano and Morris Robinson.John Robinson

Countrywise: Guide to Britain 
8pm, ITV

This gentle series is ITV’s answer to Countryfile – and a decent answer it is, 
too, featuring bucolic scenes held together by Ben Fogle’s inimitable, plummy 
charm. As it begins a new spinoff, he’s on the Isles of Scilly, presenting what 
is effectively a tourism advert for this verdant, virtually crime-free corner 
of Britain. Elsewhere, Liz Bonnin explores Dorset’s Jurassic coast and Victoria 
Pendleton gets horsey at Holkham Sands in Norfolk.Hannah J Davies

Would I Lie to You? 
8.30pm, BBC1

The Rob Brydon-helmed panel show is on its 10th series now, and it has endured 
for a reason: it’s reliably good – albeit formulaic – fun, thanks to the 
counterintuitive chemistry of David Mitchell and Lee Mack, plus the well-chosen 
guests. Tonight’s episode features the irascible Michael Smiley, the mordant 
Diane Morgan, the always‑inspired Bob Mortimer (look out for a marvellous riff 
on early 1980s haircuts) and the game, but mildly bewildered, Nadiya Hussain.
Phil Harrison

We Love Sitcom 
9pm, BBC1

With the Beeb currently, and in some cases ill‑advisedly, reworking classic 
sitcoms, here’s a tie-in quiz show hosted by Ben Miller in which celebrity 
funny folk test their knowledge of the genre that made them famous. Jennifer 
Saunders, Stephen Mangan, Jessica Hynes and Lee Mack are among the contestants. 
As Pointless fans will attest, however, celebrities are useless at quizzes – 
none of the luminaries get the Reg Varney question, an old pub quiz chestnut.
David Stubbs

Joanna Lumley’s Japan 
9pm, ITV

Silky of voice and enthusiastic of spirit, Joanna Lumley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joanna-lumley> is the perfect tour guide 
as she travels 2,000 miles across Japan. This week, she’s in the northern 
island of Hokkaido before heading to Sapporo, where the annual snow festival is 
in full swing. She charms the locals, talks to monkeys and hugs an ice 
sculpture. However, one of the most poignant moments comes when she meets a man 
who stayed in Fukushima, the site of the devastated nuclear power plant, to 
look after pets.Hannah Verdier

The Strain 
9pm, W

Series three of the horror drama co-created by Guillermo del Toro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guillermodeltoro>. The strigoi, a vampire 
herd created during an epic underworld disagreement, are rampant in New York 
and evolving into smarter predators – another bad day for alcoholic 
epidemiologist Eph (Corey Stoll) and pest exterminator Fet (Kevin Durand), 
humanity’s best hopes. As good-but-grumpy ghoul Quinlan, Rupert Penry-Jones 
offers a masterclass in big speeches delivered through restrictive prosthetics.
Jack Seale

The Roast of Rob Lowe 
10pm, Comedy Central

After holding Justin Bieber’s feet to the fire last year, Comedy Central 
targets another perpetually boyish celebrity: Wayne’s World and West Wing star
Rob Lowe <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/rob-lowe>. The roasters lining up 
to launch near-the-knuckle putdowns at the handsome actor who practically 
invented the sex tape include David Spade, former Karate Kid Ralph Macchio, 
quarterback Peyton Manning, Bo Derek and – perhaps weirdest of all – our own 
Jimmy Carr.Graeme Virtue

Film choice

Steve Jobs (Danny Boyle, 2015) Friday, 1.45pm, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere

Following the success of his Mark Zuckerberg biopic, The Social Network, Aaron 
Sorkin penned this portrait of another hi-tech/commercial genius – the 
Apple-designer-cum-cult-hero of the title. It’s arranged into three acts, 
concerning the fraught launches of the original Apple Mac in 1984, the dodgy 
NeXT computer in 1988 and the beautiful iMac of 1998. Along with the tour de 
force of screenwriting, Michael Fassbender is a striking mix of technical 
wizardry, rage and omniscience in the lead role.Paul Howlett

Frances Ha (Noah Baumbach, 2012) 11.05pm, BBC2

After working together on Greenberg, director Baumbach and star Greta Gerwig 
co-wrote this portrait of a 27-year-old dancer. Shifting from the Brooklyn 
apartment she shares with former college friend Sophie (Mickey Sumner), Frances 
(Gerwig) goes on a quest for unspecified fulfilment. Shot in black and white, 
it’s a funny, touching, angsty journey, even if Frances can be infuriatingly 
self-deceptive.PH

Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy (Tomas Alfredson, 2011) 11.10pm, Film4

John le Carré’s old-school spy George Smiley gets a top-class remake from 
Alfredson. Cold-war Britain is powerfully evoked in all its down-at-heel detail 
as Smiley (Gary Oldman) negotiates a mind-bogglingly complex plot of double- 
and triple-cross. Among the superb cast are Colin Firth, Benedict Cumberbatch 
and Tom Hardy.PH

Live sport

Paralympics 2016 Day two from Rio includes the debut of Sophie Thornhill. 
Later, Hannah Cockroft makes her 2016 bow, and there’s action in the pool and 
the velodrome. 1pm, Channel 4

Tennis: the US Open Including the mixed doubles final. 5pm, Eurosport 1

Championship football: Reading v Ipswich Town Action from the Madejski 
Stadium. 7.30pm, Sky Sports 1
 