
Tom Wolfe <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tomwolfe> is the laureate of 
American pop journalism. "The Kandy Kolored Tangerine Flake Streamline Baby," a 
collection of newspaper and magazine articles, published in 1966, was a best 
seller in the United States and won high critical acclaim and many imitators on 
this side of the Atlantic. Now comes his first full-length book, a best seller 
in America, but received here so far with cries ofDéjà Lu!

But it has not really been read before; some critics merely have trouble in 
seeing the message through the thicket of Wolfe's idiosyncratic style. The book 
is about Ken Kesey, the American writer, author of the highly successful 
peyote-inspired novel and Broadway play "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest," who 
while living the successful suburban bohemian life in Stanford, California, 
volunteered for $75 a day to be an experimental subject for "psychomimetic" 
drugs and found that LSD made him "see into people."

That was in 1959, and the experience, the LSD, the mescaline, the peyote, the 
IT-290, and the morning-glory seeds seemed to Kesey to open hidden doors of the 
mind. He gave up writing; he wanted to spread the psychedelic word and deed. In 
1963 with the money from his Broadway play he bought a new place in La Honda, 
California, and invited his friends out to explore ". . . a considerable new 
message . . the blissful counterstroke." An LSD community called the Merry 
Pranksters was formed.

In 1964 he bought a bus, painted it yellow and orange, blue and red, called it 
"Furthur" (sic), and set off East to the New York World's Fair in it, sipping 
LSD (acid) laced orange juice (Kool-Aid), making a 40-hour-long film of what 
they were doing all the way across Arizona and Texas and the Deep South. This 
and other similar adventures are the subject of Wolfe's book. Wolfe sees it and 
sets it down in various ways. There is the story of Kesey, the stories of the 
other people, the story of their effect on music, society, and the law; the 
parallel of this group and their structure and philosophy to a religious 
movement; the whole pattern of American society is related to Kesey and his 
Merry Pranksters.

The structure of the book is complex; the style is a triumph of stylistic art, 
in the old manner of setting style to subject. It should not be dismissed as 
sociological fashion writing, neither should it be put aside as yesterday's 
thing. What Wolfe is talking about is the fundamental way in which American 
society changed in the mid-1960s. Nobody before had attempted to explain so 
fully the how and why of the hallucinogens with such art and such painstaking 
care to detail and social accuracy. The book, for example, explains the sudden 
change of the Beatles' music; they had absorbed the Californian acid rock 
music. On a more serious level no one else has attempted such a serious 
appraisal of what it is about LSD which makes the experience seem so valuable 
yet be so incommunicable.

The style uses the repetition and the compressed adjectival forms of a poem, 
and the reader is pleasantly caught up in the internal rhythms. For all its 
seeming superabundance of punctuation and participles, every word seems placed 
with a care and a skill of contrivance which should command respect. The 
subject is a seemingly esoteric one, many of the details are blood chilling and 
nauseating, but the book is undeniably a major journalistic contribution to the 
future analysis of our own and America's strange period of this century.

The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test by Tom Wolfe (Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 42s).
 