
Salvador Dalí’s late-life foray into cookbook writing would not be to 
everyone’s tastes, even the artist himself acknowledged. Dieters and the 
health-conscious, especially, he warned away. “Close this book at once,” he 
orders in the introduction toLes Dîners de Gala from 1973, when he was 68. “It 
is too lively, too aggressive and far too impertinent for you.”

Yes, Dalí <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/dali>, the surrealist 
master, once compiled a cookbook and it was the culmination of a lifelong 
fascination with food. As a child, he determined he would be a chef and, even 
after he chose to pursue art as his career, the edible would be a recurring 
feature. On arrival in New York in 1934, he waved a two-metre-long baguette at 
paparazzi. He loved the “logarithmic curve” of cauliflowers, and in December 
1955, drove from Spain to Paris in a white Rolls-Royce Phantom II jammed with 
500kg of the brassica.

It wasn’t just stunts: food was a leitmotif in Dalí’s painting. In 1941, he 
createdSoft Self-Portrait with Grilled Bacon, complete with curly moustache and 
a rasher of pig that reminded him of his breakfasts at the St Regis Hotel in 
New York. He painted his beloved wife and muse Gala with a couple of gnawed 
lamb chops on her shoulder in 1934. About this work, Dalí later revealed: “My 
edible, intestinal and digestive representations at this period assumed and 
increasingly insistent character. I wanted to eat everything, and I planned the 
building of a large table made entirely of hard-boiled egg so that it could be 
eaten.”

There are no egg tables in Les Dîners de Gala, republished now by Taschen, but 
there are many irresistible flights of fancy. Dalí’s dinner parties were 
legendary: he would bring in the greatest chefs of the age; guests were 
required to wear elaborate costumes. Wild animals – including Babou, Dalí’s pet 
ocelot – roamed freely around the table.

More than 100 of the recipes from these occasions are printed in Les Dîners de 
Gala. Most are the work of an unknown chef “whising [sic] to remain in the most 
secret anonymity”, but credit is given to Parisian stalwarts such as Lasserre, 
Maxim’s and La Tour d’Argent. Some are strange for sure (bush of crayfish in 
Viking herbs, for example, or frog pasties) but many are realisable by the 
ambitious home cook. The lesson ofLes Dîners de Gala is that anything goes. 
Anything, that is, except spinach, “that detestable degrading vegetable”. “If I 
hate that,” Dalí writes, “it is because it is shapeless, like Liberty.”

Les Dîners de Gala by Salvador Dalí (Taschen, £44.99). Click here to buy a 
copy for £36.89 from the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dala.html>
 