
Name: Fruit machines.

Age: 125-ish.

Ish? Some authorities date the birth of slot machines to New York in 1891, 
with a patent from the Brooklyn-based company Sittman & Pitt. But there were 
rudimentary slot machines around in the 1880s.

How fascinating. I’ve always wondered about the history of slot machines. Do 
go on.Charles Fey developed the three-reel slot machine, which became the 
industry standard, in San Francisco in the 1890s. California promptly banned 
them because of the state’s anti-gambling laws, but the rest of the world 
became addicted.

Why are they called fruit machines? In some states where they were banned, 
owners of the machines doled out fruit-flavoured chewing gum as prizes instead 
of money. The fruit symbols made their way on to the reels on the machines, and 
the rest is ...

History? Well, misspent youth, anyway.

Life is just a bowl of cherries. Not to mention oranges, lemons, bananas and 
watermelons.

I presume there is a point to your disquisition on fruit machines. The salad 
days are over!

You seem to be spinning this out with feeble puns. Sorry, I’ll come to the 
point. The era of spinning, holding and nudging is drawing to a close. With 
usage falling,pubs are junking their fruit machines 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/dcb2154a-7bfd-11e6-b837-eb4b4333ee43.html?siteedition=uk#axzz4KsKWqQJa>
.

Why? Many reasons, according to industry watchers. The stakes (max £1 in pubs) 
are too small for hardcore gamblers, who prefer fixed-odds betting terminals in 
bookmakers (max stake £100)where they can blow their week’s wages in minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gambling-machines-tax-hikes-fixed-odds-betting-terminals>
. With profits from the machines falling, pubs prefer to put in tables where 
they can serve sea bass drizzled in balsamic for £16.95. And there are fewer 
pubs anyway.

What about quiz machines? Good question. They haven’t, as some expected, been 
killed off by Google because they can demand instant answers that don’t allow 
time for search engines to be used. But the imposition of a tax on “games of 
skill” has reduced their profitability, and in any case nerds now get their 
quiz kicks from games on smartphones.

Frequently confused with: One-armed bandits, an old, jocular name for the same 
type of machine.

Do say: “It’s a sad day for pub bores and youthful potential gambling addicts.”

Don’t say: “I quite like sea bass.”
 