
With a counter loaded with empanadas, it looks just like a typical Argentinian 
bakery. The sugar-glazed, vanilla-tinged medialunas taste just like a typical 
Argentinian croissant. In fact, I only become sure that I haven't been 
transported to the shores of the River Plate when the owner's daughter, 
Gabriela, starts telling me about their clientele. "Our regulars? Well, they 
tend to come from Cuba, Puerto Rico, Venezuela … " her list trails on and on.

But no, this isn't Buenos Aires, Argentina; this is Little Buenos Aires, 
Miami. This enclave in North Miami Beach is known for its Argentinian 
population, and here, among the steakhouses,Buenos Aires Bakery (7134 Collins 
Avenue) has become a neighbourhood favourite. Gabriela's parents set up the 
business in the 70s, working so hard they sometimes slept on the bakery floor 
and, 40 years later, they have just opened their second branch. "And in this 
current economy!" says Gabriela proudly.

In Miami, everyone has a story. It's small wonder that author Tom Wolfe has 
chosen it as the setting for his next eagerly awaited epic, Back to Blood. Due 
out in 2012, the novel is already hyped as the country's ultimate 21st-century 
portrait, with publishers billing Miami as the place "where America's future 
has arrived first".

If Wolfe can claim Miami's multicultural immigration is "exciting" for 
literature, then it's certainly exciting for travellers. Where else can you 
travel the whole of Latin America and the Caribbean in one place, and get near 
year-round sunshine to boot?

I was told Buenos Aires Bakery is a fruitful place to start exploring Miami's 
Latin cultures and, true enough, this stretch of palm-lined Collins Avenue is 
packed with restaurants representing many of the city's key groups. Within 
minutes I've ticked off Brazil, Peru, Cuba and Mexico, while a cop in 
sunglasses driving past on a motorbike plants us firmly in the States.

Without a Taco Bell in sight, this is the place to find real Latin American 
fast food. With walls lined with Montevideo memorabilia,El Rey del Chivito 
(6987 Collins Avenue,elreydelchivito.com <http://www.elreydelchivito.com>) is a 
Uruguayan restaurant that pays homage to the country's ability to pack steak, 
ham, fried egg, cheese, tomato, lettuce and mayo into one sandwich: the famous, 
belt-bustingchivito. A couple of doors down and styled like a cartoon diner, La 
Perrada de Edgar (6976 Collins Avenue) celebrates the Colombian love of 
multiple hotdog toppings.

The next day, something lighter is definitely required, so I hop over the 
causeway that separates Miami Beach and Miami. Over in Miami you find the 
downtown skyscrapers that are home to the Latin American banks, plus new condo 
buildings to entice people to live as well as work here.

Championing the bid to inject more life into downtown is Peruvian restaurant 
Cvi.Che 105 (105 NE 3rd Avenue, ceviche105.com <http://ceviche105.com>), which 
has an interesting mix of a slick, industrial interior and one of the most 
enthusiastically composed menu I've ever seen. Raw fish in a huancaina sauce 
(chilli, cream and cheese) promises to "take you to ecstasy" and the virginal 
corvina in "holy cream" will put "nirvana on the palate". Unsure I can take 
this much enlightenment on a Monday afternoon, I stick with a ceviche, a 
traditional mix of raw fish marinated in citrus. It has a split of tomato and 
cream-based sauces to make it look like the Peruvian flag. Well, I'd expect 
nothing less.

Head chef Juan Chipoco tells me how his father died when he was five and left 
him heading the household as the oldest of four brothers. After moving to 
Miami, he worked his way up from a busboy. A group of chefs known as the Mango 
Gang first brought the idea of upmarket nuevo Latino cuisine to Miami tables in 
the 1980s. These unstoppable welders of fusion food did such a convincing job 
that today you can barely see where one cuisine ends and the other begins. "The 
ingredients and dishes have just worked themselves into the general restaurant 
vocabulary," says a blogger known as Frodnesor, who writes
foodforthoughtmiami.com <http://www.foodforthoughtmiami.com>. He cites the new 
restaurant by Mango Gang cofounder, Norman Van Aken, as the perfect example. "
Norman's 180[180 Aragon Ave, normans180.com <http://www.normans180.com>] has an 
arepa with chicharrones and Salvadoran crema on the menu amid pizzas and 
burgers. It's all just part of the culinary lexicon now."

Indeed, Miami's identity is an increasingly complex one. Earlier this year, 
the Miami Herald reported that many of the old-guard Cuban places are being 
sold to new Central American immigrants, who are mixing their own influences 
into well-worn recipes.

As for the Cubans, they remain the dominant immigrant group here, and they are 
the only ones who have really managed to make their mark on tourism. I complete 
the typical circuit before deciding to move on to an immigrant community that 
gets far less attention: Little Haiti.
 Tap Tap, Miami. Photograph: Kristen Taylor/Flickr 
Miami has the biggest Haitian community outside the island itself. As you move 
into their neighbourhood, billboards suddenly start appearing with Creole 
slogans and the mini high street is dotted with botánicas (voodoo shops). An 
insight into all aspects of the culture can be found at the Haitian Heritage 
Museum (haitianheritagemuseum.org <http://www.haitianheritagemuseum.org>) or, 
for informal education, there's nowhere better thanTap Tap restaurant.

Tap Tap (819 5th Street, taptaprestaurant.com <http://www.taptaprestaurant.com>
) is just a few minutes' walk from South Beach, but has more personality than 
most of the beachfront bars put together. Along with its brightly coloured 
murals, mosaics and flags, which were created by invited Haitian artists, it is 
renowned for its goat (flown in from California every week) and flavourful 
marinades.

The Haitian-American co-owner Gary Sanon-Jules says the 16-year-old restaurant 
has "really exposed a culture" in these parts. After last January's earthquake, 
patrons raised $50,000, and since then Gary has noticed a 40% increase in 
custom, suggesting people's heightened awareness of the island didn't vanish 
along with the news crews.

Word has also spread about its live music. I arrive to catch Manno Charlemagne 
<http://www.myspace.com/mannomyspace>, one of the country's most popular 
political folk musicians who was once mayor of Port-au-Prince. "I was put into 
power by my guitar," he tells me, before admitting he left politics because he 
was disillusioned by the corruption. He now has a twice-weekly residency at Tap 
Tap.

As Manno makes his way to the mic and Gary mingles with the regulars (30% 
Haitian, 70% from all over), I sit back and take a sip of my mojito. Gary has 
already informed me that this is not just any mojito, but one made from Haitian 
Barbancourt rum, which was voted the best in Miami by the NBC TV network. A 
perfect Cuban cocktail with a Haitian twist? This could be seamless fusion 
culture at its smoothest. In the interests of intercultural relations, I might 
just have to have another.

• Virgin Atlantic (virgin-atlantic.com 
<http://www.virgin-atlantic.com/en/gb/index.jsp>) flies from Heathrow to Miami 
from around £435 return. The Miami River Inn (+1 305 325 0045,miamiriverinn.com 
<http://www.miamiriverinn.com>, doubles from $89 a night) claims to be the 
city's only B&B. With its floral bedspreads and friendly welcome, it feels like 
grandma's house in the tropics. Motel Blu at 7700 Biscayne Boulevard (+1 305 
757 8451,motelblu.com <http://motelblu.com>, doubles from $48) is basic, but 
the most interesting part – and worth a trip for non-guests – is the funky 
adjoining diner, Red Light (redlightmiami.com <http://www.redlightmiami.com>). 
New developments along this stretch of the boulevard are giving it potential, 
but be warned you will be a little ahead of your time, so don't roam far at 
night
 