
Some of the world's rarest animals were being evacuated from their habitats in 
the Galapagos archipelago last night as an international clear-up team failed 
to contain a 150,000 gallon spillage of diesel oil which is advancing to new 
islands.

Three days after the Ecuadorean tanker Jessica started leaking oil, the slick 
covers more than 300 square kilometres within one of the most fragile and 
untouched marine ecosystems in the world. it threatens the islands' unique 
species of plants and animals that were crucial in helping Charles Darwin 
develop his theory of evolution when he visited the Galapagos in 1835.

Ecuador's environment minister said the accident had already caused "extremely 
severe" environmental damage. David Bellamy, president of the Galapagos 
Foundation, told Radio 4's The World at One: "Here you have a unique series of 
ecosystems which are under immense pressure anyway. It is a catastrophe."

Last night the spillage was due to reach Espanola island, the southernmost tip 
of the archipelago, 600 miles west of the mainland. The oil had already spread 
west to Santa Fe island, home to the Santa Fe land iguana, and was continuing 
north to the central Santa Cruz island.

The bay of San Cristobal island, where the Jessica ran aground last Tuesday, 
was described as "a black pond" by Stalin Suarez, of the Galapagos national 
park's crisis team.

"It's a pretty big spill," he said. "It's sad if it reaches any island. We are 
trying to see in what way we can make the impact the minimum."

A US coastguard team has joined the Ecuadorean operation and on Sunday started 
a round-the-clock pump-out of the remaining 100,000 gallons still in the 
tanker. At least 31,000 gallons has been cleared, according to Mr Suarez. 
Captain Edwin Stanton said he would try to transfer the fuel into empty tanks 
within the ship that are still intact.

Pressure from the surf, however, was creating new fissures and speeding up the 
leak. A strong tide could cause the tanker to break apart.

"The bottom line is once oil gets out of a ship its virtually impossible to 
remove it or contain it on the ocean," Capt Stanton said. More than 150 
environmentalists, park rangers and even tourists were preparing to alleviate 
the potential effects on wildlife.Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals> are being evacuated from coastal 
areas to prevent them being harmed. Even though the Galapagos is best known for 
reptiles such as the giant tortoise, it contains 28 unique bird species which 
are more susceptible to oil slicks. Volunteers were being sent to beaches to 
bring affected birds to veterinary stations. By last night only a small number 
of boobies, pelicans and sealions had been reached by the oil.

Paola Diaz, of the Charles Darwin Centre on Santa Cruz island, said 
recuperation priority would be given to the lava gull, the rarest gull in the 
world, baby sealions and petrels.

The long-term danger is that the fuel will sink to the ocean floor, destroying 
algae vital to the food chain, threatening marine iguanas, sharks, birds and 
other species.

The islands are important because their remoteness and barrenness has given 
rise to many species not found anywhere else. Almost all the reptiles, half the 
plants and a quarter of the species of fish are unique.

The oil spills are just the latest problems facing the UN world heritage site. 
Large commercial fishing boats are now invading the waters of the 7m-acre 
Galapagos marine reserve, taking thousands of tons of fish illegally.

In the past few weeks, lawless bands of Ecuadorean fishermen have violently 
attacked conservation installations, ransacked municipal offices, torched a 
national park vehicle, harassed tourist groups and taken rare captive-bred 
giant tortoises hostage, in an attempt to gain higher quotas.

The Jessica was on a routine trip to service a private tour boat operator and 
Petrocomercial, an arm of the state oil company that provides the islands with 
fuel, when it ran aground 500 metres off San Cristobal island. A pipe in the 
ship's marine room burst on Friday, starting the leak.
 