
Garbiñe Muguruza is into her first French Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/frenchopen> final after beating Australia’s 
No21 seed Sam Stosur 6-2, 6-4 at Roland Garros on Friday.

The 22-year-old, runner-up at Wimbledon last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/11/serena-williams-beats-garbine-muguruza-wimbledon-grand-slam>
, has become the first Spanish woman to reach the showpiece final since 
Conchita Martínez in 2000.

Muguruza, the No4 seed, made the most of Stosur’s mediocre first serve on 
Court Suzanne Lenglen to race to a 4-0 lead in the opening set, also relying on 
her booming forehand to outpace the 2010 runner-up.

Muguruza held off Stosur’s late comeback charge to set up a final showdown 
with the defending champion Serena Williams, with the American scoring a 
hard-fought 7-6, 6-4 victory over Kiki Bertens.

“I played very well until I led 5-2 in the second set and then she stepped up 
a gear and I became a bit nervous,” said Muguruza, who is looking to become the 
first Spaniard to lift the trophy since Arantxa Sánchez Vicario in 1998. 
“Emotions sometimes can be bad.“

In 50 previous grand slam matches in which Stosur had dropped the first set, 
she only managed to recover to win six, and that record looked set to haunt her 
following a similarly rough start to the second set.

After being broken in the opening game, Stosur fought back to secure her first 
break of the match and level the set at 2-2 – but immediately gave it back to 
Muguruza, who quickly consolidated for a 4-2 lead.

Stosur’s second serve, which had proved so dependable on her march to the last 
four, let her down terribly as she on three occasions double-faulted on break 
point to gift her opponent the advantage.

Most crucially, she did so in the seventh game of the second set to go down 
5-2 – but, with Muguruza serving for the match, Stosur broke to love to stay 
alive.

Muguruza recovered in her next service game, sending down a pair of aces 
before Stosur netted a forehand to complete the straight-sets defeat.

Herself a powerful hitter, Stosur had no answers for Muguruza’s power game – 
making 22 forced errors, as well as 20 unforced errors, primarily as a result 
of the Spaniard’s devastating groundstrokes.
 