
In a world where no one seems to know how to connect with anyone apart from 
their own tribe any more, guess who has their finger on the pulse of modern 
Britain in all its contradictions and awkwardnesses far more than any 
politician? Gareth bloody Malone, the Nation’s Choirmaster, that’s who.

Frankly, it’s extraordinary. Two episodes into his latest countrywide search 
for an amateur choir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/02/the-choir-gareths-best-in-britain-review>
 and the tribal affiliations of our land are laid brutally bare. Every week, 
there is an insufferable group of lecherous, middle-class women who are 
addicted to giggling and prosecco; a worthy group of elderly folk who mean no 
harm but look as if time has forgotten them and are left with only garibaldi 
biscuits as consolation; and a group of downtrodden mothers of toddlers who 
have lost the will to live and yet own many colourful, bosomy maxidresses.

It can appear twee and cliched and almost unbelievably Pebble Mill. And yet 
somehow he manages to make it all seem cohesive and normal and modern and so 
inspiringly, inoffensively, harmoniously British in a way that we can’t seem to 
replicate at all in our nation’s cultural life or at the ballot box.

The Choir: Gareth’s Best in Britain review – the anti-Simon Cowell does it 
again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/02/the-choir-gareths-best-in-britain-review>
We could have far worse alternative leaders of the new world order than this 
charming, self-effacing and overgrown chorister. Since 2007, Malone’s 
television programmes have seen him morph into the unintentional pin-up for 
Brexit-era Britain in all its complexities. While political parties tear one 
another apart and the “metropolitan elite” mocks the “alt-right”, one man in 
Harry Potter specs and a sensible pair of trousers from Boden’s brushed cotton 
range is quietly sowing reconciliation and contentment, using only close 
harmonies and some standards from a 1977 Billy Joel songbook.

As one reviewer wrote: “You might have thought there weren’t any choirs left 
for Gareth to discover.” But you would be so wrong. Last week’s outing ofThe 
Choir: Gareth’s Best in Britain, the second in a series of six, saw him take to 
“Wales and the Midlands” in his jaunty rental car, chuntering all the while to 
the camera that he must find something gritty and not too polished that “really 
represents a sense of place”.

Twitter wasn’t convinced about this pairing: “You lumped Wales (a country) in 
with the Midlands (a region)? Insulting!!!!” A fair point. In my experience, 
you do not mess with Welsh choirs. I once had the misfortune to appear at a 
karaoke night hosted by a Welsh choir and my contribution was the aural 
equivalent of drawing a stick man to compete with the Sistine Chapel. Do not 
mess with that vocal inheritance. And definitely not while attempting the 
Mariah Carey part on Endless Love.

But Malone got away with it, as he seems to be able to get away with just 
about anything, casting aside theChoir of Light 
<https://www.facebook.com/TreharrisChoir/posts/1682262285418627> from Treharris 
(near Merthyr Tydfil), which auditioned movingly in Welsh, in favour of
Emmanu’-EL Apostolic Gospel Academy <http://www.el-eaga.com/>, a Pentecostal 
gospel choir from Leicester which appears to have named itself with will.i.am 
in mind.

The choir has members from Jamaica, Zimbabwe, Kenya, Nigeria, Bermuda, Canada, 
Ghana and the UK. They taught Malone mastery of an energetic Zulu dance. He 
taught them how to make an audience feel like you are singing about something 
you really care about, even if secretly you are just singing in a very happy 
way because you really want to praise God. This is basically what he does: 
teaches people that it’s all right to show that you care.

Gareth Malone: 'I was a bohemian'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/24/gareth-malone-choir-great-british-christmas-interview>
Fascinatingly, so far Malone has comprehensively rejected the Waitrose classes 
in this series. Every week, there’s a cohort of well-to-do, mildly hysterical 
Women of the Villages of Middle England who always greet him with a spread that 
looks like something out of the Good Housekeeping Institute, all gluten-free 
scones and homemade pies. OneBake Off-worthy pie featured his trademark specs 
lovingly rendered in pastry and he was forced to eat it on camera, grimacing 
with enforced gratitude. These women are treated with patience. They are heard 
out. But they are not what is required for Malone’s vision of Britain – they 
are too settled.

Malone is interested in the people who are a bit broken and a bit rough around 
the edges, who aren’t sure of themselves or of their place in the world and who 
don’t have the time, energy or inclination to construct a papier-mache poster 
of him posing as a Chippendale, garnished with a strategic cucumber. (Oh, 
Britain. Don’t ever go changing.)

He struggles similarly with the youthful a cappella groups inspired by TV’s 
Glee or Hollywood’s Pitch Perfect: they’re doing it all with too much of a 
knowing nudge and a wink. Even though Malone knows he’s working in the 
cheesiest medium and in the cheesiest of circumstances, he does everything he 
can to push for authenticity and something that feels fresh and different. 
Sometimes it’s like trying to stageWaiting for Godot on breakfast television. 
But somehow he pulls it off.

The other great joy in his programmes is his dogged celebration of 
long-defunct, abandoned “community spaces”. It is a regular trope in the 
programme that someone over the age of 80 is wheeled on to say: “I haven’t seen 
anyone perform in this village hall since VE Day. I remember the acoustic from 
when I were a lad.” (Or similar.)

This should be schlocky and worthy of Alan Partridge, but somehow it’s 
touching and real. Because this is the thing that a lot of people really care 
about and really miss: a physical centre of a community, a place where they 
could actually go, a place that isn’t Facebook or Netflix, a place where 
everyone is singing in harmony even when some of them are a bit out of tune and 
a bit rubbish. Broken Britain? Brexit Britain? No, this is Malone’s Patched-Up 
Britain. Some had to give it a go. As the late Leonard Cohen would sing: 
“Hallelujah.”
 