
The atmosphere was totally different to that at the end of last Wednesday's 
2-2 draw with Hull City, and it was not down simply to the fact that half as 
many people were there. The decision to replace Ivan Klasnic in the second 
half, with the score still at a distinctly unimpressive 2-0, was met with 
applause, while on Wednesday it "went down like the Bismarck", in the words of 
the then-manager Gary Megson, who was sacked the next morning.

With the identity of his replacement uncertain – though Owen Coyle, the 
manager of Burnley, continues to be strongly linked – Bolton's fans seemed 
content with the knowledge that, whoever leads them into their next game, it 
will not be Gary Megson. "There was an instant dislike to him, or so it 
seemed," said Chris Sutton, theLincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> City manager and a former 
team-mate of Megson's at Norwich City.

That Bolton needed a second-half own-goal to break the resistance of the 90th 
best side in the league, having not seriously threatened to score before then, 
suggests their performance was not a significant improvement on those that 
brought Megson the sack. Subsequent goals from Lee Chung-yong, within a minute 
of the first, Andy O'Brien and Mark Davies made the scoreline considerably more 
one-sided than most of the game, though Lincoln City in truth never seemed 
remotely capable of securing an upset. "The same staff are here, and the same 
bunch of players — everybody except the main man is here," explained the 
defender Gary Cahill. "So in that respect it hasn't changed too much."

If Megson enjoyed any heartfelt farewells as he tidied his desk on Wednesday 
evening, Cahill would seem a likely candidate. He will be remembered as the 
outgoing manager's most successful signing, having seen his career blossom in 
the two years since he arrived from Aston Villa for around £5m. "I appreciate 
everything he has done for me," the 24-year-old said. "If you look at where I 
have come from since I first joined the club, here I am now and I am probably 
the fifth-choice centre-back for England, with still years in front of me. I am 
definitely a better player than when I first came here. I played a lot under 
him, and he took a chance and paid a lot of money for me at that stage of my 
career. I would like to think I have repaid him in a way, but I am grateful for 
what he did for me."

An appointment is expected this week, with Coyle's refusal to speak to the 
press following Burnley's victory over MK Dons doing nothing to quell rumours. 
If the new manager wants a winning start however, he might want to delay his 
arrival until after the team have visited Arsenal on Wednesday. "Whoever comes 
in will inherit a good bunch of players and they are going to come into a very 
good club," said Cahill. "Every name under the sun is being touted about, but I 
imagine whoever it is won't be sprinting to get to Arsenal — that's just true. 
We will probably have to go there in the situation we are in now."

Man of the match Chris Herd (Lincoln).
 