
Bottom of the-table Plymouth, having lost their previous five matches without 
even scoring, produced the day's bestChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> result in winning 1-0 at 
Cardiff.

In front of a 24,010 crowd, Cardiff's biggest Boxing Day attendance for 39 
years, the home team did much to contribute to their downfall through wasted 
chances. One culprit was Michael Chopra, who seemed certain to get his first 
goal in 11 matches when put through the Plymouth defence, only to mishit his 
shot over the bar. Plymouth, for whom New Zealand World Cup star Rory Fallon 
caused Cardiff numerous problems, seized the initiative six minutes from the 
end with a Gary Sawyer shot that was deflected past the keeper by Mark Hudson.

While Sheffield Wednesday also did well with their draw against Newcastle, the 
other team in the relegation zone,Peterborough, lost 2-0 at West Bromwich Albion
 – an important result for West Brom after the goalless draw earned by
Nottingham Forest at Watford, which increased Forest's unbeaten run to 15 
matches and had enabled them to move a point above West Brom into the No 2 
spot. Forest, who were not at their best in attack on a difficult playing 
surface, could not have been too unhappy about ending the day two points behind 
their Midlands rivals, even though they came agonisingly close to victory when 
Dexter Blackstock was thwarted by an outstanding save from Scott Loach.

It was some afternoon for the Blackpool striker Brett Ormerod, who scored 
their second goal in the 2-0 win atDerby but could easily have had a hat-trick 
at least. Ormerod, having twice broken through on goal only to squander both 
opportunities, did have better luck with his third one-on-one with the keeper, 
Stephen Bywater – except that his shot was deflected into the net by the Derby 
defender Jake Buxton and credited as an own goal. Near the end, it was a foul 
on him by Dean Moxey, when he was again creating a scoring opportunity, 
whichled to Moxey being sent off.

Among the other Championship players shown a red card was Ipswich's Jonathan 
Stead for a late but not malicious-looking challenge onCrystal Palace's Freddie 
Sears. It was 1-1 at that stage and Ipswich lost 3-1 – their first defeat in 10 
matches. There were two sendings-off atMiddlesbrough, where the home team 
recorded only their second win in nine matches under the management of Gordon 
Strachan – and their first at home – in overcomingScunthorpe 3-0. Scunthorpe's 
Cliff Byrne was the first to go, for a foul on Jérémie Aliadière, which also 
brought the penalty from which Adam Johnson opened the scoring. Boro's Leroy 
Lita was shown the red card near the end for a clash with Andrew Wright. Still, 
with Aliadière looking impressive on his return to the side after two months 
out through injury, Strachan had much to enthuse over.

Stockport County's nightmare League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> run continued as they 
slumped to their 10th defeat in succession in losing 4-1 atMK Dons. Their 
present position is rather different to the one they were in 12 months ago 
,when they were among the leading promotion contenders. It was then that their 
financial problems caught up with them, leading to the club being put into 
administration and the loss of their highly rated manager, Jim Gannon. Last 
week his successor, Gary Ablett, admitted that he had begun to question his 
ability to lift the team off the bottom. That thought is bound to have become 
more pronounced than ever after yesterday's match, the highlights of which were 
two excellent strikes by Jason Puncheon.

The big surprise in League Two was struggling Lincoln's 2-1 win over 
Chesterfield – their first victory in 10 matches. Their 20-year-old defender 
Cian Hughton, the son of the Newcastle manager Chris, put them ahead with a far 
post header from a Delroy Facey cross, and Facey, on loan from Notts County, 
made it 2-0 with a header. However, Lincoln did enjoy some good fortune, 
notably when Jack Lester fluffed a golden chance to equalise forChesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> by hitting a penalty over 
the bar.
 