
These are the moments when Liverpool’s supporters must hold genuine hope their 
team are capable of catching and overhauling Chelsea at the top of thePremier 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> table. There is 
still a six-point deficit but Jürgen Klopp’s men look absolutely convinced they 
have what it takes and it was not a coincidence that the man in charge of the 
music belted out an old Starship track straight after the final whistle.
Nothing’s Gonna Stop Us Now felt like an accurate gauge of the mood.

Anfield was certainly a happy place because Liverpool not only signalled their 
intentions here but blew a gaping hole in the title chances on another of the 
teams who began the season with lofty ambitions. Georginio Wijnaldum’s goal 
inflicted the damage and the 10-match winning sequence with which Pep Guardiola 
introduced himself atManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> is starting to feel like 
a deception. This was another erratic display and, however it is dressed up, 
City’s owners did not bring in Guardiola to be 10 points adrift at the halfway 
point of the season.

Liverpool 1-0 Manchester City: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/31/liverpool-v-manchester-city-premier-league-live>
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> played with great 
panache at times and, in other periods, they showed the kind of durability that 
will be essential to sustain a title challenge. The players in red never gave 
their opponents a moment’s peace in the first half but after the break, when 
they switched to a more conservative system, they can also take great 
encouragement from the fact City had lots of the ball but did not create one 
clear opportunity.

What never shifted was the impeccable attitude of Liverpool’s players whereas 
their opponents, in contrast, took an age to get going. Once the visiting team 
started showing some urgency, with Raheem Sterling, David Silva and Kevin De 
Bruyne growing into the game, they did at least make a fight of it.

Yet it would be generous to say they deserved anything considering the story 
of the 90 minutes and, once again, they came away from Anfield filled with 
regret. They have not won here since 2003 and Sergio Agüero has not scored at 
this ground in eight appearances. The Argentinian, back from a four-match 
suspension, barely got a sniff.

Klopp’s men scored 87 league goals in 2016, their highest figure since 
managing the same in 1985. More importantly, there was hard evidence here that 
if any team can chase down Chelsea it is likely to be the one with the liver 
bird on their chest.

At one point Roberto Firmino could be seen miscontrolling the ball to concede 
a throw-in and there was still warm applause. There is a vibe here reminiscent 
of the near-victorious season now infamous for Steven Gerrard’s slip. The crowd 
can see a team who are giving everything and, in their latest victory, a set of 
players who looked desperate to show their superiority.

James Milner plays Mr Dependable in Liverpool’s new era of unflappability | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/31/liverpool-manchester-city->
For long spells, they did exactly that – quick to the ball, strong in the 
tackle and playing in the knowledge that if City’s defence are placed under 
pressure a mistake will generally follow. City have kept only four clean sheets 
from their 19 league fixtures in the Guardiola era and Aleksandar Kolarov, in 
particular, had a difficult match.

There is nothing particularly new about that but it was rare to see City look 
so incoherent in attack, particularly in the opening 45 minutes when Sterling, 
facing his former club, seemed disorientated by the crowd’s jeers and even 
Silva, of all people, could be seen misplacing relatively simple passes. 
Sterling’s early anxiety disappeared in the second half when he started 
reminding his old club of his threat. Yet Liverpool, holding on to their early 
lead and switching to a counterattacking system, still looked the more 
threatening side, albeit with less of the ball.

Perhaps the best compliment that can be paid to Wijnaldum for his goal is that 
there are Liverpool supporters of a certain generation who will remember John 
Toshack scoring headers of this nature. It was a prodigious leap but, more than 
anything, it was the sheer will on his part to meet Adam Lallana’s cross with 
the necessary blend of power and precision. The ball flashed past Claudio Bravo 
and Liverpool had scored for the 23rd successive top-division fixture on their 
own ground.

Pep Guardiola says he learned from Jürgen Klopp and praises attacking style
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/pep-guardiola-learned-from-jurgen-klopp-praise-attacking>
City had an argument that Ragnar Klavan, already booked for a challenge on 
Agüero, might have been shown a second yellow card shortly before the goal. Yet 
any grievance on their part does not alter the fact they made an almighty mess 
of the free-kick, leading directly to the game’s decisive moment. Yaya Touré’s 
decision to aim it out to the left wing was strange in itself and Kolarov’s 
touch to give the ball away was clumsy in the extreme.

City were vulnerable as soon as Firmino played the initial forward pass, 
giving Lallana the chance to make ground on the left, and Kolarov’s ignominy 
was compounded by the fact that when he made it back to the penalty area he was 
the player Wijnaldum out-jumped. That Kolarov was at fault twice probably 
summed up his evening.

It was not until the game was approaching the hour-mark that Guardiola’s team 
started to pass the ball with speed and clarity. Silva and De Bruyne switched 
positions and both became increasingly influential. Yet whatever Guardiola is 
trying is not working. Not yet anyway.

Liverpool were barely troubled during four minutes of stoppage time and the 
game finished with Klopp embracing his players, blowing kisses to the crowd and 
looking forward to 2017.
 