
Germany’s largest centre-left party says it would be prepared to let the 
country’s own short-term economic interests take a back seat and make the 
“unity of the European Union” a priority in the upcoming Brexit negotiations if 
it were to form part of the next government.

According to a draft resolution seen by the Guardian, Germany’s Social 
Democratic party (SPD) also insists that British membership of the single 
market should be tied to both accepting free movement of people and recognising 
the rulings of the European court of justice, stating that “without recognising 
this [the ECJ’s] final say a membership of the single market, especially in 
services, will not be possible”.

Philip Hammond seeks to assure Germany over 'smooth path' to Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/phil-hammond-seeks-to-assure-germany-over-smooth-path-to-brexit>
The SPD, junior partners to Angela Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union (CDU) 
in Germany’s coalition government, is also understood to be considering a push 
for a parliamentary vote on the terms of Britain’s exit from the EU, a demand 
that could considerably delay the timetable following the expected triggering 
of article 50 by the British prime minister, Theresa May, in March.

The draft resolution states that “disadvantages such as loss of foreign 
investment in UK or disruption of supply chains” should be seen as “one-off 
write-offs”, arguing the collapse of the EU and end of the single market “would 
be significantly larger in scale” and amount to “the end of the European peace 
order”.

According to the text, authored by the party’s deputy parliamentary leader, 
Axel Schäfer, “short-term interests of individual groups or member states, 
including Germany” should therefore “take a back seat” during the negotiations.

The SDP is currently second in polls to the CDU, making it likely to play a 
part in the formation of Germany’s next coalition government after federal 
elections in September, either in another “grand coalition” with the 
centre-right or a so-called “R2G” coalition with the left and green parties.

The resolution, which is likely to be passed at the end of this week, would 
not only strengthen Merkel’s uncompromising stance regarding the indivisibility 
of free movement and the single market, but also highlights the growing rift 
between the British Labour party and the continental European left.

Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour party is planning to host an “alternative Brexit 
summit” in London at the end of February in London, with view to “build 
alliances with colleagues around Europe about the kind of economic and 
political relationship we’ll have withEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> after we leave the European 
Union”, as the Labour leader stated on the BBC this week.

But unlike Labour under Corbyn, the German centre-left has stated it is very 
much still wedded to freedom of movement for EU citizens as a point of 
principle. “Anyone who wants to be part of the single market has to recognise 
these principles,” Schäfer told Reuters on Wednesday.

While stating that Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> should 
strive for “friendly and close relations” between Britain and the EU27, the 
SPD’s draft also warns that “making this possible requires realistic 
expectations”, and “there are currently doubts whether this is the case on both 
sides”.

“If we allow a ‘Europe à la carte’ it would lead to incalculable domino 
effects which would threaten the cohesion of the union,” the draft said. 
“Refusing such wishes has nothing to do with punishment, but answers to the 
widely understood interests of the EU-27 and the functioning and political 
balance of the single market.”

The Social Democrats’ positioning coincides with a survey indicating that 
German business remains relaxed about negative consequences of Britain leaving 
the union. According to a study by the Cologne Institute for Economic Research, 
more than nine out of 10 German firms do not expect strong effects from Brexit 
on their business activities in the near future.

The survey of 2,900 firms found that only a small share of 2-3% of companies 
believed Britain’s departure from the bloc of states would have strong negative 
consequences on their investment and employment. Meanwhile, a quarter of German 
firms expected to benefit from diversion of business activities away from the 
UK.

The Social Democrats are also believed to be weighing up a push for the German 
government to get a vote not just on a new trade deal between the EU and Great 
Britain, but also the conditions of Britain’s exit deal – a move that could set 
an example for other national governments around Europe to emulate.

Current plans only foresee the exit deal to be passed by the European council 
and the European parliament, with national parliaments in the 27 EU member 
states to get a vote on a deal outlining the new relationship between Britain 
and the EU, or a transitional deal once the process of the UK leaving the bloc 
of states has been completed.

Putting the agreement outlining Britain’s exit from the EU to the vote in 
Germany would therefore prove controversial, not least after the difficulty 
European member states recently experienced in building a positive consensus 
around the EU-Canada Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement.
 