
As my boyfriend and I stand under the Arc de Triomphe in Barcelona, it occurs 
to us that we may not enjoy the next few hours. We are waiting for Lisa 
Richardson, a total stranger, to come and take us shopping. This is a 
surprising thing for us to do - neither of us is a big shopper, he particularly 
dislikes high street fashion, we don't have much money to buy things, and we 
are in Barcelona for only a couple of days, so should perhaps be following the 
other tourists to the Gaudí houses or into the Picasso museum.

But we are not, because we've decided to take a chance on an incredibly 
personalised form of tour, tailored by a local to our specifications, using 
their knowledge to show us the kind of thing you just can't find in a guide 
book - an idea that is spreading all over the world. You can now buy the 
services of a trendy local in just about any city you'd choose to take a break 
in. We've asked Richardson to come up with a tour that's heavy on vintage or 
second-hand clothes and furniture.

We found her online through the company that owns the apartment we are staying 
in, an airy, bare-bricked art deco studio furnished with one-off modernist 
pieces, with a balcony overlooking a quiet, pretty alleyway, but just a stone's 
throw from the bars and restaurants of Passeig del Born. (The furniture is 
actually so special that they leave you a little note with instructions about 
how not to damage it - we spend the weekend nervously spreading out tea towels 
before putting any drinks down.)

The guides can also set up foodie tours, taking you to out-of-the-way tapas 
bars and food shops or just the famous Boqueria food market, or a tour on which 
you buy your ingredients in town and are taught how to cook them in your 
apartment. Also on offer are wine tours and haute couture fashion tours, or 
there's Barcelona by Night, a crawl around bars and traditional cabaret shows.

It's the internet that has made all this possible. It connects people with 
specific interests and so has allowed the proliferation of scores of tiny, 
specialised, guiding outfits (be they individuals or small companies), where 
there used to be just a few big mainstream tour firms in each city.

Couchsurfing.org <http://www.Couchsurfing.org> helped foster the trend when it 
launched in 2004, with the aim of helping cash-strapped travellers to stay with 
locals. It has since grown into an international network with members in 62,000 
cities. The expectation now is that members show their guests around their city 
and introduce them to their friends. In return, surfers do the same for people 
coming to visit their home towns. The site allows couchsurfers to detail their 
interests and post a profile to ensure they are matched with like-minded people.

Facebook is home to lots of city tours run by locals - in places such as Rio 
de Janeiro, Milan and New York. Most are free, including the excellent daily 
New Rome Free Tour (newromefreetour.com <http://www.newromefreetour.com>). You 
could also take a look at the Global Greeter Network (globalgreeternetwork.info 
<http://www.globalgreeternetwork.info>) which is a coalition of volunteer 
guides in cities from Lyon to Melbourne.

These are not the kind of tours where you follow a retired historian with a 
large umbrella. The point is to experience the city as a local, and to blend in 
as much as possible. There's no faffing about with tourist-office maps if 
you're following someone who knows where they are going. Plus, most of the 
people who do this kind of guiding are either volunteers or doing it as a 
sideline - Richardson used to work in fashion in Milan, and still does style 
consultancy and trend forecasting. In fact, she decided to start her guiding 
company because so many acquaintances visiting Barcelona would email her asking 
where the best shoe shops were, or how to find the best antique furniture.

Richardson has lived in Barcelona for a few years and is very cool (but also 
very nice), so she is just the kind of person you'd want to show you round 
town. We go for coffee in a tiny, very quiet square a few minutes' walk away, 
which she likes because there are never any tourists there. There she runs 
through her plan for our day, which will involve shops in the Borne area of 
Barcelona, to the east of the heaving Ramblas: it's less well known and a 
little more genteel than the lively, noisy and chaotic Ravel area to the 
southwest, where we will finish the day.

She has spent the preceding week calling up shop-owners to make sure they will 
be open for us - away from the main roads, Barcelona's businesspeople seem to 
have an idiosyncratic approach to opening times, which is to say they open when 
they feel like it. So, naturally enough, the first antiques shop she tries to 
take us to is closed.

Richardson is unsurprised and unperturbed, and instead we move on to a tiny 
shop called Zaoum, which is run by a woman who also teaches jewellery-making 
(for shop details see box). I immediately fall in love with a set of Bakelite 
bangles, an enormous navy blue hat, a collection of 1940s crystal glasses 
encased in miniature baskets for picnics and a set of small sailing boats. My 
boyfriend reminds me that with Easyjet's stingy baggage allowance, we cannot 
buy everything. I buy the boats.
 Rebecca Seal shopping in Barcelona. Photograph: Steven Joyce/guardian.co.uk 
We wind our way on through the Borne, which is made up of lots of little old 
streets, most too narrow for cars and almost identical - washing hanging from 
windows, small bakeries and cafes dotted about, and impossible to navigate 
without someone who knows where they're going. We pop out at Ivo & Co, a shop 
selling faux-vintage homewares. From there we go on to a couple of posh 
boutiques, Nunita, which is hopelessly expensive, and Coquette, which is having 
a sale. I try on several Chloé dresses and try to convince myself that if I 
don't eat for a month, I could both fit into one of them and afford it.

Next is one of Richardson's favourites, El Changuito, which is one of those 
stylishly cluttered shops that makes you wish you had thought of putting wooden 
animals along the tops of your picture frames.

Highlights included a fabulous collection of old prescription glasses and some 
silver powder compacts. Then we visit Iriarte Iriarte, a new shop where 
beautiful leather goods are made and sold by two young designers, something 
Richardson is keen we take note of, because for all that Barcelona's town 
planners are trying to resist the homogenisation of their streets, it's still 
unusual for young people to take up traditional trades. It seems amazing that 
they, or indeed any of the artisans in these minute shops on deserted alleys, 
can be making any money at all, so purely in the spirit of supporting their 
endeavours I buy a pair of their gorgeous leather brogues.

The Old Curiosity shop is next, a dark treasure trove of antiquey stuff, and 
then we cross the Ramblas - quickly, because it's crowded and horrible - and 
head towards the cathedral, where we visit Anomorfosis, which belongs to a man 
who collects industrial and scientific antiques, including everything from old 
cameras to ancient-looking microscopes and cassette tapes. Then it's on to a 
nearby poster and print shop, stacked from floor to ceiling with old cartoons, 
magazine covers and film posters.
 Smart handbags at Iriarte Iriarte, Barcelona. Photograph: Steven 
Joyce/guardian.co.uk 
For the final part of the tour we head into the Ravel for some serious vintage 
fashion: Ravel is home to a whole road of vintage clothes shops, Calle Riera 
Baixa. We make for Le Swing, a brilliantly over-the-top store selling gigantic 
platform heels, knackered old designer handbags, hats with veils and rows and 
rows of suits and dresses.

After that we have just enough time to have a quick look in Wilde, a vintage 
sunglasses shop, before collapsing over a cold cerveza. Naturally enough, 
Richardson takes us to a bar bang in the middle of the teeming Ravel which 
barely any tourist could find - Galeria La Capella De L'Antic Hospital De La 
Santa Creu on Calle de l'Hospital - a quiet and pretty open-air cafe in a 
garden in the middle of an old chapel that is now an art gallery.

There are several reasons why doing a tour with a local like Richardson is a 
great idea: they know places you would never find otherwise, and if, like us, 
you are trying to avoid other tourists, it's perfect because a local in any 
touristy city will be well-practised in staying away from them. Local guides 
are also enthusiastic - it's "their" city and they want to show it off. Plus, 
you get a real sense of the place - we had both been to Barcelona before, and 
if it hadn't been for a wedding nearby, we would never have bothered coming 
again, since having seen Sagrada Familia, the Gaudí houses, and the Picasso and 
Dalí museums we thought we had done it all. However, we discovered a really 
cool, edgy city full of friendly artistic people and quirky, interesting 
businesses.

Once she saw that we had a passion for collecting odd vintage bits and pieces, 
Richardson told us about a great flea market, Mercat del Encants, which we 
visited two days later. She gave us her recommendations for some fantastic 
hidden away bars to visit that night, including Big Bang Bar (CalleBotella 7, 
Ravel; 0034 93443 2813,bigbangbcn.net <http://www.bigbangbcn.net>) which has no 
sign apart from a bright light above the door, and which plays brilliant, 
mostly live, gypsy-swing, jazz and folk music, and serves lethal drinks.

She also pointed us in the direction of two excellent cheap restaurants: one 
was the bustling Can Resolis, in Ravel, where you can get sharing plates of 
patatas bravas, meatballs and mussels, and linger over good-value local red 
wine. The other was Au Port de la Lune, a determinedly French restaurant next 
to the Boqueria, which does a three-course set menu for €15 including herring 
salad, delicious patés and cheeses, and bull steak, which sounds terrible but 
is actually unctuous and rich and meaty. Cheeringly, they have a large painted 
sign on the wall which translates as: "We don't have Diet Coke, we don't have 
Coca Cola, we don't have ketchup, and we never will."

So, even though our time with Richardson was short, we benefited from her 
expertise for the whole weekend.

A style-seeker's Barcelona address book

Shopping

Zaoum Argenter 91, Borne; 00 34 93 269 0171; zaoum.es <http://www.zaoum.es>

El Changuito Calle Rosic 3 esq Mirallers, Borne; 00 34 93 310 6326; 
elchanguito.com

Ivo&Co Calle Rec 20, Borne; 00 34 93 268 3331; ivoandco.com 
<http://www.ivoandco.com>

Coquette Calle Rec 65, Borne; coquettebcn.com <http://www.coquettebcn.com>; 00 
34 93 295 4285

Nunita Calle del Rec 61, Borne; 00 34 93 315 0770; nunitabcn.com 
<http://www.nunitabcn.com>

The Old Curiosity Shop Volta dels Tamborets 4 bajos 2a, Borne; 00 34 93 310 
4589

Iriarte Iriarte Calle Esquirol 1, Borne; 00 34 65 357 3266; iriarteiriarte.com 
<http://www.iriarteiriarte.com>

The Poster Shop With No Name on Banys Nous in the Barrio Gótico

Anamorfosis Santa Eulalia 4, Barrio Gótico; 00 34 93 301 2943

Le Swing Calle Notariat 3, Ravel; 00 34 93 301 9870; leswingvintage.com 
<http://www.leswingvintage.com>

Mercat del Encants At the flea market - get there around nine o'clock because 
it gets very hot by midday - you can expect enthusiastic and talkative selling 
of everything from old junk piled up on the floor, to new(ish) electricals, 
household goods and bikes. It's at Calle del Dos de Maig 186 under the Gloriès 
roundabout on Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays from 8.30am. The 
nearest tram and train stop is Gloriès

Eating 

Au Port de la Lune Plaza de Sant Galdric 1, next to the Boqueria; 00 34 93 270 
3819;auportdelalune.com <http://www.auportdelalune.com>

Restaurant Can Resolis Calle Riera Baixa 22; 00 34 93 218 3000

The Into Barcelona apartments cost from €125 a night, for a studio sleeping 
two. There are a selection of walking tours on offer, including the Antiques 
and Boutiques tour, from €75 per group for a two-hour tour and €160 per group 
for a four-hour tour. All can be booked at i-escape.com. For more information 
about Lisa Richardson's tour contact 00 34 671 234800;antiquesandboutiques.com 
<http://www.antiquesandboutiques.com>

More ways to get beneath the skin of a city

London
 Banksy stencil at Exmouth Market, London. Photograph: Wood Stock /Alamy 
Forget Buckingham Palace and Tower Bridge, and instead take a tour of the 
capital's street art and graffiti. The two-hour tour of East London shows off 
the work of Banksy, Shepard Fairey, Space Invader and many more, and takes you 
through the various media being used on the street - from Fimo and laser-cut 
wood to fly-posting and replica street signs. The graffiti tour is one of a 
range from Insider London, which will also take you to see the capital's 
cutting-edge modern architecture, forward-thinking green projects, quirky shops 
and so on. Tours start whenever you want, and cost from £20 a head with a 
minimum of two people (0844 504 8080;insider-worldwide.com 
<http://www.insider-worldwide.com>).

Rio de Janeiro

To really get to grips with favela life in Rio, take a tour with Be A Local. 
There are day tours - where you ride on the back of a motorbike up to the top 
of the Rocinha favela and descend on foot - or Sunday night "Favela Party" 
tours, which promise to see you "dancing to local funk rhythms as sun rises 
over Christ the Redeemer". Prices vary (00 55 219 643 0366;bealocal.com 
<http://www.bealocal.com>).

Berlin

Berlin has long had a vibrant music scene, from the studios where U2, Iggy 
Pop, Depeche Mode and David Bowie recorded, to the edgy clubs in disused spaces 
in the eastern side of the city. Fritz Music Tours takes you on a trip through 
the city's musical past and present, guided by a former recording engineer and 
stopping at studios, clubs and party venues. From €15 per person (00 49 30 3087 
5633;musictours-berlin.com <http://www.musictours-berlin.com>).

Paris

Paris Please, a "nightlife adventures agency" will take you on the most 
glamorous night out possible in the city, with limos, cocktails and the most 
fashionable clubs, but it costs around £150. Contact 001 925 887 3774;
parisplease.com <http://www.parisplease.com>. For something totally free, book 
a personal guide with Parisien d'un Jour, whose friendly guides will take you 
on a tour of their favourite neighbourhood, and will do their best to answer 
any and all questions you pose, while showing you around markets, shops and 
historical sites, and sneaking you into places most tourists can't visit - 
including, if you're lucky, the campus of the Sorbonne. Contact 
Parisiendunjour.fr -it's part of the Global Greeter Network, offering free 
guides to give a personal introduction to cities from Chicago to Ramsgate (
globalgreeternetwork.info <http://www.globalgreeternetwork.info>).

Seattle

The Sub Seattle tour is an off-beat bus ride put together by locals saddened 
by the fact that most tourists see only the Space Needle and other mainstream 
attractions. Instead, these guys will show you Lake Washington's beaches, the 
house where Kurt Cobain lived and died and the place where Courtney Love got 
her wedding dress, and entertain you with stories about Bruce Lee. The 
90-minute tours cost $30 (001 206 682-4646;subseattletour.com 
<http://www.subseattletour.com>).

Buenos Aires

A non-profit organisation, Cicerones de Buenos Aires wants to improve the 
image of the city and help visitors have a safe experience there - the guides 
aim to show you what they call "the Latin-American capital of culture and 
literature; the cradle of tango, the entrance to Patagonia, a paradise of 
football and a feast of the most exquisite food" (cicerones.org.ar 
<http://www.cicerones.org.ar>; 00 54 11 5258 0909).

And many more

A new service launched last week offers travellers the chance to connect with 
locals in cities around the world, who will then provide personalised tips and 
suggestions for your visit.Tripbod.com <http://www.Tripbod.com> lets you 
discuss your interests with "your friend at the other end", who then compiles a 
list of suggested places to visit and emails it to you. You can continue 
corresponding with them in the lead up to and during your trip, and they 
promise to provide the very latest information. Most "tripbods" are not 
full-time tourist guides, but work in a range of professions. The service costs 
from around £35.
 