
It can be strange sometimes watching an ex-pro trying to make the transition 
into becoming the gaffer and, initially, it takes some getting used to seeing 
Chris Sutton, this tall, familiar figure synonymous with big-money transfers 
and the inauguralPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> years, patrolling the edge 
of a muddy pitch, stopwatch in hand, barking out orders and occasionally 
stopping play to pass on instructions.

This is Lincoln City's training ground, Sutton's place of work since the end 
of September when one of English football's traditionally least successful 
clubs announced they were taking a "calculated gamble" by making him their new 
manager. It has been described as the most unlikely appointment of the season, 
which is saying something in the same year that Notts County brought in 
Sven-Goran Eriksson, and it is here, on the outskirts of the old cathedral 
city, that the one-time England international could be found this week plotting 
for an FA Cup tie atBolton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/boltonwanderers> and daring to wonder 
whether a club with absolutely no history of giant-killing can do something 
remarkable.

"The club, historically, have got a particularly bad cup record," Sutton says 
with a wistful smile from behind his desk, the office window looking directly 
on to the training pitches. "This is the first time they have been through to 
the third round for ..." He is struggling to remember the year and eventually 
gives up. "Well, God knows how many years but it's been a long time anyway." 
Only twice since 1977, in fact, have the club made it this far. The furthest 
they have ever got in the League Cup is the fourth round in 1967 and they were 
on the brink of extinction until being rescued by the Save The Imps campaign 
eight years ago.

"There were major problems," says Sutton, who made a point of reading up about 
the club's history (insert joke here about it not taking long). "They were 
close to a really bad position but the club are on a sound footing now. It 
might surprise a few people when they actually come to have a look around. It's 
a good set-up, a nice stadium, a decent training ground. The only thing that's 
wrong is the results and performances on the pitch and that's why I am here."

It is a strange alliance, the first £5m footballer in England in charge of a 
club whose highest ever finish was fifth in the old Second Division in 1902. As 
a player Sutton scored for five Premier League clubs, broke transfer records 
and won the championship with Blackburn Rovers as well as three Scottish 
Premier League titles and three Scottish Cups with Celtic. Lincoln's only 
notable record, other than being the 34-time winners of the Lincolnshire Senior 
Cup, is for being the only club to reach the play-offs in five consecutive 
seasons and lose every time. The most they have ever spent on a player is 
£75,000 and they lie 90th on the English football ladder.

"It has been difficult," he says. "The job came up because the team wasn't 
doing particularly well. They had lost a lot of games, the club didn't have a 
lot of money to spend and the team were struggling near the bottom ofLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>. We're not 
poverty-stricken but, with all due respect, who's going to want to play for 
Lincoln City in this position? So it was a case of, 'So what are you going to 
do about it?' I've just been trying to get the players more organised, get them 
fitter and work harder on the training ground. Really that's the only way we 
can improve because, let's face it, we don't have a pot of gold at Lincoln 
City."

There are financial constraints, rules that must be adhered to. This might be 
Lincoln's biggest cup tie for years but, unless the weather worsens 
drastically, the club were still planning to travel by bus this morning rather 
than booking a hotel. "We don't have many overnight stops because we have to go 
by a budget and the hotels can be expensive," he says. "That's just the way it 
is at this level and you get on with it. It's fine."

He has teamed up with Ian Pearce, his former Blackburn team-mate – "a smart 
guy, someone I trust implicitly" – and enrolled him as a player, too. Pearce, 
35, is the kind of old-fashioned centre-half whose career always seemed 
destined to involve moving "upstairs" whereas, for some reason, the same was 
not often said of Sutton. By his own admission the 36-year-old scarcely gave a 
thought to trying his hand at management during his playing career. He left the 
game two years ago because of a problem in his right eye – "the vision isn't 
good and it isn't going to get better so it was a straightforward decision" – 
and has a beautiful estate on the Norfolk coast where his wife, Sam, runs her 
own horse sanctuary.

"I guess I just missed football," he says. "I had never really thought about 
it when I was playing but, after a while, you start wanting to get back in. I 
started taking my coaching badges, liking the idea more and more."

Inverness Caledonian Thistle asked him if he would be interested in the job 
that Terry Butcher eventually took last January. There were, Sutton says, 
"other whispers". Then he asked Pearce what he thought of applying for the 
vacantLincoln <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> job. "This was the 
first interview we got. The club described it as a calculated gamble, which is 
fair, I suppose, because I haven't got any experience as a manager. But then 
again, how do you get managerial experience if nobody is willing to give you a 
chance? I don't think I could have done any more in terms of who I have spoken 
to and prepared for this.

"I have been fortunate to work under some great managers and I knew I could 
benefit from that education. I went round to their clubs, talked to them, 
watched them at work and learned." Martin O'Neill, at Aston Villa, was 
particularly hospitable, along with Roy Hodgson at Fulham. "Football is not 
really a complicated game," Sutton says sagely. "It's important to have an 
understanding of the game but the beauty of people like Martin O'Neill, Roy 
Hodgson and Kenny Dalglish is that they know how to treat players. Martin 
O'Neill, for example – I probably enjoyed my football under him more than 
anywhere else. I would actually wake up excited about going into training and 
that's probably the most important thing – getting the players to want to play 
for the manager. On the flipside, I've played for managers who would say things 
or make decisions that I couldn't understand."

On England duty Sutton would pass over Kevin Keegan's team-bonding race nights 
and card schools to read a book, and, when he thought he was not getting a fair 
crack of the whip from Glenn Hoddle he announced that he was giving up 
international football. He now regards that as one of the biggest regrets of 
his career. "It wasn't wise," he says. "I just thought there were other players 
ahead of me but, even so, I shouldn't have done it."

Back to today's game, the trip to the Reebok has caught the imagination of the 
Lincoln people, with 2,000 fans travelling to Lancashire. "When you consider 
that our average gate is 3,000 to 3,500 it shows the interest in the match," 
Sutton says. "It's a good draw for us, a Premier League club, and it's 
something we should enjoy."
 