
Carlos Tevez sprayed the crowd with imaginary bullets. The Juventus striker 
had already wounded Fiorentina's supporters, scoring against their team at the 
Stadio Artemio Franchi, but now he was doing them an even more grievous injury. 
By celebrating his goal in this way, mimicking a machine gun with his hands, 
Tevez wasimitating Gabriel Batistuta 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kZxwEkZvAwQ> – one of their most beloved former 
players.

If there was any doubt that this had been a deliberate act, then it was 
eliminated three minutes later, when Paul Pogba did the same. After putting 
Juve 2-0 up with a close-range volley, the midfielder strafed the stands with 
his own fictitious firearm.

Such gestures served to remind Fiorentina's fans of a painful truth: their 
team had not won this fixture since Batistuta last won it for them. TheViola's 
most recent home victory over Juventus had arrived on 13 December 1998, with 
the Argentinian scoring the game's only goal. Batistuta was so overcome back 
then that he forgot how guns functioned, and insteadlaunched into a furious, 
fist-pumping, guitar solo <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=smw6BWiLJmk>.

The celebrations in the stands were even more delirious. A fierce rivalry 
exists between these two clubs, dating back to at least the early 80s. Juventus 
famously pipped Fiorentina to thescudetto on the final day of the 1981-82 
season – beating Catanzaro 1-0 courtesy of a Liam Brady penalty while theViola 
had a goal disallowed in their 0-0 draw with Cagliari. Conspiracy theories 
abound. "I saw [the then Juventus president Giampiero] Boniperti eating peanuts 
in the stands," claimed the film director andFiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> fan Franco Zefirelli at the 
time. "He looked like an American mafioso."

Incidents since have deepened the animosity. In 1990, Fiorentina were forced 
to play the 'home' leg of their Uefa Cup final against Juventus in Avellino – 
an area where theBianconeri enjoy great support – and duly lost 3-1 on 
aggregate. Last summerJuventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> 
persuaded Dimitar Berbatov to renege on an agreement to join Fiorentina and 
sign for them instead. He subsequently ditched both clubs and went to Fulham, 
but theViola remained furious at being gazumped.

Fiorentina, though, might ultimately have been better off without him. In lieu 
of Berbatov, the club have since acquired Mario Gomez and Giuseppe Rossi.

The latter was, of course, still recovering from back-to-back knee ligament 
injuries when he arrived from Villarreal for €10m plus bonuses in January of 
this year. He had not played in 15 months, and would need several more before 
he could even think of a return, but the potential returns were significant. 
Rossi had scored 32 goals in 52 games in his last full season for the Spanish 
club.

He had, indeed, been coveted by Juventus. "A few years ago negotiations [with 
theBianconeri] got to a very advanced stage," Rossi told Gazzetta dello Sport 
last week. "But then Villarreal got into the Champions League and said nobody 
could leave."

Instead, Rossi found himself lining up against Juve this weekend. For 66 
minutes his impact was limited. Rossi is, by his own admission, happier playing 
off another striker than leading the line – as he has been required to do in 
Gomez's absence. Despite working hard for the team on Sunday, neither he nor 
his team-mates had created many goalscoring opportunities of note, before Mati 
Fernández went down under a challenge from Kwadwo Asamoah in the area.

The referee, Nicola Rizzoli, pointed to the spot and Rossi stepped up to 
convert. There was no machine-gun celebration here. Juventus were about to be 
pierced by the rat-a-tat-tat of three more goals in breathtakingly quick 
succession.

First Rossi surprised Gigi Buffon with a snap-shot from the edge of the area 
that snuck past the goalkeeper's outstretched palm. Joaquín added Fiorentina's 
third just a few moments later, taking a pass from Borja Valero and slipping it 
in at the back post. Rossi then completed the scoring in the 80th minute with a 
glorious first-time effort to cap a lightning counter-attack. Final score: 4-2.

Even to the most optimistic Fiorentina fan such a turnaround must have seemed 
implausible. Juventus had never before conceded four goals under Antonio Conte. 
And Rossi had never scored a professional hat-trick.

The forward has now scored eight goals in as many games this season. 
Fiorentina's co-owner, Andrea Della Valle, would insist afterwards that he had 
never viewed signing Rossi as any kind of gamble, but even he cannot have 
anticipated quite such immediate returns.

Credit is due to Vincenzo Montella, the Fiorentina manager, who said on the 
eve of the game that his team's primary objective was to play entertaining 
football – even if that was not the best route to winning titles. Rossi's 
admiration for his manager is clear. He has said that the No1 attribute he 
would like to take from Montella was "the courage he had [in his playing days] 
to always try something special. Splendid overhead kicks, volleyed finishes: he 
was never afraid of messing it up".

Rossi's own confidence seems to grow by the week, and will doubtless have been 
boosted further by his return to the international fold. A 16-minute cameo 
against Armenia on Tuesday represented his first appearance for Italy in just 
over two years, but already considerable hopes are being invested in him. "With 
a Rossi up front, Italy usually win the World Cup,"quipped the Gazzetta 
journalist Paolo Condò on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/PaoloCond/status/391943528118747136>.

The player himself is not thinking that far ahead, insisting to reporters that 
he was only thinking one game at a time. And Sunday's result was certainly 
worth celebrating in its own right. Both Della Valle and his brother Diego came 
down to the changing rooms afterwards, bringing bottles of champagne to share 
with the players.

"For our fans this game alone is like winning a trophy," said the defender 
Manuel Pasqual, although the result also had positive implications for 
Fiorentina – keeping them in touch with the chasing pack. After last season's 
near-miss, this team is intent on challenging once again for a Champions League 
place.

Fiorentina were not the only ones, however, to benefit from such a result. 
Juventus's defeat allowed Roma to remain five points clear at the top ofSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>, following their own 
remarkable 2-0 victory over Napoli on Friday.

The match was originally scheduled to take place on Saturday, but was moved in 
order to avoid a clash with a planned protest in Rome against the installation 
of a new high-speed railway line. It had been mooted that the fixture could 
simply be flipped to Naples, switching dates with the return fixture later this 
season, but the Roma manager, Rudi Garcia, was strongly against any move that 
might undermine his team's early-season form.

His resistance was vindicated by another resolute performance from his team, 
who controlled the game despite losing Francesco Totti and Gervinho to injury. 
In the captain's absence, Miralem Pjanic took over the set-pieces and duly 
opened the scoring with a superb free-kick on the stroke of half-time. He later 
added the second from the penalty spot.

It was quite the week for Pjanic, who helped Bosnia to qualify for their 
first-ever World Cup on Tuesday, and it has been quite the season for Roma, who 
have now won eight consecutive games. Juventus are the only other team ever to 
have achieved such a feat in Serie A – doing so in 1930-31, 1985-86 and 
2005-06. They wonscudetto on every occasion, although the last of those was 
taken away as a result of theCalciopoli scandal.

Perhaps even more remarkable than Roma's points tally is the fact that they 
have achieved it while conceding just a single goal. A timely intervention was 
required from Daniele De Rossi on Friday, clearing off his line after Morgan De 
Sanctis could only half-block Goran Pandev's effort. Lorenzo Insigne really 
should have done better than hit a post when through on goal in the first-half, 
but those were the only real chances that the visitors fashioned.

Garcia played the win down afterwards, describing it as "a little bit of a 
Phyrric victory, given the injuries to Totti and Gervinho", but perhaps more 
revealing was the manager's decision to give his team three days off as a 
reward. That is a luxury that none of his rivals – each of whom have European 
games to worry about this midweek – could afford.

While Roma are relaxing, Juventus must gather themselves quickly for a 
Champions League trip to Real Madrid. After drawing at Copenhagen and at home 
to Galatasaray, the Italian champions are already under pressure in Group B.

But they will at least have Rossi cheering them on this Wednesday. "We'll win 
the league game, and then Juve can beat Real at the Bernabéu," said Rossi last 
week, when asked to make a prediction for Sunday's game. "That way everyone has 
a reason to smile."

Conte might not have signed up for such a deal beforehand, but he would 
certainly take it right now.

• One team that I have really not expended enough words on in this column – as 
a few of you have rightly pointed out – is Verona. They recorded their fifth 
win of the season on Sunday, moving up to fourth place after recovering from a 
goal down to beat Parma 3-2, and have looked so far like a model of what newly 
promoted sides should aspire to be – marrying the experience of veterans like 
Luca Toni and Massimo Donati with the promise of some authentically exciting 
youngsters like Jorginho (who scored twice from the penalty spot on Sunday) and 
Juan Iturbe. The manager Andrea Mandorlini has brought the different elements 
together expertly.

Sadly the team's fans have won headlines for the wrong reasons at times, 
brawling with their Bologna counterparts before their game at the Stadio 
Dell'Ara just before the international break, but on the pitch they have been 
tremendous. They go into next week's game away to Internazionale looking down 
at theNerazzurri in the standings.

• Gian Piero Gasperini seems to be making his mark already after returning to 
Genoa. The club collected four points from their first six games of the season 
under Fabio Liverani, but have matched that tally in just two games since their 
former manager returned.

• At last, Sassuolo have their first-ever top-flight win, leapfrogging Bologna 
this weekend with a 2-1 defeat of theRossoblu. Theirs was not a especially 
compelling performance, and they needed a moment of inspiration from Antonio 
Floro Flores – who scored their second goal with a fine, low shot from 20 yards 
– to get them across the line. You have to start somewhere, and for the first 
time all season, Sassuolo's players could wake up this morning knowing that 
their team were not bottom of the table.

• The first match of the Erick Thohir era at Inter was certainly an eventful 
one. TheNerazzurri had their goalkeeper, Samir Handanovic, sent off after five 
minutes, watched his replacement, Juan Pablo Carrizo, save the ensuing penalty, 
fell behind anyway a quarter of an hour later, equalised before half-time, 
conceded again early in the second, scored twice to take the lead and then blew 
it all by giving up a goal from a free-kick in the 90th minute.The more things 
change, the more they stay the same for Pazza Inter 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/goals/italy/inter-down-to-10-men-early-on-torino-grab-late-goal-to-draw-3-3-in-superb-thriller/>
.

• Milan have won three games so far this season in Serie A, and two of them 
have been settled by goals from Valter Birsa. Do what you will with that 
information, but hisgoal against Udinese 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x16684q_birsa-amazing-goal-against-udinese-19-10-2013_sport?start=9)>
 this weekend was certainly easy on the eye.

Results: Atalanta 2-1 Lazio, Cagliari 2-1 Catania, Fiorentina 4-2 Juventus, 
Genoa 2-1 Chievo, Livorno 1-2 Sampdoria, Milan 1-0 Udinese, Roma 2-0 Napoli, 
Sassuolo 2-1 Bologna, Torino 3-3 Inter, Verona 3-2 Parma
 