
It is excellent that finally the treasurer has realised that there is good and 
bad debt, but he shouldn’t stop there. Rather than just have us guessing how 
much good or bad debt there is, the budget papers should tell us.

After years of railing against government debt, Scott Morrison has discovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/14/good-debt-how-the-coalition-learned-to-stop-worrying-and-love-the-deficit>
 that actually debt is not only good, but also necessary.

In a speech to the Australasian finance and banking conference, Mr Morrison – 
after noting that a vast majority of Australia’s debt is private – argued that 
“it is patently obvious there are good uses of debt and there are bad uses of 
debt. Bad debt is debt use for recurrent spending purposes”.

Wow, who knew?! It’s amazing what happens when suddenly you are the one 
responsible for debt that continues to grow.

But, here’s a quiz. Look at the following graph and work out which is the good 
debt and which is the bad debt:

Now if one were cynical you could argue that Scott Morrison has discovered 
that debt turns good once the LNP is in charge and especially when he is 
treasurer and all the bad debt is any that can be blamed on the ALP.

But it was good to hear Morrison suggest bad debt was that which was required 
for recurrent spending, because with luck it will put to end the idiotic 
debate, whichresurfaced this week 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/the-economy/risk-room/labor-attacks-treasury-report-saying-economic-stimulus-was-counterproductive-during-the-gfc-20161209-gt7k7g.html>
, about the GFC stimulus package – which essentially had nothing to do with 
recurrent spending.

It would also be nice to believe that the thinking expressed in his speech 
will be a bit of a turning point for economic debate.

Among the dumbest economic narratives of my lifetime has been the suggestion 
that a budget surplus is inherently good for the economy and that a deficit is 
thus bad. The corollary to this is that governed debt is thus always bad and 
must be reduced.

We could hope that Scott Morrison has had this change of heart on debt because 
he has discovered the worth of fiscal stimulus and running a deficit, and the 
weakness of relying purely on low interest rates to get the economy moving.

But it is more likely his overwhelming worry that the ratings agencies are 
about to downgrade Australia’s credit rating from its current AAA rating, and 
that he will be blamed for it.

His speech pointedly mentioned those agencies, and he attempted to defend the 
government’s fiscal soundness. He noted for those “particularly in ratings 
agencies” that both “the current account and the budget, Australia’s position 
is stronger today than it was a year ago”.

He noted that Australia’s current account deficit “had narrowed to 2.7% of 
GDP, down from 4.5% in December of 2012”.

Now that is true as far as it goes, although picking December 2012 is a bit 
odd, and would appear to have more to do with it being a high point rather than 
any particular reference point of note:

The problem for Morrison, despite his new found understanding that debt can 
have positive effect on economic growth, is that the budget is very poor at 
differentiating the “good” debt from the bad. It all just gets lumped together 
– and so we only talk of the total level of debt (currently at $463.2bn – an 
80% increase on the $257.4bn held in June 2013).

It’s actually rather difficult to split up the budget into recurrent spending 
– things like pensions, ongoing defence, health and education spending – and 
capital expenditure – spending on infrastructure like roads, rail and the NBN.

One problem is such capital spending is not always “on budget”. 

Spending on the NBN, for example, is mostly “off-budget” because it involves 
spending on an asset for which there is an expected return. In such cases the 
spending is not regarded as government expenditure because unlike money spent 
on pensions or buying a new submarine, the government expects to get some (or 
all, or more) of the spending returned via someone buying the asset or 
repayment of the loan.

But there are impacts on the budget, and yesterday the parliamentary budget 
office releaseda report outlining the expected impact 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Budget_Office/Reports/Research_reports/Report_042016>
s out to 2026-27.

The PBO noted the government has committed $29.5bn in equity funding to NBN 
Co, and also a further loan of $19.5bn to complete the rollout.

That $49bn is not included in the budget deficit, but that does not mean there 
is not an impact on the budget.

Why government debt isn't the biggest threat to Australia's credit rating | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/23/why-government-debt-isnt-the-biggest-threat-to-australias-credit-rating>
The PBO noted that because the NBN Co has accumulated losses (which are 
expected in the early years of the roll out) there has been a $7.2bn 
deterioration in the government’s equity holdings. That amount is reflected in 
a decline in the government aggregate net worth, which is found “in its balance 
sheet and the department of communications and the arts annual financial 
statements” but crucially “it is not separately identified in the budget 
papers”.

The NBN does however have an impact on the budget deficit mostly from the debt 
interest payments that the government has to pay (because it had to borrow that 
$49bn).

The PBO estimates that the annual cost to the budget of the government’s 
investment in the NBN is $580m in 2016-17, and that it is expected to rise to 
$2.1bn by 2026-27.

The PBO notes, these costs “while significantly impacting the budget bottom 
line, are not separately identified in the budget papers.” It is only through 
such reports do voters or ratings agencies get a better picture of what the 
budget is made up of.

But given his new found acknowledgment of good and bad debt, one thing the 
treasurer could do in Monday’s mid-year fiscal and economic outlook, or in next 
year’s budget, is to actually provide us with the split of all such debt and 
expenditure.

That way we would have not only a clearer picture of the government’s debt 
level but also better debate about the need to cut back on recurrent spending – 
whether it be welfare, health, education or defence spending.

For now all sides operate within an environment where debt is essentially a 
black hole able to be labelled as good or bad depending on political whims.

Our economic debate would be much better served if – as with annual government 
expenditure – we were able to break down what the government debt is for and 
what the annual debt repayments are paying off.
 