
A government plan 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-launches-air-quality-consultation>
 to meet European air quality limits by letting councils ban diesel vehicles 
and charge drivers more for parking polluting cars and vans is disappointing 
and could result in further court cases and tens of thousands of unnecessary 
deaths, critics say.

The plan, drawn up by the Department for the Environment and Rural Affairs 
(Defra)in response to a supreme court ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/29/supreme-court-orders-uk-to-draw-up-air-pollution-cleanup-plan>
, proposes individual emission limits for four different vehicle types.

Local authorities would be responsible for policing its provisions in urban 
areas and would be told to incentivise electric, hydrogen and other ultra 
low-emission vehicles.

Critics say the plan offers no extra money or new powers and defers discussion 
on how the clean air zones might work in practice until next year. It also 
dodges the issue of a new runway in south-east England that could considerably 
increase air pollution.

Supreme court orders UK to draw up air pollution cleanup plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/29/supreme-court-orders-uk-to-draw-up-air-pollution-cleanup-plan>
The consultation document, launched by the environment secretary, Elizabeth 
Truss, at the same time as the announcement of the new Labour party leader on 
Saturday, accepts for the first time that more than 50,000 people a year die 
prematurely as a result of air pollution in the UK.

The figure includes around 29,000 deaths hastened by inhaling minute particles 
of oily, unburnt soot emitted by all petrol engines, and an estimated 23,500 by 
the invisible but toxic gas NO2 emitted by diesel engines.

The document says: “About 80% of the NOx emissions which are exceeding the law 
are due to transport. The largest source of emissions is from diesel cars and 
vans where there has been significant growth in numbers over the last 10 years.”

Defra, which has long resisted the idea of setting up a national system of 
clean air zones, had expected seven UK urban areas – including London, the West 
Midlands, south Wales and Nottingham – still to be breaking EU law in 2020. In 
April the supreme court ruled that this was unacceptable and said the 
government should come up with new plans urgently.

If the clean air zones and other measures outlined in the plan are all 
introduced, Defra would expect all areas except Greater London to comply with 
EU pollution laws by 2020. In London the targets will be met by 2025, five 
years earlier than previously expected, it said.


”London has a particular set of issues due to the scale of its population and 
the level of challenge presented by current levels of NO2 concentrations,” the 
document says. “Many measures have already been put in place and we consider 
that the measures in these plans will improve air quality sufficiently to 
achieve compliance with the directive in London before 2025.”

Truss said tackling air pollution was a priority. “We want local authorities 
and members of the public to come forward and share ideas on action to be taken 
at national and local level to make our nation cleaner,” she said.

“From improving bus and taxi fleets to investing in cycling infrastructure and 
upgrading roads so they run more smoothly, we want to work with our great 
cities and help them make changes to become better still.”

Alan Andrews, the director of Client Earth, a group of environmental lawyers 
who took the government to the UK and European courts to force action on air 
pollution, said: “The first reaction is disappointment. We are heading in the 
right direction but we are not seeing anything like a clear commitment to doing 
anything.

“The government seems to be passing the buck to local authorities. There has 
to be a clear legal commitment to act, otherwise the plans will be rejected by 
Europe. If we are not convinced, we will go back to court.”

Simon Birkett, the director of Clean Air for London, said: “Defra is passing 
all responsibility, without money or new powers, to local authorities. It is 
flouting the supreme court ruling to submit proper plans to the European 
commission by 31 December by intending instead to submit a ‘plan for plans by 
others’.

“It is making little or no effort to comply with NO2 limit values in at least 
28 UK zones before 2020, seven more before 2025 and London before 2030 unless 
others choose to adopt its ‘plan for a plan’ of clean air zones.”

Friends of the Earth said: “Defra claims plans would mean legal limits are met 
five or more years earlier than currently forecast, but even then London’s 
children would still suffer with illegally filthy air for 10 more years. Plans 
for a framework for clean air zones are welcome but there is no detail on how 
these could work.”

Critics also accuse the government of trying to bury the document by releasing 
it on a Saturday morning at the same time as the Labour leadership result was 
announced.




 