
David Cameron likes to boast that his coalition government was the first in 
the world to create a green investment bank to accelerate investment in new 
energy infrastructure. Now the new Conservative government is a seller. A plan 
to start to move the Green Investment Bank (GIB)into private ownership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/24/campaigners-alarmed-plans-sell-stake-green-investment-bank>
 will be announced on Thursday.

This policy will be pitched as a way to liberate the GIB to lend even more. 
Look, we will be told, our creation is so successful that it can make its own 
way in the world while staying true to the original ambitions.

A heavy dose of scepticism is required. First, the GIB has been up and running 
for only three years. It has lent only £2bn of the original £3.8bn earmarked by 
the Treasury. Current financial performance is acceptable – there was a tiny 
profit last year and the projected rate of return is 9% – but it’s very early 
to conclude that the organisation can prosper on a pure diet of private capital.

Second, the whole point of a publicly funded GIB is that it can lend at lower 
rates of return than the private-sector investors would accept. By taking the 
riskiest investment slices, it attracts other investors and thus gets new 
infrastructure built.

Would private sector owners be so happy to be high-risk lenders? It seems 
unlikely. Governments can’t tell privately owned banks where to lend. The GIB 
might end up chasing lower-risk projects, like onshore wind, where capital is 
in good supply already.

Third, the argument that the GIB is constrained by state-aid rules is weak. 
The organisation seems to win approval almost every time. Its current annual 
report, for example, boasts about expansion into community-scale hydro projects 
after the receipt of state-aid clearance.

Part-privatisation would be digested more easily if the yet-to-be-invested 
£1.8bn were still firmly committed to the GIB. Even that, though, is in doubt 
now that the hunt for private investors has started. Part of the sum may simply 
remain in Treasury coffers, where it could be described as another “saving.”

If so, it will be another jolt to investors’ confidence in an energy sector – 
green and otherwise – where investors are screaming for certainty in government 
policymaking.

Supermarket deals still distant

It’s a mighty stretch to say that the merger between Dutch group Ahold and 
Belgian counterpart Delhaize marks a revival in dealmaking in the supermarket 
sector. Yet warmer breezes managed to drift across from the continent – 
Morrisons and Sainsbury’s were two big risers in the FTSE 100 index.

Buyers may have had other reasons to like the UK supermarket duo, of course. 
Let’s hope so because the read-across, to use City jargon, from Ahold/Delhaize 
is surely precisely zero.

The €25bn (£17.8bn) merger is designed to combat Walmart in the US, where both 
companies have their main operations. The US food retailing market is still 
sufficiently fragmented to allow consolidation. The UK isn’t.

The discount invaders to the UK – Aldi and Lidl – would probably have to 
expand to at least three times their current size before regulators would 
tolerate a combination of two of the bigger players. Quite right, too: the old 
order is finally having to fight harder to retain loyalty, and we customers are 
enjoying the scrap.

Quindell questions at last

They are busy folk at the Financial Conduct Authority, but what took them so 
long to launch an investigation into Quindell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/24/fca-investigates-accounts-insurance-claims-handler-quindell>
, the insurance claims handler?

The company announced a full four weeks ago that there would be heavy rewrites 
to past figures. It said accountant PwC, brought in to take an independent 
look, deemed certain past accounting policies “not appropriate”. Indeed, the 
new boardroom regime at Quindell said itself that it viewed some practices as 
“at the aggressive end of acceptable practice”. Both statements should have 
caught the ears of the regulators at the time.

CVC eyes the finish line

If private equity house CVC really could make five times its money from its 
investment in Formula One byselling to the Qataris and/or a US tycoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/23/f1-nfl-miami-dolphins-owner-qatar-investors-bernie-ecclestone>
, it sounds like a deal too good to refuse. Bernie Ecclestone’s creation has 
made exploratory tours of the public markets more than once over the years and 
found few takers for a hard-to-understand trophy asset. That exit would seem to 
be permanently closed. In CVC’s shoes, that’s a problem that can’t be ignored 
indefinitely.
 