
The government’s controversial plan to privatise the Green Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-investment-bank> (GIB) has taken 
a major step forwards on Thursday, as business secretary Sajid Javid announced 
plans to repeal the legislation that gives ministers control over the bank.

In a written ministerial statement 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2015-10-15/HCWS239/>
, Javid said the government intended to repeal sections of the Enterprise and 
Regulatory Reform Act 2013 which was passed alongside the bank’s launch. The 
centrepiece of the legislation gives ministers a veto over any move to change 
the articles of association of the bank, including the five governing 
principles that require it to fulfil a green remit.

Javid insisted the move was necessitated by the government’s desire to move 
the bank off the public sector balance sheet so it could borrow without 
affecting the UK’s government deficit. He added that ministers would seek 
reassurances from companies bidding to buy the bank that they would not dilute 
its focus on investing in low-carbon infrastructure.

“It is now clear that to achieve reclassification of GIB as a private sector 
enterprise, we need to remove the public sector controls imposed on the company 
by the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Act 2013,” Javid wrote.

“Unless we remove these controls, there is a real risk GIB would remain 
classified to the public sector even after a sale so would remain subject to 
government control over its capital raising. This unintended effect of the 
legislation has only become apparent in the course of our work to facilitate 
GIB’s transition into the private sector.”

He also sought to downplay fears the bank’s green mission would be 
compromised. “I recognise that in taking this step, people will wish to be 
assured GIB will nevertheless continue to invest in green sectors as parliament 
envisaged,” he wrote. “I wish to make clear that the government also wants and 
expects a privately-owned GIB to continue this clear focus on green sectors – 
mobilising more private capital and further accelerating the transition to a 
green economy.

“It is clear from preliminary feedback that potential investors are interested 
in acquiring a stake in GIB precisely because of its unique green specialism 
and its green-focused business plan. As part of any sale process, we would 
expect potential investors to confirm their commitment to GIB’s green values 
and to set out how they propose to ensure these are protected.”

He added that the repeal would be delivered through an amendment shortly to be 
tabled at the Lords Committee stage, which would repeal the relevant sections 
of the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Act 2013 relating to GIB.

Despite government assurances, the move is still likely to spark an angry 
response from green businesses and activists who were reassured at the time the 
initial privatisation was announced that the bank’s green governing principles 
would retain legislative protection. Opposition is likely to be particularly 
pronounced among those who have argued thegovernment should retain a big stake 
in the bank 
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/opinion/2417891/green-investment-bank-privatisation-presents-a-threat-to-uk-low-carbon-economy>
 and borrow at the ultra-low interest rates available to public sector bodies 
to mobilise increased green investment.

Writing on  
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/opinion/2415306/why-privatisation-is-the-best-route-for-the-green-investment-bank>
BusinessGreen 
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/opinion/2415306/why-privatisation-is-the-best-route-for-the-green-investment-bank>
when the initial privatisation plan was announced, GIB chief executive Shaun 
Kingsbury said those concerned about the bank’s green remit being diluted 
should be aware that “first, our green purpose is written into law. Second, and 
to my mind more importantly, our green mission is what makes us special. 
Investors will back us because of it, not in spite of it”.

BusinessGreen understands officials at the bank and within Whitehall explored 
the possibility of the government retaining the legislation while also holding 
a significant minority stake in the bank. However, legal advice suggested that 
if the legislation allowed ministers a final say over the bank’s remit, it 
would not be possible to move the institution off the government balance sheet 
even if the government sold its entire stake.

Ministers remain adamant it is necessary to move the bank off the balance 
sheet if it is to raise additional funding through borrowing.

The bank has funding available through to early next year, but observers have 
warned that unless it is granted freedom to borrow or awarded more funding from 
the government in the Autumn Statement it may have to scale back its investment 
activities from next year.

Sources close to the privatisation process said both the bank and the 
government had been left “frustrated” by the advice on the scale of the changes 
needed to qualify as an off-balance-sheet asset. Officials are now said to be 
exploring ways to introduce new safeguards to ensure the bank retains its green 
remit in the long term.

BusinessGreen understands some form of contractual commitment may be sought 
from prospective buyers to provide reassurances the bank’s focus will remain on 
investing in low-carbon projects.

Sources close to the process said the chances of the bank’s remit being 
changed were very slim.

“The reason prospective buyers are interested is because of the robustness of 
the bank’s governance and the fact it is focused on green infrastructure,” they 
said. “The bank is seen as a major player in a growth market where there are 
not that many major players, so none of those interested in investing in the 
bank are doing so with a view to changing its green focus. But people are also 
aware there will be calls for further reassurances and safeguards.”
 