
A series of environmental tax measures will set Britain on a path towards an 
economic strategy to achieve targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The 
Chancellor claimed the planned industrial energy tax, reforms of vehicle duties 
and company car tax plus moves to protect the land represented the biggest 
package of green reforms ever seen.

 'We must resolve to lead in respecting the environment,' he said, promising 
that the programme would save 3 million tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions a 
year - almost a quarter of the official 12.5 per cent target to be achieved by 
2010.

 Patricia Hewitt, Economic Secretary to the Treasury, said the aim was: 'To 
shift the burden of tax from "goods to bads" - such as pollution. We are asking 
the polluter to pay by moving the burden of tax to the emission of greenhouse 
gases and the creation of waste,' she said.

 The deal was given a cautious welcome by industry and environmental groups. 
But Friends of the Earth warned that Mr Brown appeared to be retreating from 
the Government's 20 per cent pollution target. Tony Juniper, FoE campaigns 
director, welcomed the change to support the concept of green taxation, 
however. 'It seems the purpose of ecological taxation has been accepted and 
there has been a change in philosophy...'

 The Confederation of British Industry expressed dismay that there was no 
reduction in the overall level of fuel duty, though, and warned of the dangers 
of a harsh energy tax. But it welcomed moves towards greener transport and the 
fact that the money raised by the planned energy tax will be recycled to 
industry in lower national insurance. The Chancellor said he was implementing 
the recommendations in a report published last November by Lord Marshall, the 
British Airways chairman.

 The energy tax will be introduced in April 2001 after consultations with 
industry. It is expected to raise £1.75 billion in its first full year and 
should reduce carbon emissions by 1.5 million tonnes a year. The tax will apply 
to all industrial and commercial energy users, including agriculture and the 
public sector, but not transport.

 Organisations will pay a surcharge on purchases of electricity, gas and coal, 
which will be passed on by the suppliers to the Government.

 The cash raised will be used to reduce the level of national insurance paid 
by all employers by 0.5 percentage points.

 The initial charge is likely to be around 0.2p per kilowatt hour for coal and 
gas, and 0.6p for electricity.

 There will be concessions for heavy industry in which energy is a major 
proportion of total costs, but only if companies can come up with plans to 
improve energy efficiency.

 On landfill, the levy - first introduced three years ago - will rise by £3 a 
tonne from April 1 and by a further £1 a tonne each year until 2004. Mr Brown 
also warned that taxes could be on the way for the quarrying industry and for 
those using pesticides.
 