
Vince Cable, the business secretary, has officially marked the launch of the 
new green investment bank (GIB <http://www.bis.gov.uk/greeninvestmentbank>) by 
announcing funding of a new waste-to-energy plant and an energy saving scheme.

The small projects to build a new anaerobic digestion plant in Teeside and 
retrofit a panel-making factory in north Wales, involving investments by the 
GIB of £8m and £5m respectively, will soak up only a tiny fraction of the 
bank's total £3bn in funding.

Speaking before he formally confirmed the GIB was "open for business" on 
Wednesday morning in Edinburgh, Cable said these projects were proof of its 
wider ambitions to develop a low-carbon, clean energy economy.

He said the bank, claimed by the government to be the world's first, "will 
place the green economy at the heart of our recovery and position the UK in the 
forefront of the drive to develop clean energy.

"Three billion pounds of government money will leverage private sector capital 
to fund projects in priority sectors from offshore wind to waste and 
non-domestic energy efficiency, helping to deliver our commitment to create 
jobs and growth right across the UK."

In a deliberately political dig at Alex Salmond's Scottish government, which 
is promising to work closely with the new bank, Cable added: "Having the 
headquarters in Edinburgh is a powerful vote of confidence in the union, and a 
testimony to our commitment to helpingScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> lead the green revolution."

The GIB – which has been criticised by senior figures in the renewables 
industry for apparently refusing to invest in promising new wave and tidal 
energy designs, on the grounds they are too risky – is expected to attract 
billions of pounds of spending from private investors and banks.

Its main areas for investment will be offshore wind, waste-to-energy and 
industrial energy efficiency. The other sectors will be developing biofuels for 
transport, biomass power, carbon capture and storage, marine energy and 
renewable heat projects – all of which are in their infancy.

In a move which raised questions about whether it is also designed to 
undermine Salmond's case for Scottish independence by stressing the relative 
financial strength of the UK, the GIB will have a large office in London.

The London office will develop close and lucrative links to banks and 
investors, while the administrative base in Edinburgh will contain officials 
working on offshore and northern projects. The bank started work in October, 
after receiving state aid permission from the European Commission.

The GIB said the anaerobic digestion plant would be the first of six 
waste-to-energy power plants which would eventually produce 30MW hours of 
electricity, diverting more than 550,000 tonnes of waste from landfill. The GIB 
will spend £80m on that programme, with similar sums from private sources.

The energy efficiency project to retrofit a number of factories run by 
Kingspan is expected to cut energy use by 15% at their sites.

The industrialist Lord Smith, the chair of the GIB, said: "The Green 
Investment Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-investment-bank> 
has the potential to be a game-changing component of the UK's low carbon 
economy, and a profitable centre of excellence in specialist and renewable 
investment."

Fergus Ewing, the Scottish energy minister, is due to launch the Scottish 
government's "boot camp" – designed to help Scottish firms win backing from the 
bank – on Wednesday. The even will take place at a "futuristic" pyramid shaped 
building coated in solar panels in the former mining village of Bilston Glen 
near Edinburgh.

"Scotland campaigned hard to bring the Green Investment Bank to Edinburgh," 
Ewing said. "Edinburgh presents the best Green Investment Bank location for the 
UK. Not only is the city a major financial centre, but Scotland already leads 
the world in renewable energy, and built up world leading expertise from the 
oil and gas industry."
 