
A finance company established to provide loans to homeowners as part of the 
government’s flagship energy efficiency programme has warned it may consider 
voluntary liquidation at a board meeting next week.

The Green Deal Finance Company, set up with more than £240m of public money, 
has run into trouble partly because it has been unable to convince the 
state-ownedGreen Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-investment-bank> to continue 
funding.

The GDFC said talks were continuing with the bank and the company, which is 
backed by the big six energy suppliers such as SSE and British Gas, remained 
optimistic it would be able to obtain funding for the future.

The wider green deal scheme, which encourages householders to fit more 
efficient boilers and install better insulation, has been dogged by problems 
and failed to meet its targets.

A letter sent to the lending company’s investors on 22 September warned of 
liquidation but a spokesman insisted this was just “good corporate governance 
and risk management” by the chief executive, Mark Bayley.

“It is business as usual at the moment and this is a story of growth. We are 
now agreeing up to 1.2m green deal [financing] plans a week and are looking at 
how to fund future growth for 2015 and 2016.

“[Voluntary liquidation] is very unlikely and just one of a range of 
scenarios. We have strong support from investors and are still right in the 
middle of discussions with the Green Investment Bank [GIB],” added the 
spokesman.

But the letter from Bayley reveals that the not-for-profit GDFC has warned 
Amber Rudd, a minister at the Department ofEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> & Climate Change (DECC) about 
the need for more funding.

“We advised that the GDFC could not continue without funding and that this 
funding could not come from any source other than government [either GIB or 
DECC],” said Bayley’s letter which was first published by the website 
BusinessGreen.

The company spokesman confirmed a document had been prepared and sent to 
backers but insisted it was confidential so could not be made available.

The Green Investment Bank said it could not comment.
 