
Controversial plans to privatise the government’s Green Investment Bank (GIB) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-investment-bank> have run into 
serious trouble in parliament amid fears among MPs and peers that the sale will 
strip it of any legal requirement to back exclusively green projects and 
promote a low-carbon economy.

Key figures in government have admitted that the sell-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/15/green-investment-bank-will-be-taken-out-of-ministerial-control>
 has become hugely problematic, because ministers have been told the switch to 
the private sector has to include rule changes that will release the privatised 
bank from any duty to invest solely in green businesses or causes.

Ministers, and officials at the GIB – which is often cited by David Cameron as 
evidence of his commitment to green causes – have even been forced to admit 
under questioning by MPs that a privatised bank would “technically” be free to 
invest in projects such as fracking.

The Green Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-investment-bank> was set up in 
2012 under the coalition government to promote the transition to a low-carbon 
economy by investing in private sector projects including renewable energy. The 
aim was to offer greater security to what would otherwise have been high-risk 
ventures for private firms. Since its formation it has received £3.8bn of 
public funding.

It has become a major investor in the UK’s offshore wind industry and has 
provided investment support to renewable energy projects across the UK.

However, in June the business secretary, Sajid Javid, announced plans to 
privatise the GIB to allow it to raise more funds in the private sector and 
remove it from the government’s own balance sheet and deliver a return to 
taxpayers.

But the plans hit a problem when ministers learned that, in order for the bank 
to be taken off the government’s balance sheet, it had to be freed from rules 
which, when in public ownership, committed it to invest only in green projects.

Javid downplayed fears that it would lose its green purpose. “I recognise in 
taking this step that people will wish to be assured GIB will nevertheless 
continue to invest in green sectors as parliament envisaged,” he said. “I wish 
to make clear that the government also wants and expects a privately owned GIB 
to continue this clear focus on green sectors – mobilising more private capital 
and further accelerating the transition to a green economy.”

However, the moves have raised concerns among peers and MPs, who fear the GIB 
will become “just another bank” that will no longer be bound to support small 
projects and will be drawn instead to commercially attractive schemes that are 
not green at all.

The former Liberal Democrat energy secretary, Ed Davey,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ed-davey>said that the sale was being 
rushed before the bank had had long enough to establish a reputation. “The 
chancellor is in danger of undermining not just the bank’s green credentials, 
but also the return to the taxpayer. His rush to flog the bank before it has 
had time to establish its reputation looks more like a fire sale to realise 
cash than a well-designed strategy to promote green capitalism.”

Sepi Golzari-Munro, the head of UK programme at the environment thinktank E3G, 
said there was “a real risk that the government’s green focus will be 
destroyed. It’s extraordinary that the prime minister would tolerate this 
casual dismantling of his legacy.”

She added: “The government’s careless destruction of this British success 
story – widely admired and copied around the world – is incomprehensible, 
especially in light of the Paris climate conference, where governments, 
investors and businesses across the world have agreed to accelerate the 
transition to a low-carbon economy.”

Lisa Nandy, the shadow energy secretary, said: “It beggars belief that 
ministers’ plans for the Green Investment Bank risk setting back efforts to 
build a greener economy. Yet again the chancellor is taking steps that will 
deter investment in the clean energy projects that we urgently need to keep the 
lights on, create jobs and cut pollution.”

In November, when MPs on the Commons environmental audit committee asked 
Richard Callard, executive director of the Green Investment Bank shareholder 
team at the Department for Business, if a privatised bank could invest in 
fracking, he replied: “Technically it could. It is a question of whether it 
would.”

The House of Lords has already cut up rough over attempts to remove the “green 
mandate” on the bank when a cross-party group of peers backed an amendment by 
258 votes to 212 demanding that a privatised bank only be allowed to invest in 
low-carbon schemes. The issue will be considered by the Commons in the new year.

The dispute is an embarrassment for the government as it tries to head off 
claims that it has watered down its commitment to green causes, now that it is 
not under pressure from the pro-green Lib Dems.
 