
Greg Clarke, the Football Association chairman, has spoken to gay footballers 
and suggested the idea of a group of players coming out together.

Clarke said last year that he “wouldn’t recommend” a footballer coming out at 
the moment because of the risk they would be verbally abused, but believes 
several players sharing the spotlight may be the answer. “I put the message out 
there that if a number of top-level pros want to come out, why don’t we 
synchronise it? So one person doesn’t have to come out on their own,”he said in 
an interview with the Times newspaper 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/sport/fa-chairman-ive-spoken-to-gay-players-hg0sb3s03>
.

“The Premier League, the Football League and the FA could do it at the start 
of the season. At the start of the season everybody thinks it is their season, 
the crowds are happy, the sun is shining. I was asked [recently] if football is 
ready for top-level pros to come out and I said I’m not sure we were.

“There was a survey which said people would support gay people in their own 
team, yes, but I’m worried about what they said about gay people in the other 
team, not that they would do bad things, but I said we should prepare well.

“I’ve been asking the gay community: ‘How can we provide more support and 
orchestrate it so that people get the right level of support if people want to 
be open about their sexuality?’. I’ve met 15 gay sports people in the last four 
weeks to ask their views, including footballers.

“It is very difficult to get to a representative set of gay, top-level 
footballers because some of them are happy with their sexuality and just don’t 
want anyone to know. I don’t want to be part of a process that says: ‘You’ve 
got to come out.’ That’s not right. People are cautious. It’s a one-way street. 
Once you’re out of the closet, you’re out.”

Clarke also spoke about the possibility of the next England manager coming 
from the BAME community. “I can see a black England manager,” he said.

Asked in particular about the Brighton manager Chris Hughton, who was born in 
London and played for the Republic of Ireland, Clarke replied: “Why not? It 
would be wonderful to see a black England manager. It would put us forward 20 
years.”

He continued: “We are trying to achieve more opportunities. When I talked to 
Football League owners about this, I said: ‘How do you appoint managers?’ [They 
said]: ‘I talk to my mates, ex-players, ex-managers.’

“Who are they?’ ‘White?’ Their friends are white.

“Does that mean it would be difficult to get on your radar if you’re black?’ 
‘I hadn’t thought about that.’

“It wasn’t conscious racism. But there was a realisation that: ‘Shit, we have 
a system that is systematically biased against black people unintentionally.’”

Clarke, meanwhile, remains optimistic about introducing a winter break into 
the Premier League season 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/the-game/two-week-winter-break-is-too-short-i-want-four-weeks-jl8rw6939>
, but reckons England can win a major title even without one. “I am hopeful 
about a winter break,” he said. “It would be good for player welfare. Tired 
players getting injured is not morally right.

“You can get to two weeks by getting rid of a few replays, moving a few things 
to midweek, but medical stats show two weeks is not enough. It has to be three 
or four weeks to make a difference. That knocks a hell of a hole in the season.

“I think we can win a tournament without a winter break. England probably 
should be a consistent top-10 performer in the world, occasionally being a 
top-four performer, becoming a top one or two performer.”

Gay Premier League players are scared to come out, John Amaechi tells MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/english-football-tolerates-homophobia-john-amaechi-tells-mps> 