
The trucks were parked up, bumper-to-bumper and mile upon mile of them. No one 
is going anywhere fast in what has been dubbed the world longest-lasting 
traffic jam, in China's Hebei province.

The motorway, part of the Beijing to Tibet expressway, resembles a giant car 
park – and has done so for the past 10 days. Normally one of the busiest – and 
noisiest – trunk roads inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, now 
the only sound that can be heard is the chirrup of the crickets in the nearby 
wheatfields.

The Chinese authorities are struggling to clear the congestion, now entering 
its eleventh day and which, at its peak, stretched for more than 60 miles 
(100km). But the drivers still joining it are not optimistic about reaching 
their destinations swiftly.

"I have not moved for five hours," said Zhang Xingping, 27, standing outside 
his cab near a road traffic sign mockingly warning him to obey the 100km per 
hour speed limit.

A combination of road works and the huge volume of coal trucks that daily 
rumble along this main route is said to have caused the problem.

Stalled traffic has stretched for days between Jining in Inner Mongolia, and 
Huai'an in Hebei province, north west of Beijing.

The roadworks are necessary to repair damage caused by an increase in cargo 
lorries using the highway after large coalfields were discovered in Inner 
Mongolia.

This highway is often congested, as local drivers can attest, shrugging their 
shoulders at the monotony of hour after hour spent with their gearbox in 
neutral. Many of them think this is well on its way to being the world's 
busiest road.

This particular and spectacular jam began on 14 August. At one point vehicles 
were moving half-a-mile a day with some drivers taking five days to clear it. 
Now it is slowly easing, said Zhang. He should know. He has been through it 
once already in the past 10 days. "It took me three days last time," he said. 
"I am prepared. I have plenty of water."

Local villagers come on motorbikes to take advantage. They are selling simple 
boxed meals of rice, vegetables and pork for 10 yuan (£1) each. "It's not 
cheap. It's not filling. But we have no choice," said Zhang, of the food on 
offer.

The stranded drivers, who spend their time sleeping, walking around, or 
playing cards and chess, are a captive market, and the local entrepreneurs are 
keen to take advantage. A bottle of water, normally 1 yuan, sells for 10 yuan, 
while the price of a 3 yuan cup of instant noodles had tripled. "It's more 
expensive than eating in a restaurant," complained one driver who gave his 
surname as Lu.

Zhang had set off this morning from the coal mining area in Inner Mongolia. As 
the moon rose and time ticked into the early hours, he still had no idea when 
he would make Tangshan, in Shandong province, the coastal industrial town to 
which he and his cargo were headed. Others were following the same route. 
Instead of celebrating Zhong Yuan festival, China's equivalent of Halloween, 
with their families, they were on the highway, smoking cigarettes. Another 
driver, who gave his name as Li, blamed the high toll fees on the roads in 
neighbouring Shanxi province – as well as the volume of traffic that has become 
a big problem in China.

This year it overtook the US as the largest car market in the world, and has 
embarked on a huge expansion of its national road system in recent years.

"Everybody has to use this road as the other is too expensive," Li moaned. "It 
should be free."

He had heard that the end of the jam might be just 10km away, but was 
unconvinced. "Even if it starts moving now, it will be very slow because all 
the drivers are asleep," he said.

Huge traffic jams are common in China on some mountain roads. If a truck 
breaks down it can often lead to jams of several days. This, however, does seem 
to be an exceptional one.

China's state media reported the authorities were trying to ease the 
congestion by allowing more trucks into Beijing, especially at night, and 
asking trucking companies to suspend operations or take alternatives routes. 
But even as that was announced, reports were of more congestion, this time on 
surrounding roads as drivers tried to avoid the jam. It looks like drivers may 
well have to draw on their reserves of patience for some time to come.
 