
Guus Hiddink <https://www.theguardian.com/football/guus-hiddink> has suggested 
Diego Costa is being unfairly pursued by the Football Association for his 
reaction to being sent off at Everton last weekend after the governing body 
determined no action could be taken against the Chelsea striker over his 
tête-à-tête with Gareth Barry.

Costa clashed with the former England midfielder six minutes from time at 
Goodison Park last Saturday as the visitors slipped out of the FA Cup, amid 
fears he had initially made to bite his opponent. Barry knocked back that issue 
by stressing he had not been bitten – Hiddink suggested Costa’s motion had 
ended up turning into something more akin to a kiss – and the FA has determined 
the forward will face no sanction for an alleged gesture directed at home 
supporters on the stroke of half-time.

However, it has charged Costa with improper conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/14/diego-costa-improper-conduct-red-card-chelsea-everton>
 relating to his reaction to being shown the red card by Michael Oliver, with a 
commission expected to determine next week whether there should be further 
punishment for that on top of the two-match ban Costa will begin for Saturday’s 
visit of West Ham United.

“It is a bit like, OK, you cannot prove the bite so sometimes, in my opinion, 
they are looking a bit where they can chase him,” said Hiddink, who clarified 
he was talking about the governing body rather than the match officials. “What 
I smell and didn’t like, and what I spoke about with Diego, is we both had the 
feeling they could not charge him on the kiss, ‘but let’s see what else we can 
get him for’.

“Maybe he is a bit marked in this. I know it’s difficult if a player is 
frequently, bit by bit, provoked. We all do it … you play a bit with that, it’s 
part of the game. You see how far can you get someone out of his comfort zone 
and into the red zone. So the player has to control himself. That is why I said 
I cannot guarantee Diego will not explode in matches. But maybe there was a 
little bit of searching for ‘where we can get Diego’.”

Hiddink spoke with Costa this week about the player’s conduct on the pitch as 
the striker prepares for a spell on the sidelines. He will miss the games 
against West Ham and Aston Villa, and has been omitted from the Spain squad by 
Vicente del Bosque while he undergoes treatment on a recent tendon injury in 
his hip.

“Of course Diego is not happy because he desperately likes to play, but we’ll 
see if he gets another game a third game, as well,” said Hiddink. “We have 
spoken about his reaction. We’ve talked many times about him playing on the 
edge. But I can never guarantee whether or not, bit by bit, he can be provoked. 
It is a matter of temperament and character. But what we all would like is that 
he keeps playing as he has been, with a lot of ‘blood’ [and thunder]. He has 
been contributing a lot to the resurrection since December.”

West Ham enjoy view looking down on Chelsea – but challenge is to stay there
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/18/west-ham-chelsea-premier-league>
Costa, who was retrospectively handed a three-match ban this season after a 
clash with Arsenal’s Laurent Koscielny and Gabriel Paulista, has scored 11 
goals in his last 16 appearances forChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> and will be missed against West 
Ham, where Bertrand Traoré or Loïc Rémy will deputise.

Neither Radamel Falcao nor Alexandre Pato is considered fit enough to feature, 
while Eden Hazard will be rested for up to a month to ensure he recovers fully 
from the hip complaint from which he has been suffering since the defeat at 
Leicester in December. The Belgium coach, Marc Wilmots, has not selected the 
playmaker for his country’s friendly against Portugal this month.
 