 The literary career of Gwendolyn Brooks, who has died aged 83, was 
distinguished enough to be coveted by any writer but it is also axiomatic that, 
being black and a woman, she achieved more than her fair share of "firsts" in a 
vocation that spanned eight decades. The first African-American to win the 
Pulitzer Prize (1950) and to be appointed to the American Academy of Arts and 
Letters (1976), she became poet laureate of Illinois in 1968.
She was born in her grand mother's home of Topeka, Kansas, the first child of 
David Brooks - son of a runaway slave - and Keziah Brooks. The month-old 
Gwendolyn was taken by her parents to Chicago and remained a "Chicagoan" all 
her life. A shy, bookish child, she developed an early passion for poetry and 
in 1930 her first published verse appeared in American Childhood magazine. By 
the age of 17 Brooks was submitting work to the weekly poetry column of the 
Chicago Defender, in which she published almost a hundred poems.

Graduating from college during the Depression, she did secretarial work, then 
in 1939 married Henry Blakely, also an aspiring writer. They divorced in 1969 
but were reunited four years later. Her first collection of poetry, A Street in 
Bronzeville (1945) depicted everyday black life on Chicago's South Side, 
peopled with memorable characters. In 1946 she won a Guggenheim fellowship, as 
well as a $1000 award from the American Academy of Arts and Letters.

It was for her second collection, Annie Allen (1949), that she was awarded the 
Pulitzer. A sequence of poems about a black girl growing up in Chicago, it won 
particular praise for Brooks' innovation in poetic technique, the 
sonnet-ballad. A poetic oeuvre grew to include more than a dozen books, 
including Bronzeville Boys and Girls (1956), The Bean Eaters (1960), Selected 
Poems (1963) and In the Mecca (1968), nominated for a National Book Award.

Her reputation as a poet somewhat overshadowed her only novel, Maud Martha 
(1953), which is, in many ways, a significant precursor of more recent fiction 
by African-American women. Written with an affecting precision that details the 
process by which the young woman protagonist gradually matures, Brooks 
acknowledged its similarities to the trajectory, if not the specifics, of her 
own life: "There's fact-meat in the soup, among the chunks of fancy."

More specific autobiogra phy was included in her 1972 book, Report From Part 
One - a medley of reminiscences, interviews, photographs and vignettes, in 
which Brooks tellingly writes: "Are you aware of a fact-that-should-be 
startling about the High Days of my youth? All were Europe-rooted or 
America-rooted. Not one celebration in my black household or in any black 
household that I knew featured any black glory or greatness or grandeur. A 
capricious bunch of entries and responses has brought me to my present 
understanding of fertile facts. Know-nows: I know now that I am essentially an 
essential African, in occupancy here because of an indeed 'peculiar' 
institution. I know that the black emphasis must be, not against white, but FOR 
black ."

Though she had become an established and respected talent after starting out 
as a "literary integrationist", Brooks might have been marginalised by more 
strident black writings of the civil rights era, had she not been open to 
change and development in herself. She was clear about the moment that she 
rediscovered awareness of her blackness: it was in 1967 at a Fisk University 
writers' conference addressed by an angry LeRoi Jones (Amiri Baraka). 
Thereafter she was increasingly concerned with accessibility: "My aim, in the 
next future, is to write poems that will somehow successfully 'call' all black 
people: black people in taverns, black people in alleys, black people in 
gutters, schools, offices, factories, prisons, the consulate; I wish to reach 
black people in pulpits, black people in mines, on farms, on thrones; not 
always to 'teach' - I shall wish often to entertain, to illumine."

Her increasing concern for accessibility and affordable pricing led her to 
move publishers, to small local presses such as the black imprint Broadside 
Press - with whom she published the chapbooks Riot (1969) and Family Pictures 
(1970). She also established her own outlet, the David Company (named for her 
father). She also produced many works of non-fiction, works for children, 
essays and reviews. Her idealism was untarnished by age and she was almost 80 
when Report From Part Two appeared in 1995.

Her commitment remained steadfast - "I am interested in telling my particular 
truth as I have seen it" - yet her tone was gently insistent rather than 
dogmatic. Typically, she wrote in Corners of the Curving Sky:

Our earth is round, and, among other things 

That means that you and I can hold 

Completely different 

Points of view and both be right. 

The difference of our positions will show 

Stars in your window I cannot even imagine. 

Your sky may burn with light, 

While mine, at the same moment, 

Spreads beautiful to darkness. 

Still, we must choose how we separately corner 

The circling universe of our experience. 

Once chosen, our cornering will determine 

The message of any star and darkness we encounter. 

She is survived by a daughter and a son. 
Gwendolyn Elizabeth Brooks, writer, born June 7 1917; died December 3 2000
 