
People with fewer educational qualifications are much more vulnerable to 
suffering a heart attack or stroke, an Australian study has found.

The Sax Institute’s 45 and Up study, published in the International Journal 
for Equity inHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health>, found 
Australians who left school with no qualifications were more than twice as 
likely to have a heart attack as those with a university degree.

Lead researcher Dr Rosemary Korda said the findings of the five-year 
longitudinal study were “disturbing but clear”.

Researchers investigated the links between education and cardiovascular 
disease events – such as heart attack or stroke – by following more than 
276,000 men and women in NSW aged over 45.

Why is heart disease still killing millions every year?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/nov/08/why-is-heart-disease-still-killing-millions-every-year>
In adults aged 45-64, heart attack rates among those with no educational 
qualifications were more than double those with a degree. The risk was about 
two-thirds or 70% higher for those with some tertiary qualification, such as 
that obtained for a trade, compared with those who had a degree.

Korda said a similar pattern of inequality existed between household income 
and cardiovascular disease events. The study’s findings could reflect a number 
of factors, she said.

“It could reflect different lifestyle behaviours, so different levels of 
smoking in the community, different levels of obesity, so those risk factors 
that increase your risk of heart attack of stroke.

“It could reflect healthcare, so we know that there could be differences in 
the uptake of the use of preventative medication to reduce your risk of a heart 
attack or stroke.”

The differences showed that many instances of cardiovascular disease could be 
prevented, Korda said.

“With better education often you have better income and more resources to draw 
on so you are in a better position.”

Heart disease is the single leading cause of death in Australia, with an 
average of one person dying every 27 minutes.

Heart Foundation NSW chief executive Kerry Doyle said the research provided a 
further opportunity to unpack the relationship between educational achievement 
and cardiovascular disease risk.

“We know that good eduction impacts long term health by influencing what type 
of job you have, where you live and what food choices you make,” Doyle said.
 