
On a gloomy day on the south coast, there was a dark cloud over Heather Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson>, who will head to Wimbledon 
with diminished levels of confidence after she continued her poor run of form 
by tumbling out of the Aegon International in the first round.

Watson cut a frustrated figure for much of an uneven contest, publicising her 
exasperation early in the second set when she chastised herself after one of 
many missed shots, and the British No2 could have no complaints about her 6-2, 
6-3 defeat against Elena Vesnina. Finding herself on the wrong end of that 
scoreline against the world No53 a week before the start of Wimbledon raises 
some awkward questions.

As hard as the locals tried to lift her from the stands, Watson was unable to 
shake the torpor out of her system and it was a deeply unsatisfactory way to 
prepare for her home grand slam. “I definitely didn’t play well today,” Watson 
said. “I felt really out of timing and slow to the ball.”

Having come within two points of beating Serena Williams at Wimbledon last 
year, she ought to have been in a buoyant mood once the season switched from 
clay to grass. But the Watson who electrified Centre Court by giving the world 
No1 the fright of her life is nowhere to be seen at the moment. Ranked 50th in 
the world, and likely to slip a few places after this setback, the 24-year-old 
is straining in search of her best tennis, although she did say that she feels 
ready for SW19.

Watson’s grass campaign began with a first-round defeat against Magdalena 
Rybarikova in Nottingham, after which she revealed that she has been suffering 
from an abdominal strain, and although she beat Camila Giorgi in the first 
round of the Aegon Classic in Birmingham last week, Barbora Strycova sent her 
on her way in the second round.

Heather Watson reveals abdominal injury hastened first-round exit at Nottingham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/08/heather-watson-abdominal-injury-first-round-exit-nottingham>
On to Eastbourne, a chance to get some energy back into her legs and some 
enjoyment back into her tennis. Perhaps the sea air would have an invigorating 
effect.

Yet that rainy week in Birmingham has dampened her spirits. “I just want no 
rain,” Watson said. “I don’t mind if it’s cold. I just want no rain.”

The wet and misty conditions did not affect Vesnina, though. She dispatched 
Watson in an hour and 13 minutes of one‑sided tennis, offering her a lesson in 
ruthlessness. Watson was not clinical enough when she carved out opportunities, 
while her experienced Russian opponent was clinical every time she spied an 
opening. “When I had my chances to come back and get into the match, she hit an 
ace or always made her first serve and played well,” Watson said.

The fifth game of the opening set was critical. Vesnina saved three 
consecutive break points thanks to two aces and a crisp forehand winner, held 
her serve and broke Watson for a 4-2 lead. The 29-year-old faced more break 
points in the second set, as Watson attempted to muster some defiance, but she 
always had an answer and earned the decisive break for a 5-3 lead.

It was that kind of day for the Brits. Tara Moore, the world No229, almost 
caused a stir against Ekaterina Makarova but she was unable to convert two set 
points in the first set and dropped her serve with a double-fault to allow the 
Russian back in before losing 7-5, 6-4. Naomi Broady, meanwhile, was no match 
for Monica Puig, losing 6-1, 6-1 to the world No43.

At least there was one ray of sunshine courtesy of Laura Robson, who insisted 
on Twitter that she would be fit for Wimbledon despite withdrawing from her 
Eastbourne qualifier against Madison Brengle on Sunday with an injury in her 
right thigh. “Getting solid treatment on my leg and will be all good for 
Wimbledon,” the former British No1 said.
 