
On a cloudy day in Paris after a restless night of worry, there was clarity at 
last forHeather Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson>, 
whose victory against her new doubles partner, Nicole Gibbs, in the first round 
of the French Open just about put her on the plane to Rio for the 2016 Olympic 
Games.

Stan Wawrinka survives Lukas Rosol scare to reach French Open second round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/french-open-stan-wawrinka-scare-first-round>
The world No56 tried hard to keep her mind on this tournament but admitted 
later: “It’s been pretty much my main goal this year. I have no idea why [other 
athletes] don’t want to go – because I love it. I had a great time [at the 2012 
London Olympics], and I want to go back.”

Returning to the court after an overnight pause because of the weather, Watson 
finished off her American opponent impressively to win 5-7, 6-2, 6-2.

While Rio has occupied much of her thoughts during the summer, the night 
before this rain-interrupted match Watson was not all relaxed. “I couldn’t get 
to sleep. My mind was going over everything in my whole life, not just the 
tennis match. I slept like five hours. But I woke up feeling fine, and it was 
just all just being positive for me.”

Naomi Broady, meanwhile, is happy to reveal she is not bothered about going to 
Rio – partly because she has not played Federation Cup and is therefore 
ineligible – but nor is she going any further here, after another American, 
Coco Vandeweghe cut through the early evening gloom on Court No4 to win 6-4, 
3-6, 6-3 in just over two hours. Broady led 2-0 in the third but could not hold 
her tennis together when it mattered.

Watson next plays a first match against Svetlana Kuznetsova, the 13th seed and 
former champion here on a bit of a roll, who defeated Yaroslava Shvedova, 4-6, 
6-1, 6-4. “She is a grand slam champion, been around a long time, and can be 
extremely dangerous on her day,” Watson said. Watson broke Gibbs for 2-2 when 
they resumed after an interminable wait, then held and broke again for 4-2, 
hitting hard from behind the baseline in extended rallies that frayed the 
nerves of the small knot of supporters huddled together on Court No3.

Gibbs, wearing leggings to guard against the creeping cold, fought through 
three deuce points but hit a final forehand long and needed to hold to stay in 
the match. The American’s discipline disintegrated under quality pressure in 
the final service game of the match, and Watson sealed it with a cool overhead 
smash after two hours and 19 minutes – but which must have seemed a lot longer.
 