
The British No2 Heather Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson> has appointed John-Laffnie 
de Jager as her new coach.

The 24-year-old has been without a mentor since splitting with Diego Veronelli 
this year and the South African former grand slam doubles finalist joins up 
with Watson in China.

De Jager, who will work with Watson on a full-time basis, arrived on the day 
that she was forced to withdraw from her Wuhan Open first-round match due to a 
stomach bug.

“My new coach arrives today,” Watson said. “We were talking after the US Open 
and just putting plans in place. This is the earliest we could start working 
together. He is full-time but this will be a trial period to see how it goes 
because we are just getting to know each other.”

Watson had been working with Veronelli for two years and broke into the top 50 
under his guidance but the pair split at the end of last season. They briefly 
renewed their relationship this year, before again amicably splitting in the 
summer.

Watson was trailing 3-6, 1-2 to her American opponent Madison Brengle in 
sweltering conditions in China when she decided she could no longer go on.

Heather Watson crashes out of US Open as heat and Hogenkamp prove too much
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/30/heather-watson-out-us-open-first-round-richel-hogenkamp>
She had called a medical time out after losing the first set and a doctor was 
called on to court to take her blood pressure in some worrying scenes 
reminiscent of her first-round US Open defeat last month. However, she tried to 
play on and came out swinging in the second set before her symptoms got the 
better of her.

Watson reported afterwards that she had started suffering from the stomach bug 
overnight. “It came on this morning. I woke up in full sweats and I was like 
‘shit’. I am not feeling great, I have gastrointestinal pains, basically I have 
got a stomach bug and it is impossible to compete at a good level when you feel 
like that in the first place let alone in the heat and when you are playing 
such a tough player,” she said.

“It is frustrating, especially because I had a couple of matches under my belt 
and I was starting to feel good on court, so it is a shame this happened but 
there is nothing I can do.

“I just have to keep looking after myself. Now it sucks, because I now have to 
just practice and I way prefer playing matches.

“I was getting goosebumps on the court and that is the worst feeling, 
especially when it is hot. I came out swinging at the end of the first set but 
against a player like Maddie she will just get everything back.”

The 24-year-old had played twice on Saturday in similar mid-30s temperatures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/heather-watson-china-open-tennis>
 to get through qualifying and make it to the main draw.
 