
It is hard to think of more contrasting emotions than those which Heather 
Watson will remember from Wimbledon 2016 but after initial heartbreak the 
overriding one will be joy. Having been so down after herfirst-round defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/30/wimbledon-2016-heather-watson-knocked-out-by-annika-beck>
 in singles, when she squandered three match points against the German Annika 
Beck, the 25-year-old from Guernsey walked away with a first grand slam title, 
in mixed doubles.

Together with her Finnish partner, Henri Kontinen, the Briton clinched a 7-6, 
6-4 victory against the No15 seeds, Robert Farah, of Colombia, and Anna-Lena 
Groenefeld, of Germany, to secure the first grand slam title for either player.

Watson is the first Briton to win the mixed doubles at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> since Jamie Murray partnered 
Jelena Jankovic to the 2007 title and the first British woman to win a title 
since Jo Durie partnered Jeremy Bates in 1987. With Andy Murray winning the 
singles and Gordon Reid and Jordanne Whiley winning wheelchair titles, it made 
it four home champions in all.

“Who would have thought we’re here as champions, for me, after such a horrible 
first-round loss,” a delighted Watson said. “I made it to the last day of 
Wimbledon, which has always been one of my goals, to reach just the second week 
of a slam.

“I couldn’t have chosen anybody better than Henri. He made our time on court 
so fun. Off the court as well, like warming up together, it was just fun and 
easy. I’m just so freaking happy.”

The pair got together only after an introduction from the former British 
player Chris Eaton and knew very little about each other until they met just 
before the French Open. They gelled immediately and the results followed.

Having had a bit of luck when their first two scheduled opponents gave them 
walkovers, Watson and Kontinen, a 26-year-old Finn who had never been beyond 
round two in any doubles grand slam before, laughed their way all the way 
through to the final, upsetting the tournament favourites, Leander Paes and 
Martina Hingis, in the quarter-finals.

In the final they led 5-0 in the first‑set tie-break before taking it 7-5 and 
then broke once in the second set when Groenefeld served a double fault in the 
seventh game. After they extended their lead to 5-4 Kontinen held serve to win 
it, clinching victory with a smash down the middle of the court.

“Some people say ‘It’s fun’ but don’t actually really have fun,” Watson said. 
“I think we did. We didn’t think about winning. We just wanted to go out there 
and enjoy our time and just try and play well and good. Now we’re grand slam 
champions, Wimbledon champions.

“It’s been a great week. I’ll remember this forever. It’s been a dream of mine 
since I was a little girl to be a grand slam champion. I would take anything, 
singles, doubles, mixed doubles. I’ve got one of those now. I’m just really 
happy. Now I’m going to take a few days off. I need a little break.”

Farah and Groenefeld v Kontinen and Watson: Wimbledon 2016 mixed doubles final 
– live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/10/farah-and-groenefeld-v-kontinen-and-watson-wimbledon-2016-mixed-doubles-final-live> 