
Heather Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson> has revealed 
an abdominal injury hindered her preparation for the Aegon Open at Nottingham, 
where she suffered a first-round exit.

The British No2 was beaten 4-6, 6-0, 6-4 by Magdalena Rybarikova on Tuesday as 
her grass-court season got off to a slow start. But Watson, who exited the 
French Open in the second round a fortnight ago, had barely had any practice on 
the surface due to an injury she picked up at Roland Garros.

“I didn’t feel good out there,” she said. “Coming into the tournament I hadn’t 
had the preparation I wanted. I’d had an abdomen tear after Roland Garros so I 
only had four days’ practice before this tournament.

“I was actually pleased with the way I served. I thought that was one of the 
best parts of the game and I am pleased that I didn’t feel my abdomen at all 
because I wasn’t even sure if I would be able to play.

“So I was pleased with that but I definitely need a lot more practice on the 
grass. I didn’t feel comfortable at all during that match. I just want to get 
on the grass as much as possible and play a lot more points.”

There was an all-too familiar losing feeling for Laura Robson, who is enduring 
a frustrating time following her comeback from two rounds of wrist surgery. The 
former British No1 has won just one match on the WTA Tour since her March 
return and was beaten 6-4, 7-5 by Michelle Larcher de Brito in Nottingham.

Robson had her chances against the Portuguese qualifier but did not take them, 
especially in the second set where she led 4-1. “I could really do with some 
wins and that would definitely help my confidence but it’s not technique that 
is stopping anything,” Robson said.

“It is more just match rhythm and getting used to momentum shifts and not 
letting them last too long, and that is what happened. What the top players do 
well is have a couple of bad points but then they’re right back on it, and in 
this match I let that go on for too long. There are no physical problems at 
all, which is quite nice.”

The current British No1 Johanna Konta, now ranked 18 in the world, and 
qualifier Tara Moore are the last two British women left in the tournament and 
play their second-round matches on Thursday.
 