
Heather Watson, the last British woman to go out of the French Open, is going 
home disappointed but less than crushed.There was not a lot she could do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/25/french-open-2016-svetlana-kuznetsova-v-heather-watson-live>
 against Svetlana Kuznetsova over two quick sets, when the Russian dredged up 
some of the power and majesty that won her the title here seven years ago.

Kuznetsova was irresistible in the first set, briefly vulnerable in the second 
but ultimately too strong in the shot, winning 6-1, 6-3. Had it lasted longer 
than an hour and 12 minutes, Watson had hopes of running the Russian off her 
30-year-old legs.

She was unaware her cagey opponent had taken extra-long breaks, and was even 
called for it in the second set.

“I genuinely didn’t notice she was taking too long in between points,” Watson 
said. “It didn’t bother me at all. I guess I didn’t notice it. She wasn’t doing 
it on purpose. But I feel in that second set, definitely, it became more 
physical, with longer points. I kind of wish it was five sets today.”

But Watson, a loser for a fifth time in the second round here, acknowledged: 
“First set I thought she was pretty flawless. Second set I had a couple chances 
here and there to get even. At 4-2, to win that game she hit a backhand down 
the line from behind the baseline. There wasn’t much I could do. I fought the 
whole way through. I didn’t get chances to run around and hit my forehand. She 
was just keeping it on my backhand consistently.”

Watson follows the British No1, Johanna Konta, Naomi Broady and Laura Robson 
out of the singles, but is still in the doubles, and will then leave Paris to 
prepare for Wimbledon, scene of her greatest performance and biggest regret:
coming within two points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/03/heather-watson-serena-williams-wimbledon>
 of beating the world No1, Serena Williams, last year.

Did she ever think back to that glorious Friday evening? “No, I don’t,” she 
said politely but firmly, preferring to look forward not back. She has “just 
about” ensured a place at the Rio Olympics and soon heads to the grass of 
Nottingham before the All-England Club.

Unusually self-contained in a world of precious stars, Watson is comfortable 
with an unconventional coaching arrangement, bringing in her main mentor, the 
Argentinian Diego Veronelli, occasionally, as well as relying on her mother 
(and, once but no more, her father).

French Open 2016: Stan Wawrinka and Garbiñe Muguruza in action – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/25/french-open-2016-svetlana-kuznetsova-v-heather-watson-live>
“I’ve been happy the way it is,” she said. “I do like some weeks away from the 
coaching and have to think of things for myself. My mum, we argue a lot, but 
she is really smart when it comes to tennis. She’s been with me my whole 
career. I never listen to her – but, when it’s about tennis, I do.

“There are players that are very dependent on coaches. Some people like to be 
told everything and take direction completely. I like coming up with solutions 
on my own and thinking for myself. It depends on what type of player you are, 
what you want. It works well for me to dip in and out.”
 