
Heather Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson> and Kyle 
Edmund ensured Great Britain’s Olympic singles tennis campaign got off to a 
positive start.

Rio Olympics 2016: Peaty breaks world record as Russia win first gold – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/06/rio-olympics-2016-day-one-games-live>
Andy Murray begins the defence of his gold medal on Sunday having been given 
the day off after his flag-carrying duties at the opening ceremony. But Britain 
has greater strength in depth at the top these days and Edmund, ranked 83 in 
the world, comfortably dispatched Australia’s Jordan Thompson 6-4, 6-2. Watson 
had a tougher time in the heat against China’s Peng Shuai but the British 
women’s No2 finally clinched a 6-4, 6-7, 6-3 win after two hours and 29 minutes.

Peng, ranked 264 but in the tournament on a protected ranking after injury, 
has only won one tour-level match all season while Watson was on a four-match 
losing streak.

“It was a toughie,” said the Guernsey player, who lost in the second round on 
her Olympic debut in London. “I didn’t play my best. I don’t think it was the 
prettiest of matches but it was one of those winning ugly ones and in the third 
set I think it was a battle of the fittest and I actually felt great, so I’m 
really pleased with that.”

Watson struggled to close out the match. Having broken serve to lead 6-5 in 
the second set, the 24-year-old was unable to serve it out and then lost the 
tie-break.

She twice led by a break in the decider only to be pegged back again, and she 
was forced to save more break points serving for the match before finally 
taking her third chance.

She said: “I don’t think it was an Olympic thing, it’s just I haven’t won a 
match since Birmingham – oof, that’s a while.”

Watson, who next plays the 15th seed, Elina Svitolina from Ukraine, is setting 
her sights high, saying: “My goal here is to get a medal. That’s the dream.”

Edmund was not originally ranked high enough to qualify for the Games but the 
slew of withdrawals gave him a place and he again showed the damage his huge 
forehand can do.

The 21-year-old was Britain’s Davis Cup hero last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/davis-cup-great-britain-serbia-tennis>
 when, with Murray taking a spectating role, he won both his singles matches 
against Serbia.

After his Olympic bow, Edmund said: “It’s just nice to get the win really. 
There’s been quite a lot of training since my last match in Toronto so you just 
want to get going.

“I didn’t feel that nervous, just excited. It’s nice to put on the GB shirt, 
it’s not something you get to do all the time.”

Next up for Edmund is Japan’s Taro Daniel, with Novak Djokovic potentially 
lying in wait should they both progress to the third round.

Edmund and Watson both said they were inspired by marching behind Murray at 
the opening ceremony in the Maracaña.

Only Johanna Konta did not attend from the British team, and the decision 
looked to have backfired for Colin Fleming and Dom Inglot. First up at 11am, 
they were off court by midday, thrashed 6-3 6-0 by the little-known Mexicans 
Santiago González and Miguel Ángel Reyes-Varela in 51 minutes. Fleming 
described it as “horrendous”. 
 