
This sort of thing never happened at HBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> when Andy Hornby was in charge of 
mortgage lending. Hornby was so reliable at the Halifax that last year he 
landed the job of chief executive of the whole shooting match. So it's 
embarrassing, to say the least, that the bank has been losing market share so 
rapidly.

The good news is that the cock-up was relatively straightforward. It was a 
case of fiddling with a winning formula to encourage loyalty among existing 
customers while overlooking the threat of tougher competition from the likes of 
Barclays and Nationwide.

These policies can be reversed, and HBOS was able to reassure everyone 
yesterday that it took its "natural" market share of 15-20% during May. Given 
the overall figure for the first six months of this year will still be less 
than 10%, it follows that Halifax's lending in the first quarter was 
spectacularly weak.

So has it hit the panic button? Is it having to reclaim leadership by 
launching an unofficial price war? HBOS says not, arguing that retaliation will 
come in bursts and that profit margins will not suffer.

It will be impressive if this best-of-all-worlds outcome materialises. High 
street banks, after suffering too many bad debts in credit cards, have turned 
to mortgages as a relative haven. Suddenly conditions seem anything but gentle. 
An embarrassed HBOS, led by a chief executive with a golden reputation to 
protect, could be a dangerous beast.

Hornby is still promising to hit his target of group earnings growth of 10%, 
so he has a licence to throw some punches. It would be a shame not to.

Barclays doubters

It is not only Atticus Capital, the activist investor, which would like 
Barclays to refrain from turning the scrap for ABN Amro into a bid 'em 'up 
fight to the death. To varying degrees, the sentiment seems to be shared by 
some less vocal - and rather more significant - shareholders.

Many of Barclays' big shareholders are also investors in Royal Bank of 
Scotland, ringleader of the competing bidding consortium. There is strong 
similarity between the line-up of top-10 holders of each bank's shares: it's 
the old crew of M&G, Schroders, Legal & General and UBS through to Scottish 
Widows and Standard Life. Whoever gets ABN should win at a good price, these 
investors may reasonably think. They don't want to see another example of the 
"winner's curse".

The omens are not great. Yesterday we learned from Barclays' latest filings 
that John Varley, chief executive, first approached ABN two years ago; 
proposals were even put to the Dutch bank's board last summer. This is not a 
casual flirtation. Varley seems smitten.

More to the point, Barclays and ABN have a collection of 10 investment banks 
working on the deal. That lot earn their big bucks when the prize is delivered. 
Restraint may not be their watchword, and the combined financial brainpower can 
surely conjure some form of plan B to energise the offer if RBS gets closer to 
spoiling the party.

As for RBS, chief executive Sir Fred Goodwin has never been the retiring sort. 
The official line is that the consortium could lose interest if the Dutch 
supreme court sanctions ABN's sale of LaSalle, the US unit and the trophy RBS 
covets most, to Bank of America. Maybe, but it's more likely that the 
consortium will simply rejig its batting order and take a tilt at ABN without 
LaSalle. Either way, it is now unlikely that ABN will simply drop into 
Barclays' lap.

One school of thought says Varley may decide discretion is the better part of 
valour, and walk away rather than over-pay. That would require a bigger 
rebellion in Barclays' ranks than anything we've heard so far, but it's hard to 
deny: there is muttering at the back, and it's not just Atticus.

Icelanders' long ride

Baugur has made more winning bets than duds in its venture onto British high 
streets, and the purchase of 5% of Debenhams looks shrewd.

The fact is that the private equity brigade behind Debenhams is deeply 
embarrassed about the performance of the department store group since its 
return to market. Texas Pacific, CVC and Merrill Lynch know they'll struggle to 
float another retailer while Debenhams continues to be a mess. The trio still 
have 30% of the shares, so there is also a direct incentive to get the share 
price back to the float price.

And if they can't? Well, Baugur is now best placed to pick up the pieces if 
necessary. Last week it hired Jeff Blue, one of the Merrill men behind the 
float. This suggests that, one way or another, the Icelanders are in Debenhams 
for the long haul.

nils.pratley@theguardian.com <mailto:nils.pratley@theguardian.com>
 