
So much for the battle of The Bridge. This was a more controlled kind of 
warfare. Not to mention a more controlled, cold-blooded kind of Diego Costa, 
who led by stealth from the front as Chelsea came from one downto beat 
Tottenham 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/chelsea-tottenham-premier-league-match-report>
 in a thrilling, high-tempo match.

So often at times like these Costa has found himself at the centre of a kind 
of José-flavoured theatre of hate. Here he took his revenge served cold. In 
April Chelsea’s centre forwardhad his eye gouged by Moussa Dembélé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/04/tottenham-hotspur-mousa-dembele-chelsea-fa-charge>
 in a match that simmered and spat before ending in authentic unbound rage.

Victor Moses seals Chelsea comeback as Tottenham lose unbeaten record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/chelsea-tottenham-premier-league-match-report>
If that was a fairly mind-bending collective meltdown, the role of Chelsea’s 
chief provocateur still bears re-examination. Perhaps the greatest trick Costa 
ever pulled was persuading Mark Clattenburg not to book him in a match where 12 
yellow cards were shown, with Costa involved in at least five of then, and 
where he often seemed to play not on the edge or over the edge but with no real 
idea the edge even existed in the first place.

But then this is the amazing thing about Costa. Despite looking like he could 
be sent off in the first five minutes of pretty much every game he ever plays, 
he is yet to receive a red card in England, which tells you everything about 
his expertise in twanging only the right buttons, but winding his head in just 
as the train zips past.

There has been less of that under Antonio Conte. Here Costa’s key contribution 
wasn’t a kidney jab or an armpit pinch or anything from the Bad Diego range. 
Instead he waited and simmered as Tottenham suffocatedChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> in the first half, asserting the 
physical strength of that bulked-up central rump, and looking like a team in 
the process of applying a cold, firm choke-hold on an occasion that got away 
from them in April.

Costa had already begun to wrestle his way into this game by half time. On 51 
minutes he finally struck, producing a supreme piece of creative centre forward 
play to present Victor Moses with the chance to put Chelsea ahead. He has 
always been surprisingly quick in possession, scooting the ball along with his 
toe like a man very deftly punting a tin can along the pavement. Here he pulled 
to the left touchline, dipped and slowed and suddenly spurted off past his old 
pal Dembélé to the goal-line, cutting the ball back for Moses to finish via a 
deflection off Jan Vertonghen, who was unable to clear the ball on the goalline.

Costa has a habit of mugging defences, often in a semi-literal sense, but this 
was a controlled piece of leadership from the front. It always seemed likely 
Chelsea would need something like it. On a cold, still evening in west London 
there was a deep, murky roar for Costa’s name before kick off, although not 
before Stamford Bridge had spent 10 minutes being bathed in smoke, spotlights 
and carpet salesman convention-style inspirational music, just in case anyone 
in the ground hadn’t realised this was an appropriate moment to feel excitement.

Chelsea 2-1 Tottenham Hotspur: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/26/chelsea-v-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-live>
Costa’s first act was to tumble under Vertonghen’s challenge and then leap up 
clutching his face, already gripped with outrage, agony, fever.

With some people there is no such thing as the last straw. The first straw is 
the last straw. Before long Spurs were bossing the centre of the pitch, Dembélé 
twice walking through challenges from Eden Hazard and Pedro.

Cristian Eriksen’s opening goal had its roots in a moment of bodged 
retaliation. As Dele Alli carried the ball forwards David Luiz came barrelling 
out of defence like a man startled out of a slumber. He fell over. The ball ran 
to Eriksen, whose fierce left-footed shot was so sublimely executed there was 
the tiniest gulp, a shutter-frame of silence around the ground as it stretched 
the net and bounced down, followed by a huge roar from the far end.

Costa seized the ball and placed it on the centre spot. Before long he was 
being upended again by Eric Dier, springing up, fists clenched, and swaggering 
about in that familiar haemorrhoidal Gaucho style. In a first half that saw him 
win no aerial duels, have no shots and complete a total of six passes, Costa 
just kept on running. He overhit a cross. He punched the air and gestured 
vaguely at some imagined injustice.

The difference with this Chelsea is the breadth of threat. You can shut Costa 
down, but under Conte they can strike from other angles. Previously dormant 
parts have begun to sing. In the current run of wins eight players have scored. 
One of them, Pedro, produced a stunning moment to level the game before 
half-time, pirouetting with wonderful balance and curling a thrilling shot 
beyond Hugo Lloris into the top corner.

At times after Moses’s goal Chelsea held on in the clinches. Costa missed an 
easy chance at the end. But this was still an exhilarating seventh straight 
win, helped by N’Golo Kanté’s increasing influence in the middle and Pedro’s 
speed and purpose, and led from the front by new, increasingly regal Costa, who 
has now had a hand in more goals than any other player in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, and whose craft rather 
than his fire was key here.
 