
Alex De Minaur started day two of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> with a well-earned loll 
about at a local beach. It was part of a media opportunity involving the South 
Melbourne lifesaving club and having caught a glimpse of the 17-year-old’s rosy 
cheeks and pipecleaner limbs, you could understand if they were keeping a 
concerned eye on him.

De Minaur’s best moments in the spotlight so far have been the more 
spontaneous ones. On Monday, havingdispatched tour veteran Gerald Melzer in 
five gruelling sets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/alex-de-minaur-wins-through-to-second-round-on-australian-open-debut>
, the talented youngster shyly nodded and bobbed his head along to a series of 
questions trying to explain exactly who he was and where he had come from to 
take the first day of the tournament by surprise.


Related: Alex De Minaur wins through to second round on Australian Open debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/alex-de-minaur-wins-through-to-second-round-on-australian-open-debut>

The most arresting sight came when he had dealt with the first round of 
questions and then switched to his parents’ native tongue to answer the 
inquiries of the Spanish-speaking press. It turned out his endearing, red-faced 
rookie awkwardness remained no matter the language and, for the record, he 
could have done the same in French if asked.

As an uncynical counterpoint to the sly mumblings of Bernard Tomic and Nick 
Kyrgios’ world-weary combativeness, it was an innocent and affirming start to a 
tournament thick with egos and forever humming with the background noise of 
corporate cynicism.

After his 5-7, 6-3, 2-6, 7-6 (7-2), 6-1 win over Melzer, which stretched 
across a taxing three hours and 42 minutes in sticky, leg-cramping heat, the 
young Australian said that on a practical level, he hoped his second round 
match – against the big-hitting American, Sam Querry – would also take place on 
Show Court 3, his lucky charm. But Australia’s mini-sensation of this 
tournament won’t be playing on outside courts for long.

Equally, if De Minaur wasn’t already on the radar of the IMGs of the world, he 
will be now. Had you internet searched his name on Tuesday morning you were 
already confronted with headlines like: “Alex De Minaur: the future of 
Australian tennis?” and “How sleepover at the Hewitts’ helped Alex De Minaur”, 
which was a significant change from those which predominated the day prior. 
Sample: “Who is Alex De Minaur?”

He is, in brief, the Sydney-born son of Spanish and Uruguayan parents, and 
though he has lived since he was five years old in Alicante, remains firmly 
committed to playing his tennis for Australia. His rise here is, 
unsurprisingly, also making a few waves back in Spain, and half a dozen 
travelling journalists from the country requested radio interviews immediately 
following his round one victory. His responses were polite and considered.

Some patience might be needed. At 180cm De Minaur and his country should 
probably pray for one last growth and there’s plenty of muscle still to be 
added to his spindly frame. He favours hard courts and grass, and reached the 
junior singles final at Wimbledon in 2016. De Minaur lists Roger Federer and 
Lleyton Hewitt as his heroes and has received plenty of backing from the 
latter, but here’s one to make you feel as ancient as Harry Hopman and wooden 
rackets: he was two years old when Hewitt won his last grand slam title.

On Wednesday in Melbourne De Minaur will face world No31 Querry and his 
thumping first serve, with a potential date with Andy Murray after that. In 
lieu of live TV coverage of their son back in Spain, Mr and Mrs De Minaur will 
continue to make do with live score updates on the internet. “Definitely the 
happiest moment of my life,” was how De Minaur put his round one win. Depending 
on his recovery from a taxing first triumph in Melbourne, it might soon have 
challengers.
 