
Italian, for me, has always been the one that got away. At school, French and 
Latin came easily, but for some reason I chose German as my third language. 
After getting into university to study French and Italian, I decided I’d rather 
lie around reading novels for three years and switched to English. In my 20s, I 
signed up for an evening class, but it was full and I was bumped into Spanish. 
Though it’s far more useful – the second-most widely spoken language in the 
world – Spanish just wasn’t the same.

Finally, five years ago, after feeling frustrated that I couldn’t communicate 
on family holidays, I enrolled on an evening class at my local secondary 
school. To balance the numbers, I was bumped again, this time into the 
improvers’ class, which wasn’t ideal: after a year, I might have been able to 
understand more complex written Italian, but at least the beginners could 
confidently ask the way to the station. Still, willpower (and paying in 
advance) motivated me to go out every Monday night for a couple of years until 
the school decided the classes weren’t financially viable.

By then, I could speak Italian well enough to get by on holiday, even if I did 
drift into Spanish when winging it in restaurants. I tried to maintain it by 
dabbling with the free language-learning website and app Duolingo, but by last 
summer, on a trip to southernItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> 
where fewer locals speak English, I realised that even the limited vocabulary I 
once had was dwindling.

With evening classes both inconvenient and expensive – my nearest is £23 a 
time – I looked into other options online. I considered one-to-one lessons via 
Skype, but they cost around £40 an hour, and still wouldn’t allow me to study 
when it suited me. After some free taster lessons, I opted forRocket Languages 
<https://www.rocketlanguages.com/>, which was set up in New Zealand in 2004 and 
has 1.2m users worldwide. It offers three levels in 12 languages, online, via 
an app or on DVD, and costs from around £80 a level.

When I get home late, I cheat and just do 10 minutes of flashcards to avoid 
going back to zero on the streak counter

Will swapping a real-life teacher for a virtual one work for me? I skip 
through the early lessons until I come across things I don’t know, which I’m 
surprised to find is only a third of the way through the first level. Rocket 
Italian uses a more challenging combination of listening, writing and speaking 
thanDuolingo <https://www.duolingo.com/>, and the extra effort is rewarded with 
quantifiable progress.

There are (only slightly cheesy) audio lessons you can download to listen to 
on the go, written tests, flashcards and lots of speaking using 
voice-recognition software, which really helps with pronunciation. Like 
Duolingo, Rocket Italian uses gamification to boost motivation: you set 
yourself a daily points target and work towards it; you win badges; a streak 
counter shows how many consecutive days you’ve been studying; and a leaderboard 
ranks the top scorers in each language in the last 24 hours.

At times I miss being able to discuss grammar points with a teacher, but I 
should probably venture into the forum, where you can post questions for tutors 
and other users. I also find it frustrating that the algorithm will accept only 
one way of saying a phrase. But, conversely, a teacher with 15 students 
couldn’t possibly match the way it picks up on things I don’t know and makes me 
repeat them. And though I have to shout certain phrases over and over to get 
the software to recognise my answer, at least I remember them.

I try to practise every day, and setting my points target high encourages me 
to spend an hour or two completing a full lesson. But when I get home late, I 
sometimes cheat and just do 10 minutes of flashcards to avoid going back to 
zero on the streak counter. And while earning badges or a place on the 
leaderboard might spur on competitive types, I’m more motivated by wanting to 
be able to ask for things in the local Spar this summer.

I have a long way to go; studies suggest that it takes at least 600 hours to 
become fluent 
<http://www.effectivelanguagelearning.com/language-guide/language-difficulty>, 
even in a language closely related to English. After six weeks of Rocket 
Languages, I feel more fluent than when the evening classes finished, and I’m 
determined to persevere – even if my family are sick of me shouting Italian at 
my laptop.

Start here

• Try to think in the language you’re learning – start by describing things 
you see and do in the course of your day

• Plan when you will study and think of it as a diary commitment that you have 
to make time for

• Watch movies or read newspapers, magazines or websites in your chosen 
language

• Get a pocket dictionary or an app on your phone so conversations don’t stop 
every time you get to a word you don’t know
 