 There was once a grand little short story by Bernard Malamud which sent the 
eyes jolting off the pages in a perfect flurry of embarrassment: it had you 
wetly gnawing the front cover in anguish rather than going on to the next 
paragraph of gauchery. A nervous man at a funeral, made awkward by people and 
yet determined not to put on a bad show, and of course as he twitched and 
picked his way through the mud to avoid eye contact with anyone he slipped, and 
slid right down there, right on top of the coffin.
I thought of this when John McCririck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/john-mccririck> made his fabulously 
ill-judged call to bring smirking petty party politics to Robin Cook's funeral. 
Not embarrassment for him - for the walking liver-spot McCririck wouldn't have 
been faintly shamed if he'd gone on to pull out his two little white knackers 
and bathe them in the font then whack them on the marble in timpani 
accompaniment to a boisterous rendering of 'Mame' - but for the rest, in St 
Giles, for the quiet astonished indrawn gulp of Edinburgh breath.

Funerals. Up there, in terms of our quite thorough lack of ability to control 
them, with cancer and taxis and the sinuous ways of love: and I know that Robin 
Cook had probably wanted fat old dog-head to be there, to talk about all the 
silly horses, but surely he didn't want that. It's like someone deciding, 
giggling, to say that Edward Heath had always wanted his catafalque marked by a 
boombox version of 'Who Let the Dogs Out?', or that Queen Victoria had 
stipulated that her lying in state be made more fartily cheerful by a four-day 
stint from La Petomane. But what can we do? By then, what can we do?

It's one of my vaguely recurring nightmares (along with the one we surely all 
get, that old one with the anchovies and crossbows and Enid Blyton's talking 
spleen) to watch, from afar (obviously: well, to watch from dead) my own 
funeral, and watch people getting it either ignorantly or spitefully wrong, the 
latter becoming increasingly likely as I stumble through yet another nasty 
little birthday having lost some more good friends and fine lovers and just 
accumulated instead some more rapscallions and scrimshanks.

What, if they really wanted to get me spinning down there like a bullet in a 
barrel: what would they choose? Someone truly woeful to do the reading: perhaps 
Hazel Blears, then, or maybe a winning little appearance from Jim 'Nick Nick' 
Davidson, or a toupeed Scottish golf commentator? Music? Perhaps the theme from 
The Vicar of Dibley - 'because he was always such a fan of wry loving winks at 
religion, not funny as such but funny in a warm way' - or... or, no, I know - 
excerpts from Elvis: The Rap Years!, 'envisioned' by Andrew Lloyd Webber - come 
on, guys, let me have this, I haven't had a pop at him in years - and starring 
Pete Doherty and the fat wee Krankie. A poem, a fantastically annoying poem, 
perhaps something turbid penned by Feargal Keane to a small bored child just 
after giving up the drink: maybe a reading, repetitive and dull and untrue, 
from the works of Dan Brown or from the memoirs of either Ian Paisley or Gerry 
Adams, read out in a jokily high Brummie accent by someone such as Su Pollard 
in a clown suit. Perhaps a second 'tribute', from some illiterate 
middle-management coprolith, pointing out that my best years had in fact always 
been behind me and that I wasn't much of a team player. And off my coffin would 
happily sail, me twisting and birling away inside like seaside rock: but at 
least, dear Robin, no McCririck.
 