
‘Reality is now a kind of huge advertising campaign, selling television’s 
image of what life is about.” That could be a response to recent events, but JG 
Ballardsaid those words in 1988 
<http://jgballard.ca/media/1988_june_twilight_zone_magazine.html>. As readers 
of my father will know, he was fascinated by the way advances in technology and 
the mass media revolutionised our lives.

When reality television became a massive new trend, my father was unsurprised. 
He once said to me: “How about a series with celebrities fighting?” (I was by 
then a TV producer, no doubt influenced by the fascination with which he 
watched the small screen at home.) His suggestion was uttered, of course, with 
a certain amount of glee in his voice and a mischievous chuckle. And he was 
right – we’ve seen that fight many times over now, fromI’m a Celebrity... Get 
Me Out of Hereto other incarnations. American cable TV is awash with such 
formats.

But in a way, TV itself is now finding itself outdated, making way for new 
forms of technology, new forms of entertainment and reality. He predictedYouTube
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> nearly 30 years ago, in an 
interview withVogue, a medium “in which each of us will be both star and 
supporting player. Every one of our actions during the day, across the entire 
spectrum of domestic life, will be instantly recorded on videotape. In the 
evening we will sit back to scan the rushes, selected by a computer trained to 
pick out only our best profiles, our wittiest dialogue, our most affecting 
expressions filmed through the kindest filters, and then stitch these together 
into a heightened re-enactment of the day.”

We’ll also have the freedom to pretend to be mass murderers, to be an active 
participant in our own fantasies and dramas

He was also predicting other social media. My children have grown up with 
Facebook and now Instagram and I see them and their friends filtering and 
manipulating their profiles and photos to present what they see as the best 
version of themselves and their lives. Photos are retouched before posting, 
social media etiquette is carefully positioned.

It’s a technological freedom that could take dark turns. “We’ll also have the 
freedom to pretend to be a mass murderer for the evening… You’ll no longer be 
an external spectator to fiction created by others, but an active participant 
in your own fantasies/dramas,” my father wrote.

What’s this, but virtual reality? Consider the Audi Virtual Experience car,  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fYKCwKnhlfg>which enables a driver to wear a 
headset and then go out for a drive in a real car.

The simulation takes place on a controlled track at Munich airport. The 
virtual world features a track around a virtual city. In the virtual world, a 
cyclist falls over and another virtual car pulls out in front of the driver. It 
doesn’t feel like we are a world away from the world ofCrash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/04/zadie-smith-jg-ballard-crash> 
(the Ballard book, later adapted for film) and my father’s famous equation: sex 
x technology = the future.

However, where the developments in media technology have had the most profound 
impact is on the world of politics. I would love to know what my father would 
have to say about Donald Trump’s rapid political rise and his race for the 
White House. He would have found it fascinating. Given that he predicted a 
B-movie actor (Ronald Reagan) becoming president, I doubt he would have been 
surprised that a TV reality star ended up doing the same.

The Guardian view on the EU referendum: the vote is in, now we must face the 
consequences | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/the-guardian-view-on-the-eu-referendum-the-vote-is-in-now-we-must-face-the-consequences>
But it’s hard to imagine it happening in a world before television and social 
media. TV loves Trump’s soundbite style – his brashness and machismo. In the 
AmericanApprentice series, Trump sat in a boardroom similar to the Oval Office. 
It was a dramatic setting clearly designed to accentuate his power: the 
mahogany oak table, the lighting, the American flag in the background and the 
informed advisers conjure an image of Trump as pseudo-president.

Perhaps he was plausible as a leader to the American public because he had 
appeared in their living rooms for so long, playing a fictional commander. The 
idea of a powerful and decisive leader who dismisses people with a fierce 
“You’re fired!” can become a reality. In Britain, the recent European Union 
referendum was also played out like a TV show. The television debates were 
staged like a talent show, with the politicians on stage debating in short, 
soundbite style. One of the debates was held at Wembley Arena – in front of a 
vast crowd who either hollered approval or jeered, in the style of theHunger 
Games <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4S9a5V9ODuY> films.

This was not a debate that was conducted with intelligence and due 
consideration, even though it had severe implications for the UK’s future. It 
was about who performed best on TV. Like another episode ofThe X Factor, except 
that Britain got to lose its future health and stability, rather than missing 
out on a recording contract.

Interestingly, the tide of nationalist, anti-immigration fervour was something 
my father had written about inMillennium People and Kingdom Come. We are now 
seeing this rise in nationalist sentiment coming to the fore in other parts of 
Europe, all played out on TV of course.

Trump, Marine Le Pen, the break-up of Europe, the rise of nationalism… violent 
terrorist attacks… the world feels eerily like a world dreamt up by Ballard. 
Meanwhile, to close the loop on where my father first came in, we will retreat 
into new private worlds of fantasy and escape through virtual reality.

Bea Ballard is executive producer of the Jonathan Ross show, and former 
creative head of BBC Entertainment Events
 