
Freelancers are increasingly in demand as companies value the flexibility and 
cost effectiveness of their services. Even personal assistants (PAs), 
traditionally the heart-and-soul of an office, are working out of the office.

This move has created opportunities for those who love being a PA, but not the 
lengthy commute or the long office hours, to do the same work as a virtual 
assistant, or VA, on a self employed basis, from the comfort of their home. And 
with email, internet and Skype technology at their disposal, there is little 
that they did in the office that they can't do remotely, except, perhaps, make 
the coffee.

The move from PA to VA is one that has paid off for 38-year-old Zeina Barker. 
She spent six years commuting to London from Tonbridge in Kent to work in a 
number of support roles in the financial sector. But after having her son in 
2007, she decided that she would like to make her work fit around family life, 
instead of the other way around, and began exploring her options for working 
from home.

She says: "I did a lot of research into becoming a virtual assistant, which at 
that time was quite a new concept in the UK. I joined a couple of webinars on 
how to start and where to start, and also took a management training course so 
that my skills would be absolutely up to date."

Barker then began exploring the various online freelance websites where she 
could find work, eventually registering withPeople Per Hour 
<http://www.peopleperhour.com> where freelancers can search and bid for 
projects across a wide range of professions and business sectors. Although 
there was plenty of work available, the competition was fierce.

"I realised I was competing against a lot of other people with similar skills 
and experience, and because there was a bidding process against VAs in 
countries like India, who were bidding at incredibly low rates," she says.

Her solution was to take a more strategic approach, promoting her specialist 
skills - research and foreign languages (she speaks Arabic) and targeting 
startups, consultancies and small-business owners, who needed those skills on a 
flexible basis.

She says: "It took me a good year, with very little income, but eventually I 
started getting the type of work that I wanted. Part of the challenge was that 
at that time, business people were still sceptical about the idea of their 
personal assistant working remotely, but more and more companies are now 
realising that you don't have to be physically present to provide your 
service." Her clients hail from a variety of sectors and countries, including 
France, Luxembourg and the Middle East.

She says: "If there is a downside, it is that the workflow and therefore your 
pay does fluctuate, but when it does dip I simply bid for more projects. I know 
my clients, and we do have a good working relationship, even though we are 
based miles apart. Doing this job from home suits me and my family."

Switching from PA to VA is a move that has also suited Julia Stubblefield, 41, 
who previously worked for organisations such as the BBC, Siemens and Johnson & 
Johnson, but now works from her home in Maidenhead, Berkshire.

She says: "A lot of the work involves things like diary management and 
handling emails, which can all be done remotely very easily. The difference is 
that I can do it from home, and with three young children, that gives me the 
flexibility that I need."

Her decision to become a virtual assistant was made earlier this year when she 
began researching freelance opportunities and resources, and came acrossTime Etc
 <http://www.timeetc.co.uk>, a virtual workforce platform with hundreds of VAs 
on its books.

"I didn't want to join a freelance website where you have to look for the work 
yourself and compete with other freelancers. Time Etc will find the work for 
you, and since I joined in March I've worked as a virtual assistant for two 
companies," says Stubblefield.

"Hourly rates of pay are set by Time Etc and are lower than what I previously 
earned as a PA, but with the money I've been able to save on things like 
petrol, lunches, and clothes, I'm not too far off it. And there is scope to 
take on extra work from other clients, although it is a good idea not to overdo 
it," she says.

Virtual assistants with Time Etc have their work quality controlled by project 
managers who check they are meeting deadlines and completing the work to a high 
standard. By using freelancers who are registered on the site, business clients 
can effectively build remote workforces, overseen by the project managers. As a 
result once VAs are signed up, repeat custom is easier to find.

Time Etc founder Barnaby Lashbrooke says: "The responsibility of having to 
find new business is what puts some people off. Being a VA requires being 
proactive, but many PAs find they have excellent contacts who are more than 
willing to recommend them, or keep them on part time.

"Competition can be fierce so you'll need to be creative about how you show 
off your skills, and how you apply for projects and roles. It goes without 
saying that working across multiple clients requires excellent administrative 
and organisational skills. Fortunately, good PAs have these in abundance."

This article was originally published in November 2013

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 