
If you're looking to get media coverage for your small business, being able to 
write an effective press release is an essential skill. But how long should a 
press release be? And what kind of information should you include? Here are a 
few tips to help you get started:

Make sure your story is newsworthy

Before you even attempt to write a press release, think about the things you 
like to read, watch and listen to in the media. Most of us are generally 
interested in things we haven't heard before, find surprising or help solve our 
problems. So before drafting your press release, it's worth asking yourself 
these questions:

1. Is there anything "new" in my story?

2. Is there anything unusual or unexpected about it?

3. Would this be of interest to anyone outside my business?

4. Will anyone actually care?

The last one sounds harsh, but is probably the most important: you might be 
excited about your new marketing director or the launch of your new product, 
but will anyone else be interested? If the answer is "no", hold off on that 
press release until you've got a better story.

If you're not sure whether your story is newsworthy, read, watch or listen to 
the publications or programmes you'd like coverage in to get a feel for the 
kind of stories they typically cover.

Write killer headlines

Most journalists get hundreds of emails every day, so it's a good idea to 
label emails containing press releases with the phrase "press release" or 
"story idea". A great subject line is also a must.

But don't try to be clever: most journalists will spend just a few seconds 
deciding whether something looks interesting. If they don't immediately 
understand what your story is about, they'll move on to the next thing in their 
inbox.

So if your story is about the the launch of the first financial planning 
consultancy for women, say exactly that. "Women cash in on financial planning" 
might sound like a better headline, but may mean nothing to a busy journalist 
scanning their inbox.

Get your top line in the first line of your press release

Getting a journalist to open your email is important, but if your first 
sentence doesn't grab them, they may not read any further – which is why you 
need to get the "top line" (the most important bit) of your story right at the 
beginning of your release. Your first line should be a summary of the story (in 
no more than around 15-20 words) and read like the opening of a news story.

Journalists are generally taught to get as many of the "five Ws" (who, what, 
where, why and when) in the opening line of news stories, so if you want 
examples of great first lines for press releases, look no further than your 
daily newspaper.

Another trick is to imagine your story is going to be covered on a TV or radio 
programme. A presenter generally has around 5-6 seconds to introduce each item 
eg "And coming up next ... why a local cafe owner is giving a free coffee this 
weekend to anyone born in July." If your story was going to be featured on the 
radio today, how would the presenter introduce it? Asking yourself that 
question should give you the top line of your story.

Be concise

The ideal length of a press release is about an A4 side or about 300 to 400 
words (the length of a short news item). That's just three or four short 
paragraphs and a couple of of quotes. If yours is longer than that, you've 
probably got unnecessary waffle that doesn't add anything to your story.

Don't be tempted to include background information about your company in the 
opening paragraph. This – along with any other additional information – can 
always be included in a "notes to editors" section at the end (it's fine to run 
over to a second page for this).

Sub-headings and bullet points can be useful to make information easy to 
digest, particularly if you're including figures or statistics.

Use quotes to provide insight, not information

Including quotes from people in your company can be helpful for journalists 
(and on regional or trade publications are often used, word for word). A common 
beginner's mistake is to use quotes to provide information, for example, "last 
year, we employed 100 staff in 12 different countries and turned over £5m."

Quotes should be used to provide insight and opinion and sound like a real 
person said them. They definitely shouldn't be full of jargon or technical 
language.

A few more tips ...

While it can be a useful background document for journalists, a press release 
isn't a story. If you want to maximise your chances of getting press coverage, 
you will have to tweak your idea, and your release, for different publications 
or programmes. You can find more information about how to find journalists' 
contacts details inthis article. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2014/jun/30/how-get-press-coverage-small-business>

When you send a press release, it's a good idea to include a short outline of 
your idea (no more than a paragraph) and where you think it might fit in the 
publication you're pitching to. Paste your press release underneath, as a busy 
journalist may not bother to an open an attachment. Photos can be helpful if 
they add something to the story, but avoid sending big files that will clog up 
peoples' inboxes.

And finally ... aim high, but be realistic in your expectations. Most 
journalists are swamped with press releases, so it may take you a few attempts 
and a bit of chasing to land press coverage for your business. Don't give up 
though; determination and a willingness to learn can take you a very long way.

Janet Murray is a freelance journalist and media consultant. Her blog can be 
foundhere <http://janetmurray.co.uk/>. She tweets @jan_murray
 <https://twitter.com/jan_murray>

This article was originally published in July 2014 

Read more ...

How to get press coverage for your small business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2014/jun/30/how-get-press-coverage-small-business>

Small business tips: How to do market research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2013/aug/23/small-business-tips-market-research>

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 