
The US Open starts this week, but there will be one notable absence: for the 
first time since 1999, Roger Federer won’t be competing. It can’t help but 
remind us of the absence of the man who turned a profile of Federer into the 
greatest essay about tennis. ThatDavid Foster Wallace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-foster-wallace> died by his own hand 
so soon after the conclusion of the 2008 US Open, the last year when Federer 
would win that tournament, only makes the resonance echo louder.

String Theory: David Foster Wallace on Tennis review – the best writer on the 
game ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/24/string-theory-david-foster-wallace-tennis-review>
In an effort, perhaps, to salve that wound for Wallace fans, earlier this year 
the Library of America releaseda new anthology of Wallace’s tennis writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/24/string-theory-david-foster-wallace-tennis-review>
. Even though the game has moved on from the period that Wallace covered (the 
most recent essay is from a decade ago), the collection is still rich with 
insights into how math and metaphysics make tennis the most beautiful of sports.

Wallace was interested in how transcendence was possible if the whole world 
was mediated through the self. In both his fiction and essays, Wallace used 
tennis to wrestle with this unanswerable question. Here, in a passage from his 
mega-novelInfinite Jest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/26/infinite-jest-david-foster-wallace-20th-anniversary-20-things-need-know>
, a tennis coach muses to himself:

The true opponent, the enfolding boundary, is the player himself. Always and 
only the self out there, on court, to be met, fought, brought to the table to 
hammer out terms. The competing boy on the net’s other side: he is not the foe: 
he is more the partner in the dance.

This philosophy echoes some ideas that also surface in the tennis writing of 
the New Yorker writer John McPhee. Levels of the Game, McPhee’s book-length 
dissection of a semi-final match between Chuck Graebner and Arhur Ashe at the 
1968 US Open, manages to be about the self, racism, the American south, 
Republicans, Democrats, the 1960s, the professionalization of tennis, human 
excellence, art and politics.

This forms a fascinating contrast with Wallace’s own tennis style, as 
described in his writing. In his own childhood, Wallace wrote, he wasn’t 
thinking about transcendence at all. He was “playing the conditions”, using 
environmental factors – particularly the midwest’s frustratingly strong and 
chaotic winds – to his advantage. The wind could make a good ball go long and 
“drove some kids near-mad with the caprice and unfairness of it all, and on 
real windy days these kids, usually with talent out the bazoo, would have their 
first apoplectic racket-throwing tantrum in about the match’s third game”. 
Meanwhile, Wallace, who “was such a lazy turd in practice”, would calmly hit 
the ball down the middle of the court, daring the other players to take the 
aforementioned psyche-destroying risks.

Wallace’s method of playing tennis isn’t unique; the approach even has its own 
book, though not a literary one. It’s called Winning Ugly: Mental Warfare in 
Tennis, written by the superstar coach and ESPN commentator Brad Gilbert. 
Gilbert’s philosophy is simple: tennis is about winning games and sets. Forget 
about transcending the self – play the opponent physically and psychologically, 
play the conditions, use every advantage you can muster, and don’t worry about 
perfection. It’s not clear if Wallace ever read Gilbert’s book (he never 
mentions it), but it’s likely he did. The book was extremely popular in the 
1990s. And in today’s tennis, winning ugly is probably best represented by the 
current world No 1,Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/may/12/sport-picture-of-the-day-focus-on-novak-djokovic>
. He plays the game with a style something like the T-1000 from the Terminator 
movies, morphing around whatever you throw at him to become even deadlier until 
you go mad trying to beat him.

It was Federer’s much more elegant style, which could be called “winning 
beautiful”, that drew Wallace to him. Wallace spent almost no time interviewing 
Federer for his virtuosic essayRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> as Religious Experience, 
originally published in the New York Times Magazine. Wallace’s argument was 
that Federer’s greatness lay in the way he turned compositional beauty into a 
kind of weapon, in the way he transcended the limits of the human body and the 
speed at which we think. This made Federer a somewhat uninteresting person, 
nearly self-less, but capable of unimaginable physical grace.

It’s hard not to see some element of self-awareness in all Wallace’s praise of 
Federer. His writing always betrayed some of his desire to win ugly. It’s hard 
to think of a writer whose voice more relied on the presence of the authorial 
self on the page. Wallace reveled in subverting magazine assignments, and liked 
to use every trick in the book to move, impress and thrill a reader. In a way, 
his writing is often like an extended match between Federer and Djokovic, with 
Wallace playing both parts, luring you into traps one second, moving you to 
tears with beauty and grace the next.

Infinite Jest at 20: still a challenge, still brilliant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/feb/15/infinite-jest-at-20-still-a-challenge-still-brilliant-emma-lee-moss>
The transcendent impulse in Wallace’s writing is the key to his recent 
canonization. At its best, this impulse lent Wallace’s writing an otherworldly 
quality, as if he had been sent here to explain us to ourselves. Without it, 
there’s no This Is Water, the commencement speech posthumously turned into a 
one-line-a-page book; no long list of things learned in rehab that became one 
of Infinite Jest’s most widely quoted passages; and no in-and-of-itself 
transcendent description of the key to Federer’s appeal – “hav[ing] to do with 
… human beings’ reconciliation to having a body”.

Sometimes one wonders what Wallace would have made of his both understandable 
and frustrating elevation to Saint Dave. But in his tennis writing it’s not 
hard, sometimes, to see why he’s treated like a modern prophet. No one can 
write about tennis like this now, just like no one can imagine the “Baby 
Federers” like Milos Raonic or Grigor Dmitrov redefining the sport with 
weaponized beauty the way Roger has. But perhaps that’s because we’re waiting 
for someone to write like Wallace or play like Federer, instead of looking for 
players and writers who create whole new ways to win, ugly and beautiful all at 
once.
 