
HSBC, which I have personally banked with since 1964, recently announced that 
it will close the four accounts we hold for the campaign organisation 
Searchlight following a “review”. In a follow-up email it insisted there is 
nothing we can do to change the decision and that it will not give us a reason.

Searchlight has campaigned against racism and fascism for 52 years, published 
a magazine since 1975, and is well respected. We are not aligned to any 
political party and are multi-faith. We currently work with the University of 
Northampton and recently launched a research arm, Searchlight Research 
Associates, with many distinguished patrons.

We have no overdraft facility – our income comes from occasional grants, 
donations and subscriptions and is paid in by cheque, standing order or bank 
transfer. We have hardly any international transactions. We can think of 
nothing in our use of the accounts that could possibly give rise to any 
concerns.

The only reason I can think of is that the fascist individuals and 
organisations that Searchlight combats have maliciously given false information 
to the bank for the sole purpose of getting our accounts closed, and the bank 
has accepted it without investigation. Obviously, this is very disruptive and 
we are applying for new accounts with another bank but we don’t know whether it 
will accept our application in view of HSBC’s action. AlthoughHSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> is acting within its terms 
and conditions, its unilateral action is contrary to all principles of justice.
GG, Ilford, Essex

There’s nothing you can do to change the decision, says HSBC – except write to 
the media. As soon as I contact the bank you receive a flurry of phone calls 
and then two senior officials beg a meeting. The upshot is that the four 
accounts are reinstated with no more of an explanation than when they were 
closed. Its press office will only comment opaquely: “HSBC aims to provide the 
highest standard of customer service … where this has not been met we endeavour 
to work closely with the customer to resolve any issue as soon as possible.”

Abrupt closure of bank accounts without explanation is becoming a worryingly 
frequent issue in my inbox as banks run scared of draconian US crackdowns on 
anyone deemed complicit in money laundering. HSBC narrowly avoided prosecution 
by the US Congress, so the chances are it is neurotically reacting to any 
account with political overtones or foreign transactions, be it owned by a 
suburban householder or a high-profile campaigning group.

You’re lucky. Very rarely in my experience do the banks capitulate and reverse 
their decisions, however mystifying.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk  
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk>or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 