
The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, Friday September 21 2006

In the article below, the HSBC spokesman did not say the words "[to leave the 
loophole]" and they should not have been inserted. HSBC does not accept that 
there is a loophole or a defect in the security of its personal internet 
banking service.


 One of Britain's biggest high street banks knew about a security loophole in 
its online banking service that left millions of accounts open to fraud and did 
nothing about it for almost two years. HSBC initially denied the defect in its 
computer banking but conceded yesterday that the problem had been known about 
since the system was introduced.

The defect, uncovered by researchers at Cardiff University and exposed in 
yesterday's Guardian, was the result of a conscious decision by those building 
the system two years ago, a spokesman for the bank said. "It wasn't there 
accidentally," he said. "When the system was being designed, research was done 
into it and the decision was made. Often times these are judgment calls."

Industry professionals say it is common for companies to know about large 
numbers of flaws while designing their online banking systems, but often they 
leave some to concentrate on other problems. HSBC said the system's builders 
had decided against closing the loophole to focus on more pressing threats.

HSBC continues to publicly deny that there may be a failure of security 
procedure, but the acceptance that it knew about the flaw for almost two years 
is a shift in its stance.

The spokesman said the company was in discussions with Cardiff University to 
find out more about its research, but had "no definite plans to change it at 
the moment".

Faced by the rapid rise of cybercrime, banks have often struggled to cope with 
different threats simultaneously. Senior sources said the HSBC case was just a 
small component in a host of problems in online banking.

"These flaws are incredibly common, but it's a matter of priorities," a 
security expert, Bruce Schneier, told the Guardian. "There are hundreds of 
vulnerabilities out there affecting every single bank, and this is just a minor 
one: it's an arms race."

The flaw guarantees a potential criminal quick access to HSBC's bank accounts. 
Once inside a victim's account, attackers could transfer money out, commit 
extensive identity fraud, or have thousands of pounds delivered in cash to any 
location in the world. The problem could potentially affect any one of the 3.1 
million HSBC customers who bank online with the company, which recently posted 
record half-year profits of £6.7bn.

The researcher who led the investigation said HSBC was by no means the only 
bank with security problems, but felt that the flaw needed to be brought to the 
public's attention. "They're doing the best they can," said Professor Antonia 
Jones, of Cardiff University's computer science department. "But at the end of 
the day they are being forced to choose between the lesser of several evils."

Prof Jones said regardless of the details of the problem, customers deserved 
to know that they were not being fully protected. "One of the problems here is 
that the technology and ingenuity of these attackers moves on," she said. "The 
public should be aware that while every attempt is made to protect them, the 
nature of these things is that they are never 100% secure."

Yesterday HSBC tried to play down the matter, claiming that the "supposed 
flaw" was extremely sophisticated - despite its simplicity being labelled 
"clueless" by one independent internet security expert.

Many British banks are considering new measures to improve security. One 
proposal includes "token" solutions, under which every customer would be given 
a small device that regularly generates random passwords, offering customers an 
extra layer of security.

· September 21, letters: Dyfrig John, Chief Executive of HSBC Bank: Security 
is strong for online banking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/letters/story/0,,1877071,00.html>.
 