
Soothing acoustic music drifted through the clinical, high-tech ward. As the 
professional musician brought the gentle sounds of her African harp to 
patients’ bedsides, I witnessed the warming responses of relatives, staff and 
patients themselves. This was the most poignant, privileged and rewarding day 
I’d experienced in more than 25 years of voluntary work.

This was the first time live music had been played in the intensive care unit 
(ICU) of Manchester Royal Infirmary. I had volunteered with the charityMusic in 
Hospitals <http://www.musicinhospitals.org.uk/> for seven years and, after my 
own experience of ICU, had become convinced that the therapeutic benefits of 
live performance could be brought not only to patients on general wards, but to 
those who were critically ill.
 Holly Marland from Music in Hospitals with her African harp. 
The charity has almost 70 years’ experience of providing music sessions for 
hospitals and other care venues. The musicians are adept at entering a ward or 
care home with empathy and flexibility and adjust their musical repertoire to 
the context. Care staff are able to continue with their duties as the musicians 
play, often reporting that they, too, have benefited from the relaxing and 
calming mood the music engenders.

I had started to think that high-quality, live, therapeutic music could help 
critically-ill patients after I was an ICU patient myself in 2015 following 
unexpected surgery. Thanks to the devotion of the clinical teams, I survived. I 
have spent every day since expressing gratitude for being alive, though I never 
anticipated that recovering my pre-illness life and livelihood was going to be 
as tough as it has been.

One abiding memory of the ICU is constant, frightening noise. Imagine lying on 
a bed, unable to move, blink, speak or control your own pain relief. You may 
just about be conscious and aware of high levels of activity around your bed, 
around the clock. The whirring of machines and the ringing of alarms, bleeps 
and phones are part of the aural landscape, 24 hours a day. Hearing appears to 
be the only sense that still works.

When I was moved off the ICU on to a high-dependency unit, I briefly heard 
singing from a television – beautiful, harmonious, melodic. The calming music 
temporarily blocked out the hospital noise and brought me into the present, 
reminding me I had a life to go back to. After hospital discharge, I’d wake up 
in the night with the unnerving noises of ICU going round in my head. I learned 
to focus instead on remembering that one lovely sound – the singing. This aided 
my recovery.

My first tweet was for custard, then tinned potatoes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jul/07/tweet-foodbank-twitter>
Through attending a Manchester patient support group, I met Natalie Mason, 
critical care followup lead at the royal infirmary ICU. I learned of her 
enthusiasm to bring live music to the unit, in conjunction with a new project 
to reduce stressful noise levels on the unit. That was it. I was determined it 
would happen. Thankfully, Music inHospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> endorsed the idea and named it 
ICU-hear.

It was a pilot – there is currently no research evidence of music therapy on 
adult in ICUs in the UK – but one that worked gratifyingly well. There were 
smiles and tears from relatives as their loved ones responded. One patient 
surprised everyone by opening his eyes and singing along with the harp player, 
Holly Marland. His relatives were overcome. An otherwise stressful environment 
was momentarily transformed.

I spoke to relatives afterwards. Their feedback was overwhelmingly positive. 
Far from feeling it inappropriate to have had a music performance in an 
environment where their relatives were gravely ill, they thought it had been a 
welcome and heartening respite.

More hospitals are now interested in the ICU-hear project, which is being 
fully evaluated. I’ve been able to contribute to making a difference to 
people’s lives, in a way that has never been possible in my remunerated working 
life. That has improved my own wellbeing. Through trying to help others, I’ve 
also helped myself.

The day I made a difference is the Guardian Voluntary Sector Network’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series that showcases 
the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story you want to 
share emailvoluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com> with a short summary of your 
experience.
 