
Sam* started attending my GP practice at the same time I joined. She had no 
extensive list of medical conditions yet she had frequent doctors’ appointments 
for minor complaints – in summer she would come with a cold, in winter with hay 
fever and all year round with tiredness.

She startled easily if someone spoke too loudly or the telephone rang. When 
she once arrived five minutes late for an appointment, she had volunteered that 
there were no clocks in her flat, since they were a reminder of time spent away 
from loved ones.

Sometimes Sam would roll her fingertips on the old scars that spanned her 
wrists. I asked about those scars (and traced their criss-crossed pattern with 
my eyes) but Sam would shake her head and hide her arms.

We went on in this fashion for some years. I was no longer the new doctor. I 
stopped looking for things that probably did not exist. Then one year a medical 
student came to us on a placement. He was in first year and this was his 
initial encounter with patients. He was given the task of researching and 
writing about a patient’s journey. He spent the day with me: we saw people with 
heart disease, diabetes, headaches, depression and dementia. Somewhere between 
these 10-minute appointments, there had also been Sam, who had come in with 
“not a particularly memorable” sore throat. To my surprise the student chose 
Sam.

Sam was taken aback that the young student doctor wanted to write about her 
but bit by bit she told him her story and with her permission he wrote it down. 
A while later Sam and I read it together.

Samia was brought up in a small village in the Indian subcontinent. Her life 
was busy yet carefree. She wished that time could stop there – she was happy. 
But her parents felt she had crossed a marriageable age and were worried – 
perhaps even more so because they had other children and dowries to provide for.

Debt, homelessness, domestic violence: the GP practice acting as a one-stop 
shop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/sep/21/debt-homelessness-domestic-violence-gp-practice-acting-one-stop-shop>
By a quirk of fate, in the nearby village a man had come from the UK in search 
of a bride. Samia’s parents hoped their daughter might be considered because 
she was beautiful and they belonged to the same caste as this man.

Samia was chosen and the date was fixed for the marriage – a few days before 
the groom was to fly back. Forms for her passport and visa were secured to 
start the process of her leaving for Britain. The procession came and the 
marriage ceremony was performed, with Samia’s father spending a substantial 
part of his savings on the wedding.

The groom returned to Britain and Samia to her parents. She was happy because 
she would travel by plane for the first time. She dreamt of a beautiful place 
where lambs grazed on lush green hills. Her only sadness was that she would 
move so far away from her family, friends and even her animals.

Her husband did not ring her, but Samia and her parents assumed he was busy in 
his job. Eventually, she got a plane ticket and all of the family arranged a 
van to go to the airport to see her off.

Her husband’s parents received Samia when she arrived in the UK – he was not 
there. Her father-in-law told her that he was at work. The days passed, with 
her seeing her husband rarely. It was a big family. Eventually she learned he 
was living with someone else.

She was soon introduced to the work she was to do, which included cooking and 
cleaning. Her life back home was tough, but here it was hundred times worse. 
When she complained it was decided that she should be sent back but Samia could 
not go back. She would not be the cause of pain and disgrace to her beloved 
family, no matter how much she needed them in her despair.

Her refusal made the situation worse. The hatred became visible. Her husband 
hit her sporadically. On one or two occasions other family members slapped her 
too. She was humiliated repeatedly with bitter remarks. Samia’s father-in-law 
had incurred business losses since her arrival and she was blamed for that too. 
In the end when there seemed to be no way out, Samia attempted suicide.

Someone took her to the local hospital. From there she had gone to a women’s 
refuge, and then moved from city to city, refuge to refuge until she had come 
to us.

Samia tried to put her life back together. She got a divorce, found a job, a 
place to live and even made a few friends. But home was still several thousand 
miles away. She longed to be with her family but lacked the courage to turn up 
alone, divorced and with nothing to show for her parents’ efforts.

Samia and I both finished reading. That is how the story would have ended – 
except that it didn’t.

Our student left but Samia had started talking and healing. She told me about 
her scars, her childhood, her siblings, her parents and even her pet goat. She 
told me of her aspirations for a better life when she had come here and her 
disappointment when her hopes had come to nothing. But after despair had come 
fortitude and courage. Then I did not see Samia for a while – she had gone to 
see her family. That had been her happy ending.

Samia had needed space and time to open up and heal. At the beginning I had 
asked the questions but she had been too traumatised to talk. I then focused on 
her medical problems and fixing only what was apparent. Samia’s story made me 
realise that sometimes we all need a fresh perspective on the same problem, 
perhaps even more so when some time has passed. It can occasionally lead us to 
question our initial diagnoses.

*Sam is a composite of this GP’s experiences of patient care

 * In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In Australia, the 
crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan 
be found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html> 
If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/series/blood-sweat-and-tears> 
which is about memorable moments in a healthcare career, please read our
guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 