
Sitting opposite Andre Agassi you notice first something about his eyes. His 
father saw it, too, when his son was only a few days old. It looked to him then 
like a special kind of alertness, and Mike Agassi, the tennis coach at the 
Tropicana Casino in Las Vegas, encouraged that apparent quickness in his baby's 
attention, hung a tennis ball above his crib and let him bat it back and forth 
all day with his hand. In the 30 years since, those eyes have studied intently 
the flight of several million tennis balls, and they now seem to possess an 
almost supernatural acuity; whileAndre Agassi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> talks, his eyes constantly 
interrogate you, intensely curious for stress and nuance. They are, as a 
result, all you really see.

In a penthouse hotel bar in Lyon, where he is playing in an end-of season 
satellite tournament, otherwise slight and unremarkable in a neat grey T-shirt 
and washed-out jeans, he is looking back unblinking on a year that has been 
made all the more difficult by the extraordinary triumphant one which preceded 
it. For a variety of reasons, he says, he has 'lost his focus' over the summer, 
and the literal implication of that cliché seems to trouble him; he has taken 
his eye off the ball, and for Agassi, these days, that inattention has an 
almost sacrilegious quality. 'It's been a year that has been physically 
impairing, and draining, really, and that takes you down a level; its been a 
difficult year, emotionally and mentally and physically and as a result I feel 
very far off where I was,' he says, a little wearily. 'Your experience helps 
speed up the process [of recovery] a lot but you have always to analyse, you 
know: where is my game? Do I have the ability to still do it?'

This time last year, a couple of months before his 30th birthday, Andre Agassi 
was doing it better than ever, at the peak of an extraordinary resurgence, a 
comeback unprecedented in modern tennis. Having slipped at one time to 141st in 
the world, and having been on the verge of quitting, he had rebuilt his game 
and his life to reach the final of the previous three Grand Slams, winning two, 
including his emotional triumph in Paris where he completed his full set of the 
major tournaments, a unique achievement among his generation. He had finished 
the season as world No 1 and he was preparing for the Australian Open where he 
would again eclipse his nemesis, Pete Sampras, with faultless, instinctive 
tennis.

By the time Agassi got to Zimbabwe in early February, John McEnroe, his Davis 
Cup captain, watching him practise (shirtless, of course) was awed by how hard 
he was hitting the ball; no one, he observed, had ever struck it earlier, or 
more sweetly. Such perfection, as Agassi knows better than most, can only ever 
be fleeting, however, and a couple of days later, after he had won his second 
match in Harare's dry heat and thin air, still jetlagged after a 30-hour flight 
from Melbourne, he was doubled over and washed up, vomiting into a flowerpot at 
courtside. He went home under medical supervision, and his confidence and his 
fitness and his game, he insists, have still not quite recovered. 'That's not 
an opinion,' he says. 'All you have to do is look at the results. I've had a 
couple of semis since, and that's it.'

Throughout his career, Andre Agassi has dealt only in extremes. 'When I'm in 
the zone,' he says, 'I go hard,' but that intensity extracts a toll. As a 
baseliner, and moreover one who, at 5ft 11in, lacks the imposing physical 
stature of most of the players on the tour, Agassi puts his body under absolute 
strain to compete (Bjorn Borg, the only baseline player in recent decades to 
achieve his level of success, retired from competitive tennis at 26). And the 
vulnerability of his highly strung frame is more than matched by his apparent 
emotional rawness: his heart constantly competes for space with the indentured 
Nike swoosh on his sleeve. Agassi's dip in form this time around has been 
exacerbated not only by a succession of injuries but also by the devastating 
news in the summer that both his mother, and his sister, Tammee, were suffering 
from breast cancer. It has, he says, ever since, been far too easy to separate 
tennis from the rest of his life: 'because you have no question where you want 
to put your energies.'

 Although he has been trying to spend as much time as he can with his family - 
he withdrew in September from the defence of his Olympic title - he has not, at 
this stage in his career, felt able to take a substantial break from the game: 
'I can't afford to take months off,' he says. 'If I did that I could never come 
back. I try instead to balance it. But it is hard to compete while you are 
still consumed with thoughts of "where am I?"' Still, he says, philosophically, 
'I've taken some time away, and all things considered, my family is doing well'

 There are few sports that so relentlessly expose the individual to 
psychological scrutiny as tennis, and Andre Agassi's personal rites of passage 
over the 15 years since he turned professional have been the most vivid of its 
spectacles. He refers to the game, more often than not, in abstract, 
metaphysical terms, presumably because it has always meant so much more to him 
than simply hitting the balls. 'You don't know anything else when you start 
playing before you can remember,' he explains, with a kind of sadness, of his 
growing up on court. 'I did not know life away from it. It's kind of like a 
tortured soul, you know, you have a choice but you don't have a choice. There 
are times when you look forward to quitting and times when you don't imagine 
ever possibly doing anything different.'

It is the presentation of this internal drama, that has, in the past decade or 
so, made Agassi among the most compelling of all sports stars, an archetypal 
figure for our neurotic and solipsistic times. No tennis player in that period 
has seemed so at odds with his gifts, or so questioning of his purpose. Even 
now, having achieved much of what he set out to achieve, when he talks about 
tennis it is as if, at times, you are listening to Hamlet quibble with 
mortality. 'At the end of the day I need to do it or not do it,' Agassi tells 
me at one point, 'that has always been the question for me. The question of not 
doing this thing I was kind of born to do has been with me for 15 years It's 
been hard to ignore it at times. But I've had to think about it and answer it, 
get on the plane and do it again'

As a younger man he seemed sometimes to be losing the battle with this 
question, intent on squandering his talent, the prodigy who could not grow up. 
He turned professional in a blaze of hype at 16, but by the age of 21 he seemed 
already strung out, eating badly, losing games for fun, his ever-changing 
appearance apparently reflecting his fragile self-esteem: first he shaved his 
head, then grew a tall mohican, then bleached it, before finally settling on a 
shaggy shoulder length highlighted perm. At one tournament in Florida, when in 
his teens, he turned up on court wearing torn-off jeans, lipstick and eyeliner 
(the black socks and day-Glo shirts came later) . Looking back on that time, he 
reflects that 'maybe I was rewarded too quickly. I came at a time when tennis 
needed somebody - when tennis was looking for another American. I had so much 
notoriety before I had really accomplished great things. For me to be doing 
Nike commercials and Canon commercials and never winning a Grand Slam - that 
left me with a bad rap - all image and no substance'

The trajectory of Agassi's career to that point seemed like a blueprint for 
underachieving angst. At times, like many of the tennis stars of his 
generation, he seemed trapped in his father's dreams rather than his own. Mike 
Agassi's obsession with his son's success set something of the pattern for the 
more infamous tennis dads who followed him. Like many of them, he was a first 
generation immigrant to the States, desperately looking to find a foothold for 
his family, and tennis seemed like an ideal entrée into the American dream.

 Mike Agassi already knew all about fighting his way to the top: he 
represented his native Iran as a boxer in the Olympics at 17, and having 
emigrated to America was Golden Gloves champion of Chicago three years running. 
On the night he was to turn pro, however, like a character in a Hemingway short 
story, he escaped from Madison Square Garden through a bathroom window a few 
minutes before his debut bout was due to start. The next morning, he bought a 
tennis racket, so the story goes, headed west, and never looked back.

 Drifting to Las Vegas, he found himself work as a tennis pro and waiter in 
the casino hotels. He studied everything he could about the game: from laying 
courts to preparing equipment, and set himself up in business, stringing the 
rackets of the tennis and entertainment stars who passed through. Most of Mike 
Agassi's considerable energies however, were directed toward coaching his four 
children. The three eldest - Rita, Philip and Tammee - were all schooled daily 
using tennis serving machines that their father had adapted to fire balls at a 
higher than normal velocity, on the court he had laid himself in their 
backyard. By the time Andre was born in 1970, Mike Agassi had his methods 
honed: he taped a racket to his youngest son's hand as soon as he could walk, 
had him serving over arm on a full-sized court by the time he was two. 'It's 
easy to tell people to bend their knees and get the racket back, there are 12 
or 15 tips that all the pros know,' recalled Mike Agassi of his methods 
subsequently, 'but there's nobody to teach you how to hit a ball at 125 mph, 
say, or with no pace at all.'

 Mike Agassi aimed to teach his son just that, and to set his sights high. 
When Jimmy Connors was in town, Agassi persuaded him to knock up with his 
four-year-old genius; Borg hit a few balls with him, too, and smiled, so the 
legend has it, at the way they were returned with interest. Andre's sisters and 
brother were also developing into good players (Rita eventually achieved a top 
100 ranking on the women's tour) but little Andre seemed something special. By 
the age of 10 he was winning tournaments in California in the company of a 
highly charged group of young players that included Jim Courier and Michael 
Chang and Pete Sampras (he was also praying for rain in the Nevada Desert so he 
could be allowed to take a day off). By the age of 13, when his father thought 
he could not teach him any more, he was packed off to Nick Bolletieri's tennis 
boot camp in Florida; three years later he had turned professional; and two 
years after that he was ranked No 3 in the world, heir apparent as American 
'personality' on the circuit to Connors and McEnroe.

 Something at that time, though, always seemed to be missing from Agassi's 
game. Though he did well in some tournaments, they were never the tournaments 
that really mattered, and as his confidence slipped, so did his ranking. (At 
one point, in those days, Connors remarked of the over-exposed pretender that 
'God, in our day at least we used to win') Agassi looked set to be another 
Carling Bassett or Jennifer Capriati, the driven child star who could not quite 
hack it with the grown-ups. Looking back he says his mind was never really on 
the court, at the time - nor his heart. 'I thought I could just go out there 
and hit harder than the other guy.' he says. 'Players knew that even when I was 
playing well, if they could just hang in there long enough I would give the 
match away'

 The first turning point for Agassi came at Wimbledon. It was the tournament 
that he so little expected to win with his game that for the first three years 
of his career he did not play it at all. In 1992, though, through sheer force 
of will, he overcame Goran Ivanisevic who, during the tournament, had broken 
all serving records - and opened a debate as to whether there should be changes 
in the law to preserve the game as a spectacle. Ivanisevic produced more than a 
set's worth of aces in the five-set final, but they were not enough to break 
Agassi's unexpected resolve. Afterwards, when Agassi smiled paternally down at 
the trophy in the crook of his arm, it seemed like something more than a coming 
of age for him. Recalling that moment, he relives its significance. 'Tennis has 
always been a vehicle for me to challenge myself and look into myself and 
become more of who it is I want to be,' he explains. 'And that moment was one 
of the greatest because when I look at it in photographs now, it is for me 
about so much more than tennis; cradling the trophy was me embracing what was 
not even a dream, but more fears and doubts and questions about losing three 
Grand Slam finals, and being told by more than just the media that this was 
something I couldn't win. That is the kind of moment that makes sport great: it 
had so much more to it for me than the game of tennis.'

 If in that moment, Agassi had proved to himself he could 'just do it' - as 
his sponsor had long been expensively proclaiming - it took a good deal more 
soul-searching to enable him to repeat the process with any degree of 
certainty. In the years since Agassi has made himself something of an icon for 
the self-help industry, a case study for our times. At around the time of his 
Wimbledon triumph he put himself into therapy, and spent some time with 
Californian motivational speakers like Anthony Robbins (author of Unlimited 
Power, creator of 'the new science of personal achievement') . He also immersed 
himself in a customised new age Christianity. When he was first on the circuit 
he would study the Bible with Michael Chang on rest days during tournaments. He 
would talk about his faith, too, with reporters, explain how it had changed his 
life, but for a while now, he has not felt the need 'to pick up God's slack' in 
this way. (When I ask him about his religion, he replies only with a caveat: 
'I'm not religious, but I have my faith. Religion to me is one guy telling some 
other guy how and what and when and why. But faith certainly is very important 
to me.')

 His friend Barbra Streisand, the high priestess of self-fulfilment, who 
sometimes jetted in to see his tournaments, once famously called him 'a Zen 
master'; and certainly, when you ask him, he talks about his tennis as a kind 
of spiritual journey. In response to an innocuous question about the goals he 
sets himself in the game these days, for example, he speaks, typically, as if 
of a pilgrim's progress:'You discover more each day about who it is you want to 
be,' he suggests, 'and how you want to be, and once you discover it you are 
only half way there, after that it is about living up to it over and over again 
and failing at it a number of times'

 Agassi's failings tended to increase, it seemed, at around the time of his 
brief, ill-fated marriage to Brooke Shields. He had first got together with 
Shields in 1993; though initially their relationship, suggested by a mutual 
friend Lyndie Benson, the wife of saxophonist Kenny G, was conducted through 
daily faxes - Shields was away on location in Africa - in which each slowly 
bared their soul. Shields's grandfather had been a US Open finalist, but they 
shared therapyspeak rather than on-court chemistry; when she returned they 
talked on the phone every day for six weeks, before they finally met each other 
at the end of the year.

 At the time, Agassi told Esquire magazine that he and Shields were made for 
each other, a pair of damaged souls who could put each other back together: 
'We've both gone through the same things,' he said, ever earnest. 'We were both 
celebrities young. We were both thrown into a strange lifestyle young, and we 
both got bad raps when we were young, so we have a similar history together. 
And I think both of us haven't maximised our abilities. But that's changing.' 
These hopes for his relationship with Shields - that it would resurrect his 
game - slowly proved unfounded, however; they were married in 1997, by which 
time Agassi was at his lowest point in tennis terms, rarely playing, and mostly 
losing when he did. He won't talk in public about that period now, except to 
say, smiling that, 'with my game, it was not easy for me to drop that far down, 
to be ranked at 140. I had to put in a great deal of hard work at the buffet 
table to achieve that, a great deal of work'

 Oddly, soon after he was married and with his career virtually on hold, 
Agassi apparently made the decision to finally commit himself to his first 
love. At 27, when some of his contemporaries were giving up on the game, he set 
himself the target of fulfilling his dim and distant potential, but this time 
for himself rather than for anyone else. 'I'm very challenged by it, by this 
starting over,' he said. 'Sometimes it makes me happy with myself in a calm 
way, sometimes in a sick, demented way I've played this game for a lot of 
reasons, and none of them have ever quite been my own, but this time my desire 
is to get out there and enjoy it'

Many sportsmen dream of comebacks, but only the greatest ever achieve them. 
The defining factor in this rehabilitation perhaps came from another, more 
straightforward relationship, one that also began in 1993. Brad Gilbert had 
through the Eighties been the player on tour who had done most to maximise a 
limited talent. His high school coach had noted of him that he had 'No 
forehand. No backhand. No volley. Weak serve,' but also that he 'wins matches'. 
Gilbert delighted in proving that even the best could be beaten by application 
and mental toughness (at one changeover in the Masters tournament in 1986, John 
McEnroe told Gilbert: 'You don't deserve to be on the same court as me! You are 
the worst, the fucking worst!' he went on to lose, and afterwards talked for 
the first time about retirement.)

 Gilbert wrote a book about his approach called Winning Ugly; intrigued, and 
after having been dumped by his long-time coach Bolletieri (who took up with 
Boris Becker), Agassi asked Gilbert if he could help him out. Gilbert's great 
strength was that he could not bear to see Agassi (who looked to him 'like a 
poster boy for the caffeine industry') waste his talent, but he also knew all 
too well that talent alone did not make a champion. 'Brad could not believe 
it,' Agassi observes of their differing approaches, 'when I told him that 
sometimes I'd decide where I was going to hit my serve during the ball toss. 
For Brad, that was unacceptable because he was the kind of player who would 
think about where he was going to hit the serve two weeks before the toss'

Above all, Gilbert forced Agassi to believe that he could become what he has 
become. Watching Agassi train with his coach in Lyon, you can see how Gilbert 
has helped him to focus on every ball. Agassi was hitting for an hour or so 
with the Czech Karel Kucera, and after every rally he was leaving the court to 
discuss with his coach exactly how he was hitting the ball. Agassi has taken 
this thoughtfulness into tournaments, too. One of the great pleasures of 
watching Agassi since his return to form has been to see him slowly unpick an 
opponent's game, impose himself on a match. A case in point was his defeat of 
Mark Philipoussis at Wimbledon. The big Australian had brushed aside Tim Henman 
in the previous round and was one of the tournament favourites, but against 
Agassi his power was not only neutralised, it was made to look vaguely 
ridiculous. Agassi threw Philipoussis off his stride to begin with in that 
match by standing 10 feet behind the baseline to receive the famous scud serve, 
giving himself time to clip the ball past the Australian as he moved 
predictably to the net; by the end of the game, though, he was standing right 
up near the service line, picking up 135 mph serves virtually on the 
half-volley, as Philipoussis, rattled, tried unsuccessfully to blast the ball 
through him.

 It is perhaps no coincidence that having fallen back in love with the game, 
Agassi has also found love within it. He is not a man who gives up his secrets 
lightly, though, and when you ask him about Steffi Graf, the eyes immediately 
warn you off. (To one reporter at the recent Masters tournament ,who asked only 
if he had talked to Steffi on the phone about his semi-final victory over Marat 
Safin, he responded by inquiring: 'Are you being serious right now? Do you 
actually have, like, a journalist license? Are you actually able to write?').

 Asked whether it has been easier for him to have a relationship with someone 
who understands as well as he does the pressures, he says curtly: 'I don't 
think it's necessary for a relationship to have that kind of professional 
understanding, but I think if you do, it's an incredible asset.' In response to 
a question as to whether Steffi helps him in preparation for games he observes 
only that 'I find myself very interested in what she thinks about a lot of 
things, and that includes tennis'

 I wonder, finally, if Steffi's decision to quit while still at the peak of 
the profession will have any influence on his own decision to eventually call 
it a day? 'No,' he says carefully. 'Every athlete is different. To compare it 
is to try to write the script before it is written, my career has not been 
normal, and I'm sure my retirement won't be normal either.'

 As he prepares for the defence of his Australian Open title later this month, 
the question of whether he should try to make this his last golden season seems 
to loom large for Agassi, though he won't acknowledge it directly. His 
longevity as a tennis player has been brought into sharper focus by a number of 
things recently; first, there was the retirement last year of Jim Courier. 
Agassi has been playing Sampras and Chang and Courier for most of his life, and 
between them for the best part of a decade, Becker apart, they have dominated 
men's tennis. Courier's going, he says, 'did send signals, though more from an 
emotional standpoint. You know it gets tougher as you get older, emotionally 
growing up with a player, and having the same dreams and the same goals and 
just the same schedules, for that to be over for him, it leaves you feeling 
somewhat nostalgic, somewhat sad. And it does make me critically aware of my 
own situation.'

 That critical awareness has perhaps been further heightened by a promotional 
campaign from the ATP which has depicted himself and Pete Sampras, surveying 
the younger talent, and posing the question of succession. 'New balls please', 
runs the strapline. I wonder if there is any extra motivation, as there always 
seemed to be for say, Connors, to prove himself against the new kids on the 
block?

 Agassi laughs a little. 'I would probably consider it a great success never 
to be like Jimmy Connors in any respect whatsoever,' he says. 'For me, its 
nothing to do with younger, for me it's always only about the game inside the 
lines; when a young guy comes around and he does something differently and you 
haven't seen it before, you want to adjust and live up to the standard'

 His generation, as he points out, has set a very difficult standard to 
follow, but he points to the fact that Gustavo Kuerten and Marat Safin in 
particular have come through this year, and he 'likes Hewitt's game' and 
suggests that, despite some anxiety among the powers that be about the absence, 
in particular, of a young American challenger, there is not a lot to worry 
about. 'You are talking about a sport that transcends the lines of life. One on 
one, man to man, you are talking about how what I do affects what you do and 
how you deal with that. There's something fundamental there. And you are 
talking about something that people can play for a lifetime. So I'm not worried 
about tennis though certain things have a look of panic, which is not justified 
or necessary. The game speaks for itself in a very authentic way.'

 Is Agassi versus Sampras still, though, the biggest match. 'If we are both 
playing our best, yes.' Are those the games he most looks forward to? 'Not at 
the moment,' he says. 'Pete and I have great memories. But when we are not 
right on our game, then we don't really want to be out there, the matches don't 
live up to what we are capable of'

 Great tennis players have always needed great rivals to extend them, and in 
this sense both Agassi and Sampras seem grateful for the fact that the other 
has been around at the same time. When Agassi was thinking of quitting the 
game, Sampras expressed his hope that he would come back to challenge him; when 
he won the French Open in 1999, he received a telegram from Sampras welcoming 
him back into the fray. They have, over the years, in many ways moulded each 
other's character, at least on the court, Agassi believes: 'I think both of us 
have shaped each other's games a little and frustrated the other. He's been a 
thorn in my side, certainly, but that's what makes it special'

 Do they talk much away from the game? Agassi laughs at the idea. 'No, he's a 
way different cat than I am,' he says. 'I think each of our worst nightmares 
would certainly be to wake up and be the other one.'

 When I saw him, Agassi believed that he would be ready again to resume that 
special relationship at the Australian Open, a belief that was reinforced by 
his invigorated showing at December's Masters tournament in Lisbon, where he 
reached the final: 'It's been a while since my mind was in a place where I 
could take in and use the expectations of the public,' he said. 'It hasn't been 
about winning and losing over the years as about my desire to keep getting 
better. There have been times recently on the practice court when I have been 
very, very happy with my game, but between the practice court and the 
tournament, it hasn't happened but I know it is only a matter of time.'

 And when, later, the time comes for him to step away from the game, the only 
thing he has known, does he think he will know the right moment for that, too? 
'I hope so,' he says. 'Certainly I'm more afraid about how it is at the end 
right now, than what happens after But as soon as I think about how its going 
to end then I guess it's over. In thinking about the end, the end is already 
there.' His eyes are flashing at the complexity of this prospect. 'What I 
hope,' he says, finally, 'is that the fight happens in a way that I am proud 
of.' In the meantime, you guess, all Andre Agassi really wants to focus his 
circuitous, exhilarating attention on, is the next ball, and then the one after 
that.
 