
Ian Mercer, who has died aged 83, spent more than half a century in 
countryside conservation. His work as the first national park officer for 
Dartmoor (1973-90) and as the first chief executive of the Countryside Council 
forWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> (CCW, 1990-95) had a lasting 
impact not only on the landscapes over which he presided but on the management 
of land for wildlife, amenity and public access throughout Britain.

Ian’s greatest triumph concerning Dartmoor was to initiate the Dartmoor 
Commons Act 1985 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukla/1985/37/pdfs/ukla_19850037_en.pdf>, which 
established a commoners’ council to safeguard the interests of the moor and 
open it fully to public access. The act had wider significance, for it was the 
precursor of the nationwide Commons Act 2006, which also provided for 
commoners’ councils and enabled them to obtain environmental funding.

Ian’s national park officer post at Dartmoor was created by the local 
government settlement of 1972, by which the park gained autonomy but was 
beholden financially to Devon county council, with which Ian was often at odds 
on major issues. In 1979, for instance, he vigorously opposed the council’s 
plan to commandeer land from Dartmoor to build abypass around the town of 
Okehampton 
<http://www.dartmoor.gov.uk/learningabout/lab-printableresources/lab-factsheetshome/lab-okehamptonbypass>
, rather than using farmland to the north of the park. It was some consolation 
to Ian that he managed to get the council to finance the park’s legal challenge 
to the scheme, but in the end – to his dismay and despite a government 
commitment to keep trunk roads outside national parks – the land was taken from 
Dartmoor.

Similar disagreements arose over afforestation, the drowning of valleys by 
reservoirs (the proposed inundation of the Swincombe valley was fought off) and 
military training on the moor (he gained more public access and an end to 
mortar firing). During these years Ian had also to look over his shoulder at 
the voluntary defenders of the moor embodied in theDartmoor Preservation 
Association <http://www.dartmoorpreservation.co.uk/>, led by the implacable 
Sylvia Sayer <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/devon/3537795.stm>. Though 
both she and Ian were determined to save Dartmoor from common enemies, Ian was 
in his own words “a rural civil servant”, while “the lady in the hat” as he 
called her, was unconstrained. She thought him too ready to compromise, while 
to him she appeared unrealistic. In the end, however, they gained a respect for 
each other.

At the CCW Ian strove to eradicate the virus embedded in conservation work 
since theNational Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1949/97/pdfs/ukpga_19490097_en.pdf>, which 
had set up separate administrative and policy structures for nature 
conservation on the one hand and for landscape and access on the other. CCW 
combined these two functions and Ian fought manfully to bring them together. 
However, staff members from the two opposing cultures had no wish to be 
integrated, as the naturalists’ scientific rigour clashed with the more 
informal, people-based approach of their new colleagues, and while some 
progress was made on integration, it took many years to secure real cooperation.

At the same time Ian again had to tread carefully, chiefly this time due to 
the presence of John Redwood, the Conservative secretary of state for Wales. 
Redwood thought that conservation should be in the hands of the private sector 
and could not understand why Wales had more than 800 designated sites of 
special scientific interest, which, in his view, were barriers to enterprise 
and development.

At CCW Ian had been masterminding the Tir Cymen (well-crafted land) scheme, 
which proposed – for the first time in Britain – to pay farmers and landowners 
for providing public access to their land as well as for nature and landscape 
conservation. Redwood opposed the scheme and attempted to emasculate it, having 
already for good measure cut CCW’s budget by a sixth. Returning home from one 
sulphurous meeting with Redwood and much in need of a healing glass, Ian 
reached for the whisky bottle, only to find that it was of the Old Redwood 
Canadian brand. He tipped the contents down the sink. Fortunately Redwood left 
to seek the Tory leadership in 1995 and William Hague took over. Tir Cymen 
survived and was widely copied, with far-reaching and still visible effects on 
conservation throughout Britain.

Ian was made an honorary professor of rural conservation practice at the 
University of Wales (1991) for his work at CCW, appointed CBE (1996), and after 
retirement became secretary general of theAssociation of National Park 
Authorities <http://www.nationalparks.gov.uk/> (1996-2001), where he gave the 
parks a much-needed public voice.

Born in Wombourne, south Staffordshire, to Eric, a company director, and his 
wife Nellie (nee Dews), Ian had no indigenous or obvious connection with either 
Dartmoor or Wales, having been to King Edward VI school, Stourbridge, and then 
Birmingham University, where he gained a degree in geography.

His early conservation work was with the Field Studies Council, where he 
vividly expounded nature to young people (1956-59). In 1957 he married his 
first wife, Valerie Hodgson, with whom he ran theSlapton Ley field centre 
<http://www.field-studies-council.org/centres/slapton/slaptonley/about/history.aspx>
 on the south Devon coast (1959-68). After teaching at St Luke’s College, 
Exeter, and serving as warden of theMalham Tarn field centre 
<http://www.field-studies-council.org/centres/malhamtarn.aspx> in the Yorkshire 
Dales, he became conservation officer for Devon (1971-73) and thus progressed 
to the Dartmoor job.

A man of massive frame whose lumbering gait belied a nimble mind, he had an 
excellent knowledge of the natural world, being able, for instance, to 
distinguish every voice in the dawn chorus. But he had many other talents 
necessary to navigate the politics of his work. He was a fluent and persuasive 
speaker, especially when enunciating national park principles to sceptics, and 
had the ability – invaluable in a frequent platform performer – to speak for 
half an hour without saying much, yet leaving his audience feeling informed and 
educated. He was also a convivial presence at conferences and, having played 
rugby in his youth, knew the words to various bawdy songs with which he livened 
up proceedings.

After his divorce from Valerie, in 1976 Ian married Pamela Clarkson, with whom 
he spent four decades living in Moretonhampstead on the north-eastern edge of 
Dartmoor, a place he had loved and defended.

He is survived by Pamela and by three of the four sons, Jonathan, Tom and Dan, 
from his first marriage. Another son, Ben, died in 1997.

• Ian Dews Mercer, conservationist, born 25 January 1933; died 20 September 
2016
 