
Funny things happen in August. It's like that moment in a certain type of film 
when a ship enters the Bermuda Triangle and its compass starts spinning wildly. 
The laws of physics are suspended, tumbleweed blows through the newspaper 
headlines, ordinarily sane BBC presenters get an attack of the staggers and 
start foaming at the mouth, asylum seekers vanish into thin air, and people 
with pointy heads round on the pretty woman in the short skirt and burn her at 
the stake.

Or am I confusing my films? Whatever. It's August. No one will even notice. 
But then everyone needs a holiday. Politicians, newspaper editors, Michael 
Buerk. Even, for argument's sake, the PM, although last week's 'Where's Tony?' 
copycat of the 1980s 'Where's Sid?' British Gas sell-off campaign was a 
hopeless failure, because anyone with two-finger typing skills knows where he 
is, the security effectiveness of this particular news 'blackout' being based, 
presumably, on the idea that international terrorists are a bit backwards. Or 
have problems using Google.

There's only real mystery of the moment and that is: where have the benefit 
scroungers gone? The illegal immigrants. One minute, they are swarming our 
streets, nicking our jobs and colonising large swaths of the Home Counties, and 
then, whoomph!, they've vanished, along with the entire frontbench of the Tory 
party.

Are they all on holiday in Tuscany together? And if so, might this not merit a 
piece in the Mail? Have they joined forces in order to buy palazzos, thereby 
depriving decent, middle-class folk of their enshrined right to a second home? 
How else to explain their extraordinary absence from our newspapers at this 
time? And, moreover, why is it that into the vacuum left by their departure has 
it been prescribed that all news stories must include an aeroplane?

But then, that's the other thing about August. It throws up all sorts of 
questions of a metaphysical nature, questions that require a philosophical 
inquiry into the problem of being, yet there's no one around to answer them. Or 
even ask. Such as: do planes go round crashing into foreign mountains the whole 
time, but we just don't notice because of all the benefit cheats clogging up 
the pages?

And why is it OK to have sex if you're a business-class passenger on a Virgin 
Atlantic flight but not if you're a package holidaymaker on a Thomas Cook 
charter plane? Is it because sex has become another exclusive celebrity pastime 
available only to the rich? Or just that the idea of Airtours's customers going 
at it in the lavs is enough to put you off your breakfast cereal? And can it 
really be more than 30 years since Erica Jong wrote Fear of Flying and if so, 
how is it that the idea of female sexuality is still enough to scare the horses?

Because of all the stories involving aeroplanes, aeroplanes not taking off and 
aeroplanes not quite making their destination airports, last week's 'mile-high 
club shame of a mother on a holiday' was quite the best, involving, as it did, 
our current favourite topics: sex, class, foreign travel and airline meals.

A woman got 50 hours of community service after being discovered having sex in 
the toilet of a Boeing 757 from Tenerife. But then there's a sliding scale when 
it comes to these things. Her lover got off with an £80 fine and a pretty good 
anecdote that, according to the news report, he 'boasted about' down the pub. 
John Travolta merely had to contend with a certain boost to his profile when he 
shut the doors on his Learjet and did pretty much the same. And Richard Branson 
managed to create an entire marketing campaign out of the concept when he 
introduced double beds into Upper Class and hired Austin Powers to promote 
Virgin Shaglantic.

The woman, bless her, did her best in court, her solicitor providing several 
memorable excuses, including the somewhat oxymoronic assertion that she is a 
'shy person', and that although, yes, she didn't have any clothes on, all that 
took place was 'a bit of cuddling', and this only occurred because 'her drink 
might have been spiked'.

Apart from the obvious error of three excuses being worse than one, the 
woman's greatest mistake was to be born female and working class and attempting 
this sort of caper in August just after Big Brother's whirlpool bath had been 
drained for the summer, but before the cast of Lost had got over their flesh 
wounds and started on the serious business of disrobing their way to ratings 
victory.

There are lot of reasons to be scared of flying. Death, for one. Gate Gourmet 
meals another. But probably not because of malicious drink-spikers at terminal 
three's Rose and Crown. Nor because of sexually voracious young women out to 
destroy society. As you board your flight to Tuscany and prepare to join the 
shadow ministers and asylum seekers and Islamic fundamentalists around the 
pool, pick up your Erica Jong again. Pretend it's 1973. And try, if you can, to 
imagine a world in which single mothers have moral equivalence with overweight, 
middle-aged actors from Hollywood. Or have another pina colada instead.

• This article was amended on 13 March 2015 to remove two names.
 