
An Illinois <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/illinois> law that takes 
effect on Sunday aims to take advantage of the trusting relationship between 
hairstylists and their clients in order to prevent domestic violence.


Stylists, barbers, cosmetologists, estheticians, hair braiders and nail 
technicians in the state will receive an hour of mandated abuse-prevention 
training, as part of the licensing process. The law does not require them to 
report any violence, and it shelters them from any liability.

The training provides beauty professionals with information about local help 
and resources they can share with clients. The measure appears to be the first 
of its kind in the country, according to the National Conference of State 
Legislatures.

Hairstylists are well situated to notice signs of abuse, said Vi Nelson, 
spokeswoman for the industry group Cosmetologists Chicago.

Abusers “tend to try to find places where it could be an accident or it’s not 
as visible”, Nelson said.

LGBT people face discrimination over domestic violence claims, report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/18/lgbt-hiv-affected-people-domestic-violence-study>
“They may hit them in the back of the head, and there’s a bruise or a bump. 
The hairdresser is touching you and can see things that cannot be visible to 
the casual observer.”

Clients and stylists often develop relationships, said Karen Gordon, who owns 
J Gordon Designs salon in Chicago.

“We get very close with our clients, even so far to say we love our clients,” 
she said. “You know people through life’s ups and downs. When people come into 
a safe environment like a beauty salon, they tend to open up.”

State senator Bill Cunningham supported the measure in part because his wife 
is a former hairstylist whose customers frequently discussed incidents of 
domestic violence.

She “had a difficult time dealing with these issues when they came up. She 
wasn’t sure what to tell her clients,” said Cunningham, a Democrat.

That is why the new law was written to connect victims with services, not to 
have beauty professionals act as therapists, he said.

“The main goal is to get victims of domestic violence professional help if 
they want it,” he said. “It could be as simple as providing their client with a 
phone number. In maybe more extreme cases, it could be putting their client in 
touch with a shelter.”

The not-for-profit domestic violence prevention organization Chicago Says No 
More said the mandate was needed because past training efforts never caught on. 
The group’s founder, Kristie Paskvan, said beauty professionals were an ideal 
source to provide help because they could be more objective than family and 
friends.

“They’re listening and then they can say, ‘Hey, if you’re interested, here’s 
some information,’” Paskvan said.

State representative Fran Hurley of Chicago, who supported the legislation, 
said she knew of one Chicago-area salon owner who put business cards for a 
local anti-domestic violence group in her beauty shop’s bathroom.

“You’d be amazed at how many times she has to replace them,” said Hurley, also 
a Democrat. “She refills them all the time.”

Cosmetologists Chicago helped write the measure so it did not require beauty 
professionals to become involved or report violence unless they chose to do so. 
Once that was clarified, Nelson said, the professional response was 
“overwhelmingly positive”.

The first training sessions will be offered in March at an industry trade show 
in Chicago.

Gordon has been in the beauty industry for 38 years and said she thought she 
would have used the training if it were offered earlier in her career.

“I wish I’d had the tools,” she said. “I wish I’d had the resources.”
 