
Somewhere amid the maze of terraced houses that leads to Lincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> City's Sincil Bank stadium, a 
cheerful-looking chap approached me with a knowing smile. He curled his hands 
until both thumbs met their middle fingers and held them out in front of me.

"Nil-nil," he said assuredly. "Can't score any goals."

He was right. They can't. And they didn't. Following Saturday's goalless draw 
with Stockport County <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/match/3112537>, the 
Imps have now scored only seven times in 13 league games. No team in the top 
five divisions of English football have scored fewer league goals than Lincoln. 
It is a telling statistic and one which reflects badly on the previous manager, 
Chris Sutton.

The former Blackburn Rovers and Celtic striker scored more than 150 career 
goals at the top level of British football, but struggled to convey that 
experience to his less able charges in a spell of one year and one day 
attempting to pilot Lincoln away from the Football League's trap door. When 
Sutton arrived, the Imps were 20th in League Two. More than a year on,they lie 
21st <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=11&CPID=69> and a new man has 
been handed the managerial reins.

Born just 12 miles from Southend, Steve Tilson spent nearly two decades at his 
local league club as an industrious midfielder turned resourceful manager. 
Lincolnshire is a fair way from home for the 44-year-old, but a long 
association with one club does not preclude success with another. The most 
obvious point of reference can be found at the opposite end of the Football 
League from Lincoln's situation in the form of Queen's Park Rangers and Neil 
Warnock.

A lifelong Sheffield United devotee, Warnock worked his way through eight 
clubs during his playing days and a further nine in his managerial career 
before landing his dream job at Bramall Lane. It ended in heartbreak, of 
course, when the Blades were relegated from the Premier League on the final day 
of the 2006-07 season. Warnock looked a broken man, but his fine record in the 
capital with Crystal Palace and QPR since leaving the Steel City is something 
to which Tilson can aspire with the Imps.

That aspiration, to achieve more than mere survival with each passing season, 
will be a slow burner. The squad needs strengthening in key areas, but the 
entire budget is said to have been spent before Tilson's arrival. Lincoln's 
board say they will find the funds from somewhere. To propel the Imps up the 
table, the new man will need to find goals from somewhere. Despite the loss of 
the influential centre-back Danny Swailes to injury after half an hour, 
Stockport dealt comfortably with the threat of much-travelled target man Drewe 
Broughton and the on-loan Celtic forward Ben Hutchinson. Perhaps 'threat' is 
the wrong word.

In fairness, Broughton's well-timed through ball sent his strike partner 
racing away from the visitors' defence after just seven minutes. Hutchinson's 
casual side-footed finish, directed straight into Matt Glennon's welcoming 
arms, betrayed a distinct lack of confidence. It took until six minutes before 
the interval for Lincoln to fashion any sort of comparable opportunity, 
Broughton heading over the bar from Albert Jarrett's left-wing delivery. 
Stockport carried the greater menace before the break, with the right-winger 
Jake Simpson – the son of his manager Paul – sending a series of dangerous 
crosses into the box.
 Poacher the Imp, Lincoln City's mascot Photograph: Adam Davy/Empics Sport 
With a clear lack of resources available to Tilson, he must hope Lincoln's 
pair of African wide men will display greater creativity on a more consistent 
basis. The Sierra Leone international Jarrett showed sporadic flashes of 
invention, while the 21-year-old Gambian Mustapha Carayol endured a less 
productive day at the office. With no sign of any goal threat from the middle 
of the park, however, Lincoln may have to rely on Jarrett and Carayol upping 
their game.

Lincoln improved significantly in the second half, causing havoc at least 
three times in the Stockport penalty area where previously there had been 
nothing but calm. In the end, though, a point was a fair result and both 
managers seemed happy enough that their sides were able to keep a clean sheet. 
Both will hope to improve greatly in their next games on the one shot on target 
they each managed during this tepid encounter. Stockport have the easier task 
on paper, facing rock-bottom Hereford at Edgeley Park, while Lincoln travel to 
promotion-chasing Wycombe.

For now, that pleasant chap wandering through the backstreets of Lincoln 
before Imps home games can continue to be confident in curling both his hands 
by way of a pre-match prediction. Tilson's job is to turn one of those hands 
into a number. Any number.

David Bevan is the editor of theseventytwo.com <http://theseventytwo.com/>, 
one of the blogs featured inour Football League blogosphere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/football-league-blog/blogosphere>.
 