
Chocolate Treats

'Tis the season to indulge, so go all out on Railbookers' new seven-day 
Chocolate Tour (0844 482 1010;www.railbookers.com <http://www.railbookers.com>
). It begins in Brussels, praline capital of Belgium, where you can sample your 
way around an array of posh chocolate shops. Then it's off to Cologne to find 
out how the dark stuff is made at that city's Chocolate Museum. The trip ends 
in Vienna, where you get a chocolate spa treatment at Hotel Sacher, famous for 
its Sachertorte (chocolate cake). The tour costs from £829, including B&B 
accommodation, Eurostar travel and train transfers.

Party in Padstow

Just when you thought Padstow couldn't get any more quaint, it launches its 
first Christmas festival (www.padstowlive.com <http://www.padstowlive.com>). 
Taking place from Thursday to Sunday this week, it will feature late-night 
shopping, carols round the Christmas tree on the harbour, brass bands and a 
Christmas market, where there'll be mountains of local produce.

Best of New England

Inntravel (01653 617906; www.inntravel.co.uk <http://www.inntravel.co.uk>) has 
extended its New England portfolio with the launch of a new seven-night 
Mountains to Cape Cod holiday. Hit the town in Boston, go rambling through the 
Green Mountains of Vermont, take in far-reaching views on the Mount Equinox 
'skyline drive' and go whale-watching in Cape Cod. With departures from 16 May 
to 17 October, it costs from £1,195, including fights, B&B accommodation and 
car hire.

Focus on Marrakesh

Get under the skin of one of the world's most colourful cities with Cazenove + 
Loyd (020 7384 2332;www.cazloyd.com <http://www.cazloyd.com>). The company is 
offering visitors to Marrakesh a day's photography tour with Suzanne Porter, an 
English photographer who lives in the city. You'll get the chance to capture 
tanners and blacksmiths at work and visit Medersa Ben Youssef, an historic 
koranic school, and the iconic Koutoubia mosque. She'll give you plenty of tips 
along the way. Three nights' B&B at Riad el Fenn costs from £537, including a 
full-day tour but not flights.

Cruise control

Cruising may be more affordable than ever next year, but that doesn't help 
with choosing which route to pick. If you can't decide, the new Insight Guide 
to Dream Cruises of the World may help. It examines the world's most 
fascinating routes, from the Northwest Passage to cruises along the Danube, 
Nile and Mississippi. Each cruise has a detailed section outlining the 
itinerary, with suggestions for excursions or short trips onshore and an 
information panel on journey length, weather, and the best time to travel. 
Available in bookshops and fromwww.insightguides.com 
<http://www.insightguides.com>, price £16.99.

Christmas cheer

If you fancy a Christmas house party but feel you've left it too late, there's 
good news from Cottages and Castles (01738 451610;www.cottages-and-castles.co.uk
 <http://www.cottages-and-castles.co.uk>), which still has availability for 
Christmas and New Year. Its sizable properties can be great value if you can 
fill all the rooms. Persie House, which sleeps 18, is surrounded by gorgeous 
Perthshire countryside and has open fires in the lounge and study and a dining 
room that can comfortably seat all of you for Christmas dinner. It costs £4,500 
for Christmas week, which works out at £250 per person.
 