
It is thanks to Charles Dickens that when we think of gruel, we picture an 
almost comically horrible dish: thin and meagre, only a miser like Ebenezer 
Scrooge would keep a small pan of it warming on his hob atChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> time, and only a starving 
child like Oliver Twist would ever long for more of it. But it wasn’t 
necessarily so. The rich gruel – “a wholesome spoon-meat” – for which there is 
a recipe in Mary Kettilby’s vividly titledCollection Of Above Three Hundred 
Receipts in Cookery, Physick and Surgery of 1714 sounds delicious, made as it 
is from slowly simmered pearl barley, currants, egg yolks, sherry, cream and 
lemon rind. Can’t you just see it chalked up on some modish restaurant 
blackboard? Punters! Forget snail porridge. Gruel is where it’s at now.

I got to thinking about gruel one freezing afternoon earlier this month, when 
I called in at theFoundling Museum <http://foundlingmuseum.org.uk/> in 
Bloomsbury.Feeding the 400, its latest exhibition, looks at how children in the 
care of the Foundling Hospital (which stood on the site of the museum) were fed 
from 1740, a year after Thomas Coram established it, until 1954, when the last 
pupils were placed in foster care – and yes, it is a chastening experience, 
especially when we are all about to eat even more than usual. In the end, 
though, the visitor is moved (almost to tears, in my case) not by how badly the 
children were fed, but by how well. Although Mary Kettilby’s gruel, the recipe 
for which I found in the exhibition guide, would have been strictly the 
province of the hospital’s governors, this isn’t to say that its pupils went 
without. At their long dining tables, where (put all thoughts of wooden 
trenchers from your mind) the food was served only on china plates, frugality 
meant simplicity, not deprivation.

In perfect copperplate – everything was obsessively documented at the 
Foundling Hospital – there it all is: not only the variety of the foods the 
children were given, but the fervent desire of its stewards that these things 
might do them good. Until the beginning of the 20th century, the foundlings 
were indeed unfailingly fed gruel for breakfast every day. But it was always 
made with full-fat milk from the dairy cows of Hackney, Islington and Mile End, 
and served with hunks of bread, which on Sundays came with 15g of butter per 
child. Breakfast, like every meal, was a serious business, and not only because 
it began with grace and was taken in silence. In 1811, when it was discovered 
that, thanks to some fraud carried out by a member of staff, the children had 
been consuming skimmed milk, it was considered a scandal. Heads had to roll.

My favourite parts of the exhibition belonged to the 20th century, when the 
suet pies and boiled brisket served in Victorian times began to be replaced 
with roast veal and cold gammon – and when treats started coming the children’s 
way: cakes to mark royal weddings, jelly and ice cream for those whose tonsils 
had been removed. At one point, a Miss B J Anderson left a legacy to the 
hospital specifically so that each child would find a half pound of chocolates 
in their stockings come Christmas. A letter of 1936 from the hospital steward 
to Harrod’s complained that the bread the store had provided – 707 brown loaves 
over five days – was too “wet and sticky”. An offer of broken biscuits from 
another shop was declined on the grounds that it was difficult to give so many 
children an equal portion.

The exhibition takes its title from Received: A Blank Child, an essay by 
Dickens, published in his magazineHousehold Words in 1853, which describes the 
spectacle of the foundlings eating their Sunday dinner under the gaze of a 
middle-class audience, for whom the hospital was a favoured post-church outing 
(Dickens lived nearby, and was a regular visitor himself). Looking at an 
engraving by Joseph Swain of this weekly event, bonnets and top hats bobbing 
just beyond the regimented rows of girls in white aprons, a wave of revulsion 
crept over me. But then I wondered: were these genteel crowds gawping idly, as 
if at zoo animals, or were they, like me, busy counting their blessings? 
Forgive me if I sound, at this point, like some wizened Methodist minister, but 
I must commendFeeding the 400 to you this holiday season. Make a detour. Break 
off, temporarily, from your ceaseless shopping. It can be seen in its entirety 
in less time than it takes to stuff a turkey, and its beneficent effects will 
see you right through to New Year’s Day at least.

rachel.cooke@observer.co.uk
 