
What’s a World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> 
for? To make money and give the elite (who aren’t getting a good press 
anywhere) the chance to fly around the world in first class, drinking Dom 
Perignon champagne from golden goblets. But it’s also for the “world” (the 
clue’s in the name), so it strikes me as a good idea to invite as many guests 
as one can – within reason.

A lot of the sniping and snarling that has greeted Fifa’s decision to expand 
the World Cup looks like the media bemoaning the “research” they will have to 
do to write all of those “10 players to watch” listicles that will appear as 
soon as the 2022 shebang has finished. There are genuine concerns about a 
bloated competition – the matches splattered like a Jackson Pollock painting 
superimposed on a 2026 calendar – but, heavens above,Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> have actually thought it through 
and devised an intriguing plan that preserves the current 32-day schedule. 
There will be 80 matches rather than 64, but is having 16 more games once every 
four years really too much to bear? If we can stomach the Europa League, surely 
we can survive a few more World Cup games. You don’t have to watch all of them, 
you know.

Football fans from 48 countries react to the new 48-team World Cup format
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/football-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa>
The three-team groups will mean fewer dead rubbers (if any) and, though 
penalty shootouts are hardly satisfactory as a decider, if the final can go to 
penalties, why can’t group games. Shares in local bus companies may rise as 
national coaches look to park them, then hope their goalkeepers can give it the 
wobbly legs and sneak their teams through, but recent World Cups have hardly 
been short of unambitious teams and dull defensive matches.

The pundits’ version of “who will think of the children?” is “what about the 
quality?”, a phrase I have heard repeated over the last few days, often from 
people who would be hard pressed to name five countries ranked between 32 and 
48 (the imperfect, but best, indicator of current “quality”) never mind the 
players comprising such squads.

So who are these minnows tipping their hats to the regulars, who must agree to 
share their ball? Thecurrent rankings 
<http://www.fifa.com/fifa-world-ranking/ranking-table/men/index.html> suggest 
that the extra teams would include the likes of Senegal, Ivory Coast, Tunisia, 
Egypt, South Korea, Algeria, Romania, Paraguay, Sweden, Greece, Czech Republic, 
Serbia, Japan, Denmark, Australia and DR Congo. There are not many winners 
among that collection but there are plenty of contributors, all of whom are 
worthy of being described as “dangerous” in any draw, certainly as far as 
England are concerned.

Of course, the qualifiers are structured by region rather than ranking, with 
the extra spaces being handed out to the six confederations: Europe will have 
16 representatives rather than 13; Africa will have nine rather than five; Asia 
jump up to 8.5 from 4.5; South America are up to six from 4.5; Concacaf will 
have 6.5 rather than 3.5; Oceania are guaranteed one place rather than 0.5; and 
the host national will take the final spot as usual.

Who wants to deny Africa and Asia their extra places given the tremendous 
progress their players have made over the last generation? South America only 
get six qualifiers, but that’s from the 10 nations in that confederation. Thus 
the Jackson Pollock tournament begins to look more like a Piet Mondrian, the 
blur resolving into something quite neat.

In as much as World Cups can be summarised, my experience of the finals since 
1970 is one of a flattening of differences in talent, tactics and skills: the 
lesser teams have become more competitive and the top teams have become less 
dominant. A true “World” Cup should reflect the world, with as many hats thrown 
into the ring as possible. Fifa’s clever plan balances that objective with a 
manageable schedule (easily accommodated in a limited number of stadiums given 
21st-century pitch preparation and recovery) to the benefit of all.

So, England to play Mexico and Senegal in their group matches in 2026? What 
times are the kick-offs?

• This article appeared first on The 99.4 Blog 
<http://nestaquin.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Gary Naylor <https://twitter.com/garynaylor999> on Twitter
 