
Out on Route 21 in Washington state, the long golden prairies of wheat stretch 
out on either side of the road, lapping against distant purplish mountain 
ranges. Abandoned farms dot the landscape: gaunt timber-framed skeletons, their 
owners given up and gone to California or Seattle. I even spy a lone grey wolf, 
standing and staring at my passing car. He must have come across from Canada, 
heading south for winter maybe.

Some of the towns are no longer alive, but Pomeroy, in the south-east of the 
state, shows signs of hope. There’s a great bookshop where the owner, John, 
swears things are on the up. “Don’t call us Pomeranians though. That’s a dog.”

I tell him about my quest: a search for the perfect funky small American town, 
a place with a buzzing homespun coffee shop and a great little deli, a town 
with some youthful exuberance and a shared passion for the great outdoors – 
plus, of course, friendly bookshops such as his.
 See the full visual 
To me, those towns are where America is at its best. It’s the new American 
dream. It seems particularly appropriate that I’m doing this in the middle of a 
vicious election battle between two very different visions of America. John 
swears that Pomeroy is heading for success, but after a look around town I can 
see the battle is not quite won. I mark Pomeroy as a “maybe”.

Alternative funky towns of America. I’d spent the previous year compiling a 
list of possible locations. After I discovered a rich seam of internet 
discussion on the subject, my list had grown inordinately long and covered 
almost every state in the union. But what stood out was that north-west corner: 
northern California,Oregon <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/oregon>, Idaho 
and Washington. The area was obviously catnip to people who wanted something 
more from life than can be bought in Walmart. I drew lines on the road atlas. I 
discounted the cities – Portland and Seattle – too big and well-known. I caught 
a plane to San Francisco. I got on Highway 101. I went north.

That first night I made it as far as the Benbow Inn near Garberville, on the 
cusp of redwood country. Next morning, I had breakfast in theWoodrose Café 
<http://www.thewoodrosecafe.com/> and decided that all my towns would need 
somewhere just like this: a busy little diner serving kickstart-the-day food 
for lumberjacks.
 Breakfast at The Woodrose Cafe, Garberville 
But why, I asked my neighbour at the counter, were there so many grubby 
guitar-packing youths sitting by the gas station with cardboard signs that 
read: Garden Work Needed. “That’s a specialised form of garden work they’re 
wanting,” he told me with a wink, and when I still didn’t twig, he explained 
that Garberville is the capital of Californian marijuana culture. “Gardening 
here is paradise for stoners.”

Weed had not been on my list of requirements for the new utopia, but a decent 
bookshop was: preferably a place in which to sink into a period armchair with a 
good guide to American ghost towns. I love American ghost towns: after all, 
they are the shadows behind those rejuvenated places. Garberville has such a 
bookshop (Tiger Lily Books 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Tiger-Lily-Books/160873477267058>), but the 
town’s real attraction lies to the north along what is known as Avenue of the 
Giants.

The overpowering physical presence of a redwood forest is shocking: imagine 
picking your way through a million Big Bens standing a few feet apart. North of 
Garberville, the highway plunges into a deep sombre cathedral of trees that 
goes on and on. I emerged atEureka, a coastal town known for its seafood and 
Victorian architecture. I checked in atCarter House Inn 
<http://carterhouse.com/> (doubles from $189 B&B), one of the lovelier old 
buildings.
 Walking in the forest just off the Avenue of the Giants, northern California. 
Photograph: Kevin Rushby for the Guardian 
Funky cafes? I spotted a few. Bookshops? Three. It was looking hopeful. There 
was a bustling marina where gangs of seals and gulls were awaiting the next 
tuna boat. There were some good restaurants and bars. In one, the Oberon Grill 
(516 2nd Street), I found a framed newspaper story from 1911 describing how 
Jack London had got into a fist fight in that very place.

Eureka has gentrified a lot since then, but still has a colourful edge that 
harks back to pioneer days. In theSpeakeasy Bar 
<https://www.facebook.com/speakeasyeureka/> that evening I heard tales of 
Bigfoot sightings and monster trees. I gave Eureka a large tick on my list. It 
was a contender.
 Book and antique shops in Eureka, northern California. Photograph: Kevin 
Rushby for the Guardian 
Heading north once again, I took a saloon bar tip and turned off 101 along a 
narrow coastal road that dipped and curved along the cliffs, giving magnificent 
views of the coast, until I hitTrinidad, a pretty little seaside town and, no 
doubt, a good base for exploring this section of the Pacific coast. I pressed 
on, however, crossing into Oregon on Highway 199,one of the US’s 120 national 
scenic byways <http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/byways/>.

My objective that night was a treehouse B&B outside Cave Junction, but 
arriving in the area after dark my GPS failed and, inexplicably, my phone too. 
I pulled in to a gas station and found myself taking directions from a customer 
with a teardrop tattoo under one eye – the mark of a murderer I seemed to 
remember – and feeling like I had wandered into a Coen brothers film. Four 
hours later, having explored every backcountry road for miles, I finally rolled 
up atTreehouse Paradise <http://www.treehouseparadise.com/> (rooms for two from 
$350). By flashlight I was shown the footpath to my treehouse which proved to 
be a luxurious den high up in a Douglas fir.

 The Treehouse Paradise B&B, Cave Junction, Oregon. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
for the Guardian 
At dawn I was woken by skittering noises and peeped out to see three deer 
chasing each other around the base of the tree. Down in the main house the 
owner, Phil, was cooking breakfast. “I came up here from southern California 38 
years ago,” he told me, “We grew up surfing, climbing and hunting. But then it 
got very crowded down there. I wouldn’t go back.”

Phil and Jodie, his wife, had constructed an idyllic retreat. After arriving, 
they decided never to shoot anything on their land and soon transformed it into 
a haven for wildlife and birds – hence my experience of the deer that morning. 
Phil’s breakfast was near perfect too: a feast of fresh fruit and home cooking. 
“We are pretty self-sufficient out here,” he said. “Have you tried my blueberry 
jam?”

A week in the treehouse would have suited me just fine, but instead I set out 
again, cutting inland towards Idaho, passing through attractive little towns 
along the Rogue river. After Crater Lake and Bend I turned east on Highway 20, 
passing an astonishing dwarf forest of whitebark pines before the road became 
bleaker and emptier and finally sought sanctuary in a long shallow canyon that 
burrowed its way into Idaho, emerging on Interstate 84, which took me south to
Boise.
 Downtown Boise, Idaho’s capital with a small town vibe. Photograph: Kevin 
Rushby for the Guardian 
This city interested me. In the 1970s, a Hewlett Packard exec, Ray Smelek, was 
tasked with finding the best company HQ and location in the US. He selected 
Boise (pronounced boy-see), reasoning that you could ski in the morning and 
play golf all afternoon. Since then the place has boomed, but retained a small 
town feel.

I met up with a local climbing guide, Randall, and got his take on it. “I like 
Boise,” he told me, “but it’s too big and too white to be perfect.” He listed 
his criteria for a small town. “Mountains nearby, and some young professionals, 
but a diverse culture, and not too bourgie. Somewhere like Ketchum – mind you, 
that can get pretty bumpin’ in winter.”

We unpicked this slowly. Ketchum is a ski town in Idaho, much loved by the 
wealthy (the bourgeois) who have those great (bumpin’) parties.

I, too, liked Boise, despite its size. It boasts the largest Basque community 
outside Spain, which brings an unexpected dimension to its tidy grid-iron 
streets. There’s a burgeoning wine industry with tasting rooms, several craft 
breweries and some great restaurants (tryGoldy’s 
<http://www.goldysbreakfastbistro.com/> for breakfast).
 There’s a frontier feel to the Sawtooth Hotel in Stanley, Idaho. Photograph: 
Kevin Rushby for the Guardian 
After a couple of nights, however, I had to admit that Boise was just too big 
for perfection. I drove on, sweeping on a huge curve through Idaho, stopping 
frequently to admire the mountain panoramas. I likedStanley, deep inside the 
Sawtooth mountains, and especially theSawtooth Hotel <http://sawtoothhotel.com/>
 (rooms from $70) with its genuine frontier feel. But Stanley suffers severe 
winters and even in September the nights were frosty.

I cut north-west, luxuriating in roadside hot springs Sunbeam and Kirkham’s, 
then passing Hells Canyon and arriving atJoseph – one of Oregon’s strong 
contenders for the alternative funky town title. Once a typical logging and 
ranching outpost, Joseph has reinvented itself as an arts town, with a 
speciality in bronze-casting.

I wandered around, noting a great little pizza oven place, a bookshop and a 
cafe –Red Horse <http://www.redhorsecoffeetraders.com/>, a real treat. There 
were deer tiptoeing across the lawns of clapboard houses and a very friendly 
visitor centre. “A good hike is up Hurricane Creek,” they told me. “Folks say 
there’s a cabin of an old-time gold prospector up there still exactly as he 
left it. Nothing’s been moved.”
 Farming today … agricultural landscape near Pomeroy, Washington State. 
Photograph: Alamy 
I’d have liked a week to enjoy Joseph and hunt down that cabin, but the road 
was calling me. I headed north to the Snake river, then turning west, spotting 
my wolf and visiting Pomeroy. It made me wonder: how are those small towns 
made? The common theme of the successful places I’d seen seemed to be a handful 
of hardy young entrepreneurs, the sort who can make their own clothes, granola 
and business plans at the same time as snowboarding the local mountains or 
debugging a laptop: the cool tycoons.

My next stop was Bellingham, right up near the Canadian border. I was running 
out of US and I still hadn’t quite found perfection although, for the first 
time, I was coming across Trump posters – none for Hilary. TheTree Frog Night 
Inn <http://www.treefrognight.com/> (doubles from $100) where I stayed, 
definitely had the right vibe, as did theAslan Brewery 
<http://www.aslanbrewing.com/>, where all the beers were excellent and the 
tycoons definitely cool. Bellingham, however, was just too big to take the 
title. Next day I turned tail and hared back south, popping over the bridge to
Anacortes on Fidalgo Island.
 Antiques store in Anacortes, Washington. Photograph: Alamy 
Truth is, this wasn’t even on my list. I just liked the name. And when I saw 
it, I was in love. Any town that has large ships being built on its beach 
cannot be bad. Plus they had bookshops, cafes and complimentary pianos on 
street corners. Yes, overstrung, gaudily painted, honky tonk joannas for 
passersby to hammer out jazz standards on, which – naturally – many appeared to 
be able to do. Big tick for Anacortes, especially when I saw orcas in large 
numbers out in the bay.

These islands have some other good contenders, I realised. On Whidbey Island 
there wasLangley, with a fine coffee shop, Useless Bay Coffee Co 
<http://uselessbaycoffee.com/>, and Coupville, with its glorious old high 
street and wonderful Captain Whidbey Inn.

Time was running out, I had only one more destination. I caught the ferry west 
to the Olympic peninsula and pulled in atPort Townsend. I got off the boat and 
walked around and knew I’d found it. There were cafes, bars, bookshops and 
great architecture. There was the ocean and the mountains. It had it all. And 
it was mine. Except I had no time. My flight was next day.
 The Nifty Fiftys soda fountain, Port Townsend, WA. Photograph: Alamy 
Oscar Wilde, who knew all about lost idylls, declared that people, having 
found paradise, always did the same thing: they “set sail”.

On my last morning, perhaps with those words in mind, I wandered down to Port 
Townsend’s boatyard, a busy working yard with a great cafe – theBlue Moose 
<https://www.facebook.com/Blue-Moose-198393041370/>. I sat on the wall and 
watched the vibrant activity: men and women preparing their vessels for the 
next big journey. And I thought of the immense and wonderful trip I was 
finishing. Wilde, I decided, was wrong. It’s the journey itself that is 
paradise and that is why, having finally arrived, we always set sail once again.

Way to go

This trip was provided by VisitTheUSA <http://www.visittheusa.co.uk/>. For 
further information on these destinations, seevisitcalifornia.co.uk 
<http://www.visitcalifornia.com/uk>, traveloregon.com <http://traveloregon.com/>
,visitidaho.org <https://visitidaho.org/> and seattle-washingtonstate.co.uk 
<http://seattle-washingtonstate.co.uk/>. Car rental was provided by 
affordablecarhire.com <http://affordablecarhire.com/en/home/index>
 