
Yellowstone national park is finding new ways to manage tourism after visits 
jumped <https://irma.nps.gov/Stats/> by almost 600,000 between 2014 and 2015. 
After 15 years of steady growth, last year’s 4m visits was a tipping point, 
says park ranger Charissa Reid.

The park expects the number to rise in 2016. July is likely to be the first 
million-visit month in the park’s 144-year history.

However, extra visitors have increased accidents between humans, animals, and 
the park’s flora and fauna.

Park rangers issued more than 52,000 resource violations last year. People 
broke thermal features, interacted with protected wildlife and relieved 
themselves in the park. DUIs and domestic violence inside the park also 
increased.

The number of full-time staff at Yellowstone has remained static for over a 
decade, adding to problems. The NPS employed only 330 permanent and 406 
seasonal Yellowstone staff last year.

Some incidents <https://www.nps.gov/yell/learn/news/16032.htm> have made 
headline news – a man who strayed 225 yards off a designated path and fell to 
his death in Yellowstone’s Norris geyser basin andfive people were gored 
<http://www.yellowstonepark.com/teen-gored-bison> by bison. However, dying in 
Yellowstone is unlikely.

“When you consider we had 4 million visitors, I think we’re doing pretty 
good,” says Reid.

Managing human behavior to maintain safety, prevent staff exhaustion and keep 
visitors happy is a daily challenge.

A common disruptive human behavior at Yellowstone is an “animal jam”. This 
happens when people see a bear or a buffalo, or any other animal, and come to a 
full stop to jump from their cars.

“We can always tell the difference between a bison jam and a bear jam, because 
at a bear jam doors are flung open,” says Reid. “People kind of lose it over 
bears in the park.”

Yellowstone needs better understanding of visitor behavior to help with 
management, says Reid.

Animal biologists, law enforcement and printers in Yellowstone’s sign shop are 
all involved in visitor management. “We are trying to engage everyone to find 
solutions,” says Reid.

Yellowstone has also hired a social scientist to study humans. He researches 
how visitors enter and exit through the park, and how they interact with park 
attractions.

“Our superintendent often says visitors are the least studied mammal in 
Yellowstone,” says Reid. “We know more about bison biology than we know about 
park visitors.”

Increasing international visitors, use of social media and varied cultural 
expectations among visitors have all caused problems.

The park has hired Mandarin-speaking park rangers to communicate with the 
increasing number of Chinese visitors. Animal warnings have been translated 
into 10 languages and more toilets have been installed. New barriers and signs 
stop tourists from wandering, and protections outside wolf and wildlife dens 
keep them safe.

Reid acknowledges these are short-term solutions. Effective long-term 
solutions remain beyond park management’s immediate control, buried in budgets, 
and stored in as yet unmined visitor data.

In the meantime, visitors are part of the solution.

Reid wants people to stay on paths and to refrain from taking selfies with 
animals. Bison may seem harmless from a distance, but they injure more people 
annually than any other animal in the park.

Visitors need to heed warnings to keep 25 yards away from buffalo and other 
wildlife, and 100 yards away from wolves and bears. The parkissues pamphlets 
<https://www.nps.gov/yell/planyourvisit/safety.htm> asking visitors to use 
pullouts to view wildlife.

Literature suggests visiting during non-peak hours, before 9am and after 3pm. 
It also encourages people to explore the many alternative federal lands 
surrounding Yellowstone.

Reid, who grew up in Yellowstone, says she knows why the wild and 
awe-inspiring park keeps visitors coming back.

“You can still see predator and prey activity here,” says Reid. “Wildfires 
still rage. These big processes – predation, wildfires, migration – are still 
active in Yellowstone. Sure, there are places to buy an ice cream cone in 
Yellowstone. But there are many more places, just 200 or 300 yards into the 
wilderness, where you very quickly realize you’re a guest in a grizzly bear’s 
house.”
 