
Traditional owners pushing for a 6,000-year-old network of eel traps in 
south-westVictoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> to be 
included on the world heritage list will find out next month if the Australian 
government has accepted their bid.


The traps were built by the Gunditjmara people to manage eels in Lake Condah 
and nearby Darlot Creek and are among the earliest surviving examples of 
aquaculture.

Known as Budj Bim, the site received national heritage listing in 2004 and has 
been put forward for inclusion in the Australian government’s nomination to the
Unesco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco> world heritage council by the 
Victorian government, at the instigation of the Gunditjmara people, as part of 
an $8m management plan.

Indigenous stories, songs and dance protected under new Victorian law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/19/indigenous-stories-songs-and-dance-protected-under-new-victorian-law>
Gunditjmara elder Dennis Rose said a world heritage listing would ensure the 
long-term protection of the site – some of which was damaged when 
non-Indigenous farmers drained the lake at the end of the 19th century – and 
also attract visitors to the area.

Work has already begun to improve the area for visitors, with proposed 
construction of interpretive signage, improved access and a traditional eel 
aquaculture interpretation centre.

Gavin Jennings, the acting Aboriginal affairs minister, said it could become a 
world-class sustainable tourism site.

The traps are a series of canals and graded ponds, running for some 35km 
around the lake. Gunditjmara people manipulated water levels to encourage eels 
to swim into holding ponds, Rose said. He said they also placed funnel-shaped 
baskets at the spillway between ponds to ensure that smaller eels could slip 
through and larger eels be harvested.

The tunnels themselves were made on a lava flow, which was heated up and then 
chipped away leaving sturdy, lasting structures.

“Eels would be transferred from one pond to another, they would be fattened 
up, they would then be eaten,” Rose said.

The traps and other abundant wildlife provided by the lake allowed the 
Gunditjmara people to remain in one place, rather than following the nomadic 
lifestyle commonly associated with traditional Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander culture.

They built “a couple of hundred” stone houses around the lake, which would be 
included in any world heritage application, Rose said.

“People were living in permanent buildings,” he said. “It’s about the richness 
of the region.”

The Gunditjmara were awarded native title over the area in 2007 and plugged 
the drain in the lake, allowing the fish traps to fill again.

Monash University professor of Indigenous archeology, Ian McNiven, said that 
carbon dating of charcoal found during an excavation of one of the fish traps 
found it was 6,600 years old.

McNiven said that particular site, the Muldoons trap complex, appeared to have 
been remade a number of times over the intervening six millennia, indicating it 
was continually used.

“Muldoon trap complex is currently the oldest known stone-walled fish trap in 
the world and amongst the world’s oldest known fish traps,” he told Guardian 
Australia. “It is also the oldest continuously used fish trap in the world ... 
Indeed, the trap was still being used by Gunditjmara people at the Lake Condah 
Mission in the late 19th century.”

McNiven said the extensive network of traps were the “largest example of 
ancient freshwater fishing structures created by hunter-gatherers in the world” 
and were also important evidence in destroying the myth that Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander people did not farm or improve the land, which was part 
of the argument made by colonisers claiming terra nullius.

Indigenous business has plenty to teach about values-led business
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/29/indigenous-business-has-plenty-to-teach-about-values-led-business>
“Clearly, the Gunditjmara rupture the idea that Australian Aboriginal 
hunter-gatherers simply lived off the natural availabile food in the 
environment,” he said.

The deliberate manipulation of the environment to ensure better production of 
fish was a sophisticated form of agriculture, which McNiven said was of world 
heritage significance.

“It is a story that allows a new conception of Aboriginal people as active 
environmental manipulators and manager for thousands of years to be heard and 
recognised on an international scale,” he said.
 