
The number of hit-and-run accidents on Britain’s roads has increased, in part 
due to people thinking an incident not serious enough – or being unaware of the 
legal requirement – to report it or leave their details, according to research 
by insurers and criminologists.

Insurers warned that while victims of hit and run accidents often suffer 
long-term physical and emotional impacts, the practice was becoming more 
prevalent, and they called for measures including a national campaign promoting 
accident responsibility awareness.

Just over 12%, or 17,122, of the 140,056 road traffic accidents causing 
casualties in 2015 involved a hit-and-run incident, according to Department for 
Transport figures – up from a rate of just over 10%, or 16,667 in 2014.

While the number of serious road accidents overall has declined, the 
percentage involving hit-and-runs is now at the highest level in more than a 
decade.

Researchers found that many of those drivers eventually convicted said they 
were unaware of their legal responsibilities. A study by the department of 
criminology at the University of Leicester, surveying almost 700 hit-and-run 
offenders, found that while some were thinking about their own 
self-preservation, or were under the influence of alcohol, many did not 
consider the incident to be serious and used that as a justification for 
failing to report it.

How to safely open a car door, Dutch-style | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/how-to-safely-open-a-car-door-dutch-style>
Dr Matt Hopkins of the University of Leicester said the reasons why people hit 
and run were complex, but, he added: “Interestingly, there seems to be a public 
perception that motoring offences are not ‘real crimes’ and therefore there is 
a tendency for drivers to justify their behaviour.”

The report made a number of recommendations to help tackle this criminal 
issue, including more education about motorists’ responsibilities and exactly 
what should be done in the event of an accident, and developing easy ways of 
reporting accidents such as online apps.

The Motor Insurers’ Bureau handles 15,000 claims a year for victims of hit and 
runs. Ashton West, chief executive of MIB, said: “Hit-and-runs can have an 
everlasting impact on the victims and their families. We will be focusing on 
the recommendations that help raise awareness and educate drivers about their 
responsibilities.”

Chris Grayling, the transport secretary, has in the past called for tougher 
penalties for hit-and-run incidents. The Department for Transport declined to 
comment.

 