
Australian players Nick Lindahl, Brandon Walkin and Isaac Frost have been 
disciplined after being found guilty of tennis corruption offences from an ITF 
Futures tournament in Toowoomba in 2013.


The decisions follow investigations by the international Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Integrity Unit (TIU) and 
disciplinary hearings held by independent anti-corruption hearing officer 
Richard H McLaren.


Nick Kyrgios relying on painkillers as he prepares for Australian Open campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/nick-kyrgios-relying-on-painkillers-as-he-prepares-for-australian-open-campaign>
Lindahl, who reached a career-high singles ranking of 187, has been banned 
from all professional tennis for seven years and fined $47,580. He was found 
guilty of charges of contriving or attempting to contrive the outcome of an 
event, and failing to co-operate with a TIU investigation.

The action from tennis authorities follows completion of criminal proceedings 
against Lindahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/former-tennis-player-nick-lindahl-pleads-guilty-to-match-fixing-charge>
. In April 2016, he was convicted of using corrupt conduct information and 
fined $1,000 in Sydney’s Burwood Local Court.

The TIU said Lindahl had proposed to lose a match in return for payment at the 
Toowoomba tournament in September 2013. The next month he had refused to 
provide his mobile phone for forensic download, as required, the TIU said in a 
statement on Tuesday.

Although Lindahl, 28, retired from the sport in 2013, the TIU decision 
prevents him from resuming playing professional tennis for the seven years of 
the ban. He is also prohibited from attending any tournament or event 
sanctioned by the governing bodies in that time.

Walkin and Frost were also found guilty of disciplinary offences by McLaren.


Walkin, 22, a singles player ranked 1,066, was given a six-month suspension 
after being found guilty of contriving or attempting to contrive the outcome of 
an event. The charge involved passing a corrupt proposal to another party on 
behalf of Lindahl.


Walkin’s sanction was suspended on the basis that he commit no further 
breaches in that time so he is free to compete in any professional tennis event.


Frost, 28, ranked 1515 in singles, was found to have failed to co-operate with 
the TIU by refusing a request to supply his phone for analysis. He served a 
provisional suspension between October 2013 and September 2014 and McLaren 
concluded no additional suspension or any fine should be imposed and he is also 
free to compete in any professional event.

The Tennis Integrity Unit is an initiative of the Grand Slam Board, the 
International Tennis Federation, the ATP and the WTA, who are jointly committed 
to a zero tolerance approach to corruption in tennis.
 