
Fleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/fleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives>
 – the BBC 3 sneak-attack that became the summer’s most banged-on-about comedy 
sensation – drew praise for its thrillingly dark humour, unapologetic 
filthiness and deft exploration of grief. But one of the show’s most 
devastatingly acute observations didn’t have anything to do with sex or death. 
In the first episode, creator and starPhoebe Waller-Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/phoebe-waller-bridge>’s unnamed 
anti-heroine looks on as the sole customer in her ailing cafe declines to 
purchase any food or drink, before plugging in his laptop, phone and Kindle. 
It’s funny because cafe-squatters (and I count myself among their entitled 
number) are truly this brazen.

And now, this recognisable vignette of the reality in countless coffee shops, 
is giving rise to a fascinating new battle: cafe owners are hiding plug 
sockets, disconnecting their routers or ditching desk-style seating to stop 
their businesses being overrun by the familiar army of MacBook-clutching 
freelancers, scanning the floor for somewhere to plug in. Pour one out for smug 
workdays fuelled by free internet, siphoned electricity and complimentary 
cucumber water – the jig may be up for the nation’s Wi-Fi rustlers.

“Ultimately, coffee shops are social environments,” explains Jack Hesketh, 
owner ofStore Street Espresso <http://www.storestespresso.co.uk/>, which limits 
Wi-Fi in its two London outlets and has blocked the sockets in its Bloomsbury 
branch. “We were finding that you’d go into the cafe and it would be 15 people 
sat at 15 different tables and you could hear a pin drop.” Fighting this 
mausoleum vibe – as much as the chancers who make a mint tea last all afternoon 
– seems to be the prime motivation of a lot of the proprietors making a stand.

And sometimes the laptop brigade kill the mood in other ways. “The thing I 
hate the most is the people who come in and unplug lamps to charge up their 
laptops,” says Liam Casey, owner of thePacific Social Club 
<https://www.facebook.com/pacificsocial/> in east London, where laptop and 
tablet users are exiled to a back room. It’s not just the lone nomads either. 
“People use cafes for business meetings, which is fine,” says Casey. “But if 
I’m hungover and just want a breakfast, I don’t really want to get drawn into 
somebody’s professional networking.”

London, with its high density of students and transient workers, is a key 
battleground in this conflict. But establishments in places including Vermont, 
Copenhagen and even tech capital San Francisco have imposed similar bans, 
hoping to make a clear distinction between themselves and the startup-friendly 
“creative hubs” that loudly tout the speediness of their broadband.

So, do customers get indignant or angry when they’re told the unthinkable? 
“We’ve had a few people storming out and some negative things posted online,” 
says Casey. “But it’s generally positive.” Hesketh agrees that people are 
“super understanding” about their digital blackout. Perhaps this is a new age. 
Perhaps people truly have had enough of work encroaching on notionally social 
spaces. Either that or they have found that spot by the window where you can 
serviceably nick Wi-Fi from the train station.
 