
Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu>, was interviewed by 
detectives investigating whether he broke the law by receiving gifts from 
wealthy businessmen.


The questioning under caution took place at Netanyahu’s official residence in 
Jerusalem. The police team did not speak to journalists as they arrived. 
Reports said the questioning lasted around three hours.

A police statement after the questioning ended said “investigators questioned 
PM Benjamin Netanyahu under caution on suspicion of receiving benefits.” No 
additional details were initially given.

Netanyahu has strenuously denied any wrongdoing in relation to a months-long 
investigation into gifts received by himself and members of his close family. 
Israeli media said police were investigating whether gifts worth hundreds of 
thousands of shekels were given with the expectation of any benefit.

During a meeting of his rightwing Likud party earlier on Monday, Netanyahu 
said: “We notice reports in the media. We hear the celebrations and sense the 
way the wind blows in TV studios and in the halls of the opposition. Hold off 
on the partying, don’t jump the gun. I told you and I repeat: nothing will 
happen, because there is nothing. You will continue making wild allegations and 
we will continue leading the state ofIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>.”

The investigation comes at a difficult time for Netanyahu, whose poll rating 
has been slipping amid a series of allegations concerning his inner circle.

Netanyahu and his wife, Sara, have weathered several scandals over the years, 
including investigations into the alleged misuse of state funds and an audit of 
the family’s spending, even including sums spent on laundry and ice-cream. They 
have denied any wrongdoing.

Netanyahu’s biggest rival, Yair Lapid, whose Yesh Atid party was ahead of 
Likud in the most recent polls, called for the latest inquiry to be concluded 
quickly for “the good of the country”.

Referring to drawn-out proceedings against Netanyahu’s predecessor, Ehud 
Olmert, who was eventually jailed for corruption, Lapid said: “If two prime 
ministers in a row fall from office because of corruption, it will be very hard 
to rehabilitate the public’s trust in its leadership. I want to remind the 
members of the opposition and the media that the presumption of innocent 
applies to every Israeli, including the prime minister. We need to let the 
police do their work.”

Naftali Bennett, another of Netanyahu’s rivals and an ally in his coalition 
government, said: “The prime minister should not resign because an 
investigation was launched. An investigation can end with nothing coming out of 
it.”

Police have been carrying out the current inquiry in secret for eight months 
and were recently reported to have made a breakthrough.

In July, Israel’s attorney general said he had ordered a preliminary 
examination into an unspecified affair involving Netanyahu, with no details 
given. The Haaretz newspaper reported that billionaire Ronald Lauder, a 
longtime friend of Netanyahu’s, was linked to the affair.

In October, Lauder was summoned by police for questioning “related to a 
certain investigation conducted by them and in which Mr Lauder is not its 
subject matter,” said Helena Beilin, Lauder’s Israeli attorney. “After a short 
meeting, he was told that his presence is no longer required and that there 
shall be no further need for additional meetings.”

Netanyahu has acknowledged receiving money from Arnaud Mimran, a French tycoon 
who was sentenced to eight years in prison over a €283m scam involving the 
trade of carbon emissions permits and the taxes on them.

Netanyahu’s office said he had received $40,000 in contributions from Mimran 
in 2001, when he was not in office, as part of a fund for public activities, 
including appearances abroad to promote Israel.

Netanyahu has also faced scrutiny over the purchase of submarines from the 
German firm ThyssenKrupp. Media reports have alleged a conflict of interest as 
the Netanyahu family lawyer, David Shimron, acts for the Israeli agent of 
ThyssenKrupp.

In May, Israel’s state comptroller released a critical report on Netanyahu’s 
foreign trips, some with his wife and children, between 2003 and 2005 when he 
was finance minister.

Netanyahu, 67, is in his fourth term as prime minister and currently heads 
what is seen as the most rightwing government in Israeli history. He has served 
as premier for a total of nearly 11 years, fast approaching the revered 
founding father David Ben-Gurion’s 13 years.

Polls have shown that if elections were held now, his Likud party would finish 
behind the centrist Yesh Atid, but that voters would still prefer Netanyahu as 
prime minister.

The inquiry has led to fierce debates in Israeli politics, with Netanyahu’s 
allies accusing opposition politicians and some in the news media of unfairly 
pressuring the attorney general, Avichai Mandelblit.

On Monday, the regional cooperation minister, Tzachi Hanegbi, denounced what 
he called a “campaign of provocation and incitement” against Mandelblit. 
However, others have accused Mandelblit of moving too slowly in the highly 
charged case.
 