
Israel’s most senior law officer has ordered an investigation into an alleged 
scandal involving one of Israeli prime ministerBenjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu>’s closest confidants 
over a controversial deal to buy German submarines.

The affair – which has dominated Israeli headlines for days – involves 
allegations of a serious conflict of interest in the purchase of the submarines.

At the heart of the issue is a claim that Netanyahu’s personal lawyer, David 
Shimron, was representing the German arms manufacturer making the submarines at 
the same time Netanyahu was pushing for the submarine purchase.

Among the allegations are that Netanyahu purchased the new submarines for the 
Israeli navy over the objections of his own defence ministry.

Although Netanyahu and Shimron – who is also a relative of the prime minister 
– have insisted they never spoke about Shimron’s business relationship in the 
submarine deal, the inquiry was ordered after new information emerged both in 
the media and in a related investigation.

ThyssenKrupp, the German company behind the submarine contract, said last week 
it believed there was no misconduct in the purchase.

However, on Wednesday, Israel’s Channel 10 disclosed an email it claimed is 
proof that Shimron used his close relationship to Netanyahu to lobby for the 
submarine’s manufacturer with at least one defence official – a claim 
strenuously denied by Shimron.

According to reports in the Israeli media, the inquiry was also prompted by 
new information that emerged from the case of a second senior official who was 
arrested last week on charges of corruption.

Former deputy National Security Council head Avriel Bar-Yosef was arrested 
earlier this month on suspicion of taking bribes.


The order of an inquiry represents a volte face by the country’s attorney 
general, Avichai Mandelblit, who suggested last week that it was not necessary.

 However, a justice ministry statement said that after police received new 
information on Wednesday, Mandelblit met senior officers, the state prosecutor 
and senior justice officials.

“At the end of the discussion the attorney general decided to order an 
examination by theIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> police 
regarding various aspects related to the affair,” it said. It gave no further 
details and did not indicate who might be the subjects.

Netanyahu maintains he was unaware his lawyer was advising the seller, and 
defended the acquisition at Sunday’s weekly cabinet meeting. “The principle 
that guides me is clear: Israel will be able to defend itself by itself against 
any enemy, in any field,” he said.

 “The security of Israel requires the acquisition of submarines and the 
renewal of the submarine fleet. These are strategic weapons systems that ensure 
the future and, I tell you, the very existence of the state of Israel for 
decades to come.”
 