
Early in his major foreign policy speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/kerry-defends-us-decision-to-not-veto-un-condemnation-of-israeli-settlements>
 last Wednesday about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, US secretary of state 
John Kerry promised to tell some “uncomfortable truths”. He certainly did that. 
But here’s the key question: for jaded Israelis almost defiantly committed to 
political stagnation, will it matter?

Kerry started on well-worn paths: Israel cannot remain Jewish and democratic 
without reaching a two-state solution and the window is closing; the prime 
minister,Benjamin Netanyahu, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu> cannot claim to support 
two states and continue expanding settlements; the Palestinian leadership 
poisons peace by glorifying violence. America under Obama was overwhelmingly 
committed to Israeli military and security needs andit allowed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
 the UN security council resolution 2334, condemning settlements, for Israel’s 
own good. Lastly, he reiterated the long-standing core principles of the two 
state solution.

For an Israeli audience– and the speech felt squarely aimed at them – those 
themes aren’t new. In fact, they are axiomatic and, increasingly, transparent. 
Israelis appear to have put up a psychological separation barrier: the world 
warns that the conflict will ruin their lives, but, day to day, they feel that 
things are going fine. In this narrative, outsiders criticise Israeli policy 
because “the world” is out to getIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>. Netanyahu is in perfect symbiosis 
with this approach. He has long positioned himself as the man who speaks 
Israel’s truth to global power. He has been elected four times: his strategy 
works. Perhaps Kerry’s speech can’t dent such armour.

But there were other uncomfortable truths in the speech, less commonly heard 
by Israelis.

First, Kerry displayed surprising knowledge of what occupation means on the 
ground. In rare detail, he noted that no Palestinian can get a permit to build 
in Area C (60% of the West Bank); that over the last two years Israel has 
destroyed structures, leaving 1,300 people homeless, as settlements grow, 
outside the large blocs and east of the wall. He told about business people who 
can’t move their goods, Palestinian roads that can’t connect, children in Gaza 
playing in rubble.He observed that Israel’s settlements in the Jordan Valley 
and other calculated locations are chopping any Palestinian state into pieces. 
If Israelis even know these facts – not a given – they have implicitly presumed 
that outsiders don’t. Or that they won’t do anything about it.

A second unusual point was Kerry’s explanation of why all settlement 
expansion, including in large blocs adjacent to Israel, is bad for peace: these 
are unilateral moves. It was a not-so-subtle jab at Netanyahu’s mantra accusing 
the Palestinians of unilateral action in international forums, one of the 
latters’ justifications for rejecting peace talks. In another striking moment, 
Kerry began to sketch out the dystopian spectre of endless occupation: “If the 
occupation becomes permanent, [the Palestinian Authority] could dissolve and 
turn over all administrative and security responsibilities to the Israelis… who 
would administer the schools and hospitals? Does Israel want to pay for the 
billions of dollars of lost international assistance?”

With these hard and less hackneyed truths, Kerry may have cracked the brittle 
shell of some of Netanyahu’s own axioms. For example, Netanyahu conveys to 
Israelis that conflict management is sustainable because he can hold off global 
pressure and sell good-image stories about Israel. Kerry’s speech showed that 
outsiders look past the screen and see the occupation clearly. Netanyahu has 
argued that Israel need not negotiate if the Palestinians take unfair 
unilateral action; Kerry exposed the fact that Israel’s “status quo” is just as 
much unilateral action. While Netanyahu lulls his public with the implicit 
notion that the two-state solution will wait until Israel deems the conditions 
ripe, Kerry illustrated that in reality it is almost already gone.

Obama and Kerry will be gone first, of course. For the next few weeks, 
Israelis can tell themselves that President-elect Trump will be a better 
friend; thatTheresa May distanced herself from Kerry’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/theresa-may-israel-john-kerry-attack-extraordinary>
 and may want to co-operate with Trump on Israel, making a strong triangular 
alliance. But remember that resolution 2334 passed with the UK’s “yea” – a 
stronger statement than the US abstention. And the new chums Netanyahu has been 
cultivating – China and Russiato show the West his independence, – abandoned 
Israel in the vote as well.
 ‘Israelis may eventually have to ask themselves if Netanyahu is telling the 
truth.’ Photograph: Gali Tibbon/AFP/Getty Images 
Israelis may eventually have to ask themselves if Netanyahu is telling the 
truth – about any of it. The speech may cause Israelis to inch towards the 
conclusion that he’s not and that his so-called stagnation on conflict 
resolution is making the two-state solution all but obsolete. At that point, as 
tepid as they were about two states, Israelis will confront a menu of options 
that are less familiar, some of them far less appealing. What are they?

One is the scenario Kerry described. It is the logical extension of political 
stasis, combined with the continuing creep of the Israel Defence Forces and 
settlements in the West Bank and a locked-down, festering Gaza. The 
developments are easily visualised: the PA collapses in strife or rebellion and 
the Israeli army ends up governing. A war breaks out in Gaza; this time, Israel 
could follow through on threats made in the 2014 war to reoccupy the Strip, 
which sounded like outlying extemist voices then. For anyone who remembers the 
pre-Oslo years when Israeli soldiers patrolled the muddy streets of Gazalike 
target practice for Molotov cocktails, this is a disaster.

The next option is the rosy, rightwing panacea for all things of late: 
annexation of the West Bank, what the right calls Judea and Samaria. Once, this 
was not said in polite company; today,Israel’s education minister 
<http://www.jta.org/2016/12/25/news-opinion/israel-middle-east/israels-education-minister-calls-for-annexation-of-west-bank-in-response-to-un-resolution>
 anddeputy foreign minister  
<http://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/Politics-And-Diplomacy/Deputy-FM-hopes-to-break-the-international-paradigm-on-the-West-Bank-473303>
call proudly for Israeli sovereignty in part or all of the territory. How they 
think fortress-like, exclusive settlements of Jewish Israelis will harmoniously 
co-exist with dismembered Palestinian communities living under bastardised 
autonomy with no incentive for co-operation with Israel is unclear. The ensuing 
anger will inevitably be met with matching levels of violence. One equal, 
democratic binational or civic-identity state is sometimes mentioned as an 
option; it is a non-starter. Large majorities on both sides reject it in polls. 
Israel will never give full voting rights to a population similar in size to 
the Jewish public.

The last feasible option is a mix of separation and integration. This refers 
to federation or confederation – see the Cyprus peace plans (not yet realised), 
post-war Bosnia or even the EU. The separation element acknowledges two 
national groups with defined territories. “Integration” is more of an 
acknowledgement that borders must be made porous to relax the suffocation of 
Palestinian movement and livelihood; that natural resources in a tiny land 
require joint management; that neighbourhoods and economies are so intertwined 
that surgical separation could kill the patient.

For a long time, Israelis wanted to agree with Netanyahu and believed that 
represssing the problem would make it go away. One speech won’t change that 
overnight, but it may be a clarifying moment that certain truths can only be 
ignored for so long. Then, one of the options on the menu will happen either 
way.

Dahlia Scheindlin is a political consultant based in Tel Aviv. She is a policy 
fellow atMitvim <http://www.mitvim.org.il/>, the Israeli Institute for Regional 
Foreign Policies
 