
Israel’s parliament has voted to retroactively legalise thousands of 
illegitimate settler homes in outposts built on private Palestinian land, in a 
highly controversial move described by critics as a “land grab”. The measure, 
which passed in a stormy Knesset session late on Monday, has been met with 
international condemnation, and has already strained relations within Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s governing rightwing coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/israeli-ministers-vote-in-favour-of-legalising-outposts>
.

It comes in sharp defiance of a call on Sunday by the US secretary of state, 
John Kerry, who urgedIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> again to 
rein in the construction of settlements on West Bank land.

The bill passed its first reading by 60 votes to 49, and still has to pass a 
further three votes before becoming law. During the debate, the opposition 
leader, Isaac Herzog, fiercely denounced the law by equating its adoption to 
“national suicide”. While the bill seems likely to have support to pass its 
further readings, it appears inevitable that it will be challenged in court.

Israeli critics and Palestinians have described the legislation as a land grab 
that would further distance prospects for a two-state solution to end the long 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Some high-profile political supporters, echoing 
that view, celebrated the vote by saying it opened the way to annexation of the 
West Bank and the end of any prospect of a Palestinian state.

Israeli ministers vote in favour of legalising outposts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/israeli-ministers-vote-in-favour-of-legalising-outposts>
According to estimates by opponents – including the prominent anti-occupation 
group Peace Now – the new law, if finally approved, would effectively annex 55
illegal outposts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/28/jewish-settlements-west-bank> 
and approximately 4,000 housing units in settlements and illegal outposts.

The vote follows weeks of fierce debate. Netanyahu warned at one point that 
the legislation could put Israel’s political leaders in the dock of the 
International Criminal Court in the Hague.

The law was promoted originally by Naftali Bennett, the far right leader of 
the Jewish Home party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/07/naftali-bennett-interview-jewish-home>
, and his allies, despite warnings from senior Israeli legal figures that it 
would be illegal. It was initially designed to prevent the planned destruction 
of the illegal Amona outpost, which is home to some 40 hardline settlers living 
in caravans, and which Israel’s high court had ordered cleared by December 25.

Under the deal, the 330 Amona settlers will be moved to a nearby site on land 
that Israel considers abandoned by its Palestinian owners, but land-ownership 
claims by Palestinians have already been filed with Israeli authorities. Amona, 
founded in 1995 near Ramallah in the West Bank, is one of around 100 outposts 
built illegally but tolerated by the Israeli government.

Faced with the threat of his coalition imploding over the issue, Netanyahu and 
other parties have been pushed to a compromise that would see Amona evacuated 
in exchange for parties agreeing to vote to legalise the other illegal outposts.

Following an agreement reached before the vote, Bennett, who along with other 
stridently pro-settler politicians has been emboldened by the election of 
Donald Trump as president, signalled that he believed the vote should mark the 
final end of the two-state solution. Bennett described the agreement and 
planned vote as a “historic day” on which the two-state solution had been 
buried.


“Today, the Israeli Knesset shifted from a path to establish a Palestinian 
state to a path of extending sovereignty to Judea and Samaria [as Israel calls 
the occupied Palestinian territories]. Let there be no doubt: the regulation 
bill is what will spearhead the extension of [Israeli] sovereignty.”

However, a clause originally in the law that would have retroactively 
overturned the court decision to demolish Amona, was removed as part of the 
deal. The new version of the legislation gives settlers usage rights to 
privately owned Palestinian land, but not ownership rights.

In a sign of Netanyahu’s growing weakness against the far right in his 
coalition, he apologised to the Amona settlers in a meeting of his Likud party. 
“I want to apologise to all those who were developing hope. We are working 
extremely hard in order to find a solution to Amona, and I believe that 
everybody who sits here understands the difficulties of the residents,” said at 
the meeting.


The vote was quickly condemned by the UN envoy for the Middle East peace 
process, Nickolay Mladenov, who said the legislation “has the objective of 
protecting illegal settlements built on private Palestinian property in the 
West Bank. It is a very worrying initiative. I encourage Israeli legislators to 
reconsider such a move, which would have far-reaching legal consequences across 
the occupied West Bank”.
 