
There is a newspaper Xanadu where some of the Observer’s greatest journalistic 
triumphs reside. These include one of the greatest scoops in the history of UK 
print journalism when, in 1812, reporter Vincent George Dowling was on hand to 
witness the assassination of the prime minister, Spencer Perceval, before 
stepping in to apprehend the killer.

A century or so later, in 1919, JL Garvin penned his famous and prescient 
editorial on the Treaty of Versailles: “The Treaty left the Germans no real 
hope except in revenge.” The paper’s legacy of seeing what others refused to 
see and uttering what others feared to utter was evident once more in 1956 
during the Suez crisis. TheObserver took a principled stand of the government’s 
conduct on the issue. “We had not realised that our Government was capable of 
such folly and such crookedness,” our leader writer then wrote.

I also feel the Observer’s spirit of fearlessness digging at the coalface of 
truth inspired our campaign to restore authentic rock music to the airwaves of 
Scotland. InApril 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/19/scotland-great-rock-and-roll-swindle>
, I was shocked to learn that Scotland’s only proper rock radio station had 
been replaced by something vapid and inane called X-FM. I wrote then: “Heavy 
rock is important to society as it portrays and recalls our industrial heritage 
and celebrates hard work, honesty and integrity. If there was ever a proper 
revolution in this country it would provide the soundtrack to the social 
upheaval; not Franz Ferdinand or the Smiths or Blur.”

It seems our campaign has paid off. For it was announced last month 
<http://www.glasgowlive.co.uk/news/glasgow-news/ofcom-awards-rock-radio-commercial-12082283>
 that Ofcom had awarded Rock Radio Glasgow the FM commercial radio licence in 
the west central Scotland area. It was the culmination of a campaign that, I 
think, stands within the finest traditions of theObserver’s brave and 
counterintuitive reporting.

Donald MacLeod, who owns the Cathouse and Garage nightclubs, is chair of Rock 
Radio. He is a chap not unknown to theObserver in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> as he has often offered us sanctuary 
in one of his meaty establishments when many others had previously refused. 
MacLeod was effusive in his appreciation of theObserver for its support. “If it 
hadn’t been for the unstinting support of theObserver, I’m not sure we would 
have got over the finishing line. As Jimmy Page and Robert Plant once wrote: 
‘And it’s whispered that soon, if we all call the tune, then the piper will 
lead us to reason’.”

Scotland has been buffeted recently by fell forces that still threaten its 
economic and social wellbeing. The independence referendum was lost in a welter 
of falsehoods and half-truths wherebyLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> in Scotland and their allies in 
the Tory party conned the frail and the elderly into maintaining the status 
quo. Since then we’ve had Brexit, the rise of the hard right, ultra-austerity, 
racial aggravation and the bitter knowledge that Donald Trump is Scottish.

What would you rather your town was renowned for: fairies or rock’n’roll 
damnation

Yet there are signs that the nation is experiencing a degree of solace in a 
rock’n’roll renaissance. The news that RockRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> now possesses the new FM licence in 
the west of Scotland doesn’t just mean a return to Led Zep, Deep Purple, Van 
Halen, Mountain and Judas Priest and an escape from Adele, Justin Bieber and 
Rhianna. It will also provide training and support for indigenous bands who 
acknowledge that God has indeed given rock’n’roll to us, to paraphrase those 
great lyricists Simmons and Stanley.

This year also marked the 10th annual Bonfest <http://www.bonfest.com/> in 
Kirriemuir, held to celebrate the life and career of Bon Scott, celebrated 
frontman of AC/DC, who was raised in this douce little Angus town. Previously, 
Kirriemuir was known only as the birthplace of JM Barrie. Now, thanks to 
Bonfest, it’s been revealed that for the first time more people were inspired 
to visit Kirriemuir because of its Bon Scott connection than its JM Barrie one. 
And let’s face it, what would you rather your town was renowned for: fairies or 
rock’n’roll damnation?

Next year’s Bonfest will be held in April and, while Scotland has far too many 
arts and cultural festivals, this one shouldn’t be missed. The majority of 
festivals are principally for a wandering troupe of second-rate authors, 
singers and artists who can’t make money on their own but can live off the fees 
guaranteed by gullible local councils that think they’re funding something 
cultural and essential.

Inexplicably, Glasgow, which has a rich rock’n’roll heritage, has opted to 
turn up its nose at the chance to market itself as one of the world’s top 
destinations for the head-banging oeuvre. Although Bon Scott was the braggartly 
leader ofAC/DC <https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc>, the band were founded 
by the Glaswegian brothers Angus and Malcolm Young, who were born within sight 
of the water tower at Cranhill in the East End of Glasgow. Yet, despite the 
efforts of councillor Frank Docherty, the ruling Labour group decided against 
awarding these two the freedom of the city. The party was probably too busy 
doing what it does best: making twinning arrangements with enough cities to 
keep its councillors in jollies for a lifetime.

If Labour wants to have a chance of holding off the SNP’s assault on its local 
authority powerbase in Glasgow, it needs to get with the rock’n’roll picture. 
If the SNP get in they’ll probably ban all rock’n’roll because the lyrics are 
not sufficiently diverse and fail to deliver the appropriate pattern of 
deliverable outcomes on gender issues and responsible attitudes towards alcohol 
and relationships.

So here’s my plan to help Labour stave off the threat of the Nationalist 
roundheads. They need to announce a Rockfest week along the lines of 
Kirriemuir’s Bonfest. This would celebrate the genius of the Young brothers and 
others such as Brian Robertson, the great Thin Lizzy lead guitarist, Alex 
Harvey, Jimmy Barnes, Bobby Gillespie and Jim Kerr.

In their seminal work, Sin City, a thoughtful étude on loss and redemption in 
an urban setting, Angus Young, Malcolm Young and Bon Scott included these lines:

So spin that wheel, cut that pack
And roll those loaded dice
Bring on the dancing girls
And put the champagne on ice
I’m goin’ in
To Sin City
 