
Italy’s largest bank, UniCredit, plans to shed thousands of jobs and raise 
€13bn in the country’s biggest share issue in a bid to shore up its reserves 
and boost profits by the end of the decade.

The bank said 14,000 posts, or 11% of the workforce, would disappear across 
its businesses inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and 
1,000 bank branches in Italy would close. About €18bn of bad loans are to be 
offloaded to two new businesses mainly owned by US fund managers.

The bank’s shares rose 13% as investors welcomed the “decisive” move by 
UniCredit to distance itself from Italy’s ailing banking sector, which is 
hobbled by a legacy of non-performing loans.

UniCredit chief executive, Jean Pierre Mustier, in London on Tuesday to talk 
to shareholders, said the move would allow the bank to offer €55bn of fresh 
loans to business customers and expand retail lending.

Against a backdrop of negative interest rates in the eurozone, which the bank 
said made it difficult to generate profits, Mustier said without a large 
injection of fresh capital and a lower ratio of bad loans the bank would be 
forced to contract further, making bigger job cuts and reducing its capacity to 
make loans.


“We need to turn a page on our legacy issues to improve and support recurring 
future profitability. The aim is to be one of Europe’s most attractive banks,” 
he said.

UniCredit’s move comes at a troubled time for Italian banks and the economy, 
with the third-largest bank, Monte dei Paschi di Siena (MPS),negotiating a 
rescue package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/11/monte-dei-paschi-siena-emergency-cash-injection-european-central-bank>
, anew government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/italy-paolo-gentiloni-to-succeed-matteo-renzi-as-prime-minister>
 installed in Rome and early elections expected next year.

Italy plans Monte dei Paschi di Siena rescue if private bailout fails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/italy-monte-dei-paschi-di-siena-rescue-banks>
Mustier said he was confident MPS would reach a deal to offload more than €5bn 
of loans by the end of the year.

He ruled out joining a rescue of MPS or any other Italian bank unless the 
government forced it to take part in a broader rescue of the banking sector.

“We are extremely confident the refinancing will be resolved by the end of the 
year. Our plan does not depend on a deal for MPS,” he said.

“What we are doing shows what other Italian banks can do,” he added, before 
saying, “We are not interested in buying other Italian banks. Our plan is for 
organic growth.”

If MPS fails to secure the funds, the bank will probably require a government 
rescue, which could be launched on Friday or next Monday and could mean at 
least temporary losses for thousands of retail investors. Under EU rules, state 
intervention can only move forward once junior bondholders have taken a hit, 
although some retail investors would likely be compensated later.


Paolo Gentiloni, Italy’s incoming prime minister, vowed in a speech before 
parliament that the Italian government was ready to intervene across the 
Italian banking sector “to ensure the stability of [Italy’s] banking 
institutions”.

UniCredit has already moved 300 staff from London to Milan following Britain’s 
vote to leave the European Union. Mustier said the Brexit vote was “a huge 
opportunity” for continental banks, which are untroubled by the prospect of 
Europe’s financial centre leaving the EU.

Benjie Creelan-Sandford, equity analyst at brokers Jefferies, said: “The 
upfront bill of €13bn is clearly large but as we have highlighted previously we 
think an aggressive balance sheet clean-up paves the way for a more substantial 
re-rating.

He said the forecast by the bank’s board of €4.7bn net profits in 2019 was 
well ahead of consensus expectations of €3.9bn.


But David Cheetham, an analyst at brokers XTB, was concerned a rescue by the 
Italian government remained a possibility if UniCredit struggled to raise vital 
funds.

“The Italian lender has endured a torrid time of late and the latest action 
appears a last-ditch attempt to stave off a government rescue, with the 
strategy likely to be ultimately decided by how successful the firm raises the 
target of €13bn,” he said.

A group of investment banks have signed a pre-underwriting agreement to help 
UniCredit market the issue. These include Morgan Stanley, UBS, Bank of America 
Merrill Lynch, JP Morgan and Mediobanca.


 The bad loans would be sold to two separate vehicles, one managed by Fortress 
Investment Group and the other by Pimco, with UniCredit retaining minority 
stakes in each.
 