
Jürgen Klopp believes Daniel Sturridge has a major role to play in Liverpool’s 
pursuit of trophies providing the striker stays fit and seizes the opportunity 
presented bySadio Mané’s departure to the Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/liverpool-sadio-mane-africa-cup-of-nations-senegal>
.

Klopp is aiming to take a step closer towards a third cup final appearance in 
only 15 months as Liverpool manager on Wednesday when his side travel to 
Southampton in the first leg of their EFL Cup semi-final. Liverpool will be 
without Mané, a formerSouthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> player, because of his 
involvement in the Afcon with Senegal and though Philippe Coutinho is back in 
the squad for the first time in almost seven weeks after injury, the Brazil 
international is unlikely to start at St Mary’s Stadium.

Sturridge, therefore, has an ideal chance to reclaim a first-team place under 
Klopp having spent the majority of the campaign on the substitutes’ bench. The 
England international made his first start under the Liverpool manager in a6-1 
League Cup win at Southampton in December 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/02/southampton-liverpool-capital-one-cup-match-report>
, scoring twice in the opening half-hour, but 13 months on Klopp is still 
waiting for the striker to find the consistent fitness required to lead his 
attack.

Coutinho set for Liverpool return in EFL Cup semi-final at Southampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/philippe-coutinho-liverpool-return-efl-cup-southampton>
“It would be fantastic and sometimes you need to feel lucky with timing,” said 
Klopp on the prospect of Sturridge forcing his way into the starting lineup on 
a regular basis. “Sadio is away, Philippe is on the way back and Daniel is 
already back. That helps and I hope it stays like this for him. Against 
Plymouth we could give him 20-25 minutes after the Sunderland game and he 
trained on Monday, so good news.

“But it depends. Does he stay fit? If Daniel is fit are there ever any 
arguments here about his quality? No. We had the time when he was already fit 
and he didn’t start because there was a difference between being fit and 
match-fit and all that stuff. But it is a big step in the right direction. If 
he stays on this fitness level and improving as he always should, that is 
perfect. It is perfect news for him and for us that he can perform. It would be 
cool if we could speak like this for the next few weeks and months.”

The 27-year-old has started six games this season and appeared nine times from 
the bench, scoring six goals. Klopp insisted before the transfer window opened 
he had no intention of selling Sturridge, who had been linked with West Ham 
United among other Premier League clubs, believing the striker suits 
Liverpool’s style of play. But, not for the first time, a manager is admitting 
that fitness issues are an obstacle to Sturridge realising his talent.

“How good you can be depends on a lot of things,” Klopp said. “His talent, 
skill and cleverness there is absolutely no doubt about. Everything you need on 
the pitch is absolutely outstanding but he has not been fit often enough. That 
is how it is. That is another important part. If he stays fit, we have the 
whole thing and we don’t talk about other clubs or things like this. We don’t 
have to think about it because we are in the middle of the season. So, from my 
point of view, until now – even when he didn’t score – he made really good 
performances. Even when he didn’t score he was so important in a lot of games. 
He fits really well in our style of play. That is good for him, good for us. 
Nobody in the team, nobody in the squad is in doubt about him being a wonderful 
player. No doubt.”

Adam Lallana is in line to face his former club Southampton, with Klopp 
expected to select a stronger sidethan against Plymouth Argyle in the FA Cup on 
Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/liverpool-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-match-report>
 as he targets a return to Wembley. The in-form Liverpool midfielder, one of 
several former Southampton players in the Anfield ranks, has always received a 
hostile reception on his return to St Mary’s but Klopp believes Lallana’s 
improvement stems from stepping out of his “comfort zone”.

“I’m not here long enough to know why Southampton fans react as they do but he 
is a boy from the region. His friends and family all come from there, he comes 
from there and with his quality I can imagine everybody at Southampton thought 
he could be the player for the next 10-15 years to build a team around. That is 
how it is. But actually I’m really happy he decided differently and wanted to 
see something else and wanted another challenge and experience,” Klopp said. 
“He has made outstanding, big steps from an already high level, that is not 
always expected, and you cannot be sure he would have done the same at 
Southampton. Sometimes different circumstances help you with this.

“In the first year here, I’m not sure how long exactly because I wasn’t here, 
I heard nobody was really happy about his performances and especially himself 
probably, from what I know of him. So it’s clear he needed this kind of step 
back to make the next step in the right direction. He left the comfort zone, if 
you want. That is a difficult decision for both sides but I would hope that at 
some point they can be proud again that a boy from their region is rated so 
highly in English football. Probably one day when they sit at home and think 
back they will think it’s nice he made this development.”
 