
Melbourne teenager Jaimee Fourlis is heading to the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> after recording a 
straight-sets victory over Abbie Myers in the playoff final on Sunday. She will 
be joined by Omar Jasika, who rebounded from a first-set meltdown to win a 
place in the men’s draw with a four-set win.

Fourlis, the world No425, defeated Myers 7-6 (8-6), 7-5 at Melbourne Park and 
will play in her first grand slam at the age of 17.


The win was sweet for Fourlis, who lost the final of the Under-18 Australian 
championship last week, which also carried Australian Open entry as a prize. 
She said it was a “pretty surreal feeling” to be preparing for a tournament 
alongside the the sport’s best players.

Rafael Nadal adds former world No1 Carlos Moya to coaching team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/rafael-nadal-carlos-moya-tennis-roger-federer>
“It is an incredible feeling. I don’t know how to describe it,” she said. “I 
don’t really care [who I draw]. It’ll be an amazing feeling playing in front of 
a home crowd. I wouldn’t mind drawing an Aussie because then it’d be even. 
It’ll be awesome no matter what.”

In Sunday’s final, Fourlis showed her intent with a dashing down-the-line 
backhand winner in the match’s first point on the way to breaking Myers in the 
opening game but the 22-year-old returned fire and took Fourlis to an opening 
set tiebreak.

Myers, the world No600, lost a set point in the tight decider, and led for 
most of the second set after securing an early break. Fist-pumping along the 
way, Fourlis recovered to level the set and won it with a break in the 12th 
game.

Fourlis said spending time with Australian No1 Sam Stosur in training in 
recent months had rubbed off on her. “She’s one of the best – she hasn’t won a 
grand slam for nothing. She does everything right. I really look up to her and 
I respect her a lot,” she said.

Fourlis also guaranteed to at least quadruple her career earnings even with a 
first-round loss in the year’s first major, which will be worth at least 
$38,500.

Jasika, 19, stuttered early before steamrolling no-fuss Queenslander 
John-Patrick Smith 6-7 (2-7), 6-2, 6-0, 6-4 to ensure a return to the grand 
slam stage after successfully debuting at Melbourne Park this year with a 
second-round appearance.

Against Smith, the teenager’s precision baseline play delighted his rowdy 
‘Omar’s Army’ fangroup. But it wasn’t always plain sailing for the world No367, 
taking on a player eight years and 137 rankings places his senior.

The former junior US Open champion was so frustrated by his tiebreak showing 
that he thrashed his racquet into the court for 10 seconds, earning a point 
penalty.


After the rage came the rally. From 2-2 in the third set, Jasika won 10 
straight games, returning with poise and hitting smartly around the court. 
Smith found form in the fourth set, but gave up a break in the ninth game and 
with it, the match.

Sixteen-year-old world No388 Destanee Aiava, who defeated Fourlis in the 
Under-18 final, will be the first player born in the 2000s to play in a major.

 