
We make our own traditions. Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> Eve is frosty. The sky is 
clear. The stars are like bells. The day is short and the fire is lit. There is 
peace and anticipation.

In my mind that’s how it is. It doesn’t matter how it really is. Usually it’s 
raining, or the city is gridlocked, or nothing is ready for Christmas dinner, 
or the presents aren’t wrapped, and it’s bath salts again for your auntie.

Some years ago I realised how I wanted to begin Christmas.

I have always loved and always listened to A Festival of Nine Lessons and 
Carols on Radio 4. This plays live from the chapel of King’s College, Cambridge 
at 3pm on Christmas Eve – and it has done so since 1928.

The service runs for 90 minutes. It’s a time-warp mixture of Bible readings 
from the Old and New Testaments that prophesy and fulfil the promise of the 
Messiah. In between these readings the choir and congregation sing carols old 
and new, and there’s specially commissioned music from contemporary composers. 
The service begins with a single boy soprano carrying a single candle. He 
enters the chapel singing Once in Royal David’s City.

These days you can watch Carols From King’s on TV, but why would you?

The beauty is in the music, the voices, the readings and prayers. And a sense 
of continuity – religion is good at that.

And a sense of belonging to something more necessary than shopping and 
party-going. This is a spiritual experience, whether or not you believe in God.

My best writing tip by William Boyd, Jeanette Winterson, Amit Chaudhuri and 
more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/10/my-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson>
Wherever I am in the world I listen to this service. Everything is put aside 
and this is an hour and a half of mental relaxation and spiritual 
concentration. I listen to the readings, though I know them by heart, and I 
join in with the singing.

If I am at home I light the fire and the candles. I make sure the kitchen is 
tidy, and I make ready the same food every year, because this is a ritual. The 
point of ritual is that the sameness of it concentrates and then clears the 
mind. It’s why Jews, even non-observant Jews, light the Shabbat candles on 
Friday night.

Ritual is a way of altering time. By which I mean a way of pausing the endless 
intrusion of busy life.

Here’s my ritual for Christmas Eve.

Bake some really good dark bread – a rye bread or a sourdough. You can buy 
this, of course, but making it is part of the pleasure of making this time for 
yourself.

Get the best butter you can afford.

Get the best smoked salmon you can afford.

Lemon.

And you need pink champagne. I prefer Veuve Clicquot or Billecart-Salmon on 
Christmas Eve, because there’s a richness and an exuberance in those wines 
without any heaviness. Bollinger is a bit too powerful for me in the afternoon.

OK – so if you can’t afford any of the above there are alternatives. I’ve used 
them myself.

Stick with the best bread, but try taramasalata, preferably homemade, or get a 
couple of tins of good-quality sardines.

The oil will mean you won’t need butter either way.

Or make a chicken liver pâté the day before – it’s cheap and good if you do it 
yourself.

Cut the dark bread into small squares and put your topping on nice and thick. 
It’s Christmas!

Smoked salmon and pink champagne look so pretty together against the 
browny-blackness of the bread.

Lay out a generous plateful.

If champagne’s not for you, find a wine you love and have that instead.

Look, you could do this with a pot of tea and a piece of toast.

You could do this with a lovely cup of coffee and a plate of chocolate 
biscuits – make them yourself.

The reason I suggest making some of this small meal yourself is because ritual 
has an anticipatory relevance – we prepare for it, practically and 
psychologically; that’s part of its benefit.

It’s about making your own raft of time. Your own doorway into Christmas.

You can do this with family and friends, of course, if they’re in the zone. 
And yes, you could do it while wrapping presents, but it wouldn’t be as 
powerful.

Ritual isn’t about multitasking.

Ritual is time cut out of time. Done right it has profound psychological 
effects.

We are too busy and too distracted. Everybody knows that time is speeding up 
like a car with go-faster stripes and we are running alongside trying to keep 
pace. Christmas is the busiest time of all – which is crazy. It’s lovely 
rushing around to see family and friends, but how about an hour and a half that 
belongs only to you?

To begin with it takes a conscious effort – everything worth doing starts with 
a conscious effort. But you might find this ritual, or your version of 
something similar, becomes an unexpectedly precious part of Christmas.

Mrs Winterson’s mince pies

Mrs Winterson never gave up her war cupboard. From 1939 to 1945, she had done 
her bit for victory by pickling eggs and onions, bottling fruit, drying or 
salting beans and trading black-market tins of bully beef. She liked things you 
could store, and while waiting for either nuclear war in the 1950s and 1960s, 
or the Apocalypse Anytime Soon, she carried on pressing beef and making things 
with dried fruit.

The two essential items in our lean-to kitchen both came with handles: the 
mangle, for wringing out the clothes on wash-day, and the Spong mincer. This 
was the largest Spong mincer money could buy and it lived clamped on the edge 
of our Formica table. One of its many uses was making mincemeat for mince pies. 
Mrs Winterson made her mincemeat in the autumn because we had plenty of 
windfall apples.

It is confusing for those whose Christmas tradition does not include mince 
pies to work out why the mince is not meat, but fruit.

The answer is that mince pies go back to the reign of Elizabeth I (1558–1603), 
and in those days the miniature mince pies were indeed made with minced meat, 
fruit and candied peel.

Why?

Fruit and spices were used to disguise the inevitably “off” flavour of meat 
without refrigeration. This is probably why fruit was so popular in English 
cooking right up until the late 1960s. We are not America and fridges were 
expensive back then. We didn’t get one until I went to secondary school in the 
1970s. My dad won it in a raffle. It was a tiny under-the-counter fridge and 
mostly left empty. We had no idea what to do with it. The milkman delivered 
every day, veg came off the allotment or from the market twice a week, we had 
our own hens for eggs, and because we were poor we bought a joint of meat once 
a week – no more. The remains went through the Spong, to reappear in pies and 
meat pastes. If our food wasn’t being eaten it was being cooked, and if it 
wasn’t being cooked it was fresh. Who needed a fridge?

But if you want to make your own no-meat mincemeat, with or without a Spong – 
here’s the recipe. Yes, you can use an electric blender, but a mechanical 
device with a handle delivers a more satisfying coarseness. If you don’t want 
to make your own, buy some good stuff (read the ingredients – not too much 
sugar, no bloody palm oil et cetera), then, before you use it, tip the contents 
of your jars into a bowl, add more brandy and stir. Commercial mincemeat is 
always too dry.

For the mincemeat
sultanas, currants, raisins 450g each
cooking apples 450g, cored and peeled – and then grated
nicely chopped suet 450g (yes, suet … go figure)
demerara sugar 450g. You can add candied peel if you like it. I hate it
almonds 170g, blanched and pounded up with a pestle and mortar
lemons grated rind and juice of 2 (unwaxed, organic; you are eating this stuff 
after all)
grated nutmeg 1 tsp
cinnamon 1 tsp
salt 1 tsp
brandy 145ml – or rum if you prefer

Stuff the dried fruit through the Spong. Chuck the fruit and everything else 
into a big bowl. Blend it all together. Add more brandy or rum if you don’t 
like the consistency. Not too runny but not slab-like either. Pack into jars 
and put in the back of a cool cupboard for at least a month.


For the mince pies
your mincemeat a couple of jars should do, homemade or shop-bought
plain flour 450g, I use organic; Mrs W used Homepride
baking powder 1 tsp
unsalted butter 225g, I use organic. She used lard
sieved sugar or caster sugar 1 tbsp
cold water have this at the ready or you’ll cover the tap in pastry mix
egg 1, thoroughly beaten up in a cup for later

You’ll also need a baking tray with individual shallow pie slots; grease these 
with the butter from the wrapper – or the lard from the wrapper if you want to 
be back in the 1960s.

Wear an apron. This recipe is messy. Mrs W called her apron a pinny – short 
for pinafore – because our 1960s were also the 1860s.


Put on some Christmas carols, Bing Crosby, Judy Garland or Handel’s Messiah 
(it was written for Easter but soon became the mince-pie Christmas staple).

Chuck everything except the water and the egg into a big bowl and knead it 
with both hands. When Mrs W was teaching me this when I was about seven she 
gave me the bowl and told me to knead the mixture, but I couldn’t work out how 
to get both knees into the bowl.

When your mixture looks like breadcrumbs put in enough cold water to turn the 
stuff into dough.

Now sprinkle some flour on the counter or rolling board, turn out the mixture, 
roll it with your rolling pin – good for your triceps – bang it around a bit 
and think of your enemies, if you are like Mrs Winterson, until you like the 
texture; you should be able to throw it at someone (your enemy) and do damage. 
Put this Christmas missile back in the bowl, cover it with a robin tea towel 
(optional robin) and stick it in the fridge for an hour, or just put it on the 
windowsill if the weather is cold or snowy or seasonal. But not raining.

Mrs W never had to do this part because we had no central heating, just a coal 
fire, and our house was always freezing. Modern homes are too warm for good 
pastry. They used to say cold hands make good pastry. If you want the full 
1960s experience, lard et cetera, turn off your heating the night before and 
wear two jumpers under your pinny.

Get out the mincemeat – your own or shop-bought. Turn into a bowl and see if 
you want to add any more brandy or rum. Is the mixture too dry? This matters.

Now – and this is my bit not hers – pour yourself a glass of wine and go and 
write some Christmas cards or wrap a few gifts; something seasonal and fun. 
Don’t do the ironing.

Heat up the oven to 200C/ gas mark 6. You will know your own oven so do it 
some time during the hour the pastry is firming up. I have an Aga so I am 
useless at oven-work – and Mrs W had a gas oven of terrifying heat. It behaved 
like a castrated blast furnace roaring for its balls. Squat. Square. Short 
legs. Cast iron. Turn on the gas tap. Hiss. Throw in the match. Stand back. 
Boom. Roar. Rip of blue flame steadying to a line of unleashed orange. Inside 
of oven like a squash court of self-bouncing fire. Now cook.

Hopefully you have a tamer domesticated version of this feral firebox.

So, back to the fridge.

After an hour or so, get out your pastry, cut the lump in half and roll out 
one half onto your floured counter. Not too thick. Use a cup or a cutter to 
make pleasing circles of pastry and press these firmly into your greased baking 
trays.

Now fill each one generously, but not idiotically, with the mincemeat.

Now you have a choice.

Traditionally you roll out the other half of the pastry and make lids for the 
pies, sealing the joint with a bit of beaten egg and brushing egg over the top 
of the lid. Spear a hole in the lid with a skewer to let the steam out.

Or, make more pies and just drape an X of pastry in two strips over the 
mincemeat for those who want less pastry. Not me.

These will cook faster, so don’t burn them. Bake for 20 minutes with lids, 15 
minutes without lids. In an Aga this is not exact. In Mrs Winterson’s furnace 
it was 20 minutes or eat them black.

Store in an old tin you have no use for but can’t bear to throw out.

TIP: Make twice the amount of pastry. It will keep in tinfoil in the fridge 
for five days. And then you can make some more mince pies quick and easy.

Dad’s sherry trifle

My father was born in 1919; a celebratory war baby they soon forgot to 
celebrate.

He was born in Liverpool by the docks. He left school at 12 and worked 
alongside the men, when there was any work. This was the Great Depression – not 
only in Britain, but in the USA too, and Liverpool was a major port.

Around one-third of working-age Liverpool men were unemployed.

Those days of casual work were all zero-hour contracts – you went down to the 
docks at dawn and hoped you’d be picked for a day’s paid work, and maybe told 
to come back tomorrow.

So Dad didn’t grow up with much, not even socks – which guaranteed that for 
the rest of his life he was one of those unusual men wholove being given socks 
for Christmas. Just plain woollen socks. Much better than lining your boots 
with newspaper.

Christmas brought another treat too: sherry trifle.

This was thanks to Del Monte Canned Fruit Cocktail – the cocktail name coming 
from the fact that, in the early days of Del Monte, this fruit mix had alcohol 
in it.

Dad’s job down at the docks was unloading cargo of every kind (like Eddie, the 
longshoreman in Arthur Miller’sA View from the Bridge), but the best kind of 
cargo was foodstuffs, and the best kinds of foodstuffs were things you could 
slip in a poacher’s pocket and keep for later; that was cans.

So every Christmas his mother made the family sherry trifle. And when Dad 
married in 1947 rationing was on, but somehow he managed to eat his annual 
sherry trifle. My mother was working in the Co-op stores at the time, so that 
might have been where the tins came from.

My parents were obsessed with tinned food. Mrs Winterson still had her war 
cupboard in the 1960s, stacked with stuff that would poison us if it was ever 
to be opened. But it was never to be opened; it was an insurance policy against 
communists or Armageddon, whatever came first.

But we did eat tinned fruit – cheaper than fresh – and, until I got a Saturday 
job working on a fruit and veg stall on the market, tinned fruit was our treat 
on Sundays – and tinned fruit always went into the sherry trifle.

For me, growing up in the 1960s, sherry trifle meant Christmas.

And Dad made it.

old cake
ratafia biscuits optional but nice
jelly make a pint from a jelly block
fruit large tin of Del Monte Fruit Cocktail
custard tin of Bird’s Custard
double cream (you can use a tin of condensed milk)
Harveys Bristol Cream sherry
tube of hundreds and thousands

About the old cake: fancy cooks want you to make a sponge specially – and I 
understand that shop-bought sponge fingers aren’t for everyone.


The point about food is that a lot of it used to be leftovers and recycling. 
Same here. A dry, old cake is just what you want for a trifle because a fresh 
cake has moisture in it and gets soggy once you pour in the sherry. A dry cake 
soaks up the sherry and sits firm and content at the bottom of the bowl. So now 
you know.

Get out your best cut-glass bowl from a dusty shelf at the top of the 
cupboard. Or find one in a charity shop for the right look. Wash it.


Single-layer the old cake in chunky slices on the bottom of the bowl and a 
little way up the sides as with bread-and-butter pudding – another great pud 
made from a base of stale leftovers.

Crumble in some ratafia biscuits for an almond taste – you can use fancy 
Amaretti.

Pour over the sherry – standing back a little, as the fumes from a fresh 
bottle of Harveys Bristol Cream are quite heady. Leave for 5 minutes to soak 
in. Do not drink the rest of the bottle until you are desperate.

Pour in the fruit cocktail. One tin or two is up to you.

Pour the liquid jelly over the fruit and sponge and leave in the fridge to 
set. In our case no fridge was needed as the house was so cold (see Mrs 
Winterson’s Mince Pies, page 42).

When the jelly is set you can spread the custard in a thick layer on top.

Then, for the true triumph of a sherry trifle, pipe the cream in peaks on top 
of the custard. (You can just spoon it on if you prefer, but a piping bag was a 
big part of wartime England and beyond.) This is the moment where a couple of 
tins of condensed milk can substitute for cream, but I don’t recommend it.

Decorate with hundreds and thousands – these look like mini-multicoloured ball 
bearings.

Put it all back in the fridge and serve when you are ready.

Modern people use fresh or frozen raspberries, make their own custard and 
usually leave out the jelly. They top it with flaked almonds and truly it is a 
thing of beauty.

But one day you may find yourself with some old cake, a tin of custard, a tin 
of fruit cocktail, a few cubes of jelly, some sweet sherry and a bit of cream – 
or maybe even a tin of condensed milk if you are camping. These things happen.

And you will know what to do.

In 2008 my father died – but not before he had spent his last Christmas on 
Earth with me.


If you’ve read my memoir Why Be Happy When You Could Be Normal? you’ll know 
something about that last Christmas.

Dad was 89 and too weak to sleep upstairs – I had him on cushions in front of 
the fire and I was sure he would die that Christmas night. He had stopped 
eating, except for … yes, he wanted a sherry trifle, and not the fancy kind.

I made it for him and we watched Toy Story on TV.

Three days later, back up north, he died.

I think about that time and, without being sentimental, I am sure that if we 
can find reconciliation with our past – whether parents, partners or friends – 
we should try and do that.

It won’t be perfect, it will be a compromise, and it doesn’t mean happy 
families or restored bonds – there is often too much damage, too much sadness – 
but it might mean acceptance and, the big word, forgiveness.

I have learned, painfully, over the years that the things I regret in my life 
are not errors of judgment but failures of feeling.

So I am glad of that last Christmas with my dad – not because it rewrote the 
past, but because it rewrote our ending. The story, for all its pain and 
sometimes horror, did not end tragically; it ended with forgiveness.

My New Year’s steak sandwich

sourdough bread best you can buy
sirloin steak buy a wedge and slice it thinner than usual – think sandwich not 
slab.
winter salad greens and reds radicchio, chicory, romaine lettuce
horseradish
homemade mayo

Homemade mayo

Separate 3 organic eggs. Whites not wanted.


In a warm bowl stir or whisk the yolks till viscous, and slowly add excellent, 
not too fruity olive oil as you stir – maybe a little lemon juice, and a pinch 
of salt. You can add Dijon mustard if you prefer. Most people add vinegar.

If this is your first time, like all first times, keep tasting till you like 
it.

Steak sandwich

Slice the bread not too thin. Spread with mayo. Not butter.


Pile on the greens and reds – both pieces of bread.

Fry or grill your slices of sirloin the way you like them – bloody or burnt – 
and put one or two on top of one slice of bread.

Spread the steak slice with horseradish.

Slap the second slice of bread on top of the first – the lettuce will stay put.

Cut in half with a lethal knife.

Eat at once.

Drink with a slightly chilled gamay whatever the time of day, including 
breakfast. This is New Year’s Day and millions of people will be detoxing, 
dieting and proclaiming Dry January. Take a stand.

If I have guests who are vegetarian I make them an omelette sandwich, same 
bread, spread with HP sauce, no butter, and served with a glass of champagne. 
Or a cup of strong tea. That’s the best I can do. Happy New Year.

Extracted from Christmas Days by Jeanette Winterson (Vintage, £14.99). Click 
here to buy a copy for £12.29 from the Guardian Booskshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/christmas-days.html>
 