
The cellist Jennifer Ward Clarke, who has died aged 79, enjoyed a long and 
versatile career. A familiar figure in the role of continuo player in baroque 
music, and principal cello in period instrument orchestras, she also retained a 
keen interest in contemporary music.

In 1967 she was a founder member of the Pierrot Players, working closely with 
Harrison Birtwistle andPeter Maxwell Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/peter-maxwell-davies>. With this group and 
its successor, the Fires of London, she took part in many first performances, 
including Maxwell Davies’s Eight Songs for a Mad King and Birtwistle’s Medusa. 
In December 1969, she gave the first performance of Maxwell Davies’s Vesalii 
Icones, for solo cello, dancer and ensemble. Jenny had to perform her demanding 
part dressed as a monk in a voluminous and constricting habit.

She had joined the London Sinfonietta at its inception in 1968, and continued 
for several years to play a prominent role in its concerts and recordings. 
Jenny also developed an interest in continuo playing, working with Roger 
Norrington’s Schütz Choir of London, and with Paul Steinitz in the Steinitz 
Bach Players. She enjoyed a particularly rewarding relationship with the double 
bassist Francis Baines. With the founding of the Music Party (a chamber group 
masterminded byAlan Hacker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/03/alan-hacker>) in 1972, and of 
the Academy of Ancient Music in 1973, Jenny began the study, and soon the 
mastery, of the cello in its 18th-century form. She was one of the first string 
players in Britain to do so.

Jenny was born in Yateley, Hampshire, the daughter of Harry Ward Clarke, a 
prep school headteacher, and his wife, Dorothea (nee Devitt). Her interest in 
the cello was fostered at Benenden school, in Kent, where she encountered 
Adelina Leon, an inspirational cello teacher, a pupil of Pablo Casals, who 
remained a lifelong friend.

After Benenden, Jenny studied at the Royal College of Music in London, with 
Ivor James and Harvey Phillips, winning the prize for cello. Then she obtained 
a French government scholarship for a year’s study at the Paris Conservatoire 
with Paul Tortelier. She entered the Casals competition in Jerusalem, winning 
third prize, and also attended, on three occasions, masterclasses in 
Switzerland with Casals himself.

Back in London, Jenny joined the Philharmonia Orchestra, making recordings 
with Otto Klemperer andCarlo Maria Giulini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jun/16/guardianobituaries.italy>, but 
after a year decided to concentrate on chamber music and work with small 
orchestras such as the English Chamber Orchestra and the Academy of St Martin 
in the Fields.

Later on, established as a baroque and classical specialist, she took leading 
positions withAndrew Parrott’s Taverner Consort 
<http://taverner.org/andrew-parrott/> and with the London Classical Players 
underRoger Norrington <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jul/21/music>. 
She also played in Trevor Pinnock’s English Concert, and it was after a 
rehearsal of this group that the Salomon Quartet was formed, comprising Jenny, 
the violinists Simon Standage andMicaela Comberti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/mar/14/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
, and the viola-player Trevor Jones. Between 1981 and her retirement in 2009, 
the quartet undertook an extensive touring programme as well as making numerous 
recordings, many of them premieres on original instruments, including most of 
the Haydn quartets, Mozart, and lesser-known works by English and Austrian 
composers.

Playing alongside Jenny in the Music Party and the Fires of London, I found 
the professionalism and seriousness of her approach continually inspiring. 
Above all, I admired her command of the bow, and the imaginative way she used 
it to find the most appropriate sound and articulation for each and every 
phrase. It was no doubt these musical qualities that resulted in her gaining a 
considerable reputation as a teacher of baroque cello, at the Royal Academy of 
Music and privately.

Though not naturally outgoing, Jenny would always speak up in support of what 
she believed in, be it a social or musical issue. She was a fine 
conversationalist, always interested in what you had to say, and with a wide 
range of interests, notably the art and music of different cultures. She had an 
adventurous spirit, too: as a student she visited east Africa, taking her 
cello, which, on a 400-mile trip, travelled on top of the bus. She always 
enjoyed her extensive foreign tours, and visited more than 50 countries.

Jenny is survived by her husband, the writer Michael Foss, her daughter, Kate, 
granddaughter, Jessica, and great-grandson, Rowan.

• Jennifer Ward Clarke, cellist, born 20 June 1935; died 1 March 2015
 