
When Joachim Gauck is elected German president on Sunday, it will go down in 
history as the day when East Germans were finally able to ditch the feeling of 
being the nation's underdogs.

The 72-year old Protestant pastor's stellar rise has established the 
domination of Germany's political leadership by two figures who grew up under 
communism in EastGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>.

Like the chancellor, Angela Merkel, Gauck was brought up in a Protestant 
household under the Communist regime. Both of them began their political 
careers after the fall of the Berlin Wall.

The newspaper die Zeit has called it a "perfect East German triumph", and a 
sign that the often troubled integration between east and west has finally been 
achieved.

Gauck now has to bring his experience as a former East German rights activist 
as well as his own troubled history – his father was sent to a hard labour camp 
by the communist regime when he was just a boy – to the highest office in the 
land. He says he wants to invigorate Germans with a more positive sense of 
themselves, having declared his desire to "free" them of their "angst".

Freedom is his favourite word and one which he has repeated throughout his 
career as a Protestant preacher and, after the fall of the Berlin Wall, the 
head of the archives of the communist secret police, the Stasi, where he was 
responsible for sorting out the paper trail documenting their destructive 
deeds. The man who did not get to vote until he was 50 years old, and fittingly 
on 18 March, the same date as Sunday's vote, also repeatedly chides Germans for 
not appreciating their freedom.

Germany is preparing to be "put on the psychiatrist's couch", according to the 
Spiegel, by the most philosophical figurehead the country has had in years.

The silver-haired politician says it is time Germans wake up to the fact that 
they have much to be proud of. "Germans love being in the doldrums," he said in 
2010. "The whole country lives … in a barbaric state of vexation."

The charismatic Gauck, who describes himself as "a leftwing, liberal 
conservative", will become the country's ninth postwar president following the
unceremonious fall from grace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/17/german-president-christian-wulff-resigns1?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
 last month of Merkel's former ally Christian Wulff, who became caught up in a 
scandal over alleged corruption. But some see his appointment as a bitter blow.

The runup to his election in the Bundestag, for which he has the support of 
all the mainstream parties, has been tarnished by rows over everything from the 
extent to which he earned the title of dissident to whether he should be 
allowed to "live in sin" with his long-term partner when he moves into the 
presidential palace.

The most vocal opponents are members of the opposition Linke ("Left") party, 
many of whom still have their roots in the old Communist party. They have 
fronted their own candidate, the Nazi hunter Beate Klarsfeld.

But some in the East German dissident movement have also voiced their 
concerns. Heiko Lietz, a co-founder of the Neues Forum opposition movement, 
says Gauck's dissident role has been exaggerated. "An artificial character was 
built up around him," Lietz said.

However Johann-Georg Jaeger, also a former dissident and now a Green party 
member, defended Gauck's record. He recalled his bravery, describing how he 
gave fellow dissidents access to his photocopier – a rare thing in East Germany 
– for printing political pamphlets, and erected a secret letter box in his 
house to allow messages to be passed between dissidents.

Gauck has admitted to what he calls past mistakes, saying he was a latecomer 
to the opposition movement. He has also talked frequently about reflective 
periods of time he himself has spent in the analyst's chair. But he has 
rejected accusations from the left that he tried to relativise the Holocaust by 
talking about it in the same breath as Stalinism, and has so far resisted calls 
from the right for him to divorce his wife of 53 years and marry his long-term 
partner, a journalist.

In a 2010 interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/20/joachim-gauck-angela-merkel-president?INTCMP=SRCH>
 he described how the disappearance of his father following his arrest by the 
Communists utterly defined his political outlook.

"The fate of our father was like an educational cudgel," he said. "It led to a 
sense of unconditional loyalty towards the family which excluded any sort of 
idea of fraternisation with the system."
 