
Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> is leaving 
behind a stressful end to 2016, which included the death last month of her 
personal adviser, Juan Coto, followed quickly by an amicable split with her 
tennis coach, Esteban Carril.

John Tomic blows up at umpire as daughter Sara fails to reach Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/john-tomic-blows-up-at-umpire-as-daughter-sara-fails-to-reach-australian-open>
In conversation with her at the National Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Centre on Thursday it was clear she 
is handling the trauma with the sort of fortitude that has contributed to her 
extraordinary rise through the rankings over the past 18 months.

Konta, who recently broke into the world’s top 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/johanna-konta-beats-madison-keys-china-open>
, does not separate the personal from the professional and has always been tied 
firmly to her emotions. It has been her burgeoning skill of controlling 
pressure and challenges that has marked her progress, however.

Now she is moving on. It is likely that the 36-year-old Belgian Wim Fissette 
will be her new coach when she arrives in Melbourne for the first major of the 
year in January. They are heading for Nice on Monday to continue their early 
work and Konta sounded as if she is leaning towards a permanent appointment, 
although there have been plenty of other coaches interested in what is one of 
the prize jobs on the WTA Tour. Fissette, one of the most respected young 
coaches in the business, has worked with Kim Clijsters, Simona Halep and 
Victoria Azarenka, among others.

“Number one consideration is always availability,” Konta said. “Then it’s 
about – for me and I guess for every player – the connection with the coach, 
like with any relationship how you work together, the chemistry on court. So it 
was about finding that and he was the first coach I trialled. Things are going 
well.

“I wanted to go where there’s a bunch of players congregating and that was the 
place to be, so I’m jumping on the bandwagon.

“I am trialling a new set-up and things are going well. Nothing’s been made 
official yet but I am having a really good pre-season. Everyone’s integrating 
well and – if you follow me on Instagram – I went trampolining. I’ve been rock 
climbing. Has anyone actually appreciated the things I’ve done?”

This was not distraction therapy, it seems, but a genuine programme to improve 
her athleticism, which is considerable, given her teenage years as a track 
athlete and her obvious ability on the tennis court.

“We were trying to coordinate my body, basically,” she said. “I am trying to 
get more coordinated and more in tune, and so my fitness trainer, she was 
thinking of creative ways where we could make things fun and we were basically 
doing it every Wednesday to break up the week a bit.”

The split with Carril took many by surprise – coming as it did after the shock 
death of Coto, who has been so important to Konta in her personal development 
away from the game. However, the player and the coach would seem to have had a 
calm and mutually acceptable discussion about it.

“I think it was more sudden than gradual,” she said, “but not in an abrupt 
way. It was a mutual decision and the best decision for both of us moving 
forward. I’m sure I’ll be seeing him around. Tennis is a small world. I think, 
for now, he’s probably enjoying being at home with his family. He’s got two 
children now.”

Konta, speaking publicly about Coto for the first time, said: “I know that 
Juan would be supportive of me continuously improving [her personal and 
emotional side] because it’s more than just tennis, it’s about my life. He’s 
still very much a part of everything that I do, everything that I will continue 
to do in this sport and this career, and most likely beyond that as well. He 
has gifted me with an incredible amount of tools and habits that I still to 
this day am looking to improve, every single day.”

As for Fissette’s lack of years, she laughed and said: “No, he’s not that old 
but he’s been on the Tour for quite some time, so I’m definitely looking 
forward to being a sponge and absorbing as much of his experience and knowledge 
through the years. He’s been with Kim as well, and some of the players I’m 
currently playing against. Again, it’s early days. I think there’s only so much 
that you can feel out in the training block and then the year starts. That’s 
when you really feel how you get along.”

Did she know him before?

“Not well but I had seen him before. I had obviously played Vika in Miami, so 
I saw him then, and I’ve seen him randomly a couple of times throughout the 
year.”

Konta, like most players, needs comfort and understanding in her coaching 
set-up, unlike the few who crave firm direction. “I am a firm believer – and 
this applies to every single team member – that I’m looking for a partner. I 
like working together harmoniously. I like being involved in my own 
development, having my input and basically, yeah, a partnership more than 
anything.”

Rather than a dictatorship …

“Exactly.”

Back on the road quickly after her training stint in Nice – at Patrick 
Mouratoglou’s new academy– Konta heads for tournaments in Shenzhen then Sydney 
before the Australian Open.

This time last year she could hardly have imagined she would be arriving in 
the country of her birth as No10 in the world – but she has surprised herself, 
and others, many times in her career.
 