
It is easy to regard Johanna Konta’s impressive rise from nervous 
underachiever to genuine contender for major honours as the result of a dry, 
programmed preparation, as is often reflected in her language.

The word “process” has become an almost parodic feature of her lexicon. She 
talks about staying in “the moment”, and any attempt to pierce her carefully 
constructed psychological armour is met with polite deflection. But she is no 
robot, whatever the impression of her archer‑like serve and clean, well-chosen 
ground strokes.

It becomes obvious in conversation with Konta that there is still a lot of 
emotion bubbling under, the jitters that her one-time Fed Cup captain Judy 
Murray said always sublimated her considerable potential. If those nerves did 
not jangle still, Konta would struggle for motivation under pressure – which 
will no doubt arrive at various “moments” when she begins her US Open campaign 
on Monday against Bethanie Mattek-Sands. It is likely to be on one of the big 
show courts, possibly even Arthur Ashe. The pressure and the spotlight will be 
fierce.

Johanna Konta beats Venus Williams in first WTA final to win Stanford Classic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/johanna-konta-venus-williams-stanford-classic-final>
The American – who, with Jack Sock, beat the British No1 and Jamie Murray on 
her way to gold in the mixed doubles at the Rio Olympics – is Konta’s polar 
opposite, rushing towards flamboyance and gestures, dressed confidently, it 
seems, in a variety of publicity-grabbing outfits.

“We hadn’t played each other ever and now we are playing each other twice in 
three weeks,” Konta said with a laugh. “She is playing very well, she has an 
incredible amount of experience, she is coming off the back of something that 
is incredibly inspirational and life‑changing so I think it’s no secret that a 
lot of American players play better here. I’m expecting a very inspired 
Bethanie and I will do my best. She is a popular player and a gold medallist so 
I’m sure there’s an incentive for it to be a big court. Whatever we’re on, 
we’ll make it a good one.”

Where Mattek-Sands has a look-at-me attitude to life and her career, Konta 
prefers the quieter route to prominence. “I haven’t really looked at myself as 
someone that needs to prove a point to anyone,” the British player said.

“I look to constantly be a better version of myself every time I step out on 
court. That has come out with some good wins and good things on paper but if my 
ranking were to drop or to rise, it wouldn’t affect my goals or how I want to 
keep improving. That’s why I employ the people I employ, for me it’s about 
working on the here and now, working on the process that matters to me but in 
terms of what my forehand looks like or how much or how many points I need to 
defend here or there, that’s not my job.”

Johanna Konta: ‘You’re going to go through phases of hating the sport’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/21/johanna-konta-wimbledon-tennis-interview>
Did she recognise change in herself over the past year or so, rising from the 
outer reaches of respectability in the rankings to No14 seed here, and almost 
crashing the top 10 in Canada a few weeks ago? She also has the considerable 
financial incentive of $3.5m (£2.6m) prize money to go with this title, as well 
as a slice of the $1m available for being near the lead of the US Open series 
bonus challenge. “I’m exactly the same person,” the 25-year-old said. “I’m 
definitely older and that much wiser as well, I hope.

“I think I have had a lot of experiences in a short space of time at this 
level. There wasn’t so much of a warm-up period [in her career]. It was very 
much just on the WTA Tour this year and that has been an incredible experience, 
one that I hope to continue every year for the rest of my career. Otherwise I 
think I’m just as happy, hard-working and motivated as I was last year.

“I do feel that this year has gone very, very quickly, it just feels like so 
much has happened in such a short space of time. But I hope to be feeling the 
same way this time next year.

“The tour keeps moving, tournaments keep coming and going, and I think the 
better job I do of staying present and healthy and enjoying what I’m doing the 
more reasons I give you guys to write about me.”
 