
Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> collapsed to 
her knees midway through her match in stifling heat at the US Open before 
recovering to record an astonishing and controversial win in three sets over 
the Bulgarian Tsvetana Pironkova. The incident sent a worrying shiver through 
the tournament as high humidity drained even the fittest players – and few are 
better conditioned than the British No1.

A set up but fading physically towards the end of the second on an exposed 
outside court, Konta served on set point against her, fell woozily to the 
ground and was seriously distressed as she grabbed for her breath. For seven 
minutes she sat on a towel with ice packs wrapped around her before waving away 
concerned attendants to sit on her courtside chair. She rose unsteadily and 
returned to double-fault and surrender the set, then left the court to change 
her clothes before resuming.

Andy Murray ready to face Marcel Granollers in US Open second round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/31/andy-murray-us-open-marcel-granollers-second-round>
Although still breathing hard and looking less than great, Konta conjured a 
magnificent comeback, full of artful drop shots, lobs and passing shots, to win 
6-2, 5-7, 6-2 in two hours and 32 minutes. She was so exhausted she could not 
celebrate. If she is fit, she will play on Friday against the Swiss Belinda 
Bencic, who beat Andrea Petkovic 6-3, 6-2.

Konta, who revealed she had collapsed in similar conditions in the United 
States four years ago, said, “I was feeling a little bit the conditions, and 
also my own energy levels [crashed]. Basically my heart rate spiked and I 
couldn’t really control my breathing. I started hyperventilating. I started 
shaking. That’s why I went down on the ground, because I was quite violently 
shaking.

“Because I’d experienced it once before I didn’t start crying. I don’t know if 
anyone’s had a panic attack but that’s basically what it feels like. I’m doing 
everything I can to recover well and try to get myself into a state to be ready 
to compete again on Thursday, Friday. I don’t know what day it is. I feel quite 
certain that, with some TLC, I’ll be good to go again in a few days’ time.”

Konta denied she had manipulated the situation for an extended break between 
sets. “The medical timeout was right at the end of that second set. I guess it 
worked out that way but I needed to get changed out of my clothes. I was soaked 
through. I did the best I could with the cards that I had. My opponent, she was 
gracious, and she was also very understanding of the situation that was going 
on.”

Pironkova said Konta deserved her win but she described the conditions as: 
“Not that bad compared to other days”.

She added: “Obviously, she wasn’t feeling well. I could see that. When you see 
the player that you’re playing against look like this, that you couldn’t stand, 
it’s scary, I think. I was hoping she will get through that and that she will 
be OK.

“What was frustrating for me was what happened after that, the toilet break. 
Because, with that toilet break, I think the match was stopped for just too 
long. And it was an unfortunate time. I had my momentum going. I was getting 
back in the match because I had a hard start.”

Pironkova did not notice any change in Konta at the end. “I couldn’t say her 
game was struggling or anything. She played the same way that she played 
before.”

Kyle Edmund <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kyle-edmund> had a way more 
straightforward route into the third round than his compatriot. The forehand he 
put beyond the reach of the young American underdog Ernesto “Nito” Escobedo to 
win their second-round match was the British player’s 54th clean winner of the 
match, his 94th of the tournament.

If the 21-year-old Yorkshireman is to create an even bigger stir by beating 
John Isner in the third round on Friday, he will need all the gathering 
strength in that strong, freckled right arm to reach the second week of the 
tournament.

Edmund’s cannon is his forehand and that is where 49 of his winners have come 
from in the space of three days, withstraight-sets wins over the 
still-dangerous Frenchman Richard Gasquet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/29/kyle-edmund-richard-gasquet-us-open-first-round>
 on Monday and the Californian Escobedo, the wiry 20-year-old son a of Mexican 
truck driver.

“A lot of good things today,” Edmund said courtside after winning 7-5, 6-4, 
6-4 – and before he had heard Isner had beaten the Belgian qualifier Steve 
Darcis in four sets on Louis Armstrong.
 