
Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> is through to 
the second round of the US Open, the tournament that properly announced her 
arrival a year ago, when, ranked 94 in the world, she came within a few stray 
groundstrokes of making the quarter-finals.

She has risen 80 places since then and, in what should have been the last day 
match on the new Grandstand stadium but turned out to be an early-evening extra 
show, she beat the American Bethanie Mattek-Sands with a bit to spare, 6-3, 6-3 
in an hour and 22 minutes.

The verdict of Great Britain’s Davis Cup captain, Leon Smith, who was 
courtside for Eurosport, was: “She yet again showed the level she can play, 
against a tricky opponent. She was dominant, serving particularly well 
throughout.”

In a sparsely populated but impressive new stadium (Phil Collins had pulled in 
a full house at nearby Arthur Asheto inaugurate the opening of the new roof 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/djokovic-nadal-phil-collins-kick-off-us-open-040843517--ten.html>
 there ahead of Novak Djokovic’s match against Jerzy Janowicz), they had to 
generate their own energy.

John Isner beats Frances Tiafoe in battle of US tennis's present and future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/29/john-isner-frances-tiafoe-us-open-cici-bellis>
They’re used to it, though, as are all players who have had to slog their way 
through the backblocks of their sport. Mattek-Sands played her part by dressing 
as if she wasan extra from Mad Max: Fury Road 
<http://madmaxcostumes.com/mad-max-fury-road/> – with headband, top knot, 
flounced skirt and long black socks – although a touch of deep, dark eye makeup 
would have completed the look.

Konta played it straight in violet and white. Enough of the fashion show – the 
tennis was clinical, most of the good stuff in the first set coming from the 
British No1, who stuck to her uncluttered strategy of big serve, deep ground 
strokes and energetic defence. It was good enough for her to wrap up the first 
set in 38 minutes. She took two of her break chances, hit the spot on first 
serve a semi-respectable 14 out of 24 times and, like her opponent, kept her 
unforced errors down to 10.

The level dipped a little in the second, although one glorious Konta lob in 
the fourth game lit up the echoing arena with the simplicity of its execution, 
leaving the American stranded at the net. Mattek-Sands, rattled, pushed a 
concluding backhand wide and Konta led 3-1.

Sticking to her regimented archer’s serve – each bounce plopped with care, the 
ball toss cutting a recurring arc and the racket smacking its target flat and 
hard – was enough to take her further clear.

Mattek-Sands, who partnered Jack Sock to beat Konta and Jamie Murray on their 
way to gold in the mixed doubles in Rio 
<http://www.espn.com/espnw/culture/the-buzz/article/17310933/despite-winning-olympic-gold-medal-bethanie-mattek-sands-called-right-name>
, fought hard to stay in the contest, mixing up her ground strokes to stretch 
her opponent laterally.

In the seventh game, she was heartened to see Konta land her third double 
fault, but the Archer got back in a groove to save five break points. 
Mattek-Sands tried all her tricks, from outrageous moon balls to viciously 
sliced backhands, and dragged her opponent into a five-deuce struggle before 
succumbing to Konta’s all-round power in the longest duel of the match.

Lukas Rosol plays down history before meeting Andy Murray in US Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/29/lukas-rosol-plays-down-history-andy-murray-us-open>
Serving to stay in the tournament at 2-5, Mattek-Sands established a 30-love 
cushion but within moments she was saving her first match point. She overcame 
the anxiety of keeping the ball in play in several tough rallies, and held.

The match, though, was decided by Konta’s metronomic racket, and she made 
short work of serving out to love for an impressive win. It might have lacked 
the drama of earlier contests on day one, but the final backhand winner down 
the line did the job.

Later, sipping on a recovery drink in her prized Team GB mug from Rio, she 
seemed barely out of breath. Konta’s conditioning is spot-on, as is her 
mindset. Nothing disturbs her commitment to living “in the moment”.

Even though she has advanced considerably since her debut here last year, 
Konta refuses to be carried away by a single win at the start of a fortnight 
she hopes to finish.

“I was happy with how I was able to deal with things on my side, separating 
myself from the situation. Every first round, you have to find your feet and 
get into the rhythm of the tournament. With Bethanie, the more emotion, the 
more tension that comes in a match, the better she plays, the more inspired she 
plays. That was a big thing for me to do: to make it as businesslike as 
possible.”

It is not a unique approach in modern tennis – nor in sport in general – but 
Konta expresses this almost fierce determination to remain unmoved by 
circumstance better than most.

Paradoxically, the noisy, exciting US Open is her favourite tournament, rather 
than the restrained confines of the All England Club, where she has not done 
quite so well yet.

“I love the energy of the place,” she said. “It’s brilliant to be here for the 
two-and-a-half or three weeks that I hope for – but then it is definitely good 
to leave. I remember being on Ashe last year. There were planes going, there 
were sirens, there was a train going by, there was honking, there was talking. 
There was so much going on. It makes the whole vibe very infectious.”

While there weren’t many adults there, Konta stayed on to do selfies and 
autographs with an enthusiastic knot of young fans. Despite her appearance and 
demeanour of an automated professional, she is a warm character who could 
establish a wide supporter base if she can break into the top 10 and stay there.

Konta, a keen music fan, could just about hear the strains of Phil Collins on 
nearby Ashe, and said, “I kinda heard him, but not clear enough. Before going 
on, I heard him warming up, and I thought, oh my God, oh my God, please let us 
hear him while we’re on Grandstand. I do like him, yeah.”

And there’s another anomaly: the regimented and disciplined professional 
letting just a little bit of emotion seep through at the very moment when her 
focus was about to switch to her job.

Konta next plays the 28-year-old Bulgarian, Tsvetana Pironkova, ranked 71 in 
the world, who looked strong beating the Frenchwoman Virginie Razzano 6-1, 6-2
 