
In a twinkling, the story of the women’s draw shifted dramatically on day 
seven of the US Open to Latvia, whose best player, Anastasija Sevastova,shocked 
Johanna Konta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/04/johanna-konta-v-anastasija-sevastova-us-open-fourth-round-live>
 when the British No1 may have imagined a quarter-final place was hers for the 
taking.

Sevastova, the world No48, hit the ball beautifully to win stylishly 6-4, 7-5 
– and deserved it. Whether or not she can build on that at the business end of 
the tournament is less certain, so there must be a sense of lost opportunity 
kicking in for Konta. Shereached the fourth round last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/07/us-open-2015-johanna-konta-rues-double-faults-as-she-falls-to-petra-kvitova>
, when ranked 97, and was well placed to do better than that here, ranked No14 
in the world.

“None of us saw that coming,” the former British No1 Annabel Croft said. “She 
just couldn’t get going.”

Well, somebody saw it coming. After beating the No3 seed, Garbiñe Muguruza, 
then the tough Ukrainian Kateryna Bondarenko to get this far, Sevastova uttered 
the mantra of the game: “In women’s tennis, everybody can beat everybody on 
their day.”

Johanna Konta v Anastasija Sevastova: US Open fourth round – as it happened | 
Les Roopanarine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/04/johanna-konta-v-anastasija-sevastova-us-open-fourth-round-live>
Sunday was her day and fans of free-flowing tennis ought to celebrate her 
advance because she plays with such ease in the shot, almost carefree. Konta’s 
backhand, one of her weapons, did not click in the first set and she struggled 
to find a rhythm thereafter. She struck 34 unforced errors in the hour and 41 
minutes it lasted.Having collapsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/31/johanna-konta-collapses-beating-tsvetana-pironkova-us-open-kyle-edmund>
 in the heat of the second round before coming back strongly tobeat Belinda 
Bencic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/us-open-2016-johanna-konta-beats-belinda-bencic-to-reach-last-16>
 in the third round, Konta was not at her best. She may well have been coping 
with the aftermath of that physical trauma.

“I thought I did a good job getting myself back into the match,” she said. “It 
wasn’t easy. I didn’t play the tennis level that I maybe would have liked to 
have played but I competed the best I could. I left it all out there.”

She invariably does but it is a shame she could not reproduce some of the 
excellent form she showed in the third round after her physical meltdown in the 
second.

“I’m sure there are some remnants of [her colllapse] but it’s not the reason I 
lost,” she said. “What happened a few days ago, it’s an accumulation of things. 
I have played a lot of tennis in this space of time. But I can’t exactly 
complain about that because that’s a wonderful problem to have.”

Konta has come through fire to get so deep in the US Open – her favourite 
tournament – so it was odd to see her struggle against an opponent she beat in 
qualifying for the Australian Open three years ago. A lot has changed for both 
of them in that time, though.

Sevastova, who quit the Tour for 18 months because of injury before returning 
in January last year and saying tennis is not the focal point of her existence, 
is an altogether more laid-back individual than the intense Konta – and it 
showed in the relaxed way she hit her shots. She plays with freedom rather than 
the fear of their consequence and took the first set in 45 minutes.

The forehand volley she thrashed to break for 5-3 in the second set oozed 
confidence, although she hid her excitement well. Stepping up to serve for an 
unexpected place in the quarter-finals, she looked across the net at a 
desperate and, consequently, dangerous opponent.

Konta, who had converted four of nine break points, knew this was do or die – 
and her exquisite lob to break for 4-5 said it all. It was a shot of bravery in 
extremis, the only one on offer as Sevastova lurked at the net and it gave the 
British No1 a sliver of hope.

The pressure was on the Latvian. She had embraced an upset but was suddenly 
plunged into familiar territory: survival. She dragged herself back to deuce on 
Konta’s serve and then forced a second match point.

A loose return to a big body serve hit the tramlines, she overcooked a 
forehand from behind the baseline and then drilled a backhand into the net to 
hand Konta parity. The match hung by a thread, despite Sevastova’s lead on the 
scoreboard. She held, nervously, for 6-5 and it was now all on Konta’s serve.

Faced with elimination, she needed to find some of her earlier tournament form 
but found Sevastova in no mood to accommodate her. She fired a couple of 
remarkable winners and forced a final shank from Konta that spiralled upwards 
and out on the last point.

It was a towering win for Sevastova. “It’s unbelievable,” she said. “There 
were hard moments in 2013, no fun. Now I’m back. It’s so tough to play these 
two matches. I’m just fighting and fighting in my head. I knew I had a chance.”
 