
Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> arrives in 
Melbourne this weekend as happy and confident at 25 as she can ever have been 
in a career that has dipped and soared like an artist’s brush across a canvas.

A player who for a worryingly long time was simultaneously enigmatic, talented 
and a nervous wreck has thrust herself into the upper echelons of her sport,
freshly crowned as champion of Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-agnieszka-radwanska-sydney>
, the city where she was born, and well aware she is good enough to win the 
Australian Open.

“She was just playing unbelievable tennis from the beginning until the end,” 
said Agnieszka Radwanska, the estimable Pole who could take only six games off 
the British No1 in an hour and 22 minutes of the Sydney Open final on Friday.

“Normally, you’re thinking on the court that she can’t play like this the 
whole match and she’s going to have a couple of games where she plays worse. 
But she didn’t. She was just playing the whole match so aggressive, with pretty 
much everything in, and I couldn’t do much. I was doing everything right and 
hitting the ball well but it was coming back better and better.

“I can’t even be angry with myself. What she was doing was unbelievable. It 
went too fast. Even when I started serving better, the ball was coming back 
stronger. Well done to her. I was playing good but she was playing amazing 
tennis and so aggressive, hitting it very deep, I couldn’t do much.”

Johanna Konta wins Sydney title after brushing Agnieszka Radwanska aside
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-agnieszka-radwanska-sydney>
Konta identifies her surge to No9 in the world – to be confirmed on Monday – 
as linked to a steady rise of self-belief, from drowning in the 700s of the 
rankings a couple of years ago to holding her own against the game’s best on 
the eve of the first major of 2017.She beat the resurgent Canadian Eugenie 
Bouchard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/daniel-evans-claims-first-top-10-win-laura-robson-fails-to-make-australian-open-tennis>
 out of sight in the Sydney semi-finals and her win over Radwanska completed 
surely the best consecutive performances of her career.

Like Bouchard, Radwanska, who beat Konta in their two matches last year, in 
Beijing and Cincinnati, and is regarded as one of the most adaptable and 
intelligent players on the circuit, could not find a meaningful reply to her 
precision and power. If Konta’s form holds in the opening round in Melbourne, 
it is unlikely the respected but inconsistent Belgian, Kirsten Flipkens, will 
be able to do much better.

Konta has in her corner a coach, Wim Fissette, who knows his compatriot 
Flipkens better than most. He has proved to be an inspiring guide in their 
short time together and in the break between sets on Friday simply said to her: 
“If you’re going to go for it, go for it.” Konta could hardly have delivered 
more spectacularly on those instructions. It had been that way almost from her 
first match.

In a week she will not easily forget, Konta dropped a mere 29 games in winning 
five matches in straight sets. No British player had won this title since Jo 
Durie in 1983 and none deserved it more. Konta has won 22 of her past 27 
matches and reached the semi‑finals or better in four of her past five 
tournaments. That is crazily consistent. This is her second WTA title. It is 
unlikely to be her last.

“Each match I was playing, I was thinking a little more clearly and was 
getting that much more match-tight,” she said, adding with self-deprecation 
that those who know her well will recognise, “overall, I was very happy with 
the match I played.”

Her groundstrokes on both wings, were devastating and she hardly twitched when 
going for the lines. Her serve was accurate, strong and intelligent. Her nerve 
held throughout and her demeanour was as calm as a lagoon on a summer’s day.

“I definitely maintained a high level throughout and I made it very difficult 
for her to do much,” she said. “Going into any match against Aga, I knew it had 
to be nothing short of what it was today if I was to have a chance of coming 
through.”

However, the challenges intensify now. The Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> is an altogether different 
scenario. Champions lurk everywhere, young, not so young and old.

Angelique Kerber, 29 and out of sorts, has pride and a title to defend; Serena 
Williams, 35 and dethroned by the German, has pride and history to reach for, 
needing one more major to post her 23rd and consign Steffi Graf to second place 
on the all-time list. It is a tournament loaded with possibilities.

If Konta gets past Flipkens, she may need to beat one of the most vibrant new 
talents in the game, Naomi Osaka, then either Caroline Wozniacki, who has 
rediscovered her verve and resilience, the former finalist Dominika Cibulkova … 
then Williams in the quarter-finals. If she does to the great American what 
Heather Watson almost did a few years ago at Wimbledon, her semi-final opponent 
could well be Radwanska.

She will be thinking of none of those options but the first one. After years 
of suffering in the wilderness, that has become Konta’s singular strength: an 
ability to stay in the only moment that matters. She did it to stunning effect 
in two matches at the end of the Sydney tournament that left her rivals 
awe-struck, most notably Radwanska, who is not easily impressed.

Watson should dent home ambitions by beating the woefully out-of-form Sam 
Stosur in the first round in the other quarter of the draw on that side, but 
may struggle if she gets as far as the third round, where Elena Vesnina will 
likely be waiting. Naomi Broady is also in the section but the Australian Daria 
Gavrilova might have too many tricks for her in the opening round.

It is a thin British representation but one led by perhaps the most impressive 
British player since Durie.
 