
Firebrand tennis father John Tomic has been involved in another ugly incident, 
scolding a chair umpire during his daughter Sara’s match at theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> wildcard playoffs in 
Melbourne.

An agitated Tomic repeatedly shouted at the umpire after a line call went 
against Sara in her three-set quarter-final loss to Alison Bai at Melbourne 
Park on Thursday.

Bernard Tomic ready for a full-time coach and a crack at the top 10
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/bernard-tomic-ready-for-a-full-time-coach-and-a-crack-at-the-top-10>
“Change linesman if they cannot see!” he yelled, prompting the official to 
warn Tomic he would be removed from the venue unless he kept quiet.

Second-seeded Bai went on to win the match 6-4, 6-7 (6-8), 6-3 to secure her 
place in the final four who will compete for a sole berth in the main draw of 
January’s Australian Open.


Tomic has been no stranger to controversy, receiving a suspended jail sentence 
in 2013 for headbutting son Bernard’s French training partner.

He has also clashed with Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> 
Australia, last year accusing high-performance director Pat Rafter of picking 
favourites when it came to player funding.

The attack led Rafter to declare Tennis Australia would no longer fund either 
of the Tomic siblings.

Down 5-1 in the second set after losing the first, 18-year-old Sara Tomic won 
five straight games to force a tiebreaker and take the match to a third set.

But the more experienced Bai held her nerve and took control of the third set, 
her strong service game allowing her to aggressively charge to the net.

The match against Bai was Tomic’s only extended hitout of the tournament after 
her first-round opponent, last year’s winner Maddison Inglis, retired while 
four games down in the opening set.

On Wednesday, Sam Groth’s simmering frustration boiled over during his 
five-set defeat to Chris O’Connell in the men’s draw. 

The 2015 Newcombe medallist repeatedly clashed with the umpire and couldn’t 
get the better of O’Connell, who prevailed 7-5, 3-6, 7-5, 4-6, 8-6 at Melbourne 
Park.


Groth blew up late in the third set when the umpire overruled the line judge 
and called a fault against him. The 29-year-old double-faulted, going on to 
lose the game and, with it, the set, before smashing his racquet repeatedly 
into the ground.

“That’s the most unbelievable time to overrule a call,” an incensed Groth told 
the umpire. “You are a joke.”

The outburst cost Groth a code violation and a point penalty but it didn’t 
stop him continuing to fire up at the umpire.
 