
John McEnroe has challenged Nick Kyrgios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> to quit professional tennis if 
his heart isn’t in it. Commentating on American TV, McEnroe was scathing of 
Kyrgios’s demeanour before Australia’s last singles hope retired from his 
third-round US Open match against Illya Marchenko with a hip flexor injury on 
Saturday night.

Kyrgios was trailing two sets to one – 4-6, 6-4, 6-1 – when he called it 
quits. The 14th seed complained of the injury during his first two matches and 
said he felt like he’d been “hit by a bus” at one point during the defeat.

Serena Williams sets women’s record of 307 victories in grand slams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/serena-williams-womens-record-307-victories-grand-slams-martina-navratilova>
“I can’t move. I can’t turn, mate,” he said to his courtside trainer. “What’s 
the fucking point?”

McEnroe has been critical and complimentary of Kyrgios in equal measure since 
the 21-year-old’s emergence as one of tennis’s hottest prospects. Last year he 
lashed Kyrgios for his “bonehead” tactics during a first-round loss to Andy 
Murray at Flushing Meadows, while he also took aim at the world No16 at 
Wimbledon.

But his latest attack was particularly harsh, given Kyrgios’s obvious injury 
concerns. “Nick Kyrgios, if you don’t want to be a professional tennis player, 
do something else,” McEnroe said. “He’s hurt because he’s not training enough.”

There was no sign of any trouble early as Kyrgios broke Marchenko on the 
Ukrainian’s first service game before comfortably securing the opening set. At 
times he toyed with the world No63, producing a series of nonchalant 
backhand-down-the-line winners to appear in cruise control.

Kyrgios lit up Arthur Ashe Stadium when he ran down a drop shot and conjured 
an incredible around-the-net-post backhand winner in the fifth game of the 
third set. But the over exertion may well have inflamed his injury, with a 
clearly lame Kyrgios managing to win just six more games and dropping serve 
four times before stopping.

“It’s not going to get better by playing, I guess,” a dejected Kyrgios said 
later. “It’s tough. I don’t like to retire. It’s probably like the second or 
third time I’ve done it. It’s never easy, of course. I’ve got a lot of belief 
in my game to still win matches when I’m not feeling great.

“[But] his strength is to make balls move you around. It’s not great. I mean, 
to be fair, my hip was bothering me my first two matches and I got through. I 
guess it was just a matter of time.”

Kyrgios’s injury places him in doubt for Australia’s Davis Cup playoff with 
Slovakia in Sydney from 16 to 18 September. “I don’t really care right now, to 
be honest,” he said. “Hopefully I get better in time. Obviously I want to play 
but I’m not really thinking about that right now.”

Despite McEnroe’s critique, Kyrgios attributed the injury to training and 
playing overload. “It’s the whole year leading up to it with the whole 
schedule,” he said. “I’ve got to take more time and be more diligent with gym 
and everything so this doesn’t happen to me.”

The loss was Kyrgios’s first in 21 matches against unseeded opponents at grand 
slam events but despite the setback he is set to climb to a career-high No15 in 
the world.


Marchenko admitted it was not the way he wanted to reach the last 16 of a slam 
for the first time, five days shy of his 29th birthday. But the Ukrainian said 
it was “a dream come true” to earn a showdown with two-time grand slam champion 
and third seed Stan Wawrinka on Monday for a place in the quarter-finals.
 