
The big man is back. In his first grand slam event for two and a half years 
after a series of false dawns following wrist surgery, Juan Martín delPotro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/juan-martin-del-potro> produced a 
performance that surely even he did not think he was capable of at this stage 
of his comeback. His 3-6, 6-3, 7-6 (7-2), 6-3 second-round win over the No4 
seed, Stan Wawrinka, was his best win since he returned to the tour full-time 
in March and, more importantly, showed that the 27-year-old Argentinian may 
just be on track to return to the form that won him the US Open in 2009.

Wimbledon 2016: Juan Martín del Potro takes out Stanislas Wawrinka – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/01/wimbledon-2016-nick-kyrgios-tomas-berdych-and-more-day-five-live>
“It is an amazing sensation for me,” said Del Potro, whose hands were shaking 
after he came off the court. “I beat one of the guys who’s playing great tennis 
this season. I couldn’t expect this victory today but I played much better 
after the first set. I was so happy to be on court, the score didn’t matter, 
but now I am really happy. After my third surgery, it’s like my second or third 
career in my young life. I just want to play tennis again. It’s a great 
sensation for me. I feel alive.”

Having undergone right wrist surgery in 2010, which kept him out for a year, 
Del Potro made it all the way back into the top 10. In some ways, it could be 
argued that he had a hand in Andy Murray’s 2013 Wimbledon win, his effort in
pushing Novak Djokovic so hard in an epic semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/05/novak-djokovic-del-potro-wimbledon-semi>
 perhaps contributing to the Serb’s performance in the final.

In 2014 Del Potro required an operation to his left wrist, which did not work 
and left him in pain, wondering if he would ever play again. At his lowest 
point, Del Potro was close to hanging up his rackets but, helped by chats with 
the likes of Lionel Messi, he decided to give it one more go and has been 
climbing back up the rankings. He still struggles to hit through his two-handed 
backhand but his serve and forehand remain big weapons and here he looked like 
his old self as he clinched a satisfying victory that was equally popular with 
the crowd.

As he has worked to build up strength in the wrist, his backhand slice has 
improved beyond recognition and Del Potro, now ranked No165, said he hopes that 
when he is 100 per cent again he may even be better than in the past.

“I am trying to hit my backhand as I did in the past but sometimes I don’t 
feel confident enough to do it, so I am using the slice a lot,” he said. “I 
have to do two to three hours a day with treatment, exercise, workout and 
flexibility, everything, and after that I go to practice. Then I have to work 
on the backhand, so it’s not easy to do every day. I’m still confident to get 
back my old backhand and the doctor said I can do it. But I have to do some 
things with my mind. Two or three months ago I could only hit slice, now I can 
hit some returns harder and that for me is a small thing but good thing. In 
future, if I can get all the shots in my game, I could be a better player.”

Having skipped the clay-court season to give him more time to strengthen his 
wrist, the 2009 US Open champion reached the semi-finals in Stuttgart but was 
beaten by John Isner in the first round at Queen’s. Nothing there suggested he 
might be capable of upsetting Wawrinka, even if the two-times grand slam 
champion has never been beyond the quarter-final here. The Swiss looked in 
control when he took the first set but Del Potro settled down in the second 
set, his thumping forehand reverberating inside the Centre Court under the 
roof, which was closed from the start.

A Wawrinka double-fault handed Del Potro the vital break in the second set and 
with the No4 seed making several uncharacteristic errors, even on his usually 
brilliant one-handed backhand, the Argentinian levelled the match.

The pair traded four straight breaks of serve at the start of the third set 
but Del Potro took it on the tie-break, 7-2. Wawrinka saved two break points at 
2-3 in the fourth but Del Potro broke two games later and served out to set up 
a match with No32 seed, Lucas Pouille of France.

Wawrinka, who had taken on the 1996 Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> champion, Richard Krajicek, as an 
adviser for the grass-court season, said he had allowed himself to over-think. 
“I gave him the break with a double-fault and then it wasn’t easy,” she said. 
“He was in front with a break, he was always serving big, serving good. I 
started to play a little bit too much between, not playing completely free, not 
playing aggressive enough and I didn’t find a way to come back in the match. At 
the end it’s a tough loss, but he also deserves it because he went for it.”

Del Potro has never played Pouille but, as the tournament tries to catch up 
after a week of interruptions, recovering physically for Saturday’s clash could 
be tough. “I don’t have a day off, so it’s going to be a challenge for me to 
play another five-setter but I think the surface could help me because usually 
matches are not that long on grass.”
 