 Which of the following statements is true? 
· Victims of rape always have to confront their attacker in a courtroom.

· Crown Prosecution Service lawyers will only take a case to court if they 
believe there's a 51 per cent chance of winning.

· Rape cases don't go ahead because the CPS doesn't believe the victim.

None of them. Rape victims automatically qualify for 'special measures', which 
means they can give evidence from behind a screen or by television link. The 
public gallery, where the defendant's family and friends may be sitting, which 
can be very intimidating to the victim, can be cleared. Changes in the law mean 
the defendant cannot cross-examine the victim in person, something that was 
particularly traumatic for rape victims in the past.

There is no scale to weigh evidence where 51 per cent means 'go ahead' while 
50 per cent or below means 'no chance'. But prosecutors will make a decision 
based on whether there is enough evidence for a realistic prospect of 
conviction. If there isn't, a case cannot go ahead, no matter how important or 
serious it may be.

Few other cases depend so crucially on one person's word against another 
(there are rarely witnesses). When the CPS decides not to go ahead, it is not 
because we don't believe the victim but because there is not enough evidence.

If we decide not to go ahead, or to drop a case, that decision is referred to 
a second specialist rape prosecutor. The victim is told of the decision and 
offered a face-to-face meeting with the specialist prosecutor.

Some have criticised the fact the victim does not meet 'her lawyer' until the 
case goes to court. This is because the CPS does not act for victims or 
represent them in court; our decisions reflect the public interest rather than 
the particular interest of any one person.

It is true that most people still believe in the 'stranger rape' scenario: the 
hooded attacker who leaps out of the dark in the street or breaks into the 
victim's home. These cases do happen, but they are rare and the conviction 
rates for this type of rape have stayed about the same for a number of years. 
The overwhelming majority of rapes involve attackers known to their victims.

The issue in cases where the defendant and victim are known to each other is 
nearly always consent. Previously, it was a defence that the defendant believed 
the victim consented, however unreasonable that belief may have been. Now, 
under the new legislation, 'consent' is legally defined, so that juries will 
find it easier to decide whether the victim was able to and did in fact give 
their consent.

Another change is that the defendant cannot argue that they believed the 
victim consented if, for example, the victim was asleep or had been drugged.

We hope changes such as these will help victims to come forward and make 
giving evidence easier. But at the same time as minimising the trauma for 
victims, we have to protect the right of defendants to a fair trial.

This is the balancing act which faces all the 520 specialist rape prosecutors 
in the CPS. Prosecuting rape cases will never be easy, but we are committed to 
ensuring that justice is done.

Cps.gov.uk <http://www.cps.gov.uk/publications/prosecution>
 