
Athletes do not, generally, regard losing as a victory, however the lily is 
gilded. Yet that has been the enduring curiosity of theOlympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> since they were resurrected 
in 1896, one which Kei Nishikori was happy to embrace when he accepted bronze 
instead of the gold he and the other leading contenders had aimed for when they 
arrived a week ago.

The Japanese world No7, who spends nearly as much time on the physio’s table 
as on court and who tested Andy Murray seriously in the first semi-final on 
Saturday, beatRafael Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> 6-2, 
6-7 (1), 6-3 on a well-patronised Court One in front of a crowd who probably 
had not expected such a feisty encounter for third place.

The air seemed to have been sucked from Nadal’s game after he had left 
everything on court 24 hours earlier against Juan Martín del Potro in the 
second semi‑final, which lasted three hours and eight minutes. Yet, from 
somewhere, the Spaniard found the will to fight when other options appeared 
easier.

Rafael Nadal and Marc Lopez win tennis gold in Olympic men's doubles final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/rafael-nadal-wins-tennis-gold-in-olympic-mens-doubles-final-in-rio>
It was not a contest that would have pleased Piers Morgan, whose lust for a 
headline is matched only by his annoying ability to create one out of thin air 
and who enraged his battalions of social media snipers all week when he 
belittled the concept of silver and bronze medals at the Olympics. It was 
tempting at several points in the third-place play-off to say he had a point, 
yet the evidence before us told another story.

Alongside ego at the highest level resides pride – and Nadal’s was taking a 
battering at a set and 2-5 down, when he identified hesitancy in his opponent 
and decided to seize the moment. He broke twice, saved match point to level and 
dragged the wretched Nishikori into a tie‑break, where he thrashed him for the 
loss of a mere point.

So, on a day when they might have been better employed packing to go home or 
on to Cincinnati or New York ahead of the US Open, which starts in a fortnight, 
they were asked to go one more round. Nishikori must have felt like a 
heavyweight contender poised over a falling champion with a finishing left 
hook, only to slip in the execution of the blow and fly through the ropes. But 
he too found something extra. It is what makes them special.

America could not lose in the mixed doubles final, where Jack Sock teamed with 
Bethanie Mattek-Sands to beat their compatriots Venus Williams and Rajeev Ram 
6-7 (3), 6-1 (10-9) in an hour and 45 minutes of keenly contested tennis.

Monica Puig makes Puerto Rico gold medal history in women’s singles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/monica-puig-puerto-rica-gold-medal-history-rio-2016-womens-singles-monique-kerber-tennis>
In the women’s doubles final at the end of a productive week in difficult 
conditions, Ekaterina Makarova and Elena Vesnina stood on the highest deck of 
the podium, smiling in the afternoon sun and draped in gold on behalf of their 
benighted nation. They defeated the Swiss pair of Timea Bacsinszky and Martina 
Hingis 6-4, 6-4 handily enough in an hour and 38 minutes on a sweltering 
allegedly winter’s day.

Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> was the first of the 28 
sports at these Olympics to forgive the Russians for the shameless state-run 
doping programme, an endorsement that did not smack of prudence. There is no 
suggestion that either winner had doped, but wider suspicions linger.

Maria Sharapova, infamously, is absent. She would have given the Russian team 
a considerable boost but for having to put the finishing touches to her 
postponed appeal for a drugs ban, which the court of arbitration for sport is 
due to hear next month.

Elsewhere, it was an afternoon of rolling consolation for those more active on 
court. Lucie Hradecka and Radek Stepanek gave their Czech team-mates something 
to cheer about when they beat the fourth seeds from India, Sania Mirza and 
Rohan Bopanna 6-1, 7-5 in an hour and 11 minutes on Court One for the mixed 
doubles bronze. It was the sort of event family and friends would enjoy 
barbecue around at the neighbours.

There are worse ways to spend a Sunday afternoon, perhaps.
 