
Although any assessment of this match must acknowledge a wretched performance 
fromStan Wawrinka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka>, the 
manner of his sorry collapse should take nothing away from Kei Nishikori, whose 
sparkling tennis suggested that he is in the mood to go far in this tournament.

Nishikori delivered an emphatic message with his subtle game, dominating a 
surprisingly one-sided affair by thumping the US Open champion 6-2, 6-3 in 67 
minutes, earning the admiration of the crowd at the O2 Arena with an array of 
searing forehands. It was a fine way for the world No5 to begin his campaign – 
a ruthless, artful win that will please his supporters – but an afternoon to 
forget for Wawrinka, who looked out of sorts from the start.

Novak Djokovic prepares for battle in bid to unseat world No1 Andy Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/14/novak-djokovic-world-no1-andy-murray-tennis>
Wawrinka’s form has been scratchy since he beat Novak Djokovic in the US Open 
final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/stan-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-us-open-final-2016>
 two months ago and the world No3 played like he had a hangover here, serving 
three double-faults and making 31 unforced errors. With matches against Andy 
Murray and Marin Cilic to come, the Swiss will need to raise his level 
significantly to qualify from the tougher of the two groups.

He has struggled with a knee injury, though, and said that he is not happy 
with his physical level as another draining season draws to a close. “I was a 
little bit slow on everything,” Wawrinka admitted. “I was hesitating a lot with 
my game, my movement. I felt better the last two days on the court. I thought I 
could have played better, but I didn’t find any solution to play a better 
tennis today.

“I’m sure I still have something inside me to play some great tennis before 
the end of the year, so I’m going to try everything for that in the next match.”

Wawrinka was poor but Nishikori still had to pull off some outstanding shots 
to record such a convincing victory over a player of his talent. Sensing his 
opponent’s discomfort, Nishikori pushed hard from the first game and was in a 
bright mood throughout, hitting 19 winners and converting four of his seven 
break points. His occasionally vulnerable serve was solid and he did not face a 
single break point, although it is worth pointing out the contribution some 
wayward returns from Wawrinka made to that statistic. Impressing with his 
variety and movement, Nishikori broke in the fifth game of the first set, 
softening up Wawrinka with a vicious forehand and advancing to ram a winner 
into the open court.

Nishikori has hopes of overtaking Wawrinka and finishing the year as the world 
No3 this week. “It would be nice,” he said. “I see a good chance to be there if 
I can play good this week. Also next year I hope I can stay No4 or No3 to try 
to catch up Andy and Djoko.”

Incapable of mustering any resistance, the life drained out of Wawrinka, who 
handed Nishikori another break with a double-fault. An argument could be made 
that Nishikori was fortunate to catch Wawrinka on an off day.

Few players are capable of living with the Swiss when he is at his explosive 
best, even Djokovic, who has lost to him in two grand slam finals, including in 
New York in September. Rafael Nadal, Roger Federer and Murray have also fallen 
to the 31-year-old in the slams – he is the winner of three majors and it would 
be foolish to write off his chances of reaching the last four here.

Equally, however, there are times when he is too unpredictable for his own 
good and this was one of those matches when everything went wrong. His lethal 
one-handed backhand turned on him – one framed return in the second set flew 
towards the roof and almost hit the lights before dropping into the sympathetic 
but disappointed crowd – and his forehands tended to drift long, wide or into 
the net.

All the same, Nishikori played some inspired stuff. Serving for the first set, 
he adjusted magnificently when Wawrinka attempted to catch him off guard with a 
clever lob, responding with a superb overhead backhand that offered a stunning 
exhibition of his agility and reflexes.

Nishikori lost to Wawrinka at Flushing Meadows in the semi-finals, but there 
was never any prospect of him losing their seventh meeting and he grabbed the 
crucial break in the fifth game of the second set, a stretching forehand return 
sailing over Wawrinka’s head and landing inside the line. The fight was over 
when Wawrinka sent a sad backhand over the line.
 