
Thanasi Kokkinakis has capped his comeback tournament by claiming the Brisbane 
International doubles title with Jordan Thompson.

The Australian wildcard duo eased past American Sam Querrey and Luxembourg’s 
Gilles Muller in Sunday night’s final on Pat Rafter Arena, winning 7-6 (9-7), 
6-4.

Shoulder problem ends Ashleigh Barty's Hobart International hopes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/shoulder-problem-ends-ashleigh-bartys-hobart-international-hopes>
It was the first ATP final of any kind for either player and, for Kokkinakis – 
still not at 100% fitness – it marked his return to competitive action after 15 
months off following shoulder surgery.

Kokkinakis and Thompson were not even supposed to be playing together in 
Brisbane until injuries to other players led to them joining forces, becoming 
the first Australian pairing to win the tournament’s men’s doubles crown.

“Our first week together, we weren’t going to play together, but were put 
together last minute. I’m not regretting one bit of it,” said Kokkinakis, who 
will face Thompson in the first round of the Sydney International.

They led 5-2 at one stage in first set and, although they were stretched to a 
tiebreaker, they never looked out of control, serving eight aces to one.

Later on Sunday, world No17 Grigor Dimitrov claimed the singles title after 
outlasting Kei Nishikori in a tense final.

The pair was evenly matched over the first two sets but crucial errors from 
Nishikori in the third opened the door for a 6-2, 2-6, 6-3 victory for 
Bulgarian Dimitrov at Pat Rafter Arena.


In Tasmania, Queensland teenager Lizette Cabrera caused a major upset on day 
one of the Hobart International, disposing of world No40 and fifth seed Misaki 
Doi.


The world No216 from Townsville beat her Japanese challenger 6-4, 5-7, 7-5 to 
progress to the second round.

Handed a wildcard to the main draw in Hobart after failing to qualify for the 
Brisbane International, Cabrera, 19, was making her WTA tour debut.

She now faces the winner of the match between 2010 French Open title holder 
Francesca Schiavone and Croatian qualifier Jana Fett.

In other day-one action, American Shelby Rogers notched up a surprise 6-2, 
1-6, 6-4 win over world No34 Anastasija Sevastova from Latvia. The 59th-ranked 
Rogers dismissed last year’s US Open quarter-finalist who was the Hobart second 
seed.

Former world No1 Jelena Jankovic was another first-round loser on Sunday after 
Romania’s Monica Niculescu easily accounted for the Serb 6-2, 6-3. Jankovic now 
heads to Melbourne Park with limited match practice after a lacklustre 2016 
plagued by a shoulder injury.
 