
During seven years in Nirvana, Krist Novoselic witnessed all manner of 
unscheduled onstage chaos, often featuring the abuse of musical instruments. 
His forehead is scarred from the moment he hurled his bass into the air at the 
1992 MTV awards and failed to catch it. But neither he nor anyone else at the 
opening of a museum exhibition dedicated toNirvana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/nirvana> is prepared for the impromptu 
intervention of one of his former bandmates.

Christina Orr-Cahall, CEO of Seattle's Experience Music Project, has just got 
to the part of her speech where she thanks the museum's corporate benefactors 
when a figure appears onstage, yells "Corporations still suck!", then slips 
back into the audience. Novoselic recognises the interloper as Aaron Burckhard: 
the man who played drums for Nirvana before the band even had a name.

If Burckhard's protest goes unheeded, it's possibly because the event feels 
surreal enough already. The Frank Gehry-designed EMP – funded by Microsoft 
co-founder Paul Allen – is a futuristic temple to the power of technology. The 
VIP opening of Nirvana: Taking Punk to the Masses is held in the museum's "Sky 
Church", a vast hall with a 70ft ceiling, the guest speakers dwarfed by the 
world's largest indoor video screen. There's a pointed contrast between the 
hi-tech setting and the exhibition's vivid exposition of Nirvana's 
unprepossessing origins in Aberdeen, a poor logging town in rural Washington.

Certainly, as the former director of Norton Art Museum in Florida, Christina 
Orr-Cahall's grunge credentials are slim. Her fellow speakers shape up better: 
local politician Dow Constantine claims he used to hang out at Seattle's 
hardcore punk club the Metropolis during the pre-grunge era, while EMP curator 
Jacob McMurray worked for 18 months assembling the exhibition. It's testimony 
to his sensitive approach that Novoselic and other key figures agreed to 
collaborate, lending a wealth of archive material – instruments, clothing, 
letters, audio tapes and other, more quixotic items, such as the pink Samsonite 
suitcase used as an ad hoc drum kit by the 15-year-old Kurt Cobain on his 
first-ever recording. The suitcase belonged to Cobain's mother Wendy, who is 
present in the audience at EMP with Kurt's sister, Kim.

Both are acknowledged by Novoselic in a speech that, like the exhibition 
itself, seeks to place the Nirvana phenomenon in its proper context: as a 
culmination of the US underground rock scene that took inspiration from punk in 
the late 70s and gradually developed into a network of local communities, each 
operating independently of the mainstream music apparatus, and each with its 
distinct cultural characteristics. Novoselic thanks the mother of Dale Crover, 
for letting her son's band the Melvins practise in her house on West Second 
Street in Aberdeen, rehearsal sessions at which the teenage Krist befriended a 
kid two years his junior named Kurt. As much as it possibly can be, the 
personality cult of Cobain is de-emphasised, though for obvious reasons there's 
poignancy in hearing Novoselic speak of his friend, as opposed to the tragic 
rock star.

"Here was a man who would never clean his kitchen or take out the garbage, or 
do those kind of chores. But Kurt Cobain was not a lazy person. We came to 
Seattle and we recorded a demo. Kurt Cobain earned the money for that: he was a 
janitor and he worked nights. Basically he cleaned toilets – that's how he paid 
for that demo. That's how hard he worked. He was a compelled artist, who 
excelled at every form he wanted to do. When I walk down the street, even 
tonight – people walked up to me and said: 'Nirvana changed my life.' And I 
think that's a testament to Kurt Cobain and the vision he was channelling. I 
owe him so much, I can't even start. So many people owe Kurt Cobain."

The audience listening to Novoselic includes Jack Endino, the man who recorded 
Nirvana's first proper demo tape and produced their debut album Bleach, plus 
Bruce Pavitt whose Sub Pop record label released that album, and Charles 
Peterson whose black and white photographs of bands like Soundgarden and 
Mudhoney, as well as Nirvana, helped codify the scene's visual aesthetic as 
well as proclaim the visceral power of the music simmering in this then 
unfashionable corner of America. All three individuals have contributed to the 
EMP exhibit, with Endino and Pavitt providing vivid recollections and analysis 
for the massive cache of oral history that visitors can access through 
headphones at a series of touchscreens; each contains six hours of material. 
Peterson's pictures, meanwhile, are enlarged over entire walls of the building, 
with the entrance foyer dominated by the image of a guitar-playing, 
crowd-surfing Cobain at Vancouver's Commodore Ballroom.

Given the man's iconoclastic sensibilities, it is certainly incongruous to see 
the shirt Cobain is wearing in that photograph displayed in a cabinet, along 
with various other items of his clothing, including a beige cardigan with the 
unintentionally risible caption: "One of Nirvana's appeals was that they wore 
everyday clothes and not rock star costumes. Cobain was a fan of cardigans and 
he wore this often."

Yet the elevation of such mundane items into museum pieces feels less mawkish 
now than it might once have done. Time has blunted the possible pain inherent 
in commemorating a band whose story ended in tragedy, but more significant is 
the wholehearted participation of Nirvana's surviving members: Chad Channing 
and Dave Grohl (who both contribute drum kits) and especially Novoselic. He 
narrates the exhibit's audio guide, and the majority of the candid and often 
very funny photographs come either from his personal archive or that of his 
ex-wife, Shelli Hyrkas. Even the display case wood originated with him: 
Novoselic lives on a farm in Deep Water, a remote corner of south-west 
Washington, and is the master – or chair – of the local Grange, an agrarian 
self-help group. When a 100-year-old elm tree fell on Grange land, it was by a 
happy coincidence at the time EMP's Jacob McMurray was initiating plans for the 
Nirvana exhibition.

"I convinced the members: let's mill this elm up and it'll be a fundraiser for 
the group," Novoselic tells me. "So we sold it to EMP for $3,000 and now we're 
buying windows for our Grange hall. I like the EMP approach: it's scholarly, 
these are museum people. I said to Jacob: Come on over, because I've got all 
this gear just laying around in a closet. Here are the photos – go through them 
and take what you want. Here's the Buck Owens American guitar [played by Pat 
Smear on MTV Unplugged] – take it. Here's a guitar I dropped on my head, 
famously. Take it! Here's a bass I played on Unplugged. Take it! Those are good 
instruments that I enjoyed playing, but guitars grow legs and they walk off. 
Never to be seen again. Someone swiped my guitar right off the stage at the 
1992 Reading festival. Who knows where that guitar is? Because I was in 
Nirvana, I can't take these guitars out of the house. So I figured if people 
would enjoy it, I might as well hand them to a museum, where it's put in 
context and it's educational."

The EMP exhibit offers no more vivid physical illustration of the jarring 
relationship between art and commerce than the Mosrite Gospel, one of Kurt 
Cobain's favourite guitars: taking care never to smash it, he wrote many of 
Nevermind's songs on the instrument and it was played at the legendary 17 April 
1991 gig at Seattle's OK Hotel, where Nirvana debuted Smells Like Teen Spirit 
to the public. Originally purchased in August 1990 by Cobain from a used guitar 
shop in San Francisco, it was sold at auction in 2006 for $131,450 and is now 
owned by a venture capitalist, who loaned it to EMP.

Although there is an undoubted frisson to such items, the contents of 
Novoselic's closet offer the best insight into a story that has been 
over-mythologised during the past 20 years. Beneath a glass cabinet containing 
the four-track reel-to-reel tape recorder on which Cobain recorded his early 
demos and his mother's Samsonite suitcase, we can read a letter, dated 16 April 
1986, written by the Melvins' Buzz Osborne to Novoselic, who had recently moved 
to Arizona. Osbourne talks excitedly of a tape that "Ko-bain" and Dale Crover 
have made at the home of Kurt's Aunt Mari. "Some of [Kurt's] songs are real 
killer! … I think he could have some kind of a future in music if he keeps at 
it."

For Novoselic, such bittersweet memories are a fact of his life. For years 
after Cobain's death in April 1994 he found himself stopping at pawn shops in 
downtown Seattle and looking for left-handed guitars to replace the latest 
casualty of Nirvana's auto-destructive concert finales. "I'm thinking: 'Hey 
Kurt, I found this guitar for you; it'll work, we'll restring it.' Then I'm 
like, Oh – I don't need to do that any more." Today he enjoys the privacy of 
life on the farm, though he's far from reclusive: aside from his Grangemaster 
duties, he's studying for a law degree at Lower Columbia Community College 
("I'm getting straight As") and is a passionate advocate of proportional 
representation as the chair of FairVote. He also finds time to combine his 
other two loves: aviation and music. A few weeks before the EMP opening, he 
flew his Cessna down the coast to California where he met up with Crover and 
Osborne for a jam.

"There are a lot of things I would do differently in life, but I just didn't 
have the skill or the awareness to do it," he says. "Just personally, I got 
caught off guard. The whole thing ended in a disaster. It didn't have to end 
like that. So if I'd just had more maturity and more life experience I would 
have done things differently. Other bands dealt with it. But it is what it is. 
I've been playing with Buzz and Dale for 30 years. That goes together pretty 
well." He laughs and fingers the link between politics and punk. "People 
naturally associate. I found Kurt Cobain and Buzz Osborne. And I had something 
in common with them, I had a need and values, and we just naturally came 
together. That's my sexy message to the kids: it's gonna take a lot of work and 
you need to be involved!"

For further information on Nirvana: Taking Punk to the Masses, visit 
bit.ly/empnirvana <http://bit.ly/empnirvana>
 