
Nick Kyrgios and Stan Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka> will play against each 
other for the first time since last year’s infamous sledging incident in 
Friday’s semi-final of the Dubai Tennis Championship. A red-hot Kyrgios stormed 
to his eighth successive win with an impressive 6-4 6-4 victory over world No.7 
Tomas Berdych on Thursday to book his spot in the last-four.

It follows his maiden ATP tournament success in Marseille on Sunday where he 
also beat the third-seeded Czech in the semi-finals. World No4 Wawrinka brushed 
aside Germany’s Philipp Kohlschreiber 7-5 6-1 to set up a meeting with Kyrgios.

Nick Kyrgios beats Marin Cilic in Marseille to win first ATP title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/21/nick-kyrgios-marin-cilic-marseille-atp>
The controversial Kyrgios incensed former Australian and French Open champion 
Wawrinka when he made comments about his girlfriend during a match in Canada 
last August. “What was said I wouldn’t say to my worst enemy. To stoop so low 
is not only unacceptable but also beyond belief,” Wawrinka Tweeted after the 
incident.

The pair were reportedly involved in a locker room bust-up before Kyrgios 
issued an apology and accepted a USD$10,000 ATP fine and a six-month suspended 
ban. The Australian celebrated the end of that suspended sentence on Sunday 
with victory over Marin Cilic in the Marseille decider and heads in to the 
clash with the Swiss in the best form of his young career.

Despite struggling with a back problem and food poisoning, he produced a 
superb display against Berdych, losing just four points on his serve in the 
second set and sending down 10 aces in a match that lasted just under 90 
minutes.

“I wasn’t in the greatest shape, obviously. I think I got a bit of food 
poisoning last night,” Kyrgios said. “I was really surprised with the 
performance I gave out there today, coming out and beating a quality player and 
in tough conditions. It’s probably my favourite win over the last couple of 
weeks.”

“It’s tough, especially with Tomas. He’s so diligent with everything he does, 
so professional. For me to come out there and put in a great performance like 
that... I just took my chances when they came. Conditions were really fast. 
When one of us got a pretty good strike, I think the point was pretty much 
over. I served well and competed well. I’m very, very happy.”
 