
The leading Labour moderate Tristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt> moved to reclaim the issue 
of inequality for his wing of the Labour party, calling for a property wealth 
tax, universal free childcare, reversal of cuts to inheritance tax and stronger 
trade unions, including repeal of the trade union bill within 100 days of a 
Labour government coming to power.

Hunt’s keynote speech stressed that a future Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government would need to take 
tough choices to tackle growing concentrations of wealth, adding: “Inequality 
impoverishes us all.”

His intervention appears to be part of a concerted effort by Labour moderates 
not to allow themselves to be portrayed as indifferent to inequality in the 
manner of Tony Blair in the mid-90s.

In a speech to the Fabian Society at Westminster, he reminded his audience 
that Labour moderates come from the tradition of RH Tawney, with the goal of 
arresting inequality being at the heart of their thinking, but he said the new 
challenge was not just to arrest wealth inequality but to reverse it.


Bullying, dissent and the need for Labour party unity | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/07/bullying-dissent-and-the-need-for-labour-party-unity>
Hunt was speaking alongside the leftwing Guardian columnist Owen Jones, who 
identified few points of difference with Hunt’s emphasis, apart from suggesting 
that Hunt may be soft on corporation taxes.

 Hunt has been embroiled in recent days in a row about Jeremy Corbyn’s 
decision to attend a fundraiser for the Stop the War Coalition, but his focus 
on Monday was to set out a political agenda that on the surface at least makes 
it more difficult for party moderates to be open to the charge of either being 
“red Tories” or bloodless technocrats.

Directing criticism at the former Labour leader, Ed Miliband, Hunt said: “If 
May’s defeat shows us nothing else it is that turning up on the British 
people’s doorstep armed only with moral outrage about the top and the bottom is 
not enough to win. Somewhere during Ed Miliband’s leadership we stopped 
challenging ourselves.

“Whilst politics was changing dramatically across Europe, we were seeking out 
the safe and stolid comfort zone of technocratic social democracy.

“For at least 20 years now we have failed to tell the British people a story 
which connects rising inequality to their hopes and aspirations – either 
because we were too timid, or because we were tone deaf.

“We cannot afford to fail again. Reducing inequality is in the national 
interest. It is a just fight. A moral mission. What we need now is to turn it 
into a winning argument.”

 He added: “Moral outrage about inequality – although important – is simply 
not enough. We need to demonstrate much more effectively how it blights 
ordinary lives and how it stops people getting on and enjoying a better life.“

 Making the case for a property wealth tax to replace the existing regressive 
council tax, Hunt pointed out that 14 OECD countries – including the US – raise 
a recurring tax on the value of residential property. An annual 0.5% tax upon 
the value of each property – less than most countries – would completely cover 
the cost of replacing the council tax, he said.

 The tax would be raised on owners not occupiers, taking “generation rent” 
completely out of local taxes altogether.

 He also argued that boosting collective bargaining rights for trade unions 
was also essential.

“The OECD points out that in the last decade labour’s share of national income 
fell by 4% in rich countries. Doesn’t sound like much until you work out it’s 
around £96bn. So, the next Labour government should certainly commit to 
repealing the trade union bill within its first 100 days.”

 Hunt, who has been criticised in the past for crossing a picket line at 
university, said the government “should work with trade unions on rebuilding 
them for the coming economy of self-employment, micro-businesses, declining 
social rights, and the unequal effects – sometimes liberating, sometimes 
exploitative – of flexibility. In short, a chance, once more, to be on the side 
of the insurgents and outliers, rather than a public-sector comfort zone.”

 Hunt repeated his call for what he describes as “upstream socialism” – the 
need to intervene early to attack inequalities at source for young people.

 He said: “We are tantalisingly close to a Scandinavian-quality, universal 
childcare offer. Only £2.5bn a year away – and that includes £450m to radically 
raise workforce quality.

“I called for this back in May and I will keep calling for it until it becomes 
official party policy. Because for true social investment, nothing else comes 
close.

 “It would boost maternal employment, reduce the cost of living, slash the 
welfare bill, generate growth, improve the quality of early education and child 
wellbeing, and radically reshape the structure of our labour market.”
 