
Tristram Hunt’s argument that Labour should respect not challenge white 
working-class xenophobia is nostalgic paternalism (“There’ll always be an 
England ... and Labour must learn to love it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/15/therell-always-be-an-england-tristram-hunt-labour-patriotism>
”, In Focus, last week). It is not crassly materialistic or “metropolitan 
squeamishness” to oppose the visceral racism underlying Brexit anti-immigration 
discourse.

Recent research from the London School of Economics proves that European 
workers have brought in tax income and economic growth far outweighing their 
costs, and that their presence has not led to significant job losses or wage 
cutting. They enhance rather than undermine public services such as the NHS and 
social care.

Culturally and socially we are enriched, not threatened, by their presence – 
as with previous waves of immigration. Hostility to this is not some organic 
expression of English identity but the outcome of decades of inflammatory media 
distortion and political opportunism, building an atmosphere of ignorance along 
with the dehumanisation of immigrants and refugees. 

Labour’s role is not to pander to this scapegoating but to provide the real 
facts about migration, such as that millions of Britons work, study or are 
retired in Europe.

Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> should not promote 
narrow, backward-looking English nationalism but the working-class tradition of 
solidarity and the socialist value of internationalism. 
Gideon Ben-Tovim
Senior fellow in sociology
University of Liverpool 

If one of Tristram Hunt’s students based a whole thesis on one quote, out of 
context, it would certainly be failed. Labour lost in Harlow in 2015, as in the 
country generally, for many reasons, but primarily because it had still not 
adequately refuted the lie that the 2008 global financial crash was caused by 
Gordon Brown’s profligacy, while its “austerity light” programme did not 
inspire voters that the party had a viable alternative.

In the recent local election in Harlow, Labour held all its seven seats, 
retaining its overall council majority of five. It pushed Ukip into third place 
overall, and had Ukip’s two sitting councillors been up for re-election this 
year, Labour would have regained their seats. So much for Labour alienating its 
traditional working-class voters!

As a party member since before even Jeremy Corbyn was born, I have this 
message for all the plotters and the naysayers: every negative statement you 
make about not winning in 2020 helps to make it a self-fulfilling prophecy. 
Stop it! Have constructive debates about policies, of course, but be positive, 
united and comradely in the process.

Incidentally, what Emily Thornberry should have done was to knock on the door 
of the St George’s flag house and have a chat with the occupier. It could have 
been enlightening for both parties.
Frank Jackson
Harlow Labour Party

Labour has lost its traditional working-class voters because of a loss of 
trust brought about by the experience of Labour governments being tied to 
pro-business policies in office, and forgetting practical ideas to satisfy 
working-class aspirations, such as the repeal of anti trade union legislation, 
building council houses and providing support for manufacturing.
Ian Hughes
Bridgend
 