
It was heartening to hear Ed Miliband say in his speech that tackling climate 
change is a passion of his and that solving it could be a massive 
job-generating opportunity (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/23/ed-miliband-pledge-nhs-election-labour-conference>
, 24 September). The inevitable question of how to pay for this can be tackled 
by writing to Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England. He is on record 
as saying that if the government requested it, then the next round of QE could 
be used to buy assets other than government debt. Miliband said that theGreen 
Investment Bank <http://www.greeninvestmentbank.com/>would be used to fund 
green economic activity and so Labour should allow it to issue bonds that could 
then be bought by the Bank using “Green QE”. Similarly, local authorities could 
issue bonds to build new energy-efficient public homes funded by “Housing QE”.

The Bank has already pumped £375bn of QE into the economy, but with little 
tangible benefit to the majority. Imagine the galvanising effect on the real 
economy of every city and town if a £50bn programme of infrastructural QE 
became the next government’s priority. This could make every building in the UK 
energy-tight and build enough highly insulated new homes to tackle the housing 
crisis. It would provide a secure career structure for those involved for the 
next 10 years and beyond, massive numbers of adequately paid apprenticeships 
and jobs for the self employed, a market for local small businesses, and 
reduced energy bills for all. Such a nationwide programme would generate tax 
revenue to help tackle the deficit, but in an economically and socially 
constructive way. Best of all it would not be categorised as increased public 
funding, since QE spending has not and would not be counted as government 
expenditure.
Colin Hines
Convener, Green New Deal Group <http://www.greennewdealgroup.org/>

• Ian Martin (I can’t remember a more spineless opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/23/ian-martin-labour-conference-thick-of-it>
, 24 September) sums up the feeling of millions of working-class people. 
Millions are desperate to get rid of the current government, yet at the same 
time depressed because they don’t believe a Labour government would mark a real 
change. As Ian says: “Labour’s message to the electorate is clear – austerity 
is the new reality.”

To get rid of the Tories many, like Ian is clearly considering doing, will 
vote Labour in the general election next year. Others will abstain from the 
elections in disgust, or even vote for the rightwing stockbrokers of Ukip to 
express their anger. One clear result from Scotland is proof that it is not 
“apathy”, but disillusionment with the diet of pro-big-business, pro-austerity 
parties on offer, that is responsible for falling election turnouts. But trade 
unionists and socialists cannot continue to accept a choice between parties 
whose policies are so similar you can barely get a fag-paper between them. That 
only leaves the road open to Ukip and its ilk. That is why the Trade Unionist 
and Socialist Coalition (TUSC – to which Ian refers) was co-founded by the late 
Bob Crow to begin to build an electoral voice for working-class people.  In May 
2014, TUSC fielded 560 local election candidates in nearly 90 towns and cities, 
in the widest socialist challenge to Labour for 60 years. In May 2015 – for 
both the general and the local elections – we are going to up our game, aiming 
to stand even more widely, to ensure austerity is not unchallenged at the 
ballot box.
Dave Nellist
Chair, TUSC <http://www.tusc.org.uk/> 

• Ian Martin highlights the dramatic change that followed the coalition 
legislating the five-year parliament. By removing the opportunity to force a 
general election at any time following a government defeat, for example when 
the government lost the vote on alterations to the “bedroom tax”, this 
government has removed the incentive for persuasive, adversarial discussion in 
the house as the government can rely on the “five-year rule” to override the 
opposition. There is no longer the tense, adversarial atmosphere that used to 
exist and so we get the impression that the opposition is “spineless”.
David Hurry
Hurstpierpoint, West Sussex

• Ian Martin’s “spineless opposition” has a good deal more to offer to my 
constituents in a hard-pressed ward in Newcastle’s West End than he allows. 
From the scrapping of the bedroom tax to rescuing the NHS, new social and 
council house building to dealing with the problems of the private rented 
sector, better training and job creation, and above all fairer funding for 
local council services slashed by the Tory/Lib Dem government, a Labour 
government will make a huge difference. The author of The Thick of It may not 
recognise it; the people who live in the thick of it will ifLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> wins next May.
Jeremy Beecham
Labour, House of Lords

• Smoking costs the NHS between £2.7bn and £5.2bn a year, and Mr Miliband 
wants to add a windfall tax to the £9.5bn annual excise revenue to help fund 
the NHS. Obesity cost the NHS £16bn in 2007, but I hear no calls from him to 
tax the supermarkets that sell us the processed food that makes us fat, or 
calls for taxes (or at least reduced subsidies) on the sugar that goes into 
them. The link between sugar and obesity is now as clear as the link between 
tobacco and cancer. The time to act on obesity is now, and taxing those who 
cause us harm would be a popular and sensible policy.
Richard Cooper
Chichester, West Sussex

• Owen Jones (Memo to Miliband: Britain’s social order is bankrupt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/21/miliband-memo-britain-social-order-bankrupt>
, 22 September) rightly points out that, since the start of the recession, the 
richest 1,000 people in the country have doubled their wealth to £519bn, as 
much as the annual earnings of two-thirds of the British workforce, but it is 
even worse than that. We now have more billionaires per capita than any other 
country and London has more billionaires than any other world city. We have 
more million-earning bankers than the rest of Europe combined. FTSE 100 chief 
executives are being paid an average of £4.7m a year, almost £13,000 a day, and 
get 170 times as much as the average worker. And the richest five families in 
the country have as much wealth as the poorest 20% of the population.

Yet, since the start of the recession, average incomes have fallen by 10% 
after inflation is taken into account, the number of adults in poverty has 
risen to 8.7 million and the number of children in poverty has risen to 4.1 
million. A third of households are living below the breadline and a million 
people are forced to use food banks every year. And, according to the OECD, our 
poorest fifth of households are among the most economically deprived in western 
Europe and have levels of deprivation which are more on a par with a number of 
eastern European countries. These attacks on working people and those unable to 
work must be resisted, and a mass turnout for the“Britain needs a pay rise” 
demonstration 
<http://www.tuc.org.uk/events/britain-needs-pay-rise-march-and-rally>, which 
the TUC is organising in London on 18 October, is now more important than ever.
Richard Lynch
London

• I’m a retired Tory party activist but also a long-time reader of the 
Guardian, a paper that strives for accuracy and intelligently challenges my 
prejudices. So I’ve little time for Ed Miliband, but John Crace’s offensive and 
ill-directed mockery of his alleged pronunciation (Sketch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/23/ed-miliband-labour-party-conference-speech-sketch>
, 24 September) leaves an unpleasant taste in the mouth. Miliband speaks an 
ordinary and clearly pronounced educated English. Crace’s diatribe appears 
facing a headline “Playground insults from the right”. How apt.
Eugene Byrne
London
 