
In case you live in a cave and missed the story, last weekend Prince Harry was 
spotted getting wet and wild with dozens of bosom buddies at the 
alcohol-fuelled pool parties in Las Vegas. Over the past few days it's been 
hard to ignore all the pap shots of him getting on down at the Wynn Hotel's XS 
nightclub, challenging American Olympic champion swimmer Ryan Lochte to a race 
in his jeans, and wearing a "let's get wild" vest belonging to someone called 
Lauren's bachelorette party.

Well, if it's good enough for British royalty, it's good enough for me, and in 
fact I was one step ahead of the party prince, having visited the city's pool 
party scene earlier this summer.

The Vegas pool party concept launched in 2004 with the original day club, 
Rehab at the Hard Rock Hotel, and is now the focal point of wild weekends for 
America's youth, in much the same way as young Brits descend upon Magaluf or 
Mykonos. The craze has taken off in recent years, with all the major hotels 
along the strip now boasting party pools.

I had a few concerns. It wasn't just the possibility of booze-sozzled 
drowning, and getting wrinkly fingers. "Where do these party people go when 
they need a wee?" my mother had asked. A valid point, but not one that lingered 
in my mind as I reclined in the 40C heat on my sunbed at Encore (another club 
where Harry partied), mojito in hand, nodding my head to the skittering 
electronic beats cascading from the two-metre high speaker stacks across a 
scene that brought to mind the saying "only in America".

Cocktail waitresses with six-inch stilettos, pearly white smiles and tiny 
bikinis walked by, carrying trays laden with pitchers of frozen margarita. A 
six-foot, six-packed beefcake bellowed into my face that his wife would like to 
take a picture with me. Well, fine, you don't have to shout. Sun-kissed girls 
gyrated to the music, arms raised, saluting the blue skies. Resident DJ Morgan 
Page scrutinised his Mac Notebook and blended one heavily remixed chart hit 
into another. My natural instinct was to find a quiet spot away from the din to 
tune in to Test Match Special on long wave. But this was Vegas. They've never 
even heard of cricket. It was time to put the Englishness on hold. Before I 
knew it, somebody had tossed me a rubber ring, handed me a rubber duck filled 
with Bacardi and pinched my bottom. Then I was floating away into a writhing 
mass of oiled bodies.

Las Vegas weekends usually revolve around nighttime forays into a hedonistic 
world. Casinos don't have windows or clocks on the walls, so weary punters 
don't know it's time to hit the hay, and just keep on pumping money into the 
slot machines. Lately, however, they've discovered a new way of partying, and 
one that doesn't lead to vitamin D deficiency – it's called day clubbing.

My pool odyssey began at the Marquee day club at the Cosmopolitan hotel, on a 
terrace packed with sunbeds, Jacuzzis, liposuctioned bodies and a moderately 
sized pool, overlooked by palm trees and glitzy 60-storey hotels, iridescent in 
the sun. After walking there through the hot desert winds, from my suite at the 
stylish Vdara hotel (with views of the Strip and the hills of the Mojave 
desert), I was glad to jump straight into the pool. At its edge, as well as 
$500-a-day sunloungers, Grand Cabanas are available for $3,500-$5,000 a day. 
These soft-seated chillout zones seat up to 15 people; they are open sided, 
with sun shades, flatscreen TVs, minibars loaded with beer, water and soft 
drinks, and private infinity pools. A pitcher of margarita or mojito costs $48, 
a beer or bottle of water $8.

Kaskade, in the DJ booth, banged out standard Vegas fare – US chart meets 
Balearic-style beats and soaring synths – but the music was really just a 
background soundtrack to the people-watching. And unlike in, say, Paris or St 
Tropez, at Vegas pool parties people look around to check whether other people 
are looking back at them. And it was the men, rather than the women, who were 
the real attention- seekers. The dress code for the guys is long Bermuda shorts 
and taut, rippled torsos. For women it's micro bikinis, wedges and tattoos. 
Shades obligatory.
 Union jack the lad … Joshua makes friends at the poolside 
I asked the manager whether he sees wild stuff happening here. "Oh yeah, we 
positively encourage it." Drugs? I ask. "Oh, no, drugs aren't allowed." Sex? 
"No sex either." I wonder if he's just being on message … I'm pretty sure that 
boy and girl over by the palm trees aren't just shaking hands …

In contrast to Marquee's laidback but expensive vibes, the mayhem at Encore 
Beach Club was mind-blowing. With 1,000 people in attendance on any given 
Sunday (swelling to its 3,000-capacity on a big holiday weekend) this sprawling 
mass was something to behold. In the booth next to us, six scantily clad 
40-something all-American gals told me they visited every year to have some 
time away from their husbands and show off their tummy tucks, boob jobs and 
belly-button piercings.

Around us, a huge crowd fell about, drinks in hand, posing, flirting, laughing 
and grinding like extras on a Yo! MTV Raps video shoot. Around the DJ booth, 
stick-on tattoos of the DJ, Morgan Page, were in evidence. Kids were going 
wild. Even the lifeguards were bopping their heads.

Where does Page rank among the international DJs that come to Vegas, I asked 
Shaun, a seasoned dayclubber from Ohio. He fired off a list of big names: 
Tiësto, Deadmau5, SkyBlu from LMFAO, Benny Benassi – they all play here on the 
big weekends, and clubbers need to book ahead for these. Memorial Day at the 
end of May is the biggest weekend, but Labor Day in September and Spring Break 
are traditionally frantic.

On a normal day, Encore entry costs $50 for men and $40 for women, but those 
doing it in style will get a big group together and hire an upper-tier 
bungalow, for $15,000 to $30,000 a day. This includes a private pool party and 
a vista from on high of an ocean of writhing bodies.

Sundays are the big day for pool parties, and Wet Republic at the MGM Grand – 
where Prince Harry was spotted – is one of the biggest. When I arrived, the 
army of bouncers at the door appeared to be in the midst of an almighty power 
trip. One was complaining that all the "hoes" in the "line-up" (queue) were 
"pissing him off". His colleague suggested he take a break. He should try 
working a Friday night at Oceana in Watford.

While door policies are no more restrictive than at nightclubs back home, and 
you're unlikely to be turned away, Mark Kmetz, a promoter at Liquid day club at 
the Aria hotel, told me the best bet for a guaranteed good weekend is to ring 
your hotel before arriving and book a senior host or promoter for your stay, to 
guarantee smooth entry to all the clubs and reserved sun loungers. Vegas is 
many things, but it is not restrictive: if you go there to party you'll be 
welcomed.

Inside, there were plenty of washboard stomachs on display, and flab too. 
However, the cabanas overlooking the pool and main stage were populated with 
what can only be described as supermodels and sports stars. A contestant from 
US TV show The Bachelor was partying hard in the pool, surrounded by a harem of 
girls.

What to do amid such a scene? Float in the pool, dance to DJ Bad Boy Bill's 
set of hip-hop classics, have a water-pistol fight? Or simply hire a daybed 
(which accommodates three to four people), sip my Corona and take it all in. I 
wouldn't be seeing this back in Southend-on-Sea.

• Visit Las Vegas (visitlasvegas.co.uk) <http://www.visitlasvegas.co.uk> 
provided the trip. British Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>), which provided 
the flights, flies from Heathrow to Las Vegas from £597 return. A new flight 
from Gatwick starts on 29 October, costing from £569 return. Doubles at the 
Vdara hotel (vdara.com <http://www.vdara.com>) cost from $140. A day pass for 
theEncore Beach Club <http://www.encorebeachclub.com/flash/>, bought in 
advance, costs from $20 for women, $30 for men;Marquee at Cosmopolitan 
<http://www.marqueelasvegas.com/>, from $20/$30; Wet Republic 
<http://wetrepublic.com/> at the MGM Grand, from $30/$50
 