
Probably not since he was a junior has Andy Murray been drafted into a 
tennis match as late as he was for the mixed doubles here on Thursday, when he 
andHeather Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson> beat David 
Ferrer and Carla Suarez Navarro, 6-3, 6-3,
long after many of the casual fans had drifted into the night.

Only an hour or so after Murray had warmed down from his tough three-setter 
against Fabio Fognini to earn a place in Friday’s singles quarter-finals, he 
and Watson were told the Romanians Monica Niculescu and Florin Mergea had 
withdrawn. Mergea wants to save his energy for the men’s doubles final, after 
he and Horia Tecau had beaten the Americans Jack Sock and Steven Johnson 
(Murray’s opponent in Friday’s singles quarter-finals).

Those computations are a fair reflection of the hectic nature of Olympic 
tennis. The mixed doubles is really tacked on to the other disciplines, 
when teams and the draw are finalised after any residual mayhem in the 
singles has been taken into account.

There was further late chaos when Rafael Nadal, through to the next rounds 
in singles and men’s doubles, also pulled out of the mixed. His exit – 
after the exertions of winning in singles and men’s doubles earlier in the day 
– left Garbine Muguruza without a partner and handed a walkover to the Czechs 
Radek Stepanek and Lucie Hradecka, as there were no alternates left. It is far 
from ideal to have an Olympic event disrupted in such a haphazard way.

Murray could not have imagined he and Watson would be hurled into the draw so 
late, given they were two off the cut. But the withdrawal of the Serbians on 
Wednesday and the Romanians on Thursday changed all that. No sooner had Murray 
fulfilled his media obligations after beating Fognini, he
was advised to get warmed up again.

As for the match, the day-time wind on the expansive acreage of Centre 
Court had subsided, but not the intensity. On a mild night under clear 
skies, the British pair – who would have teamed up in London, had Murray 
not chosen to play with Laura Robson (going on to take silver) – clicked 
immediately. 

They kept their momentum going to win 6-3, 6-3, and will be back on court on 
Friday to face India. Meanwhile out on Court 4, Murray’s brother, Jamie, and Jo 
Konta – who’d not long endured the disappointment of losing to Angelique Kerber 
in the women’s singles final – struggled against Jack Sock and Bethanie 
Mattek-Sands. The Americans won 6-4, 6-3.
 