
The only thing worse than sore losers are sore winners. They have the victory, 
the field is theirs, but still they scream bitter abuse at the defeated.

The millions who know that Brexit will shrink their world have every right to 
be angry. The young who voted to remain because they wanted to learn, work and 
love where they choose, without facing restrictions on which university they 
could study at and which husband or wife they could bring home, have every 
right to be furious too. As for EU immigrants in Britain and British immigrants 
in the EU, it is fair to imagine them directing an emotion more intense than 
anger at the 17 million people who took the cold-blooded decision to risk their 
future happiness.

Yet, instead of seeing the losers’ anger, we are witnessing a novel and 
graceless phenomenon: victors’ rage. Supporters of Brexit shout about “enemies 
of the people” and denounce “Remoaners” with all the venom of men and women who 
have lost rather than won the biggest political struggle of their lives. They 
demand their opponents pass loyalty tests, as if we were living in a 
dictatorship. They do not allow you to say the referendum result betrayed our 
country’s best interests. They instruct you to play the hypocrite and pretend 
to believe what you know to be untrue. Be warned. Refuse to go along with the 
political correctness of the right and you will feel “the people’s” wrath.

On its own, the Leave campaigners’ victory makes the rage on the right appear 
baffling. But the mystery does not end there. There is a faint but real 
possibility that a Greek or Italian eurozone crisis, or a second wave of 
refugees, will vindicate their desire to quit the union. Meanwhile, although the
pound has fallen and real wages are shrinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/brexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch>
, Remainers must admit events have disproved their apocalyptic forecasts of 
recessions and house-price crashes – for the time being at least.

Why in these circumstances are Leavers angry? What the hell do they have to be 
angry about? A part of the answer is that raging is all the poor dears can do. 
Across the west, the populist right is as much a countercultural movement as a 
political movement. Its supporters are closer to satirists than thinkers and 
doers with practical plans to change society. The right feasts on undoubted 
hypocrisies and evils in the liberal mainstream. It picks them apart and 
examines their ghoulish contradictions. Like its counterparts on the left, it 
then rapidly loses itself in the magic world of conspiracy theory. If you 
genuinely believe a sinister force has organised 97% of climate scientists to
lie about global warming 
<http://www.breitbart.com/london/2016/03/28/climate-change-the-biggest-conspiracy-against-the-taxpayer-in-history/>
, or Brussels has bribed economists across the world tolie about the danger of 
Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/25/vote-leave-attacks-ifs-thinktank-brexit-austerity-paid-up-propaganda-arm>
, you are not just assuming mass mendacity at an astonishing level. You are 
also assuming “the establishment” is capable of the astonishing level of 
organisation required to persuade tens of thousands to lie.

Paradoxically, Leavers are the establishment’s greatest admirers. Unlike those 
of us who have seen Britain’s shambling state at work, they believe it is 
capable of anything. Naturally, they suspect “the establishment” is conspiring 
to overturn the referendum result. This is why their pious exclamations about 
respecting the will of “the people” never extend to granting “the people” the 
privilege of changing its mind. No matter how bad the condition of Britain 
becomes, they allowed us the one vote and that was that.

It is as if Nigel Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, 
Boris Johnson and Michael Gove persuaded the British to abandon a familiar 
route ahead and try their short cut to national greatness. The landscape 
becomes menacing. The supposedly open road turns out to be tight and tortuous. 
But as soon as the passengers begin to mutter about going back, the furious 
demagogues of the right bellow that not only can they not turn the car round, 
they cannot even stop for a vote on whether they should turn the car round. To 
ask for a sensible reappraisal is to fall into the trap of an establishment 
that is plotting to deceive us.

Even if they will not allow us second thoughts, Britain’s Weimar culture of 
stab-in-the-back theories will poison the wells for years hence. Treason and 
fear of the accusation of treason fill the mental universe of the right.

You should not forget that the referendum campaign had two Leave campaigns, 
which hated each other as much as they hated their opponents. The official Vote 
Leave campaign wanted nothing to do with Nigel Farage and Arron Banks, who they 
regarded as racists.Farage dismissed the Tories at Vote Leave as cretins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/20/nigel-farage-ukip-eu-referendum-interview-vote-leave-brief-every-day>
.

To outsiders, their hatreds looked like distinctions without differences. 
AlthoughDaniel Hannan <https://twitter.com/DanielJHannan/media> and other 
supposedly respectable Conservatives pretend they did not win by palming the 
race card from the bottom of the deck, it is a matter of record that Vote Leave 
began by promising a “positive” and “internationalist” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/18/eu-referendum-vote-leave-campaign-poisonous>
 vision and finished by aping Ukip and warning that 76 million Turkswere about 
to land at Dover 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/eu-referendum-boris-johnson-michael-gove-turkey-migration-deliberately-lying-to-voters-yvette-cooper-a7072661.html>
.

Those inside the toxic world of the right took notice of the frenzied 
accusations, however, and learned how easily treason charges can be directed 
inwards. It is said that Stalin killed his Bolshevik comrades because, after 
learning how to organise one revolution against the tsar, he feared they could 
organise another against him. Modern populists aren’t so different from old 
communists. They know there are two scenarios for Brexit. The first is a 
compromise to avoid the economy tumbling over a cliff. We already know Ukip and 
the Tory right will denounce as a sellout any transitional arrangement that 
involves Britain still obeying the European Court of Justice, still paying 
money to the EU and still accepting freedom of movement.

But, and this is as likely, suppose we go over the cliff. What will the right 
say to all those who lose their jobs and businesses? You can already guess it 
will blame the Germans and the French. We could have had a good deal, it will 
maintain as it pretends the world owes us a living, but wicked foreigners 
connived against us. The xenophobic fury will be cranked up so loud it will 
drown out an obvious question, which must haunt the Leavers even now: does not 
responsibility for a disaster lie with the men and women who have led us to 
disaster?

Why are the Leave campaigners so angry? Because they fear the demagogic rage 
and charlatan tricks they have used against others will one day be used against 
them.
 