
Given the current anti-expert feeling, I’m reluctant to criticise a movement 
that would make better social use of data, but Evgeny Morozov’s call for data 
populism (“Data populists must seize our information for the benefit of us all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/04/data-populists-must-seize-information-for-benefit-of-all-evgeny-morozov>
”, In Focus, last week) fails on a number of points. He writes of data and 
artificial intelligence as if they were the same thing: they are not.

More worryingly, he seems to have taken the “data is the new oil” mantra a 
little too literally. Unlike oil, data doesn’t exist independent of action. It 
isn’t sitting in the ground waiting to be discovered. It only exists because 
people take action, and others – often companies – take time and effort (and 
use money) to collect and analyse it. Similarly, data doesn’t become valuable 
simply by putting it in a database. Without extensive cleaning, linking and 
analysis, you’re just paying a large amount of money for storage. And AI 
doesn’t simply turn data into profit – it takes significant effort (and money) 
to make AI useful.

It seems Morozov is simply calling for the nationalisation of data without 
consideration for what that might actually mean: a lost cause, even if it were 
possible to pin data down to a nation. But there are positive options for 
making data serve people, not just profits – through the application of data 
and AI to the public and third sectors. And that is both practical and 
achievable today.
Duncan Ross
Trustee, DataKind
London EC1

Trust teachers, not pollsters

The mood in our school staffroom was buoyant at the revelation that teachers 
scored 88% in the veracity index (“Britain’s trust deficit is getting worse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/03/poll-uk-trust-deficit-getting-worse-politicians-teachers-nurses>
” News, last week). However, we had to raise a collective eyebrow at the 
finding that pollsters scored as high as 49%.
Steve Newman
Sunderland


A better Murray legacy

Dunblane Community Council opposed Judy Murray’s Park of Keir proposal (“
Murray says it’s now or never for tennis academy to build on sons’ legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/andy-murray-judy-dunblane-tennis-coaching-facility>
”, Comment, 27 November) after considering the plans in detail. It is 
completely against the recently approved local development plan. There is 
widespread local opposition, especially to the housing and the site.

The developer insists that the housing must be part of the proposal. They and 
Murray know this is the issue for the community. A public inquiry highlighted 
that the housing only provides about £2m net towards the tennis centre. Murray 
is now suggesting she can “drum up” funding from benefactors. So why not drum 
up all the required finance, instead of building controversial houses on 
greenbelt land? The proposal is being imposed on the community. It is in the 
wrong place, too big for local needs and likely to run at a loss.

The alternative could be a “Murray legacy” of community based tennis 
facilities benefiting all of Scotland. The same funding could build several 
smaller indoor tennis courts across the country and would offer a much more 
sustainable and fitting legacy to the Murray brothers’ success than one big 
tennis centre, built in the teeth of local opposition on a windy, wet, hillside 
just three miles from the National Tennis Centre.
David Prescott, Rosemary Hunter
Dunblane Community Council


Justice for media libel victims

Nick Cohen (“How our laws inspired Trump’s attack on free speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/03/our-laws-inspired-donald-trump-attack-free-speech>
”, last week) criticises Sir Brian Leveson for not “cutting the costs of libel 
and privacy actions and opening the courts to all”. Yet this is precisely what 
Leveson has proposed. His report starts from the premise that anyone with a 
genuine case should be able to sue, but recognises that hardly anyone can 
afford to risk hundreds of thousands of pounds in the high court.

Leveson’s solution is inexpensive arbitration. But if a major newspaper or 
wealthy individual refuses and insists on going to court, it should pay the 
costs of both sides. That is only fair. If you and I are travelling and you 
insist on hiring a Rolls Royce when I can only afford the bus, it’s only right 
that you should pay.

My family charity does indeed fund IPRT, recognised as charitable by the upper 
tribunal. IPRT funds Impress, a Leveson-compliant press regulator. Impress 
offers inexpensive arbitration.

The only logical explanation for newspapers refusing to join Impress, or make 
their own Independent Press Standards Organisation regulator Leveson-compliant, 
is they don’t want ordinary members of the public to be able to sue them. 
Understandable, perhaps, but then they should say so and not pretend Leveson’s 
proposals amount to state control of the press.
Max Mosley
London SW3


Suez and the Observer

David Mitchell’s piece in your 225th anniversary supplement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2016/dec/04/observer-at-225-writing-david-mitchell>
 encapsulated exactly why I’ve read theObserver for more than 60 years. As a 
young national service subaltern, I was sent to Port Said in 1956 in the belief 
that “they” must know what they’re doing. Out there, we saw UK papers a day or 
two late and I was surprised and shocked by the discrepancies between what I 
had seen and what was reported.

I don’t ever remember seeing the Observer but, after returning home in 
January, 1957,, it became obvious why. My parents explained that they had 
stopped taking it because of the dreadful slurs on the efforts of our boys. I’m 
not sure whether I ever convinced them that David Astor was absolutely on the 
button accusing Eden of “folly and crookedness”, but I certainly was.

Since then, I have bolstered my conviction that “they” don’t always know what 
they’re doing by maintaining my readership of this paper which shares my values.
Melville Thomson
Arnside, Cumbria
 