
Although I support Barbara Ellen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/brevity-soul-of-wit-mr-davies-put-a-sock-in-it>
’s criticism of Philip Davies’s filibustering (“Brevity is the soul of wit, Mr 
Davies, so put a sock in it”; Comment), I believe it pales into insignificance 
against the underlying subject of supporting male victims of domestic abuse.

Quite rightly, the last 30 years have seen improvements in support and 
resources for female victims of domestic abuse, but those for males have lagged 
far behind, verging on the non-existent, beyond a helpline. Ellen says that 
amendments to the bill could be made later. The Council of Europe states that 
“parties to the Convention are encouraged to apply the protective framework it 
creates to men who are exposed to violence”. Such nebulous options are far less 
likely to be pursued and a mandatory agenda needs to be laid down.
Dr John Trounce 
Hove, East Sussex

No justification for child labour


With regard to the article, “UN’s ban on child labour is a ‘damaging mistake’” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/18/child-labour-un-ban-damaging-mistake>
 (News), I was aware of this line of thought in academic and activist work, 
advocating greater flexibility of – or even elimination of – child labour 
regulations, on the grounds of the socioeconomic and cultural specificity of 
the settings where children end up in work environments.

Authors resort to arguments relating to children’s rights, cultural 
relativism, social constructions of childhood and empirical evidence of the 
benefits of child work. Yet the strength of such arguments is generally 
overestimated and deeply questionable and, in many respects, they can be 
similarly used to justify the prohibition of child labour.

As I have argued extensively elsewhere, it is essential to retain a 
restrictive approach to child work. This is particularly the case in the 
European context, on the basis of legal, social, economic and cultural factors, 
especially since the socioeconomic crisis that began in 2008, and both the 
European Union and the UK have a clear role to play. The same can be argued in 
relation to other regions.

Some interventions by international agencies and foreign aid donors have had 
negative side-effects for not taking into consideration the local context and 
failing to implement a more appropriate range of supportive measures. That 
should not be used to question the appropriateness of the prohibition of child 
work of a certain type and until a certain age. Complexity cannot foster 
complacency. Although the proponents of relaxing the rules on child labour may 
not wish to do so, they may be favouring irresponsible deregulation and 
excessive neoliberal economic practices.
Nuno Ferreira
Professor of law, University of Sussex

A way to save a town hall


Chris Currer is absolutely right when he says of the disposal of Hornsey town 
hall that “Haringey council’s choice seems to hinge mostly on the money” (“
Cities paying the price of austerity”, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/18/cities-pay-price-of-austerity-selling-civic-heritage-sheffield-london-parks-libraries>
 News).

The tragedy is that there is a workable and sustainable alternative that this 
doctrinaire-driven cabinet refuses to discuss – a community asset transfer to a 
trust. This would allow full restoration of this wonderful building, the 
provision of social and affordable housing, community use and an arts centre, 
as well as relieving the council of its cost. Instead, it has gone for the 
luxury housing and boutique hotel model that will impress their developer chums 
but cut no ice with the thousands of homeless families in Haringey who will be 
spending the holiday season in temporary accommodation.
David Winskill
Hornsey Town Hall Appreciation Society and CIC, London N8

Pointlessness of privatisation


Thank you to David Mitchell for expressing so well his opinions on the energy 
fiasco (“Change my power supplier? I haven’t got the energy”; New Review). 
Surely there couldn’t be a better example of how wildly inaccurate were the 
Tory claims in the 1980s of the advantages of privatisation of the energy 
industry. The assertion that it would lead to more competition, more choice and 
the forcing down of prices, can clearly be seen as a lot of hot air.
David Williams
London SE8

Woes of the privileged


Vanessa Thorpe wrote an article about the changing of the guard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/18/changing-of-guard-arts-venues-end-of-golden-era>
 and how it will affect the arts in Britain (In Focus), but all the 
institutions she wrote about are in central London. The cuts in local authority 
funding affect the other 50 million people in the UK. You are reporting on 
people playing musical chairs on the top deck, while the boat is slowly sinking.
Simon Marlow-Ridley
Hinckley, Leicestershire

When silence was golden 


In your feature “Films that make comedians laugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/18/the-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel>
” (New Review), it was striking that only one of the standups – Tim Key, who 
chose Harold Lloyd’sSafety Last! – cited a silent movie. Standup comedy today 
is all about production-line delivery of verbal humour, but the fact that the 
silent films of comic geniuses such as Chaplin and Keaton (whoseThe General 
would get my vote) don’t tickle the funny bone of most current “comedians” 
suggests that they need to go back to laughter school.
David Head
Navenby, Lincolnshire
 