Islam in a hole 
Jason Burke makes an excellent case for differentiating between justification 
and understanding when it comes to mindless acts of violence (Focus, last 
week). While I agree that 'know thine enemy' is the number one principle in any 
stand-off of this kind, I cannot come to terms with the fact that the offspring 
of those who chose Britain as a safe refuge from political persecution and/or 
economic oppression are now bent on creating those very conditions in the UK.

A refugee from Idi Amin's Uganda, I felt enormous relief in being able to make 
a new life in London - away from the irrational whims of a military 
dictatorship and the pseudo-religious rantings of Islamic clerics. There's an 
Urdu saying: 'Never make a hole in the plate from which you eat.'
Jameela Siddiqi
London W2

Jason Burke's recipe for stopping the new terror calls for the appeasement of 
the Muslim world with no mention of the innate problems of Islam. While some 
Muslim grievances do need to be addressed, Islam will never be at ease within a 
modern secular and tolerant world until it has been reformed.

Can Islam overcome its fixation on every comma of the Koran, on fatwa contract 
killings and on worldwide theocracy?

Not while it is led by imams who regularly call for the annihilation of Jews 
and other non-Muslims.
Dr Patrick Vidaud
London W10

Race relations

Zoe Smith's suggestion (Comment, last week) that inter-racial relationships 
are a glaring non-issue in this country is correct. I am a white man and my 
girlfriend black. She was born in Paris and her parents are from Benin. Her 
mother will have nothing to do with me because I am white. My mother, who is 
British, gets on great with my girlfriend.

My girlfriend cannot get over the fact that here it is so widely accepted that 
black people are as much a part of every community as whites. She says that in 
France this is so different. There is no equivalent of Trevor McDonald on 
French TV.

My previous girlfriend was Indian. Her parents hated me as I was white and my 
degree was only a BA and not a BSc. This country is tolerant and welcoming; we 
should strive to ensure it remains so.
Brian Robinson
Liverpool

Closer encounter

I was bemused by Will Hutton's view that France is 'our closest European 
neighbour' (Comment, last week). In Ireland we assumed it was us because: (a) 
we share a land border with the UK, (b) we are only 13 miles from Scotland, and 
(c) we are European (not just defined by an appalling number of Eurovision 
winners).
Dave Deighan
Dublin

Stab in the dark

My disappointment at Mark Townsend's article ('One way ticket out of Stab 
City', Focus, last week), which trotted out the usual cliches about what Kate 
O'Brien called 'my dear native place', was replaced with total amusement when I 
read Barbara Ellen's brilliant piece in OM. Her description of the begrudgery 
felt by the middle classes when someone they normally patronise wins the 
European lottery had me in stitches. Ferdinand Mount, writing about a visit to 
Limerick, said that he had heard it was dubbed 'Stab City'. He had such a good 
time he surely referred to stabs of pleasure.
cáit ní cheallacháin
Limerick

Class roots

Your letter writers (The big issue, last week) seem to have forgotten that 
comprehensives were phased in by education ministers in the 60s and 70s when 
schools were being made much bigger. Rather than super- sizing, we need 
smaller, easier to control secondary schools, with no more than four forms 
(120) in each year.
David Nowell
New Barnet
Hertfordshire

Brain drain

With regard to the psychology of potential suicide bombers (Comment, last 
week), it may be interesting to consider how the intended outcomes of 
brainwashing can be reversed by excessive use. For example, my enthusiasm for 
the premiership of Tony Blair was flagging, but thanks to the reliable nagging 
of Richard Ingrams, my discomfort at the PM's grin is cured.

It is exciting to think how this retired Eye could take his repetition into 
new arenas, swaying susceptible young would-be extremists to change their 
views. I suggest they would emerge from his sessions believing the current 
British leadership cannot possibly be as devoid of good as some would have them 
believe.
Angela Barnett
Villars
France

Letters, including emails, which may be edited, should be short, include a 
full name and postal address and be sent to:Letters to the Editor, The 
Observer, 3-7 Herbal Hill, London EC1R 5EJ (to be received by 5pm Thursday). 
Fax: 020 78377817 Email:letters@observer.co.uk <mailto:letters@observer.co.uk> 
(please insert 'Letter to the Editor' in the subject field).
 