
Sonia Sodha goes too far in her article “Is the state sometimes wiser than 
parents? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/06/state-sometimes-wiser-than-parents>
” (Comment). She proposes banning home education and suggests “some may be 
getting an adequate education – we just don’t know”. But we do know because 
there has been plenty of research showing that such education is largely very 
effective.

The government’s own research has shown that every year at least 10,000 
children get worse results at GCSE just because they are summer born 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/jul/29/august-children-worst-gcse-results>
. These young people are also less likely to go to university and more 
likely to be bullied at school.

We know that more than a quarter of children are bullied sometime in their 
life at school. It can be a sensible parent who decides on an 
alternative to school instead of sending their child in each day to be beaten 
up. Indeed, research on children who have had traumatic experiences, such as 
bullying, is that they are three times more likely to suffer psychotic episodes 
in adulthood.

The evidence is clear that parents may need to take matters into their own 
hands because the state ignores the evidence.
Dr Ian Cunningham, chair of governors
Self Managed Learning College
Hove

To suggest parents lack the “moral right” to keep their children home from 
school is an illiberal remark that I’m surprised to see in theObserver. The 
duty of parents is made very clear in the 1996 Education Act: to ensure a child 
has “full-time education suitable to his [sic] age, ability and aptitude, and 
to any special educational needs he may have, either by regular attendance at 
school or otherwise”. Sodha seems to believe parents are incapable of deciding 
whether that duty is best discharged by mainstream schooling or “otherwise”. I 
am glad that the law is not so patronising.
Philip Ball
London SE22

Feminism has many faces

As a male feminist of many years activity, arguing the case in meetings, 
writing on the subject, having plays produced, articles and letters to the 
media, I am disappointed with Catherine Bennett’s seemingly supercilious 
rejection of my constancy and effort (“The odd neediness that makes a man a 
woman of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/06/bono-feminism-glamour-magazine>
”, Comment).

My anger and conviction on the issue of equality, on the disgusting treatment 
of women over the centuries and still today, and my certainty that no society 
can begin to call itself evenly remotely civilised until the very philosophy of 
that society is as strongly and deeply feminised as it has been shamefully 
masculinised for centuries are in no way less than those of any woman. However, 
I would not pretend to claim the best way forward as a woman, what needs to be 
changed or what it is like to be female in our society. Only a woman knows 
that. And I know that too, because my feminism is quite as valid as anyone 
else’s, female or male.
Ian Flintoff
Oxford

Don’t deny me my pension

I write with controlled outrage following the recent announcement from MPs 
that the state pension should be reviewed as it is no longer “sustainable”. I 
am shocked that Frank Field is one of them. At 77, my only income is the state 
pension. The suggestion that it is no longer sustainable denotes how low a 
priority it is given in the continual austerity delusion of today.

Why is it that I paid towards my pension entitlement from the age of 15 to 65, 
enabling those before me to receive same? Why has it become questionable that 
the contributions of those in work today are no longer “sustainable” to cover 
the expense? Unless the government respects those who worked all their lives, 
they will find the “silver vote” will turn against them.
Harry Brown
Swaffham, Norfolk

No shame in showing hurt

Among the torrent of news, views and analysis of Brexit and Trump in the 
Observerlast week were 10 words on page 22, which illustrated vividly of how we 
live today: “Suicide is the leading cause of death for young men”

(“Men much less likely to seek mental health help than women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/05/men-less-likely-to-get-help--mental-health>
”, News.) I recently saw a gripping play about the life of ex-England cricketer 
Colin Milburn, who died an early death mired in depression and alcoholism.When 
The Eye Has Gone 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/england/content/story/1044213.html> was admirably 
commissioned by the Professional Cricketers’ Association to highlight the 
difficulties men can face when careers fade and end.

Among the causes of Milburn’s tragic decline appeared to be a “golden rule” 
drummed into him at an early age: “Never show anybody you are hurt.” Perhaps 
the golden rule we need as a society is: “Always show someone you are hurt.” As 
the UK becomes an increasingly dysfunctional place, emotional disturbance will 
correspondingly rise and males must have the courage and opportunity to seek 
help.
Stuart Bryan
Worcester

The true worth of the poppy

Until a few years ago, before it became a fashion accessory, the poppy was a 
sign one had contributed to the British Legion, a charity devoted to the 
welfare of ex-servicemen and women. A minute’s silence was the norm at public 
occasions. Will the mega-rich footballers, the FA and the SFA make a donation 
to the British Legion? Or is wearing a poppy a symbolic, superficial gesture?
Tom Watson
Kendal
 