
Carole Cadwalladr is absolutely right to highlight how Google’s autocomplete 
and algorithmic search results can reinforce hate speech and stereotypes
(“Google is not ‘just’ a platform” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/google-frames-shapes-and-distorts-how-we-see-world>
, Comment).

But she is less right to claim I tried to absolve Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> of responsibility by tweeting: 
“I’m sure @google will argue they aren’t responsible for the results” in 
support. What I actually tweeted was that plus – “but they reap advertising 
revenue from the search. Is that ethical?”

Google and others argue their results are a mirror to society, not their 
responsibility. As a chartered engineer, I strongly agree with Ms Cadwalladr 
that companies such as Google, Facebook and Uber need to take responsibility 
for the unintended consequences of the algorithms and machine learning that 
drive their profits. They can bring huge benefits and great apps but we need a 
tech-savvy government to minimise the downside by opening up algorithms to 
regulation as well as legislating for greater consumer ownership of data and 
control of the advertising revenue it generates.
Chi Onwurah MP
Houses of Commons
London SW1

In all the justifiable furore over the pernicious influence of rightwing 
websites and how it’s reinforced by Google’s algorithms, I’m surprised no one 
has mentioned one longstanding, though admittedly partial, answer: don’t use 
Google! Not as difficult as you might think.

For several years now, I’ve avoided using Google (to the extent of barring its 
cookies) and used DuckDuckGo (seeduckduckgo.com <https://duckduckgo.com/>) for 
all searches. It’s just as effective and when, for instance, you try Carole 
Cadwalladr’s sample search, “did the hol”, none of the offending websites and 
references comes up. You get a long list of options, but none from Holocaust 
deniers; indeed, the Holocaust doesn’t come up at all.
Jonathan Lamède
London N8

When work is right for children

On 6 December, the UN committee on the rights of the child released its 
general comment on rights during adolescence. Many of the recommendations are 
commendable; however, one fails to protect children. The recommendation to ban 
all employment below a minimum legal age (articles 84 and 85), a policy set out 
in the International Labour Organisation’s Minimum Age Convention 138 (1973), 
makes the false premise that children are better protected if childhood is free 
from work.

Research has shown this can trigger worse living conditions, reduce education 
opportunities and push some children into more hazardous and exploitative work. 
Moreover, age-appropriate safe work can be developmental for children of all 
ages. That the Minimum Age Convention harms children is now so well established 
that several dozen researchers and practitioners specialising in child work 
formed an ad hoc expert group to provide the committee with advice and 
evidence, arguing that Convention 138 should be revoked or ignored and more 
effective policy should specifically target work that is dangerous or damaging 
to children.

Monitoring mechanisms need to be in place to ensure children’s work at all 
ages benefits them and is not hazardous or exploitative and does not conflict 
with education. This can be done through the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child. Convention 138 is both harmful and unnecessary.

Professor Jo Boyden

University of Oxford

Dr Ben White

Erasmus University, the Netherlands

Dr William Myers

International Institute for Child Rights and Development, US

Professor Priscilla Alderson

University College London

Dr Bree Akesson

Wilfrid Laurier University, Canada

Dr Nicola Ansell

Brunel University

Professor Michael Bourdillon

University of Zimbabwe

Dr Rachel Burr

Social Work & Education, University of Sussex

Richard Carothers

Partners in Technology Exchange, Canada

Dr Kristen Cheney

ISS, The Hague

Professor John Cockburn

Universite Laval, Canada

Dr Tara Collins

Ryerson University, Canada

Dr Philip Cook

International Institute for Child Rights and Development, Canada

Dr Philip Cook

University of Edinburgh

Dr GIna Crivello

University of Oxford

Dr Jennifer Driscoll

Kings College London

Dr Jason Hart

University of Bath

Professor Roger Hart

Graduate Centre of the City University of New York

Dr Neil Howard

European University Institute

Dr Roy Huijsmans

International Institute of Social Studies, The Netherlands

Dr Antonella Invernizzi

independent researcher, France

Dr Victor Karunan

Chulalongkom University and Mahidol University, Malaysia

Dr Natascha Klocker

University of Wollongong, Australia

Professor Deborah Levison

Humphrey School of Public Affairs, Minnesota

Professor Manfred Liebel

International Academy Berlin

Dr Peter Mackie

University of Cardiff

Dr Stanford Mahati

University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa

Dr Emma Mawdsley

University of Cambridge

Dr Virginia Morrow

University of Oxford

Dr Maria Federica Moscati

University of Sussex

Dr Sevasti-Melissa Nolas

University of Sussex

Samuel Okyere

University of Nottingham

Dr Alphonce Omolo

Lensthru Consultants in Social Development, Kenya

Kirsten Pontalti

University of Oxford

Professor Gina Porter

Durham University

Kavita Ratna

Advocacy of the Concerned for Working Children, India

Dr Elsbeth Robson

University of Hull

Dr Kettie Roelen

Institute of Development Studies

Dr Jessica Taft

University of California

Professor Nigel Thomas

University of Central Lancashire

Dr Dorte Thorsen

University of Sussex

Professor Kay Tisdall

University of Edinburgh

Dr Afua Twum-Danso Imoh

University of Sheffield

Professor Lorraine van Blerk

University of Dundee

Dr Debbie Watson

University of Bristol

Heartless to the homeless

It is a sad indictment of our society that we have driven so many of our 
citizens on to the streets. Now we punish them further, as illustrated by Tracy 
McVeigh’s excellent article on the“dehumanising” campaign against the homeless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/11/rough-sleepers-homeless-charity-architecture>
 (News). Many readers will know that if it wasn’t for the bank of mum and dad, 
their children could be among the poor unfortunate homeless.

The councils, planners, businesses and security people involved in 
implementing these draconian measures should hang their heads in shame. I hope 
they do not sleep well in their comfortable beds.

We should have a policy of name and shame. How about printing a league table 
showing the least compassionate cities and businesses where most of this 
“defensive architecture” is in place, so that tourists and potential clients 
can boycott them? These spikes and railings must be in somebody’s parish. I 
know many church leaders do good voluntary work but why don’t we hear their 
voices in the media making comparisons to the parable of the Samaritan and the 
innkeeper? As for sanctuary and best use of churches, I’m sure Jesus would be 
delighted to see the homeless sleeping on the pews at night time. This could be 
overseen by a warden to ensure that nothing sacrilegious took place.
R Dudley Edwards
North Yorkshire

Savagery is not new

In the wars of the 20th century, “civilians were not surrogates for the 
enemy”, writesWill Hutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/aleppo-war-horrors-bombing-hospitals-geneva-conventions>
 (Comment). Tell that to the survivors who were in Hamburg or Dresden (or, 
indeed, Coventry) in the 1939-45 war if he can find any.
Bob Horn
Cranleigh, Surrey
 