
Liam Fox (Don’t blame globalisation for poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/30/globalisation-poverty-corruption-free-trade-liam-fox>
, 30 September) talks of the UK’s post-Brexit trade potentially helping 
developing markets trade their way out of poverty. But this doesn’t quite cut 
it. In the short term, the drop in sterling is already leading to job losses in 
flower farms in Africa, as they struggle to absorb an effective 10% price cut. 
In the medium term, uncertainty around the UK’s future trade position means 
that tea and sugar farmers in Malawi or Mauritius don’t know if future UK sales 
will expand or drop off a cliff. In the long term, there could be major 
disruption to the lives of millions of the very poorest if, for example, new 
deals open up new import routes from emerging economies that squeeze out the 
least developed countries in Africa.

The government must promise that any changes to trade rules will at least do 
no harm, but preferably benefit the poorest countries in the world. The least 
developed countries already enjoy duty free access to the UK as part of EU 
trade rules, so a unilateral commitment to stick with this would be a start. 
Second, the UK should look closely at how future deals will affect the poorest 
farmers, and commit to avoid harmful effects and create new opportunities.

In his Manchester speech the trade secretary also talks positively about 
Fairtrade’s work delivering fair prices to 1.5 million farmers in developing 
countries. Fairtrade can only do its job if there is market access in the first 
place, and these same farmers urgently need clarity on the UK’s intentions.
Barbara Crowther
Director of policy and public affairs, Fairtrade Foundation

• Liam Fox presents a myopic view of world trade. Globalisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/globalisation> is not a panacea; there have 
always been winners and losers as the international economy develops. In the 
days of Adam Smith, Britain’s industrial revolution destroyed India’s 
indigenous cotton industry. China was exploited in the opium trade. Calcutta 
boomed as Englishmen built a European city. Indian agricultural labourers were 
reduced to poverty.

Today, China and India are in an era of expansion, Britain runs a systemic 
trade deficit and London has become the new Calcutta: the new global rich buy 
up property as many of the native population are driven into penury. Nothing
Liam Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> writes is wrong, it is 
just selective from a wider whole.
Martin London
Henllan, Denbighshire

• Liam Fox correctly argues that international free trade creates increased 
incomes. However, he ignores the distributional effects of trade. Britain grows 
but with increased inequality, devastating old industries. China grows and 
becomes more unequal thereby currently increasing the popularity of Maoist 
groups. Trade has to involve the compensation of losers with welfare support, 
retraining and other market interventions if social harmony is to be preserved. 
Such investments are inadequate in Britain and China.
Professor emeritus Alan Maynard
University of York

• Liam Fox writes of the “brave and historic decision of the British people to 
leave the European Union”. But the British people en masse didn’t decide any 
such thing, bravely or not. Even if, in the June referendum, a few more had 
voted to remain than to leave, the result could only have been more a 
preference than a decision, since no one could remotely forecast the impact of 
Brexit (and Fox’s own government department still can’t tell us).

There was, however, a very clear message: that the country is almost exactly 
split down the middle in its preferences, ill-informed as they may or may not 
have been. Maybe once the impacts of Brexit and the possibilities of reform 
within the EU have been defined and digested, we should have an informed debate 
and decision – but not yet.

The government has done nothing to assuage the raw emotions raised on both 
sides. The country remains divided (and still ill-informed), and the underlying 
problems that may have influenced the votes have not been investigated, 
addressed or solved. Liam Fox, instead of wilfully misinterpreting the vote, or 
trying to rewrite history, should buckle down to bringing the bruised and 
divided British people together again.
Peter Davis
Bath

• The fact that a judge has decided (Early legal win for anti-Brexit 
campaigners over article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/28/government-must-disclose-legal-arguments-article-50-procedure-peoples-challenge>
, 29 September) that the government should disclose the basis of its claim to 
prerogative power in relation to the timing and terms of Brexit is to be 
welcomed. But this is fundamentally a matter of politics, not law, and should 
be settled in parliament. It is the job of parliament to challenge prerogative 
power, not to be rolled over by it or to leave it to the courts. Whatever the 
views on Brexit, parliament should be united in asserting its sovereignty when 
the prerogative is used to deny it the role it should have.
Professor Tony Wright
(Former MP and chair of the Commons reform committee 2009-10), Birmingham

• The international trade secretary writes under the headline “Don’t blame 
globalisation for poverty” (30 September). Neo-liberal spin perhaps? Or Fox 
News by other means?
Robert Lawrence
Oxford

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 