
There is a view heading into this 2017 Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> that local hope Nick 
Kyrgios might not be fully fit. A more accurate description would be to say 
he’s been limping worse than Jimmy Stewart in Rear Window, and you wouldn’t 
blame him for being similarly paranoid. The world No14 enters the year’s first 
major tournament carrying a burden of expectation that would buckle the knees 
of Rod Laver.

None of this you would have known from the 21-year-old’s responses on the 
topic of that gammy left knee prior tohis withdrawal from the World Tennis 
Challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/nick-kyrgios-pulls-out-of-adelaide-event-to-rest-knee-before-australian-open>
 in Adelaide, a situation that heaped more frustration on a group of 
Australians even more maligned than the Kyrgios entourage.

“Just relax,” was the plea from Kyrgios after he hobbled his way to an early 
Hopman Cup exit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/australias-hopman-cup-defence-over-kyrgios-injury-concerns>
 last week, though with each passing day mild panic was setting in, and by 
Tuesday this week Kyrgios himself had revised that up to “extreme caution”. 
Like Dr Dre, whose headphones he endorses, the Australian is not after all a 
medical professional.

Bernard Tomic's Australian Open campaign unburdened by expectation | Russell 
Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/bernard-tomics-australian-open-campaign-unburdened-by-expectation>
As ever, Kyrgios is probably damned no matter what the result of this campaign 
and perhaps would be better off with this asterisk next to his name, because 
nothing less than an impeccable, graceful tournament win will silence his many 
critics. Even then he’d somehow lift the trophy in such a way as to bring the 
entire sport into disrepute.

Some players, like Kyrgios’ ally Andy Murray, wed to their brilliance an 
emotional resilience that allows them to thrive in spite of physical pain. In 
the last few seasons Kyrgios – still growing into his body, to be fair – has 
not been one of those players. Add in Melbourne’s traditional flair for 
airless, baking hot January afternoons and that awe-inspiring first serve might 
not get it done this time. Kyrgios’ travelling physiotherapist Will Maher will 
be logging plenty of overtime.

There is a small and perhaps significant “but...” there. It clearly did 
Kyrgios few favours in his preparation for the real deal, but if his 
eye-catching 105-minute win against Rafael Nadal during Monday night’s Fast4 
exhibition was anything to go by, maybe he’s starting to learn how to disguise 
the discomfort and frustration that come with injuries, rather than 
telegraphing them to his opponents. Before departing the court with his knee 
iced, he’d shown no outward signs of distress.

That Kyrgios is an enthusiastic backer of the new blink-and-you’ll-miss-it 
format is the sport’s least surprising development since the introduction of 
code violations; it is reliant on personality, of which he has an abundance, 
and as per the description on the tin, the matches themselves are shorter.

Kyrgios has even cheekily suggested Fast4 should be added to the ATP tour 
proper, though he should have some reservations if the commentary announcements 
are anything to go by. On Monday he and Nadal, we were told, were “set to get 
off against each other,” which sounded like one for the Family First party or 
the censors rather than Wally Masur.

Yet it’s Kyrgios himself they were there to see, and maybe the tide of public 
opinion on this fully-fledged national obsession will shift even further if 
he’s heroic or even just defiant in the face of his latest setback. It was 
certainly endearing on Monday the way he goofed about with Lleyton Hewitt as he 
took down Nadal, proving also there’d be no better Frankenstein monster in 
world tennis than Hewitt’s scheming brain attached to Kyrgios’ body.

When assessing Kyrgios’ likely path from Monday’s first round, it’s worth 
bearing in mind that heavy-handed predictions about injured players make mugs 
of us all. Ten years ago the former Wimbledon champion Pat Cash, so often a 
shrewd observer on the game, confidently predicted Serena Williams would never 
again challenge for a grand slam singles trophy. In the time since, she has won 
15, and the only cash she thinks about is the kind that fills bank vaults. If 
Kyrgios even goes close to saluting here, they should put his face on 
Australia’s $100 note.

Nick Kyrgios pulls out of Adelaide event to rest knee before Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/nick-kyrgios-pulls-out-of-adelaide-event-to-rest-knee-before-australian-open>
No doubt further controversies await him. In the lead-up to this tournament 
tennis proved itself equally proficient as cricket at turning something 
seemingly trivial into a blazing Twitter row when the Australian Open logo – a 
real tour veteransince the serving man’s emergence in 1995 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/tennis/australian-open-2017-which-longserving-figure-will-be-missing-next-january-20160901-gr699h.html>
 – was redesigned into a minimalist “AO” symbol, where the A is actually an 
upside down V. In truth it proved nothing outside the fact that graphic 
designers and branding consultants are far bigger charlatans than any of 
Australia’s challengers in the men’s draw.

Whatever comes in the next fortnight, we can safely assume that hordes of 
children will be lining up 10-deep to catch a glimpse ofNick Kyrgios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios>, becoming hooked on a sport 
that might otherwise have been lost on them entirely. He is, if nothing else at 
all, pure entertainment, and tennis needs entertainers. Those who can’t find a 
moment of uncynical joy in watching him are simply tired of life.
 