
The Lincoln City manager Danny Cowley claimed his non-league side’s historic 
FA Cup victory againstIpswich Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ipswichtown> struck a blow for 
working-class fans.

Cowley’s National League side defeated Ipswich Town 1-0 in their third-round 
replay with a superb goal in stoppage time from Nathan Arnold.
 See the full visual 
It maintained their impressive rise under the guidance of the former teacher, 
who swapped his “day job” in May for full‑time management and has led the Red 
Imps to the top of the table and now to the fourth round for the first time 
since 1976, when the late former England manager Graham Taylor was in charge.

Cowley said: “I watched a couple of documentaries that I’d seen before but I 
watched again because I knew I would be asked a lot of questions about him and 
I wanted to remind myself of what he’d done.

“He had a brilliant season here in 75-76 and what he then went on to do at 
Watford was remarkable. What he achieved in his career – to go from Lincoln 
City to England manager – was remarkable.” TheLincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> manager believes his side’s 
success will help restore the faith of fans in the footballers they pay to 
watch. “I am massively proud,” he said.

“There are some people at the top of the game unfortunately engulfed by money 
and not always good role models for the game we all love. It is nice when you 
see a group of people work hard and get a result they deserve. This result is 
for the people.

“It frightens me really – football and the money it has. It frightens me that 
football is going to get so far detached from reality that people are going to 
fall out of love with it. The great thing at this level and why I enjoy this 
level so much is you still have a connection with the people.Football is about 
the emotion and what it does to people. You saw what it meant to the people 
when we were walking around at the end, you can see on the people’s faces what 
it meant to them and that inspires me to keep working hard.”

Cowley and his brother and assistant manager Nicky, who also left a teaching 
job to enter full-time football, has led the Red Imps two points clear at the 
top of the National League on top of theirFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> heroics, beating Oldham Athletic 
of League One in the second round before pulling off Tuesday night’s upset to 
set up a fourth-round tie with Brighton and Hove Albion.

Related: Nathan Arnold’s late winner sends ecstatic Lincoln City into fourth 
round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/17/lincoln-city-ipswich-town-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report>

“The way they’ve worked day in, day out is incredible,” Cowley said. “You can 
have great days like this if you put so much work in like we have done. I 
thought we competed really well and worked every minute so hard. We pressed 
from the front and actually thought we had a great control in the game even 
against a Championship side like Ipswich.

“ It’s a great night and an amazing feeling for the club. We need to continue 
this moment. I’ll let the boys enjoy it but we’ve now got to turn to Dover on 
Saturday. It’s great for the club.

“For me it’s not about money. It’s about moments like this and putting smiles 
on people’s faces. That has been the great thing about this journey we’re on.”
 