
There was blood and thunder, as there always is in this fixture, but there was 
also a fair amount of thud and blunder. After all the hype – including a 
non-stop 12-hour build-up on one Norwegian channel – the latest meeting between 
these old rivals certainly fell short, no matter what it showed us about how 
the modern-dayManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> are evolving and where 
Liverpool still need to improve.

This was not one of those occasions when José Mourinho could face allegations 
of unremitting negativity. His team did, however, play with the structure and 
organisational qualities that are automatically associated with their manager 
when it comes to category-A fixtures. This was a tough, obdurate performance 
from what Jürgen Klopp described as a “very physical, strong team” and it is 
difficult to know the last time a United side had as little as 35% possession 
in aPremier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> match. 
That figure is the lowest since Opta began collating statistics in 2003 and 
that alone should guide United’s supporters about what they might have to 
expect occasionally under their new manager.

Manchester United’s Paul Pogba fails to live up to price tag in draw at 
Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/paul-pogba-manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league>
Mourinho seemed reasonably satisfied but, equally, he was exaggerating when he 
said United “controlled the game tactically and emotionally” and again when he 
mentioned David de Gea was “on holiday for nearly 90 minutes”. De Gea did not 
have a great deal to do but his night did incorporate one of the outstanding 
pieces of goalkeeping the Premier League will witness all season. His save from 
Philippe Coutinho – one-handed, at full length, in front of the Kop – left the 
Brazilian holding his head in disbelief and Klopp applauding on the touchline. 
“That is how he plays when he plays us,” Klopp noted afterwards of United’s 
goalkeeper. “Last year was similar. He loves games againstLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>.”

That save can certainly be added to the list of occasions when De Gea has 
spared United over recent seasons but it was not the only occasion that made 
Klopp grimace afterwards and it needed a brilliantly executed tackle from 
Antonio Valencia to deny Roberto Firmino the possibility of a late winner.

Liverpool 0-0 Manchester United: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/17/liverpool-v-manchester-united-premier-league-live>
These, however, were extraordinary moments in an otherwise ordinary match and 
if it was true, as Mourinho pithily observed, that Liverpool’s attack have been 
acclaimed as “the last wonder of the world”, this was not a night when that 
became apparent. Coutinho’s usual refinement was not always there. It was 
unusual to see Sadio Mané make such little impact and Daniel Sturridge was 
substituted after a difficult hour. Sturridge, to give him his due, came up 
against two resilient centre-backs in Eric Bailly and Chris Smalling and Klopp 
made the point afterwards that there was not a great deal of service for the 
striker.

The early pressure that might have been anticipated from the home side never 
really materialised and it quickly became apparent Liverpool were not going to 
have the freedom to dictate the tempo as they had in their previous Anfield 
fixtures. The game, Klopp noted afterwards, was played more in the way that 
United would have wanted than his own team. Everything can feel very rushed in 
these fixtures and sometimes it is not such a bad thing to have a player who 
puts his foot on the ball. “The game was very hectic,” Klopp said. “We couldn’t 
get rid of the hectic pace. When you have the ball you have to calm down, 
immediately. We wasted a lot of energy, for nothing really.”

Plus this is a different United team to the ones we are used to seeing. 
“Physical-wise, they are stronger than we are,” Klopp said. Taller, too. Klopp 
also talked about knowing his team would need to guard against “a lot of high 
balls” once he saw the United line-up, with Wayne Rooney starting on the bench 
for the fourth successive match.

In the end, Liverpool can be satisfied with their first clean sheet of the 
season and though Mourinho called it a “very positive performance”, the truth 
is United created very little after an encouraging start in which Marcus 
Rashford looked lively and Zlatan Ibrahimovic seemed intent on playing a 
prominent role.

United’s best opportunity came 10 minutes into the second half when Paul 
Pogba, playing in a slightly more advanced role than usual, eluded Jordan 
Henderson before crossing to the far post. Ibrahimovic had an awkward angle to 
negotiate but a striker with his reputation still ought to have done better 
with his headed chance.

Otherwise, Liverpool were emerging as the more likely winners but even then, 
Henderson and Emre Can usually hung back rather than joining the team’s 
attackers. One exception almost led to the breakthrough when Joël Matip strode 
elegantly forward and played the first pass of the night to open up the United 
defence. It took an age before Can, surrounded by opponents, took aim and De 
Gea’s one-handed save, low to his right, was the first reminder of the 
goalkeeper’s brilliance.

Liverpool and Manchester United fail to light up Anfield on drab evening
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/liverpool-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-jurgen-klopp>
The second, from Coutinho, had Anfield howling in anguish but Klopp’s praise 
for the opposition goalkeeper was mixed with criticism of his own players for 
not being telling enough with their passing. “We had 65% possession but you 
have to do more things with it,” he complained.

Instead, the most positive aspect, perhaps, was that nobody could argue the 
refereeAnthony Taylor’s performance was crucial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/15/referee-anthony-taylor-manchester-united-liverpool>
 to the result, despite all the scrutiny on the Altrincham-based official 
beforehand. Taylor made a few mistakes and was reasonable without being 
immaculate – but the same could be said of both teams on a strangely subdued 
night.
 