
Australia’s leading hopes at the Brisbane International, Samantha Stosur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> and Bernard Tomic, have 
both received unfriendly draws to start their 2017 season.

Seemingly jinxed at her home tournament where she has annually disappointed, 
Stosur will again be under immense pressure after drawing world No7 Garbine 
Muguruza in the first round.

The Australian Open Series: Federer, Nadal and local hopefuls tune up for 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/29/australian-open-series-federer-nadal-local-hopefuls>
It will be a replay of their French Open semi-final where the Spaniard beat 
the Queenslander before going on to upset Serena Williams in the final at 
Roland Garros.

Muguruza enters the first tournament of the Australian summer as the fourth 
seed, while Stosur, ranked world No21, is unseeded in a high-quality field 
which features five top-10 players.

The victor would set themselves on path for a likely quarter-final against 
world No9 Svetlana Kutznetsova.

The other Australian in the 30-strong women’s draw, comeback kid Ashleigh 
Barty, will play a qualifier but victory would pit her against world No1 
Angelique Kerber in the second round.

Tomic will lead a charge of three Australians in the men’s field, which also 
features five from the top 10, but must be on song from the start after drawing 
eighth-seeded Spaniard David Ferrer.

Ferrer, the 2013 French Open finalist, would start slight favourite but the 
Gold Coast-born local has a fine record in Brisbane where he made the 
semi-finals earlier this year before falling to eventual champion Milos Raonic.

Canadian world No3 Raonic is back as the No1 seed and is on track to meet 
drawcard Rafael Nadal in the quarter-finals.

Nadal, who is currently playing impressively in Abu Dhabi, has a tricky 
opening encounter with heavy-hitting Ukrainian Alexandr Dolgopolov.

If world No26 Tomic prevails over Ferrer he could set up an all-Australian 
second-round match with wildcard Jordan Thompson who has drawn Swede Elias Ymer 
first.

Fellow wildcard and Olympian Sam Groth will play Frenchamn Pierre-Hughes 
Herbert in his opening round clash where victory would see him play fourth seed 
Dominic Thiem.

Second-seed Stan Wawrinka is drawn to meet either Victor Troiki or a qualifier 
in the second round.
 