
For many London cycling activists and politicians with transport 
responsibilities the Netherlands is the touchstone nation for urban cycling 
policy, as demonstrated by the London Cycling Campaign’songoing “Go Dutch” theme
 <http://lcc.org.uk/pages/why-go-dutch> and Boris Johnson’s borough-centred 
“mini-Holland” schemes 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/travel-information/improvements-and-projects/cycle-mini-hollands>
. It is easy to see why. In 2014, cyclists accounted for a commanding 32% of 
modal share across the Dutch capital Amsterdam, higher than any other category 
and rising. Only walking rivals it as a way to get around. How did Amsterdam 
come to be such a beacon as a cycling city and what can London learn from it?

Professor Ruth Oldenziel 
<http://www.cyclingcities.info/sum-team/ruth-oldenziel/> of Eindhoven 
University – a Dutch person and a cyclist, just so you know – is co-editor of a 
new book calledCycling Cities: The European Experience 
<http://www.cyclingcities.info/>. In it, she and a colleague characterise 
Amsterdam as the “world bicycle capital, by chance”. Last week, presenting the 
book’s findings at aLondon Travelwatch 
<http://www.londontravelwatch.org.uk/home/> event, she summarised the city’s 
cycling pre-eminence as resulting from “a kind of coincidence”.

The professor’s Amsterdam cycling story is not of the city’s authorities 
introducing a visionary type of street design and everything proceeding from 
there, but one arising from the interplay of a range of factors over time, 
during which cycling policy was never more than “makeshift” and change has been 
untidily incremental. Nor is Amsterdam representative of every city in the 
Netherlands. “There are many different Dutch cycling cultures,” Oldenziel said. 
While Groningen and Enschede have banned cars from their city centres, 
Rotterdam’s cycling levels are very low.

Amsterdam’s recent rising high cycling levels have been quite gradual compared 
with the dramatic plunge they took from peaks as high as 75% in the 1950s. By 
then, cycling had become perceived as an obstacle to modernisation. The book 
reproduces a photograph from 1957 showing Amsterdam’s main commercial and 
commuter street, the Leidsestraat, clogged with cyclists, bikes and trams, all 
competing for the same road space. Something had to give in the heart of 
Amsterdam’s main transport artery. It did: the photo’s caption says that in 
1971, cyclists were banned from it.

Oldenziel records that there was a class element to the disciplining of 
Amsterdam cyclists, which had been going on in various forms for decades.Cycling
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> was what the lower orders 
did and, in the view of the authorities, they did it in a manner that was 
unruly, unpredictable and a hindrance to the car-led future. The first 
segregated cycle lanes, introduced in the 1930s, were an outcome of the process 
of marginalising cycling rather than an attempt to encourage it. But from the 
mid-1970s, new social forces came into play. Amsterdam’s counter-culture, 
allied with its preservationist movement, reclaimed the city’s cycling heritage 
as part of its resistance to motor-domination and redevelopment. “Thereafter, 
the city adopted a pro-cycling policy, albeit on pragmatic rather than 
principled grounds,” Oldenziel writes.

Today, in the centre of Amsterdam, a thumping 87% of trips of less than four 
kilometres are made by bicycle. Oldenziel attributes this to a combination of a 
determined social movement, a stubbornly strong cycling tradition, Amsterdam’s 
compact layout and a “pragmatic mix of pro-cycling and car-limiting policies,” 
of which the curbing of motorists has “proved the most effective”. She said 
that the Dutch approach as a whole “is really about intervening on the streets, 
inch-by-inch, bottom-up and really cost-effective, with very few large 
engineering infrastructural projects”.

The book looks at what has happened to cycling in 14 European cities, 
identifying five main factors explaining why it has thrived in some and faded 
in others: the nature of the urban landscape; the availability of alternative 
modes of travel, including public transport; cycling’s place within wider 
traffic policies; the effects of social movements; and cycling’s changing 
cultural status, from the transit mode of poorer people towhat it is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/oct/12/why-are-london-cyclists-so-white-male-and-middle-class>
 today. London is not among those studied. It is, of course, as distinctive as 
every other city and a very different one from Amsterdam, both physically and 
historically. But some of the reasons for Amsterdam’s success can surely be 
transferred.

 Oldenziel, who had pedalled round parts of the capital during the afternoon, 
told me her research had found that traffic-calming measures have represented 
the best use of public money in European cities in terms of encouraging 
cycling. Making car parking more expensive produced strong results too and 
generated funds for road infrastructure changes. She was precise about what 
sort of infrastructure brings about the best results. “A lot of cycling lanes 
are at the expense of pedestrians or public transit,” she explained. “These 
infrastructure visions often mean travelling at a high speed from A to B. 
That’s actually a car mentality. What you want is an infrastructure that is 
about the living street: about negotiation, about meandering and traffic 
calming. We do need to invest in infrastructure, but not in separate lanes.”

Although the Amsterdam story she tells includes periods of conflict between 
trams and the demolitions required for subway construction on the one hand and 
cycling on the other, Oldenziel would prefer the interests of pedestrians, 
cyclists and public transport users to be allied and complementary. It’s about 
having the right priorities for making a city a place to live in rather than 
one for racing through. “The story of Amsterdam is actually that automobility 
was so expensive that car space is now taken over by cyclists by default,” 
Odenziel said. “There are speed bumps everywhere too. But it is mostly about 
making the decision that cars do not belong.” Plenty there forLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> to reflect on.

Cycling Cities: The European Experience can be purchased via here 
<http://www.cyclingcities.info/>.
 