
Few conductors can claim to have carried out their profession since childhood, 
butLorin Maazel <https://www.theguardian.com/music/lorin-maazel>, who has died 
aged 84, made his distinguished debut at the age of nine. Since then his 
various manifestations included violinist, composer, opera director, 
multilingual narrator and film-maker, and he claimed he could even have become 
a space scientist, but it is for an especially masterful art of conducting that 
he will always be remembered. Orchestral musicians may look back with less than 
the warmest affection, and a more collegial attitude in the world of music has 
turned its back on the title "maestro" by which Maazel liked to be referred, 
but he always maintained impressive results over one of the longest careers in 
the business.

In 1932, two years after his birth in Neuilly-sur-Seine, near Paris, Maazel's 
parents, Lincoln and Marie, moved the family back to their native America. It 
was there that the five-year-old began to study the violin with Karl Moldrem 
and conducting with Vladimir Bakaleinikoff, a friend of the musical family and 
associate conductor of the Los Angeles Philharmonic. Within a few years, the 
child was deemed ready for the podium and, after taking a rehearsal with 
Bakaleinikoff's orchestra, made his official debut with the University of Idaho 
Orchestra, conducting Schubert's Unfinished (Eighth) Symphony. "You had to rub 
your eyes to believe it," wrote a critic of a New York appearance, "this chubby 
little figure in a white linen suit pace-making for an orchestra of seventy, 
and giving every cue on the dot."

The 11-year-old Maazel was invited to conduct Arturo Toscanini's NBC Symphony 
Orchestra, and after a rebellious show of defiance, the players quickly 
respected a good ear for mistakes and a memory which became legendary.

As with most prodigies, a reaction set in during Maazel's teenage years. While 
studying mathematics, languages and philosophy at Pittsburgh University, he 
also engaged his violin skills to lead both the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra 
and an associated string quartet. In 1951 a Fulbright scholarship took him to 
Italy to study baroque music, and his adult conducting career spread from a 
last-minute replacement in Catania to other European cities. At the age of 30 
he became the youngest conductor (and the first American) to appear at 
Bayreuth'sWagner 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h9ObRSy3D1E&list=RDh9ObRSy3D1E#t=33> festival, 
in Lohengrin, and a post at the Deutsche Oper, Berlin, followed in 1965.

In the same year, he even directed the work he was conducting in Rome, 
Tchaikovsky's Eugene Onegin, working out the co-ordination of stage action to 
music well in advance. In the early 1980s, he professed respect for only two 
directors – Joseph Losey, for whose groundbreaking film of Don Giovanni (1979) 
he conducted the soundtrack, and Filippo Sanjust. But he also went on to work 
on other films he admired – Francesco Rosi's Carmen (1984) and Franco 
Zeffirelli's controversial, much-cut Otello (1986). He made his own short 
movie, A Week in the Life of a Conductor, for French television.

Maazel shone in the Italian operatic repertoire and among the highlights of 
over 300 recordings are several instalments in his Puccini cycles, but here, as 
in so much else, he was passionately engaged in what he most admired and 
altogether more aloof when the score posed fewer challenges.

A classic case was the saga of two recordings following performances at La 
Scala, where he was especially welcome from 1983 onwards: a revelatory approach 
to the orchestral complexities of Puccini's La Fanciulla del West in 1991, for 
which the Milanese players thundered their approval, was succeeded by a less 
than loving Manon Lescaut. The Maazel who received interviewers in his room at 
the studios was a difficult customer – abrupt, sarcastic and adamant that there 
was nothing to say about the work – in total contrast to the animated figure of 
the previous year, clearly in love with Puccini's most detailed score.

The contradictions had already been well established in Maazel's operatic 
dealings elsewhere. His overdue debut at the Royal Opera, London, with Verdi's 
Luisa Miller in 1978, brought an enthusiastic response: the man whose slogan 
might have been "call me maestro" went out and had a T-shirt blazoned with "I 
love opera!" But at the same time, one rehearsal with Covent Garden musicians 
broke down because the players felt he was making unreasonable and 
unsympathetic demands. The sorry end to Maazel's artistic and general 
directorship of the Vienna StateOpera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera>
, a four-year contract which he had undertaken with such buoyant optimism in 
1982, but which was curtailed in 1984, was on the other hand not his fault: the 
city's notoriously intransigent musicians had already conflicted with more 
amenable figures.

In the orchestral repertoire, he made a strong start: his Decca recordings of 
the 1960s, chiefly his Sibelius and Tchaikovsky symphonies, still have an 
impulsive freshness, and at least two of his Mahler symphonies, made with the 
Vienna Philharmonic in the 1980s, remain among the most expressive and finely 
balanced versions. His relationship with the Vienna Philharmonic extended to 
appearances as both violinist and conductor at the New Year's Day concerts, 
most recently in 1999 and 2005.

Less impressive, and typical of his concern for detail at the expense of the 
whole, warm-blooded organism, were his Strauss recordings with the Bavarian 
Radio Symphony Orchestra, of which he took control in 1993 for eight years for 
a supposedly record-breaking fee. In America, his tenure of the Cleveland 
Orchestra (1972-82) was criticised by his successor, Christoph von Dohnányi, as 
marked by an over-preoccupation with authoritarianism and beating time rather 
than phrase-making, but again the discipline could hardly fail to impress.

Following the Vienna debacle, he achieved equally distinguished results with 
the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra, where he was first consultant and then chief 
conductor from 1988 to 1996, and he quickly settled in to his stride as the 
music director of theNew York Philharmonic 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YsI0yTC7bic&list=RDh9ObRSy3D1E&index=31> from 
2002, featuring John Adams's memorial to the victims of 9/11, On the 
Transmigration of Souls, in his first season.

Only at the beginning of this year did Maazel have to start making 
cancellations in a still-full conducting schedule; the reason given was an 
unspecified illness, which would eventually lead to his death from 
complications due to pneumonia. Having already conducted one Mahler cycle with 
the Philharmonia orchestra decades back, he had embarked on another. Critics 
were mostly baffled by the uniformly slow tempi and lethargic approach, which 
made singing very difficult indeed for a great artist such as the mezzo-soprano 
Alice Coote in a vocally extraordinary interpretation of Das Lied von der Erde. 
In June Maazel resigned from his post as music director of the Munich 
Philharmonic Orchestra and ceded toSemyon Bychkov <http://www.semyonbychkov.com>
 what would have been a lavish celebration around Richard Strauss's 150th 
birthday with the Berlin Philharmonic.

Maazel's own achievement as a composer remained on a level with his 
contemporary André Previn. In interview with Adams, he remarked that, for 
composers, "there is nothing new under the sun. Everything has been used and 
done, so it's not the means you use, but how you use them."

But perhaps because, like Previn, his appetite for music as a conductor was so 
all-encompassing, he rarely transformed his own ingredients into something 
truly original. In 2005, he was much criticised for "buying" Covent Garden for 
the premiere of his opera based on Orwell's 1984. The score, slick, superficial 
and wedded to a simplistic libretto which made a travesty of its source, 
impressed few of its listeners. But as an honourable rendering of a new work, 
the performance was beyond reproach; and Maazel's superbly controlled 
conducting ensured that his music, for all its derivativeness, always sounded 
well.

Yet if the sum invested in the production was generally judged ill-spent, 
Maazel was beyond reproach in his fundraising efforts for organisations such as 
Unesco and the Red Cross. He was actively associated with the World Wide Fund 
for Nature and undertook an extensive tree-planting programme on his estate in 
Virginia. Together with his third wife, the distinguished German actor 
Dietlinde Turban, he founded theChateauville Foundation 
<http://chateauville.org/> in 1997 "to nurture children, foster art and reclaim 
the human spirit". He was to the last a ferocious force for good, both through 
his music-making and his wider sympathies.

Dietlinde and their two sons and daughter survive him, along with a son and 
three daughters from previous marriages.

• Lorin Varencove Maazel, conductor, born 6 March 1930; died 13 July 2014
 