
Non-league Macclesfield Town pulled off the biggest shock in the first round 
of theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> when they won 2-0 at 
League One promotion challengersSwindon Town.

The Conference team, relegated from the Football League last season, were not 
the only non-league side to beat league opposition with Chelmsford City,Hereford
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hereford> United and Harrogate Town also 
moving into the second round at the expense of higher-ranked teams.

Macclesfield are sixth in the Blue Square Bet Conference Premier and on 
Saturday they took the lead in the 63rd minute through a stunning long-range 
strike from Tony Diagne. Things got worse for Swindon when moments later Aiden 
Flynn was sent off for the second time in four games when he was given a 
straight red card for a challenge on theMacclesfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/macclesfield> midfielder Sam Wedgbury.

The upset was sealed when Louis Thompson scored an own goal in the last minute.

The Conference South team Chelmsford City beat in-form Colchester United, 12th 
in League One, 3-1. The hosts went ahead against their Essex neighbours when 
Anthony Cook fired in from distance in the 23rd minute and they moved closer to 
an upset when Donovan Simmonds headed into the net in the 63rd minute.Colchester
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester> pulled one back seven 
minutes later through Michael Rose's long-range free-kick but Jamie Slabber 
sealed victory late on.

Torquay United had an unbeaten home record which had guided them to seventh in 
League Two but they went down 1-0 at home toHarrogate Town. Chib Chilaka scored 
the only goal after 20 minutes to send the Conference North side into the 
second round.

Hereford United, 14th in the Conference Premier, provided the first shock of 
the day when they dumped out League OneShrewsbury Town 3-1 thanks to two goals 
by Ryan Bowman.

Will Evans gave the hosts a third-minute lead, slotting Chris Todd's header 
into the bottom left-hand corner. Hereford doubled their lead nine minutes 
later through Ryan Bowman's fierce shot. Luke Summerfield's free-kick halved 
the deficit on the half-hour but Bowman's second, a penalty, wrapped up victory.

Lincoln City, 19th in the Conference Premier, were on the brink of an upset 
when they led League OneWalsall 1-0 thanks to Jamie Taylor's effort in 
first-half injury time. However, George Bowerman headed an equaliser three 
minutes from full time to secure a replay.

League Two sides also secured some impressive League One scalps, most notably 
whenRotherham United beat Stevenage, fourth in League One, 3-2. Mark Bradley 
fired the Millers ahead after half an hour before the on-loan Lee Frecklington, 
with goals in the 53rd and 56th minutes, apparently putting the match out of 
Stevenage's reach. However, James Dunne pulled one back two minutes later with 
Filipe Morais making it 3-2 with a little under 20 minutes remaining but the 
South Yorkshire side held on.

The League One strugglers Hartlepool United suffered a 6-1 hammering at 
Chesterfield. Scott Boden, after 16 minutes, Mark Randall (29) and Craig Clay 
(42) gave the Spireites a 3-0 half-time lead.

Terrell Forbes (54) made it four and while Antony Sweeney pulled one back with 
12 minutes remaining, Jack Lester and Craig Westcarr rounded off a humiliation 
for the visitors.

The League Two leaders Gillingham hammered their relegation-threatened League 
One opponentsScunthorpe United 4-0 at Priestfield.

Hendon, of the Isthmian League Premier Division, threatened an upset when they 
went ahead at the out-of-form League Two sideAldershot, Dean Cracknell firing 
in an unstoppable volley after 28 minutes. However, Danny Hylton levelled 13 
minutes after the break before he powered home a late winner.

Sheffield United were the highest-ranked team playing on Saturday but the team 
second in League One were given a scare when David Clarkson took advantage of 
some slack defending to put Bristol Rovers ahead in the fifth minute at the 
Memorial Ground.

However, Nick Blackman equalised eight minutes after the break with an 
unstoppable shot across the keeper and Chris Porter won the game nine minutes 
later.

Crawley Town won 2-1 at the Met Police. Josh Simpson and Billy Clarke put the 
visitors 2-0 up and although Alan Tait pulled one back with seven minutes 
remaining, the Isthmian Premier League side could not muster an equaliser.

The League Two high-flyers Port Vale survived a comeback at Forest Green when 
the Conference Premier Division side hit back from two goals down to pull level 
at 2-2. Ben Williamson restored the league side's lead against the run of play 
10 minutes from time to give them a 3-2 victory.

Cheltenham Town, third in League Two, dispatched Yate Town, the lowest-ranked 
team left in the competition, 3-0.
 