
Josh slips me a tie pin under the clock in Grand Central Terminal. "This'll 
help you channel some of the Don Draper vibe," he says, as New York commuters 
wash past us – a blue-grey torrent surging across the polished marble floor. 
Thankfully, likeMad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> itself (the 
award-winning TV series set in fictional 1960s advertising agency Sterling 
Cooper), Josh's tour of Manhattan is stylishly slower paced. As the famous 
clock moves past 7pm, he leads us across the concourse to begin our induction 
into the world of Draper and his immaculately dressed, obstreperously behaved 
cohorts.

"We will be stopping at some upscale establishments, so please dress 
accordingly," my email confirmation had said. "Sixties-style clothing is 
encouraged and fun."

The others in the group – three female fans in their mid-20s – had taken this 
to heart, sporting silk blouses, pencil skirts and thick red lipstick. None of 
them would look out of place in the Sterling Cooper offices. Josh and I, hair 
slicked down, are both wearing slim-fitting suits and skinny ties with pocket 
squares. As a group, we look like we're en route to a 60s wedding, two 
generations too late.

Our first destination, The Grand Central Oyster Bar 
<http://www.oysterbarny.com/>, doesn't even involve stepping outside. Hidden 
pearl-like within the terminal, the 100-year-old Oyster Bar reopened last month 
after extensive renovation work, but retains its timeless elegance.
 The Oyster Bar in Grand Central Station 
"Matthew Weiner, the show's creator, says when he's writing episodes he's 
constantly asking himself, 'what would Don do?'" says Josh. "That's something 
we like to channel too."

A round of old fashioneds later, Josh whips out an iPad to show us a scene 
from the show set here. In it, Draper and senior partner Roger Sterling down 
oysters and martinis, shortly before Sterling regurgitates his meal at the feet 
of some potential clients. The series itself is now filmed almost entirely in 
Los Angeles, but locations are obsessively researched and recreated in 
fetishistically accurate sets, right down to the tablecloths and framed 
pictures on the walls. Sadly, there's no time to stay for a round of oysters 
before heading to our second stop: theRoosevelt Hotel 
<http://theroosevelthotel.com/> on the corner of nearby Madison Avenue.

One of the most regularly referenced locations in the show, it's here that 
Draper comes to live in season two, after his first wife Betty kicks him out. 
Slippery account man Pete Campbell follows suit at the end of season six, a few 
episodes after the two men's ill-fated pitch to Heinz in one of the suites.

Over cocktails at the hotel's Madison Club Lounge, Josh plays another clip – 
this time of art director Salvatore Romano on a clandestine date with a male 
client in the same spot. Again, the recreation of the locale is unerringly 
accurate.
 On the New York Mad Men tour … tour guide Josh Hirsch (left) and the writer 
at the bar of the Roosevelt Hotel. Photograph: Neville Elder 
Skinny ties are already being loosened as we move up Madison Avenue to take in 
the Advertising Walk of Fame, and learn about some of the real-life executives 
behind Weiner's characters. In particular, the legendary Mary Wells Lawrence, 
who rose from secretary to CEO in the hard-drinking, misogynistic environment 
of 1960s advertising, and whom the character of Peggy Olson is supposedly based 
upon.

Unsurprisingly, the imminent seventh and final season is the talk of the 
evening (so skip to the next paragraph to avoid a potential spoiler). Weiner is 
notoriously protective of his storylines – allegedly removing the Romano 
character after the actor who played him, Bryan Batt, revealed too much – but 
speculation is rife that Draper will die in the final episode, possibly by 
throwing himself out of a window on to Madison Avenue. "The clue has been there 
in the title sequence since the very start," says Josh. "But I hope Don finds 
some kind of redemption instead, especially after hitting rock bottom at the 
end of last season."
 PJ Clarke's, one of Manhattan's oldest bars 
The conversation moves on to Peggy Olson as we arrive at The Monkey Bar in the 
Hotel Elysee <http://monkeybarnewyork.com/> – the setting for her tryst with 
Duck Phillips in season three. Jessica, one of the women on the tour, is 
convinced that we're going to see Olson surpass her mentor Draper in the final 
season, emulating Mary Wells Lawrence by becoming the head honcho.

After a detour to the site of the original Sterling Cooper office from seasons 
one and two, our final stop of the night isPJ Clarke's <http://pjclarkes.com/>, 
one of the oldest bars in New York. Olson and her cronies are seen here dancing 
the twist after landing a big client, and Christina Hendricks – the actress who 
plays office manager Joan Harris – is rumoured to be a frequent visitor in real 
life.

The Mad Men-approved drink of choice here is a martini and sidecar – "one part 
sweet, one part sour, one part strong". But thankfully it also serves "the 
Cadillac of burgers", named by Nat King Cole who was a big fan of the house 
cheeseburger.

The Mad Men tour, which Josh's company runs every Thursday and Friday evening, 
officially comes to a close at 10pm, but at 11.30pm we're still sitting in PJ 
Clarke's debating the show. It's been a genuine treat experiencing the 
real-life venues behind the whisky mist of what Rolling Stone magazine recently 
hailed "the greatest TV drama of all time." But when Josh suggests a final 
martini before heading back to the Roosevelt, I'm caught in two minds: what 
would Don do?

• The trip was provided by The Mad Men Experience (madmentour.com 
<http://madmentour.com/>, evening tours $150pp including cocktails, daytime 
tours $59). For further information on New York, visitnycgo.com 
<http://www.nycgo.com/>. Mad Men season seven starts on Wednesday 16 April on 
Sky Atlantic

Carrie shopped here: More TV tours and shows in New York
 Sex and the City … the girls at a New York cafe. Photograph: HBO/Everett/Rex 
Features 
Sex and the City
The last episode aired more than 10 years ago, but the daily SATC tour is as 
popular as ever. Taking in large swaths of mid- and lower-Manhattan, it visits 
more than 40 locations from the show in 3½ hours.
• onlocationtours.com <http://onlocationtours.com/>, $49pp

Glee
Attention Gleeks! This 90-minute Broadway tour is led by a musical guide, who 
encourages you to sing along as you walk. The itinerary focuses on both the 
cast and the songs, exploring the theatres where each had their Broadway debuts.
• newyorkbroadwaytours.com/tours 
<http://www.newyorkbroadwaytours.com/a-glee-broadway-fan-walking-tour/>, $25pp

Tonight Show
It's free to get tickets to the Jimmy Fallon's popular Tonight Show – filmed 
daily at 5pm at Rockefeller Plaza, complete with celebs and the brilliant Roots 
band – but you'll need to be quick off the mark when tickets are released each 
day – about 6-8 weeks in advance.
• showclix.com 
<http://www.showclix.com/event/thetonightshowstarringjimmyfallon>
 