
There are so many musicians on stage, you can hardly see the conductor in the 
photo. But right in the middle of the mass of players and singers – 1,030 of 
them to be precise, one of the largest collections of humanity ever assembled 
in the service of a symphony – stands the 50-year-old composer and conductor
Gustav Mahler <https://www.theguardian.com/music/gustav-mahler>. He is 
rehearsing his Eighth Symphony for its world premiere in Munich in September 
1910, the performance that will be the single greatest public triumph of his 
life, and the last time he hears a new symphony of his in the flesh. Just eight 
months later, Mahler will be dead from a chronic heart condition, but he will 
treasure the memory of these Munich performances as one of the crowning moments 
of his career.

The Eighth was dubbed by the impresario who publicised the premiere as the 
"Symphony of a Thousand", a moniker Mahler hated. But the symphony needs a vast 
musical congregation to realise its gigantic philosophical vision. (Not quite a 
thousand, though: when the BBC Symphony Orchestra's conductor Jirˇí Beˇlohlávek 
brings the baton down on the Eighth Symphony to open theProms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms> on Friday, he'll have a cast of 674 
in his choirs and his orchestra.) Composed in a blaze of inspiration in the 
summer of 1906, Mahler described the piece as "the whole universe beginning to 
ring and resound. [The singers] are no longer human voices, but planets and 
suns revolving."

The lineup Mahler requires to create his new musical universe is on a scale 
that no composer had ever dared to dream: there are two huge choirs of adult 
voices, a children's chorus, seven vocal soloists, an off-stage brass ensemble, 
an organ, harmonium and piano, as many harps as the orchestra can afford, an 
arsenal of percussion, and an orchestra that looks like the ensemble for 
Beethoven's Ninth Symphony on steroids, with dozens of brass and woodwind and a 
string section that should be as large as possible. Philosopher Theodor Adorno 
disparagingly called the piece a "symphonic monsterpiece"; in terms of scale at 
least, he was on to something.

And yet the essential message of this enormous, 80-minute symphony is as 
intimate as it is universal. The piece is a paean to the spiritual, mystical 
and earthly power of love. Mahler sets a ninth-century Latin hymn in the 
20-minute first part, and the concluding scene of Goethe's Faust in the 
hour-long part two, the salvation of Faust's soul by the Eternal Feminine. 
Outwardly, the Eighth is Mahler's most positive, life-affirming work, and it 
contains some of the most thrilling noises you'll ever hear. It opens with a 
thunderbolt in E flat major and a choral call to arms, and only increases in 
intensity through the overpowering climax of the end of the first part and the 
contrasting vision of spiritual unease at the start of the second. And then 
there's the unforgettable setting of Goethe's final stanzas at the end of the 
symphony, an evocation of the Eternal Feminine that Mahler dramatises with 
music of cosmic breadth and power. Those final few minutes are the symphonic 
equivalent of Douglas Adams's Total Perspective Vortex in the Hitchhikers's 
Guide to the Galaxy: music in which you realise just how tiny you are next to 
the all-encompassing universe of Mahler's musical creation.

Yet the story behind this defiantly optimistic symphony's premiere is one of 
the most pain-racked and pathetic in Mahler's personal life. The piece was 
composed in 1906 during a time of great happiness. Four years later, he 
dedicated the symphony to "My dear wife, Alma", the first time he had given any 
of his pieces a personal inscription. A symbol of marital bliss, the perfect 
union between Mahler's Faustian creativity and Alma's eternal femininity? Far 
from it. Mahler's dedication was part of a strategy to rescue his marriage 
after Alma brought it to the brink of destruction during the summer of 1910 – 
she was having an affair with the architect Walter Gropius. Mahler had 
discovered the truth as he composed his 10th Symphony, the same summer that the 
Eighth was finally being rehearsed for its premiere. The discovery of his 
wife's infidelity was the greatest psychological and emotional crisis he would 
ever experience (so much so, that Mahler consulted with Freud in Holland that 
August). But just a few weeks after he had confronted his inner demons of 
jealousy and betrayal, Mahler had to conduct the premiere of the Eighth; his 
hymn to love was to be premiered by a man whose faith in the central 
relationship of his life had been shattered.

Whatever Mahler's experience as one of the world's most famous conductors, 
nothing could properly prepare him for the musical stress and logistical 
headaches of putting the Eighth together – for the simple reason that no human 
being had ever attempted to compose and then conduct a new symphony for this 
number of performers. He had begun rehearsals in May that year, before he knew 
of Alma's infidelity. The record of his working sessions in Vienna, Leipzig, 
and Munich is the most revealing insight we have into Mahler the practical 
musician and neurotic composer. After the first full rehearsal in June, he 
wrote to Alma: "It was a veritable purgatory. I don't know what to do when I'm 
finished here," before outlining the reason for his use of Goethe in the piece. 
"The most important aspect of it is Goethe's view that all love is generative 
and creative and that there is a generative force that is both physical and 
spiritual and the emanation of this 'Eros'. You have a symbolic depiction of it 
in the final scene of Faust."

By September, and the final week of rehearsals leading up to the first 
performance at the 3,200-seat Neue Musik-Festhalle in Munich, there was a grim 
irony to Mahler's words. His Eros-obsessed symphony was no longer a symbol of 
the earthly paradise he thought his marriage had been. Alma was in Munich, too, 
publicly supporting her husband, while privately carrying on her affair with 
Gropius. And yet Mahler threw himself into the symphony, taunting his 
incompetent pianist, charming the children in the choir, trying and failing to 
force a new leader on his orchestra, and cajoling his musicians to find the 
poetry of his music: "Here I want my orchestra to be nothing but a large 
guitar!"; "My children's choir must enter here like a knife through butter."

The performance was one of the most talked about musical events of the new 
century, causing a storm of adulation from his supporters and a wave of 
antisemitic vitriol from his opponents. But Mahler himself was transformed at 
these performances. Composer Anton Webern was there, and wrote to Arnold 
Schoenberg: "I can't tell you how beautiful Mahler's symphony is … The first 
movement is unprecedented in its impact. The loudness at the end reaches a high 
peak … It's hardly bearable. As a whole, the work is barely conceivable, and 
I'm still completely bowled over by it."

Every audience for this piece can share Webern's feelings. At the Proms 
tonight, the Royal Albert Hall becomes a portal to another musical dimension: 
the universe according to Mahler.

Jirˇí Beˇlohlávek conducts Mahler's Eighth Symphony for the First Night of the 
Proms at the Royal Albert Hall, London, tonight. Box office: 0845 401 5040. 
bbc.co.uk/proms. The concert will be broadcast live on Radio 3 and BBC2.
 