
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
says Donald Trump’s election to the White House has shown the world the 
benefits of globalisation need to be shared by the many, not just the few – and 
he says the environment for reform is getting more challenging.

The prime minister has used a speech to the Business Council of Australia to 
argue fairness must be a central concept for governments in an atmosphere of 
rising protectionism.

“Our policies must not ignore the fact that the impacts of change can be borne 
unevenly across the community,” Turnbull said on Thursday night.

Greg Norman reportedly teed up Malcolm Turnbull's early access to Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/greg-norman-reportedly-teed-up-malcolm-turnbulls-early-access-to-donald-trump>
“To overcome the rising disquiet, we must ensure that the benefits of open 
markets deliver for the many and not just a few.”

“If the results of the recent US presidential election have taught us 
anything, it is that policy changes must be fair in a very broad sense.”

 While making his pitch about fairness, Turnbull also attempted to reframe its 
definition.

Fairness is generally measured in a public policy sense by analysing the 
winners and losers from a particular government program, and assessing their 
specific circumstances as a consequence of the change.

But Turnbull contended on Thursday night that convention needed to shift to an 
assessment of a system overall, and consideration of the impact of policies 
over a lifetime.

“Fairness does not mean examining each decision in isolation, looking at a 
narrow set of winners and losers,” the prime minister said on Thursday night.

“It means making sure our overall system is fair, examining the transfers of 
goods and services over a person’s lifetime and asking ourselves, does this 
reflect the benchmarks we set ourselves of an open, fair and just society?”

The prime minister said Australia could not afford to retreat from the open 
markets model, or from trade liberalisation, because those policies had 
delivered significant gains in income, employment and living standards, and 
lifted billions of people out of poverty.

But he said there was currently significant community disquiet about change, 
and people were concerned their personal circumstances were deteriorating. 
“Weaker growth in incomes is feeding uncertainty, helping anti-trade sentiment 
find a foothold.”

“In the past year, we have seen economies introduce new protectionist trade 
measures at the fastest pace since the global financial crisis — the equivalent 
of five per week.”

“But retreating from policies that have delivered us prosperity and 
opportunity is the wrong call. We would ignore the gains from openness at our 
peril.”

“Instead of looking backwards, we must make the case to increase global 
economic integration.”

“Instead of retreating from the world, we need to strengthen our engagement 
internationally and with the fast-growing nations in our region.”

The speech also addressed current policy issues. The prime minister said 
getting the budget back into the black was a fairness issue, as was lowering 
the tax burden for young people facing “the twin challenges of getting a foot 
in the door of the job market and saving for a housing deposit.”

He signalled a pragmatic approach to working on further fiscal consolidation, 
citing $12bn in budget savings the government passed with Labor’s support 
earlier in the year.

Turnbull said the ratings agencies weren’t concerned about various policy 
roadmaps to bring down the debt and deficit, the agencies were concerned about 
“the belligerence and partisanship that were so dominant in the 44th parliament 
will put that return to surplus at risk.”

“I am determined that this should not be the case for the 45th parliament. My 
government’s approach will continue to be driven by pragmatism.”

Turnbull also had a message for business. He said big companies needed to “act 
in accordance with the values and expectations of society.”

He said the government wanted to be in a position to “look Australians in the 
eye and say we don’t apologise for wanting businesses to do well in these times 
of remarkable change.”

Turnbull said the government wanted to deliver policies that allowed companies 
to attract investment so they can create more jobs, pay higher wages, and pay 
their fair share of tax – but that required businesses responding to community 
expectations.

He said one example was business had a responsibility to pursue hiring 
practices that progress the interests of women, of both older and younger 
workers, and of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.

More needed to be done to appoint women on boards, he said.

The prime minister will travel to Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/australia-signals-support-for-chinese-led-trade-deals-to-replace-tpp>
 on Thursday night to attend the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit 
before the resumption of parliament for the final two sitting weeks for 2016.

Before his address, the BCA urged the government to press ahead with its 
10-year plan for company tax cuts. The business lobby pointed to a campaign 
promise by Trump to lower the US company tax rate to 15% as a reason for 
Australia to push forward.

Australia signals support for Chinese-led trade deals to replace TPP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/australia-signals-support-for-chinese-led-trade-deals-to-replace-tpp>
But given there is only limited Senate support for big business tax cuts, 
which comprised the centrepiece of the Coalition’s election campaign in July, 
the government has been hastening slowly.

Labor said on Thursday the government should just dump the idea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/bill-shorten-rejects-calls-to-back-coalitions-company-tax-cuts>
. “What doesn’t generate a brighter future for more Australians is the idea of 
persisting with Donald Trump-style corporate tax cuts for multinationals and 
big banks,” the Labor leader, Bill Shorten, said Thursday to a welfare 
conference.

“Labor believes the best way to prioritise jobs is to look after working class 
and middle class families with a strong safety net, a strong minimum wage, good 
superannuation, a properly funded pension system, good skills and education for 
our young people and workers seeking to be retrained, investment in 
infrastructure.”
 