
It was once a sleepy seaside town, a place where surfers could shop at 
family-owned markets alongside celebrities such as Goldie Hawn and John 
McEnroe, who admired Malibu's laid-back feel in a town of Hollywood hustlers.

All that has now changed, say long-time Malibu residents, who complain that a 
series of rent hikes has forced small shops out and brought higher-end boutique 
stores in.

With luxury chains such as Missoni and James Perse replacing the city's 
well-loved independent bookshops and family-run restaurants, locals have been 
forced to adjust to the changes. "Paparazzi Zone" placards now dot the Spanish 
stucco walls of Malibu's plazas. There are celebrity Rolls-Royces and BMWs with 
blacked-out windows in the car parks, and yachts owned by billionaires such as 
Larry Ellison and Roman Abramovich often occupy the sun-drenched bay.

"Malibu really used to be 'the boonies', a place where people rode their 
horses to the local market to do their shopping and the clothing store sold 
nothing but cowboy gear with buckles and boots," said resident Judy Van 
Schoyck, a local estate agent of 20 years' standing. "Then, just like the rest 
of LA, it got developed. A university came in, more people moved here, and 
property prices went up. Now you can rent a house on the beach for $170,000 
[£108,000] a month, and mom-and-pop stores just couldn't afford to stay."

As the locals moved out, drawn by lower rents further afield, investors moved 
in. Many of Malibu's businesses, which residents say long defined the city's 
sense of self, were bought out by businessmen who some tenants say are "only 
interested in profits, not community". 

In the newly rechristened Malibu Village, only a handful of the original 
businesses remain after a sale in 2007 that saw their rent increase three-fold 
to $18,000 a month, said one tenant who wished to remain anonymous.

"People think that because this is Malibu, everyone has tonnes of money and 
they don't mind spending $10 on an ice cream or $500 on a T-shirt. But not 
everyone's rich, and not even the rich people want to waste their money like 
that," the tenants said.

"Now the locals would rather go over the hill [to an adjacent city] to save 
even just a couple of dollars than come down here, because there's nothing for 
them to do here anymore, nowhere to hang out."

Concerned residents have taken up the matter at council meetings, where 
solutions to "bring back the community" have centred around retaining a certain 
percentage of stores for local retailers.

But for some disgruntled residents, it may be too late.

"I miss the old way of life, having stores that actually provide a service to 
me, of knowing who works in the store, who owns the store, who's who around 
here," says Greg Latham, a former stuntman who has lived in Malibu for 40 years.

"I think it's kind of over, that it may be time to move. But I also know it's 
up to us, the locals, to support the local shops – or whatever remains of them 
– and buy and do what we can here in Malibu while we can."
 