
The line about New England is that you should go there in the autumn, or 
indeed, the fall. The region attracts a variety of foliage-obsessed travellers 
known locally as "leaf-peepers". These people come to admire the colours of the 
leaves, and exchange notes, train-spotter style. There are even accepted 
itineraries for this type of activity.

Of course, this approach makes about as much sense as saying that you should 
only go to Paris in the springtime. The scenery in New England is never dull, 
whether it be craggy mountains or misty river deltas. The forests around 
Concord, New Hampshire, resonate so loudly with the strains of Blair Witch that 
it's hard not to shudder.

Villages are made up of thin-spired 18th-century churches and brightly painted 
clapboard houses. It took me several days to work out where I recognised the 
houses from - they're the model for Lego.

In the port towns, a few of the imposing mansions that were once the homes of 
merchant sea captains have, gratifyingly, been turned into hotels, such as the 
Francis Malbone House in Newport, Rhode Island. The refined splendour of this 
inn is substantial: there are log fires in every room and a four-poster so huge 
you need steps to get into it. Tea and cakes are served every day at 3pm, the 
parlour is well stocked with red wine and board games, and the reception keeps 
a library of videos, just in case you can't resist lounging on that four-poster 
after a soak in the Jacuzzi. All told, this is a dreamlike place to spend a 
romantic weekend.

The six states that make up New England were the cradle of the American 
nation. The struggles for religious freedom which led the Pilgrim fathers 
across the Atlantic, and the Puritanism they brought with them, continue to 
mark the region. There's a strong strain of asceticism in some rural areas - 
many restaurants don't allow smoking, there are few bars, and it is illegal in 
Maine to serve alcohol to someone dining at a table outside a restaurant. After 
a long day, my request for a bedtime beer at my inn in Portsmouth was received 
not so much with disapproval as puzzlement that anyone should want such a 
thing. The concept of "inn" obviously suffered in the Atlantic crossing.

It's not all puritans, though. Tolerance led to religious diversity, so that 
in Kennebunk, Maine, the stately episcopal church stands next to an evangelical 
meeting house (Sunday sermon: "Going to hell? Not me!") Newport has America's 
oldest synagogue, and Boston's Italian and Irish communities mean that 
Catholicism is well represented, with very welcome side effects in the way of 
bars and pizzerias.

One of the most intriguing sects to have flourished in the area were the 
Shakers, a commune-based order of Christians who devoted their "hearts to God 
and hands to work". They were entirely celibate, yet managed to sustain several 
communities for nearly 200 years, through conversion and adoption. Their simple 
lifestyle is celebrated at their village in Canterbury, New Hampshire. The 
Shakers are most famous, though, for their elegant style: their furniture and 
clothes showed divine simplicity, and reproductions of both are available. As 
with many simple things, though, they don't come cheap: a Shaker cardigan sells 
for $250, and a rocking chair for $460.

Because most of the states have very low sales tax and New Hampshire has none 
at all, several "outlet" centres have evolved with some towns almost entirely 
dedicated to selling branded goods at significantly reduced prices.

The Maine town of Freeport is one of the more surreal examples, being a 
functioning town that was gradually taken over by Levi's, Ralph Lauren and the 
like until there was almost nothing else left. Here, you can stock up on men's 
501s at $34.99, and Calvin Klein briefs at $10, but don't expect to find 
anything too original or quirky. Gallingly, you can also find Burberry blazers 
and Reebok trainers (direct from London, England) at huge discounts.

In New England's tourist resorts, the shopping is more adventurous. As some of 
the oldest parts of America, the coastal towns of Kennebunkport, Portsmouth and 
Newport offer some serious antique shopping. Portsmouth has a somewhat bohemian 
flavour as well, so the work of local artisans is plentiful, though of very 
mixed quality and usually impressively costly. Spotted in Kennebunkport: three 
maple leaf skeletons, dyed and suspended in a picture frame, at a cost of $195. 
One for the committed leaf-peeper.

Boston, the region's main city, is also a shopper's delight. Prices for 
clothes and electronics in the US are usually the same in dollars as they would 
be in pounds, and there is the added bonus in Boston of some very decent and 
inexpensive chain stores that haven't made it over here (yet). My own credit 
card was abused in Abercrombie & Fitch, J Crew and Banana Republic, while the 
girls got pretty reckless in Express and Pottery Barn.

A very Bostonian curiosity is Filene's basement, in a department store in the 
city centre. This is like all the crazy sales you've ever seen, with bins piled 
high with dirt-cheap branded clothing, and it runs all year round.

Charles Street, near the Harvard Bridge, has some charming boutiques, and a 
conservation order means every shop must advertise its wares with a wooden sign 
(the chiropractor's is a curved spine) and the street is permanently gaslit. 
Legend has it that the city council decided it was cheaper to leave the lights 
on than pay a man to light them every evening.

Harvard and MIT are both in Boston, along with several other universities, so 
the city is not short of record shops, bars and new and secondhand bookstores.

But a man can only shop so hard. When you've had enough, head for Newport, in 
Rhode Island, a watering hole for America's aristocracy (JFK and Jackie married 
and summered there). Check in to the Francis Malbone house, and after afternoon 
tea, have yourself a jar or two. New England, perhaps surprisingly, produces 
some of the finest beers anywhere, from weissbier through pale ale to porter, 
and Newport offers plenty of opportunities to sample them.

Refuelling points

 Christie's


 A favoured haunt of America's Cup crews and other yachtsmen, Christie's is 
vibrant and bustling The menu is hearty: huge, fresh lobsters and local beers. 
From $30-$50 a head, not including drinks.

·  351 Thames St, Newport, RI (tel: +401 847 5400). 

 White Horse Tavern


 Allegedly the oldest surviving tavern in the US, though every town in New 
England seems to have at least one "first in America". We didn't eat, but I can 
recommend the Newport porter.

·  Marlborough and Farewell Streets, Newport, RI 02840 (tel: +401 849 3600). 

 The Creamery


 The Creamery at the museum offers Shaker-inspired cooking, using organically 
grown ingredients, and only eschewing real Shaker recipes because they were too 
rich. A four-course meal costs $32pp including tax and gratuity but not drinks.

·  Canterbury Shaker Village, 288 Shaker Road, NH (tel: +603 783 9511). 
Reservations only. Open from April through to December but call for specific 
dining times and for more information.

 Hub Pub


 A welcome respite from pavement-pounding in the middle of Boston's main 
shopping streets. Real American pub grub and cold beer.

· 18 Province Street, Boston, MA 02108-5108 (tel: +617 227 8952). 

Way to go

 Getting there: British Airways (0845 7733377, ba.com) operates a twice daily 
service to Boston from £218pp plus tax for a three-day advance-purchase ticket.

 Where to stay: Courtyard Marriott, 1000 Market Street, Portsmouth NH 03801 
(tel: +603 436 2121). $89-$249 per room per night. Bow Street Inn, 121 Bow 
Street, Portsmouth, NH 03801 (tel: +603 431 7760). $115-$175 per room per night 
inc breakfast. Freeport Inn, US Route 1, Freeport, ME 04032 (tel: +207 865 
3106). $59.95-$79.95 per room per night. The Francis Malbone House, 392 Thames 
Street, Newport RI (tel: +401 846 0392). $99-$325 per room per night inc 
breakfast.

 Further information:  Discover New England operates a visitor information 
line, tel: 0906 55 88 555, weekdays 9.30am-6pm (with an answerphone in 
operation outside of these hours). Alternatively visitdiscovernewengland.org. 
Time difference: GMT -5hrs. Country code: 001 Flight time: Heathrow-Boston 
7hrs. £1 = 1.42 dollars.
 