
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> have 
been charged with breaking the Football Association’s anti-doping rules after 
allegedly failing to provide detailed “club whereabouts” information for their 
players on three separate occasions.

The charge does not concern any individual player. On Tuesday the governing 
body issued a statement which said: “It is alleged the club failed to ensure 
that their ‘club whereabouts’ information was accurate, contrary to regulation 
14(d).”

The Premier League club has until 19 January to respond to the charge and is 
likely to receive a financial punishment should it be found guilty. It is 
understood the charge concerns training schedules not having been updated with 
regard to where players would be at particular times – including members of 
City’s elite development squad.

The FA operates a whereabouts team that has to be informed of where any player 
of any club might be so that they can be tested whenever the anti-doping 
department of the governing body wishes.

The FA has a three-strikes-and-out policy and it is alleged City have fallen 
foul of this, having thrice failed to update schedules of players who have 
changed training times when they have, for example, moved to train with Pep 
Guardiola’s first-team squad. Once Manchester City enter a plea, an independent 
commission will sit and judge the case.

When this will occur is dependent on how City plead and what evidence it might 
provide for any mitigating circumstances. If the club accepts the charge the 
case should be resolved quicker than if it pleads not guilty as the commission 
will require more time to consider it.

The matter concerns a breach of FA rules only and is not under the 
jurisdiction of the World Anti-Doping Agency, which has no provision for team 
violations in its code, or UK Anti-Doping.

Manchester City are not considered to have committed an anti-doping rule 
violation (ADRV), because there is no provision for team ADRVs in the World 
Anti-Doping Agency Code – the document that harmonises anti-doping policies and 
related rules and regulations for sport across the world. Instead City have 
been charged under FA rules only and are facing a code of conduct charge that 
is likely to lead to a reprimand or fine.

Regulation 14(a) reminds clubs that they must furnish the FA upon request with 
any whereabouts information, which at a minimum should include the dates their 
players train, the start and finish times of training, the address at which 
such training will take place; and the home address for a player and any other 
address at which they regularly reside overnight.

Regulation 14(c) also tells clubs that it will be a breach of the regulation 
for a club to fail to provide regular details of the times, dates and venues of 
the club’s training sessions in the manner directed by the FA. Regulation 14(d) 
– which Manchester City have violated – says it is a breach of the regulations 
if the information contained in such reports is either initially inaccurate or 
has not been updated by the club as necessary to ensure it remains accurate.

Guardiola’s side are fourth in the Premier League on 42 points, seven behind 
the leaders, Chelsea, and next play Everton at Goodison Park on Sunday. City’s 
captain, Vincent Kompany, may be back after seven weeks out with a knee injury. 
The Belgian has been training all week with the senior squad, along with Leroy 
Sané who has been out with a muscle injury since before Christmas.
 