
Pep Guardiola has urged his Manchester City players to be “mentally stronger” 
followingthe 3-1 defeat by Chelsea on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, with the manager putting the result down to a failure by his team to take 
their chances against Antonio Conte’s side.

City took the lead thanks to a Gary Cahill own goal but failed to capitalise 
on opportunities to increase their advantage, with Kevin De Bruyne hitting the 
bar with the goal gaping. Instead, Chelsea staged an impressive comeback , 
scoring three times in the closing third of the contest, which ended with 
Fernandinho and Sergio Agüero being sent off in a late melee.

It was confirmed on Monday that Agüero will serve a four-match ban for his 
lunge on David Luiz. Both City and Chelsea have also been charged by the 
Football Association for failing to control their players during the mass 
confrontation that ensued following Agüero’s reckless tackle and during which 
Fernandinho clashed with Cesc Fàbregas. The Brazilian will now serve a 
three-match domestic ban.

FA charges Manchester City and Chelsea with failure to control their players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/fa-bans-manchester-city-sergio-aguero-fernandinho-chelsea>
Guardiola, whose side host Celtic on Tuesday night in their final Champions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group match with 
qualification to the knockout stages already sealed, said: “In this kind of 
game against big teams you have to be lucky, in the sense you score goals and 
you don’t concede. We were unlucky. That’s why you have to improve and mentally 
be stronger in the moments when we don’t score a goal or concede, like we did 
in the first half, keep going, keep going. It’s a long road and [Chelsea] does 
not finish our season. We are going to improve on that.”

Despite the defeat, Guardiola believes what he witnessed from his team was 
encouraging. He said: “We analyse the last minutes and the result and they won, 
congratulations, but we played quite well, really. That’s why I’m satisfied. 
Much better than the last two games away [against Burnley and Crystal Palace] 
where we won and nobody said anything.

“Of course I would have preferred to have won against Chelsea and we would be 
top of the league. “Then our analysis would be completely different. But I’m 
confident because we played 60, 65 minutes good. We need to continue and when 
we do, we’ll be there.

“When our game is up and down, like Crystal Palace and Burnley, you win when 
you don’t play well or don’t deserve it. But now I’m happy and half an hour 
later, one hour when I am home after the Chelsea game, I think to myself: ‘This 
season is going to be good.’”

City’s double sending-off against Chelsea made it a total of six red cards in 
the 23 matches they have played in all competitions this season. Fernandinho 
and Agüero have received two each and Nolito and Claudio Bravo have also been 
sent off. However, Guardiola refused to discuss his side’s disciplinary issues 
when they were put to him on Monday. “We are the best team with ball possession 
and with most red cards,” was his response. Regarding who was responsible for 
the fracas on Saturday that included the double sending off, Guardiola said: 
“The players.” Asked again, he said: “The fans. You. Me.”

There was also no concern voiced regarding the side’s defence. City have kept 
just one clean sheet in their past 15 games in all competitions. “I don’t 
divide football in attack and defence,” Guardiola said.

“Of course there are individual actions when you score goals. We create 
enough. Football is a continued transition. When you attack well, you defend 
well. It is not about the strikers just focusing on attack and the defenders 
just focus on defending. I don’t think like that.”

Guardiola will make changes for the visit of Celtic. “There will be changes, 
definitely. I am so happy to give minutes to people who deserve to play and who 
did not play in the last games,” he said. “If Sergio [Agüero] is going to play 
or not, I am going to decide today or tomorrow. I don’t know at the moment.”
 