
If this was his last match as Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> manager, Louis van 
Gaal at least went out on a note of triumph. He arrived for his post-match 
press conference with the FA Cup, planting the trophy on the table in front of 
him, and when the questions were done he lifted it on two separate occasions as 
he made his way to the door. “Thank you for the congratulations,” he repeated 
twice, glowering at the people he described, with no great affection, as his 
“friends in the media”.

José Mourinho set to be appointed Manchester United manager next week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/jose-mourinho-to-be-appointed-manchester-united-manager-next-week>
By that stage the news had already been leaked that José Mourinho, Van Gaal’s 
old friend and colleague, should be installed in the coming days and, amid all 
the celebrations on the pitch a short while earlier, it was certainly 
noticeable that United’s supporters reacted differently when the Dutchman was 
shown on the giant screens. There were even some isolated boos when it was his 
turn to lift the trophy and the cheer was nothing like as loud as that moment 
when Sir Alex Ferguson appeared, pointed at himself and clenched a fist, with 
that familiar rubicund smile.

United’s supporters must pine for those happy old days but at least the club 
have won their first major trophy since Ferguson announced his retirement three 
years ago. It has taken longer than the club might have anticipated but 
finally, after all the disappointments of the Van Gaal era, the accusations of 
blandness and the permanent suspicion that a once-mighty club have been 
dramatically under-achieving, they have remembered what it is like to win a 
trophy and the joys it can bring.

They also had to do it in the manner of the old United – or, at least, with 
some of the old capacity for worrying their supporters – given that Jason 
Puncheon had givenCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> a 78th-minute lead and 
Chris Smalling was sent off for his second bookable offence after Juan Mata’s 
equaliser had taken the game into extra time.

The winner came in the 111th minute courtesy of Jesse Lingard’s equivalent of 
Lee Martin’s famous goal when these sides met at the old Wembley 26 years 
earlier and Alan Pardew might come to regret his touchline dance when Puncheon 
volleyed past David de Gea and Palace’s manager showed the moves of a tipsy 
uncle at a wedding. Pardew looked like he had been spent the morning practising 
in the mirror but Palace were ahead for only two minutes and United showed 
great competitive courage after Smalling’s dismissal late in the first period 
of extra-time.

Lingard might never have struck a shot with more power and precision and, on 
the balance of play, it was difficult to argue it was undeserved. United had 
struck the post twice in the second half and Marcus Rashford’s speed, 
directness and high confidence made him a frequent danger until he was forced 
off with a second-half injury that might threaten his involvement in England’s 
pre-Euro 2016 plans. Wayne Rooney was prominently involved in his new midfield 
position and Marouane Fellaini, often the player United’s supporters like the 
least, justified his selection after three games out with suspension.

More than anything, United showed great competitive courage after the jolt of 
going behind and, though the occasion will probably be remembered for Lingard’s 
winner, perhaps the most impressive part was the way they absolutely refused to 
accept defeat. Rooney, showing all his leadership qualities, eluded three 
challenges on the run that led to Mata’s equaliser. His cross was expertly 
turned across the six-yard area and Mata provided the volleyed finish after 
Fellaini had chested the ball down.

Pardew reflected afterwards about the moment in the first half when Rooney 
chased Wilfried Zaha into the penalty area, missing the ball with his sliding 
challenge but was given the benefit of the doubt by the referee, Mark 
Clattenburg. Puncheon’s goal left Palace on the brink of the greatest result in 
their 110-year history and the glory could still have gone their way if another 
substitute, Dwight Gayle, had managed to beat De Gea with their best chance of 
extra-time, with the score at 1-1.

What a noise the Palace fans created, rarely letting the volume drop and 
urging on their team during those difficult moments when Fellaini lashed one 
shot against a post, Anthony Martial struck the frame of the goal with a header 
and Pardew’s men struggled to cause too many problems at the other end.

Louis van Gaal was doomed at Manchester United by refusal to adapt | Amy 
Lawrence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/21/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-sack>
It was unusual for United’s supporters to be out-sung so comprehensively but, 
then again, it was an unusual occasion in many ways. It was difficult to think 
of anotherFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> final when the 
winning manager has been condemned so quickly and, if that will be remembered 
as an embarrassment for United, there was an awkward sub-plot for the Football 
Association as well, bearing in mind the ridiculous razzmatazz that preceded 
the game. With the teams waiting to come out, the build-up involved shooting 
flames, a bemusing cameo from Tinie Tempah and enough nonsense to delay the 
start by five minutes, all capped off by a singer who was supposed to be taking 
us through the national anthem missing her cue. Karen Harding later described 
herself as “mortified”.

Thankfully, a game of football did eventually break out and, though it was 
certainly not a classic, that probably was not a tremendous surprise for anyone 
who has watched United closely in the Van Gaal era.

On this occasion, though, he could legitimately argue that his tactics and 
substitutions had worked. United have now equalled Arsenal’s record of 12 FA 
Cup wins and Lingard will never forget the moment when Antonio Valencia’s cross 
was turned back into his path on the edge of the penalty area. Lingard’s volley 
was a peach, still rising as it hit the net. “It was a beautiful goal,” Van 
Gaal said, and some way for a manager to potentially go out, a trophy in his 
hands.
 