
This was not the first time Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> have failed to turn 
dominance into victory and not the first time José Mourinho has been sent to 
the stands.

United will rue their lack of ruthlessness and Mourinho may regret the 
27th‑minute incident in which he kicked a water bottle in anger at the booking 
by Jonathan Moss of Paul Pogba for diving, which was actually proved to be the 
correct decision by the referee.

Mourinho received a one-match ban for verbal misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-manager-ban-fa-referee>
 towards Mark Clattenburg during the draw here with Burnley in October.

The United manager may well be handed a similar punishment – at a minimum – 
for his behaviour on Sunday, with Moss also the referee who dismissed him 
againstWest Ham United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> at 
the Boleyn Ground when he was with Chelsea last season.

Speaking in Mourinho’s absence his assistant, Rui Faria, said the manager’s 
ire derived from Pogba apparently deserving a foul earlier in the same 
incident, though what evidence there was seemed inconclusive.

None of this should distract from another disappointing result for United that 
leaves them with 20 points, their poorest return after 13 matches since the
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> began.

“We were the best team on the pitch,” Faria said. “We didn’t have any tactical 
issues during the game. The game was what we expected. Defensively we were very 
compact. Offensively we created the chances to win. We are showing that as a 
team we are a strong side and we can do very good things.”

Of Diafra Sakho’s opening goal for West Ham, he said: “We will have time to 
analyse the goal. When you concede a goal there is always a reason for that and 
something that went wrong at a defensive set play. If it is something wrong it 
is something we will try to correct. We need to watch.”

Towards the end, Henrikh Mkhitaryan hit the right post and Jesse Lingard 
finished but this was adjudged offside. Pogba went close with a shot Darren 
Randolph – who had a fine outing – saved impressively.

However, despite the grandstand finish United might have lost. At the death 
the replacement Ashley Fletcher forced David de Gea into a frantic close-range 
stop.

This means Manchester United are now 11 points behind Chelsea and any 
title‑challenging hopes distant. Faria dead‑batted a question on whether the 
prospect is now gone.

“In this moment we are more looking to the team and trying to get the best 
results,” he said. “We knew the job was not easy and we try to change things. 
We believe things will change and what we are chasing will arrive for sure.

“If it was easy, the ones who were here before would do it. We had a lot of 
work in front and it is what we are doing. It is big work and we are also used 
to big clubs and we know how to take a big club to win. We know we will get it.”

For the third time this season United were caught out at the kick-off. The 
previous two occasions led to goals by Chelsea (after 40 seconds) and 
Fenerbahce (two minutes) – and 90 seconds were gone on Sunday when United went 
behind.

This was simple stuff. Dimitri Payet lifted a free-kick in from the right and 
Sakho eased ahead of Zlatan Ibrahimovic to head home. Ander Herrera may or may 
not have been impeded by Michail Antonio as the ball flew past but Ibrahimovic 
should still have done better. Or, perhaps, an actual defender – Phil Jones or 
Marcos Rojo – might have been detailed to mark Sakho.

The bottom line was that the Portuguese was reduced to waving his men back to 
restart quickly and United were behind far too soon.

Slowly, United took over and, 19 minutes later, equalised via the intelligence 
of Pogba and Ibrahimovic. When the Frenchman looked up he saw the No9 darting 
into space and landed a chip on his head from which Ibrahimovic beat Randolph 
for his ninth goal of the season.

Then came Mourinho’s latest altercation with an official.

Manchester United v West Ham United: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/27/manchester-united-v-west-ham-united-premier-league-live>
When Pogba went down following a Mark Noble challenge it appeared the 
Frenchman had been fouled. Mourinho was incandescent that he was booked but 
replays showed Moss was correct. Moments before, Payet had bought a free-kick 
when Ander Herrera seemed to make zero contact and this also made Mourinho 
cross. This may have added to his fury at Pogba’s yellow card yet, really, he 
should have calmed himself. Instead, a water bottle went flying and off he 
went, though where to exactly was a mystery.

Arsenal’s 3-1 win against Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/arsenal-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
 earlier had increased the need for United to win if they wished to keep the 
top four in sight. So as he ordered his side out for the second half Mourinho 
surely urged them to hunt for the three points.

The XI chosen showed six changes from Thursday night. Out went Wayne Rooney, 
Mkhitaryan, Luke Shaw, Sergio Romero, Michael Carrick and Daley Blind. In came 
De Gea, Rojo, Matteo Darmian, Marcus Rashford, Lingard and Herrera.

There was a place, too, for Bastian Schweinsteiger on the bench – yet by the 
close West Ham had an invaluable point and United were staring at a fourth 
consecutive home league draw.

The West Ham manager, Slaven Bilic, said: “I am very pleased with the 
performance.”
 