
It was cold, wet and horrible – the kind of night to make a continental 
manager pine for those winter breaks. There have been plenty of pictures doing 
the rounds in recent days of European players reclining on beach loungers in 
expensive-looking locations. Pep Guardiola’s pleasure was a first taste of 
football’s oldest competition.

It all turned out rather nicely. The spotlight had burned intensely on the 
Manchester City manager, a result of a few sketchy results in December andhis 
tetchiness after his team’s home win over Burnley last Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-city-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
. He had given the impression of being a little embattled with this English 
football lark. The vultures were circling.

West Ham 0-5 Manchester City: FA Cup third round – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/06/west-ham-manchester-city-fa-cup-third-round-live>
His City team gave a powerhouse performance, shaped by a virtuoso display from 
David Silva, the floating midfield sprite, and marked by ruthlessness. It was 
an occasion when everything went right for Guardiola’s team. Take the fourth 
goal. Yaya Touré sliced his shot following Raheem Sterling’s pass back to him 
but it flew perfectly into Sergio Agüero’s space and he touched home deftly.

The game had turned on a soft 33rd-minute penalty, awarded after Pablo 
Zabaleta drew contact from Angelo Ogbonna. Touré rifled it past Adrián. But 
City had been the better team up until that point and they cut loose thereafter.

Sterling pressured Havard Nordtveit into putting through his own goal and 
Silva ended the game as a contest with the third before half-time. He 
practically had a cigar out before he placed his shot past Adrián.

Slaven Bilic was still smouldering after West Ham’s 2-0 loss to Manchester 
United here on Monday, when Sofiane Feghouli had been wrongly sent off in the 
15th minute. The card would be rescinded but it was too little, too late. “I 
still feel angry and disappointed,” Bilic said, earlier on Friday.

He could express his exasperation over the penalty award but this was a night 
when West Ham were outclassed by a strong Guardiola selection.

Bilic used Dimitri Payet only as a 57th-minute substitute and the winger 
managed to nutmeg Agüero. There was precious little else for West Ham to 
remember. Feghouli blew their only clear chance at 1-0 down and it was a 
terrible miss from close range.

Pep Guardiola sitting pretty as Slaven Bilic looks for a place to hide | Simon 
Burnton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/manchester-city-pep-guardiola-west-ham-fa-cup>
Guardiola’s lineups are routinely difficult to classify, such is the movement 
of his players and the manner in which they interchange positions, and nobody 
is harder to pin down than Silva. His licence to roam was pronounced and so, 
too, was his threat.

There was one lovely cutback in the early running for Zabaleta, who offered a 
passable impression of a box-to-box midfielder, and his shot was blocked by 
Winston Reid while, from a Gaël Clichy pass, Silva worked Adrián.

Watching football in this vast bowl remains a curious experience. There were 
moments here when the noise levels rose sharply but many more when it all 
seemed to drift away on the breeze. Perhaps City simply succeeded in taking the 
sting out of the occasion.

West Ham’s Sofiane Feghouli has red card against Manchester United rescinded
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/west-ham-sofiane-feghouli-red-card-manchester-united-rescinded-fa>
Their passing was too slick for West Ham and it felt symbolic that Bilic’s 
team did not even pick up a yellow card in what was a humiliation. They could 
not get close to their City counterparts.

The visitors had further advertised the opening goal through Sterling and 
Agüero. The first chance was created by Silva only for Sterling to choose the 
wrong option in jinking inside Nordtveit; Reid nipped back to tackle. Agüero’s 
effort was a beautifully sculpted side-on volley, after Michail Antonio’s ropey 
clearance. Adrián tipped over.

It took the penalty to break the deadlock and it was a depressing moment for 
West Ham and Ogbonna. Everybody inside the stadium knew that Zabaleta was going 
to take a touch following Silva’s cute pass and then see if there was any 
contact to be had inside the area. Thanks to Ogbonna, there was. Did Zabaleta 
initiate it? Possibly. Yet it was there and the referee, Michael Oliver, was 
entitled to point to the spot. From West Ham’s point of view, it just felt so 
needless.

Pep Guardiola insists he has ‘no plans to retire’ from football any time soon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/pep-guardiola-insists-he-has-no-plans-to-retire-from-football-manchester-city>
West Ham’s big moment came immediately after the penalty. Antonio bustled 
through and his shot was pushed out by Willy Caballero but only as far as 
Feghouli. He looked odds-on to score but when Clichy dived into a saving 
challenge, he managed to distract him and Feghouli shot badly wide. Antonio had 
also worked Caballero on 14 minutes.

City summoned a devastating one-two punch. First, Bacary Sagna ran on to 
Agüero’s ball forward and put a devilish delivery into the area towards 
Sterling. In front of his own goal, Nordtveit was in that unenviable position 
for a defender. He could not leave it; he had to do something. The right-back 
stretched out his right leg but he succeeded only in diverting it past Adrián.

Minutes later, it was 3-0. Sterling swapped passes with Agüero and bombed away 
and, when he looked across, he had Silva completely unmarked in the centre. 
Silva had the time and composure to take a touch following Sterling’s low cross 
and, with Adrián grounded, impudently rolled the ball past him.

Guardiola could afford to remove Silva on 57 minutes, and Kevin De Bruyne and 
Touré after that, and the last word went to John Stones. From the substitute 
Nolito’s corner, he flashed home a header that the goalline technology showed 
had crossed the line before Mark Noble’s attempted clearance. It was Stones’s 
first goal for City since joining last summer.
 