
It made me feel sentimental to see “mansplaining” in the news again. Did you 
read the story? Actually, there have been two: the first was thatUnionen, 
Sweden’s largest trade union, has launched a mansplaining hotline 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-sweden-unions-mansplaining-idUKKBN13A1WB> for 
women to phone if they’ve been a victim of male condescension.

Oh, with what shivers of nostalgia this took me back. Back, back, back to the 
salad days of, ooh, 2013 it must have been, when I first heard the term.

It was pretty obvious what it meant, though somebody (probably a man) told me 
anyway: mansplaining is when a male explains something to a female in 
unnecessary detail, often a female who understands it better than he does. I 
was familiar with the phenomenon, of course. Every woman has had simple things 
explained to her at interminable length by a man. That’s just basic social 
interaction.

Of course it’s annoying; nobody likes to be treated like a fool. Of course 
it’s boring; nobody likes to be lectured. But still, how wistfully I remember 
the luxury of being troubled by that sort of thing, in the long-lost idyll of 
2013.

Do you remember what troubled you back then? On the world stage, I mean. You 
may have struggled – may still struggle – with all sorts of private worries: a 
medical trauma, a row at work, a harrowing debt. The way your wife runs out of 
the room giggling when her phone bleeps late at night. That weird recurrent 
dream you have about a marrow festival.

But the things we worried about generally, in 2013… my word, I spent serious 
time worrying about whether the 500-year-old remains of Richard III should be 
buried in York or Leicester! Those were the bloody days.

Have we really got time and space, now, to kvetch about whether men talk to 
women in a patronising way? With all the other wars that threaten to wage?

The truth is, I don’t think mansplaining is even sexist. I don’t think men 
reserve a patronising tone for women alone. It’s just how they talk.

In the original essay Men Explain Things To Me 
<https://www.guernicamag.com/daily/rebecca-solnit-men-explain-things-to-me/> 
(which, although not actually coining the zeitgeisty word, is credited with 
being the core identifier of the tendency), author Rebecca Solnit writes about 
a man who lectured her on the subject of one of her own published books.

Because he employed the sort of painstaking, long-winded detail that Solnit 
herself would only use if giving instructions to an idiot, she assumed the man 
thought she was an idiot. But the point that I think has been missed by Solnit 
– and by all the women who have written and talked about mansplaining ever 
since – is:men also talk this way to each other. It’s not that they don’t defer 
to women. It’s that they don’t defer to anyone.

Men simply love explaining things. That is what men want to do in 
conversation: make jokes and explain things. Your average man would be happy to 
tell Gareth Southgate how to manage the England football team, or the head of 
MI6 how to deal with Isis, or Stephen Hawking what he reckons about black holes.

It isn’t about the person they’re talking to – it’s about themselves. If 
anything, the inclination could be seen as a compliment. They offer their 
nuggets of wisdom as gifts, like a cat offers a half-eaten bird.

That doesn’t mean there is no danger in the mansplaining tendency. Many of the 
world’s problems can probably be traced to the way men take this approach into 
government, filling the atmosphere with a load of hot, unschooled certainty. I 
suspect we’d be better off if we all reached consensus by respecting others’ 
opinions and experience.

But socially no harm is meant by it. Men would be terribly sad if they were 
told they must never explain anything again. They get so much pleasure from 
being expansive, from chewing over their thoughts, sharing a bit of 
half-remembered fact or quote, airing a littleaperçu that occurred to them when 
driving along the M6. And sometimes it is properly informative or enjoyable.

That is Christmas, for most men: sipping a tasty drink, reaching for the 
nutcrackers and settling in for a good long disquisition on why it rains or 
what’s wrong with modern television or whither North Korea.

And, if you ask me, the biggest problem facing our western world at the moment 
is the decline of kindness. As huge differences of opinion batter against each 
other, we forget to be gentle and careful with each other’s dreams, respectful 
of each other’s self-worth.

It means a lot to your poor old dad, uncle, colleague, husband or friend to 
offer his advice and insights. Sitting there, mug or glass clutched eagerly in 
hand, looking forward to holding forth… how much do you really want to see him 
quiet and disappointed, confronting his own limitations? How much do you want 
to shout: “Nobody gives a shit, Granddad! You pompous old bore! Let’s talk 
about me!”? How much are you actually reduced if you let him feel listened to?

At the start of this column, I said there had been two recent stories about 
mansplaining. The first was that the 600,000-strong Unionen has launched a 
mansplaining hotline.

And the second, which followed soon after, is that the majority of calls to 
the hotline have been from men: anxious, self-doubting men, asking exactly what 
mansplaining is and how to avoid doing it.

Beware of throwing your ire at the wrong target. It’s so easy to get angry 
about things. Too easy. We get distracted from what’s actually important, 
dissipating our energy with the wrong fights.

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> don’t want to be 
silenced by men. But I don’t think the answer is for us to silence them in 
return.
 