
One of the two security guards stationed outside Hull City’s training ground 
on Friday clutched a sheet of densely scripted A4 paper. It detailed the names 
of journalists permitted entry to Marco Silva’s unveiling as the club’s manager 
and proved something of a novelty.

“This is the first time we’ve ever needed a list,” joked one sentry, pulling 
his collar up against the driving rain and raw wind on one of those bleak 
January days which never seems to become properly light.

Inside the slightly old-fashioned clubhouse which serves as Hull’s weekday HQ, 
the reason for all this fuss sat behind a table, stressing that the weather 
really was the least of his problems before deflecting repeated invitations to 
liken himself to José Mourinho.

Looking for a Silva lining: the big problems facing Hull’s new manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/04/looking-for-a-silva-lining-the-big-problems-facing-hulls-new-manager>
The 39-year-old Portuguese charged with somehow lifting Hull off the bottom of 
the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/hull-city-appoint-marco-silva-as-new-manager>
 and rescuing them from relegation is not only a good friend of Manchester 
United’s manager but looks a bit like a cross between a younger Mourinho and 
Luís Figo. Yet if Silva’s appearance alone invites parallels, the former 
Estoril, Sporting Lisbon and Olympiakos manager prefers to avoid them.

“I don’t like the comparison with José,” says a man more concerned with 
pulling off what he readily acknowledges would be “a miracle” in east 
Yorkshire. “It’s not a bad one and José’s a fantastic, open person but I don’t 
like it.” Yet if Mourinho is the “special one” how does he describe himself? 
“As Marco Silva,” he replies. “That’s my name.”

Despite winning last season’s Greek title with Olympiakos, lifting the 
Portuguese cup at Sporting and, earlier, leading Estoril into Portugal’s top 
tier, Silva was very much a shock choice to succeed the sacked Mike Phelan.

On his part, though, this was very much a planned move. It is no accident that 
his English, honed during that year in Athens, is much better than advertised 
and reduced Friday’s interpreter to a peripheral role. “In Greece I was already 
thinking about the next step – learning English was part of that,” he says. 
“The Premier League is the biggest league. Now my biggest ambition is this 
miracle.”

Hull City appoint Marco Silva as new manager on deal until end of the season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/hull-city-appoint-marco-silva-as-new-manager>
Despite signing merely a six-month contract at a club very much up for sale, 
his calm courtesy and humour-tinged charm are underpinned by 
considerable self-assurance and he stresses longevity is the ambition. “My 
aim,” he says. “Is to stay many more years in the Premier League.”

Doing so may well require the completion of that “miracle” and, as he prepared 
for Saturday’s FA Cup tie at home to Swansea City, Silva will doubtless have 
been relieved to learn that the Allam family, Hull’s owners, had turned down a 
£3m bid for Robert Snodgrass from West Ham. The Scotland winger is the team’s 
most gifted player and Silva desperately needs him on his side.

“Of course, this job is a risk,” he says. “But a coach’s life always has risks 
and I believe it’s possible to change this situation. I know we don’t have a 
lot of time but I would tell fans to believe, like I believe.”

A coach who although represented by Carlos Gonçalves is close to Jorge Mendes, 
the Portuguese super-agent, has faith an understaffed squad will shortly be 
restocked. “I know what the team needs,” he says. “The owners know what the 
team needs; you wait until we do our business. But it’s clear we need to 
improve our roster. Today I have only 14 or 15 fit players.”

Apart from working his contacts to import talent, he indicated Hull’s 
all-Portuguese backroom could soon be supplemented by an English coach – “maybe 
next week” – hired to help accelerate his integration to British life.

Silva certainly could be forgiven for feeling a certain culture shock after 
being parachuted into possibly the Premier League’s most modest training 
facility. “It’s true, it’s different from Olympiakos and Sporting,” he agrees, 
surveying the cloud shrouding the bottom of the long, narrow, semi-rural lane 
in Cottingham leading to his new workplace.

Situated a few miles west of Hull, resolutely middle-class Cottingham – among 
England’s safest Conservative seats, local MP key Brexiteer David Davis – is 
one of those places which cannot quite decide whether it is a large country 
village or a leafy suburban dormitory. It may initially seem a slightly 
puzzling habitat to a lifelong urbanite accustomed to Lisbon and Athens but 
Silva will not have to venture far to feel oddly at home.

After all, a reminder of the Vasco da Gama bridge – Europe’s longest – arcing 
imperiously, and seemingly endlessly, over the Tagus is merely a long goal-kick 
away. The Humber bridge possesses marginally less wow factor but remains an 
impressive, similarly evocative, sight.

Whereas Da Gama, one of the great Portuguese explorers, was the first European 
to reach India by sea, Silva follows in the footsteps of, among others, 
Mourinho, André Villas-Boas and Sheffield Wednesday’s Carlos Carvalhal in 
attempting to conquer England.

Hull’s status as the UK’s city of culture for 2017 may reflect a changing 
image and spirit of regeneration but its football club remains one of the 
country’s toughest outposts.

Indeed, many believe even his friend Mourinho – whom he will shortly meet in 
the EFL Cup semi-finals – might struggle to keep Hull in the top tier. 
“Sometimes miracles do happen, though,” Silva counters. “Maybe in May the 
miracle happens here.”
 