
A late equaliser by the substitute Marco Reus allowed Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> to peg back the 
holders, Real Madrid, and win Group F after setting a scoring record of 21 
goals in the group stage of the Champions League.

Karim Benzema scored in each half at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium to give 
Madrid a 2-0 lead, but the forward Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang pulled one back 
for the German side before Reus struck in the 88th minute. “In the end it was a 
happy outcome for us,” the Dortmund coach, Thomas Tuchel, said. “It was very 
important to stand up toReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> twice. We played full of 
courage.”

Dortmund had drawn 2-2 with Real when they met in Germany. Cristiano Ronaldo’s 
team were left with the consolation of matching the club’s 34-game unbeaten 
streak that had stood since the late 1980s.

“We had a lot of opportunities to put the game away and we didn’t,” the Real 
coach, Zinedine Zidane, said. “We played a good match but couldn’t get the win, 
now we have to move on. In the end it was well-deserved for them [Dortmund] for 
what they have done so far.”

Dortmund finished the group with 14 points, two more than Real. Legia Warsaw, 
who defeated Sporting Lisbon 1-0 in Poland, finished third with four points to 
qualify for the Europa League.

“To win the Champions League it doesn’t matter if you are first or second in 
the group,” Benzema said. “You have to beat all the teams.” Ronaldo was kept 
scoreless for the fourth straight game in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>, again missing the 
chance to become the first player to score 100 goals in European competitions. 
His total remains at 98.

Benzema opened the scoring from close range after 28 minutes, connecting with 
a low cross by Dani Carvajal from the right flank. The Frenchman added to the 
lead early in the second half with a firm header after a cross by James 
Rodríguez.

Aubameyang scored from inside the area and then set up Reus’s equaliser after 
a quick counterattack. Aubameyang’s goal helped Dortmund match the previous 
record of 20 group-stage goals, a mark that had been achieved by three other 
clubs: Barcelona, this season and in 2011-12, Real in 2013-14 and Manchester 
United in 1998-99.

Dortmund’s campaignincluded 6-0 and 8-4 routs against Legia. The draw allowed 
Zidane’s team to match Madrid’s unbeaten run set under coach Leo Beenhakker in 
the 1988-89. Real are undefeated since April at Wolfsburg in last season’s 
quarter-final first leg. “It’s important to continue to make history and 
continue our good run,” Zidane said.

Ronaldo’s best chance was a close-range shot that struck the far post in the 
78th minute. He had also come close 10 minutes earlier with a right-foot strike 
that forced a cross-handed save from the Dortmund goalkeeper, Roman 
Weidenfeller.

He remains the competition’s all-time leading scorer with 95 goals, two more 
than Lionel Messi, who netted his 93rd in Barcelona’s 4-0 win over Borussia 
Moenchengladbach on Tuesday. It was Messi’s 10th goal in the group stage, one 
short of Ronaldo’s record of 11 achieved last year.

Ronaldo only scored two goals in this season’s group stage, his worst mark 
since joining the Spanish club in 2009.
 