
Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> has a new young champion. 
Whether Marin Cilic is at the vanguard of the much discussed, long awaited 
power shift after beating Kei Nishikori in three quick sets to win the 2014 US 
Open on Monday night we will discover in what now looms as the most intriguing 
year in the sport for a decade.

At last, after 10 years of dominance by a small handful of great players, 
tennis has what invigorates every area of life, from historic referendums to 
grand slam finals: uncertainty.

What we do know is that the Croatian is a history man, bad and good. The 
player whose career looked wrecked beyond repair when he was banned for drugs 
in 2013 finishes 2014 on top of the pile, champion in the closing major.

He is the first player from his country to reach a slam final since his coach, 
Goran Ivanisovic, won Wimbledon in 2001 – and how the big man went berserk in 
the stands when the fourth of his player’s backhand winners left Nishikori 
rooted to the baseline after an hour and 54 minutes for a clinical 6-3, 6-3, 
6-3 win.

“My team have brought something special to me, especially Goran,” Cilic said. 
“The most important thing he brought to me is joy in tennis, having fun. I 
think I played the best tennis in my life. For all the other players who work 
hard, this is a sign that it is going to pay off.”

Nishikori, who a few weeks ago thought a slowly healing cyst on his right foot 
might exclude him from the tournament, said, “He was playing really well today, 
I couldn’t play my tennis. It was a really tough loss but I am really happy to 
be in my first final.”

The Croatian had the bigger weapons, held his nerve better on the big points 
and fully deserved the victory. He travelled without the support of a single 
journalist from his homeland but the supporters who dotted the stadium wearing 
the distinctive red-and-white checked colours of Croatia certainly made their 
presence felt in a cavernous setting designed for raucous passion.

His 300th career win on his sixth visit to New York earned him not only $3m 
but 2,000 ranking points to lift him seven places to No 9 in the world, back 
inside the top 10 for the first time since April, 2010, simultaneously 
shuffling Andy Murray back to No 11, his lowest placing since June, 2008. 
Murray’s task of reaching the end-of-season ATP World Tour Finals got more 
difficult as Cilic bounds up to the top five on that list.

These are the subtle but significant indicators of change in tennis.

Although Murray said after losing to Novak Djokovic in the quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2014/sep/04/andy-murray-v-novak-djokovic-us-open-2014-quarter-final-live>
 that the prospect of missing a place in London did not concern him greatly, it 
will do nothing for his self-confidence, and he finds himself bobbing about in 
the same lifeboat as Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, whom he beat here to break his drought 
against top 10 players since winning Wimbledon last year.

This, though, was a night to savour for the wider possibilities it opens up 
for players who have been trying to bang down the door on the Big Four for 
years. It was the final that was not supposed to happen. We were supposed to be 
watchingFederer and Djokovic in a rematch of their Wimbledon final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/06/novak-djokovic-wins-wimbledon-title-roger-federer>
.

But those great players fell to these fine players in the semis. Cilic sealed 
it with one of the best serves in the game, a punishing two-fisted backhand 
that steadily dismantled Nishikori’s defensive game, as well as a delightful 
array of forehand winners.

He got to the final with 81 aces – 13 of them outfoxing Federer on Saturday – 
and put another 17 past Nishikori, three of them in a row to hold to love in 
the sixth game of the second set, a body blow which pretty much bled the 
remnants of resistance from him.

Cilic’s easy firepower with ball in hand far-outstripped that of his 
24-year-old opponent, a player known for speed and resilience and who came into 
the final on the back of only 30 aces. He managed two on Monday night.

Nishikori had also racked up way more pre-final court time – 16 hours 26 
minutes to Cilic’s 14 hours 49 minutes – and the two back-to-back five-setters 
he survived to beat Milos Raonic and Stanislas Wawrinka plainly left him 
drained, not to mention the nervous energy flooding through his body on the 
biggest night of his career.

The championship has its third new champion in six years, after Juan Martin 
del Potro in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/sep/15/juan-martin-del-potro-us-open>and
Murray two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2012/sep/11/us-open-andy-murray-video>
. Will either of those break into the upper echelons again? More than likely 
but now they have for company as legitimate rivals Nishikori and Cilic, who 
move alongside Grigor Dimitrov and Raonic as genuine threats.

As a measure of the change in the game, consider this: the final was the first 
between debutants in a decider since Pat Rafter beat Greg Rusedski 17 years 
ago. The last player outside the top 10 to win a major was the 44th ranked 
Gastón Gaudio at Roland Garros in 2004, just as Federer was establishing his 
regal presence and Rafael Nadal (absent injured) was snapping at his elegant 
heels.

Either or both of the finalists, of course, might find the pressure of 
emerging atthis level as difficult asWawrinka has done since beating Nadal in 
Melbourne this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/26/stanislas-wawrinka-rafael-nadal-australian-open>
 – or they could blossom at just the right point of the development, in 
theirmid-twenties as their slightly older betters come to terms with the new 
challenges.

It was not the final anyone had predicted but it was one people eventually 
accepted as inevitable, even if they rolled up slowly to fill maybe four-fifths 
of the available seats.

They played under grey skies on a mild Monday evening of 70-plus Fahrenheit, 
unlike Saturday when a 15-mile-an-hour breeze from the Atlantic caught in 
transit then dumped on the tennis, swirling at angles around Arthur Ashe court.

There were no storms last night. Even the weather was not interested.

But by the end everyone in tennis was taking notice. It felt very much like a 
significant turning point in the modern game.
 