
At her first big press conference in 1997, Pearson's new chief executive made 
a silly promise.Marjorie Scardino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/marjoriescardino> said the company's new 
goal was to achieve double-digit growth in earnings per share every year and to 
double the share price within five years. "I think we can do it and I think our 
shareholders should demand that we do it," she declared.

Briefly, in the dotcom madness that inflated the value of every media stock, 
the pledge was fufilled – indeed, surpassed. The share price actually tripled 
from Scardino's starting point. Then the reality dawned that FT.com was 
swallowing an awful lot of cash; worse, Scardino was perceived as having 
overpaid in her refashioning of the conglomerate. Everybody had understood the 
logic of shedding some of Pearson's bizarre collection of assets – such as 
Madame Tussauds, a half-share of Lazards in the UK and a bit of Channel 5 – but 
the march deeper into education in the US had come at a pretty price and 
delivered mundane initial returns. By 2002, the share price was lower than when 
she had started. Few would have bet on her surviving another decade at the helm.

It took several more years for those education investments to come good and 
for a Scardino-ledPearson <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson> to be 
recognised as a financial success. Indeed, it's only in the past four years 
that the share price has really begun to motor. Scardino's final statistics (or 
statistics with three months to go) look like this: share price up 88% during 
her time and total shareholder return (share price plus dividends) of 217%. 
It's a long way short of the excitement imagined in 1997 but a lot has happened 
in that time. Pearson's TSR performance trumps the 137% for the FTSE 100 index 
in the same period and puts the miserable 59% for UK media stocks to shame.

There's probably two morals there. First, chief executives should never 
promise a specific share price. Second, even when they do, they're worth 
keeping if the strategy and the culture is right, as they clearly are at 
Pearson.

Scardino's more-remembered remark, of course, is the one about how the 
Finacial Times would only be sold "over my dead body". That was in 2002, and 
probably did have the desired effect of giving the hacks at the pink 'un a 
greater sense of security (at least when they realised Scardino had staying 
power). But she has also been clear over the years that owning the FT opened 
doors in places where the Pearson name would receive a shrug of non-recognition 
– the Chinese education ministry, for example. Arguably, though, that benefit 
is not as necessary as it was. When you're now "the world's leading education 
company", which is how Pearson styles itself, maybe you no longer have to use 
the FT name as a calling card.

John Fallon, Scardino's successor, did not put his body on the line on 
Wednesday,preferring to describe the FT as a "highly valued and very valuable 
part of Pearson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/oct/03/pearson-marjorie-scardino-step-down>
". If you were a rich and ambitious company or individual in search of a trophy 
asset – Bloomberg, say, or a member of the wealthy Qatari dynasty – you might 
want to test what Fallon means.
 