
Mark Strand, a Pulitzer prize winner and former US poet laureate widely 
praised for his concentrated, elegiac verse, has died. He was 80.

Strand, whose works were translated into more than 30 languages, died Saturday 
morning at his daughter’s New York home from liposarcoma that had spread 
throughout his body, just weeks after entering hospice care, said his daughter, 
Jessica Strand.

“He was a funny, elegant, generous and brilliant man,” she said of her father. 
“A man who lived to work and to be with his friends and the people he loved.”

A distinctive presence even at the end of his life, with his lean build, white 
hair and round glasses, Strand received numerous honors, including the Pulitzer 
in 1999 for Blizzard of One, a gold medal from the American Academy of Arts and 
Letters and a National Book award nomination this fall for Collected Poems. He 
was appointed US poet laureate for 1990-91, although he did not count his time 
in Washington among his great achievements.

“It’s too close to the government. It’s too official. I don’t believe that 
poetry should be official ... there are poets who aspire to such positions; I 
never did.”

Author of more than a dozen books of poetry and several works of prose, Strand 
was haunted by absence, loss and the passage of time from the beginning of his 
career, sometimes peering just beyond the contents of the page and wondering 
what, if anything, was out there.

Strand also wrote children’s books and art criticism, helped edit several 
poetry anthologies and translated the Italian poet Rafael Alberti. He was a 
committed doubter, even about poetry. He went through occasional periods when 
he stopped writing verse and once quarreled with his publisher, Alfred A Knopf, 
because he considered his 2012 collection Almost Invisible to be prose, not 
poetry.

He was born in Prince Edward Island in Canada, his mother a painter, his 
father a salesman whose work led to the family living in many locales from Peru 
to Cleveland. Strand thought of himself first as an artist, and would dismiss 
his adolescent poetry as “feverish attempts to put my feelings on paper, and 
little more”.

He majored in art at Yale University, but felt stifled and by graduate school 
had decided he was better suited for writing, with Philip Larkin and Thomas 
Hardy among the poets he was reading. He received a master’s degree from the 
University of Iowa’s prestigious writers’ workshop, and later taught at Iowa, 
Columbia University and the University of Chicago, among other schools.

The most profound absence in his work was that of god, his atheism passed down 
to him from his father, who had terrified his young son with stories of 
heretics burned at the stake. In Poem After the Last Seven Words, from the 2006 
collection Man and Camel, Strand imagined how it felt “to open the dictionary 
of the Beyond and discover what one suspected, that the only word in it is 
nothing”.

“I haven’t met God and I haven’t been to heaven, so I’m skeptical,” he said. 
“Nobody’s come back to me to tell me they’re having a great time in heaven and 
that they’ve seen God, although there are a lot of people claiming that God is 
telling them what to do. I have no idea how God talks to them. Maybe they’re 
getting secret emails.”

His daughter said Saturday her father found comfort in art.

“We weren’t religious people, but we worshipped at the foot of culture,” she 
said. “He was always an artist.”

Besides his daughter, Mark Strand is survived by a sister and a son, Thomas, 
who lives in Seattle.
 