
Mauricio Pochettino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> 
has earned a reputation as a fine tactician, and this was a very impressive 
strategic performance by the Tottenham Hotspur coach against Antonio Conte’s 
3-4-3 system – the first time anyone has truly outwitted Chelsea in that shape.

Since Conte switched to 3-4-3 after a 3-0 defeat against Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-live>
 at the Emirates Stadium in September, Chelsea had won all 13 league matches, 
and had been so utterly dominant that opposition managers have found themselves 
terrified of playing their regular system for fear of being torn apart. The 
problem, though, is that no one had actually worked out which alternative shape 
to deploy either, and the most dramatic change in system from an opposition 
coach – Ronald Koeman sending out his Everton side in a 3-4-3 formation, 
matching Chelsea across the pitch – resulted in Conte’s mostcomprehensive 
Premier League victory, 5-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/chelsea-everton-premier-league-match-report>
. Pochettino’s decision to use a 3-4-3 of his own, therefore, was a very brave 
move – although the 4-1 weekend win over Watford in that shape proved very 
useful preparation.

Tottenham’s Dele Alli ends Chelsea’s winning run short of record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
Throughout much of the first half, it was obvious Spurs had sought to match 
Chelsea’s system, and the two sides effectively cancelled out one another. 
Neither side was capable of finding midfielders in space: Mousa Dembélé and 
Victor Wanyama were up against N’Golo Kanté and Nemanja Matic in a particularly 
feisty central battleground, while Danny Rose was tracked by Victor Moses and 
Marcos Alonso nullified Kyle Walker. In a 3-4-3 versus 3-4-3 battle, the 
midfield quartets were locked together closely.

Tottenham dominated possession, however, and there was a difference in how the 
teams pressed. Chelsea’s three forwards pressed sporadically, but Pedro 
Rodríguez and Eden Hazard often dropped back to keepChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> compact, allowing Spurs’ 
centre‑backs time on the ball. The left-sided centre‑back Jan Vertonghen, in 
particular, looked to bring the ball forward from defence and the majority of 
Spurs’ promising attacks in the first half came down that flank. Rose’s 
incredible pace and stamina became increasingly obvious, forcing both Pedro and 
Moses into clumsy tackles, while Dembele found space by drifting left and going 
on one of his typical, mazy slaloms between opposition defenders.

Pedro and Hazard offered surprisingly little counter-attacking threat, partly 
because Wanyama and Dembélé protected the defence well. Chelsea’s most 
memorable counter-attack was launched by Diego Costa through the centre of the 
pitch, which resulted in an almighty squabble between him and Pedro when the 
latter made a poor run. Hazard, so often the catalyst for Chelsea’s best 
attacking play this season, was quiet by his standards and the away side’s most 
promising approach was playing through-balls for Costa, who had a running 
battle with the linesman’s offside flag.

Mauricio Pochettino demands more from Tottenham after win over Chelsea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/mauricio-pochettino-tottenham-chelsea-antonio-conte>
Tottenham pressed more intensely and forced Chelsea’s defenders to play 
longer, often unsuccessful passes from the back. Their two attacking 
midfielders, Christian Eriksen and Dele Alli, played important roles and tended 
to drift inside into central positions. Without possession they pushed inside 
to help press Chelsea’s central midfielders, which often left the Chelsea 
wing-back on the far side unattended, and with possession they took up clever 
positions, which contributed to Alli’s opener. Eriksen was always drifting 
between the lines, while Alli is in fine goalscoring form and at times played 
more like a second striker. It was not entirely surprising, then, that Spurs’ 
goal came from Eriksen finding a pocket of space and dinking a perfect cross on 
to the head of the onrushing Alli, who looped a header past Thibaut Courtois. 
That, in first-half stoppage time, was the first shot on target of this 
contest, summarising a game when both teams seemed determined to stop the other.

Chelsea started the second half strongly, enjoying longer spells of pressure – 
although this allowed Tottenham more counter-attacking opportunities, and it 
took less than 10 minutes of for them to double their lead. The second goal was 
a carbon copy of the opener – after Eriksen exchanged passes with Walker, he 
again curled a perfect cross into the path of Alli, making a near-identical 
run, to head home once again. Chelsea, clearly, had not learned their lesson – 
and while their defence has been absolutely superb in recent months, Cesar 
Azpilicueta’s lack of height means he’s somewhat vulnerable to powerful 
far‑post runs to meet deep crosses.

Alli was the hero, but the real matchwinner here was Eriksen. In a fast-paced 
contest based around pressing, physicality and a clear clash of similar 
systems, the Dane was the only pure playmaker on show, and the only performer 
playing the game at a more reserved tempo, varying his position intelligently 
to find space away from his direct opponent. Indeed, it may have been crucial 
that Gary Cahill was booked for clumsily rugby‑tackling Eriksen on 38 minutes – 
having previously shut him down extremely quickly, suddenly the centre‑back was 
reluctant to move out from defence, and Eriksen found freedom. He took full 
advantage with two delicious assists.
 