
Mauricio Pochettino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> 
believes Tottenham can achieve big things after ending Chelsea’s winning run 
with a 2-0 derby victory. Spurs are now third in the Premier League, seven 
points behind the leaders after Dele Alli’s double secured the hosts’ fifth 
straight home success.

“It’s only one game,” he said. “We need to be regular and consistent during 
the whole season. We’re happy for the victory, but it’s only three points. If 
we want to fight until the end of the season for big things, for trophies, you 
need to keep that intensity. That is always the challenge.”

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> were seeking a 
single-season record of 14 straight wins, to draw level with Arsenal’s all-time 
record from 2002 that was spread across two campaigns.

They would have gone eight points clear of Liverpool, but their lead remains 
five. “It was important for us to reduce the gap,” Pochettino said.

Tottenham’s Dele Alli ends Chelsea’s winning run short of record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
“The top four is very competitive, it’s very close. It’s true the gap still is 
important to Chelsea. It was the perfect thing for us to arrive to third place 
and be close. That is important for us and there are a lot of games before the 
end of the season.”

Pochettino was pleased with the maturity his side showed, having imploded at 
Stamford Bridge last May, when they conceded a two-goal lead in a draw that 
clinched the title for Leicester. “The performance was fantastic,” he said. 
“The most important thing was that we showed great character. We were very 
competitive. Maybe that was the problem last season, that we missed to compete 
in a competitive way. You need to play, you need to suffer, you need to fight. 
Sometimes you need to give the ball to them because they push you. Today we 
understood what it means to be competitive.”

Pochettino praised Alli, but does not believe the former MK Dons midfielder is 
an exception in the Spurs ranks. “Dele was clinical in front of goal. It was 
great. He’s showing big talent and potential. Not only him. We can talk about 
Harry Kane, many others.”

Tottenham deliver statement of intent but derby revenge still tastes sweet | 
David Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/04/mauricio-pochettino-dele-alli-tottenham-chelsea>
Chelsea’s most recent league defeat was also in north London, a 3-0 loss at 
Arsenal on 24 September. The head coach,Antonio Conte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte>, believes his team have 
been transformed since then. “After a defeat it’s always very difficult to know 
your reaction,” he said. “It’s normal when you lose a game to try to think why. 
This defeat is totally different if you compare our defeats in September.

“Against Liverpool and Arsenal at that moment we weren’t a team. Tonight, we 
showed we are a team. We are a strong team. We tried to fight. We tried to win 
the game, or not lose. I saw the right will in my players, but don’t forget 
that tonight we played against a really good team, a tough game.” Conte rued 
the moment when Diego Costa and Pedro squabbled in the first half. “A good 
chance for us and we wasted this chance.”

The Italian’s switch to a 3-4-3 formation has served his team well during the 
13-game winning sequence but Conte knows there are challenges to come. “To stop 
us the other teams are changing formation,” he said.

He believes Tottenham, Manchester City, Manchester United, Liverpool, Arsenal 
and Chelsea are in title contention. United are 10 points behind Chelsea in 
sixth. “The situation is very clear. There are six teams that can fight for the 
title or a place in the Champions League. I’m sure one of these six teams will 
be champions.”
 