
Alex Calderwood

Founder: Ace Hotels
Age: 38 
Shaking up the hotel trade by blending luxury and budget
 Alex Calderwood, founder of Ace Hotels. Photograph: PR 
Calderwood is a leading creative force behind the Ace hotel group, one of the 
the most innovative in North America. In 2009, Ace will open hotels in New York 
and Palm Springs. "Ultimately, we want the hotels to feel residential, like 
staying in someone's apartment," he says. The first Ace, in Seattle, broke 
several sacred rules when it opened in 1999. A former boarding house, most of 
the rooms had shared bathrooms, but the owners resisted the temptation to turn 
them all en suite. "In a deck of cards the ace is both high and low. We chose 
it because we wanted the brand to appeal to every sort of traveller."

A room at the New York Ace, which opens in the spring, will start at $169 a 
night, rising to $700. "Affordability is in our DNA," Calderwood says. "It's 
not about being the cheapest but it is about delivering good value."

Ace hotels are also full of enjoyable quirks; the Seattle one has a laundry 
room: "Our guests aren't into dry cleaning, but if you've just flown in from 
Japan it's a luxury to be able to put your things in a washing machine in the 
middle of the night." The group's second hotel opened in Portland, Maine in 
2007 and features turntables in the rooms and a library of vinyl. Palm Springs 
will have a bohemian edge to reflect its Californian heritage.

"We didn't know anything about hotels when we started," says Calderwood. "We 
just went on instinct."

• Top tip: "Right now it's all about Japan. They have very creative solutions 
to space and culture. I know Tokyo well but this year I want to explore the 
rest of the country."

acehotel.com <http://www.acehotel.com>

Lisa Sounio

Founder: Dopplr
Age: 38 
Holiday planning for the Facebook generation
 Photograph: Lisa Sounio 
Most social networking sites allow you to tell people where you have been. 
Dopplr.com lets you know where your friends - and their friends - are going to 
be. Sounio, who is based in Helsinki, and her friends came up with the idea in 
2006: "We were friends from all across the globe - San Francisco, London and 
Finland - and couldn't keep track of each other. All of us had spent a lonely 
night in a hotel in a foreign city, only to realise afterwards that a friend 
had been there at the same time without realising.

"Dopplr helps you plan your travel and tells you what your carbon footprint 
is, using a clean, unfussy design. We hired a cottage near Brighton for a 
couple of days, ate spinach pasta and brainstormed until we came up with the 
kind of site we wanted. Dopplr is a social networking site, but it's more 
private than Facebook. We always wanted 1.5 million users and we're almost 
there. Some social networking sites can get too big too fast - people pile in 
to take a look and then get bored, but we want everyone to be active and get 
more out of travelling."

• Top tip: "For me, it's the UK. Over the next year places close to us are 
going to become important, so people in Britain will rediscover the British 
coast and its cities. Britain might be in recession but the greatest business 
ideas still come from London."

dopplr.com <http://www.dopplr.com>

Sharon Holmes

Founder: Native Escapes 
Age: 38 
Helping travellers see africa, up close and personal
 Sharon Holmes, founder of Native Escapes. Photograph: PR 
Redundancy was the change Holmes needed to finally make the leap and become 
her own boss: "I'd always wanted to run my own business, and after seven years 
working in tourism marketing I felt I'd learnt enough to give it a go. I'd 
visited southern Africa several times and loved it - and knew from research and 
looking at tourist board statistics that visitor numbers were on the rise."

She was keen to work with suppliers, hoteliers and companies that offered the 
chance to connect with local people and put money into communities, giving 
travellers the opportunity to experience a more authentic, less sanitised 
version of southern Africa. Having talked to the tourist boards, she travelled 
to the countries she wanted to work with - Namibia, South Africa, Botswana and 
Zambia - to seek out likeminded businesses.

"I met guides, visited lodges, checked out excursions and by last February I 
was ready to launch my own ethical tour company, Native Escapes - seven months 
after being made redundant."

• Top tip: "In Botswana the government has allowed only limited tourism 
development, which means there are only a few lodges. Its pricey, but for a 
real wilderness trip with a lots of wildlife, it's unbeatable."

nativeescapes.com <http://www.nativeescapes.com>

Graham Austick

Founder: Piste to powder and Lyngen Lodge 
Age: 38
Letting skiers get far from the madding crowd
 Graham Austick, founder of Piste to Powder and Lyngen Lodge. Photograph: PR 
Most mountain guides grow up in Alpine villages and follow their fathers' 
crampon steps into the mountains. So it's all the more impressive that Austick, 
one of the most innovative guides working in Europe today, grew up in Newcastle 
and started out working for his dad's electrical engineering firm. "After a 
while it was a case of 'Son, you ain't going to fit in here'," he says. "I 
spent every possible spare minute skiing, so pretty soon I decided I had to 
make it my career."

After parting company with his dad, aged 19, Austick moved to St Anton, 
Austria, and by 2000 had become the first Briton to have both the top British 
skiing-instruction qualification and the highest-level mountain guiding 
certificate. The same year, he set up Piste to Powder, a ski school 
specifically catering to the growing number of people who wanted to ski 
off-piste. Rather than hiring a private guide for at least £250 a day, it meant 
individuals could turn up, pay a flat fee (this winter £71) and join a group of 
a similar standard. A simple idea, but traditional Alpine ski schools have 
always been slow to innovate, and copycat operations are only now starting to 
pop up in the Alps.

But Austick didn't stop there. Recognising that more and more skiers were 
looking for adventures away from crowded resorts, he started running trips to 
ever more remote slopes - from Greenland to Alaska, Russia, the Himalayas and 
South America. Austick pushed into the least visited areas, until clients were 
skiing down mountains that had never been climbed, let alone skied before. In 
Alaska, the group travelled into the wilderness on a ski-equipped light 
aircraft then set up camp, in Greenland they arrived by dogsled.

Now Austick has a new focus - the Lyngen Alps in arctic Norway. "When I first 
went I'd never seen anywhere like it for skiing - super mountains, great snow, 
and your final turns finish on the beach where the waves are breaking." He 
started ski trips in the area based on a chartered sail boat, but has now built 
his own wilderness lodge, from which skiers are ferried by speed boat to 
different mountains each day. "For your average alpine skier, the concept of 
skiing untracked powder, and ending up on the beach, is just bananas really."

• Top tip: "Ski touring [using sticky skins attached to skis to climb uphill, 
rather than ski lifts] is coming into its own. Heliskiing is fun, but there's a 
level of stress that you don't get with ski touring. People are wanting to come 
back to the roots and get back to the real feeling of being in mountains."

www.pistetopowder.com <http://www.pistetopowder.com>; lyngenlodge.com 
<http://www.lyngenlodge.com>

Stevie Christie

Director: Wilderness Scotland
Age: 31
Sharing a love of adventure in the highlands and islands
 Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
What separates Wilderness Scotland from other similar companies is the local 
knowledge every member of staff has, which helps create its unique brand of 
holidays. Christie is no exception; he joined the company in 2003 as a mountain 
guide and still loves to get out on the mountains whenever he can.

"I grew up in the area and after three years at the Scottish Executive, 
working on environmental policy, I knew I wanted a job that - at least partly - 
involved being outdoors," he says.

"Wilderness Scotland was started by Neil Burnie and Paul Eastow in Neil's 
bedroom. They had both worked overseas on eco-projects in the developing world, 
but felt that no one was offering that type of holiday back in Scotland. The 
idea was to combine their experience of working in ecology, with their expert 
knowledge of the local area."

Alongside traditional hiking and mountain-biking holidays, Wilderness Scotland 
offers more unusual trips - kayaking, photography and family exploratory 
holidays - and has expanded its brand of eco-friendly holidays overseas. "We 
set up a sister company about three years ago, Wilderness Journeys, which runs 
trips to remoter parts of Kenya, South America and Bhutan. All the trips work 
with local people, and ensure the economic benefits go to the local community."

Wilderness Scotland is run on green principles, and is introducing an optional 
payment of £5-£10 per booking, matched by the company, to go to nominated 
environmental projects.

• Top tip: "The credit crunch means more people will be holidaying in the UK - 
as they should. Scotland is the adventure capital of Europe, and has some of 
the best mountain-biking and kayaking in the world."

wildernessscotland.com <http://www.wildernessscotland.com>

Jamie Andrews

Co-founder: Loco2travel 
Age: 25
Finding a viable alternative to flying 

The idea was conceived by Jamie's sister Kate, who wanted to travel after 
university and found there were limited resources for people who wanted to make 
long-haul journeys without flying. "She mocked up the website, but the problem 
was that it was almost impossible to create a journey planning tool that could 
combine global information on bus, train, boat and ferry links," he says. "At 
this point it was just an idea, and Kate decided to go travelling."

This was where Jamie came in; having worked for a web development company, he 
created the current loco2travel.com website. "It's very much a version 1.0 at 
the moment," he says. "There are two main strands we're working on. The journey 
planner is integral to what we want the site to be. But the other strand is to 
enable people to have authentic gap-year experiences; to travel overland and 
get involved in projects as you travel."

Andrews admits travelling overland can be daunting, and loco2 aims to set up 
itineraries - including placements with community projects - to make it easier. 
"We want to be useful for those who want to travel on a whim, and for those 
planning a whole adventure."

• Top tip: "Convergence on Copenhagen is about bringing people together who 
are travelling to November's Climate Conference without flying. Using the 
internet, they can join up and stay together on their way to Denmark - a kind 
of 'secular pilgrimage'."

loco2travel.com <http://www.loco2travel.com>

Verity Bertram

Founder: 20 days
Age: 30
Removing the stress of organising a group getaway 
 Photograph: Verity Bertram 
After running her university's branch of Busc (the British Universities Sports 
Council) and a year in Australia organising sporting events, Bertram saw a gap 
in the market for a company specialising in group trips and days out. 
"Organising a group holiday can be a nightmare," she says, "but it's something 
I've always enjoyed, and felt that people would really use a company that took 
over all the administration." She started the website at the end of 2006 with a 
25-person trip to Puerto Banús in Spain, and the business has built steadily.

"There are two aspects to the firm," she says. "The first is where we put on 
an event or a holiday - we organise transport, accommodation, excursions, find 
the best bars and restaurants - and people sign up in any number to join the 
group, from one to 40. The second is where a group comes to us - either 
corporate or friends - who might want a ski trip to Switzerland or to go 
kite-surfing in Italy, and we organise the holiday for them.

"We've also introduced 'Snowdays', where we book a variety of accommodation in 
a ski resort and arrange entertainment and excursions people can join in or not 
as they like. People nominate a group leader and use their name when booking on 
the site. We collate all the bookings, then contact the group leader with the 
information, so no one has to take responsibility for booking the whole trip."

• Top tip: "Holidays are going to be the new hunting ground for singles - the 
days of 'singles holidays' as such, are long gone. The web is making it much 
easier to find like-minded people for a trip abroad."

20days.co.uk <http://www.20days.co.uk>

Tom Dawe and Lisa Knights

Founders: Yurtel
age: 29 and 34
Taking the mud and the misery out of festival-going

The original idea behind Yurtel was a mobile spa business; Dawe and Knights 
were both massage therapists who decided to create a spa they would take to 
festivals. "We wanted to offer massages and treatments but weren't sure what 
kind of structure to use. We decided on a yurt and in 2007, we took just one 
yurt around the country, offering treatments," says Dawes.

While at the festivals, they realised that although there were companies 
offering "comfortable accommodation", a gap in the market remained.

"There was nothing particularly luxurious, and we felt yurts could offer that, 
so we went back to the guy in Devon where we had bought our first one and 
ordered 12 more. We then set up a mobile hotel: each yurt has a kingsized bed 
and fresh flowers, and we still offer the spa treatments. At some festivals we 
offer a B&B service - fresh croissants and coffee."

Yurtel's clients tend to be older people who might not go to festivals if it 
meant toughing it out under canvas, and they intend to up the luxury factor.

"We're looking to add five more yurts and also a shower and toilet trailer." 
But Dawe admits that their long-term goal is a touch more glamorous: "Our 
ultimate dream is a health retreat somewhere overseas. We're heading to Goa 
next month to look at possible locations."

• Top tip: "As the recession bites, holidaying in the UK will become more 
popular. With stress levels increasing, people will be looking to nurture their 
mind, body and soul at affordable destinations within the UK."

yurtel.co.uk <http://www.yurtel.co.uk>
 