
Thomasina Miers <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/thomasinamiers> 
stands on a sunny petrol station forecourt in Highland Park, a neighbourhood to 
the northeast of Los Angeles, enthusiastically eating a marinated beef-tongue 
taco. "It's so delicious," she says through a mouthful of corn tortilla, 
coriander and tomatillo salsa.

This low-rise residential area, an hour and a world away from the Walk of 
Fame, bristles with signs for cheap loans and fast food. It is not on any 
tourist map. Star-tour buses don't pull up round here. But rather than 
celebrities, we're looking for Mexican street-food trucks, picking out their 
vivid orange, blue and pink awnings or distinctive fin-shaped roof vents from 
among the stucco-covered houses, corner shops and drive-throughs. At the La 
Estrella and El Pique trucks, we found what we crave. We order more tacos, 
a beef torta (sandwich) and a buttery hot quesadilla and wolf them as the 
traffic whizzes past, juices running down our chins.

Miers, former MasterChef winner and co-founder of the Mexican restaurant chain 
Wahaca, is researching her next venture – a two-year pop-up restaurant opening 
next month on London's South Bank with a street-food menu. She's here because 
there are 11 million Mexican-Americans living in California, making up 30% of 
the population.

"LA has such a huge Mexican population," she says. "In terms of food trends, 
America, and particularly California, is often five to 10 years ahead of the 
UK, so it is interesting to see where they're at, particularly with Mexican, 
which you can find here as easily as getting a hamburger."

Angelenos also have more than 100 years of Mexican street-food history – the 
arrival and popularity of horse-drawn tamale carts caused the same kind of 
bureaucratic angst in the 1880s as the influx of taco trucks has done in the 
past couple of years – so residents have exacting standards. They want rich, 
slow-cooked sauces, chillies of every hue and heat, soft corn or wheat 
tortillas piled with meaty fillings, and they want them day and night. There 
are hundreds of hole-in-the-wall taco stands and trucks to keep them happy.

As we work our way round the best of them, Miers grins from ear to ear. Her 
interest in Mexican food was piqued when she was in her early 20s and ran a bar 
in Mexico City. She came home to find she couldn't get authentic Mexican 
anywhere in the UK and so resolved to open her own casual restaurant. Six years 
and five Wahacas later, the hunch she and her business partner Mark Selby had 
about the gap in the market has been proved right and her obsession with 
Mexico's food has only grown. Yuca's is one of LA's oldest street-food joints – 
a small shed and plastic awning next to a car park – and she can't help but 
order almost every dish, while Selby tries to keep things in control.

"I'm on belt hook three at the moment," he says ruefully, "and I'd like to 
stay that way." Ignoring him, Miers adds a plate of carne asada tacos (grilled 
beef) to a conchinita pibil (Yucatan-style pork) and machaca (shredded beef) 
tacos, pickled jalapeño peppers, and a chile verde bean and cheese burrito. 
This is their first lunch of six today.
 Thomasina Miers eating tongue tacos from La Estrella food truck 
Our tour continues to take us to corners of Los Angeles most tourists would 
miss. We visit Olvera Street in Downtown and eat $3 rolled-up beef taquitos 
with warm avocado sauce from Cielito Lindo. We hit Las Glorias del Buen Comer 
in Silver Lake – home to an impressive collection of plastic floristry – for 
creamy shrimp enchiladas in a green coriander sauce; chilaquiles made with 
fried stale tortillas, salsa and scrambled egg; and huge poblano chillies 
stuffed with soft white cheese.

At Grand Central Market we watch tripe being packed into split gorditas, 
deep-fried maize-dough pockets, and are given carnitas (pork tacos) to try by a 
group of men leaning on a red Formica lunch counter, swigging coke out of huge 
old glass bottles. The sawdust-covered walkways lead to stalls selling jar 
after jar of dried chillies and piles of tomatillos (a fruit resembling a green 
tomato) and jicama, which look like turnips and taste like water chestnut.

The best dishes of the day are served in Guisado's, a small, plain shop in 
Boyle Heights, a Latino neighbourhood east of Downtown. After we order most of 
his menu, owner Armando de la Torre takes us to the grocery shop next door 
where, incongruously, he gets his corn cooked, skinned, hoppered and ground, 
and then hand-makes it into tortillas or adds lard to make masa for tamales 
(stuffed steamed breads) or conchas (sweet pastries).

His daughter Natalie loads our table with cardboard plates of tacos topped 
with tinga de pollo (spiced shredded chicken), skirt steak simmered in pimento 
sauce, fiery grilled fish with chilli diablo, and a chicken mole (a traditional 
sauce that takes at least a day to make properly). We try chicharron, made with 
black beans and slow-cooked pork scratchings. It's much more appetising than it 
sounds: the fatty pork rinds render down and what's left is melt-in-the-mouth 
pigginess.

Only one dish defeats us: a chilli taco with habanero ketchup so spicy that it 
leaves anyone who tastes it red-faced and gasping. Legend has it one visitor 
managed four in one go. "Eat one, get another free!" says Armando cheerfully as 
he pours us a shot each of smooth tequila royale reposado to sip. We are, 
finally, sated.

Next day, the main aim is to find a Kogi truck. Kogi shot to local and then 
national fame in 2008 when the first of a fleet of five vans popped up selling 
a surprisingly successful blend of Korean and Mexican food – a signature dish 
is soy-marinated short rib tacos with coriander and cabbage – and has since 
spawned dozens of imitators. Its trucks change location up to three times daily 
and can only be located via Twitter, where Kogi has 96,000 followers; in 2010 
its head chef, Roy Choi, was named best new chef in the US byFood & Wine 
magazine – quite an accolade for a kitchen the size of a caravan.

We find the truck (and its lengthy queue) outside an office block next to the 
Fox studios in Century City and feast on kimchi quesadillas, which are sweet, 
gingery cheese and pickled cabbage tortilla sandwiches, and Kogi sliders: 
miniature brioche buns with Korean bulgogi-marinated short-rib burgers. We 
finish the meal with an entirely unnecessary and ridiculously moreish home-made 
chocolate bar with squidgy chilli salt caramel and peanuts.

"Coming here, you can see authentic Mexican cooking and lots of its famous 
street food, but you can also see where else this food can go," says Miers. 
"This is some of the most exciting, innovative food we've tried. This trip is 
giving me masses of ideas to work with!"
 Santa Monica beach, the usual pull for Los Angeles tourists 
Half an hour later we pull up at Komodo, another 
Korean-Mexican-Asian-Californian truck, where somehow find room in our stomachs 
to try delicate fish and grape tacos with pickled cucumber and sesame oil and 
pork meatballs that are charred and crisp on the outside and pink and lightly 
spiced inside. Although they're incredibly tasty, even Miers agrees that 
ordering two portions of truffled potato fries was a mistake; we attempt to 
cleanse our palates with lychee juice.

Our final stop of the day is Mariscos Chente, a seafood restaurant where we 
sample drunken shrimp and chipotle prawns and drink vast micheladas – beer 
mixed with Clamato (clam and tomato) juice and lime, served in a chilli-salt 
rimmed glass. Then it's back to the hotel, where we swim lengths of the pool in 
a bid to make room for dinner.

Oddly, Los Angeles's very high-end Mexican restaurants don't seem to deliver 
food that's as exciting as the city's street food. In the evenings we try two 
of the best: Border Grill, founded by Mary Sue Milliken and Susan Feniger, and 
Red O, which belongs to Rick Bayless. These three chefs have done more than 
anyone to popularise and legitimise Mexican food in America. But although the 
meals were fine, it was as though the punchy mouthfuls of flavour we'd been 
ploughing through all day didn't taste the same inside, off pieces of fine 
china and eaten with cutlery; they didn't give us the same intense sense of the 
place and its inhabitants as the foods they cook and eat every day could. 
However good a posh restaurant's heirloom tomato tostadito or yellowtail 
ceviche might be, they couldn't beat those tongue tacos eaten in the roar of 
the traffic.
• Thomasina Miers' new recipe book Wahaca – Mexican Food at Home  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444722390>
is out next month

Essentials

Rebecca Seal's accommodation was provided by the W Hotel Hollywood (
whotels.starwoodhotels.com <http://www.whotels.starwoodhotels.com>) and she 
flew to LA with British Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>)

Food stops

La Estrella and El Pique
Corner of York and Avenue 54, Highland Park, CA 90042 
Yuca's
2056 Hillhurst Avenue, Los Feliz, CA 90027 (001 323 662 1214)
Cielito Lindo
E-23 Olvera Street, CA 90012 (001 213 687 4391; 
cielitolindo.org <http://www.cielitolindo.org>)
Las Glorias del Buen 
Comer 620 Silver Lake Boulevard, Silver Lake, CA 90026 (001 213 484 9090)
Grand Central Market
317 South Broadway, Downtown, CA 90013 (grandcentral square.com 
<http://www.grandcentral square.com>)
Guisado's
2100 East Cesar Chavez Avenue, Boyle Heights, CA 90033
Kogi
Check @KOGIBBQ for daily locations
Komodo 
Komodofood.com <http://www.Komodofood.com> 
for daily locations
Mariscos Chente
4532 South Centinela Avenue, Culver City, CA 90066 (001 310 390 9241)
Border Grill
445 South Figueroa Street, Downtown, CA 90071 (001 213 486 5171)
Red O
8155 Melrose Avenue, West Hollywood, CA 90046 (001 323 655 5009; 
redorestaurant.com <http://www.redorestaurant.com>)

Thomasina Miers's pork belly carnitas
 Pork Carnitas Photograph: Steven Joyce 
Carnitas is one of the most mouth-watering dishes in the Mexican repertoire: 
succulent chunks of pork that are slowly braised in their own fat, just like 
duck confit

Serves 6–8 
pork belly boned
lard 500g 
bay leaves 2
garlic 5 cloves, bashed
oranges 2, sliced
peppercorns 1 tsp 
cola drink 500ml
thyme a handful of sprigs
sea salt

How to do it
Preheat the oven to 130C/gas mark 1. Cut the pork belly into six roughly equal 
pieces. Rub with salt and leave to sit for 1 hour. Put the pork chunks into a 
large casserole pan with the rest of the ingredients and bring to simmering 
point. Cover well with a tight-fitting lid or foil and cook in the oven for 2-3 
hours until the pork is so soft it can be cut with a spoon.
Scoop out the pieces with a slotted spoon and arrange them on a baking sheet. 
Turn the oven up to 190C/gas mark 5. Roast the pork for about 30 minutes, until 
the pieces are crispy, golden and caramelised. Roughly chop the meat and serve 
on a wooden board or heated plate with bowls of coriander, white onion or 
shallot, wedges of lime, a salsa, and warm tortillas for making your own tacos.
 