
Michael Downey has tendered his resignation as the chief executive of the Lawn 
Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association after three years 
in the role.

The Canadian, who will serve out six months’ notice, is to return to his 
previous role as chief executive of Tennis Canada. Downey, whose two sons live 
in Canada, cited his desire to return home as the driving force behind his 
departure, which came as a shock to staff at the LTA’s Roehampton base.

“I’ve been honoured to have led the LTA over the last three years, as we’ve 
sought to drive grassroots tennis,” he said. “While the opportunity for me to 
return to Tennis Canada coincided with my personal desire to return to my home 
country, I am hugely proud of the foundations the team at the LTA have laid in 
order to turn participation in Britain’s beloved sport around.

“It’s an exciting time for tennis in this country and I look forward to the 
next six months, maintaining the momentum we’ve built in our continued mission 
to get more people playing tennis, more often.”

David Gregson, chairman of the LTA, said: “The progress we have made under 
Michael’s stewardship will continue. The centre of gravity of the LTA shifted 
when I joined and we will remain focused on grassroots tennis.

“Michael has worked hard to ensure that the British Tennis strategy to get 
more people playing tennis more often is embedded in the organisation and more 
broadly among the tennis community. He has put in place the right executive 
team with the strengths, passion and commitment to continue delivering the 
strategy.

“While Michael’s move will be a great loss to the LTA, we respect his decision 
to lead the sport of tennis in his home nation, close to his family. We thank 
him for his hard work and dedication to tennis in Britain.”

Richard Lewis, the chief executive of the All England Club, said: “We have 
enjoyed working with Michael and in particular with regard to the evolution of 
the grass court season leading up to the Championships.

“The expansion of facilities at the Queen’s Club tournament and the combining 
of the tournaments in Eastbourne and Nottingham into both men’s and women’s 
tennis will provide enhanced opportunities for players to compete ahead of the 
Championships and make for an even more exciting build up to Wimbledon this 
summer. Even though Michael is unfortunately departing, we look forward to 
continuing to work with the major events leadership team on these important 
events.”
 