
Thought for the week

Notts County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> were not quite 
the only story in League Two last week. Indeed the side they beat 3-1 at Meadow 
Lane last Saturday, Port Vale, promptly found themselves embroiled in a soap 
opera of their own.

It all kicked off when Vale's disgusted manager, Micky Adams, reacted to that 
reverse – their third in a row – by placing his entire 26-man squad on the 
transfer list. Now the world is watching to see how those players respond to 
him, starting tonight at home to Accrington. Already there is a whiff of mutiny 
in the air with Tommy Fraser, Vale's 21-year-old captain insisting: "The lads 
are good enough, we can reach the play-offs." After a dressing-room conflab his 
team-mates have resolved not to discuss the matter further in public for the 
time being.

Life as a League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> 
footballer can be a precarious business but, even so, Port Vale's pros are all 
members of the Professional Footballers' Association, one of the strongest 
unions in the country, and cannot be expected to be automatically cowed by one 
of the oldest managerial threats in the book. Unfortunately, for Adams, 
transfer-listing everyone is something of an empty gesture. After all there are 
a lot of games to go until the transfer window reopens in January and the squad 
know that Vale could conceivably have a new manager by then.

Even if it was now mid-summer or mid-January, the recession dictates that the 
market at this level remains sluggish and interest would be unlikely to be 
shown in more than one or two individuals. Meanwhile the squad know they are 
sitting on the security of watertight, PFA-endorsed contracts. Moreover, a lot 
of these young men are products of a school system which these days shies away 
from the word failure and duly detest losing face or being "dissed". 
Accordingly, modern managers need to be able to "do subtle" and understand that 
the carrot can be far more effective than the stick. As Middlesbrough's Gareth 
Southgate has said: "You simply cannot give young players the sort of 
dressing-downs I had as a kid, you've got to do things differently." Similarly, 
Lou Macari wrote in his column in Stoke's Evening Sentinel: "I fear today's 
players are too fragile to respond to Micky by going out and saying 'we'll show 
you, you b******'."

Rather like a man trapped in a lift randomly flicking every available switch, 
Adams's shock tactic seems born of desperation. He really has taken the nuclear 
option here – and, having activated the red button, simply cannot pretend he, 
as Glenn Hoddle might put it, "never said them things".

"We were like a woman who has got a big fur coat on but underneath she's got 
no knickers on," Adams moaned following the Meadow Lane collapse. "It will be 
fascinating to see how many offers I get for my players. There are hundreds of 
footballers who don't have a job and if ours don't want to take the profession 
seriously I don't want them. It [transfer-listing the entire squad] is not a 
stunt. It's an effort to wake the club from the slumber it's been in. If I get 
a response from the players then we will sit down and talk about it. They can 
respond in two ways. Either prove me wrong – or they can show they don't want 
to play for Micky Adams andPort Vale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale>."

Adams's problem is that managers are horribly dispensable and his name will 
not always necessarily be synonymous with Port Vale – and the players know 
that. Much depends on how his board reacts. A few years ago Paul Jewell was 
having major problems with his squad at Wigan and a watershed was reached only 
when Dave Whelan, the owner, marched into the dressing room and informed senior 
pros that the manager was "going nowhere" and they had better start responding. 
Or else. It worked and Wigan swiftly reached the Premier League. So far Vale's 
chairman, Bill Bratt, has said: "We back Micky's judgment." Only time will tell 
whether Bratt really means that. If Vale somehow end up inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> next season Adams's 
stunt will be seen as having paid off but, from the outside, that looks an 
overly optimistic forecast.

There is, however, an interesting precedent for this. Back in the 1979-80 
season John McGrath, then Vale's manager, transfer-listed his entire 15-man 
Fourth Division squad, including the highly rated Mark Chamberlain, six weeks 
after taking over in December 1979. By the following May all 15 were still at 
the club and Vale finished fifth bottom. McGrath stayed in charge until 1983.

We will watch Adams and his class of 2009-10 with interest.

Goal of the weekend

Akos Buzsaky's second goal for Queens Park Rangers in the 5-2 home demolition 
of Barnsley <http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/football/eng_div_1/8277281.stm> – 
a 30-yard chip. The midfielder has recently returned from a 10-month lay-off 
following career-saving knee surgery.

One to watch

Well actually two. While the Gillingham striker Simeon Jackson attracted the 
attention of yet more higher-level scouts by registering his ninth goal of the 
season to earn the Gills a 1-1 draw against Norwich at the weekend,Chris Sutton 
was preparing to begin managerial life at the bottom with League TwoLincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> City. Unlike his one-time 
Blackburn Rovers co-striker Alan Shearer, Sutton is opting to learn his trade 
at grass-roots level. It will be fascinating to see how he fares. And, indeed, 
where he and Shearer are in five and 10 years' time.

Games to look out for

Tonight

Port Vale v Accrington: How will Vale's transfer-listed squad respond?

Sheffield United v Ipswich: Can Roy Keane win his first game of the season?

Lincoln City v Notts County: Chris Sutton v Sven, well, sort of.

Darlington v Rochdale: Life after Colin Todd begins for Darlo – it looks 
unlikely to be much better.

Wednesday

Newcastle v QPR: Can Newcastle keep winning and might Nile Ranger score the 
first goal his performances deserve for Chris Hughton's side? Will Marlon 
Harewood turn prolific in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>?

Saturday

Leeds v Charlton: The really big one in League One. Charlton must be mindful 
of Robert Snodgrass, the Leeds right-winger. He tormented Liverpool in the 
narrow Carling Cup defeat last week.
 