
Middlesbrough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> remain 
optimistic about their chances of securing Bojan Krkic in an £8m transfer from 
Stoke City by the end of the month. Although Mark Hughes stated on Friday that 
he does not want to sell a player disillusioned by a lack of first-team 
football in the Potteries, Stoke’s manager is believed to be willing to do a 
deal should he secure his own preferred transfer targets. Much may depend on 
whether Hughes succeeds in signing Saido Berahino from West Bromwich Albion.

Bojan is unlikely to be part of the Stoke squad for Saturday’s Premier League 
game against Sunderland at the Stadium of Light. That absence is apparently 
because of a hip problem but may encourage Aitor Karanka in his pursuit of the 
former Barcelona attacker.

Middlesbrough’s manager is attracted by Bojan’s ability to play on both flanks 
and through the middle. Karanka, who is also a big admirer of Hull City’s 
Robert Snodgrass and retains a real interest in the Scotland forward, believes 
he can return Bojan, still only 26, to former glories after his failure to 
properly recover his best form following a serious knee injury sustained in 
early 2015.

Leeds reject £7m offers from Middlesbrough, West Brom and Palace for Charlie 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/charlie-taylor-leeds-crystal-palace-west-brom-middlesbrough>
It is understood that there are no offers for Stewart Downing although the 
Crystal Palace manager, Sam Allardyce, has expressed an interest in signing the 
former England winger. That may have lessened following Palace’scapture of 
Jeffrey Schlupp from Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/crystal-palace-jeffrey-schlupp-signs>
 on Friday, although Karanka is prepared to let Downing leave this month.

Since recovering full fitness last season Bojan, who has failed to force his 
way back into Hughes’s starting XI on a consistent basis, is unhappy to have 
been reduced to a bit-part role and is believed to be keen on the prospect of 
working with Karanka on Teesside.

Hughes, meanwhile, said talks have reopened with West Brom in an attempt to 
finally thrash out a deal for Berahino. Stoke have shown interest in the 
23-year-old in the past two transfer windows and the manager is keen to end his 
protracted chase for the striker by reaching an agreement this month.

Berahino has been offered a new contract by West Brom, even though he has 
failed to make a first-team appearance since September, with the club keen to 
protect one of their prized assets. But Hughes has resumed negotiations and is 
seeking an indication over the amount of money it would take to prise Berahino 
away from The Hawthorns.

“I’m not sure where we are with Saido Berahino,” Hughes said. “We are probably 
getting to the point where we need to make a decision one way or another.

“I am hopeful that we will be able to get something done. We are interested in 
him, as a number of other clubs are, but nothing has moved forward from last 
week. We are still waiting for the player’s club to give us an indication.

“I think we are looking at players who we feel can improve us, not only 
short-term but long-term too, and we have taken that into consideration with 
this deal. It is out of our hands unfortunately, but we are ready to discuss 
the situation and see where it progresses.

“It has been long-winded, and sometimes you lose some enthusiasm when that 
happens, but I have learned over the years that you have to be patient. We have 
been looking for a striker who can score 20-plus goals for some time now. They 
are a little bit scarce on the ground and you have to work hard to get them 
over the line.”
 