
As we nudged the Mustang on to the vast metal bridge spanning the Mississippi, 
a glorious sunset broke behind us, shading the skies in luminescent reds and 
streaks of burnt orange. The bluffs by the great river were clad in lush 
foliage and draped in mist, while below us families celebrated the Fourth of 
July with barbecues on the banks.

It was the perfect start to a long-cherished dream. An hour earlier I had 
landed with my son in Minneapolis, a place peopled by some of the driest wits I 
have encountered.Pulling out of the airport, we ignored the lure of the world's 
biggest mall and set off on a 2,000-mile drive along the river to New Orleans, 
a trip I'd promised Hamish, 18, more than a decade before to celebrate the end 
of his school career.

The plan was simple: to follow the Great River Road from top to bottom through 
10 states along the nation's backbone. As darkness fell, however, the reality 
of trying to find somewhere to stay on a public holiday dawned. The first town 
looked horrible, all strip malls and neon, so we pushed on. At Lake City there 
seemed to be a party by the water's edge, with people in deckchairs munching 
burgers, drinking beer and watching fireworks, but every hotel was full – as 
they were in the next town, and the next.
 Road map Photograph: Guardian 
By midnight – or 6am according to our body clocks – we were discussing 
sleeping in the car. Eventually, in a gritty place called Winona, we found a 
cheap motel room. There was a view of a petrol station to one side and a 
McDonald's on the other. But it was clean, so we turned in with 140 miles and 
three river crossings in the bag.

We woke to the sound of rain hammering down and headed through the downpour 
into La Crosse, an engaging university town that seemed stuck in the 1950s. 
Ducking into Fayze's restaurant (fayzes.com <http://www.fayzes.com>) for 
breakfast, I asked the waiter if he knew where we could find a bookshop.

"Sorry," he said. "I don't read books."

Mark Twain would have been shocked. In his book Life on the Mississippi, he 
praised La Crosse as one of the great towns of "this amazing region", populated 
by an independent race, well-read, educated and enlightened. Few could fault 
their efforts to bring in visitors, however. Who could resist the lure of the 
town's landmark: the world's largest six-pack of beer, holding enough for 7m 
cans? In such a big country, small towns do their best to stand out. We had 
already passed the world's biggest boot, and ahead of us lay such delights as 
the world's biggest ketchup bottle and the largest picnic and barbecue (at the 
wonderfully named hamlet of Fancy Farm, in Kentucky). Then there were the 
welcome signs proclaiming towns as the home of something: from watermelons to 
water-skiing.

Such hometown pride is part of the joy of middle America. But the real 
attraction lay in the unfolding landscapes. The midwest may have a lot of 
farms, but instead of dreary prairies there were lush green hills, upland 
meadows, thick forests, looming limestone cliffs and, further south, cypress 
swamps.

Leaving La Crosse, we meandered south through verdant scenery, the sun burning 
wisps of mist off the jutting bluffs. As we crossed into Iowa, the scenery 
softened, with sweeping vistas of rolling hills and ripening corn dotted with 
white clapboard farmhouses and futuristic metal silos.

After 240 miles, we ended the first day in Bellevue, which lived up to its 
name, with panoramic views down the river. Following in the footsteps of Kevin 
Costner when he made Field of Dreams, we checked in to the Mont Rest B&B, high 
above the town. The chatty owner, Christine Zraick, directed us to a cosy 
riverside restaurant, where we ate shrimp and pike while fireflies flashed 
green lights at us and hummingbirds hovered over flowers outside the window.

Back at the B&B, freshly baked peach pie and beers were waiting in the 
kitchen. We talked into the night with Christine and her husband Ralph, a 
professor of politics, about small-town life and the state of the nation. 
Pictures of the couple with Barack Obama, Al Gore and Michael Dukakis hung on 
the wall, a reminder of Iowa's pivotal role in presidential elections.
 Hamish with the Mustang by the Mississippi. Photograph: Ian Birrell 
With sun-drenched hills carpeted in corn and sorghum, the much-maligned 
Hawkeye state turned out to have a timeless charm. At gas stations families in 
check shirts ate homemade burgers and children slurped ice-cream floats.

Suddenly the skies turned dark and water lashed down so hard we could not see 
the road. Laughing at our summer holiday weather, we crawled into the hamlet of 
New Boston and a friendly farming bar.

" That's some rain," I said to the woman serving us.

"Glad of it," she drawled. "Been so hot I nearly sweated the flesh off my 
bones."

The lyrical rejoinder was a reminder that we were heading south. In southern 
Illinois, there were vineyards, then glimpses of the great midwest prairies – 
and of an idiosyncratic world view. We spent an entertaining hour with a 
vintner who tried to persuade us that his president was a communist destroying 
the American dream and Sarah Palin was the nation's saviour.

In Missouri, the rolling hills were studded with hickory and maple trees, and 
the corn had turned golden. Sunflowers started to appear, then white picket 
fences. White-tailed deer watched us speeding by. But the rain continued to 
follow us. A stop in Hannibal – Mark Twain's hometown – was interrupted by 
flash flooding so severe the police were called to rescue drivers trapped in 
newly formed lakes.

Checking into a luxurious cabin at the Pere Marquette state park, we disturbed 
a racoon raiding a bin. The sun was back the next day, so after a blueberry 
stack and a game on the giant hallway chess board, we went for a hike. We were 
soon drenched in sweat, trudging along trails through the creeper-clad trees, 
but were rewarded with grandiose views over a swollen river and lakes that had 
burst their banks. After a quick swim it was on to St Louis for huge hickory 
burgers in Chuck Berry's local diner.

The days drifted by in this amiable fashion. I drove, keeping off the main 
roads and enjoying the Mustang's ability to eat up the empty roads. We took 
turns to control the iPod, while Hamish navigated, a task made easier by the 
green signs – with pilot's wheel and steamboat – that identified the Great 
River Road.

As the landscape changed, we had the rare luxury of time to talk about 
anything and everything. And never knowing where we would spend the night added 
to the pleasure. We spent evenings eating pizza and sharing six-packs of beer 
in cheap motels, or catching glimpses of small-town life in genteel B&Bs.

The greatest joy was never knowing what was over the next hill. Arriving in 
Nauvoo, Illinois, at dusk we stumbled on a massive, and slightly spooky Mormon 
pageant, with scores of people in 19th-century costumes. Natchez, Mississippi, 
once home to the most millionaires per capita in the nation, still offers an 
amazing display of antebellum finery. Sainte Geneviève, Missouri, the only 
surviving French colonial village in the country, is full of beautifully kept 
old houses, antique shops and smart cafes.
 Superman statue at Metropolis, Illinois. Photograph: Ian Birrell 
The next two stops, celebrations of American popular culture, could not have 
been more different. First up was Chester, Illinois, home of Popeye, with 
rather tragic statues to Olive Oyl and Bluto and the spinach-guzzling sailor. 
Then came Metropolis, also in Illinois, declared "Superman's hometown" by the 
state legislature in 1972, despite having no connection to the superhero beyond 
its name. It was making strenuous efforts to exploit its supposed link, with an 
enjoyably tacky 15ft bronze statue, plus a ragbag of museums and gift shops, 
and a quick-change telephone box. But the town's real landmark was a far bigger 
statue advertising the Big John supermarket.

In Kentucky, we turned off into the Land Between the Lakes (lbl.org 
<http://www.lbl.org/>), where damming has created a beautiful island nature 
reserve, with wooded slopes by the water. A skunk ran across the road, then a 
deer stood defiantly in our path. We pitched the tent and lit a fire. "We've 
only got three beers," Hamish complained, so we headed back to a nearby petrol 
station. The owner shook her head: "You want beer you'll need to go another 21 
miles. This is a dry county."

Kentucky steadily became more rural. It was a Saturday, so an endless parade 
of husbands were circling their front lawns on sit-on mowers. Towns stopped 
inscribing their population on their welcome signs, presumably because many 
were little more than a handful of houses and a church.

In Tennessee the towns became smaller still, and more unkempt. Bars had signs 
warning people against carrying guns, or that fights would lead to a jail 
sentence. We sped past place names from afar: Paris, Cadiz and Bogotá joined 
the likes of Cairo, Genoa, Lima, Warsaw and Wakefield. It felt almost like a 
world tour.
 Hamish at Graceland, Memphis. Photograph: Ian Birrell 
Memphis was the hit of the trip. Arriving in the early evening, we passed 
prosperous, tree-lined streets on the way to Central BBQ (cbqmemphis.com 
<http://www.cbqmemphis.com>), where a slab of sticky ribs was sensational. 
Beale Street had blues blaring out of the bars and buskers competing in the 
streets, giving it the feel of a festival. But best of all were the museums: 
the National Civil Rights Museum in the Lorraine Motel (civilrightsmuseum.org 
<http://www.civilrightsmuseum.org/home.htm>), where Martin Luther King was 
assassinated; Graceland (elvis.com/graceland), more homely than imagined but 
still a joyful temple to kitsch opulence; and best of all, the mellow Stax 
Museum of American Soul Music (soulsvilleusa.com <http://www.soulsvilleusa.com/>
).

We cruised on through the realm of King Cotton, passing a stream of floating 
casinos on our way to Clarksdale, the heart of the delta and the real home of 
the blues. This was where Robert Johnson supposedly sold his soul to the devil 
at a crossroads, and where locals included Sam Cooke, Muddy Waters and John Lee 
Hooker. It was a dishevelled place, with boarded-up shops and decrepit shotgun 
shacks, but dripping with character that crept into your soul. The Shack Up 
Inn, a collection of converted sharecropper huts, with old pick-up trucks and 
rusting farm machinery on the lawns, offered an unexpectedly charming place to 
stay.

All too soon we were in New Orleans. Bourbon Street was a disappointment, with 
its tourist dross, sleazy clubs and drunken gaggles clutching cocktails. But at 
the harbour we watched a paddle steamer pull out slowly into the massive 
expanse of what we now felt was "our" river as the sun set. After a dinner 
where ordering fried oysters led to jokes from the laconic waitress about BP 
and Brits, Hamish and I waddled off to Preservation Hall.

It was tiny, like a faded old church, but the old-style gospel jazz was 
brilliant and my hip-hop loving son adored it. Even after two weeks and a 
lifetime together, I was learning new things about him.

Afterwards we strolled up to Elysian Fields Avenue. Music blared from the 
bars, a woman was writing poetry on a battered typewriter on the pavement, a 
wasted man directed the traffic, and a brass band played on a street corner 
while people danced.

"Now this is what I imagined New Orleans to be like," said my son happily.

It seemed a world away from the clean and orderly Minneapolis of a fortnight 
earlier. But it was just another of the myriad faces of America seen on our 
trip down its greatest river. The joy of seeing so many sides of the nation and 
its people was magnified by the pleasure of sharing such intense time with my 
son. As Mark Twain, sage of the Mississippi, once said, you must not dream your 
life but live your dream. Sadly, it was time to wake up, for we had reached the 
end of our road.
 