
In one room, a ghastly wall of bloody, uncensored photos showcases the mob's 
greatest hits. In another, visitors are taught to load a revolver. And for when 
a gun just won't do, an oddball collection of household items – a shovel, a 
hammer, a baseball bat and an icepick – show the creative side of some of 
America's most notorious killers.

On the 83rd anniversary of the St Valentine's Day massacre, Las Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/las-vegas> honoured one of its earliest 
relationships with the opening of a museum dedicated to the mobsters that made 
the desert city. There are tommy guns, money stacks and a bullet-riddled brick 
wall from the 1929 massacre that saw Al Capone seize control of the Chicago mob.

Las Vegas has long been enamoured with its gangster roots. Its long-time 
former mayor played himself in the mob flick Casino, and hotels often promote 
their nefarious origins. But the publicly funded, $42m Mob Museum represents a 
new level in Sin City's lawlessness devotion. Even the local FBI agents are in 
on it.

"We wanted to make sure the truth came out," said Ellen Knowlton, a former 
special agent in Las Vegas brought on board to legitimise the downtown 
attraction.

It's the second mob-themed attraction to open in Las Vegas in the past year. 
The Mob Experience at the Tropicana casino on the Las Vegas Strip quickly shut 
down because of slow ticket sales and other problems. It is scheduled to reopen 
later this year under the name Mob Attraction Las Vegas.

City officials say their version will perform better because it's an authentic 
examination of what made Las Vegas an international symbol of debauchery and 
excess. The museum is housed in a former Depression-era federal courthouse 
where the seventh of 14 US Senate hearings on organised crime was held in the 
early 1950s. The trials, watched by 30 million people, introduced the mob to 
most Americans.

But critics argue the government-backed attraction is a waste of tax dollars 
at a time when Nevada tops the nation in foreclosures and unemployment.

"It's is a risky bet," said Andy Matthews, president of the conservative 
Nevada Policy Research Institute, which planned to protest against the opening 
ceremony on Tuesday.

Las Vegas casino workers and longtime visitors alike are known to be nostalgic 
about the days when mob bosses kept drink prices low and streets violence-free. 
Their casinos became celebrity playgrounds and architectural icons. The 
Stardust, the El Cortez, the Tropicana, the Dunes Hotel, the Desert Inn, the 
Flamingo and the Fremont hotel were all backed by the mob at one point in the 
past. Elvis and Priscilla Presley married at the once mob-controlled Aladdin 
resort, and Wayne Newton later bought it.

More recently, Las Vegans made lawyer Oscar Goodman, known for representing 
alleged mobsters, their mayor three times.

The mob, the story goes, helped build the remote highway that would eventually 
become the Las Vegas Strip. Gangsters took over resorts built by frontmen, 
skimmed the profits and built nightclubs, country clubs, housing tracts and 
shopping centres.

Increased law enforcement scrutiny and competition from business titans such 
as Howard Hughes saw Las Vegas turn corporate in the late 1960s. Then the 
celebrity chefs and Cirque du Soleil dancers moved in. These days, Las Vegas 
feels more like a raunchy version of Disney World than a mob hangout.

"We felt nostalgic the moment the old days ended," said Michael Green, a 
history professor at the College of Southern Nevada in Las Vegas working with 
the museum. "To Americans, Las Vegas will always have that image, and they 
don't come here for Mickey Mouse."

Museum officials deny that they are sensationalising the mob experience to 
sell tickets, which cost up to $18 each. One exhibit shows the modern reach of 
organised crime through the drug cartels of Mexico, money laundering schemes in 
the Bahamas, counterfeit rings in China and human trafficking in Brazil.

The museum also tries to show the personal motivations behind the mugshots. 
There are pictures of a baby-faced Anthony Spilotro marking his first 
communion, Frank Costello relaxing in a hammock at home and the gambling titan 
Meyer Lanksy with his daughter at the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem. All three were 
among the mob's most powerful men.

But the museum's extensive photography collection depicting cratered heads, 
exploded cars and full body bags will probably be its biggest draw among fans 
expecting a hefty dose of mob violence. There's Jack "Machine Gun" McGurn, his 
lifeless body splayed in a Chicago bowling alley in 1939. Another photo depicts 
the death of Giuseppe "Joe the Boss" Masseria, assassinated at his favourite 
Italian restaurant in New York in 1931.

A small gift store also plays up the mob's bloodthirsty reputation. The 
shelves lined with novelty items feature mobster paper dolls and gangster teddy 
bears dressed in striped suits and armed with plastic machine guns.

A T-shirt reads: "In Godfather we trust."

• The Mob Museum, 300 Stewart Avenue, Las Vegas, Nevada, 89101; +1 702 229 
2734;themobmuseum.org/ <http://themobmuseum.org/>
 