
Andrew Lee-Hart (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/apr/11/comfort-station-cannon-street-edwards?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 10 April) blames Stravinsky and Schoenberg for making modern classical music 
"the preserve of an intellectual elite". But that's nothing new. I'm not sure 
what he means by "liberating and beautiful" music, but perhaps he would include 
in that definition the music of Haydn, who composed for the vastly wealthy 
Esterhazys and their guests, and of Beethoven, whose ground-breaking Eroica 
symphony was given its first performance in one of the private palaces of the 
Lobkowicz family.

Handel's music eventually became the property of the masses, but he too wrote 
principally for the privileged and well-heeled few who could afford the 
subscription tickets for his first performances. Mr Lee-Hart's attitude is 
representative of a peculiar and regrettable British disinclination to accept 
the intellectual challenge posed by new (and newish) music. In Paris they are 
much more adventurous and open-minded. They might on occasion vent their 
displeasure as some did at the first performance of the Rite of Spring 100 
years ago, but at least they turned up then in large numbers to give a new 
piece a hearing – and they continue to do so today. Perhaps it's because 
Parisian audiences are not ashamed of being thought "intellectual".
Robert Charlesworth
London

• Contemporary visual art falls into many categories (figurative, abstract, 
conceptual etc). Similarly, "modern classical music" cannot just be lumped into 
one nebulous category. Lee-Hart seeks music which is "liberating and 
beautiful". Try Pärt, Tavener, Gorecki. Whatever modern classical music is 
(experimental, atonal, electroacoustic?), it requires one to invest of oneself 
in the audition process. It is not music to let wash over you. As a composer, 
performer and animateur, I use contemporary musics with all ages in my 
workshops. No one who works with these beguiling works finds them difficult or 
confrontational. Through experimentation, they gain ownership of amazing new 
sound worlds. I revel in the amazing breadth of artistic styles (visual and 
sonic arts) available. I fear a world filled only with the blandness of 
Vettriano and Enaudi.
Barry Russell
Holmfirth, West Yorkshire 

• Mr Lee-Hart has not explored much classical music written since 1907. I 
offer the slow movement of2nd piano concerto of Shostakovich 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AofJHLynad4>, Elgar's Cello Concerto 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RM9DPfp7-Ck>, Barber's Adagio for strings 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RRMz8fKkG2g>, the slow movement of Tansman's 
4th Symphony and Alexander Krein's Dance no 4 for violin and piano. They show 
there is plenty of beautiful classical music since 1907. He might also listen 
to Maxwell Davies' Farewell to Stromness for piano, not to mention much Arvo 
Part.
Ivor Solomons
Norwich
 