
It’s incongruous to sit with Monty Don in a Soho restaurant. His grin demands 
a backdrop of hedgerow and coppice, not the clogged London streetscape outside
Quo Vadis <http://www.quovadissoho.co.uk/>. When we meet for lunch the 
restaurant is in a late stage of refurbishment so the exterior is temporarily 
scaffolded and only half the dining room is open. Don seems a bit confined at 
our corner table, itching for a skyline. He lived in London for nine years from 
the age of 25, and this was a fairly regular haunt back then in one of its 
previous incarnations. The arrival of some of chef Jeremy Lee’s signature 
rustic manchet bread makes him feel more at home; he loosens his shoulders a 
bit as he breaks into it.

We talk about the only previous time we have sat in a restaurant together, 
when Don was hired as the gardening correspondent of theObserver magazine, of 
which I’d just become deputy editor. That was 23 years ago. I remember being 
struck then, as I am now, by his slightly timeless physical presence in a room 
of flighty city dwellers; though back then he was new to writing about gardens 
(the jewellery business he had run with his wife, Sarah, had just gone bankrupt 
and they had lost everything) as soon as he started to talk about his plans 
there seemed no doubt he would make it a vocation. His ancestor was the 
botanist George Don, foreman of the Chelsea Physic Garden and inveterate 
tropical plant hunter. Monty seemed directly grafted from the same stock.

He recalls that lunch and the job that followed it as something of a before 
and after for him. “I remember theObserver calling and saying they would like 
me to do the column,” he says, “and the editor explaining that it wasn’t 
unfortunately a ‘life-changing’ contract, with a bit of a laugh. I think it was 
£250 a week. But the fact was that to me at that moment it really was 
life-changing. We had a young family, we had lost our house and everything. The 
idea that somebody was saying we are going to give you this cheque every week 
was like a miracle.”

I guess I still have a sense of the wolf, if not at the door, then at least 
prowling on the horizon﻿

Don had moved out to a rundown smallholding, Longmeadow in Herefordshire, 
where he has lived ever since, nurturing and developing the seeds of that 
writing life, along with the gardens that, after theObserver, became the 
setting of BBCGardeners’ World. He has no hankering for city life, never did 
really. Even as a student at Cambridge he kept chickens. And in London, he 
says, he spent more time in his patch of garden than anywhere else. “I used to 
go to the cinema a bit, the occasional meal out. But I don’t crave any of that 
now. There isn’t really a decent cinema for miles near us anyway.”

As a long-term president of the Soil Association, from which he recently 
stepped down, he has a clear passion for the kind of seasonal British cooking 
that Lee has made his name with at Quo Vadis. Don loves good fresh ingredients, 
but, like Lee, doesn’t fetishise them. He orders his leek, bacon and egg salad, 
and salt cod and shrimp cakes to follow with the minimum of fuss and eats them 
and a generous side of parsley potatoes with the relish of a man who knows 
flavour when he tastes it. A while ago he and Sarah published a farmhouse 
cookbook and the garden supplies most of what they eat. They cook together as 
often as they can, though work on his seriesBig Dream Small Spaces, in which he 
helps suburban gardeners create their fantasy plots, has seen him on the road a 
lot of late.

“More than ever I want a few friends and family and quiet and space,” he says. 
“Sarah is more sociable, but our problems are always about not spending enough 
time with each other than too much.”

The other ingredient of that life is the occasion for our meeting. Having been 
pestered to for many years, Don has written a book about his lifelong love 
affair with his dogs. The book’s star (and the alternative star ofGardeners’ 
World) is his golden retriever, Nigel. It’s an affectionate and surprisingly 
affecting story. For a while Don couldn’t work out how to tell it, without it 
seeming too saccharine. “It clicked when I based it around the garden,” he 
says. “It became a map, Nigel’s territory, that is where he and I both live.”

The other hurdle was to write it straight without any distancing ironies. “Any 
kind of blokeiness had to be silenced. You have to put yourself in that frame 
of mind when you are on your own sitting with a dog by your side with the rain 
beating on the window.”

For Don the companionship of dogs is of a piece with what he sees as the 
unique British passion for gardening. It’s a result of a race memory of the 
brutalities of the industrial revolution, he believes, a psychological need for 
green thoughts in green shades. “That all happened so fast, 200 years ago, that 
it is as if we are still coming to terms with it,” he suggests. “What we didn’t 
lose was the sense of what we lost. Our obsession with gardening is unique. In 
Italy or even in France, where they didn’t have that revolution until a century 
later, they don’t see why you would garden yourself when you can afford to pay 
someone to do it. They regard gardening like we regard plumbing. And the whole 
British caricature of a grand lady in tweeds with her bottom sticking out of a 
herbaceous border. It doesn’t exist in those countries.”

My rescue dog is saving my life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/04/new-rescue-dog-save-my-life-health>
Dogs <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/dogs> are the other element of 
that transplanted desire for older rural harmonies. “I like dogs because they 
are not humans,” he says. “I get very uncomfortable when people start talking 
about dogs as ‘my boys’. What is wonderful is that this is a wild animal which 
has chosen to go into partnership with you. It is the only wild animal that 
really does that.”

Built into that relationship is a sense of dogs tracing the contours of his 
own life, often in ways that writing the book has revealed to him. “When I 
recorded the audiobook I realised just how much was involved,” he says. “There 
are three dogs in the book I’ve had who have died. And I broke down completely 
reading about one of them and when I turned round the engineer was also 
sobbing. I thought: ‘Jesus what is going on here?’ We had to stop and have a 
cup of tea and get a grip…”

In some ways, like the garden, the dogs have been a way of measuring out the 
years. Don says he’s never forgotten the tougher times and reflexively works 
very hard to make sure they don’t return. After a minor stroke in 2008 he had 
to step down from the BBC for nearly a year, and the money immediately dried 
up. “I had a bit of rainy day money for the first time ever,” he says. “And 
then it rained and all the money in the bank got spent. I guess I still have a 
sense of the wolf, if not at the door, then at least prowling on the horizon. 
Shit does happen.” He can’t imagine packing it in – “why would you not work?” – 
but he does try to be selective.

He must have been asked to go into the jungle?

“I have – and to dance. All of them,” he says. “My basic philosophy is never 
do anything with the word ‘celebrity’ attached to it. Without being overly 
pompous, if you have worked hard to have an audience trust you a bit, why blow 
it? That is my currency.”

It’s also, you guess, a kind of psychological necessity for him to keep things 
as “real” as possible. Don has long suffered from bouts of seasonal depression 
and the rhythm and labour of the garden – and the smallholding he farms with 
his son in the Black Mountains over the Welsh border – has proved the best 
antidote. It’s probably telling that a part of him still thinks of himself 
ruefully as a “failed novelist” (he published a couple of works of fiction in 
his 20s). But there are compensations. “The farm uses up a lot of my creative 
urges,” he says. “It’s a sort of rough and ready space, I don’t film there.” He 
and his son keep 500 breeding ewes and maybe 50 heifers, all organic. “If I’m 
honest,” he says, “the thing I am proudest of is my varieties of wild flowers 
in the hay meadow.” Holding that very bright thought in mind, he slurps his 
coffee and heads out into the black and white London afternoon. 

Nigel: My Family and Other Dogs is out now (Two Roads, £20). Click here to 
order a copy from Guardian Bookshop for £16.40 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nigel.html>
 