
Fears that Greece’s seven-year debt crisis is about to enter a troubling new 
phase have been voiced by one of the world’s leading rating agencies.

Moody’s said it was worried by the decision by the European authorities to 
suspend a debt-relief deal for Greece after the government in Athens gave a
Christmas bonus to pensioners, promised free school meals for the poorest 
children and cancelled a VAT increase. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/17/tsipras-greek-spending-spree-flouts-bailout-rules-syriza>

The rating agency said any “material delay” in concluding talks between Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> and its European creditors would 
make it harder for the troubled country to meet next year’s onerous financial 
commitments and would increase the risks of bondholders not being paid.

Tsipras’s spending spree may be relief to Greeks but it won’t end crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/17/tsipras-greek-spending-spree-flouts-bailout-rules-syriza>
After months of negotiations, Europe agreed to limited debt relief to Greece 
earlier this month by giving Athens longer to pay and reducing the interest 
rate payable on its loans.

But within days the decision was put on hold by the European Stability 
Mechanism (ESM) – the Luxembourg-based body that provides help to countries and 
banks facing financial difficulties – after Alexis Tsipras’s coalition 
government decided to provide help to pensioners, schoolchildren and VAT payers 
on the Greek islands.

The plans involved spending amounting to €617m (£518m) – less than 0.5% of 
Greece’s GDP – but were made without consultation with the country’s creditors.

Hardliners in Brussels and in Berlin were outraged by Tsipras’s decision, seen 
as evidence of backsliding on a commitment made in August 2015 to keep to a 
tough programme of economic reforms in return for an€86bn bailout. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/14/greece-edges-third-bailout-positive-signals-germany>

Tsipras says that Greece has overachieved on the budget targets set by Europe 
and that the money will be going to those hardest hit by austerity. Greece has 
seen its economy shrink by 30% since its financial crisis began in 2009.

Kathrin Muehlbronner, a senior vice-president at Moody’s, said: “The 
suspension points to renewed tensions between Greece and its European creditors 
and will likely delay completion of the second review of Greece’s current 
economic adjustment programme and the disbursement of around €6.1bn in ESM 
funding, a credit negative.


“Such a delay increases the risks that repayments to bondholders due in July 
2017 may be missed.”

There had been hopes that talks between Greece and its creditors would be 
concluded with time to spare before the country is due to make debt repayments 
next summer.

Muehlbronner said she still expected the review to be completed – but added 
that it would be hard for Tsipras to force through painful reforms given his 
wafer-thin parliamentary majority and the opposition to fresh austerity 
measures.

“Freezing the ESM’s debt-relief measures indicates renewed hardening in 
creditors’ positions toward Greece, which we expect will prolong negotiations 
over the second review of the programme. Political dynamics in Europe and the 
electoral calendar of key European creditors including France and Germany are 
likely to complicate the negotiations and prevent a rapid resolution.


“For Greece, lingering obstacles to the implementation of the politically 
challenging reforms in the second review of the programme revolve around labour 
and product market reform and additional steps toward privatisation. These 
include Greece’s governing coalition’s slim three-seat majority in parliament, 
weak institutions and elevated social discontent,” said Muehlbronner.

Greece’s bond yields have risen sharply since the ESM suspended its planned 
debt relief, with interest rates on 10-year bonds standing at just over 7%. 
Tsipras has been under pressure from Greece’s central bank to back down rather 
than risk an escalation of the tension.


Muehlbronner said Greece’s track record of reform implementation, Europe’s 
desire to keep the country in the eurozone, and the risks of any renewed 
flare-up of its sovereign debt crisis, suggested the eventual completion of the 
second review.

“However, a material delay in the negotiations would raise the credit risk to 
bondholders. Greece has large upcoming maturities in July 2017, with €2.3bn 
owed to private-sector bondholders and €3.9bn to theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>. Greece will be 
highly challenged to meet these redemptions without completion of the 
programme’s second review and without the disbursement of €6.1bn of ESM funding 
by the summer.”
 