
The credit rating agency Moody’s has agreed to pay nearly $864m to settle with 
US federal and state authorities over its ratings of risky mortgage securities 
in the run-up to the 2008 financial crisis, the department of justice said on 
Friday.


Moody’s reached the deal with the justice department, 21 states and the 
District of Columbia, resolving allegations that the firm contributed to the 
worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, the department said in a 
statement.

The Big Short: is the next financial crisis on its way?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/big-short-financial-crash-steve-eisman-italy-banks-risk>
 “Moody’s failed to adhere to its own credit-rating standards and fell short 
on its pledge of transparency in the run-up to the ‘great recession’,” 
principal deputy associate attorney general Bill Baer said in the statement.

 S&P Global’s Standard & Poor’s entered into a similar accord in 2015 paying 
out $1.375bn. Standard and Poor’s is the world’s largest ratings firm, followed 
by Moody’s.

 Moody’s said it would pay a $437.5m penalty to the justice department, and 
the remaining $426.3m would be split among the states and Washington DC.

 As part of its settlement, Moody’s also agreed to measures designed to ensure 
the integrity of credit ratings going forward, including keeping analytic 
employees out of commercial-related discussions.

 The rating agency’s chief executive also must certify compliance with the 
measures for at least five years.

 Moody’s said that it stands behind the integrity of its ratings and noted 
that the settlement contains no finding of a violation of law or admission of 
liability.

 Moody’s said it already has implemented some of the compliance measures in 
the agreement.

 Moody’s shares closed at $96.96 on Friday. The stock plummeted more than 5% 
on 21 October, the day it disclosed the justice department had notified the 
firm it was planning to sue over the ratings.

Moody’s settlement on Friday resolved the justice department probe without a 
federal lawsuit. In theStandard & Poor’s case, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/21/standard-poors-to-pay-fine-banned-rating-mortgage-securities-one-year>
 resolution was reached after the US filed a $5bn fraud suit.


 Connecticut, whose attorney general helped lead negotiations, filed a lawsuit 
against Moody’s in 2010. Mississippi and South Carolina later sued, and other 
states had potential claims.

 Connecticut’s law suit claimed that Moody’s ratings were influenced by its 
desire for fees, despite claims of independence and objectivity. It also 
accused Moody’s of knowingly inflating ratings on toxic mortgage securities.

 Moody’s ratings were “directly influenced by the demands of the powerful 
investment banking clients who issued the securities and paid Moody’s to rate 
them,” Connecticut attorney general, George Jepsen, said in a statement on 
Friday.
 