
During the buildup José Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho> and Jürgen Klopp were 
careful to highlight each other’s qualities. Cut to his arrival at Old Trafford 
and the Liverpool manager quickly dropped that stance and ended the game 
arguing with his opposite number saying: “I read the programme notes and it is 
the first time there was nothing about welcome to Liverpool or something like 
this. Then I wanted a coffee and in the can was only tea. It’s started already, 
yeah? It’s all OK. It’s football and we are ready for it.”

So, too, was the crowd whose vibrancy gave the stadium a cauldron‑like feel, 
the United support answering Mourinho’s midweek demand to “come and play” with 
his side. All that really mattered to the managers, of course, was the result 
and how 90 minutes of play may illuminate how clear the vision is for their 
respectiveManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and Liverpool teams.

Klopp’s side have yet to win in 2017 but had they done so here the gap to the 
leaders, Chelsea, would have returned to the five points it was at the start of 
the weekend. Mourinho, in contrast, came into the game with nine successive 
victories and a 15-match unbeaten sequence.

More importantly, he had United performing precisely as he wished before what 
was a litmus test. “I’d say to my guys don’t lose the identity that we built up 
in these last couple of months,” he said before the kick‑off. “We have to play 
the same way because this is the identity we want to develop.”

Zlatan Ibrahimovic strikes late for Manchester United in draw with Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
Key in this has been how the main players have performed. In the opening 
exchanges Anthony Martial offered one illustration. He was a nightmare for 
defenders with his balletic footwork and dazzling pace. That came afterLiverpool
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> offered an initial threat via 
Divock Origi. After this Klopp became the concerned man in the dugout and 
Mourinho the man who could rue Paul Pogba missing a golden chance and admire 
the vision of Henrikh Mkhitaryan that gave the attacking midfielder the opening.

Mourinho also touched on how Klopp can be the more animated during a match. 
Just before the 25th minute both made a first retreat from technical area to 
the bench but within moments Klopp was back out and was soon followed by 
Mourinho.

Klopp’s masterplan has constant pressing at the forefront. So it was that 
Liverpool’s opener came when Roberto Firmino harried Phil Jones into a mistake 
which won the corner from which Pogba handballed for James Milner’s penalty.

Cue role reversal for the managers, as Klopp could enjoy the control this gave 
Liverpool and Mourinho hoped anxiety would not disrupt United’s rhythm.

Rio Ferdinand, the former United defender who experienced many of these games, 
said: “This Liverpool team is exciting. They’re great to watch. They play with 
verve. They have a direct, aggressive, quick, attacking mentality and attack in 
numbers. While I think, defensively, they have an achilles heel, if they’re 
going to outscore teams then they’re going to be a big threat.”

This was surely the weakness Mourinho instructed his men to exploit when they 
came out for the second half with Wayne Rooney now among their ranks and 
Michael Carrick removed. The rejig had the captain at No10 and Pogba dropping 
into Carrick’s midfield berth as Mourinho made the first move in this battle of 
the No1s.

It had an immediate impact as Rooney linked with Zlatan Ibrahimovic and 
Liverpool struggled to get out of their half. United were the ones pressing now 
à la Liverpool, and when Firmino hooked a ball skyward the tension that coursed 
through Klopp was shown by him going ballistic.

He can be a difficult read, though. Moments before Klopp threw a grin at 
Mourinho and later that broad beam of his was aimed at the bench following a 
harum-scarum hack clear. It was also being played in a bear‑pit atmosphere in 
which each set of fans swapped particularly pithy pleasantries.

Ferdinand had said: “José has had one of the hardest jobs out of the top teams 
in terms of personnel, changing the mentality at the club, going against the 
philosophy that had been drilled in over the last couple of years.”

Ibrahimovic’s late equaliser showed how far along Mourinho already is on this 
chart. United’s display was the latest evidence the dour days of Louis van Gaal 
Ferdinand referred to are gone. Mourinho’s team are the best of the post-Sir 
Alex Ferguson era.

A similar claim can be made of Klopp’s Liverpool. They are the Anfield club’s 
most complete team since the Premier League began.

Just as United have the right man in charge, so do Liverpool. Near the close 
they clashed and Klopp refused Mourinho’s offer to make up, though they did 
shake hands at the final whistle. Expect their rivalry to dominate English 
football for some time.
 