
Preamble Good day and welcome to Guardian Unlimited's coverage of Rafael Nadal 
v Andy Murray from Melbourne (writes game-by-game reporter from his Farringdon 
bunker). The bookies reckon Nadal, with his Popeye muscles and caveman grunt, 
is a huge odds on favourite to overpower Murray. But Murray has yet to drop a 
set at theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 
and to me looks good value at 5-2 to win. Cue, probably, a three-set win for 
the Spaniard.

10am Sharapova is a set and a break up in her match, so Murray's match is 
likely to be underway by 10.30am or so. Meanwhile Todd Jenkins takes issue with 
my prediction that Murray may sneak this. "Murray has no second serve and will 
run out of gas by the fourth set - if it goes that far," he snears. Perhaps 
Todd, perhaps. But Murray had a 71% first-serve percentage against Juan Ignacio 
Chela, and he's a lot fitter than he was. I hope.

10.15am Sharapova, who was 7-5, 5-2 up, has just lost her serve and blown a 
match point. She's still got another chance to serve for the match, mind. 
"Everyone bangs on about how fit Nadal is, with his well-developed muscles and 
so on," says David Holmes. "But these same people fail to extend such feelings 
towards Amelie Mauresmo. It's rank hypocrisy if you ask me. I suspect this 
match will be a five-setter, anyway, with Murray to fade badly in the fifth."

10.30am Finally, on her fourth match point, Sharapova wins 7-5, 6-4 to move 
into the quarter-finals. We'll be underway shortly. "I watched Federer and 
Murray play over the weekend," says James Andrews, "and Our Andy looked slow, 
tired, and out of touch compared with Mr Federer. And then I saw Murray 
interviewed och-aying 'that's the best I've played'. As Nadal has the best win 
record against the Swiss since Tiger Tim stopped caring (c2004), this does not 
bode well for Murray."

10.45am The players arrive on court to polite applause: Murray looks grimly 
determined, Nadal relaxed. "The BBC have just shown an interview with Murray 
conducted by - I think - Garry Richardson in Melbourne," points out Dermot 
Richards. "Seeing as the BBC's coverage of the tournament so far has been 
non-existent, does this count as the cushiest job around?" Well?

10.50am The players are knocking up. Nadal dressed in flamboyant canary 
yellow, Murray in a more sober white and black number. Meanwhile the TV cameras 
have found a couple waving a Scottish flag - two women in their early 50s, 
tennisy types. "I hate this ridiculous negativity," says Adrian Bradley. "Put 
this into perspective: Andy has got into the second week of a grand slam 
without dropping a set. Last season he beat Roger Federer. I think it's 
ridiculous that people are already writing him off before a single ball has 
been served."

10.55am Murray wins the toss and elects to receive. Here we go. "Re your photo 
ofAndy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> - is that just a 
shadow, or is he sporting the finest sideburns since Barchester Chronicles 
finished?" asks Jonathon Wood. "Or is it a rather trendy strap, ensuring his 
baseball cap doesn't fall off when he performs his trademark on-court vomit?"

First set: Nadal* 1-0 Murray After a first rally, in which both players 
tentatively tip it to each other, Murray sends a running forehand wide. Three 
unforced errors follow, and Nadal holds to love. "Re: 10.45 comment. Having 
seen previous Gary Richardson interviews, I imagine the BBC employ him in 
positions where he can cause the least damage to their reputation," says Daniel 
Seppings.

First set: Nadal 1-1 Murray*  Murray loses the first point of his serve, and 
is in trouble at 0-15 down ... until Nadal sends a fairly easy backhand volley 
into the net. Revitalised, Murray wins the next two points before holding with 
a stunning forehand. "Am I right to identify a degree of uncertainty in the air 
whenever Andy Murray is playing?" asks David Hopkins. "We've all become so used 
to mockery and gloating whenever Tiger Tim is playing, that we don't know 
whether to back the new boy or not. Does anyone have a definitive answer as to 
whether we want Murray to win, or whether we want to enjoy laughing when he 
loses?" I want him to win, David - yes he's young, yes he whinges a bit, but 
he's got character and fight. I like him.

First set: Nadal* 2-1 Murray Another easy hold for Nadal. "It's not 
'ridiculous negativity' to expect Murray to lose this one," says David Holmes. 
"It's more accepting that Nadal is the world No2 and is in blinding form, that 
Murray has never been beyond the fourth round of a slam, and that his victory 
over Federer last season was at least partly due to the Can't Miss Swiss being 
knackered from the week before. I think Murray will push Nadal hard though."

First set: Nadal 2-2 Murray* Twice Murray allows himself to be dragged into 
Nadal-type rallies, and is sent round the court, this way and that. But at 0-15 
and 15-30 down he resorts to serve and volley - to great success - before 
eventually holding with an easy smash. "I'm not certain what Daniel Seppings is 
inferring about Garry Richardson," says John Bains. "His interviewing technique 
is formidable, especially on Sunday mornings in Sportsweek on Radio 5. He is 
brilliantly ruthless and will not duck any issue or hard question. I didn't see 
or hear the Murray interview, but I'm certain Garry Richardson was in London 
yesterday. Not for nothing is he nicknamed 'rottweiller.'" Couldn't agree more, 
John.

First set: Nadal* 3-2 Murray Nadal is holding a lot easier than Murray, who is 
being made to workincredibly hard to chase balls down. That may catch up with 
him in the fourth or fifth sets. At the moment, though, the standard of tennis 
from both players is very high indeed. "Since the departure of Goran 
Ivanisevic, the notion of me getting even remotely exited about tennis has 
seemed ridiculous," says Ben Hendy. "Now the boy Murray is around, my interest 
has been piqued. I like a player who gets angry, who lets his emotions show - 
one reason why I never jumped on the Henman bandwagon. Murray acts like he 
really cares about the game and I hope he goes all the way."

First set: Nadal 3-3 Murray* Again the pattern repeats itself: Murray goes 
0-15 before reverting to serve-volley. It works the first time, but then Nadal 
wins a glorious exchange - the players trade volleys before a Murray lob-volley 
is chased down by Nadal, who hits a brilliant winner - to go 15-30 ahead. 
However Murray's serve comes to the rescue twice, and he holds after one deuce 
and further adventures. "Should I be getting nervous that Nadal service games 
seem to refresh with an update quicker than I thought the electronic signals 
would be expected to get to Australia and back?" says Iain Pearson. "Or am I 
just not taking the service break into account when I hammer the refresh button 
on a Murray serve?" It's a bit of both Iain.

First set: Nadal* 4-3 Murray Nadal wins to love. He's only dropped two points 
on his serve so far. "So what should we call this," asks Josh Robinson. "It's 
clearly not OBO. Point-by-point would be more ridiculous than ball-by-ball. And 
game-by-game just sounds silly. So?"

First set: Nadal 4-4 Murray* Better from Murray, who mixes his game up nicely 
before holding to love with a smash that even I could've put away. "Murray can 
serve and volley and move Rafa around the court," says Des Benson. "He looks 
intelligent like a British winner. Shame he can't play cricket, eh?"

First set: Nadal* 5-4 Murray Nadal races to a 40-0 lead, but then Murray grits 
his teeth and starts swinging like a man with nothing to lose. Suddenly, in the 
blink of an eye, it's deuce. But Nadal responds with an unplayable serve down 
the line and a dreamy cross-court double backhand that Murray, at the net, 
can't dig out to go 5-4 ahead. "Could the negatitivity being shown towards 
Murray be, perish the thought, anti-Scottish sentiments?" asks John Murray. 
Sadly, I think you're right, although it works both ways: remember Murray did 
say he wanted 'anyone but England' to win last year's World Cup?

First set: Nadal 5-5 Murray* Murray serve has go-faster stripes on it right 
now: he opens with an ace down the middle and there's another unplayable serve 
in the mix too. There's also several drop shots too - bizarrely as Murray's 
coach Brad Gilbert hates them - but they seem to be keeping Nadal off balance 
as he holds to 15. "Re: alternative suggestions for game-by-game. Depending how 
involved you get maybe fingernail by fingernail?" suggests Peter Brown.

First set: Nadal* 6-5 Murray Murray has a real chance at 30-15, but hits a 
weak backhand volley from a position of strength. A few seconds later, Nadal 
holds to 15. "This is amazing," cries Niall Firth. "Your reports are coming a 
split-second after I've just seen it happen live on the BBC website. Are you 
guessing what's going to happen and then just pressing send when you're 
premonition is confirmed? Or maybe the BBC website is just lagging?" Er, I 
think it's the latter, Niall.

First set: Nadal 6-6 Murray* Murray opens with a wide serve to Nadal's 
backhand, but the Spaniard hits a sizzling return which Murray hits into net. 
Murray then goes 30-15 up, but then he sends a running forehand wide and hits a 
drop shot halfway up the net. Suddenly it's set point, which Murray saves with 
a huge serve and putaway. "Come on!" he cries. Two deuces follows, before 
Murray holds. Tiebreak time. "I quite like game-by-game as the acronym is GBG, 
which sounds a bit like heebeegeebees, which is what Henman always got in big 
games," says Dan Ashley. "It is also the name of a band Angus Deayton was in 
the 80s."

First set: Nadal 6-7 Murray (tiebreak)


Nadal 0-1 Murray: a length rally ends when a wild forehand from Nadal flies 
out. Murray has an early mini-break


Nadal 0-2 Murray: an ace from Murray out wide.


Nadal 1-2 Murray: Murray tamely hands the mini-break back with a forehand into 
the net.


Nadal 2-2 Murray: Murray whacks Nadal's serve long.


Nadal 3-2 Murray: Murray hits Nadal's serve just wide.


Nadal 3-3 Murray: Another Murray ace, his sixth of the match, levels it in the 
change around.


Nadal 3-4 Murray: Murray challenges a fault call on his serve, and Hawkeye 
proves him correct. That's another ace.


Nadal 3-5 Murray: Murray forces an error with a deep return, Nadal's looping 
forehand drops well out. Another mini-break for Murray


Nadal 3-6 Murray: Nadal misses an easy backhand smash at the net. Murray now 
has three set points.


Nadal 3-7 Murray: Another long rally ends with Nadal sending a shot long. It's 
called in by the linesman, but Murray correctly challenges and wins the first 
set.


Second set: Murray* leads 7-6, 1-0 Nadal After both players go for a lengthy 
toilet break, Murray opens the second set by holding to love. Meanwhile your 
emails are continuing to food in. "Game-by-game seems perfectly acceptable to 
me, although perhaps the acronym can be tweaked when Miss Sharapova is on 
court," suggests Nick Hughes. "Grunt-by-grunt anyone?"

Second set: Murray leads 7-6, 1-1 Nadal* The first fistpump of the night from 
Nadal! And he's every right to be happy: he was 0-40 after Murray had followed 
a step-in-and-swing forehand with two brilliant returns, but then Nadal won the 
next five points. A big, big game for Nadal. "Lengthy toilet break?" splutters 
Peter Counsell. "Surely Fred Perry et al just carried on regardless of the 
pressing needs of their bladders, or was that the reason for the natty flannels 
worn in days past?"

Second set: Murray* leads 7-6, 2-1 Nadal Murray is clearly sulking about 
throwing away his chance in the last game and allows Nadal to get 15-40 ahead 
without the Spaniard having to do anything more difficult than getting the ball 
back in play. But a big serve and a fine backhand smash bring it back to deuce 
- and when Nadal misses an easy volley, Murray is able to hold. "I think that 
the tennis coverage can benefit here from a more US approach," says David Horn. 
'Play-by-play' would seem to cover the regular flow of the match (i.e. 
game-by-game), but also be flexible enough to allow for tie-breaks, and other 
occasions when a more 'drilled down' coverage is given - often, point by 
point." Perhaps David, perhaps. But it sounds so American...

Second set: Murray leads 7-6, 3-1 Nadal* In the first set, Murray was all jab 
and move: with lots of slow slices and spins. But now, incredibly, he's 
dictating play. From 40-15 down, a sublime half-volley and a hefty forehand 
brings him to deuce, and a further forehand winner and Nadal error gives him 
the first break of the match. "Surely Andy Murray must be the only great 
sportsman Scotland have produced in the last 30 years with the exception of 
two-time darts world champion Jocky Wilson?" asks D.A Fraser. "Oh, and that guy 
with the brown bonnet from Dundee who took 12th place in the 1991 European 
Curling Championships." What about Rhona Martin?

Second set: Murray* leads 7-6, 4-1 Nadal The best rally of the match - both 
players exchange angled drop volleys at the net, before retreating to the back 
of the court where they trade further blows - ends when Nadal can't return a 
smokin' forehand. Murray double faults at 40-15, but holds on to confirm his 
break. "What about procrastination-by-procrastination, 
work-avoidance-by-work-avoidance, or 
here-comes-my-boss-better-minimize-this-window-by-here-comes-my-boss-better-minimize-this-window?" 
suggests Josh Robinson. "Or would that just be silly?"

Second set: Murray leads 7-6, 4-2 Nadal* Nadal holds comfortably to 30. "What 
do you mean Scotland have produced no great sportsman in the last 30 years?" 
fumes Angus Weir. "What about Gavin Hastings? Sir Alex Ferguson? Kenny 
Dalglish? Stephen Hendry? Colin Montgomerie. And don't you dare forget our 
women curlers either."

Second set: Murray* leads 7-6, 4-3 Nadal Nadal is fistpumping like Henman in 
his pomp after two classic winners, the second of which was threaded through 
the eye of a needle, to give him breakpoint at 30-40. Murray saves it with a 
superb half-court winner, but he quickly sends one long to give Nadal the break 
back. "Once again your OBO coverage (for that is what it is) kicks the BBC all 
over the screen," says Ben Waterhouse. "I couldn't help noticing however that 
the name of the guy writing for the BBC isBen Dirs 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/tennis/6285599.stm>. Have your IT guys been 
throwing some Gremlins into the works or was he just born unlucky?"

Second set: Murray leads 7-6, 4-4 *Nadal Murray, like a late period Oliver 
Reed, is certainly going for his shots. A game or two ago they were going in, 
now they're finding the net. He recovers from 40-0 down to make it 40-30 with a 
brilliant drop-smash, but Nadal's angled volley levels the proceedings at 4-4. 
"Scotland not producing any decent sportsmen for 30 years? What about Les 
'McDanger' Wallace?" points out Donald Lunan. "Not to mention Scottish 
dominance of indoor bowls for the last 20 years. It is this sort of 
Anglo-centric outdoor sport bias that gives fuel to the nationalistic fire."

Second set: Murray leads 7-6, 4-5 *Nadal Murray's first serve percentage in 
the first set was 68%. Now it's 39%, which really isn't good enough. A feeble 
service game ends with a double fault, and Nadal has now won the last four 
games. There may mitigating circumstances, however: Murray's started to clutch 
his right side between every point, which isn't encouraging. Meanwhile the 
debate about great Scottish sports stars continues. "I see no one has mentioned 
David Coulthard," points out Chris Brock. "Funny that."

Second set: Murray 7-6, 4-6 *Nadal Nadal makes it one set all, without much 
fuss or work. Murray has taken to elbowing himself in the stomach, muttering to 
no one in particular a la Ivanisevic and is now crying. Unless he gets some 
treatment on his side problem, these next two sets could be over very quickly 
indeed. "I believe that Alan Wells was a quite good sprinter a few years ago, 
and may have won some kind of medal at the Olympics," says Stewart Ellinson. 
"Going a bit further back, some bloke called Ming Campbell ran at the Tokyo 
Olympics; what ever happened to him?"

Third set: Murray 7-6, 4-6, 1-0 Nadal Intriguingly, Murray doesn't call for 
the trainer in between sets, even though he's still touching his right side. 
And, equally bizarrely, he's found his first serve again. An ace - his 10th of 
the match - takes the opening game of the third set. "I see that no-one has 
mentioned the Duke of Argyll, captain of Scotland's world-championship Elephant 
Polo team." says Gary Stirling. According to Wikipedia, Scotland are 'arguably 
the powerhouse of world elephant polo', an accolade that I am sure cannot be 
attributed to an England side at present, apart from 'arguably the powerhouse 
of capitulating to Australia'.

Third set: Murray 7-6, 4-6, 1-1 Nadal I rate Murray hugely as a player, but 
these constant injury niggles are continue to worry: he's like the school 
asthmatic - frail and on the verge of some sort of problem. Nadal holds easily. 
"When I discovered you were doing OBO/GBG, it was 4-1 to Murray in the second 
set," says Chris Drew. "Now's he's lost 6-4. This feels too much like the last 
day at Adelaide."

Third set: Murray* 7-6, 4-6, 1-2 Nadal Dear oh dear oh dear. Two double faults 
in a row from Murray at 15-30 gives Nadal another easy break. Yet still Murray 
refuses to call for a trainer. Strange. Meanwhile the list of great Scots 
continues to grow. "Graeme Dott, Scott Harrison, both world champions, Peter 
Nicol (turncoat but still a Scot) and Richie Ramsay, the first Scot to win the 
US Amateur since Tommy Armour 80 years ago," says Colin Huxtable.

Third set: Murray 7-6, 4-6, 1-3 Nadal* Brilliant from Murray, who again 
succeeds with his drop-shot-from-the-baseline-followed-by-a-lob-volley 
combination. But it's all-too-brief: Nadal fights back from 0-30 to hold again. 
"Rhona Martin, Gavin Hastings, Sir Alex Ferguson, Kenny Dalglish, Stephen 
Hendry, Colin Montgomerie ... can you hear me?" chuckles the in-no-way 
predictable Paul Scott. "Your boy is going to get one hell of a beating!"

Third set: Murray* 7-6, 4-6, 2-3 Nadal There are still flashes of genius from 
Murray - another superb angled volley falls out of Nadal's reach in that game - 
but right now his future looks as bleak as a baby wildebeest being scouted by 
hungry lions. Saying that, he does hold to 30 in that game.

Third set: Murray 7-6, 4-6, 3-3 Nadal* "Ironic, isn't it, to have all these 
Scotsmen queuing up to list their pantheon of sporting greats as their latest 
one capitulates like a true Englishman," says Richard Marsden. You say that 
Richard, but he's just gone 0-30 up and is moving a good deal freer than he 
was. Nadal pulls it back to 15-30, but two points later Murray breaks back! 
(Although he's still uttering expletives in between points, so I'm guessing 
he's in a good deal of pain).

Third set: Murray* 7-6, 4-6, 4-3 Nadal Murray holds with an ace and suddenly 
he's right back in this match. What a comeback! "Re: some people's 
anti-Scottish comments. How very modern - it's like listening to Jade Goody!" 
says David Coleiro. "I could understand it if the draw was packed full of 
English tennis heroes."

Third set: Murray 7-6, 4-6, 4-4 Nadal* Nadal, is bouncing around like a boxer 
before the fight, Murray is grimacing then smiling then grimacing again. I 
can't tell what is going on, except that Nadal has just held comfortably to 15. 
"Any chance of a Guardian wallchart of great Scottish sportsmen and women, 
preferably drawn by Steve Bell and featuring the one and only Jocky Wilson?" 
asks Phil Astley. Good idea, Phil, I'll have a word with our marketing 
department.

Third set: Murray* 7-6, 4-6, 5-4 Nadal Murray looks in trouble at 15-40, but 
once again he pulls it out of the bag. "Why does the press always harp on about 
how young Murray is, and how it will take time to develop into the world beater 
everyone expects him to be?" says Sam Taylor. "Sampras was 19 when he won his 
first grand slam, Becker was 17, Nadal 19 and Borg 20. The Times chose to 
compare Murray to Tommy Robredo over Christmas, citing that if a 'plodder' like 
Robredo could make top five, it was only a matter of time before the gutless, 
graceless Murray did. The fact that Robredo has won AMS titles, is incredibly 
fit (and doesn't fall away physically during matches that last over two hours) 
and is in control of his emotions clearly eluded the writer. Murray is good, 
but he's not a great yet, and if he doesn't improve his fitness and his 
attitude he never will be." Think you're being harsh, Sam. Murray is still 
young, both physically and emotionally, and certainly has the talent to be a 
top five player. We shouldn't overhype him, but neither should be underplay his 
obvious talent.

Third set: Murray* 7-6, 4-6, 6-4 Nadal Murray, who looked dead and buried 30 
minutes ago, hits successive swishy forehands and suddenly he is 15-40 up and 
has two points for the set. The first one comes and goes when Murray hits a 
deep, deep approach into the net - but then Nadal can't control a meaty 
forehand and Murray is - incredibly - two sets to one ahead! "Re: the 
'anti-Scottish' sentiments, I made the original comment and I'm a Scotsman," 
says DA Fraser. "Why can't we just admit we've been rubbish at sports? But 
we've got the TV, telephone, light bulb, penicillin and the steam engine to be 
proud of. The Swiss have just got Roger Federer and Toblerone."

Third set: Murray* 7-6, 4-6, 6-4 Nadal There's a brief pause as Murray goes 
off for a toilet break. "How are the Australian crowd taking to Murray?" asks 
Gary Naylor. "He's talented, doesn't like the English and has beaten the best 
the world has to offer - so they should adopt him as one of their own. But he 
also does self-deprecation and gloomy Private Frazer wit, which is hardly your 
Ricky Ponting stock-in-trade. My guess is that they're ignoring him and 
concentrating on past-it Hewitt and soon to be past-it Aussie Kim." Actually, 
they've started cheering him to the hilt, especially since he went 3-1 down in 
the third set.

Fourth set: Murray* leads Nadal 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 1-0 Murray speeds into a 40-0 
lead, and though Nadal wins the next two points, he's able to hold. "I may be 
being overly cynical, but does it not appear odd to anyone else that these 
little 'injuries' always occur when Murray is taking a beating of some 
description?" asks Andrew White. "Nadal had him pants down, over his knee in 
the second set and all of a sudden Murray feels a strain or a twinge. It's only 
when he realises that he's a world-class tennis player and doesn't have to cry 
for Mummy when the bigger boy breaks his serve that he miraculously recovers 
and starts performing again (viz. third set)." Agree something is strange, 
Andrew, but I can't put my finger on what.

Fourth set: Murray leads Nadal* 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 1-1 You'd never know that 
Murray had a side strain in the second and third sets as he hits successive 
winners to go 0-30 ahead. But when he misses a makeable half court shot to go 
0-40 ahead, Nadal doesn't give him another sniff. "Come on, the Swiss invented 
the pencil and the sugar-cube," insists Robert Baker. "They shouldn't be 
dismissed so lightly." And don't forget the cuckoo clock or the army knife.

Fourth set: Murray* leads Nadal 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 2-1 Again Murray goes 0-15 
down, again he recovers. His serve - now back on track after a horrible second 
set - is ticking over again, and he's continue to play a series of delightly 
flicks around the net. The big question of course is: can he keep it up? "The 
niggles that Murray keeps repeatedly getting remind me of another sportsman who 
promised so much at 19 but went through a good couple of years with a variety 
of minor injuries that made us all think that he'd never get to where his 
talent should take him," suggests Lee Calvert. "Step forward one Steven 
'Stevie' Gerrard. I imagine that Murray's career will be the same - his body 
will finally get sorted at about 21 and he'll then go on to be trumpeted as a 
great of the game without doing much to justify it." Er, an FA Cup and a 
Champions League title, Lee?

Fourth set: Murray leads Nadal* 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 2-2 Incredible stuff as Nadal 
savesfive breakpoints to hold. Murray had gone 0-40 up after scrambling to a 
drop shot which he delicately steered past Nadal, hitting a monster forehand 
for a clean winner and a Nadal error, but the Spaniard pulled it back to deuce. 
Murray then had a fourth breakpoint ... which Nadal saved with an in-to-out 
forehand. Murray then earned another breakpoint with a dropshot but after 
somehow chasing Nadal's bombs all round court he missed a fairly easy 
half-court forehand. Meanwhile Lee Calvert is back. "Er, an FA Cup and a 
Champions League title, Lee?' See: Traore, Djimi," he writes.

Fourth set: Murray* leads Nadal 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 3-2 Murray holds to love. "I 
find it rather odd when people criticise Andy's attitude," says John Bowker. 
"Like many, I haven't seen him properly since Wimbledon, and the improvement on 
his serve, volleying and - it seems - fitness is extraordinary. Surely to 
improve by so much you must be a hard worker with a great attitude. He's also 
really quite witty." Couldn't agree more, John.

Fourth set: Murray leads Nadal* 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 3-3 Again Murray puts Nadal's 
serve under pressure, again he's unable to take advantage as Nadal holds to 30. 
Still, Murray is looking fresh and full of fight. "This probably marks me out 
as a charmless pedant," says Vaughan Michael. But? "But those 'Scottish' 
inventions: telephone - the deeply unScottish Antonio Meucci; steam engine - 
the ancient Greeks, Hero (or Heron) of Alexandria, penicillin - a natural 
occurrence so couldn't be invented, and Fleming actually abandoned research 
thinking it couldn't survive in the human body. It was Bumstead and Hess who 
first used it on humans, neither Scottish. Light Bulb - loads of potentials 
(Humphrey Davy, de la Rue). An Englishman was the first to get a patent for an 
incandescent lamp (Moleyns). Scotsman James Lindsay did claim he'd come up with 
continual electric light, but his claims are hard to prove. So that leaves the 
TV. And, unfortunately, a gent by the name of Charles Jenkins (an American) 
beat Logie Baird to it. So that leaves sport. Gavin Hamilton anyone?"

Fourth set: Murray* leads Nadal 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 3-4 Nadal is beginning to read 
Murray's back-of-the-court dropshot. Twice the Scot essays it, twice Nadal 
grunts it past him for a winner. He has breakpoint at 30-40, but Murray is able 
to save with an ace that clips the outside edge of the line. However Murray is 
able to take advantage of a game point of his own, and Nadal breaks when 
Murray's forehand volley hits the net. "Is Lee Calvert somehow trying to 
intimate that Liverpool won the FA Cup and Champions League thanks to Djimi 
"The Legs" Traore?" asks a bemused John Olney. "Comfortably the worst player 
ever to play, and win, a Champions League medal he didn't even play in the FA 
Cup so how?"

Fourth set: Murray leads Nadal* 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 3-5 Another half chance goes 
begging! At 30-15, Murray is working over Nadal this way and that, and all he 
needs now is to put away an easy forehand. Instead he sprays it long and Nadal 
holds. "Re: Vaughan Michael. You would think that rather than inverting his 
name as pretty poor disguise, our glorious cricket leader might be getting 
fit?" splutters Mark Devey.

Fourth set: Murray leads Nadal* 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 3-6 Murray looks to the 
heavens, and grimaces. At 30-30, Nadal gets a netcord which brings him a 
breakpoint, a Murray double-fault then hands him the set. Two sets all, and 
we're about to enter a final set. "Sorry to be pedantic, but who on earth were 
Bumstead and Hess?" asks Dorian McIlroy. "Everybody knows that the purification 
and clinical use of penicillin were pioneered by Howard Florey's group in 
Oxford. Florey himself was Australian, so I guess that gives some sort of 
tenuous connection to the matter in hand."

Fifth set: Murray 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 3-6, 0-1 Nadal* It's now 1.12am in Melbourne, 
and both players look to be flagging. Case in point: at 30-15 ahead, Nadal 
finds the net twice with sloppy forehands and Murray suddenly has a breakpoint 
... which he fails to convert by an absolutely whisker. Another chance comes 
and goes before Nadal holds. Murray has now made only three out of 14 
breakpoints tonight - no wonder he is screaming furiously into the Melbourne 
sky. "Is 2007 the greatest thing to happen to British sports fans?" asks Gary 
Noble. "Ramps' Paso Doble was just about the sporting highlight of 2006, but 
we've already had both darts finals and now Murray and Nadal. What chance a Mal 
Loye inspired Cricket World Cup victory for England, followed by Murray 
dethroning King Roger of Wimbledon and a Jonny Wilkinson-led crushing of the 
All-Black hordes as the Rugby World Cup is retained? Or am I getting carried 
away?" Think you just might be Gary.

Fifth set: Murray* 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 3-6, 0-2 Nadal Nadal breaks! He found all 
sorts of angles that game and at 30-40 seals things with a searing cross-court 
forehand. "Simpson and anaesthetic? Dunlop and pneumatic tyres? Macadam and 
tarmac? Nobody charmless out-pedants me," insists Siobhan Cavanagh.

Fifth set: Murray 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 3-6, 0-3 Nadal* Murray is fighting back! 
First he hits a raging forehand down the line - his 60th winner of the night, 
compared to 47 from Nadal - then an ungetbackable double-hander puts him 15-40 
ahead. He looks certain to break back until he hits a volley that's going about 
a foot out, and then is beaten by a Nadal drop shot which brings it back to 
deuce. Another superb forehand gives Murray his third breakpoint of the game, 
and the sixth of the set ... but he sends another forehand long and Nadal 
holds. "Why is it that every other grand slam tournament permits matches to 
carry on until the wee small hours, but Wimbledon shuts up shop by 9pm latest?" 
asks Michael Rosen. "Don't tell me it is because Wimbledon doesn't have 
floodlights. Or maybe it is because they have sympathy for everyone who might 
miss the last District Line train back into London." Floodlights and dew, 
Michael...

Fifth set: Murray* 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 3-6, 0-4 Nadal That, surely, is game over. 
Murray spends every other point in that game swearing and fighting at/with 
himself, but it's all to no avail: Nadal has the double break. "Raymond van 
Barneveld won the PDC World Darts Final," points out Ben Mimmack. "He's about 
as British as Greg Rusedski."

Fifth set: Murray 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 3-6, 0-5 Nadal* Murray continues to berate 
and hurt himself - and you can't blame him: after all, he's matched Nadal blow 
for blow during this match, and hit more winners, but he's failed to take the 
many, many breakpoints (five in the fourth set, six in the opening two games of 
this set) that have come his way. What's more, he doesn't look overtired - 
Nadal has just outfought him in the crucial points. "Anyone else think Googles 
been made to work overtime with all the Scottish Inventors searches recently?" 
smiles John Olney, not unreasonably.

Fifth set: Murray* 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, 3-6, 1-5 Nadal Murray earns a standing 
ovation from the Scots in the crowd by holding to 30, but surely it's just a 
matter of time now. "Whether he wins or loses from here, Murray has got to be a 
good bet for the US Open when he will be stronger and Federer and Nadal surely 
weakened by long seasons," reckons Gary Naylor. "Before this tournament, Murray 
was 16-1 for Wimbledon - that may be too soon and too much, but I'd take 
anything above 8-1 for New York in September. Let's get behind Britain's best 
young sports star (OK, that's like a World's Tallest Dwarf Award, but still)." 
8-1 is too short, but agree the US Open is his best chance...

That's it! It's over! After just under four hours of tennis, Nadal wins 6-7, 
6-4, 4-6, 6-3, 6-1! He collapses to the ground before shaking hands with 
Murray, who puts his arm around him. Murray played brilliantly in patches, but 
Nadal was just too tough and consistent. Thanks for all your emails, sorry I 
couldn't use them all. Cheers, Sean.
 