
The following correction was printed in the Observer's For the record column, 
Sunday August 21 2005

Julian Barnes <https://www.theguardian.com/books/julianbarnes> is not odds-on 
to win the Man Booker Prize, as we claimed in the standfirst above. The odds 
are 9-2 against his winning. The favourite is Ian McEwan at 4-1.




A prize of £50,000 was handed out on Friday at the conclusion of the public 
spectacle known as Big Brother. And so now, without fear of missing anything, 
our attention can seamlessly switch to a literary bearpit which will also 
eventually produce a £50,000 prize winner. The purse may be the same and, these 
days, the television audience share may not be so different, but in every other 
way the two contests, at opposite ends of the cultural spectrum, will prove 
spectacularly contrasting exercises.

For this year, the Man Booker search for the best new novel will be much, much 
closer to Celebrity Big Brother in style. The spotlight will beam down on the 
clash between four literary heavyweights; Kazuo Ishiguro, Ian McEwan, Salman 
Rushdie and the bookies' current favourite, Julian Barnes. Bets are being 
placed at 4/1 on Barnes, with McEwan and his novel, Saturday, in second place.

Barnes, who is perhaps the least well-known of the impressive quartet, also 
seems to make little distinction between the febrile speculation about who will 
win a reality TV show and who will win the Booker. He once said at the 
Cheltenham Literary Festival that the annual fiction award was 'an 
out-of-control beast' and has recently attempted to damp down the heat of 
excitement by explaining that the fuss about this year's prize is 'ridiculous'. 
'It just so happens that Ish, Ian, Salman and I have books out at the same 
time,' he added.

Barnes has been on the list twice before, once with his second novel, 
Flaubert's Parrot, and again in 1998 with England, England, when he was headed 
off at the pass by McEwan's Amsterdam. We can assume, all the same, that we 
won't see any of the unruliness of the recent, unkempt winner, DBC Pierre, if 
Barnes is triumphant at the awards ceremony in October. He is, after all, a 
novelist repeatedly admired for his clarity and discipline. Barnes is happy to 
admit that he favours the dangers of stereotypically reserved Englishness to 
the swampy perils of the fashion for self-revelation.

'There is a tradition of English emotional reticence which can easily fall 
away into emotional inexpressiveness and frigidity,' he has said. 'I prefer 
that to the Oprahfication of the emotions, which is what has happened. People 
talking about their emotional lives in staggering detail on Celebrity Love 
Island is so banal.'

Books by Barnes are often called 'clever', but he is a writer who also makes 
his reader feel clever, a bit like Henry James on a good day. It is a kind of 
writerly confidence about which Barnes again has shown some self-knowledge. 'I 
think I have an ease with the reader - you're talking about readers who like 
you - but I think I feel quite relaxed in the reader's presence in the books,' 
he has explained.

In person, Barnes, now 59, is the epitome of urbanity. His demeanour is 
cerebral and in conversation he tends to lean or loom over his interlocutor in 
a patrician manner, because of his height. He is carefully turned out and 
speaks in beautiful phrases. A proper British man of letters and yet at the 
same time a man who is better known and better loved in France, with a 
boundless affection that he returns. He is in fact a Commandeur de L'Ordre des 
Arts.

The time he spends on the other side of the Channel and the lovely clarity of 
his books have given this writer a daunting untaintedness. Compared with him, 
Rushdie and Martin Amis, with their younger partners and suggestions of 
loucheness, seem a very different breed. (And this in spite of the fact that a 
couple of gossipy scandals about Barnes's private life have rocked the literary 
world since his successes, of which more later.)

His nine previous novels may not have scooped the Booker Prize, but as a 
writer he has already entered British literary consciousness for good. He is 
mentioned in a Craig Raine poem and in Terence Blacker's novel, Kill Your 
Darlings, and in Duncan Minshull's anthology, The Vintage Book of Walking. He 
also features in The Letters of Kingsley Amis, who thought him 'all right, but 
mad. Wouldn't surprise me if he went for his missus with a hatchet any day'.

Barnes's longlisted novel is Arthur & George. It is a story about Sherlock 
Holmes's creator, SirArthur Conan Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurconandoyle>, but it does not, like the 
myriad of other books and plays with this starting point, draw on Doyle's texts 
or on the deductive techniques of his great detective. 'I deliberately didn't 
want to write a book that bounces off his work,' Barnes has said.

The George in the title is George Edalji, a Birmingham solicitor and the son 
of a country vicar from Bombay who was a converted Parsee. In the normal course 
of life, the two men would never have met, but in 1903, Edalji was convicted of 
maiming horses in his father's parish of Great Wyrley in Staffordshire. The 
'Great Wyrley Outrages', as they were known, became a cause célèbre when Doyle 
took up the cudgels in order to correct what he regarded as legal injustice and 
racism. Doyle became to Edalji what Emile Zola was to Dreyfus. Barnes's telling 
of the near-forgotten tale focuses on our appreciation of guilt, a guilt that 
the Victorian novelist also feels over his fading love for his dying wife, 
Louise, and his growing, unconsummated passion for his wife-to-be, Jean Leckie.

Barnes threw himself into research on the Edalji case and confronts his 
version of Doyle with the same documentary material that he uncovered in trying 
to piece together the truth. He chose to write the novel, he has said, partly 
because the case has almost vanished from British history. 'It makes not a 
ripple anywhere. It's gone. I wrote about it because I couldn't read about it.'

Born in Leicester and educated at City of London School and then Oxford, 
Barnes turned to journalism after reading for the Bar. He worked as television 
critic for the New Statesmen in the early Eighties, where he became friends 
with Martin Amis, and then moved on to this newspaper.

His acclaimed first novel, Metroland, came out in 1980 and won a Somerset 
Maugham Prize, while Flaubert's Parrot won the French Prix Medicis four years 
later. In the 1980s, under the name Dan Kavanagh, he wrote detective fiction 
about a bisexual sleuth called Duffy working the streets of Soho. His other 
works include Talking it Over and Love etc, but for the last seven years he has 
avoided reading all reviews. There is a sense that this novelist is so deep in 
the world of words and takes them so very seriously that their blows might be 
lethal to him.

Barnes lives in north London with his wife, literary agent Pat Kavanagh, and 
it is this close association with the cannibalistic publishing scene that has 
drawn Barnes into controversy or, at least, into the gossip columns.

When Amis junior decided to leave his agent Kavanagh after 23 years so that he 
could throw in his lot with American agent Andrew Wylie, known as 'the Jackal', 
his old friend Barnes severed all links, sending a letter in January 1995 which 
contained a phrase that Amis has described as 'a well-known colloquialism. The 
words consist of seven letters. Three of them are fs'.

Talking at the time of the publication of his memoir, Amis has since defended 
his actions by saying his decision to drop Kavanagh was not about money and 
that negotiations for the rights to his book, The Information, had 'got out of 
control'. In his memoir, Experience, he claims he wrote back to Barnes, 
finishing with the lines: 'Jules, tell me to fuck off and everything if you 
want - but try and stay my friend and try and help me be a friend to Pat ... I 
will call you in a while - quite a long while. I'll miss you.'

In the same volume, Amis refers to Barnes as 'uxorious', possibly making some 
veiled suggestion that he was henpecked or perhaps just noticing the enduring 
bond between Pat and Julian. It is a bond that has survived another scandal 
with author Jeanette Winterson's revelation that she had an affair with 
Kavanagh. Barnes has refused to comment on either incident, but this reticence 
has only whetted appetites.

His public want more Barnes precisely because he offers less of himself than 
others do. He has even talked about writing as being 'life declined', yet there 
are crucial passions at work in his books and occasionally they are quite 
explicit. The little half-chapter, or 'Parenthesis', in A History of the World 
in 10½ Chapters begins with a romantic and beguiling description of his 
sleeping wife. It is a moving attempt at 'love prose', although Barnes 
deliberately undercuts it by arguing that only poets should talk of love. There 
is also a real horror of death in his work, a subject he has thought about 
every day since he was 15 and which still haunts him.

It is by keeping a constant eye on this and other dark fears that he suggest 
he is able to keep his characteristic cool air of clarity. In support of this 
idea, he has quoted a line from his hero Flaubert which could well serve as 
Barnes's motto: 'It is only by gazing down at the black pit at our feet that we 
remain calm.'

Julian Patrick Barnes

DoB: 19 January 1946 (Leicester)

Job: Author

Education: City of London School; Magdalen College, Oxford

Books: Metroland, Flaubert's Parrot, A History of the World in 10½ Chapters, 
Talking it Over, The Porcupine, Arthur & George
 