
Our kitchen is … the hub of our home. It’s the biggest space and it’s where we 
get everything done. There’s nothing fussy about it. It’s arranged to create a 
good workflow – surface, cooker, surface, sink, surface – which means no 
doubling back on yourself. We’ve an Insinkerator for food waste, so we clean 
the work surfaces straight into the sink. Great for the flow! The difference 
between our kitchen and a professional one is that ours is mostly wood. It 
isn’t that great an idea, but we love it, and it’s cheap. Also, we needed to 
make a distinction between the cold, stainless work kitchen and our home.

Our favourite kitchen tool is … an old wooden spoon. From the perspective of a 
professional chef, it’s symbolic of home cooking and freedom: it’s what unites 
cooks the world over.

Ravinder Bhogal’s kitchen: ‘I don’t believe in secrets in the kitchen’ | 
Kitchen encounters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/15/ravinder-bhogal-jikoni-restaurant-london-kitchen-encounters>
Our storecupboard staple is … our secret house blend of dry spices. It 
contains coriander seeds, cumin, star anise … We use it all the time, to 
sprinkle on chicken, as a dry rub for meat, in marinades and on fish.

When we’re starving we … eat Nepalese chicken dumplings – Gurkha momo 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Momo_(dumpling)> – from Far East Foods, our work 
kitchen neighbours. They are really simple, but the flavour is unreal. When we 
come home late, that’s all we want to eat – boiled then fried in butter till 
crisp, with dipping sauce or in a bowl of broth. And a vodka martini.

Our culinary inspiration is … each other. We’ve inspired one another in our 
cooking since we first met. We come at things so differently, but we’re never 
at loggerheads, just always learning from each other.

Our best-kept kitchen secret is … something we learned from Ruth Rogers of the 
River Cafe – she’d always say: “Stop what you’re doing and clean up.” Having 
everything in order is so important. A clean chopping board is a clean mind. 
You work faster and more efficiently. And for us, the whole point of food is 
the sitting down and enjoying of it. So cooking is important only as a means to 
an end.

When we’re invited to dinner we always take … each other. There’s just no 
reason to go out alone. Jonathan’s grandparents were married for 65 years, and 
apart for only two nights that whole time. We’re a bit like them.

Everything tastes better with … time. Taking time to eat, and time to cook. 
Chicken broth that’s taken ages to make is always better. We love it when the 
weather gets cold, and you need coats, boots and long, slow cooks. Even in 
summer, we’d rather eat warm food – putting warmth in your belly is so 
important.

When we go shopping we … are super-organised. It’s practically a military 
operation. We hate food waste, and are obsessed with our freezer.

For dinner tonight … salt beef (pictured above). We get it raw and boil it. 
Often we’ll just have it with a fried egg and pickles; the ultimate is a 
homemade Reuben – on bread, with sauerkraut, melted cheese, a fried egg. And a 
bowl of broth.

• Natalia and Jonathan Conroy are the founders of Kitchen Orchard, a range of 
readymade dishes. Natalia is the author ofThe Kitchen Orchard  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/kitchen-orchard.html>(Ebury Press); 
kitchenorchard.co.uk <http://www.kitchenorchard.co.uk/>
 