
The National Theatre <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/>’s wildly successful 
West End production of War Horse is to close next year after a seven-year run.

War Horse <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/war-horse> has been an artistic 
hit and a cash cow with the production at the New London Theatre delivering 
around £13.5m of extra money for the NT.

The NT’s director, Rufus Norris, said the runes had been read and its time was 
coming to an end. “We could keep it going for longer, we could put a new cast 
in and drag it out, but our subsidy is to make work here and to reach out to 
audiences around the country.

“We always knew it would come to an end and nobody expected it to last as long 
as it has.”

The extra money will be missed. The announcement comes as all arts 
organisations brace themselves for big cuts when George Osborne announces his 
spending review in November.

Norris said The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-time was still doing 
brilliantly on Broadway and was strong in London but he said the NT did not 
need these commercial hits to balance its books.

“We need to cut our cloth, which is what we are in the process of doing.”

All large arts organisations are modelling what they would do if the mooted 
cuts of 25% or 40% are imposed on them.

“We have had a 30% cut in real terms over the last six or seven years and we 
all know the figures that have been bandied about for the future,” said Norris. 
“We are looking very hard at all the options that are available to us in terms 
of getting a bit leaner.”

The NT breaks even financially and Norris vowed that would continue in the 
future. Some of the cost-cutting options might be ending Sunday opening for 
part of the year or having fewer actors on stage in the Olivier.

War Horse has played more than 3,000 performances and been seen by 2.7 million 
people in London and 7 million worldwide.

An adaptation of Michael Morpurgo’s story of a boy and his horse set against 
the backdrop of the first world war, it was directed by Marianne Elliott and 
Tom Morris and played two seasons at the NT before itsWest End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend> opening in 2009.

After the West End closure, a UK tour will begin in the autumn of 2017 to 
coincide with the final centenary year of the first world war.

Much of the money made from the production will be spent on the NT Future 
project with a big chunk of the remainder paying for the temporary Shed theatre.

Norris made the announcement as he gave details of forthcoming productions in 
2016.

Highlights include a new translation of Brecht and Weill’s The Threepenny 
Opera, directed by Norris and starring Rory Kinnear; Yaël Farber will direct 
Les Blancs by Lorraine Hansberry, Nadia Fall will direct The Suicide by Suhayla 
El-Bushra; Carrie Cracknell will direct a new production of Terence Rattigan’s 
The Deep Blue Sea; and Howard Davies will direct Sean O’Casey’s The Plough and 
the Stars.

Katie Mitchell will direct Cleansed, which is, remarkably, the first play by 
the late Sarah Kane to be staged at the NT.

Another highlight will be an import from New York, Annie Baker’s Pulitzer 
prize winning play The Flick, directed by Sam Gold.

Norris took over from Nicholas Hytner last year and was initially in charge 
alongside the former boss of Film4, Tessa Ross.That lasted only six months with 
Ross resigning after it was agreed one person should be in charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/16/tessa-ross-resigns-as-national-theatres-chief-executive>
.

Norris stressed once more that the parting was an amicable one. But he 
revealed the key reason: “I think this place is built to be run by an artist, 
actually. It is such a factory: we do 30 shows a year.”

 * Buy tickets at theguardianboxoffice.com 
<http://www.theguardianboxoffice.com/tickets/war-horse> or call 0330 333 6906  