
The author of a book on Ned Kelly which was shortlisted for the Prime 
Minister’s Literary award last year has accused the Australian government of 
pushing a biased and sympathetic view of the bushranger.

In a letter sent to the offices of the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, and 
the education minister, Simon Birmingham, Doug Morrissey described the
Australia.gov.au website entry on Ned Kelly 
<http://www.australia.gov.au/about-australia/australian-story/ned-kelly> as 
misleading.

Imagining Ned: exploring the truth and myth behind Australia's Che Guevara
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/01/imagining-ned-exploring-the-truth-and-myth-behind-australias-che-guevara>
The government website “pays homage to the Ned Kelly myth and distorts 
historical truth”, Morrissey, a historian and author of Ned Kelly: A Lawless 
Life, wrote. Morrissey has asked for “the errors of fact to be corrected and a 
more evenhanded approach taken”.

Leo Kennedy, the great-grandson of Sergeant Michael Kennedy, who was murdered 
by Kelly at Stringybark Creek, has contributed to the letter.

The website “presents an inaccurate portrayal of Ned as a hero fighting for 
‘poor Irish settlers’,” their letter says.

“Ned was no hero to the families of the policemen he murdered from ambush, 
leaving two grieving widows and nine young children orphaned with little money 
and the breadwinner dead,” Morrissey and Kennedy wrote.

“The truth not divulged on the website is that Ned was a notorious horse 
thief, a bank robber, a murderer of policemen and a would-be mass murderer.

“What is presented on the website as legitimate history is not just one-sided 
and biased in favour of a villainous outlaw; it is a concocted fairytale that 
presents the public and impressible young schoolchildren, with a ‘feel good’ 
version of a ‘celebrity’ criminal and the times he lived in.”

The entry for Kelly on the Australia.gov.au website described Kelly as “a 
flawed hero”.

“Ned Kelly in his armour came to symbolise a fight by a flawed hero, a 
convicted criminal, for ‘justice and liberty’ and ‘innocent people’,” the 
website says.

“This captured the imagination of writers, authors and the general public 
alike.”

Kelly was at first a horse thief, a crime which he was convicted of and 
imprisoned for. Upon his release he continued to steal horses. In 1878 he fled 
to the bush after allegedly attempting to murder a police officer who turned up 
at the Kelly family’s home.

Ned Kelly, the legend that still torments Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/nov/30/australia.davidfickling> 
Kelly and his gang were declared outlaws after fatally shooting three police 
officers, including Kennedy. In 1880 the Kelly gang executed 
friend-turned-police informant Aaron Sherritt. Kelly was arrested that year 
during a shootout with police that saw three members of his gang killed. Kelly 
was hanged for his crimes.

According to the State Library of Victoria’s entry on Kelly, “there’s no 
denying that Ned Kelly was a notorious criminal, feared aroundVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> and beyond as a robber 
and murderer”.


“Despite this, he had many sympathisers who believed that he was a symbol of 
the Australian spirit – an enduring underdog with the courage to challenge the 
authorities,” the website says.

Matt Shore is the manager of the Ned Kelly Vault, a permanent exhibition 
dedicated to Kelly Gang memorabilia in Beechworth, Victoria. He said part of 
what made the Kelly story so enduring was the argument as to whether he was a 
hero or a villain.

The views of people like Kennedy and other ancestors of those killed needed to 
be respected and heard, he added.

“People can name the colour of the jocks Kelly wore when he was captured and 
that kind of minute detail, but no one can name all the widows or kids left 
without fathers because Kelly murdered them,” Shore said. “I do think that’s 
really sad.”
 