
Jet-setting stallions and high-flying hounds at New York’s Kennedy airport can 
look forward to a new luxury terminal that will handle the more than 70,000 
animals flying in and out every year.

The ARK at JFK, its name inspired by Noah’s biblical vessel, will more than 
measure up to terminals for humans: horses and cows will occupy sleek, 
climate-controlled stalls with showers, and dogs will lounge in hotel suites 
featuring flat-screen TVs. A special space for penguins will allow them mating 
privacy.

The ARK is billed as the world’s first air terminal for animals.

Set to open next year, the $48m, 178,000-square-foot (16,500-square-meter) 
shelter and quarantine facility will take in every kind of animal imaginable — 
even an occasional sloth or aardvark. From The ARK, they’ll head to barns, 
cages, racetracks, shows and competition venues in the United States and abroad.

Many arriving animals are quarantined for a period of time (for horses, it’s 
normally about three days) to make sure they’re not carrying contagious 
diseases. And The ARK is designed to make their stay as pleasant as possible, 
with hay-lined stalls for up to 70 horses and 180 head of cattle, plus an 
aviary and holding pens for goats, pigs and sheep.

Amber Heard charged with illegally bringing dogs to Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/16/amber-heard-charged-with-taking-dogs-to-australia-johnny-depp>
For dog owners, The ARK will offer a 20,000-sqf (1,860-sqm) luxury “resort” 
run by the company Paradise 4 Paws, complete with bone-shaped splashing pools, 
massage therapy and “pawdicures with colored nail pawlish.” Dogs can watch 
flat-screen TVs and their owners can check in on them via webcam.

Cats will have their own trees to climb. And all animals will have access to a 
24-hour clinic run by Cornell University’s veterinary college.

Even animals that don’t need to be quarantined — a huge dog that can’t fit in 
the cabin and has to travel as cargo, for example — will be held at the 
facility until departure or pickup by its owner.

“A lot of our design making is in collaboration with veterinarians and 
consultants to help minimize the amount of stress placed on the animal,” said 
Cliff Bollmann, a leading airport architect working on The ARK for the San 
Francisco-based architecture firm Gensler.

Pets on holiday: share your photos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/03/pets-on-holiday-share-your-photos>
Kennedy receives the bulk of animals entering the United States, but there are 
similar facilities near airports in Chicago, Los Angeles and Miami. Until 
Kennedy’s ARK opens, animals in transit will continue to be handled at the 
airport’s aging Vetport, built in the 1950s.

Lachlan Oldaker, an Oklahoma-based equine specialist and key member of the 
architectural team, called The ARK “an enormous leap forward.”

“The design allows planes to taxi directly to the building, so horses can be 
transported in a seamless fashion that reduces stress,” she said.

The ARK is being built on the site of an unused cargo terminal that has been 
demolished. ARK Development, an affiliate of the Madison Avenue real-estate 
company Racebrook Capital, has signed a 32-year lease for the airport property 
with the Port Authority ofNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> and New Jersey agency that runs 
Kennedy.

When completed, the facility is subject to approval by the US Department of 
Agriculture.Animals <https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals> will be charged 
fees — still being determined depending on services — that will help fund the 
terminal. High-end dog “suites” could top $100 per night.

Transporting animals by air is not aimed at low-income owners. A flight to 
London for a dog can cost about $1,000, plus a crate, airport fees and vet 
certifications. And moving a horse can add up to at least $10,000.

The ARK’s designers have had to meet challenges not found in other 
architectural projects — for instance, figuring out how to dispose of animal 
waste. They came up with the idea of a “poo chute,” an angled floor from which 
manure slides into a container.

The equine wing is a welcome improvement to international show jumper and 
organizer Derek Braun.

Horses must currently be driven to a quarantine facility in Newburgh, about 80 
m(130 km) north of Kennedy. The ARK has an in-house quarantine.

“I personally, as well as competitors for my shows, ship so many horses from 
Europe each year that having the peace of mind that one step of the travel 
process will be eliminated is a big relief because it eliminates part of the 
risk of injury,” he said.
 