 'Let's kill all the lawyers!' is a slogan now to be heard, though a bit more 
decorously expressed, from Michael Howard QC and Tony Blair, a lawyer married 
to a lawyer. Both the leader of the opposition and the Prime Minister have 
insinuated that the judges will be to blame if Britain is not as secure from 
terror as the politicians would like it to be.
The Tory leader warns the judiciary not to thwart the wishes of parliament 
over anti-terror measures, playing Sir Echo to Mr Blair, who had already told 
judges to respond to the 'different mood' since the London atrocities.

When they practised at the Bar, Mr Howard specialised in planning law and Mr 
Blair in employment cases, so the constitution is not a specialism of either 
barrister turned politician. But you would think that Charlie Falconer, the 
Lord Chancellor, might impress on his former flatmate the importance of the 
independence of the judiciary. He has preferred to turn up the burner further 
by suggesting that new legislation can be passed to 'instruct' recalcitrant 
judges in how to interpret the Human Rights Act.

There are three legs to our constitution: the executive, the legislature and 
the judiciary. To that trinity we should probably now add a fourth - the media. 
The unacknowledged legislators of the world are not, as Shelley once had it, 
poets. They are newspapers. The majority of the Commons are members of the same 
party as the executive. The executive often runs scared of the media. That 
leaves the judges as the only reliably independent safeguard against illiberal 
laws.

With occasional assistance from the House of Lords, the judiciary is the 
guardian of fundamental freedoms from panicky, foolish or authoritarian 
government. The whole point of having an independent judiciary is that it 
should not blow in the winds of the public 'mood'. Otherwise, we might as well 
replace the Law Lords with a focus group.

A lawyer called Cherie Booth eloquently defended their independence the other 
day when she argued: 'It is all too easy for us to respond to terror in a way 
which undermines commitment to our most deeply held values and convictions and 
which cheapens our right to call ourselves a civilised nation.' She might use 
some of their quality time together to remind her husband of that.

The judges should not take it too personally when they are attacked by the 
politicians. A lot of this is displacement on to the judiciary of the 
politicians' fear and confusion. When Mr Blair announced his 12-point 
anti-terror plan, with the cry that 'the rules of the game have changed', the 
idea was to show the firm smack of government before he went off on holiday, 
leaving John Prescott, ahem, in charge. What the Prime Minister has actually 
left in his wake is alarm among civil libertarians and muddle among his 
ministers.

One personification of that has been the saga of Omar Bakri Mohammed. The week 
begins with it being suggested that this preacher of hate and others of his 
poisonous ilk may be prosecuted under the 14th-century treason laws. While the 
law officers send contradictory signals, Mr Prescott tells us: 'I don't know.' 
It then transpires that this potential candidate for a trip to Traitor's Gate 
has already been allowed to leave the country for Lebanon. Whether he might 
soon be back, Mr Prescott doesn't know either, but he tries to make a joke of 
it by wishing him a long holiday.

The Deputy Prime Minister's struggle to keep up with events is understandable. 
By the end of the week, the Home Secretary is using his 'personal powers' to 
exclude this particular preacher, though the Home Office either doesn't know or 
can't say why this couldn't have been done earlier.

John Denham, the former minister who chairs the home affairs select committee, 
was a bit generous to the government when he criticised ministers for floating 
'half-baked ideas'. Some have not even been quarter-baked. One ill-defined idea 
to pop into the ether is establishing special anti-terrorist courts meeting in 
secret. Another back-of-the- envelope notion came from the unavoidable Hazel 
Blears when she suggested that alienated young Muslim men might feel more 
integrated if they were relabelled as Asian-British. How exactly the government 
will make people think of themselves as hyphens has never been explained.

The best tests of the proposals from ministers are whether they are a 
proportionate reaction to the threat and whether the measures will actually 
achieve the objective of diminishing that threat. The police are asking for the 
power to detain suspects for longer than a fortnight. They need to show that 
this would detect or prevent attacks that would otherwise occur. They want to 
be able to hold someone for three months. If they are then released without 
charge, that would mean an innocent person serving a prison sentence without 
ever facing a trial. There must be a very convincing argument to justify that.

Will banning extremist groups stamp them out or merely drive them underground? 
It was not proscribing the IRA that hurt its ability to organise murder. It was 
penetration and intelligence. This is not an argument for not trying to 
legislate in these areas just because they are tricky. What it does show is 
that it will take great thought and care to draft laws which will be effective 
rather than useless or counterproductive. These are certainly not laws that can 
be written to fit into a tabloid headline.

This sudden outpouring of half-formed measures is in contrast to the immediate 
aftermath of the 7/7 attacks, when the government's knee appeared to be 
impressively unjerking. The message from Number 10 then was that it would act 
with the coolness and gravity that the situation deserved. 'We're not rushing 
into anything,' one Downing Street official told me. 'We all remember the 
Dangerous Dogs Act.'

There was a serious effort to build a consensus with the other parties. Muslim 
leaders were called into Downing Street for consultation. Charles Clarke was 
firmly of the 'don't panic' tendency. The day after 7/7, the Home Secretary was 
asked what difference the atrocities would make to British politics. He replied 
that he didn't think they would change anything fundamental at all.

By contrast, Mr Blair is as hyper-alert as ever to shifts in the popular mood, 
particularly as it is mediated through the tabloids which have been running 
noisy campaigns portraying Britain as a lawless haven for extremists and 
clamouring for MPs to get back from their holidays and do something.

The government has been stung by the 'Londonistan' accusation that it has 
previously been too soft on Islamic extremism. It is embarrassing when Saudi 
Arabia's ambassador takes his leave of Britain complaining that he got 'the 
runaround' from ministers and the security agencies, as it is also awkward when 
the leader of Pakistan complains that Britain has been too complacent about 
dealing with home-grown extremists.

The French have understandable cause for complaint about the delays in 
extraditing a man wanted for the bombing of the Paris Metro a decade ago. 
Imagine how our press would be raving about the perfidious Frogs if the French 
were being difficult about giving Britain custody of one of its most wanted. 
The sudden zeal to be deporting and legislating has all the characteristics of 
an attempt to compensate for past failures to appreciate fully the extent and 
the nature of the threat.

The cumulative impression is that the government has relapsed into some of the 
worst headline-chasing vices of New Labour. The Prime Minister produces a 
spatter-gun of eyecatching but undetailed initiatives before he jets off to tan 
himself. His understrappers then try to put flesh on these ideas while floating 
further ill-prepared notions of their own. A fatuous rebranding exercise is 
offered as the answer to deep-seated problems.

The idea was to show that the government was in control. The result has been 
the exact opposite.
 