
Rafael Benítez <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rafael-benitez> remains 
quietly optimistic that Mike Ashley will continue backing his transfer market 
judgment and allow him to strengthen Newcastle United’s squad as he sees fit 
this month.

It is understood that Newcastle’s owner, who still listens to the advice of 
Graham Carr, the Championship-topping club’s chief scout, would prefer Benítez 
to acquire players aged 25 and younger with potential for high sell-on values 
but, although broadly happy with that policy, the manager craves the odd 
slightly more experienced recruit.

Related: Aleksandar Mitrovic carried off as Birmingham hold stuttering 
Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/birmingham-city-newcastle-united-fa-cup-match-report>

“We have to find the right players now to improve a little bit and not take 
any risk [of missing out on promotion],”Benítez said as he prepared for the 
FA Cup third‑round replay at home against Birmingham City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/birmingham-city-newcastle-united-fa-cup-match-report>
on Wednesday night. Newcastle’s manager communicates with Ashley via Lee 
Charnley, the managing director, and is content with this situation.

“We’re talking about some targets,” he said. “Especially one target I like and 
everybody can see he’s maybe a good option – so we’re progressing. I still have 
confidence we can do what we want to do.”

Asked how old his prime target is, Benítez smiled. “He’s a good age. I’m not 
worried if a player is 21, 28 or 30.” If Ashley questioned the wisdom of the 
former Real Madrid manager recruiting Daryl Murphy, 33, from Ipswich Town last 
summer as a backup striker, injuries to Dwight Gayle and Aleksandar Mitrovic 
dictate that move is now paying dividends. “You need a balance,” Benítez said.

“We signed Murphy because he has experience and our squad is quite young. I 
think the oldest squad is Brighton and they’re near the top with experienced 
players. For me it’s simple to understand what we need to improve the team. My 
understanding is that, if you have a good manager, leave him to take 
responsibility.”

Benítez has monitored, among others, Fulham’s Tom Cairney, Everton’s James 
McCarthy, Callum Wilson of Bournemouth and Hull City’s Robert Snodgrass, and is 
also exploring loan moves with Crystal Palace’s Andros Townsend one possibility.

Asked if he still has the final say on transfers, he replied: “It’s a tricky 
question but I’m sure we’ll sign who we need and we’ll do well. People think I 
like to sign old players but I like to sign young players to develop and 
improve them but, at the same time, sign players we need. Players like Daryl 
Murphy, who can make the difference, are important.”
 