
Newcastle and Perth remain in the A-League’s top six after playing out a 
neck-and-neck 2-2 draw marred by a controversial late red card to Glory captain 
Rostyn Griffiths.

The Jets came from behind to lead 2-1 at half-time via a contentious penalty 
and quick counter-attack, before Perth equalised after the break at McDonald 
Jones Stadium on Sunday.

Besart Berisha has red card rescinded, free to play against Wellington
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/besart-berisha-has-red-card-rescinded-free-to-play-against-wellington>
But Griffiths’ 87th-minute send-off will form the biggest talking point of a 
thriller in which referee Stephen Lucas handed out eight yellow cards.

The powerful midfielder received his second yellow card for a tackle on 
Devante Clut, but was promptly shown a straight red after giving Lucas an 
earful on his way off.

Glory coach Kenny Lowe was livid on the field and voiced his frustration at 
both decisions. “Obviously the momentum changes on a decision that maybe wasn’t 
a decision ... I think he’s gone down like Greg Louganis,” Lowe said.

“It was a tough one to take, then we’ve given one just before the end just for 
the icing on the cake.”

The rest of the affair was end-to-end and Perth took the lead inside seven 
minutes when Lachlan Jackson mis-kicked with just enough force to lay the 
opening goal on a plate for Adam Taggart.

The former Jet was only too eager to oblige, sweeping the ball past Jack 
Duncan at his near post.

Irish striker Andy Keogh tried to double the advantage almost immediately with 
an audacious long-range bullet, before Chris Harold came closer to the target 
when his glancing header hit the crossbar.

Keogh and Diego Castro continued to circle as the high-pressing Glory squeezed 
a Jets outfit struggling to escape their own half.

That was until the 37th minute, when Morten Nordstrand went down in Perth’s 
penalty box over what appeared to be an innocuous foul on Shane Lowry.Lucas 
pointed to the spot, and from there Mateo Poljak beat Liam Reddy, injecting 
life into the hosts.

Realising his team were unable to play out from the back, Jets captain Nigel 
Boogaard sent a couple of long balls up the pitch. It opened up space and 
allowed Newcastle to strike again on the tick of half-time.

Joseph Mills undid his earlier good work, getting dispossessed in defence and 
allowing Nordstrand to tee up Nabbout on the wing. The in-form flyer lucked out 
with two deflections but still managed to evade Reddy – and then a fence that 
collapsed as he celebrated with active supporter base The Squadron.

Perth emerged from the break with renewed vigour and pushed hard for an 
equaliser, Castro missing two gilt-edged chances within a minute as the 
Spaniard struck the bar once from point-blank range before skimming it again 
from further afield.

Finally, Harold whipped a ball in to the back post where Keogh flung out a 
boot to divert into the turf and then the net.

As both sides hunted a winner, Duncan kept Newcastle in the game with an 
immense one-on-one save to deny Taggart a tap-in, before Griffiths’ dismissal 
sent Perth down to 10 men.
 