
The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> has been declared the best 
healthcare system by an international panel of experts who rated its care 
superior to countries which spend far more on health.

The same study also castigated healthcare provision in the US as the worst of 
the 11 countries it looked at. Despite putting the most money into health, 
America denies care to many patients in need because they do not have health 
insurance and is also the poorest at saving the lives of people who fall ill, 
it found.

The report has been produced by the Commonwealth Fund, a Washington-based 
foundation which is respected around the world for its analysis of the 
performance of different countries' health systems. It examined an array of 
evidence about performance in 11 countries, including detailed data from 
patients, doctors and the WorldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation.

"The United Kingdom ranks first overall, scoring highest on quality, access 
and efficiency," the fund's researchers conclude in their 30-page report. Their 
findings amount to a huge endorsement of the health service, especially as it 
spends the second-lowest amount on healthcare among the 11 – just £2,008 per 
head, less than half the £5,017 in the US. Only New Zealand, with £1,876, spent 
less.

In the Commonwealth Fund study the UK came first out of the 11 countries in 
eight of the 11 measures of care the authors looked at. It got top place on 
measures including providing effective care, safe care, co-ordinated care and 
patient-centred care. The fund also rated the NHS as the best for giving access 
to care and for efficient use of resources.

The only serious black mark against the NHS was its poor record on keeping 
people alive. On a composite "healthy lives" score, which includes deaths among 
infants and patients who would have survived had they received timely and 
effective healthcare, the UK came 10th. The authors say that the healthcare 
system cannot be solely blamed for this issue, which is strongly influenced by 
social and economic factors. Although the NHS came third overall for the 
timeliness of care, its "short waiting times" were praised. "There is a 
frequent misperception that trade-offs between universal coverage and timely 
access to specialised services are inevitable. However, the Netherlands, UK and 
Germany provide universal coverage with low out-of-pocket costs while 
maintaining quick access to speciality services,", the report added.

The NHS also outperforms the other countries – which include France, Germany 
and Canada – in managing the care of people who are chronically ill, the report 
said.

Dr Mark Porter, leader of the doctors' union, the British Medical Association, 
said the fund's findings were "clear evidence that our much-maligned NHS is one 
of the top-performing healthcare systems in the world."

However, he warned that the service's achievements were now at risk. "We 
should not be complacent as we are facing pressures that are threatening the 
high-quality care that the Commonwealth Fund has rightly praised. A combination 
of rising patient demand, staff shortages and falling funding is undermining 
the very foundations of the NHS, as is the constant short-term interference 
from politicians of all colours."

Dr Peter Carter, chief executive of the Royal College of Nursing, said: "I'm 
absolutely thrilled to see this because it reinforces that this is a very good 
NHS, despite the fact that it has such a low level of funding relative to other 
countries."

The health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, who has been criticised by some senior 
doctors for painting an unfairly negative picture of NHS staff and the quality 
of care provided, welcomed the report. "NHS staff work incredibly hard to care 
for patients and these encouraging results pay testament to that," he said.

• This article was amended on 23 June 2014 to clarify the data sets that the 
survey used.
 