
First Australian in action at French Open Olivia Rogowska suffers collapse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/25/french-open-olivia-rogowska-suffers-collapse>
Nick Kyrgios hailed Australia’s “unbelievable” start to the French Open after 
leading six through to the second round at Roland Garros. Kyrgios and fellow 
seeded flagbearersSamantha Stosur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> and Bernard Tomic, along 
with teenage ace Thanasi Kokkinakis and exciting young imports Daria Gavrilova 
and Ajla Tomljanovic all advanced in Australia’s best start to the claycourt 
major in five years.

“It’s unbelievable,” Kyrgios said after outclassing Denis Istomin 6-3, 6-4, 
6-3 in his first outing as a grand slam seed. “I am really, really happy with 
Thanasi getting through. Bernard surprised me a little bit today. He fought 
really well and Dasha [Gavrilova] has been playing some really good tennis, and 
Sam as well. All in all, it was a pretty good day for the Aussies.”

Riding high after claiming her first title of the year in Strasbourg at the 
weekend, Stosur swept past American Madison Brengle 6-1, 6-3 in 77 minutes. “It 
was a good start. I guess I was in control of the match and it was on my 
racquet,” Stosur said. “I just had to keep concentrating, keep doing the things 
that were working and I thought I did pretty well.”

Stosur’s victory thrust the 26th seed and former finalist into a meeting on 
Wednesday with French wildcard Amandine Hesse, who earlier eliminated Jarmila 
Gajdosova in three sets.

Still struggling with a virus that forced his withdrawal from last week’s Nice 
Open, Tomic dug in for an impressive 6-3, 3-6, 6-3, 6-4 victory over Italian 
qualifier Luca Vanni.

“It was not easy. He beat me before, so I was very happy to win,” Tomic 
said. “I wasn’t feeling that good. Still sick. I’m getting better, but still a 
little bit down. So it was tough out there. Everything felt much, much longer 
than it was. I was really feeling the fatigue out there. Happy I won in the 
end.”

Tomic’s first victory at Roland Garros since 2012 and Kokkinakis’s 3-6, 6-4, 
7-6 (7-4), 6-2 success over Georgian qualifier Nikoloz Basilashvili set up a 
second-round showstopper between the Davis Cup team-mates. The reward for 
Wednesday’s victor is a likely third-round shot at world No1 Novak Djokovic.

“Yeah, I’d love to get a crack at Novak, but Bernie is a tough task,” 
Kokkinakis said after claiming his first-ever win at Roland Garros. “I’ve got 
to go out and try and play the ball. I know his game and he knows mine. I think 
we know what each other is going to try to do.”

A quarter-finalist at Wimbledon and the Australian Open in the past 10 months, 
Kyrgios next faces British qualifier Kyle Edmund and has a golden opportunity 
to book a third-round blockbuster with Andy Murray.

“I’ve tried not to think about it, but it is hard not to,” Kyrgios said. “On 
social media, I see it every day – Kyrgios v Murray, third round – and I hadn’t 
even won a round yet. So I have probably thought about it.”

Tomljanovic crushed compatriot Casey Dellacqua 6-2, 6-2 in 62 minutes to set 
up a second-round clash German 11th seed Angelique Kerber, while Gavrilova 
added to Australia’s triumphant day with 6-1, 7-6 (7-3) victory over Swede 
Johanna Larsson. The Russian-born 21-year-old’s maiden grand slam win earned 
her a crack at 20th-seeded German Sabine Lisicki.

Like Dellacqua, Jarmila Gajdosova, Sam Groth and Marinko Matosevic all crashed 
out on day two, but James Duckworth will be looking to continue Australia’s 
flying start when he plays Italian qualifier Andrea Arnaboldi on Tuesday.



 