
A cloud remains over the fitness of Nick Kyrgios with less than a week to go 
before theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 
starts after a knee complaint forced the home favourite out of the World Tennis 
Challenge in Adelaide.

Kyrgios revealed on Monday that he was taking the anti-inflammatory drug 
cortisone as he prepares for the first grand slam of the year in Melbourne, 
which starts next Monday.

Nick Kyrgios relying on cortisone as he prepares for Australian Open campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/nick-kyrgios-relying-on-painkillers-as-he-prepares-for-australian-open-campaign>
The world No14 played, and defeated, Rafael Nadal on Monday night in a Fast4 
exhibition match in Sydney, but said he could feel his bothersome knee towards 
the end of the one-hour, 45-minute outing.


After the win, Australia’s No1-ranked male player said he would exercise 
“extreme caution” in the remainder of his preparations for the Open, and on 
Tuesday he confirmed he would sit out the upcoming three-night tournament in 
Adelaide.

Kyrgios will now have at least five days of rest before commencing his 
Australian Open campaign at Melbourne Park, where he reached the quarter-finals 
in 2015.

Meanwhile, Australian teenager Alex De Minaur played the game of his life to 
cause an upset over Frenchman Benoît Paire at the Sydney International.

Ranked 287 places below the world No46 and playing in his second match on the 
men’s tour, De Minaur prevailed over a tiring Paire 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (7-1) in one 
hour and 44 minutes.

The 17-year-old, who was a Wimbledon junior finalist in 2016, dazzled fans 
through qualifying for the Brisbane International when he upset 2015 Sydney 
runner-up Mikhail Kukushkin.

He went down to Mischa Zverev in his tour debut, but did not take long to 
claim his first senior win on the men’s tournament in his hometown on Tuesday. 
His round two match-up will be either Andrey Kuznetsov or Martin Klizan.

In the women’s competition, defending champion Svetlana Kuznetsova fell in the 
second round, going down to Russian compatriot Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova.

World No9 Kuznetsova was one of three top seeds to fall early on Thursday’s 
third day at Homebush, including world No6 Dominika Cibulková and No18 Roberta 
Vinci.

After ousting Australian Samantha Stosur on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/sam-stosur-ends-her-australian-open-preparations-with-another-defeat>
, world No27 Pavlyuchenkova won her first career meeting with Kuznetsova 7-5, 
6-3.


Pavlyuchenkova will next meet former Wimbledon finalist Eugenie Bouchard, who 
took advantage of an error-riddled Cibulková 6-4, 6-3 to claim her fourth win 
in five clashes.

It was also the Canadian star’s third win over a top-15 opponent in her past 
12 matches, giving her some much-needed confidence ahead of next week’s 
Australian Open.


“Any time you play one of the best players in the world – I think she’s ranked 
five right now – it’s like a standard of where you’re at,” Bouchard said after 
the match.


“It was OK. I mean, I feel like I could play better tennis. I feel at times we 
both kind of were making unforced errors, but we were also pressuring each 
other to make mistakes.


“I have taken a couple of solid steps this week, but I’m far from where I want 
to be. Even though I won, to me, I could do a lot of things better.”


Also on Tuesday, ninth-seeded Italian Vinci had no answers for fellow veteran 
Barbora Strýcová of the Czech Republic, losing 6-2, 6-3.

 * AAP contributed to this report
 