
Nick Kyrgios is vowing to fight through the pain barrier after revealing he 
will rely on cortisone to get through theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.


Australia’s big hope is battling a knee injury that led to a quickfire 
straight-sets loss in his third and final match at last week’s Hopman Cup in 
Perth.


Nick Kyrgios could be the best in the world, says Rod Laver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/kyrgios-could-be-best-in-world-says-rod-laver>
“I’m getting some sort of cortisone thing but it’s not an injection,” Kyrgios 
said. “I’m doing everything I can for it.”

The 2015 Open quarter-finalist said beating 14-times grand slam champion 
Rafael Nadal 4-3, 2-4, 4-3, 4-3, 4-3 in a Fast4 exhibition match lasting an 
hour and three quarters on Monday night was the perfect test for his injury.


“I was starting to feel it a little bit towards the end but I had to test it 
today,” Kyrgios said. “If I can’t play Fast4, then it’s not going to be looking 
great for a best-of-five at a grand slam.

“But I’m really happy with how it pulled up. The level was really, really 
good. I don’t think Rafa knows any other way than to go out there and give 
100%. So I’m going to take great confidence from that.

“I’ve still got a couple of treatments with what I’m doing and I think I’m 
gaining improvement every day.”


Kyrgios carried a hip injury into the US Open in September, only to quit his 
third-round match against Ilya Marchenko.


The 21-year-old world No14 upped his training during the summer to try to 
avoid similar setbacks but is now racing the clock to be 100% for his home slam 
starting next Monday.


“I’m going to lay it all on the line in Melbourne. Whether it hurts or not, 
I’m going to push it to the limit,” Kyrgios said.


Two-time Open finalist Pat Cash says Kyrgios must blow his early-round 
opponents away if he’s any chance of breaking Australia’s 41-year men’s title 
drought in Melbourne.


“I’ve always felt that to have success in a slam you need a bit of luck and if 
Nick’s got a niggling injury he wants to get through the first rounds as 
quickly as he possibly can,” Cash said. “A long five-set match can make life 
tricky.”

Cash said a key to the success and longevity of four-time champion and former 
world No1 Roger Federer was his ability to blitz early-round opponents.


“He’s got the sort of game that can blow players away and Nick is developing 
it,” he said. “Getting through the early matches quickly is going to be a big 
advantage to someone like Nick if he’s carrying a injury.”

Cash himself carried a shoulder injury into the 1987 final, losing in five 
sets to Swede Stefan Edberg. “I always say this is the one that got away,” the 
51-year-old said.
 