
Nick Kyrgios <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> has made a 
successful return to Davis Cup to give Australia a 1-0 lead over Slovakia in 
the World Group playoff in Sydney. Kyrgios made light work of world No127 
Andrej Martin to cruise to a 6-3 6-2 6-4 in Friday’s opening singles rubber at 
Ken Rosewall Arena.

Australian No2 Bernard Tomic takes on Jozef Kovalik in the second singles 
match as the hosts look to take a stranglehold on the best-of-five-rubber grass 
court tie.

Making his first Davis Cup appearance since a forgettable performance in last 
year’s quarter-final win over Kazakhstan in Darwin, Kyrgios was more 
inconvenienced by a nose bleed than his lowly-ranked opponent. The world No15 
spent much of the final set with a tissue up his left nostril but overcame the 
irritation to collect his firstDavis Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/daviscup> point for Australia in two years.

Andy Murray to miss grandfather’s funeral to play in Davis Cup semi-final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/andy-murray-to-face-juan-martin-del-potro-in-davis-cup-semi-final-great-britain-argentina-tennis>
After suffering a shock loss to world No115 Aleksandr Nedovyesov in Darwin, 
then-Australian captain Wally Masur replaced the temperamental youngster with 
Sam Groth for the must-win reverse singles. Kyrgios was then overlooked for 
Australia’s semi-final loss to Great Britain last year following his infamous 
sledging of Stan Wawrinka, before missing the first-round defeat to the US at 
Kooyong in March with a virus.

But the 21-year-old made a welcome – and incident-free – return to national 
duties on Friday to give Australia the early ascendancy in their bid to retain 
their place in the 16-team World Group for 2017.

Kyrgios bounced back from the disappointment of dropping serve to love in the 
seventh game of the match to break Martin for a second time and pocket the 
opening set in just 25 minutes. He broke the Slovak’s serve for a third 
straight game to seize the early advantage in the second set and secured a 
two-set lead with his fifth ace.

The Australian No1 dropped serve immediately after requiring treatment for his 
nose bleed to fall behind 3-1 in the third set. But he quickly regained control 
to reel off four straight games to take the match after one hour, 40 minutes.

Kyrgios opted only to have running repairs on the nose bleed, with tissues 
placed in his nostril during a changeover before he completed his straight-sets 
win. “I’m not like trying to do a Novak at the US Open,” he said. “Like, I’ve 
got a blocked nose, mate. I’ve got to fix it. I can’t play with blood coming 
out of my nose.”

“I mean, I want to play. I don’t want to take breaks. It was tough. It breaks 
the momentum. Obviously, the other guy doesn’t really know what’s going on 
either. I want to get the match going as quickly as possible as anyone. I don’t 
want to hang around.”
 