
Nick Kyrgios and Bernard Tomic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> have again been snubbed as 
nominees for Australia’s top tennis award, the Newcombe Medal. In a season that 
ended in an three-week suspension following a meltdown in Shanghai, world No13 
Kyrgios’s failure to be nominated as the country’s “most outstanding elite 
tennis player and ambassador for the sport” comes as little surprise.

But Tomic perhaps can feel a little stiff to at least not be shortlisted next 
to Dylan Alcott, Daria Gavrilova, John Millman, John Peers, Samantha Stosur and 
Jordan Thompson. While his season tapered off, Tomic spent much of the year in 
the top 20, reaching two grand slam fourth rounds and making a final in Mexico.

Potentially held against him was a decision not to make himself available for 
the Rio Olympics while holding his racquet head instead of the handle when 
facing match point at the Madrid Open was hardly a good look.

Andy Murray humble in victory against a magnanimous Novak Djokovic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-world-no-1-tennis>
Alcott and Gavrilova would be the likely favourites for the award which will 
be handed out in Melbourne next Monday. Wheelchair tennis player Alcott won the 
Australian Open in 2016 and took out gold in singles and doubles at the 
Paralympic Games.

Gavrilova reached a career high No25 in 2016 and made the final of the Moscow 
Open to close in on Stosur’s Australian No1 ranking. “This year has been just 
incredible for me,” Gavrilova said in a statement. “Winning the Hopman Cup with 
Nick (Kyrgios), getting to represent Australia in Fed Cup and at the Olympics 
and now this, a nomination for the Newcombe Medal.”

“I’m so proud and grateful. It’s a real privilege and I’m looking forward to 
being there on the night.”

Kyrgios and Tomic were also overlooked in 2015 when other issues held sway 
over on-court performance. Last year’s award went to Sam Groth who had a horror 
2016, plummeting to No181 in the world.



 