
Local hope Nick Kyrgios <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> will 
launch his Australian Open campaign against Portugal’s world No.81 Gastao 
Elias, while a grudge match looms for the Australian in the fourth round, in 
which he’s on track to face former champion and world No4 Stan Wawrinka.

A quarter-finalist in 2015, Kyrgios will play either Andreas Seppi or fellow 
tour veteran Paul-Henri Mathieu should his suspect knee hold up sufficiently to 
get past Elias. Kyrgios could face countryman Sam Groth in the third round 
before Wawrinka – the reigning US Open champion and only man in the past seven 
years to conquer Novak Djokovic at Melbourne Park – is likely to be lying in 
wait in the round of 16.

Australian Open fashion of the 1990s: from Lendl's eagle to Steffi's style
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2017/jan/13/australian-open-fashion-of-the-1990s-from-lendls-eagle-to-steffis-style>
In a tough draw, Bernard Tomic – Australia’s only other men’s seed – opens his 
campaign against Brazilian baseliner Thomaz Bellucci and has Marin Cilic, 
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga and Jack Sock lurking in his section.

Of Australia’s hopes in the women’s field, seeded locals Samantha Stosur and 
Daria Gavrilova have landed in the same quarter of the draw. But Australia’s 
top two women will be doing well to reach the second week, let alone clash for 
a semi-final berth, after being handed a rugged path through the opening rounds.

Stosur, the tournament’s 18th seed – who has ventured to the last 16 just 
twice in 14 previous attempts – faces Great Britain’s Heather Watson first up, 
while 22nd seed Gavrilova also meets a Brit in Naomi Broady. Gavrilova has been 
presented the best chance to make a run, but fourth-seeded US Open runner-up 
Karolina Pliskova shapes as a formidable obstacle in round four.

Victory over Broady, the world No.95, would likely set up a second-round 
meeting with Kristina Mladenovic, the Frenchwoman Gavrilova beat in the last 32 
in 2016. With her sorry record at her home slam, Stosur won’t be looking beyond 
the 75th-ranked Watson, but Australia’s former US Open champion could strike 
third seed Agnieszka Radwanska if she makes the fourth round for the third time.

Wildcard playoff winner Omar Jasika has drawn Spanish 21st seed David Ferrer, 
while Christopher O’Connell’s grand slam debut will be against in-form 15th 
seed Grigor Dimitrov. Exciting Australian teenager Alex De Minaur has an 
inviting opener against Austria’s world No84 Gerald Melzer.

Limping Nick Kyrgios only a long shot but a fascinating Australian Open looms 
| Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/limping-nick-kyrgios-only-a-long-shot-but-a-fascinating-australian-open-looms>
Meanwhile, a “gutted” Thanasi Kokkinakis is out of the men’s singles due to 
injury. The 20-year-old was a late withdrawal from the Sydney International 
with an abdominal strain and has not been able to recover in time for the Open 
starting on Monday at Melbourne Park.

Kokkinakis had been poised to make a long-awaited singles comeback after 
enduring shoulder, pectoral and groin injuries during a 15-month stretch on the 
tour sidelines. “Absolutely guttered (sic) to withdraw again from the best 
tournament in the world @AustralianOpen ... just can’t seem to get my body 
right #soon,” Kokkinakis posted on Twitter on Friday.

Kokkinakis would have been able to play with an injury-protected ranking of 81 
if he had recovered in time for the Open. Tournament director Craig Tilley 
confirmed the South Australian would be replaced by a “lucky loser” from the 
qualifying draw.

Local wildcard Omar Jasika said it had been a hard pill to swallow for 
Kokkinakis after such a long absence. “I talked to Thanasi this morning and he 
wasn’t too happy,” Jasika said. “He was a bit upset because he really wanted to 
play in this year’s Aussie. But what can you do. You’ve got to look after your 
health most importantly. Hopefully he’s back soon.”

Fellow Aussie Nick Kyrgios took to Twitter to express sympathy for his good 
mate. “Tennis isn’t the same without him around,” he posted. It is unclear 
whether Kokkinakis will still play in the doubles at the Open. Kokkinakis’ 
career has stalled since 2015, when he bettered Bernard Tomic in a memorable 
five-setter then lost to Novak Djokovic at the French Open. The ATP event at 
Indian Wells in March appears the next most likely tournament for him to 
re-launch his singles career.

Australian women: 18-Samantha Stosur v Heather Watson (GBR), 22-Daria 
Gavrilova v Naomi Broady (GBR), Arina Rodionova v 17-Caroline Wozniacki (DEN), 
Ashleigh Barty v Annika Beck (GER), Destanee Aiva v qualifier, Jaimee Fourlis v 
Anna Tatishvilli (USA), Lizette Cabrera v Donna Vekic (CRO)

Australian men: 14-Nick Kyrgios v Gastao Elias (POR), 27-Bernard Tomic v 
Thomaz Bellucci (BRA), Christopher O’Connell v 15-Grigor Dimitrov (BUL), Omar 
Jasika v 21-David Ferrer (ESP), Alex De Minaur v Gerald Melzer (AUT), James 
Duckworth v Paolo Lorenzi (ITA), Sam Groth v Steve Darcis (BEL), Andrew 
Whittington v Adam Pavlasek (CZE), Jordan Thompson v Joao Sousa (POR)
 