
About a third of living Nobel laureates – 108 at last count – have signed an 
open letter which attacksGreenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> for campaigning against 
genetically modified crops, especially one called Golden Rice.


Addressed to the global environmental group, the United Nations and 
governments,the letter 
<http://supportprecisionagriculture.org/nobel-laureate-gmo-letter_rjr.html> on 
Thursday says Greenpeace has “misrepresented the risks, benefits and impacts” 
of genetically altered food plants.

“There has never been a single confirmed case of a negative health outcome for 
humans or animals from their consumption,” wrote the top scientists.

The group included 41 Nobel medicine laureates among them James Watson, 
honoured in 1962 for co-discovering the basic structure of DNA.

The letter called on Greenpeace to “cease and desist” in its efforts to block 
GM <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gm> crops, and on governments to 
embrace “seeds improved through biotechnology”.

“Opposition based on emotion and dogma contradicted by data must be stopped.”

The Nobel winners singled out Golden Rice as a genetically modified crop with 
huge potential to improve health and save lives in the developing world.

A patented strain developed in the 1990s, Golden Rice contains an artificially 
inserted gene which boosts the level of vitamin A-rich beta-carotene.

After 30 years, is a GM food breakthrough finally here?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/feb/02/genetic-modification-breakthrough-golden-rice>
The World Health Organization estimates that a quarter of a billion people in 
developing nations suffer from vitamin A deficiency, causing up to two million 
preventable deaths per year and half-a-million cases of childhood blindness.

Golden Rice’s developers say a single serving provides about 60% of daily 
vitamin A requirements. It is currently distributed royalty-free to indigent 
farmers on a humanitarian basis.

Greenpeace however hit back at the Nobel laureates.

“Accusations that anyone is blocking genetically engineered ’Golden’ rice are 
false,” Wilhelmina Pelegrina of Greenpeace Southeast Asia wrote in a statement.

Corporations are using the strain “to pave the way for global approval of 
other more profitable genetically engineered crops,” she said.

Greenpeace’s longstanding position is to oppose all patents on plants or 
animals, or their genes, and that “life is not an industrial commodity”.

Previously, the environmental NGO has said Golden Rice was “environmentally 
irresponsible, poses risks to human health, and could compromise food, 
nutrition and financial security”.

The NGO also maintains that genetically modified organisms should be held back 
“since there is not an adequate scientific understanding of their impact on the 
environment and human health”.
 