
So he is mortal after all. Novak Djokovic’s bid to win a fourth Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> title, a fifth straight grand 
slam crown and the third leg of the coveted calendar year grand slam came 
crashing down in a barrage of aces on Saturday as he was beaten 7-6 (8-6), 6-1, 
3-6, 7-6 (7-5) in the third round by the American Sam Querrey. It is the first 
time Djokovic has gone out before the quarter-finals in a grand slam since the 
2009 French Open and with the world No1 gone, the men’s title is there for the 
taking.

Querrey, the No28 seed, had gone past the third round here only once, in 2010, 
and even though he was leading by two sets to love overnight, most believed 
that Djokovic, who had won 30 grand slam matches in a row, would somehow find a 
way to win. Last year, he recovered from two sets down to beat the South 
African Kevin Anderson in round four but Querrey, a former winner at Queen’s, 
smashed 31 aces and kept going for it to record the best win of his career 
while simultaneously blasting a massive hole in the top half of the draw.

In terms of ranking differential, this was not quite in the same league as 
George Bastl’s win over Pete Sampras in 2002 or Rafael Nadal’s defeats to Lukas 
Rosol, Steve Darcis and Dustin Brown here in recent years. But in terms of 
magnitude, it sent tremors rippling around Wimbledon, the seemingly unbeatable 
Djokovic going down and going down with little more than a whimper.

There were few of the guttural roars that we have come to know so well 
whenever Djokovic has found himself from tough situations and though he 
continued to battle, it was like he was operating on power saver, unable to 
unleash his usual ferocity. Djokovic, who was pushing his usually brilliant 
backhand instead of ripping it and whose serve speed was down on its usual 
level, admitted that he was “not really” at 100% but did not want to elaborate. 
Amid rumours that he was struggling with his left shoulder, it was perhaps 
telling that he should clutch at it several times as he discussed the match 
soon after.

“He played very well and he deserved to win,” said Djokovic, trying hard to 
put a brave face on things despite the obvious disappointment. “I had my 
chances maybe in the fourth set, serving for the set. In the tie-break, I was 
leading. Just wasn’t feeling the ball as well as I wished. But that’s sport.”

Djokovic said the effort in winning his first French Open just a month ago, 
which gave him the career grand slam, had not drained him of energy, but he 
hinted that achieving such a goal may have been a factor in his display. “It’s 
an amazing feeling, obviously, to be able to hold four grand slams at the same 
time,” he said. “Coming into Wimbledon, I knew that mentally it’s not going to 
be easy to kind of remotivate myself. But the importance of this tournament is 
so immense that you always find ways to really get inspired and prepare and try 
to give your best. Obviously my best wasn’t enough this year.”

Trailing 7-6, 6-1 overnight, Djokovic won the first four games on the 
resumption and, after the first of three rain delays, he wrapped up the third 
set. Yet he still looked flat, unable to find the rhythm and accuracy that has 
dominated the men’s game in recent years

Still he had his chances. After another rain break at 1-1 in the fourth, 
having already missed three break points in the opening game, he missed another 
three in the next and then, after saving two of his own, missed two more, as 
Querrey came with big serve after big serve, many of them with aces. But 
Djokovic broke to lead 5-4 only to falter, netting a forehand volley to give 
the break back. Querrey then held for 6-5 before another rain delay – this time 
of just over an hour – left Djokovic needing to hold to stay in the match.

He managed that, holding to love, but in the tie-break he squandered a 3-1 
lead and then, after saving one match point at 4-6 with an ace, he pulled a 
forehand wide to hand a jubilant Querrey victory and a fourth-round match 
against the Frenchman Nicolas Mahut.

“It’s an unbelievable win and to do it here at Wimbledon is really special,” 
Querrey said. “I’m just so ecstatic right now, so happy. Today, I played the 
break points really well. Every time I had a break point I was able to come up 
with a big serve and then in the tie-break I hung in there and got a couple of 
loose points and that was it.”

Wimbledon 2016: Novak Djokovic knocked out by Sam Querrey – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/02/wimbledon-2016-novak-djokovic-on-the-brink-against-sam-querrey>
Djokovic said he would not be playing in this month’s Davis Cup tie against 
Britain in Belgrade and that he needs a rest to get himself prepared for the 
remainder of the year, starting with the Olympic Games in Rio.

“Thankfully I have a family and I have a life outside of tennis [so] I have 
plenty of things to look forward to,” he said. “I’m going to obviously pay more 
attention to those things than tennis in the next period. I need it. It’s been 
a very successful year so far, but very long one, exhausting one, in every 
sense of that word. I just need some rest.”
 