
To understand what Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> is experiencing for the 
first time since 23 June 2014 – the last time he wasn’t No1 in the world – it 
helps to stand back from the heat that has been generated around him in London 
this week.

The pressure on him now, as he seeks to win his fifth ATP World Tour Finals in 
a row and reclaim the rankings crownhe lost to Andy Murray in Paris 10 days ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/andy-murray-becomes-tennis-world-no1-milos-raonic-walkover-paris>
, is unlike everything else he normally goes through. Djokovic knows when he 
steps on court that he wins eight times out of 10, whoever he is playing. That 
certainty has been dented.

Kei Nishikori beats Stan Wawrinka in ATP World Tour Finals opener
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/14/kei-nishikori-stan-wawrinka-atp-world-tour-finals>
Against Murray he is 34-10 win-loss over the course of their near-parallel 
careers. They cannot meet for a 35th time until the semi-final on Saturday at 
the earliest, and that would provide as rousing a finish to the season as we 
have seen in a long time. Murray does not want to be a two-week wonder at the 
head of the rankings.

Against the other three players in his group at this tournament, Djokovic is 
24-0 after surviving an edgy first set to beat the nothing-to-lose young 
Austrian Dominic Thiem on his London debut on Sunday afternoon. On Tuesday 
night, Djokovic looks for victory No25 against the trio ranged against him, 
this time taking on Milos Raonic, whose torn right quad forced his retirement 
in Paris but who looked near to his powerful best beating Gaël Monfils in 
straight sets on Sunday night. However, Djokovic’s hold over him is total: 7-0, 
the most recent win coming in two quick sets on the Madrid clay in the summer.

Yet it has invariably been in defeat that Djokovic has spoken most movingly 
and with the sharpest insight about himself and his sport. After a loss to 
Marin Cilic in the last Masters 1000 tournament of the year handed Murray his 
ranking supremacy after a reign of 123 weeks [when the Scot then was 
prematurely crowned after Raonic pulled out of their semi-final], he was 
considerably more measured than when he snapped in victory over Thiem. He 
responded with undisguised impatience on Sunday when asked if hitting the ball 
into the crowd at the end of the first set was part of a worrying pattern of 
behaviour and whether or not he was comfortable with his “mindset”, which he 
earlier in the year admitted had been disturbed by events on and off the court. 
It was a reasonable question to ask a player with the highest profile in his 
sport.

“You guys are unbelievable,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/novak-djokovic-dominic-thiem-atp-world-tour-finals>
 Djokovic said, before retreating to what probably was the relative comfort of 
more amenable questions from the Serbian media. They have been loyal allies and 
remain defensive about any criticism of their country’s best and most famous 
athlete, as a cursory glance at social media will reveal.

Yet Djokovic’s Parisian take on life and tennis could not have been more 
candid. “I’m aware that I’m not the only player in the world who wants to win 
when he gets out on the court,” he said in defeat 10 days ago. “I’m going to 
keep playing at this level as long as I feel like that’s the right thing for 
me. I have to get to that state of mind where I’m able to perform as well as I 
want to, match after match. I was not able to find that level for the last 
couple of months.”

He added: “A lot of things are coming out, a lot of things, a lot of emotions 
went through my mind and body in the last two years. It took a lot out of me.”

Yet it is when Djokovic is wounded, physically or spiritually, that he has 
found the iron will of a champion. In the ATP’s Under Pressure ratings, he 
leads Andy Murray 271.1 to 257.5 over the past 52 weeks - although his stats 
will have taken a light hit since he lost to Sam Querrey in the third round at 
Wimbledon.

In the subcategories of the rankings, Djokovic has converted 42.4% of break 
points (Murray 45.1), saved 67.9 (65.8), won 73.9% of tie breaks (70.4) and, 
most pertinently, 87.5% of deciding sets, to Murray’s 76.2%. All of those 
numbers are impressive for both players, who they lead Kei Nishikori, Juan 
Martín del Potro, Thiem, Raonic, Lucas Pouille, Richard Gasquet, Viktor Troicki 
and Florian Mayer in the aggregated rankings.

None of which will invade Djokovic’s thinking when he steps out against 
Raonic. He knows his resilience under the cosh has wilted a little. He does not 
need reminding that the latter part of the season has been his most 
uncomfortable spell in a long while.

Although he says his troubles began at Wimbledon, he won the Rogers Cup in 
Toronto without dropping a set.

After that, it got seriously tough: Del Potro put him out of the Rio Olympics 
in the first round, inducing a tearful exit; Stan Wawrinka beat him at the end 
of a bizarre US Open, where a walkover and two retirements helped him into the 
final; world No19 Roberto Bautista Agut beat him for the loss of eight games in 
the quarter-finals of the Shanghai Masters; and Cilic, who had not beaten him 
in 14 attempts, completed the misery for him in Paris.

The reality of battle consumes Djokovic. It delivers him the inner animal that 
resides in all great champions. If he is fit, he should beat Raonic, although 
it might take three sets. After that, he has the unique challenge of the 
unorthodox Monfils, who briefly confused him before losing in four crazy sets 
in the semi-finals at Flushing Meadows. If Djokovic gets to the weekend, as he 
should, the likelihood is we will see the player who for two years has been the 
best in the world.
 