
The defending champion Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> survived five match points 
against Fernando Verdasco to reach the Qatar Open final on Friday.

Djokovic prevailed 4-6, 7-6, 6-3 after the 42nd-rankedVerdasco, a left-hander 
and former top-10 player, controlled the first two sets until the latter stages 
of the tie-break.

Andy Murray made to fight for his quarter-final place in the Qatar Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/andy-murray-qater-open-novak-djokovic>
Of the five match points Verdasco held in the second-set tie-break, the 
Spaniard lost four from his own mistakes. “I would like to say tough luck for 
Fernando, he was clearly the better player for the bigger part of the match and 
he should have won,” Djokovic said on court after a match that lasted more than 
two hours. “It was just unfortunate. It’s definitely one of the most exciting 
matches I’ve played. I don’t think I’ve saved five match points too many 
times.” The second-seeded Djokovic, who didn’t lose a set en route to the 
semifinals, broke Verdasco’s serve in the third game of the third set to 
finally establish what turned into a permanent lead in the 2-hour, 22-minute 
match.

Djokovic, who only had one unforced error in the final set, sealed the match 
by breaking Verdasco’s serve in the final game.

Verdasco initially trailed 4-2 in the first set, then broke Djokovic at love 
in the seventh and ninth games to take the set.

Verdasco last played Djokovic in the second round of last year’s Qatar Open, 
where the Spaniard’s loss was his 11th consecutive against a world No. 1 
player. Djokovic leads their head-to-head 9-4.

Top seed Andy Murray and third seed Tomas Berdych were playing the late 
semifinal. Meanwhile, Johanna Konta’s hopes of beginning 2017 with a second WTA 
Tour title disappeared as she was beaten by Katerina Siniakova in the Shenzhen 
Open semi-finals. Konta, the world No10, would have been eyeing up more 
silverware as the highest seed left in the tournament but she did not count on 
a stunning performance from the world No52 who earned a 1-6, 6-4, 6-4 win.
 