
Novak Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>, eight times 
out of 10 for most of his career, has found a way. On Tuesday night he did it 
again with tennis which he admitted was short of his best but palpably too good 
for the eighth time in a row against Milos Raonic.

The Serb served two timely aces – one to save a break point in the first set, 
another to grab match point in a tie-break for the second – and soaked up 14, 
proving too strong in the moments that mattered to punish the Canadian’s lack 
of rigour and win 7-6, 7-6 in 2¼ hours on day three of theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> in Greenwich.

Novak Djokovic v Milos Raonic: ATP World Tour Finals – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/15/novak-djokovic-v-milos-raonic-atp-world-tour-finals-live>
Victory put him straight into the weekend semi-finals of a tournament he has 
won four times in a row – and he may well make mincemeat of the out- of-sorts 
and injured Gaël Monfils in his last round‑robin match. Raonic goes into an 
uncomplicated shootout with Dominic Thiem for second place in the Ivan Lendl 
group.

“I should have done my job earlier, to be honest,” Djokovic said, expressing 
frustration at dropping his serve twice in the second set, but he rightly 
observed: “All in all, two tie-breaks against a big server is a great win and a 
great confidence boost.”

It is odd to hear Djokovic, the world No1 since mid-2014 until unseated by 
Andy Murray in Paris last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/andy-murray-becomes-tennis-world-no1-milos-raonic-walkover-paris>
, talking about a need to create confidence but these are strange times for him.

He has objected vociferously to the suggestion since he arrived in London but 
he has not looked himself on the court or in fencing with the media. Until 
Tuesday night. The scary certainty of his demeanour remains slightly mellowed, 
and the sharp eye did not seem so finely focused in some key moments ... but he 
finds a way.If there were problems lurking unidentified beyond the court, he 
sought comfort in a walk in Hyde Park earlier in the day with his young son, 
then in the familiar refuge in the workplace where he has been comfortable for 
most of his life. This is where he would work it out.

It was never going to be a nuanced exchange, and both players opened their 
shoulders from the start. Raonic, hitting harder and with unalloyed confidence, 
got a look on the quarter-hour but Djokovic saved two break points and fought 
through deuce to hold for 2-1. He was seriously annoyed when the chair 
interrupted his serve at 15-15, 5-5, because someone had flashed their mobile 
phone camera light, but he got it done and the pressure was back on Raonic to 
force the first tie-break.

As Greg Rusedski, no slouch with ball in hand, observed, “This is the best 
chance for Raonic, in the tie-breakers, if he is going to win this match.” He 
led 4-2, trailed 3-5, got a break on a challenge for 4-5, smashed third-time 
lucky to equalise, got lobbed to hand Djokovic set point, bullied his way in a 
long, quality exchange for 6-6, butchered a return on a 77mph second serve for 
6-7, then, after 64 minutes of even struggle, double-faulted to gift Djokovic 
the set.

Djokovic broke and held through deuce to widen the gap at the start of the 
second set. Raonic got on the board with a ninth ace, holding to love to avoid 
what would have been a terminal second break, and shocked the Serb with two 
exquisite winners on either wing to break back in the fifth game – only the 
third time he had managed that in their seven matches.

Rivals need more than just “game” to beat Djokovic, though; they have to bring 
rock-solid self-belief, calm, steadiness under pressure, and mongrel instinct. 
Raonic has those assets, but they did not all kick in at the right time, and 
Djokovic made him crack again.

Andy Murray to stick to the script against Kei Nishikori at World Tour Finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/andy-murray-kei-nishikori-atp-world-tour-finals>
However, orderly progress slithered to a halt when he stopped in the shot and 
netted to gift Raonic a break-back for 4-4. He motioned to his box, touching 
the right arm that has troubled him in the latter half of the season, shrugging 
his shoulders and appearing slightly woebegone again. It was a curious and 
unexpected dip just when he was pushing towards a win.

Now, after nearly two hours of uneven but engrossing tennis, it was his turn 
to force a tie-break. An inexplicably rash backhand gave Raonic set point but 
he wasted it with equal lack of discipline.

There was little in the second tie-break most of the way, Djokovic giving 
Raonic hope with a double-fault, but a quite amazing backhand winner in the 
10th game opened the door to the inevitable, and Raonic, after missing his 
first serve, succumbed to the pressure and shoved his final backhand into the 
tramlines.

Earlier, Thiem, the young Austrian with the mature game who lost to Djokovic 
on Sunday when nerves gripped his racket after he had taken the first set, 
survived a mid-match collapse to beat the unpredictable Monfils, 6-3, 1-6, 6-4.

In a stirring doubles performance, Jamie Murray and Bruno Soares played like 
champions to beat the brothers who have worn that mantle for so long, Mike and 
Bob Bryan, 6-3, 6-4 in a tick over an hour. The Scotland/Brazil pairing are 
looking good to reach and win the final on Sunday.
 