
Andy Murray and Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> meet for the 35th time on 
Sunday in a match loaded with more significance than even some of their many 
contests for majors: the championship of each other, as someone once described 
the trilogy of world heavyweight title fights between Muhammad Ali and Joe 
Frazier.

They have not absorbed as many physical bruises as did those fine, departed 
warriors, but there has been pain, psychological as well as physical, since 
they first played as youths nearly 20 years ago and kept punching all the way 
through their professional careers, with Djokovic ahead in these surely latter 
stages of the rivalry, 34-10. “This maybe is one of the biggest matches that we 
have ever played against each other, so let’s enjoy it,” said the Serb.

Andy Murray suffers for his art in marathon win over Milos Raonic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/andy-murray-atp-world-tour-finals>
Murray has won two of his three slams by beating Djokovic in the final but 
this match is different. It has its recent genesis in Djokovic’s surprise 
collapse in the early stages at Wimbledon and has been building by the week, as 
he struggled on and off the court while Murray went on the sort of run every 
player dreams about: unbeaten now in 24 matches over more than three months and 
returning in front of his home fans with four titles collected on the spin 
among eight for the year – plus the scalp of the man who will look across the 
net at him around 6pm at the O2 Arena on Sunday.

At stake is the world No1 ranking, which the Scot took from the Serb in Paris 
nearly a fortnight ago. Their almost inevitable collision follows semi-final 
wins that could hardly have been more different, Murray taking a record three 
hours and 38 minutes to wear down the serving monster that is Milos Raonic, 
5-7, 7-6, 7-6, before Djokovic’s one hour and six minutes stroll to blow away 
Kei Nishikori 6-1, 6-1. There was very little traffic on Route 66.

Much will depend on how the two players recover: Murray’s match was the 
longest of the week (and in the history of the tournament), while Djokovic’s 
was the shortest.

The Serb was awesome, back to his best, and will be so tough to beat. He said 
later: “I pretty much executed everything that I tactically planned to do.

“I started off very well. That helps when you’re playing against a top player. 
Kei was obviously a little bit tired, not at his best. My week has been going 
in the right direction. The last couple of matches have been pretty much 
flawless and now we’re coming up to the last match of the year, the one 
everyone wanted. There are two of us on the court, let’s start with that. Let’s 
enjoy the occasion, be conscious of the great match. I’m honoured to be part of 
the history with Andy tomorrow. We have known each other many years.”

Novak Djokovic v Kei Nishikori: ATP World Tour Finals – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/19/novak-djokovic-v-kei-nishikori-atp-world-tour-finals-live>
The biggest struggle of the match arrived in the first set when security 
guards grabbed a spectator who ran on to the court and escorted him from the 
premises. Djokovic said, “No, I did not feel threatened. Maybe he just wanted 
to be noticed.”

The second semi-final was a pointed statement – not necessarily intentional – 
as Nishikori engaged in a three hours and 20 minutes game against Murray on 
Wednesday night, to that point the longest match in the tournament’s history. 
There was precious little left of the Japanese player against Djokovic, whose 
confidence and power have blossomed by the day after an uncertain start last 
Sunday.

There are some who still regard him as the world’s best, whatever the slim 
lead Murray has over him in the rankings. Others closer to the heat of battle 
see it differently; Raonic for instance.

“He’s done a lot of great things,” the Canadian said of Murray, clearly 
exhausted after what was one of the most draining spectacles – for players and 
spectators alike – this season. “Nothing’s missing in that storyline.

“Tennis ranking is a game of checks and balances. Who’s going to finish No1 is 
who does the best that year.

“Doesn’t matter whether [Murray and Djokovic] played or not. You could take 
that away from Andy in a way; then you could also say it’s sort of Novak’s 
responsibility to get to that point because Andy was there every single week. 
Regardless, Andy’s still the best player in the world of 2016. There’s no 
question about it.”

If Nishikori was totally spent after enduring a Murray mauling, the question 
remains unanswered about what the winner of the first semi-final can bring to 
the final. Raonic did not lack for candour about his own physical state. “I’ll 
probably feel like crap for the next few days,” he said.

Murray was more circumspect, not wanting to give Djokovic even a sliver of a 
psychological advantage, but he could not deny he was spent after a match that 
demanded as much mental fortitude as physical stamina.

“I don’t know how I’ll feel tomorrow,” he said. “Obviously I’m tired just now 
because it was a really hard match. It wasn’t just that it was physically hard, 
it was mentally a tough match, too. It was pretty stressful. I was quite far 
behind in the second set, a set and a break down, managed to turn it round. 
Then it was back and forth in the third set.”

The pressures also bring frustration. Earlier in the week, Djokovic was 
castigated for hitting a ball into the crowd, risking censure at least, not to 
mention injury to a spectator. His local media went apoplectic when a British 
journalist questioned him about it. “You guys are unbelievable,” he said in an 
exchange that was pretty feisty.

Well, Murray hit a ball into the crowd on Saturdaylast night, off an overhead 
beam admittedly, but conceded later: “If you hit balls into crowds, stuff like 
that, obviously you’re close to getting defaulted. You have to be very, very 
careful with that. That’s happened to my opponents this week, as well, and they 
didn’t get warnings for hitting a ball up into the scoreboard.

“I think for the players, you just want the consistency there. But, if you’re 
hitting balls into the crowd or anything like that, you deserve to be warned. 
It’s up to the umpire, if you hit a ball into the crowd, if it hits someone, 
whether they default you or not.”
 