
A study published in the Journal of Oral Rehabilitation reports that more than 
100,000 A&E visits a year are caused by tooth problems, with patients trying to 
avoid NHS dental charges by going to hospitals for free treatment, frequently 
at weekends.

This comes as no surprise. While it’s said that it will soon be possible to 
identify whether someone is rich or poor simply by how overweight they are, 
I’ve long thought that dentistry could turn out to be another poverty 
indicator, with many of the poorest unable to afford to maintain basic dental 
health.

In some areas of the country, NHS dentists are notoriously hard to find and 
oversubscribed, but it doesn’t end there. NHS dentistry is chronically 
underfunded, with patients forced to make up the shortfall for treatment costs, 
whatever their personal circumstances, while dentists who treat NHS patients 
complain that fixed fees don’t cover the time spent on complex issues.

British dental problems aren’t always about money; children are entitled to 
free care, but figures showed thattwo out of five 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/23/nhs-dentist-visits-decline-children-england>
 hadn’t visited an NHS dentist in the past year. However, it does seem to be 
about money when so many adults are clogging up A&E departments or, as reported 
last year, turning to GPs, who are obviously ill-equipped to treat them.

Put bluntly, the poorest in British society are increasingly becoming too 
frightened to go to the dentist, not because of the treatment, but because of 
the cost. This is shameful. If these findings are anything to go by, Britain is 
well on the way to regaining its international reputation for notably bad 
dental health. Not all Britons, of course, just those who can’t afford basic 
care, with “basic” being the operative word.

At the risk of being accused of liberal hand-wringing, this feels very 
personal to me because, where dental treatment is concerned, I’ve been such a 
spoilt cow. When I was last with an NHS dentist, I was always able to afford 
upgraded treatment over the basic option, but it was obvious that for some 
people that “choice” was going to be as stark as the choice between extracting 
a tooth or – the more expensive option – trying to save it.

Then there’s cosmetic dentistry. I’m just coming towards the end of a lengthy 
period in adult braces, which has been quite an experience – I look as though 
I’m permanently vomiting a garden gate. Away from the comedy aspect, I’m 
painfully aware of how lucky I am. My orthodontic treatment, even with a 
finance plan, will have been way out of reach for many people. These are people 
who’d need the same treatment (which, without boring you with details, wasn’t 
purely cosmetic), but wouldn’t have been able to afford it or even been given 
the chance on the NHS.

Where teeth are concerned, what does “cosmetic” even mean anyway? Not everyone 
wants gleaming, whitenedTOWIE choppers, but nor are teeth just for chewing. 
Teeth aren’t optional – teeth are crucial. And teeth are emotional. Not only is 
toothache vile, with teeth linked to general good health; people need teeth for 
everything from work and job interviews to personal confidence, relationships 
and every conceivable form of social interaction.

It’s not enough to say: “Well, look after them then.” Of course people should 
look after their teeth and most people, rich and poor, try their best. However, 
when things go wrong, it can’t be anything but a disgrace if people are so 
scared by dental costs that they end up sitting in casualty departments in the 
hope of free care.

This should be a source of national shame, as should be the growing 
realisation that it won’t be too long before a person’s social circumstances 
can be accurately assessed simply by them opening their mouth.

Who really needs a booze bracelet?
 Where was this miraculous ‘stop boozing you idiot!’ device when the likes of 
me sorely needed it? Photograph: Philip Toscano/PA 
Excitement is mounting as the world gets ever closer to a tracking device to 
tell you exactly how disgustingly sloshed you are. And that’s because, on 
realising how drunk we are, all of us are likely to say: “Good heavens, in that 
case, I must depart this fine hostelry to make my way homewards.” Because 
that’s how it always works, especially in Britain.

Milo Sensors <http://www.milosensor.com/>, from California, has developed a 
product called Proof. It is “wearable technology” (or how about just admitting 
it’s a bracelet?), a bit like a Fitbit, and it monitors blood alcohol levels, 
alerting you to the point where you may start feeling the urge to sing, dance, 
cry or express your viewpoint more candidly than usual – a bit like being in a
Question Time audience, only with more alcohol and less Brexit.

Where was this miraculous “stop boozing you idiot!” device when the likes of 
me sorely needed it? The angst we’d have avoided, the time we’d have saved, all 
those deathly mornings ringing around apologising for behaviour you couldn’t 
remember to people who’d rather not speak to you.

However, maybe the answer is that people like me didn’t need it. Or more 
precisely, we wouldn’t have heeded it. Instead of electronic devices, previous 
generations had these things called partners, family, friends and bar staff who 
told you when you’d had enough…and whoever bothered listening tothem?

In which case, how many people are going to take any notice of an electronic 
bracelet nagging them about their alcohol levels?

I still like Proof as an idea, and I’d still like them to send me a free one, 
but it seems fated to be used by people who are more likely to be intoxicated 
by new technology than they are by alcohol.

It’s touching how much Robbie Williams likes his fans
 Coming clean: Robbie Williams using hand sanitiser. Photograph: BBC 
Robbie Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/music/robbie-williams> has 
responded to the furore over the incident on New Year’s Eve, when, after 
shaking hands with members of the excited crowd, he was shown squirting 
sanitiser on to his mitts, his face plastered with the kind of grimace usually 
reserved for old footage of cow rectal examinations onAll Creatures Great and 
Small.

Williams isn’t a complete PR dolt, so he’s now issued an amusing video of 
himself using hand sanitiser after he’s touched a family member.

Well played. However, it’s not quite enough to dispel the feeling that as much 
as celebrities such as Williams say they “love” their fans, it’s nowhere near 
as much as they love a nice relaxing bath in scalding hot Dettol after they’ve 
had anything to do with them.

The feeling that this “love” they feel for fans may be a tad selfish and 
needy, as in, wholly to do with wanting them to continue buying their stuff. 
And as much as they want to reach out to their public and touch hearts and 
lives, this doesn’t include any other kind of touching or the little bottle of 
Carex hand gel is coming out again.
 