
More contaminated soil and rubble will remain at the sites of Britain’s old 
nuclear power plants rather than going to a dedicated dump, under 
government-backed proposals.


But officials said that the sites would not be left in a hazardous state 
because international radiological standards would still be upheld.

They argued the changes would mean former nuclear sites could be cleaned up 
more quickly, less waste would need to be moved around the country, and 
decommissioning would be cheaper than under today’s regime.

Experts were split over the proposals. Some said that it showed the UK did not 
know what to do with its nuclear waste, but others welcomed it as a way of 
saving money.

The government said a change to the Nuclear Installations Act 1965, outlined 
in a discussion paper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/565233/Discussion_Paper_3_November_2016_.pdf>
 last week, is needed now because several sites will reach the final stage of 
cleanup in the early 2020s, such as Winfrith in Dorset and Dounreay in 
Caithness.

The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) currently oversees the licensing of 17 
nuclear sites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/30/hinkley-point-c-developers-face-72bn-cleanup-bill-at-end-of-nuclear-plants-life>
 that are slated for decommissioning and cleanup. The final stage involves 
dealing with large amounts of rubble, concrete, brick and soil, some of which 
is radioactive and designated low level waste (LLW). That waste currently goes 
to the UK’s only LLW site, at Drigg in Cumbria, which is almost full.

Industry, the regulator and the government want that last stage of the process 
to no longer be the ONR’s responsibility, and for the LLW to instead stay at 
the former nuclear sites, which range from old power plants to research 
facilities.

“It is possible that local communities may be concerned that this would mean 
the site being left in an unacceptable or hazardous state. This would not be 
the case,” the paper said, because the changes would not go ahead if they were 
inconsistent with the radiological standards of health watchdog Public Health 
England.

Malcolm Grimston, a senior research fellow at Imperial College London, said 
the current system was unwieldy and the change would be a better use of money. 
“While we continue to treat radioactivity as if it was in a different category 
of hazards, we perpetuate this idea that radioactivity is more dangerous [than 
other hazardous material], which the science doesn’t back up.”

He added that the level of radioactivity was low enough that local communities 
should not be worried at more waste being left at sites after their cleanup. 
“Even if people decided to eat this stuff or set up house and live as close as 
they could, there would be no detectable change in the cancer rate.”

But nuclear critics said the changes showed the government lacked a long-term 
plan on nuclear waste.

“It’s another example of how much of the stuff we have and we don’t really 
know what we’re going to do with it, we’re just leaving it [the LLW]. It’s an 
appalling choice,” said Dr Paul Dorfman of University College London, who was 
involved in the decommissioning of Harwell in Oxfordshire, a former nuclear 
research site which is now partly used as a business park.

“The notion of the acceptability about LLW being just low level: you can say 
low, but this stuff is dangerous. You don’t want this stuff near you,” he said.

Under the proposed changes, former sites would no longer be considered 
“nuclear” at the end of their cleanup, and therefore no longer the 
responsibility of the ONR. Regulation would fall instead to the Health and 
Safety Executive and environment agencies.

“What the government is suggesting is, they’re turning off the liability but 
they’re not turning off the risk or hazard,” said John Large, a nuclear 
consultant who has advised the UK government on nuclear issues.

He said one of the drivers behind the change might be the pressure on the ONR 
from regulating and overseeing the new nuclear reactors planned in the UK, such 
as EDF’s new reactors atHinkley Point in Somerset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/30/hinkley-point-nuclear-waste-storage-costs>
, and the regulator wanting to lighten its load. “I suspect the ONR are cutting 
their cloth here, I suspect they are hard pushed,” he said.

The government’s discussion paper said the changes could not be made without 
legislation being amended to allow the ONR to relinquish regulation of sites in 
their final stages of decommissioning. A public consultation on the proposal is 
planned in 2017.
 