 More than 2 million people have been moved from their homes over the past 20 
years, many of them forcibly, to clear space for the Olympic Games, a human 
rights group reported yesterday.
Three quarters of the displaced people are in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, where the authorities are clearing 
large swaths of residential districts ahead of next year's Olympics, according 
to a new report by the Geneva-based Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions 
(COHRE).

The report said that 1.25 million had already been moved from their homes due 
to "Olympics-related redevelopment" with an another quarter million evictions 
expected before the games start.

The Chinese foreign ministry rejected the statistics as "groundless". It said 
that just over 6,000 households had been demolished and that the homeowners had 
been compensated and resettled.

However, the COHRE report insists that its statistics are conservative, and do 
not include rural migrants living in the overcrowded central districts of 
Beijing who the group says will be forced out.

"In Beijing, and in China more generally, the process of demolition and 
eviction is characterised by arbitrariness and lack of due process. In many 
cases, tenants are given little or no notice of their eviction and do not 
receive the promised compensation," the report states.

"This lack of adequate compensation (or any compensation at all) sometimes 
leaves the evictees at risk of homelessness. The forced evictions are often 
violent and abuses committed during the eviction processes have multiplied."

The International Olympic Committee has agreed to attend a COHRE workshop next 
week to learn more about the report and the housing implications of the games.

"We're in contact because it's a matter important to us. It's important for us 
to understand what kind of international norms that exist on this matter, that 
governments can follow," an IOC spokeswoman said.

"We don't want to react to the figures now. We really want to go into the 
nitty-gritty on how the figures were made."

Jean du Plessis, COHRE's executive director, said yesterday he was "very 
pleased" with the committee's response.

Mr du Plessis acknowledged that China's breakneck economic growth has led to 
the bulldozing of countless homes anyway. But he said preparations for the 
Olympics has led to a marked acceleration in the rate of evictions.

"One can judge the Olympic effect," Mr du Plessis said. "There was a trend of 
development-related evictions and removals prior to the Olympic bid, but there 
was a clear spike after the bid - a doubling of the rate at which evictions 
were carried out."

There are other sporting events and big public occasions which have led to 
large-scale evictions and house-clearing, and their impact is reported in the 
COHRE report: Mega-events,Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> and Housing Rights. For 
example, 1,000 shantytown homes were allegedly bulldozed to make room for the 
2002 Miss World beauty pageant in Abuja, Nigeria. But the report makes clear 
the Olympics is the biggest steamroller of all.

According to COHRE, 720,000 people were forcibly evicted in the preparation 
for the 1988 Olympics in Seoul and 30,000 people were displaced in the 
gentrification and development for Atlanta in 1996.

In London, where the Olympics are still five years away, COHRE said 1,000 
people faced the prospect of having to move. The impact would be felt 
disproportionately by the poor and minorities, the report said. A London 
Development Agecy spokesman said the report was "littered with misleading 
information". He said half the 1,000 people mentioned were students whose 
accommodation was being moved for reasons unrelated to the 2012 Olympics.

"The regeneration sparked by the Olympics will create up to 40,000 new homes," 
he said.
 