
A divorce is one of those things you don’t anticipate, plan or want to be 
party to. It’s tough to go through, especially when children are involved, but 
throw a business into the mix and there will be even more to consider.

In an ideal world, you will have a pre- or post-nuptial agreement, your house 
ownership will be clearly documented, and your business will have a partnership 
or a shareholders’ agreement. However, as a commercial lawyer I know this is 
rarely the case. Let’s be honest, ensuring you have the documentation outlining 
clearly allocated shares isn’t the most romantic proposition.


But divorces do happen and they can be bad for business if not handled 
correctly – in the worst-case scenario, it could be the end of your business as 
well as your marriage. If you own a company with your partner, what do you need 
to know?


The 50/50 split

Without legal documentation, the starting point in family proceedings is that 
joint assets are divided 50/50. Alternatively, your shareholding in the 
business when you set up (even if it’s since changed) will determine the 
division.

If a business decision is required during proceedings – such as renewing a 
commercial lease or approving an incoming investor – and you both own the 
company equally (by law or by default), but cannot agree, this could end with 
the company being wound up.


We have acted for many clients in this situation. Often, one partner plays no 
real role in the business, but they use joint ownership as a means to negotiate 
for more in the divorce. In another instance, one client lost everything 
because he never documented loans he’d made to the company. When he and his 
wife divorced, his extra investment wasn’t recognised.

Hiding assets

I have seen a variety of tactics deployed by couples when personal 
relationships sour. Delayed account preparation for the proceedings is common 
especially where one partner is an active director, with a relationship with 
the accountant, and refuses the other party access. Theoretically, an 
accountant must remain impartial on behalf of the company, but in reality this 
can be very difficult.

Gifting away or liquidating assets of a company at a lower value ahead of 
anticipated divorce also happens a lot. One of the spouses could sell business 
assets to a friend, intending to re-buy them later, for example. Legal 
documents should specify that more than one signature is required to sell and 
specify how these assets are valued but often 50/50 owners don’t think about 
doing this.

Luckily, if assets are undersold, the family court has powers to reverse the 
transaction or “count in” the asset at the actual value instead so that no real 
loss is suffered by the other party.

How to protect your business

Divorce <https://www.theguardian.com/money/divorce> isn’t something we want to 
contemplate while happily married, but if you run a business with your spouse, 
you should consider:

 * Transferring all intellectual property (IP) rights to the company – IP can 
be one of the business’s most valuable assets. If jointly owned, one party will 
need to buy out the other if they want to use it post divorce

 * Drawing up a founders’ agreement, setting out what happens in the event of 
a dissolution or dispute 
 * Agreeing restrictive clauses to prevent the departing spouse from stealing 
clients, setting up in direct competition or sharing confidential information. 
 * Specifying who owns what shares and clearly documenting any loans to the 
company 
 * Getting a pre- or post-nuptial agreement. These can be very persuasive 
during divorce proceedings, providing each party has had independent legal 
advice 
 * Making sure that your will mirrors these terms too, so that in the event of 
your death, it is clear how your shares or their cash value will be distributed 
Amicable resolution

It is possible to find common ground during a divorce, providing both parties 
are open to finding an amicable resolution and some due diligence has been done 
in advance:


 * Have well-drafted contractual documents in place, covering the terms of the 
working relationship and how it can come to an end 
 * Keep clear and distinct financial records, covering monies paid in and 
withdrawn. Clearly record any loans made to the company and document the terms 
for the repayment of that loan 
 * Instruct lawyers and good accountants, who are known to resolve issues, 
rather than litigate 
 * Consider exploring mediation and/or arbitration to discuss matters 
Above all, any business founders should have their house in order to protect 
the enterprise and themselves. Clear legal documents mean that if a divorce 
does materialise, the business interests can be unravelled fairly, as easily as 
possible.

Karen Holden is the founder of A City Law Firm <http://www.acitylawfirm.com/>


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 