
"It's better to celebrate life than death," opined my new best friend, sitting 
next to me on a bar stool and clutching a bottle of Samuel Adams lager at 
Alberto's Ristorante in Hyannis, Massachusetts. I had driven the 90 minutes 
south from Boston that morning, and now we were bonding over littleneck clams 
and dead presidents.

On 22 November, the world's attention will focus on Dallas, where 50 years 
ago, 46-year-old John Fitzgerald Kennedy was assassinated at 12.30pm central 
standard time.

In New England, they prefer to concentrate on happier memories of the local 
hero, who was born in a Boston suburb and summered with his family in Hyannis 
Port. And at Newport, Rhode Island, an hour down the coast, where his wife 
Jackie spent much of her childhood, think of iconic images of a dapper, tanned 
JFK sailing his boat, the Honey Fitz – sunglasses tilted back over perfectly 
coiffured hair, bronzed legs protruding from a pair of crisp, white shorts, or 
playing on a beach with his young children … the photos were probably taken at 
one of these two seaside towns.

This stretch of the New England coastline still attracts hordes of summer 
visitors, with its sailing, lobster feasts and a presidential legacy that 
blankets the area with an iconic sense of cool.

Every summer the Kennedys would make the 70-mile trip south along the Pilgrims 
Highway out of Boston to their estate (or compound, as it was known) beside the 
sea in Hyannis Port. From 4 July to Labor Day, in early September, the area 
throbs with visitors, drawn by the pretty, unspoilt beaches, en route to catch 
a ferry to Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard, or hoping to probe the Camelot 
myths created by Jackie after JFK's death.
 Photograph: Kindra Clineff 
Hyannis is home to a small presidential museum and monument (
jfkhyannismuseum.org <http://jfkhyannismuseum.org/>), as well as a 
quintessential slice of middle America along Main Street, with its collection 
of mom'n'pop cafes, restaurants and shops. Nearby are the stunning beaches of 
the 44,000-acre Cape Cod National Seashore, a national park created by JFK in 
1961, during the first year of his presidency.

Once on the Cape Cod peninsula, the Kennedys often dined at the Captain's 
Table at the Hyannis Yacht Club (hyannisyachtclub.org 
<http://www.hyannisyachtclub.org/>), and at Baxter's (baxterscapecod.com 
<http://www.baxterscapecod.com/>), a restaurant built over the water by the 
harbour, where you can still sit on the deck, butter from a lobster dribbling 
down your chin, pondering not what Americans could do for their country, but 
what an extra portion of French fries and homemade coleslaw will do to their 
waistlines.

I chose the cheap and cheerful Spanky's Clam Shack (spankysclamshack.com 
<http://spankysclamshack.com/>) for lunch, though, as it was right next to the 
departure point for an hour-long boat trip around Lewis Bay on the MV Patience (
hylinecruises.com <http://hylinecruises.com/>), the easiest way to see the 
Kennedy estate, which comprises six acres of waterfront properties first built 
in 1904 along Nantucket Sound. It was here that JFK fell asleep at 3am on 
election night in November 1960 with the result in the balance. The next 
morning he was woken by his daughter, Caroline, with the words "Good morning, 
Mr President", and the secret service stationed outside. And it was here that 
he entertained (and escaped the chains of office) by sailing. "I always go to 
Hyannis Port to be revived," he said, "to know again the power of the sea and 
the master who rules over it and all of us."
 Photograph: David Fox 
I craned my neck to see the cluster of homes that were owned by brothers John, 
Ted and Bobby. (Ethel, the latter's widow, now in her 80s, still uses theirs.) 
It's the closest view you can get – from the road, it's just the gate and 
hedges – and where you can imagine the president launching his sailing boat, 
throwing a ball to John Junior or oohing and aahing with the kids at 4 July 
fireworks.

Back on Main Street Hyannis, the cosy bar at the back of Alberto's restaurant (
albertos.net <http://www.albertos.net/>) was a good spot to chat about the 
former president. The general feeling towards Kennedy is of local pride, a life 
and opportunities wasted, and – with the recentUS government shutdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/23/us-shutdown-congress> in 
full swing – a sense of bewilderment and embarrassment at how the current 
politicians are behaving.

A 90-minute drive west, Newport, Rhode Island, is the self-proclaimed "sailing 
capital of the world" and site of many gaudily impressive, late-19th-century 
mansions built for American industrialists – the Vanderbilt and Astor families 
and their peers. Even now you can picture the playground for the wealthy that 
was once the Newport scene. It was at Hammersmith Farm that Jackie grew up, and 
where she and John held their wedding reception, with a receiving line that 
lasted nearly four hours. Their daughter Caroline kept her pony, Macaroni, on 
the farm, and it was here that JFK plotted a course through the final throes of 
the Cuban missile crisis in the autumn of 1962. Today, the best way of getting 
a glimpse of Hammersmith Farm is on a rather more egalitarian trolley bus tour (
vikingtoursnewport.com <http://www.vikingtoursnewport.com/>).

John and Jackie's marriage ceremony took place in Newport, at the solid, 
19th-century St Mary's Church (stmarynewport.org <http://stmarynewport.org/>) 
on William Street, where you can still push open the door and wander in to see 
the small Kennedy plaque on pew number 10. During my visit, the priest was too 
busy sweeping the floor to notice me, or perhaps just too jaded… there was a 
steady flow of Kennedy tourists. On the wedding day itself, Jackie's father was 
allegedly too drunk to lead her down the aisle, so he was shipped off in an 
ambulance and her stepfather was drafted in at the last minute.
 JFK with Jackie and daughter Caroline at Hyannisport, Massachusetts, 1959. 
Photograph: CORBIS 
From Cape Cod, it's an easy drive across the bridge into Boston, where local 
historian David O'Donnel, who has an encyclopedic knowledge of Kennedy and his 
family, leads two-hour tours on foot around the city centre (kennedytour.com 
<http://kennedytour.com/>). Starting from the open spaces of Boston Common and 
finishing in the North End (now an Italian neighbourhood, but once Irish), the 
tour is a good orientation – and proof that the nickname "America's walking 
city" is well deserved. As well as exploring JFK's local haunts, David 
highlights locations that were instrumental in the rise of Irish political 
power in the city from the late 1800s onwards, including those that played host 
to JFK's grandfather.

The tour finishes near the Union Oyster House (unionoysterhouse.com 
<http://unionoysterhouse.com/>), which claims to be America's oldest 
restaurant, established in 1826, and which from the outside has "ye olde 
tourist trappe" written all over it. Inside, my fears prove unfounded, as I 
read my guidebook over a bowl of New England clam chowder, JFK's favourite 
dish, in "the Kennedy Booth", his regular newspaper-reading spot (just look for 
the flashbulbs popping in the corner, the small plaque and flag, not to mention 
the sign hanging from the ceiling).

If you want to go the whole Kennedy hog, pop by the Omni Parker House hotel (
omnihotels.com <http://www.omnihotels.com/FindAHotel/BostonParkerHouse.aspx>) 
on School Street. Legend has it that in the somewhat dour restaurant, at table 
40 in the corner, John proposed to Jacqueline Bouvier in May 1953 with a 
2.88-carat diamond and emerald ring. The public areas of the hotel have a dimly 
lit, old-school, pre-Mad Men feel: it's not too hard to imagine JFK and his 
buddies tipsily weaving their way along the first floor corridors from the 
Press Room, where he held his stag do in 1953. It's alleged that one of the 
stags, Senator George Smathers, fell out of a window and smashed his ankle, but 
what goes on tour ...

That afternoon, I rode the T (Boston's subway train) to Coolidge Corner 
station in Brookline, then walked along leafy, affluent streets to 83 Beals 
Street, a wooden clapboard house with a garden. Number 83 is JFK's birthplace (
nps.gov/jofi <http://www.nps.gov/jofi/index.htm>), the house where Kennedy 
matriarch Rose famously ruled with an iron fist, and now a museum administered 
by the government: when I was there a few weeks ago, it was closed due to the 
government shutdown, and I could only peek through the windows. When the 
elected representatives of the American people aren't squabbling among 
themselves, you can take a 30-minute guided tour of the property and watch 
videos relating to the presi2dent.

The most impressive presidential site in Boston, however, is the large, white 
marble, IM Pei-designed John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum (
jfklibrary.org <http://www.jfklibrary.org/>), situated near the harbour 
entrance into which Kennedy's forefathers sailed from Ireland. Here, I pored 
over vintage movie footage and memorabilia, with a recreation of the Chicago TV 
studio where Kennedy and Richard Nixon took part in the first televised 
presidential debate in 1960, and a presentation on the Cuban missile crisis, 
including the map on which the president plotted events. I enjoyed the more 
personal items, such as the coconut on which Kennedy carved a rescue message 
during the second world war, after his ship was sunk by a Japanese destroyer in 
the Solomon Islands, and a series of taped interviews Jackie gave in 1964 that 
were sealed for almost half a century and only made public two years ago.

As I left for Boston airport, the weather had shifted, almost overnight. 
Summer was over, the trees were shedding their leaves: autumn had arrived and 
there was a chill in the air. Seasons, like lives, can end too quickly.
 