
According to convention, travel writers work alone. But when John Steinbeck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnsteinbeck> set out in 1960 on a journey 
across 37 US states, he wanted some company, and perhaps even a little 
protection. Charley, his 10-year-old blue standard poodle, seemed the ideal 
road buddy. Steinbeck travelled in a van that he called Rocinante, after Don 
Quixote's horse. The result was Travels With Charley, Steinbeck's account of 
his search for America.

Steinbeck had achieved fame and acclaim for his realist novels of the 1930s 
which were bleak tales of working-class struggle in the Depression years. 
Success brought him a comfortable New York lifestyle and international travel. 
Meanwhile, the US changed. At 58, Steinbeck felt he had lost touch with his own 
country and felt compelled to reconnect.

Avoiding most of the tourist sights, Steinbeck sought out the mundane, funny, 
depressing and beautiful corners of what he describes as "this monster land". 
He drinks a toast with migrant workers in Maine, shares a pew with the faithful 
in Vermont, enthuses over cheese in Wisconsin and despairs at the ugly racism 
at the school gates of New Orleans. He cogitates about burgers, trailer parks 
and truck drivers, and muses at length about dogs.

Steinbeck kept dogs throughout his life. One of them, an Irish setter called 
Toby, chewed up half of the only manuscript of Of Mice And Men. In a letter to 
his agent, the author was magnanimous towards the mutt: "The poor little fellow 
may have been acting critically," he explained.

Being a writer of empathy and humanity, not to mention a wee overdose of 
imagination, Steinbeck gives a detailed account of Charley's foibles, 
preferences and prejudices. Intelligent and well-mannered, Charley is more than 
just a travelling companion; he is integral to the project. The dog helps break 
the ice with strangers: "Charley is my ambassador," writes Steinbeck.

Born Charles le Chien in Bercy, on the outskirts of Paris, he speaks a little 
poodle-English but prefers French, "otherwise he has to translate, and that 
slows him down". Charley is a dog who chooses diplomacy over aggression and is 
prone to vanity when groomed. He doesn't like to be subjected to baby speak 
because "he feels that he is a first-rate dog and has no wish to be a 
second-rate human". Charley wants to be judged according to doggy rather than 
human standards of achievement. He can't read or drive a car, but "in his own 
field of endeavour, he has no peer". Steinbeck finds refinement and sensitivity 
where others might see only sniffing and peeing. Charley's "delicate exploring 
nose" reads messages that are "perhaps as important in endless time as these 
pen scratches I put down on perishable paper."

Steinbeck respects dog wisdom - "In some areas Charley is more intelligent 
than I am" - but even the cleverest poodle can occasionally fall short of the 
expectations of a Pulitzer and soon-to-be Nobel prize winner. Steinbeck is 
annoyed with the dog for not appreciating the magnificence of redwoods and is 
surprised at his canine indecorum when he bares his teeth and barks fiercely at 
bears in Yellowstone National Park - "For the first time in his life, Charley 
resisted reason." Steinbeck writes about his one-sided conversations, his 
fretting over Charley's ailments, and the comfort of canine company. But 
Travels With Charley is only partly a portrait of one man and his dog; it is 
the human condition that most concerned Steinbeck. As is inevitable in any 
relationship in which one partner is speechless, Steinbeck projects his own 
feelings on to the dog. While he is broadly in favour of people, he sometimes 
despairs of human folly. It is in one of these darker moments that he looks 
down at Charley and writes, "I am convinced that basically dogs think humans 
are nuts."
 