
The Northern Division club OOH Lincoln have emerged as surprise but serious 
contenders for a place in the new Super League, which is set to start in 2011. 
The club chairman, Geoff Adams, initially the most vocal of sceptics of the 
Football Association's vision of an eight-team elite league to be played during 
the summer, has now embraced the concept to the extent thatLincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> (the acronym OOH is from the 
club sponsor Ray Trew's "Out Of Home" company) will be making a "massive" bid 
to become founder members.

"The whole idea was anathema to me originally," admitted Adams, "but I've 
spoken to a lot of people since it was first mooted and I now believe that we 
should be involved. In women's football terms we shall have an almost unlimited 
budget, and we'll be putting in a massive bid."

Lincoln's efforts are being co-ordinated by the sports marketing consultant 
Fiona Green, who in the past has worked in the men's game on a consultancy 
basis for Manchester United, Real Madrid and Milan. "The bid is being based on 
solid business principles," said Green, "and with the club's main sponsor 
making a significant commitment for the next 10 years we have excellent backing 
and the finances in place to compete strongly with much higher-profile names 
than Lincoln for a place in the league."

The Football League club Lincoln City, whose Sincil Bank stadium would become 
the women's home ground if they are accepted into the Super League, are also 
backing the bid. The chairman, Steff Wright, said: "It's a great opportunity 
for them. We are very supportive of their proposals and we'll do what we can to 
help."

If successful in their bid then Lincoln would be playing top-level football 
for the first time in the club's history. Their Northern Division game at 
Manchester City was postponed at the weekend, when in the top flight Sunderland 
regained the leadership with a 2-0 victory over Chelsea. Blues dropped to 
second place while Doncaster climbed to third with a 3-1 win against Birmingham 
in the only other game played.
 