 The everyday use of a piece of simple computer technology placed this 
newspaper at the centre of a storm last week, providing the twitchy global 
community of conspiracy theorists with enough material for a whole conference 
and prompting a record number of visits to our website.
Our exclusive front-page lead reported that a secret document, leaked to us, 
showed that the US administration was conducting a secret surveillance campaign 
against United Nations Security Council delegates in its battle to win votes in 
favour of war onIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>.

The memorandum, written by a top official at the National Security Agency 
(NSA), gave orders to agents to step up surveillance on delegations from 
Angola, Cameroon, Chile, Bulgaria, Guinea and Pakistan.

Trouble began when we reproduced part of the memo on the front page and the 
full document on our website. In preparing the story, the memo had been typed 
into our computer system and a spell check run against it, which changed the 
American spellings of 'favorable', 'emphasize', 'recognize' to UK-style 
'favourable', 'emphasise and 'recognise'. The date on the document was also 
changed from the US style 2003/01/31 to 31/01/2003.

The story drew a swift and furious reaction from the US. 

'Any paper that would change date, spelling and content then call a document 
authentic isn't worth fishwrap. Your paper, politics, and reporting are 
contemptible...' 'Your paper is full of baloney. You have never gotten hold of 
secret emails from our NSA and you never will. All of you Europeans seem afraid 
of a measly little dictator. Get some balls about yourselves. Stand up and face 
the big bully...'

By 3am on Sunday, only hours after the paper appeared, the Drudge Report, the 
US website which shot to fame when it broke the Monica Lewinsky scandal, was 
alleging that The Observer had smeared the US government.

A reader wrote: 'I think The Observer has done itself a major disservice by 
automatically changing the spellings used - unless, of course, the memo has 
been fabricated, as Drudge certainly implies. I don't believe you did; in the 
current climate of paranoia and knee-jerk patriotic zeal abroad in the US, 
however, such an accusation will find ready believers.' How true.

The American spellings were restored on our website, with an explanation, but 
conspiracy theorists were not satisifed.

'You guys have the best comedy running! You try to defend your obvious 
fairytale by saying you had to translate a supposed NSA memo so the British 
populace would understand it? Face it - you fabricated a story.'

After consulting reporters, our web editor emailed Drudge, putting the record 
straight on the spelling and telling him that the paper had spent three weeks 
verifying the document and stood by the story. Drudge changed his piece to 
read: 'Spelling alterations and typographical slip-ups notwithstanding, editors 
of The Observer are standing tough behind the paper's investigation.'

www.observer.co.uk <http://www.observer.co.uk> recorded 964,373 page 
impressions on Sunday and another 800,000 over the next three days. This was a 
record. Papers from Chile to Spain, Australia to Canada picked up on the story 
after seeing all the attention on the web.

'What this again shows is just how quickly the web disseminates information 
around the world,' says our website editor. 'Immediately we publish something, 
it is picked up and commented on in any number of different forums.'

Just a decade ago, to know how an issue was being covered in different places 
around the world would have been very difficult for somebody who was not a 
foreign correspondent or media expert. Now, readers can instantly compare and 
contrast coverage at home with howa story is being covered in Britain or 
Europe, creating a global marketplace for ideas, news - and, unfortunately, 
misunderstandings.

Write to Stephen Pritchard, Readers' Editor, The Observer, 119 Farringdon 
Road, London EC1R 3ER, tel 0207-713 4656 Mon-Fri, fax 0207-713 4279 or email 
reader@observer.co.uk More reaction to the UN espionage story online at
www.observer.co.uk/readerseditor <http://www.observer.co.uk/readerseditor>
 