
According to one encyclopaedia fog may be defined as "a cloud that touches the 
ground reducing the visibility to less than 1,100 yards". We have had a "cloud 
touching the ground" in London for the last two days which has frequently 
reduced the visibility to eleven inches or less and which shows no signs of 
lifting. The traffic standstill is almost absolute in Central London, bus 
services have been cancelled wholesale, and travellers must depend on the 
underground, which is running almost normally but much overcrowded. All over 
London there are abandoned cars whose drivers have given up the struggle, and 
by six o'clock tonight almost all traffic had ceased, leaving the streets to 
walkers playing a dangerous form of blind man's buff with each other. At Hyde 
Park Corner last night the chaos was complete, and it was the same at the 
Elephant and Castle today when the police found it impossible, for a time, to 
disentangle the traffic locked in the dark, beyond aid from traffic lights, 
flares, or constables with torches.

The Great North Road at Highgate, its highest point often escapes fogs which 
lie low around the river, but this afternoon it was dead and empty, without 
buses, trolley buses, or lorries. Many homes in this part of London were 
without milk today.

Tomorrow's Danger

The fog is as thick as any Northerner has ever seen it, but not as acrid. You 
can still breathe in moderation, even though movement is difficult. The 
prospects for tomorrow are appalling, unless a breeze springs up, for today's 
troubles have been minor ones compared to what might happen tomorrow if the bus 
services are curtailed and if motorists try to get into Central London. Their 
associations are warning them to keep out, but the business of the City cannot 
cease just because of a fog, and for everyone who decided to stay at home 
thousands would have to travel. If the fog tomorrow is like today's they might, 
with some difficulty, arrive - but the problem of getting them home after 
nightfall (except by underground) might prove beyond even the resources of 
London Transport.
 