
A provision for 10 days of paid domestic violence leave would far from harm 
Australia’s competitiveness, a thinktank says.

Research undertaken by the Australia Institute’s Centre for Future Work 
suggests only about 1.5% of women and 0.3% of men are likely to use such leave 
in any given year if it was available.

And offering 10 days of paid leave across all workers in Australia would cost 
in the range of $85m-$120m per year for the whole economy.

That’s less than one-fiftieth of 1% of existing payroll costs in Australia and 
less than 1% of the estimated economic costs from domestic violence, the 
institute argues in its report, released on Thursday.

Labor attacks Coalition for saying domestic violence leave an impost on economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/11/labor-attacks-coalition-minister-for-saying-domestic-violence-leave-an-impost-on-economy>
“The cost of doing nothing is enormous, since domestic violence imposes an 
ongoing economic burden every day on all segments of society, including 
governments and employers,” the centre director Jim Stanford said.

“The extra payroll costs associated with extending this provision are so tiny 
they can hardly be measured.”

The finance minister, Mathias Cormann, was recently criticised for arguing 
that such leave, which Labor and trade unions support, would damage Australia’s 
international competitiveness.

The institute says that claim – and those made by many business groups – are 
not credible.

“The costs to employers associated with those payouts are likely to be largely 
or completely offset by benefits to employers associated with the provision of 
paid domestic violence leave,” it says.

The benefits include reduced absenteeism and staff turnover, as well as 
improved productivity.

The Fair Work Commission is considering a proposal by the ACTU to extend the 
provision of up to 10 paid domestic violence leave days for victims of domestic 
violence.

The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry believes such leave could 
impose an additional cost to employers of $2bn annually.

The chamber says, overwhelmingly, bosses act with compassion towards staff 
experiencing such violence, including voluntarily granting time off work and 
access to additional leave.
 