
After the longest singles contest ever played at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon>, the old man had triumphed in one 
of the finest and most emotional matches on the Centre Court since the war.

Pancho Gonzales, aged 41, and former champion of the world but never of 
Wimbledon, beat time, weariness, and expectation in defeating Charlie Pasarell, 
the best first-day player in the tournament, as both Santana and Rosewall 
remember, 22-24, 1-6, 16-14, 6-3, 11-9. Overnight he had been two sets down, 
and altogether he played for 5 hours and 20 minutes, and for a total of 112 
games - 19 more than Jaroslav Drobny played against Budge Patty in Wimbledon's 
previous longest match 16 years ago.

It was a match that cannot be discussed in ordinary lawn tennis terms. Here 
was Gonzales, gaunt and greying, the great player, fighting desperately. On 
Tuesday night, complaining bitterly about being forced to play on in 
semi-darkness, he had been booed by sections of the crowd. Yesterday, there was 
only cheering. Pasarell, younger and stronger, challenged him all the way, and 
reached match point seven times. Gonzales was so tired that he could scarcely 
hold his racket, but he saved himself - twice from 0-40 - and went on to win 
the match. It was the kind of match that took your breath away, and moved you 
to tears at the same time.

Absolutely right

For a long time it seemed that Pasarell must win. When Gonzales, taking the 
last 11 points, finally beat him, it was absolutely the right result. The crowd 
had watched Gonzales hold on and crawl uphill until, finally, stricken with 
cramp in the final set, and moving only when necessary, he reached the winning 
post. In the end he had to win. Any other result would have been emotionally 
wrong.

The tremors of Tuesday night's argument about whether or not Captain Mike 
Gibson, the referee, was right to allow the second set to be played in the 
fading light had scarcely died away when they went on the court, and the crowd 
was clearly divided into pro- and anti-Gonzales sections. In the first half of 
the third set he drifted close to danger. Around the eighth game there were 
signs that his service was shortening, and all the pressure was coming from 
Pasarell.

The change began four games later when, at 6-5, he held the first of his nine 
points for the set. There Pasarell produced a service of the utmost ferocity 
into his stomach which made him double up defensively. Oddly, Pasarell was 
using fewer and fewer of the lobs which had served him so well in the first 
set. When chances came this way, he tended to hit his forehand nervously, and 
missed two crucial chances of breaking service at 8-8 and 10-10. At 13-14, 
Pasarell served three aces, one of them saving Gonzales' seventh set point, but 
at 14-15 he served two disastrous double faults.

Once Pasarell's service had gone, his confidence followed. As he said 
afterwards, he found Gonzales difficult to play because Gonzales had coached 
him and knew his weaknesses and had earned his respect. Gonzales, who had 
always moved as economically as possible, attacked with swifter purpose as he 
saw Pasarell wilting mentally. The fourth set hung on its seventh game, which 
was a disaster for Pasarell. Gonzales left him looking forlorn with an angled 
lob and by producing as many angles as Euclid in one rally. Pasarell finally 
lost it with a double fault.

By now the match was rather like the end of a marathon. Bruce Tulloh, having 
run across America, can hardly have looked more exhausted than Gonzales at the 
start of the last set. Time and again he leant on his racket. He regarded every 
good shot that Pasarell hit with a kind of dismal death's head face. The 
younger American, who had broken strings in his two favourite rackets, kept 
shaking his head, but he had the advantage of serving first.

The fascinating thing at this point was to see that both men were still 
capable of using every possible variation of service-spin, flow short, deep, 
fast, cut, angle, or straight-to suit the situation, and in the rallies they 
were stroking the ball rather than hitting it. If bodies were tiring, brains 
were still alert. At 4-5, after three tired points, Gonzales was 0-40 on his 
service and Pasarell was beginning to lob again. But two lobs went inches out, 
and Gonzales saved his third match point with a centre line service. This 
agonising game went to deuce seven times.

At 5-6 he was down at 0-40 again and the crowd became wilder as, with a smash, 
a sweetly angled volley, and a service, he destroyed every one of Pasarell's 
chances. Could he last any longer? All the time Pasarell seemed to be getting 
closer. He missed his seventh match point at 8-7 when he lobbed out.

By this time it looked as though Gonzales could only serve. When Pasarell 
served, the older man seemed to have lost control of his racket. Yet suddenly 
he used his last reserves of energy. Pasarell cracked and lost 11 successive 
points for the match. To Wimbledon, Gonzales has always been a world champion 
by repute. His great matches have been played elsewhere. Yesterday he showed 
the centre court what it has missed in the years when he had been unable to 
play there.
 