
Dame Marjorie Scardino <https://www.theguardian.com/media/marjoriescardino>, 
one of the UK's highest-profile female corporate leaders, is to step down as 
chief executive of Financial Times and Penguin owner Pearson at the end of 
2012, and will be replaced by the head of its international education division, 
John Fallon.

Fallon will succeed Scardino as chief executive on 1 January 2013, and joins 
thePearson <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson> board with immediate 
effect. He has been chief executive of Pearson's international education 
division since 2008 and is responsible for education businesses outside the US.

Scardino, an American-born British citizen, has been Pearson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pearson> chief executive since 1997. During 
her tenure, sales have tripled to nearly £6bn and profits grown more than three 
times to a record high of £942m in 2011, as the company focused on learning 
products and moved towards digital.

Shortly after her arrival, Scardino tidied up Pearson's conglomerate 
structure, for example selling off its historic stakes in investment bank 
Lazard, and focused the business on education and publishing. She tenaciously 
defended Pearson's ownership of the Financial Times, memorably declaring she 
would sell the business newspaper "over my dead body"; her departure will 
trigger speculation that a sale of the financial newspaper could happen.

She received cash and share awards worth £9.6m in 2011, making her Britain's 
highest-paid female director of a FTSE 100 company.

Pearson boosted pre-tax profits 72% to £1.1bn last year, thanks largely to the 
sale of its 50% stake in FTSE International. This year, it expects to generate 
more than half its revenues from digital and services businesses for the first 
time in its history, up from a third in 2011.

Education accounted for two thirds of Pearson's total £5.9bn revenue in 2011; 
the international education division generated sales of £1.4bn and operating 
profits of £196m last year.

Scardino said: "For more than 160 years, Pearson has stood for integrity, 
quality and business strength. It has been a privilege to be part of such a 
great company for a small part of its history.

"Though we've changed the company beyond recognition from its form in 1997, we 
are still in the foothills of the climb to make all kinds of learning more 
accessible and more effective for more people.

"I know that John, the board, the senior team and our 40,000 people have the 
bravery, imagination and decency to lead the company to new ways of achieving 
these goals, while holding on to the traditions and values that make Pearson 
unique."

Fallon said: "Marjorie's legacy is a company with a strong performance record, 
a deep commitment to its wider social purpose and a unique culture. I am proud 
to be part of the company; it is a tremendous honour and responsibility to be 
asked to lead it.

"Pearson has a clear position of leadership in global learning and publishing, 
with strong foundations for growth in technology, services and developing 
economies. Our challenge is to seize those opportunities in an era of 
tremendous industry change."

Before joining Pearson, Fallon was director of corporate affairs and a member 
of the executive committee at Powergen.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 