
The chief executive of Cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> 
Council Australia, Prof Sanchia Aranda, has said people need to learn that 
sunscreen is a last line of defence against ultraviolet rays and that spending 
hours in the sun in swimwear “goes against every recommendation we would make” 
– even while wearing sunscreen.

Aranda made the comments in response to reports from consumers that they or 
their children had suffered horrific burns despite using sunscreen. The Cancer 
Council’s Peppa Pig children’s sunscreen and the Banana Boat range have come 
under fire, with consumers questioning the efficacy of the brands.

A mother from Brisbane last week said her baby was treated for burns in 
hospital despite having been covered in Peppa Pig sunscreen. And Banana Boat 
issued a statement on its Facebook page on Wednesday afternoon after being 
flooded with complaints from consumers who said they had been burned despite 
using the brand’s sunscreen products.

Australia the first country in the world to see decline in skin cancer rates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/06/australia-first-country-world-decline-skin-cancer>
Similar clusters of complaints occur each year as the weather gets warmer and 
more people venture outside. Last January Banana Boat receivedsimilar attention 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/retail/mother-takes-on-banana-boat-over-childs-sunburn-20160128-gmgl26.html>
 after a mother posted to Facebook that her nine-year-old got burnt on 
Australia Day despite wearing sunscreen. Andin March 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/lifestyle/health/melbourne-woman-blames-severe-sunburn-on-faulty-banana-boat-sunscreen/news-story/1b861f828efd14a420d517878b5f001d>
 a Melbourne woman said faulty sunscreen had caused her to suffer severe 
sunburn.

But Aranda said it was more likely people were either suffering from a rare 
adverse reaction to the sunscreen, or were failing to use it properly in 
conjunction with other sun-safe measures. The issue was not that the sunscreen 
was ineffective, she said.

“Sunscreens on the market in Australia are chemical sunscreens so there is a 
risk of a reaction, and adults who previously had no reaction can suddenly 
develop a reaction,” she said. “International research shows that less than 1% 
of people have these reactions, which can be very severe and can look like 
serious sunburn.”

But the predominant problem was the way people applied sunscreen, she said. 


“People see it as a suit of armour,” she said. “But when you see someone 
wearing a bikini and out in sun for six hours one would expect to get burned, 
even with sunscreen on. It’s against every recommendation we would make.

Does sunscreen prevent skin cancer?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/13/sunscreen-prevent-skin-cancer>
“Sunscreen should be a last line of defence and used with a rashie, 
sunglasses, a hat and people should also stay in the shade as much as possible. 
Sunscreen should be used on top of these measures and applied sensibly, every 
two hours.”

In 2015 the consumer advocacy group Choice tested six SPF 50+ sunscreens and 
found four failed to meet the stated sun protection factor claims on pack, 
including two Banana Boat products.

But those products still came in at SPF42. Aranda said this would still be 
plenty to protect people if they were using the sunscreens properly and were 
not allergic to them. “You have to understand that 50+ sunscreen isn’t hugely 
better than 30+,” she said. “50+ gives you 96.5% filter and 30+ gives you a 95% 
filter. Our recommendation is that sunscreens need to be 30+ or above.”

Aranda said it was important to note sunscreen tests were conducted in a 
laboratory and that while products may meet the standards for 50+ in that 
setting, “the lab doesn’t mimic what happens when you use it on the beach when 
you’re sweating and swimming and using towels to dry”.

She added that people should always patch-test sunscreen on babies and 
children, who she said should not be taken into the sun, especially without 
other protection, anyway. Sunscreen should be applied 20 minutes before going 
into the sun, reapplied every two hours, and at least a teaspoon needed to be 
used on each limb. Consumers should also store their product below 30 degrees 
and ensure it had not expired.

A Choice spokesman, Tom Godfrey, said to be sold in Australia all sunscreens 
had to be listed with Australia’s drug regulator, the therapeutic goods 
administration. In order to be listed, manufacturers have to test the product 
according to the Australian standard to ensure it meets the claimed SPF.


The plural of anecdote isn’t data. People don’t check the accuracy of their 
claims against the evidence.

“It’s concerning we are still seeing reports of consumers being badly burnt 
after using sunscreen,” Godfrey said. “Clearly the companies selling these 
products need to work with the regulator to find out what is causing the 
problem.”

But Dr Nial Wheate, a pharmaceutical chemist at the University of Sydney, said 
it was “frustrating” to see allegations of the sunscreens themselves being 
ineffective cropping up every summer. “One thing will happen to one person and 
they will post it on social media, and suddenly other people will make the same 
conclusion that their burns must have been caused by the same product.

“But the plural of anecdote isn’t data. People don’t check the accuracy of 
their claims against the evidence. And that’s how people like Donald Trump get 
elected as president, and why we have an anti-vaccination movement.”

He said people genuinely believed they were helping other consumers by sharing 
their stories. But he advised people to see their pharmacist or doctor if they 
were concerned rather than posting to social media.

More education about how sunscreens should be used was not the answer, he 
said. “How much should we be spending to ensure people understand sunscreens? 
There’s so much information out there that I think it’s more important to teach 
people scientific literacy, and from a young age.”

Hugh Jackman posts sun safety appeal after getting skin cancer removed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/09/hugh-jackman-posts-sun-safety-appeal-after-getting-skin-cancer-removed>
Two out of three Australians will get a skin cancer by the age of 70. 
Sunscreen use over the period of one decade will prevent 16,000 skin cancers 
this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/13/sunscreen-prevent-skin-cancer>
, including 1700 melanomas.

In 2014 melanoma rates in Australians under 40 began declining for the first 
time, largely thanks to use of sun protection and heeding to “slip, slop, slap” 
messaging.

In its statement, Banana Boat said its “number one priority” was the safety of 
sun protection. “We are very sorry to hear that some customers have been 
unhappy with certain Banana Boat products,” it said.

“To date, we have never found any issues with our product range. It may seem 
like there are a lot of complaints but we have sold millions of sunscreens each 
year to many satisfied customers. In the cases where we have retrieved the 
product that was used and conducted additional testing the results have not 
shown an issue with efficacy.”
 