
Pep Guardiola wished the assembled media a happy new year at the start of his 
post-match press conference and extended the seasonal goodwill message to their 
families when he left the Anfield stage. It was a nice touch by the Manchester 
City manager but the niceties were part of a performance better than that 
produced by his team at Liverpool and exposed by an angry, exasperated exchange 
with Txiki Begiristain shortly afterwards. There was no goodwill to be found in
defeat by Jürgen Klopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/liverpool-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 and falling 10 points adrift of Chelsea, the leaders.

Press duties completed, Guardiola headed back to the makeshift dressing rooms 
in the bowels of Anfield’s new main stand where he met Begiristain, City’s 
director of football and a man with some serious questions to answer over the 
club’s expensive and erratic recruitment drive. Guardiola, pacing up and down, 
scratched his head, pulled at his tie and began punching his fist into the palm 
of his hand as he dissected City’s display with his former Barcelona colleague. 
They have trailed and recovered before but that was at a club attuned to 
Guardiola’s methods and vice-versa. A revealing glimpse into genuine 
frustration and the performance that provoked it were reminders of how much 
work is required to recreate that understanding at the Etihad Stadium.

Georginio Wijnaldum gives Liverpool deserved win against Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/liverpool-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
“The manager was angry at half‑time,” Yaya Touré admitted. “When you are 
losing like that and Liverpool are the better side then it’s not going to be 
happy at half-time. It was disappointing and we all felt that. Of course he is 
going to be angry. He is a manager who can be angry. We have to sometimes 
improve and react to situations, and of course we knewLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> would be waiting when we lost 
the ball and they did that to score. So he will be angry for everything that is 
happening.

“We are not going to be perfect. There are times when we won’t take 
opportunities but we can take opportunities from this too. Anfield is not easy 
but we can learn from this and what the manager says about it. When you lose 
games, what do you have to do? You are disappointed and you want to bounce 
back. We don’t want to let the gap grow much more between us and Liverpool, 
Arsenal and Tottenham. So we have to react. We will use it – we are not going 
to give up. We will go to the end.”

Touré and co responded to their manager’s criticism, controlling possession in 
the second half and forcing Liverpool into a retreat when David Silva switched 
to the centre in place of the subdued Kevin De Bruyne, but not to the extent of 
creating one chance of note. Klopp’s team were restricted as an attacking 
threat, too, but having punished City’s weakness in the air early, when 
Georginio Wijnaldum produced an outstanding leap and header to convert Adam 
Lallana’s eighth-minute cross, their compact shape held firm.

The Liverpool manager had bemoaned the freedom with which Joe Allen roamed 
between his midfield and defence in theirprevious outing, against Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/liverpool-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
. He ensured there was no repeat against Manchester City with a more protective 
midfield trio of Wijnaldum, Jordan Henderson and Emre Can. Raheem Sterling, 
fading amid the hostility that greeted his latest return to Anfield, De Bruyne, 
Silva, in the first half, and Sergio Agüero, throughout his first appearance in 
28 days, were comprehensively shackled. Klopp had the answers to City’s array 
of individual talents.

His team have collected 13 points from 18 while Philippe Coutinho has been 
injured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/philippe-coutinho-liverpool-out-six-weeks-ankle-injury>
 and, as the Brazilian nears fitness, so Liverpool have emerged as formidable 
challengers to Chelsea. Klopp said it must be annoying for Antonio Conte’s team 
to have won 13 consecutive league games and still found Liverpool hanging on 
six points behind. Equally, how annoying must it be to have won 12 of the last 
16 league games and sit second?

“We came from eighth position last year so we don’t think about being champion 
or whatever this year, but we are much better than last year and the position 
is completely different,” said Klopp. “We are fine. If anyone else thought we 
had to be champion this year then maybe it seems different to them but we are 
fine. We are where we are and if it ends there then cool.

Liverpool 1-0 Manchester City: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/31/liverpool-v-manchester-city-premier-league-live>
“If we are still there five matches before the end and are only a few points 
behind then we will think about something else but not in this moment. I’m not 
like this. I have had much more difficult situations in my life than being 
second in a very difficult league. We are happy about our way and what the rest 
is doing we can have no influence on until we play them. That’s all we can do. 
I’m not annoyed. Not for one second.

“I won a league twice and I honestly didn’t think about the opportunity until 
really late. We have targets. We are ambitious. You saw it again against City 
how ambitious the boys are but talking about it doesn’t bring you one point. 
You have to work. When you see the final line and if you are still in and 
around then the pressure will increase. You could see the pressure here – not 
because we didn’t want to lose the game but because we wanted to win it. That 
is really pressure against a very good side. You do the analysis and think: ‘Oh 
my God, I don’t want to show the boys all of this because they are a really 
good side.’ I know there is criticism of their defending or whatever but they 
play some of the best football in the world and you have to defend it. We did 
it. I’m happy with our situation in the table at the moment.”

Klopp can be content not only with Liverpool’s league position but how his 
team have developed rapidly according to his managerial ideals. Guardiola, 
between the new year wishes, admitted he is unsure when City will do likewise. 
“I don’t know, I’m not able to tell you that,” he said. “Jürgen is here more 
than one season, more than one year. I’ve been here just six months and the way 
we want to play in the league is not that simple. We need a little bit more 
time but I’m a guy who is so optimistic and we’re going to try.”
 