
US government agencies are working on temporary rules to allow a private 
company to land a spacecraft on the moon next year, while Congress weighs a 
more permanent legal framework to govern future commercial missions to the 
moon, Mars and other destinations beyond Earth’s orbit, officials said.

Plans by private companies to land spacecraft on the moon or launch them out 
of Earth’s orbit face legal obstacles because the US has not put in place 
regulations to govern space activities, said industry and government officials.

“We do not have formal authority today to deal with what happens on orbit or 
on other planetary terrestrial bodies. That’s the issue that we’re wrestling 
with,” said George Nield, head of the Federal Aviation Administration’s office 
of commercial space transportation.

“What is being looked at right now is a Band-Aid fix because the system is 
broken,” Nield said at an American Bar Association space law forum in 
Washington on Wednesday.

Asteroid mining could be space’s new frontier: the problem is doing it legally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/06/asteroid-mining-space-minerals-legal-issues>
A 1967 international treaty obliges the US and other signatories to authorize 
and supervise space activities by its non-government entities. But no US agency 
has authority to regulate commercial space activities outside of rocket 
launches, spacecraft re-entries into the atmosphere and operations of 
telecommunications and remote sensing satellites in Earth orbit.

The issue is coming to a head in part because of a request by Florida-based 
Moon Express for permission from the US government to land a spacecraft on the 
moon in 2017. So far, only government agencies have flown satellites beyond 
Earth’s orbit.

 “No commercial company has ever asked to go outside of Earth orbit and go 
elsewhere before. We’re a pathfinder out of necessity,” Moon Express’s chief 
executive, Bob Richards, said in an interview on Monday.

Richards and Nield declined to comment on what specifically Moon Express is 
proposing.

Other countries are moving faster to establish rules for space launches in 
compliance with international treaties. Luxembourg last week announced it was 
partnering with two US companies interested inmining asteroids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/03/luxembourg-aims-to-be-big-player-in-possible-asteroid-mining>
 and set aside €200m ($226m) to woo space firms to relocate. The United Arab 
Emirates also intends to serve as a commercial space haven.

“We don’t want to create the environment where there’s a competitive advantage 
for payloads to go overseas,” said space attorney Michael Gold, who chairs the 
Federal Aviation Administration’s commercial space advisory panel.
 