
Wimbledon's great day had arrived, that set apart for the final of the men's 
singles. The excitement that had simmered for nearly two weeks was at boiling 
point to-day. Was Perry to retain his championship and repel the challenge of 
G. von Cramm and at the same time make a record in playing though and winning 
in two consecutive years? One had seen Cramm, knew about Perry's win in Paris 
over the German champion, and knew also that victory had been won on a hard 
court, so different from the fiery, fast and glassy surface of the wornWimbledon
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> centre court. The crowd was 
dense, the centre court gates locked, the weather ideal. There was a 
'curtain-raiser' in the shape of a women's doubles semi-final, which was 
regarded indulgently, but one's thoughts were on the struggle to come.

When one's own nationality is at grips with another, when your own champion is 
contesting a great title with another champion, then your interest ceases to be 
academic, you hope, and you fear, and you do both greatly. The crowd needed no 
admonition to "Keep quiet, please", the match was played to hushed attention, 
one and all being intent on the play, the score, appreciating the power of the 
challenger, knowing that victory called for the best Perry, and praying that 
the great Perry should dwell on the court not part of the time but all the 
time. Their prayer was granted, for Perry won his second consecutive Wimbledon 
championship, beating Cramm 6-2, 6-4, 6-4.

There are many finals which are not great matches. The occasion sometimes is 
greater than the quality of the play. Not so to-day. The crowd was given a 
lovely display of great lawn tennis by two great players, and Perry played like 
a great champion, fit to take his place with the great of all time in the game, 
not merely because he won but because of the manner of his winning and on a 
just estimate of the player he defeated.

An indispensable attribute for a champion is accuracy, and rarely has Perry 
been so accurate. That forehand of his was magnificent, whether to the backhand 
corner, down the line, or across court. In particular one recalls his mastery 
over the cross-court return on the forehand at an acute angle, recalls the last 
game, in which, when leading 5-4, Perry stood love-thirty on his own service 
and levelled on two such returns, made off shots that in themselves looked 
winners; returns which were within inches of the line, beat Cramm, as they 
would have beaten anybody, and caused Borotra to declare that they were the two 
finest consecutive shots he had ever seen. That early stroke on which Perry 
loves to come to the net was working smoothly, his volleying was excellent, and 
he never failed to kill a smash. Examine a game as one would, there was no 
weakness.

Cramm also played great lawn tennis, but not great enough. In particular the 
accuracy that marked Perry's play did not uniformly distinguish Cramm.

In the first set Cramm began uncertainly. There was a great fight for the 
fourth game on Perry's service, which ran to six deuces before Perry led 3-1 
and then 4-1. Perry's forehand was magnificent. How well he took Cramm's fine 
service and how well he played from the baseline in running to 5-1! Cramm 
served himself another game and then Perry took the first set after being 15-40 
down on his own service; both men in turn raced for the net and Cramm finally 
found the tram-lines. This was indeed great going, but would Perry keep it up? 
Cramm now decided that he would not wage battle from the back of the court and 
decided to make for the net. Perry accepted the challenge, which made the game 
yet more furious and more exciting. Cramm led 2-1 and 3-2; then Perry showed 
his mettle and took two consecutive love games, and Cramm found his rhythm 
disturbed by the sight of that little figure racing for the net. The German 
then captured Perry's service and the score was four all. Truly Cramm was 
great, and in all departments of the game! His service to follow too. Not so 
nice for Perry's supporters, but they need not have worried, for Perry took the 
enemy's service with the loss of only one point, and after being love-thirty 
down on his own ran out a winner. Two sets none.

What beautiful lawn tennis it had been, those two graceful athletes tearing 
for the net in turn, and how could one elude such clever and agile volleyers? 
Perry showed all sorts of ways, by finding the tram-lines, lobbing out of 
reach, or playing that slow backhand cross-shot such as Crawford used when he 
slew Vines in the Wimbledon final two years ago. This had been fast work, for 
the two sets were over in forty minutes.

The third set was the closest set. The pace was just as fast, the two seasoned 
athletes abating nothing of their fire. Two games all, but what bitter games 
some of them were! Cramm led 3-1 on his own service after being love-40. Then 
Perry levelled on his after six deuces and for the course of that game there 
had been passing shots by Cramm which left Perry standing at the net and caused 
him to open wide his mouth in astonishment. Perry's forehand levelled the games 
and then Perry broke through Cramm's service, Germany losing the game on three 
consecutive failures to volley at the net, one an easy one. Cramm was shaken 
for a moment, and Perry served finely and served and led 4-2. Cramm served yet 
more finely and took a love game, so that Perry now led 4-3. Then 5-3 on his 
service, which was excellent.

Five-three and two sets up. The crowd felt happy, but such was their 
appreciation (a just one) of Cramm that they were not taking anything for 
granted. In the next game on Cramm's service, match-point arrived and was saved 
and Perry led only 5-4. For Cramm served grandly , his high serving being 
particularly awkward to handle though for the most part Perry showed how it 
could be done.

Now Perry to serve 5-4. How intent and concentrated Perry was, making that 
nervous bounce of the ball before serving! He started badly and was 
love-thirty. Lose that game and it was five all and dangerous. Then came those 
two matchless forehand cross returns that left the crowd breathless and it was 
30 all. Then match-point, Cramm having hit out before the menace of Perry at 
the net. But the end was not yet; it arrived only on the third match-point, 
when Cramm's return fell over the baseline.

Perry had won and the crowd let him know what they thought of his performance 
as he came out of his fierce concentration and for a moment looked around the 
centre court and then perhaps fully realised what had happened, and with 
obvious pleasure received the homage of his admirers. The undisputed master 
player of the world, with the finest figure and the finest stamina.

The crowd was sated. Anything that could follow was doubtless agreeable to 
watch, but their capacity for great emotion was exhausted.

The men's doubles finalists are Allison and Van Rym and Crawford and Quist. 
The American pair lost the first set to Tuckey and Hughes, but after that they 
fairly put the English pair 'through it'. What fierce volleying, what a pace 
they play the game at, how Allison revelled in running and leaping, what severe 
smashing! It was too much for the home pair and when all was over Allison, of 
course, flew over the net, jump he had to. Tuckey's backhand weakness was 
exposed and Hughes' inability to finish a rally. Then Crawford and Quist 
defeated Mako and Budge in two short sets and one of 24 games. Budge was 
excellent most of the time, Mako part of the time. Quist is a great doubles 
player and managed to look miserable all the time. Crawford was erratic, but 
when great he was very great.

Tomorrow the women fight it out. As one left the ground already there were 
people sitting and lying preparatory for their 18-hour wait for Wimbledon's 
last day. Mrs Moody v Miss Jacobs. Mrs Moody has 'come back' as far as the 
final round, that has caught everybody's imagination. Both women belong to the 
same club in Berkley, California; both are rivals, though for years it was Mrs 
Moody first and Miss Jacobs some way behind. Miss Jacobs, the official No. 1 of 
the United States, will like to show Mrs Moody that the title is no empty one. 
And behind Mrs Moody's quiet and pretty face is there not the determination to 
show Miss Jacobs "just were she gets off' to prove once again, as she has so 
often, that Mrs Moody is in one class and Miss Jacobs in another. That is how 
it was once upon a time, but two years have passed.

History can repeat itself, and Mrs Moody on that Wimbledon centre court has 
not known defeat at any woman's hand since far-off 1926, when Mrs Godfree beat 
her. She wants to equal Mrs Chambers' great record of seven victories. She 
wants to confound the critics and "come back," and above all she wants to beat 
Miss Jacobs. Miss Jacobs is determined that she shall not. This is the sort of 
spirit in which to wage a fight and for which that centre court will be full to 
overflowing.

We have an English pair left to contest the women's doubles, for Miss Stammers 
and Miss James will face Mme Mathieu and Mme Jedrzejowska, and the winners will 
play Quist and Mile. Jedrzejowska and the winners will play the Hopmans. So 
Perry has the chance of another title (what is that to him now) Miss Round an 
opportunity to redeem her reputation, and the umpire an opportunity of showing 
that the name of the Polish Champion means nothing to him.
 