
The final of the men's singles at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> was played to-day between F.J 
Perry (Great Britain), the holder, and G von Cramm (Germany). Perry won, and 
won as he liked, for Cramm sprained a muscle in his thigh on the first service 
of the match.

The two men both wore white jackets when they appeared, and neither carried 
the many rackets usually associated with the first-class player. Instead, a 
servitor, also in a short white coat, appeared in their rear, carrying rackets 
and towels for the two combatants. Perry was nervously looking behind him on 
order to be quite sure that the servitor was in due attendance.

The first game promised a grand fight; the first game in Perry's match with 
Budge yielded ten deuces and this one nine. It was Perry's service, and he was 
serving well. Each had two net cords, and Perry won it after all on a net cord 
of his own. He had made mistakes and had even double-faulted, but he was also 
making great shots and playing confidently. One game all was called, Cramm 
winning his service to thirty on a great backhand. Perry led 2-1, having served 
finely, and after that there was no fight at all. Perry never relaxed, which 
was as well, served finely and was obviously in form, for his famous forehand 
worked smoothly. One sympathised with both men on an unsatisfactory and unhappy 
final. When all was over, Perry went off with Cramm, giving the latter's hair a 
tug, presumably for sympathy, Thus Perry became champion for the third 
successive year, and all in forty minutes.

Hare and Wilde now played Borotra and Brugnon; our young 'hopes' against the 
French veterans, some forty-five years against some eighty. A heavy handicap. 
Hare played well, his serving was severe, and his forehand volley (remember he 
is left-handed) extremely destructive. His smashing was good, and so was his 
return of service. Only on the backhand was there weakness, for the stroke is 
poorly produced. Wilde also served really well; the way he gets his body into 
the service is a liberal lesson for the many servers who do not. He, too, is 
shaky on the backhand, but he plays a good double if not a great one.

Borotra at first was extremely bad; he could not move. In the second set he 
was better, smashing often as only he alone can, supported by Brugnon with his 
fine service return. France had a long lead, but only won at 6-4 on Brugnon's 
service. Borotra had keyed himself up, doing wonders in spite of the strained 
muscle, and one heard his urgent "laisse" as he instructed his partner to leave 
a lob alone. After that first set Great Britain held the upper hand, the end 
came on Wilde's service, and it was he who made the winning volleys.

The foot-fault judge was in great form; Borotra got it hot. On crossing over 
on one occasion he carefully waited before serving so that the foot-fault judge 
should be in his place. Borotra knew he could not win; he took all the rubs 
with a broad smile, not even being foot-faulted worried him. It is on the last 
two days of Wimbledon that the foot-fault rule comes to full flower.

The other semi-final was between Tuckey and Hughes and Allison and Van Ryn 
that seasoned American pair who have been champions of the United States and 
twice Wimbledon champions. Last year in the Davis Cup matches our pair beat 
them. To-day Tuckey and Hughes are a better pair than they were then, the 
Americans not so good, for the first one and then the other, sometimes both are 
liable to lapses. To-day it was Van Ryn who for over two sets was not the 
monument for regularity that he usually is. His famous service was temporarily 
absent.

We profited by the lapse. Tuckey was extremely good, his service formidable, 
scoring time after time; his forehand drive for the first two sets magnificent 
his smashing was severe. Even his stiff and strained backhand was steady. 
Hughes was in great form. One has rarely seen him serve better, and overhead he 
was decisive; indeed for the whole of the first set and until the sixth game of 
the second he did not miss a smash, which is remarkable, considering the amount 
of smashing that he did.

After two sets to our credit we started in great style by taking Allison's 
service. But Tuckey now for a time fell away. Allison improved, the old tiger 
was showing his paces, fierce serving, a rush for the net and volleys to which 
there was no reply, while overhead he was the old Allison, which says volumes. 
Van Ryn also came back into the picture. His dipping service returns dip; the 
Americans ran to 5-2. Tuckey took a love game on his service, and then the 
Americans took the third set; what looked like a good thing for our pair was 
evidently no such thing. We were two sets to one up, but America were now the 
dangerous pair. And we did it! But only after 20 games had been played.

Tuckey and Hughes are now a real pair. That means that they have the 
understanding indispensable to doubles play. The testing stroke of a doubles 
match is the smash, and on to-day's form we have two real 'killers' - a rare 
possession. And so the doubles championship will be contested by two British 
pairs. Wonderful! We have not held the doubles title since Lycett and L.A. 
Godfree took it in 1923. And before that not since Roper Barrett and Dixon in 
1913. The singles and doubles in our possession! Perhaps it reads better than 
it really is, for one remembers Cramm's injury and Borotra's, and the fact that 
Allison and Van Ryn are not the power they were. Still, we have also to 
remember what a great player Perry is and that Tuckey and Hughes on their 
present form can only be beaten by a first-rate pair.

Perry and Miss Round are in the semi-final of the mixed, having beaten Petra 
and Mme Mathieu in two close sets. The winners now meet Wilde and Miss 
Whitmarsh. Budge and Mrs. Fabyan, playing the two-up formation (of course, for 
on the volley Mrs. Fabyan is delightful), were too for Malfroy and Fru Sperling 
and beat them easily, a win that emphasises the power of this American pair. 
Perry and Miss. Round should reach the final, and their match with Budge and 
Mrs. Fabyan should be a match indeed, for Budge has a defeat to wipe out and 
Perry wants to repeat his victory of last year.

Somehow one does not think of Perry as having won - but champion he is, and 
for the third time. He is the greatest player in the world. What is also 
satisfactory is the reflection that in Hughes and Tuckey we have at last a 
really first class pair - just what we had been seeking, for the Davis Cup 
challenge round will call for the finest services. Where has Hughes learnt the 
smash we saw today? It used to be tentative; to-day it had the real American 
tang - most refreshing; Hushes must have enjoyed himself. We have a chance also 
of taking the women's doubles title, for Miss Stammers and Miss James (holder) 
meet Miss Jacobs and Mrs Fabyan. Can we do it? Such strange things have 
happened at this Wimbledon that there seems to be no good reason why we should 
not. Then we should own all the Wimbledon titles but one, and in coronation 
year! Can this be a dream?
 