
Yesterday was Wimbledon's great day, that on which the final of the men's 
singles is decided. It was blazing hot, not a cloud in the sky, but the crowd 
took all that for granted. "It is like that for Wimbledon" and they forgot the 
chequered first week. The centre court was specially rolled by seven men and a 
large roller, and one realised how worn it was, how brown it was, and how the 
baseline had suffered, but, being what it was, it played true.

The crowd was prepared to enjoy itself; Perry and Crawford, no foreigners in 
the final, a family affair, and they considered that Perry should win and that 
an Englishman should wear theWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> crown, for we had not the Davis 
Cup. And altogether it was to be a very dream of an afternoon for all those 
thousands of tennis 'fans'.

There were sound reasons for their assumption. Crawford was such an elegant 
player, no one knew better than he how to deal with savage serving, what 
control from the baseline, what a backhand! He could deliver service aces and 
one thought of that occasion last year when he beat Lee, the last three strokes 
being three successive services. He could smash, he could volley, and his 
stokes were so sure, their artistry so perfect, what flint for Perry's steel!

They also gloated on the known prowess of their own champion, what a smash he 
had, unanswerably from right to left, delivered as he leapt for it, the result 
of the uncoiling of that lithe body. How swift in action, how deadly at the 
net, no temporising with the ball, no pretty-pretty work, no torturing of the 
ball, but a swift and painless death.

They all knew about Perry's wonderful forehand too, and were able to imagine 
what it must feel like to have one of those fearful thrusts into the forehand 
corner and to know that the fellow who made it was waiting for your return (if 
you return it) at the net.

What is more the crowd now knew that Perry had a real backhand. Let Crawford 
do his worst! They were to see a great fight, indeed they fancied their own man 
and even if he lost, well... in that case let Crawford wear the crown for the 
second year, then whom there was no better sportsman, none better mannered, and 
whom the crowd loved dearly.

There was due preparation for the contest, over twenty photographers. The two 
men, Crawford a little taller and much more massive, entered together, between 
them a little, weary looking man who carried towels and rackets for the two 
champions. They then posed together at the net, old hands now at this sort of 
game; so Perry laid one hand upon the net and Crawford his left hand on his hip 
and both looked as thousands to-day know they looked.

One reflected that, fine man as Crawford is, Perry has the best figure and 
physique of any tennis player, the result not of special training but because 
he just happened to be born that way, which is the pleasant lot of all great 
athletes.

The first game was a fine one, the crowd was delighted, Crawford served, and 
was serving with great speed; he scored three service areas. Perry began to 
race for the net; it was a struggle, and game for Crawford, after a very pretty 
exhibition on both sides on some long baseline exchanges.

The fight was on. Perry took a game to love. There was Crawford leading 2-1, 
and he went to 3-1 after a fine game, with three deuces in it, and the crowd 
said that, good as Perry was, here was the great Crawford, and it settled 
itself more deliciously to watch the fight. Perry obliged, and it was three 
all, and he had only lost one point in the two games; and in the last one, with 
Crawford at the net, Perry had passed his man with a gorgeous backhand, England 
led at 4-3. There had been a fight for that game which had gone to deuce. As 
they changed over Crawford looked thoughtful. From this stage and for nine 
games Australia collapsed. The first set was lost on a double fault. The second 
was a procession for Perry, not one game going beyond thirty, two going to 
fifteen, and one to love. So Perry won with the loss of 8 points.

The crowd was dumfounded as well it might be. The Australian Davis Cup team 
and the Australian girls sat together, and their faces were sad and serious. 
Perry was magnificent, his forehand working perfectly, his backhand steady as a 
rock, he would even come up and score. His volleys drew roars of applause. The 
umpire said "Quiet please" as he would to naughty children, and, in the 
Wimbledon tradition, the crowd was promptly quiet.

The last ball of that set was a forehand cross volley, and Crawford went after 
it as it flew, and nearly fell in his effort and seemed reluctant to get up. He 
stood on his baseline waiting for the next set; no need to towel or sip, he had 
done so little, only watched the great Perry in full cry. How sympathetic the 
crowd was for Crawford; they sorrowed with him and for him that the reigning 
champion should be at such a loss; and, besides, they wanted a fight.

In the third set it looked as though the fight was really coming after all. 
Perry led one love on fine serving, and Crawford equalised on an ace, and the 
crowd cheered mightily that Australia might take heart. Perry led 2-1, then 
Crawford, coming up to volley, won a love game. The real Crawford was back. Two 
games all; no match is won till the last ball is struck, and remember how he 
had lost the first two sets to Shields.

One could imagine Crawford, as holder, determined to sell his life dearly 
indeed. Level pegging now to four games all, and some great tennis. Perry had 
on one occasion suffered from the famous backhand pass when up at the net, just 
as Vines had suffered, and bowed his head in acknowledgement. Crawford now led 
5-4 on a great reply to Perry's forehand thrust, the ball hitting the tape and 
falling inside the line, the foiled Perry glaring indignantly at the ball.

How Crawford fought for the next game! Perry fought better and once again his 
forehand cross drive won a game and it was five games all. Perry took his 
service game to thirty, and led 6-5. Crawford was forty-love on his own 
service; it was a fight surely, but Crawford's forehand went and with it the 
championship. The last point was a tragic one; Crawford served and made for the 
net and was foot-faulted. His second service was another fault.

Crawford turned, bowed to the foot-fault judge, and slowly walked to meet his 
conqueror. Perry patted him on the shoulder, threw his arm round his neck, and 
the crowd in their shout for Perry had a sob in the throat; they felt so sorry 
for Crawford. Doubtless his poor showing was the result of his indisposition 
and the cumulative strain of a fortnight's championship tennis.

Lott and Stoefen defeated Prenn and Hopman with the loss of one set. It was 
Stoefen who amused the crowd; he was so immensely long, lolled about the court, 
was so disgusted when he failed, would hurl his racket to the ground. But when 
he smashed, that was what the crowd enjoyed; he hit so hard, all his long 
length in one mighty bang; some balls went out, some in the net, but when 
right, and a lot were, what bangs they were! One nearly arrived in the royal 
box, and Sir Herbert Wilberforce was solicitous for the safety of the royalty 
there.

Then at set point in the fourth set, Lott missed a backhand return and showed 
his grief by jumping high with both legs bent under him as he gave a loud and 
agonised howl. The American doubles champions meet Borotra and Brugnon, the 
holders, who found Collins off colour and him and Wilde in four sets.

The mixed doubles lie between Miki and Miss Round and Austin and Mrs 
Shepherd-Barron, so that Austin, who played beautifully yesterday, may win a 
championship after all. Miss Round may likewise win two.

The crowd departed in a strange mood, so pleased in Perry, so grieved about 
Crawford, and there was Wimbledon in dissolution, the outside courts deserted, 
another championship meeting nearly over. Perry now stands on top of the world 
- even if it is only the tennis world.
 