
How would you react if you were 18 years old and described as the best young 
prospect since George Best? Or, for a contemporary audience, compared with Dele 
Alli? If you are Leo Da Silva Lopes, the young Peterborough midfielder 
attracting attention from all sides, you laugh, a little bashfully. Lopes 
prefers N’Golo Kanté, though, and he might get a chance to play against the 
player whose game he wishes to emulate when hisPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> side face Chelsea on Sunday.

“He’s a box-to-box player, like me,” says Lopes, of similar stature to the 
Frenchman but still growing and bulking up. “I like the way he keeps it simple, 
short passes, gets forward. I try to do that.”

Lopes was born in Lisbon but arrived in England aged 12 with his mother, 
brother and sister, and was spotted playing in a local league game aged 14. 
Grant McCann, now Peterborough’s manager, was coaching the under-15s at the 
time and immediately recommended to the manager, Darren Ferguson, that Lopes 
start training with the first team. “He’s 14,” replied an aghast Ferguson, but 
McCann insisted and the next year he was taken on a training camp to Spain with 
the seniors.

“I remember seeing him then and thinking ...” says McCann, trailing off at the 
memory of such a precocious talent. “This kid’s got so much potential it’s 
untrue. He’s got the lot.”

FA Cup third round: match previews
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/fa-cup-third-round-match-previews>
Lopes, whose birthday was in November, is already a regular at Peterborough, 
but might not be there for much longer, with just about every big club around 
keeping tabs on him. Peterborough have turned down three bids, not necessarily 
because they are fighting to keep him for years to come (“We never stand in 
anyone’s way,” says McCann), but because they think he is going to get better 
and more valuable. It is not so much his natural ability that makes those at 
the club so confident, but his attitude. If you are looking for Lopes at the 
club’s training ground, which is right next door to a school full of kids not 
much younger than him, chances are he will be studying match footage.

“I know I need to work hard because I’m playing with older players, so I can’t 
be lazy,” says Lopes. “I can’t get away with stuff I would in the youth team. 
So I always watch the games back and look what I can improve. I’ll watch the 
whole game, not just my clips. I concentrate on the stuff I do wrong and try to 
get better at it.”

A youngster trying to improve his game is not exactly unheard of, but Lopes 
stands out as particularly dedicated. “Kids don’t realise how lucky they are, 
sometimes,” says McCann. “Leo’s completely different – I’ve seen kids with top 
ability who drift out of the game because they don’t want to get better. They 
think they know it all at a certain age. He’s trying to get better every single 
day.”

Performing in League One every week should help, too. “To play in a first team 
you need to toughen up, so I’d say it’s definitely better than being at a top 
club and playing 18s and 21s football,” he says. There is not quite the 
old-school roughhousing from senior pros of the past, though. Is Lopes too 
quick for them? “Yeah, probably,” he says, laughing.

Evading those sort of challenges triggered a memory for Barry Fry, now the 
club’s director of football. “He reminded me of when George Best first came 
through at Manchester United,” says Fry, who was a United trainee back then. 
“He rode tackles like Besty – everyone wanted to kick him, but he stayed on his 
feet. He’s the best young player I’ve seen since.”

Giantkiller or early bath? Test your FA Cup knowledge – quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/football-quiz-fa-cup-third-round>
Big words, but words that should be treated with a little caution. Fry is the 
consummate salesman and Peterborough’s model is to find rough young players, 
polish them as McCann puts it, then sell: they have already made handsome 
profits on Dwight Gayle, Britt Assombalonga, Conor Washington and George Boyd. 
Fry knows a little hype never hurt anyone’s asking price.

For a more impartial recommendation, there is Karl Robinson. The Charlton 
manager recently watched Lopes and ranks him with Alli as among the best player 
he has ever seen at that age: for a man who mentored Alli at MK Dons, and spoke 
of him like a doe-eyed father, that is high praise indeed. Robinson promptly 
recommended Lopes to Liverpool. “You can see what Alli is doing now,” says 
Lopes. “I’m a different sort of player to him, but I want to do what he’s 
doing.”

England have cast their eye in his direction too. The FA’s technical director, 
Dan Ashworth, has encouraged Peterborough to arrange a British passport, but 
Lopes is keeping his international options open. “In the long term, I’d rather 
play for Portugal,” he says. “But at the moment, if I play for England, it 
doesn’t really change anything – it would be a great honour.”

But first, to Stamford Bridge. As is relatively obvious from spending a bit of 
time in his company, nerves are not really a factor. “I can’t let it get to my 
head,” he says about the prospect of playing in front of 41,000 people. “You’ve 
just got to be relaxed – if I went there nervous I’d have a bad game.”
 