
While many, myself included, might have reservations about the quality of 
Peter Maxwell Davies’s music, few could doubt the impact he made on musical 
life in this country (Obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/14/composer-peter-maxwell-davies-dies-aged-81>
, 15 March). Unlike his great colleague, Harrison Birtwistle, he didn’t remain 
cool, calm, collected and consistent. He was more a musical jumping 
jack-in-a-box, responding eagerly and often uncritically to every new idea and 
influence. An enemy of mediocrity in both the musical profession and education, 
his impact on a whole generation of composers and performers was immense. He 
also maintained great respect for anyone who took him seriously, as I found the 
last time I met him. It was after a performance of an extended work and I dared 
to cast doubt on the quality of his musical invention in its first few minutes, 
but told him that the rest was wonderful. “Yes, you’re quite right, thank you,” 
he said. Always ready to challenge anyone who doubted the importance of music 
in education and in our lives generally, he was a model modern composer. The 
comment made by Margaret Thatcher, when he met her at a Downing Street 
reception – “We all know about you” – said it all. He was a treasure.
Meirion Bowen
London 

• Peter Maxwell Davies <https://www.theguardian.com/music/peter-maxwell-davies>
 did indeed live “far away” if by that his obituarist means from London. But to 
state that Orkney is not a “centre of culture” displays typical metropolitan 
ignorance. Last week JK Rowling joined a local book group reviewing her crime 
novel The Cuckoo’s Calling, Liz Lochhead, the Scottish Makar, read her own 
poetry in Stromness, and Japanese pianist Masayuki Tayama gave a solo recital. 
Only one thing missing; of all the national newspapers it is the Guardian that 
seldom arrives.
Charles Warlow
Edinburgh

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 