
Petra Kvitova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/petra-kvitova> described 
being able to move the fingers on her left hand as “the greatest Christmas 
present I could have wished for”. Kvitova, 26, was speaking publicly for the 
first time since being attacked by an intruder at her apartment in the Czech 
Republic on Tuesday.

Petra Kvitova could return to tennis within six months following knife attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/petra-kvitova-focused-return-tennis-following-knife-attack-surgery>
Kvitova suffered potentially career-threatening injuries to her dominant hand, 
which was covered in a substantial bandage as she addressed the media in Prague 
after her release from hospital.

The two-times Wimbledon champion looked remarkably relaxed, smiling and 
laughing as she first read out a statement in Czech.

“I’m happy to tell you I’m feeling well,” she said, switching to English. “The 
medical staff, the police, my family and my team have all provided me with 
amazing support in this difficult situation.

“I want to thank each and every one of them for the important part they have 
played in the past four days. I have been overwhelmed by the flood of messages 
and love I have received from the tennis family, fans and the public – thank 
you.”

Kvitova revealed that movement had returned to her fingers during a session 
with her doctor on Thursday morning.

The world No11 needed surgery lasting nearly four hours after tendons in all 
four of her fingers and her thumb were damaged along with two nerves.

The intruder gained access to her apartment in Prostejov by posing as a 
utilities man before pulling out a knife and putting it to Kvitova’s throat. 
The injuries occurred as she pulled the knife away.
 A Czech police handout showing the man who attacked Petra Kvitova. 
Photograph: AP 
An identikit photo of Kvitova’s attacker was released by the police on 
Thursday. The man remains at large.

The popular Czech has been told she will not be able to hold a racket for 
three months, and she is not expected to return to the court for six months.

“While what happened to me was very scary, I do not see myself as a victim,” 
she said. “I do not feel sorry for myself and I will not look backwards. I will 
use all my energy to focus on my recovery and I will do everything I can to 
return to the sport I love as soon as possible.

“I am now looking forward to spending time with my family and I ask for 
privacy and peace as I start my journey towards a return to the tennis court.”
 