
The autumn statement on Wednesday will be the first time in 10 years George 
Osborne will be nowhere in sight for a major fiscal event. There will be many 
who breathe a sigh of relief at that alone. But his presence will be heavily 
felt.

Not least as the budget last March contained a black hole as the decisions he 
had made for the previous six years started to catch up with him. However, it 
also poses the first major test for the new chancellor,Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>. I ask him a simple 
question: will you genuinely change course on the economy? It is a simple yes 
or no question, but it defines the entire approach he takes to this year’s 
autumn statement.

If the Brexit vote taught us anything it is that many people are demanding 
change. The chancellor and the prime minister may want to blame Brexit for our 
current economic plight but, as a recent leaked Treasury document shows, the 
damage to public finances was done before the referendum. Brexit has simply 
exposed the fact that the last six years were wasted and that the Tory economic 
policy they supported every step of the way has failed so many in our country.

The budget in March was a prelude to Wednesday, when the Tories are set to 
fail by their own measure – breaching their own fiscal targets set out in the 
2015 Conservative manifesto. They said they would cap welfare spending and yet 
they have breached their own cap while punishing working families. They said 
they would increase business investment with huge corporation tax giveaways, 
but it is decreasing and companies are sitting on huge cash piles, not 
investing.

Yet most of all they have failed because they did not equip our economy for 
the challenges that Brexit poses. The Tories have no answers to meet the task 
ahead.

Last week, I gave a speech in which I said we now need a positive approach to 
Brexit. Let me be clear. I will continue to oppose a “hard Tory Brexit”. That 
is because the Tories want to take a Trump-lite approach with a minuscule 
increase in infrastructure investment, a pernicious immigration policy, the 
destruction of workplace rights and environmental protections, alongside a race 
to the bottom in taxes for the rich and in wages for the rest of us. Labour 
will oppose them every step of the way in parliament and insist on full 
accountability for their negotiating positions.

As a democrat, I respect the referendum result. Not to do so would sow even 
deeper divisions within our society. But that does not mean we cannot use the 
period of the Brexit negotiations positively to work with our socialist, social 
democrat and progressive friends in Europe to construct a new relationship 
based upon solidarity, co-operation and democracy. Labour has long argued that 
there are aspects of current single market regulations that should be reformed. 
The Brexit negotiations provide an opportunity to work with European partners 
to advance those reforms, such as state aid rules and enforced deregulation and 
privatisation.

Labour will press the government to take up that opportunity. We must move the 
debate on from the divisions of the referendum and bring people together. We 
must look to the future, not the past.

The Tories have no more a plan for our economy than they do for Brexit. It is 
why their handling of the Brexit negotiations has descended into a shambles and 
why they’re now making up deals factory by factory. As the foreign secretary 
said, it looks like a Tory Brexit will be a “Titanic success”.

In addition, they still put the rich ahead of the rest of us by making working 
families pay for the giveaways to a wealthy few. For instance, 0.3% of the 
population are getting a tax cut worth £3,000 a year on average, while cuts to 
universal credit will leave more than two million families on average of £2,100 
a year worse off.

Austerity was always a political choice, not an economic necessity. That is 
why we need an autumn statement that is on the side of working families and 
with polices that are equipping our economy for the future.

The autumn statement must meet Labour’s three tests.

First, we need a credible fiscal framework, which is crucial not just for the 
public finances but also to help us to invest in our economy so we can create 
jobs and growth. The government should target a balanced current budget five 
years ahead and separate capital expenditure from day-to-day spending. To best 
do this they should replace the fiscal framework with Labour’s fiscal 
credibility rule. We would also set up a national investment bank with a 
regional banking network. It would mean we could invest properly in our country 
and start to address regional inequality.

In contrast, the government’s commitment to the “northern powerhouse” has 
always been a media exercise, just like the now-forgotten “big society”. The 
government is only paying lip service to people in the north of England, but it 
can’t continue to just re-announce old schemes, it needs to deliver on them. 
The fact that only one in five projects in the infrastructure pipeline is in 
construction shows that the government has not been meeting its own promises. 
The Hull-Selby rail electrification plan has been cancelled in the last few 
weeks and the government is failing to commit seriously to develop HS3 for the 
north of England. Labour wants to set up a “bank of the north” so that we can 
channel the vital funding and investment that the region needs.

Second, we need actual support for those in work on low and middle incomes, 
who will struggle as prices rise. The chancellor can start by introducing a 
real living wage. He needs to provide honest solutions to the childcare crisis. 
Furthermore, he should reverse the giveaways to the wealthy and reverse those 
cuts, such as universal credit and employment and support allowance, to low and 
middle earners.

Many people are indeed “just about managing”, but that is directly due to Tory 
economic policies that have favoured a rich few over the rest of us, and left 
many in our country behind while a few at the top have soared ahead.

Third, we need secure and properly funded public services. With the NHS at 
breaking point, with a £2.5bn deficit, and social care in crisis, with one 
million people not receiving the care they need, there can be no more fudges on 
funding. The same applies to local authority funding, which has been cut at 
nearly every fiscal event under the Tories.

Ultimately, the autumn statement needs to be ambitious for Britain by 
signalling a genuine change by Philip Hammond, not more cuts and half measures. 
Austerity should not be delayed, but ended – once and for all.

Otherwise it will just provide further proof why only a Labour government can 
ensure no one and no community is left behind.
 