
Mobile phone manufacturers and providers are facing demands from ministers to 
introduce software that will prevent drivers from being distracted by calls and 
texts.

An informal meeting in Whitehall is due to take place early in the new year, 
the Guardian can reveal, in which ministers and officials will tell mobile 
companies that “drive safe” modes, similar to the airplane mode that has become 
standard, must be included in basic software ahead of a broader crackdown on 
illegal mobile phone use on the roads.

Drive safe mode differs from a flight safe mode because it can potentially let 
the driver make emergency calls or accept calls from certain designated 
persons. There is also the possibility of automatically blocking the phone 
using GPS technology if certain speeds are reached.


In spring 2017, the fixed penalty for using a mobile phone while driving 
without a hands-free device will double to £200. The fixed penalty noticewill 
increase from three to six points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/17/penalty-points-fines-double-drivers-using-mobile-phones-200>
.

Ministers are concerned by the number of deaths that are at least partly 
attributed to being distracted by mobile phones – about 20 a year – with 
“distraction in vehicle” a factor in 70 deaths annually.

Holding a mobile phone while driving has been illegal since December 2003, but 
there has been an alarming change in motorists’ attitudes to talking to friends 
or colleagues without using hands-free devices.

Two-thirds of the population own smartphones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/23/two-thirds-of-britons-will-own-a-smartphone-by-2018-research-finds>
 and the vast array of apps and functions means there are increasing 
distractions for drivers.

The RAC’s annual report on motoring, published in September, found the number 
of drivers who admitted to using a handheld mobile phone on the road had
increased from 8% in 2014 to 31% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/illegal-mobile-phone-use-by-motorists-is-increasing-says-rac>
.

Nearly one-fifth admitted to sending a text or email, or posting on social 
media, while 14% filmed a video or took a photo while driving. The number of 
drivers who thought it was acceptable to take a quick call on a handheld phone 
doubled to 14%.

The transport minister Lord Ahmad said the meeting would “consider safe drive 
modes, or other practical applications, when a person is driving”.

But road safety campaigners said the government should compel manufacturers to 
include a drive safe button, if they resisted ministerial pressure.

A separate RAC Foundation-commissioned report published this summer found that 
without a legal obligation, few companies would include software that limited 
the use of their equipment, because it would put them at a commercial 
disadvantage and they felt the onus was on the driver to make sure their use of 
technology complied with the law.

Steve Gooding, the director of the RAC Foundation, said: “New smartphones and 
tablets come fresh out of the box loaded with apps and other functions, easily 
activated through on-screen icons. While flight safe mode comes as standard 
issue, where is the drive safe equivalent?

“Drivers must carry the personal responsibility for avoiding distraction when 
they are at the wheel, but telecoms companies surely have an obligation to help 
them do the right thing, something we’re discussing with the Department for
Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> (DfT).

“If industry doesn’t help voluntarily, then maybe we need to consider 
legislative options.”

Gary Rae, the campaigns director for road safety charity Brake, said: “We’re 
pleased that Lord Ahmad is looking into this. The use of mobiles behind the 
wheel is a growing menace.

“Drivers who use phones, either hands-free or handheld, have been found by 
researchers to be four times more likely to be in a crash resulting in injuries 
than drivers who were not distracted.

“The technology exists now to shut off mobiles when they’re in a vehicle. It 
just needs the political will to make this happen. We’re ready to take part in 
any talks between government, vehicle manufacturers and mobile operators.”

A DfT spokesman said: “We are determined to crack down on mobile phone use at 
the wheel. Our plans to double penalties for this serious crime should act as 
an incredibly strong deterrent. We will continue to explore what more can be 
done to tackle this crime.”
 