
This is war without prospect of peace. The massed guns of old Fleet Street 
boom defiance. Assorted artillery under Colonel Corbyn, Major Clegg and the 
Hacked Off battalion volley and thunder a reply. Non-combatants from the 
Guardian Media Group,FT and Evening Standard man their third-way trenches in 
between. And so the latest battle for what we call British press freedom is 
joined.

Apocalypse imminent! At least if you read awful warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/03/max-mosley-rejects-fears-of-high-legal-costs-under-proposed-regulation-law>
 from theMail, Sun, Times et al should Karen Bradley, secretary of state for 
culture, media and sport, choose to activate the dormant section 40 of the 
Courts and Crime Act as her period of consultation on its future ends this 
week, thus making it possible for newspapers that win – repeat, win! – libel 
trials to be saddled with the costs of the entire case, defeated plaintiffs and 
all. Unless, that is, they’ve signed up with Impress, the embryonic press 
regulator recently blessed with potential royal charter approval (which means 
it can offer low-cost arbitration instead of high-cost libel actions).

Impress <http://impress.press/> is totally independent of the press – unlike 
theIndependent Press Standards Organisation <https://www.ipso.co.uk/about-ipso/>
, launched and financed by newspapers as a response to Lord Justice Leveson’s 
criticisms three years ago – and such purity is supposedly safeguarded by a 
government-appointed panel that hinges regulatory recognition on a set of 
Leveson-derived principles.

But, as with most things in times of war, fog soon shrouds the landscape. 
Impress can only open its doors for business becauseMax Mosley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mosley>, the ex-Formula One chief infuriated 
when theNews of the World filmed and embellished his sex life, has handed it 
nearly £3.8m, with more to come when necessary. “The situation is I’ve given, 
rather my family charity has given, money to a charity that exists to promote a 
Leveson-compliant regulator,” he mystically explains.
 Max Mosley has handed £3.8m to Impress. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the 
Guardian 
So finance is a big problem for Impress. Ipso has well over 80% of UK papers, 
magazines and websites voluntarily paying its dues. Impress has only a few 
dozen mini-publications and blogs. Without Mosley, it would die in a moment. 
And human rights fervour isn’t a Hacked Off monopoly either.Index on Censorship 
<https://www.indexoncensorship.org/2016/12/impress-ipso-thankfully-theres-better-idea-guardian/>
 and other fighters for press freedom round the world have rallied to Ipso’s 
banner. “If another country had a press law like section 40, Britain would 
condemn it for persecuting journalists”, as oneTelegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2017/01/03/another-country-had-press-law-like-section-40-britain-would/>
 headline has it.

The difficulty about this whole imbroglio, though, is not merely a dispute 
over facts and legal imperatives. It is also, more damagingly, a matter of 
trust and distrust.

Put the first three names on the rival regulatory boards side by side. Here’s 
the first chief of the Financial Ombudsman Service, the CEO of Action on 
Smoking and Health and the president of the British Board of Film 
Classification in Impress’s corner. Here’s a former lord justice of appeal, a 
former vice-chair of the LSE court and council (and Scott trustee at theGuardian
) and a leading Ofcom consumer panel dignitary leadingIpso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso>.

In short, there’s no obvious difference between them in the great-and-good 
stakes. Nor do the two editorial codes of behaviour they promulgate differ 
greatly in substance or range. (Indeed, Impress has been usingthe Ipso code 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/editors-code-of-practice/> while it gets its full 
tackle in order.) So what’s the real problem? Basically that Fleet Street’s 
backers of Ipso fear Impress is some kind of front for the politicians and 
celebrities who want to see them hobbled or broken and Impress supporters see 
Ipso as a tabloid ramp enabling grubby business as usual.

This is a divide of suspicion, frankly, that goes back to the Attlee 
government’s surprise at finding a feisty, combative press operating again 
after years of wartime censorship. Something, ministers thought, had to be done 
to make it as respectable, as sober-sided, as compliant as the BBC. Thus arose 
a profusion of commissions and inquiries, of which Leveson is only the most 
recent, each of them fought off by newspapers crying freedom. Think 70-year 
wars.

There won’t be peace now if Bradley decides to activate section 40. The big 
players will fight in domestic courts and then in the human rights court of 
Strasbourg they otherwise disdain. Hundreds of small local papers that find the 
“low cost” of arbitration the difference between survival and death a threat 
will lobby and plead. There’s no swift outcome here – and, of course, no 
prospect ofImpress <https://www.theguardian.com/media/impress> “winning” before 
even Mosley’s money runs out.

So blood-curdling warnings on either side are grotesquely overdone. Impress, 
in code, manpower and performance, might be a huge disappointment to its Hacked 
Off champions. Equally, Ipso might acquire a better public profile if only the 
details of its performance were allowed to speak for themselves. (Being told 
how “rigorous” you are by theSun doesn’t exactly do the trick.)

Leveson wanted just one press regulator set up by and supported by the press 
itself. His muddied legacy is only a barren rivalry – plus the Guardian Media 
Group andFT’s third force, which doesn’t trust either Ipso or Impress and fears 
political meddling via what one of its former editors called the “medieval 
nonsense” of a royal charter. Give the politicians a say and they’ll inevitably 
use it.
 Hacked Off supporters will not give up without a fight. Photograph: REX 
Could Bradley try a little conciliation as she decides on section 40? It’s 
maybe worth the attempt unless she wants to doom future DCMS ministers to 
referee the same ferocious fights every five or 10 years. But she knows, and 
those who define their stance by being merely anti-Mail or anti-Murdoch ought 
to realise, too, that events have moved on fast since Leveson put down his pen. 
The key problem today isn’t phone-hacking – that fundamentally died in the 00s 
– but news faked and privacy destroyed and elections manipulated somewhere 
south of Moscow. The problem of unregulated, uncontrollable global publication 
by Facebook, Google and Snapchat. Rule by net pirates, not metropolitan elites.

Bradley has new wars to worry about, far beyond disinterring the events of 10 
years back – or even 20 years back – for Leveson 2. Bet, then, that she’ll keep 
section 40 on ice, a kind of political pistol held close to editors’ heads in 
case they get troublesome again. Which will be a pretty lousy outcome too. Of 
course politicians, from Trump to Erdoğan, want to bully the media. Of course 
they chant that “we’re all in favour of press freedom, but…” That damned, 
inevitable but!

The real challenge now is to stop obsessing about old battles and hatreds 
post-1945 – while shrugging haplessly over duff-data dumping that delivers new 
masters at the top.
 