
Phyllis Schlafly, the outspoken conservative activist who helped defeat the 
Equal Rights Amendment in the 1970s, has died. She was 92.

Schlafly died on Monday afternoon of cancer at her home in St Louis, her son 
John Schlafly said.

Schlafly rose to national attention in 1964 with her self-published book A 
Choice Not an Echo which became a manifesto for the far right. The book, which 
sold three million copies, chronicled the history of the Republican National 
Convention and is credited for helping conservative senator Barry Goldwater of 
Arizona earn the 1964 GOP nomination.

Feminist group appeals to second-wave activists to rejoin cause: 'You're not 
done'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/26/veteran-feminists-of-america-baby-boomers-activism-pam-ross>
She later helped lead efforts to defeat the proposed constitutional amendment 
that would have outlawed gender discrimination, galvanizing the party’s right.

Schlafly graduated from college while working overnight at a factory during 
the second world war, her newspaper column appeared in dozens of newspapers and 
she was politically active into her 90s — including attending every convention 
since her first in 1952.


Yet she told the Associated Press in 2007 that perhaps her greatest legacy was 
the Eagle Forum, which she founded in 1972 in suburban St Louis, where she 
lived. The ultraconservative group has chapters in several states and claims 
80,000 members.

“I’ve taught literally millions of people how to participate in 
self-government,” Schlafly said. “I think I’ve built a wonderful organization 
of volunteers, mostly women but some men, willing to spend their time to get 
good laws and good politicians.”

The Eagle Forum pushes for low taxes, a strong military and English-only 
education. The group is against efforts it says are pushed by radical feminists 
or encroach on US sovereignty, such as guest-worker visas, according to its 
website, which describes the Equal Rights Amendment as having had a “hidden 
agenda of tax-funded abortions and same-sex marriages”.

As momentum grew in the 1970s for the amendment, Schlafly became its most 
outspoken critic — and was vilified by its supporters. She had a pie smashed 
into her face and pig’s blood thrown on her, and feminist Betty Friedan once 
told Schlafly: “I’d like to burn you at the stake.” She was chastised in a 
1970s Doonesbury — a framed copy of which hung on her office wall.

“What I am defending is the real rights of women,” Schlafly said at the time. 
“A woman should have the right to be in the home as a wife and mother.”

A woman should have the right to be in the home as a wife and mother.”
Phyllis Schlafly 
Thirty-five states ratified the amendment, three short of the necessary 38. 
Schlafly said amendment supporters couldn’t prove it was needed.

“They were never able to show women would get any benefit out of it,” she told 
the AP in 2007. “It [the US Constitution] is already sex-neutral. Women already 
have all the rights that men have.”

St Louis University history professor Donald Critchlow, who profiled Schlafly 
in his 2005 book Phyllis Schlafly and Grassroots Conservatism: A Woman’s 
Crusade, said the defeat of the amendment helped revive conservatism and pave 
the way for Ronald Reagan’s election in 1980.

“What the ERA [defeat] did was show the right, and especially Reagan 
strategists, that a new constituency could be tapped to revitalize the right. 
It allowed the right to take over the party,” Critchlow told the AP shortly 
after his book was written.

Schlafly was born on 15 August 1924 and grew up in Depression-era St Louis. 
Her parents were Republican but not politically involved.

Her own activism was born partly out of convenience. With the country involved 
in the second world war during her college years, Schlafly worked the graveyard 
shift at the St Louis Ordnance Plant. Her job included testing ammunition by 
firing machine guns. She would get off work at 8am, attend morning classes, 
then sleep in the middle of the day before doing it all over again.

The schedule limited her options for a major. “In order to pick classes to fit 
my schedule I picked political science,” Schlafly recalled in the 2007 
interview.

She graduated from Washington University in 1944, when she was 19. Her first 
taste of real politics came at age 22, when she guided the 1946 campaign of 
Republican congressional candidate Claude Bakewell, helping him to a major 
upset win.

In 1952, with her young family living in nearby Alton, Illinois, Schlafly’s 
husband, attorney John Schlafly Jr, was approached about running for Congress. 
He declined, but she ran and narrowly lost in a predominantly Democratic 
district. She also ran unsuccessfully for Congress in 1970.

Schlafly earned a master’s degree in government from Harvard in 1945. She 
enrolled in Washington University School of Law in 1976, and at age 51, 
graduated 27th in a class of 204.

Schlafly received an honorary degree at Washington University’s commencement 
in 2008. Though some students and faculty silently protested by getting up from 
their seats and turning their backs to the stage, Schlafly called it “a happy 
day. I’m just sorry for those who tried to rain on a happy day.”

Citing Schlafly’s views about homosexuals, women and immigrants — she was an 
outspoken opponent of same-sex marriage, abortion rights and loosening U.S. 
border restrictions — protesters said she went against the most fundamental 
principles for which the university stood.

Schlafly remained active in conservative politics well into her 80s, when she 
was still writing a column that appeared in 100 newspapers, doing radio 
commentaries on more than 460 stations and publishing a monthly newsletter.

Schlafly’s husband died in 1993.
 