 Why do the poor die younger than the rich? There are many explanations, and 
most of them involve the fecklessness of the poor. They eat the wrong food, 
smoke too much and exercise too little. Recently we learnt that they may not be 
solely to blame for their own misfortunes: cancer treatment, the Cancer 
Research Campaign revealed last month, is far shoddier for people on low 
incomes. But while all these factors are doubtless important, one of the most 
deadly killers has been largely overlooked. The poor die younger than the rich, 
new research suggests, because they are being systematically poisoned.
Dr Dick van Steenis is a retired GP who, in 1994, was asked to look at the 
possible health effects of pollution from power stations in south Wales. He 
struck upon the simple device of mapping the use of asthma inhalers by primary 
school children. He was astonished to discover that, before long, he was able 
to predict the number of asthma patients to within 1 or 2%, simply by measuring 
how far they lived from the nearest major source of pollution. In some 
villages, he found as many as 38% of four and five year olds using inhalers.

 He started deploying his simple test in other parts of the country. In 
Lancashire, he discovered that six times as many inhalers were used downwind of 
the cement works he studied than were used upwind. This was, he found, hardly 
surprising. While government monitoring equipment in the plant recorded an 
impressive though scarcely credible reading of minus 17 microgrammes of smoke 
particles per cubic metre of air, unofficial monitors in a nearby school 
playground found levels as high as 485 microgrammes, or nine times the 
government's generous 'safe limit'.

 Van Steenis found that where coal is being dug out of open cast pits in south 
Glamorgan, the residents are suffering from respiratory problems very similar 
to those which afflicted the miners who used to work in deep pits. In 
Lanarkshire, he discovered that asthma levels dropped back towards normal soon 
after the quarry he was studying closed. Asthma is just the first and most 
obvious symptom of poisoning by pollution. Van Steenis began to realise that 
much of the difference in disease rates in Britain could be explained simply by 
means of where people live.

 While the number of Britain's factories has declined sharply in the past 40 
years, the range of pollutants we produce has greatly increased. The main 
reason is that we are generating more waste. It is either being dumped in 
landfill sites (where pollutants can react with each other to produce more 
deadly ones) or being incinerated. Since 1991, companies have been allowed to 
burn toxic waste to power industrial processes. It is not hard to see why they 
should want to do this: while coal costs some pounds 26 a tonne, they are paid 
to take poisonous chemicals away. But because the chemicals they burn are 
classified as 'fuel', rather than 'waste', they are not required to fit proper 
scrubbing equipment to their chimneys. In 1998 the United Kingdom's largest 
factories released more than 10,000 tonnes of cancer-causing chemicals into the 
air.

 The result, says Van Steenis, is an explosive increase in certain diseases. 
He links the rise of endometriosis - a condition now afflicting up to 10% of 
British women - to emissions of dioxins, which are common toxic by-products of 
incineration. Hypothyroidism seems to be linked to volatile organic pollutants. 
Fluorides are associated with certain forms of arthritis and rheumatism, while 
heavy metals have been blamed for cancer, heart disease and strokes.

In the villages around two toxic waste dumps in south Wales, infant mortality 
levels (at 12 per 1,000 births) approach those of Belarus in the aftermath of 
the Chernobyl disaster.Pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/pollution>, in short, is becoming one 
of Britain's major health hazards.

 It is hard to believe that these chemicals would have been allowed to spread 
so far and so fast if most of the people they poisoned were rich and powerful. 
But a recent study by Friends of the Earth shows how pollution in Britain has 
become the companion of poverty: 662 of the UK's largest factories are in 
places in which the average household income is less than pounds 15,000. Five 
are in places whose average income is more than pounds 30,000.

 Where poverty is most concentrated, so are the poisons. Seal Sands on 
Teesside contains 17 of Britain's most polluting factories, and has an average 
income of pounds 6,200.

 Van Steenis's work could go a long way towards explaining why three times as 
many men in social class five die each year than in social class one. 
Ironically, many of the industrial processes which are poisoning them result 
from consumption patterns in which the poor cannot participate. It is not just 
the fecklessness of the poor that is killing them, but also the fecklessness of 
the rich.
 