 Damir Dokic, the father of Australian Wimbledon competitor Jelena Dokic, was 
yesterday detained and interviewed by police after reports that he was drunk 
and abusive and smashed a journalist's telephone shortly after his daughter's 
victory on court number five.
Mr Dokic, who has been dubbed the "tennis father from hell" after landing 
himself in trouble during tournaments on previous occasions, had been drinking 
heavily prior to the match and was then seen walking aroundWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> waving a cross of St George and 
shouting slogans.

As bemused tennis fans looked on, Mr Dokic approached the main press building 
where he became involved in a heated conversation with journalists.

Shouting things such as "the Women's Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association are fascists and 
political" and "the Queen is for democracy, everything else in this country is 
fascist", Mr Dokic is then reported to have smashed a journalist's mobile 
telephone before being taken away by officers to the police room.

He was released without charge and officers escorted Mr Dokic out of the 
courts, but tournament organisers said that he would be free to return as he 
had not been charged with any offence.

Last year, Mr Dokic hit the headlines after he staged a sit-down protest in 
the street moments after being ejected from a tennis tournament in Birmingham 
in which his daughter had been playing. He was accused of barracking his 
daughter's opponents during matches and later accused tournament organisers of 
being Nazis.

Yesterday's outburst came as it was revealed that Wimbledon has become the 
first grand slam tournament to introduce a players-only rule in locker rooms 
following a request from the Women's Tennis Association, the governing body for 
women's tennis.

It followed complaints from players about the presence of mothers in locker 
rooms prior to matches. Their influence over their daughters at tournaments has 
caused tension in locker rooms and the ban is to be extended to all the leading 
tennis tournaments.

The Association of Tennis Professionals, which governs the men's game, has not 
asked for a similar ban and its players will be allowed to have one non-playing 
guest in locker rooms prior to matches.

The WTA said yesterday: "We have asked all grand slam events to respect our 
request. Despite reports to the contrary this decision was not targeted at 
mothers but all non-player parties, including coaches, family and friends."

Some of the world's leading players, including Martina Hingis, who is 
constantly accompanied by her mother Melanie Molitor, and Anna Kournikova, 
whose mother Alla is an ever present in locker rooms, will be affected by the 
ban.

The mothers watch all their daughters' matches, travel the world with them 
during the season, sit in on press conferences, and have been criticised for 
their forceful influence over them.

Most players at Wimbledon yesterday agreed with the ban.
 