
A privileged background, attending private school and who you know are key 
factors in landing an internship, according to a report that paints a bleak 
picture of social mobility in modern Britain.

A survey of 5,000 people carried out on behalf of the Debrett’s Foundation 
<http://www.debretts.com/foundation> found that 72% of privileged young Britons 
admitted to having used family connections to secure a work placement and those 
who attended private schools were twice as likely to get internships in London 
compared to state educated children.


On average, people completed seven placements before getting a job, 
illustrating how important they have become in securing full-time employment 
and the potentially far-reaching consequences for those unable to land them.

Debrett’s chief executive Joanne Milner, said: “It’s normal human instinct to 
help those you’ve got connections with and that’s always had some sort of 
impact but within the last few years, with the growth of the way graduates get 
jobs through internships, it’s became much more important. I think people in 
Britain care about meritocracy but all the evidence is very bad – people who 
don’t have those connections are not getting on the career ladder. We’re 
actually going backwards.”

The survey, published on Monday, found that just under half of all young 
people from underprivileged backgrounds said they had not applied for 
placements away from home that they really wanted because their family could 
not afford the associated living and travel costs.

A quarter of young people felt that the system was not fair and significant 
minorities identified factors that should be irrelevant as, in their opinion, 
nevertheless proffering an advantage.

One in four believe a double-barrelled surname offered an advantage, one in 
five thought the type of school attended did, and one in six said that accent 
made a difference.

Debrett’s, known for its guides to etiquette and Britain’s most influential 
figures, launched the foundation last year. It runs a development programme 
established to deliver training and networks to academic achievers from less 
privileged backgrounds.

Milner said the subject was one close to her heart as she attended a 
comprehensive school and went back recently for a prize-giving at which she 
told current students that they could achieve what they wanted if they worked 
hard, only to feel afterwards that she may have inadvertently misled them.

She said that it would be foolish to expect – or try to stop – people helping 
their children but it was about giving others similar opportunities. “It’s 
about making sure it’s not preventing someone who hasn’t that privilege from 
competing,” she said. “We need to be careful we are not just discriminating 
against people from a privileged background.”

Opinium surveyed 3,000 people aged 16 to 25 and 2,000 aged 30 plus in November 
2014 for the report. In classifying people as either privileged or 
underprivileged, it looked at their schooling and their socio-economic status.


 One in 10 young people said they had completed 15 placements before getting 
the job they wanted. One in five were not paid anything and one in 10 only 
received travel and lunch expenses.

On average, people on work experience placements or internships take home £100 
according to the survey but there was evidence that the gender pay gap starts 
early. Boys on average received £116 per week compared to £88 for girls – 32% 
more.Office of National Statistics figures published in November last year 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/ashe/annual-survey-of-hours-and-earnings/2014-provisional-results/stb-ashe-statistical-bulletin-2014.html>
 showed that men earn 9.4% more than women, the lowest gender gap since records 
began in 1997.
 