
Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> may have 
wanted his televised interview with citizens on Thursday to portray a 
conciliatory side. But the Russian president’s current antipathy towards the US 
was never far beneath the surface during his phone-in with the nation.


"To a certain extent, trust has been lost. But we do not think we are to 
blame," Putin said, conceding that relations had plummeted to their worst level 
since the cold war. "The United States can act in Yugoslavia, Iraq, Afghanistan 
and Libya, butRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> is not allowed 
to defend its interests."

Catching himself, Putin added: "I want to emphasize once again: Russia is 
interested in growing relations with the United States, and will do everything 
to ensure that this confidence is restored."

He made similar overtones towards Europe: “We do not intend to spoil the 
relations between Russia and Europe, and we hope that this is not part of our 
European partners' plans."

Putin even offered an uncharacteristically charitable assessment of Barack 
Obama, when asked by a six-year old girl if the US president would come to his 
rescue if he were drowning. "He's a decent and brave man,” Putin said. “He 
would do it."

Yet Putin’s animosity toward Obama, and the western powers he represents, was 
clear.

In Putin’s view, the deterioration in relations between the two countries did 
not begin with the crisis over Ukraine, but could be traced back to 2011, 
following Nato’s intervention in Libya, which culminated in Muammar Gaddafi 
being ousted from power and later killed.

Russia did not use its veto against a UN security council resolution enabling 
a “no-fly zone”, a move Putin subsequently regretted, saying the resolution 
provided western powers with a cover to launch a “medieval crusade”.

On Thursday, Putin pointed to that moment as the source of the breakdown of 
the much-vaunted “reset” in relations between Washington and Moscow. "You know, 
it's not that [the reset] has ended now over Crimea. I think it ended even 
earlier, right after the events in Libya," he said.

The so-called “reset” came in 2009, when then US secretary of state Hillary 
Clinton presented her counterpart Sergei Lavrov with a button to symbolise a 
clean slate. It seemed doomed before it had begun; in an embarrassing 
mistranslation, the button contained the Russian word for “overload” rather 
than “reset” – a gaffe Putin brought up during his phone-in.

Evidence of the failure of the reset was clear in the appearance of 
whistleblower Edward Snowden on the show, asking a pre-recorded question via 
video message. It would almost certainly have been sanctioned by the Russian 
president beforehand.

The public relations manoeuvre had echoes of Putin’s op-ed article 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/12/opinion/putin-plea-for-caution-from-russia-on-syria.html>
 in the New York Times in September last year, after Obama had abandoned 
planned military strikes against Syria. Ostensibly urging the US to resist 
force in Syria, the article was widely seen as an attempt to mock Obama, using 
many of the arguments that would appeal to his own liberal base, and taking 
issue with America's self-perceived “exceptionalism”.

Obama, of course, has been prone to riling Putin in not-so-subtle ways. In 
recent days, the White House has repeatedly played down Russia's power, saying 
its influence has waned since the days of the Soviet Union, and it can no 
longer be called a "superpower". On Wednesday, Obama said in an interview with 
CBS that Moscow would not want a military confrontation with the US because it 
realised Washington commands "significantly superior" military capabilities.

At times, Obama’s slights against Putin have been as personal as anything in 
the other direction. “I don’t have a bad personal relationship with Putin,” 
Obama said at a press conference last August, before quipping: “I know the 
press likes to focus on body language and he’s got that kind of slouch, like 
the bored kid at the back of the classroom.”
 