
Rafael Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> and Marc Lopez of 
Spain won the Olympic men’s doubles tennis title, beating Romania’s Florin 
Mergea and Horia Tecau to secure their country’s third gold medal of the Rio 
Games.


 Nadal and Lopez defeated the Romanians 6-2, 3-6, 6-4 while American duo Steve 
Johnson and Jack Sock beat Canada’s Daniel Nestor and Vasek Pospisil 6-2, 6-4 
to clinch bronze. The doubles win sets up Nadal for a potential golden double 
in the men’s events at the Rio Games as he is still alive in the singles draw.

Andy Murray forced to dig deep by Steve Johnson to reach Rio semi-finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/andy-murray-steve-johnson-semi-finals-olympic-tennis>
 Nadal, who won singles gold in Beijing eight years ago and missed the 2012 
London Games due to a knee injury, will play Argentina’s Juan Martin del Potro 
in the semi-finals on Saturday.

 Nadal said his partner was a close friend even though they had little 
experience of playing together and were tested by a experienced Romanian pair. 
“It is a privilege to be able to share this moment with one of my best 
friends,” he said. Nadal and Lopez claimed Spain’s fifth overall medal, 
following others in swimming, canoe slalom and weightlifting.

 A gruelling match lasting two hours and 26 minutes was a challenge for Nadal 
who has had an exhausting schedule and cited fatigue when he pulled out of the 
mixed doubles on Thursday.

 After two matches on Friday, the second of which stretched into the night, 
Nadal will have little time to recover before the singles semi-final at mid-day 
on Saturday. “I will be at a disadvantage, but the scheduling is just something 
you have to accept,” he said.

 Nadal has struggled with a wrist injury this year and the left-hander, more 
known for his sweeping ground stokes than the serve and volley play typical of 
doubles, arrived in Rio having not played since withdrawing from the French 
Open in May.

 “Just 25 days ago I couldn’t even train,” Nadal said, adding that he was 
unsure until days before the Games whether he would compete at all. Tecau and 
Mergea, both 31 years old, are doubles specialists and each rank among the 
world’s top 15 in the pairs event.
 