
In his first match since quitting the French Open nearly 10 weeks ago, Rafael 
Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> showed no signs of 
discomfort in the torn tendons of his left wrist and was as imperious as ever 
in dismissing the world No43 Federico Delbonis in the first round of the 2016 
Olympics tennis tournament. The Spaniard, who has slipped one place to fifth in 
the world during his absence from competition, took a little under an hour and 
a half to dismiss the 25-year-old Argentinian clay-courter 6-2, 6-1 on the 
hardcourts of the new tennis complex in Rio.

Nadal had quietly expressed reservations about the surface beforehand, 
wondering, with some justification, why he was not playing on his favoured clay 
in a country where the red dirt is as common as in his native Spain. It did not 
seem to bother him, however.

Andy Murray eases past Viktor Troicki as he begins Olympic title defence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/andy-murray-viktor-troicki-olympic-title-defence>
Nadal was efficient rather than spectacular behind a rock-solid serve, 
although Delbonis was competitive when he got the opportunity and stretched his 
illustrious opponent in several exchanges early in the match. But the pressure 
told. Nadal had 16 break points and took six of them, enough to steadily break 
the resolve and focus of Delbonis, who has now won just 11 games in three 
matches against the former world No1.

Can Nadal make an impact here? If he were to reproduce this form deeper in the 
tournament – although he is on the same side of the draw as Novak Djokovic and 
Juan Martín del Potro, who were scheduled to meet later in the first round. And 
he will not need reminding that he began the French Open – where he has been 
champion nine times – with two blinding victories before a chronic complaint in 
his fabled left wrist forced him to retire to Mallorca. In recent weeks he has 
entertainedAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/andy-murray-viktor-troicki-olympic-title-defence>
 among others on his practice courts there, and would seem to have arrived in 
Rio much improved in spirit and fitness.

Elsewhere on day one, the exciting Dustin Brown was a set up against the 
Brazilian Thomaz Bellucci when an ankle injury forced his retirement towards 
the end of the second set. David Ferrer, whose form over the past year has been 
mixed, breezed past Denis Istomin 6-2, 6-1 in just an hour and a quarter.

However, there is no denying the men’s draw looks a little shabby through the 
absence of so many of the game’s leading players, including Roger Federer and 
Stan Wawrinka (who has leap-frogged Nadal to No4 in the world), Bernard Tomic, 
Milos Raonic, Dominic Thiem and Nick Kyrgios, who beat the American John Isner 
in Atlanta on Sunday.

Thus Brazil’s Roger Dutra Silva had his moment on the home stage, beating the 
Italian Thomas Fabbiano 7-6 (4), 6-1 in an hour and 22 minutes. David Goffin, 
restored to his best this year, took just two minutes longer to handily beat 
the Australian Sam Groth 6-4, 6-2.

With no disrespect, matches and scores such as those lend the competition the 
air of an ATP 500 event. Until the better players begin to work their way 
through the draw for tougher engagements, it will not seem properly like a 
top-level affair.
 