
A government minister has pledged that no other disabled traveller should go 
through what wheelchair user Anne Wafula Strike experienced when she was forced 
to wet herself on a train because there was no working accessible toilet.

The rail minister, Paul Maynard, told Wafula Strike through her MP, Robert 
Halfon, that government officials are meeting with CrossCountry, the rail 
company involved. They want to ensure that measures are in place to prevent 
anyone else having a similar experience to the Paralympian’s.

“We are committed to ensuring no passenger has to go through this again,” 
Maynard said. “I am dismayed at the terrible experience that Wafula Strike had 
while travelling from Nuneaton to Harlow in December.

“She is right to bring this matter to the Department [for Transport’s] 
attention and I applaud her bravery for speaking openly about her experience.

“I have asked officials to meet with the franchise operator, CrossCountry 
trains, and discuss the remedial procedures they intend to put in place to 
ensure that no other disabled passenger experiences such humiliating 
circumstances while travelling with them. This will include reviewing their 
arrangements for the maintenance of the onboard accessible toilet.

“I will also arrange for the lessons learned from this event to be shared with 
Rail Delivery Group, to inform how the existing passenger assist service may be 
improved to deal with such circumstances, and the Office of Rail and Road, 
which monitors train operating companies’ disabled people’s protection 
policies.”

Wafula Strike said the response from the government, transport and disability 
organisations, and members of the public had been overwhelming since the
Guardian revealed her distressing experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/paralympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet>
 earlier this week.

“I really do believe that a change is going to come on the issue of disabled 
access,” she said.

She said she had been asked if she was going to call for a boycott of 
CrossCountry and other transport services that fail over the facilities they 
are obliged by law to provide for disabled people.

“I do not want to call for a boycott, quite the opposite,” she said. “I want 
to encourage more disabled people to get out and about, to use transport and 
other services, and to hold companies and businesses to account. If we hide 
away, change will not come.”

But Wafula Strike said CrossCountry had not contacted her directly.

“They are speaking to me through the media, but they should have picked up the 
phone to me to apologise,” she said.

There was very little policing of the Equality Act 2010 in terms of ensuring 
that the legal rights afforded to disabled people were adhered to, she said. 
“As disabled people, it is left to us to police this legislation.

“I am encouraged by the fact that this week, so many disabled people have 
spoken up, whereas before they said they feared doing so. As people with 
disabilities, we don’t want sympathy, we just want to be given equal 
opportunities,” she said.

“When the system is slacking, we need to remind people what is happening. It 
should not just be a person in a high position deciding when to repair the 
broken disabled toilet on the train. We need to monitor things, and ensure that 
adaptations are in place and working so that we can contribute to society.”
 