
A smarty-pants reader who shall therefore remain nameless sent in instructions 
for peeling and eating a clementine this week. Not that I blame them. Haven’t 
you ever been on a train or sat at a desk and suddenly the scent hits you and 
you’re frantically turning your head to see who’s eating aclementine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/04/nadiya-hussain-bake-off-interview-cod-clementine-curry-recipe>
? The spritz of citrus oil that blesses the air as you break into the dimpled 
skin and tear off a crumble of pith and golden orange is enough to light a 
room. It turns out though, there are excellent uses, other than the obvious 
peel-and-eat, to which this pretty fruit can be put, and you really sent in the 
pick of the crop.

The winning recipe: Clementine and pistachio pilaff (main picture)


Fadime Tiskaya <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Fadime> dedicated this 
recipe to all the other people who’ve taken part in Readers’ Recipe Swap 
throughout the year. But that isn’t why it won. People from four different 
continents tasted it at my house this weekend, and all anybody wanted was more. 
The garnish of candied peel is the crowning jewel, to be sure, but what it tops 
shines just as bright. A parade of flavours heralding the promise of a new year 
in cooking.

Serves 4-6
300g basmati rice
1 tsp salt
A pinch of saffron threads
Boiling water
4 clementines
100g sugar
½ cinnamon stick
4 tbsp olive oil
3 medium red onions, peeled and finely sliced
1 carrot, peeled and julienned
100g butter
50g pistachios
50g dried cranberries
¼ tsp ground cinnamon
Salt and black pepper

1 Wash the rice in a sieve under running cold water, then put it in a bowl 
with 1 tsp salt. Cover it with cold water, then set aside for about 30 minutes.

2 Crumble the saffron threads into a small cup. Add 3 tbsp boiling water and 
set aside until it infuses.

3 Meanwhile, prepare the clementines. Slash the skin into segments and peel 
them off. Very thinly slice the skin and transfer to a saucepan. Squeeze the 
clementines and add the juice to the pan with the skin. Add the sugar and 
cinnamon stick, top up with some water to just cover the peel. Bring it to the 
boil and simmer over a low heat until the peel is almost dried and candied. 
Halfway through, take 2-3 tbsp of the juice from the pan and set aside.

4 Boil the rice in plenty of water for 1 minute, then strain and refresh under 
cold water until completely cold. Leave to drain completely.

5 Heat 2 tbsp olive oil in a nonstick pan over a low heat, then fry the onions 
gently until soft. Add the carrots and cook until also softened.

6 In a separate large pan, melt the butter. Add the pistachios and cranberries 
and gently fry them for 2 minutes. Add the ground cinnamon, salt and pepper, 
along with the 2-3 tbsp of reserved clementine juice.

7 Add the rice, then mix well. Flatten it and drizzle with the saffron water. 
Put the lid on to rest for 5-10 minutes.

8 Mix in the onion and carrots. Pour into a large serving bowl and sprinkle 
with the candied clementine skin (as much as you want) then serve.

Baked clementines

Heating the fruit through, as Linda Aizlewood does, is an unexpected delight. 
And the toppings ensure the citrus shines.

Serves 4
4 clementines
Creme fraiche
Demerara sugar
Flaked almonds

1 Preheat the oven to 160C/325F/gas mark 3. Wrap the clementines in foil and 
bake for 10-15 minutes.

2 Peel carefully and separate into sections. Serve immediately with creme 
fraiche, demerara sugar and flaked almonds.

Candied clementine and fennel seed polenta cake

Letitia Clark’s method for candying the clementine slices is decidedly 
unfussy, yet still yields excellent results. And her choice of fennel is 
inspired – perhaps too much so; flavourwise, the aromatic somewhat pushes the 
citrus into the sidelines. To look at though, this is one handsome bake.

Serves 8-10
250g butter
250g golden caster sugar 
4 eggs
190g plain flour
150g polenta (or fine cornmeal)
2 tsp fennel seeds, slightly ground in a pestle and mortar 
2 tsp baking powder 
Zest and juice of 4 clementines

For the candied clementines
4 clementines 
350g sugar

1 To candy the clementines, slice them into thin discs, put in a saucepan and 
cover with 1 pint (about 570ml) of water. Bring to the boil and discard the 
water. Pour over the same amount of fresh water and repeat. Add the sugar and 
another pint of water. Put on a low heat for at least 40 minutes or until the 
oranges are soft, shiny and candied.

2 Set the oven to 160C/325F/gas mark 3. Cream the butter and sugar until light 
and fluffy. Add the eggs, little by little, mixing continuously. Fold in the 
flour, polenta, fennel seeds, baking powder and zest and juice of the 
clementines. Spoon into a greased and lined cake tin and bake for 45 minutes, 
or until a skewer inserted into the centre of the cake comes out clean.

3 Leave to cool on a wire rack, then garnish with the candied clementines and 
their syrup. Sprinkle with a few extra fennel seeds, to taste.

Clementine fizz

HoxtonHill’s Christmas bell(ini) as they called it was never not going to be 
delicious.

Serves 2
Juice of 4 clementines
Something bubbly (prosecco, crémant, champagne …)

1 Put as much juice as you might cordial in a glass – I used the juice of 2 
clementines per person – then top up with bubbly.

Duck with clementine sauce

Rachel Kelly <http://marmadukescarlet.blogspot.co.uk/>’s use of clementines 
instead of the more standard orange with the duck brings extra sweetness that 
only makes the meat happier. Beautifully succulent.

Serves 4
5 clementines
Zest and juice of 1 lime
A knob of fresh ginger, grated (about a 4cm length)
4 duck breast fillets (about 180g each)
3 tbsp honey (preferably clear, runny honey)
1 cinnamon stick, broken in half
100g fresh cranberries
Salt and black pepper

2016 Readers’ Recipe Swap home cook of the year | Readers’ recipe swap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/31/readers-recipe-swap-home-cook-of-the-year-2016>
1 Zest and juice 2 of the clementines. Make sure the zest is finely chopped. 
Combine the zest and juices with those of the lime, plus the ginger.

2 Peel the remaining clementines and separate the segments. Remove any 
membrane and pith.

3 Slash the skin of the duck breasts.

4 Warm up a large heavy-based frying pan. Cook the duck breasts skin-side down 
for 5-6 minutes, until the skin is well-browned. (There’s need to oil the pan 
since the duck fat does the job).

5 Remove the meat. Drain the pan of any of the fat, then add the fruit juice 
mixture to the pan with the honey and cinnamon stick. Stir until the honey has 
dissolved. Simmer for 1-2 minutes.

6 Add the duck to the pan, skin-side up, and the cranberries. Simmer for 2-3 
minutes for a slightly pink meat, or a bit longer if you prefer it darker.

7 Add the clementine segments to the pan for the last minute of cooking time 
and stir to ensure that they are well coated in sauce.

8 Slice the duck breasts and serve with the pan juices drizzled over.

Clementine and chocolate drizzle cake

When she can’t decide between baking a drizzle or chocolate cake, Anna Thomson 
makes this mashup of the two, and it’s a lovely early‑year specimen, simply 
sweetened and fragrantly fruity.

Serves 8-10
200g butter
180g sugar, plus 20g for the syrup
Juice and zest of 6 clementines, plus 1 more for the chocolate topping
4 eggs, beaten
200g self-raising flour
100g dark chocolate (70% cocoa solids)

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Melt the butter and sugar in a pan 
over a low heat, then add to a bowl. Stir in the clementine zest and eggs. Sift 
and fold in the flour.

2 Melt 50g of chocolate in a bowl over a saucepan of barely simmering water. 
Don’t let the bowl touch the water.

3 Put two thirds of the cake batter in a prepared 20cm round baking tin. 
Drizzle over the melted chocolate in puddles and gently swirl with a skewer to 
create a marbled effect.

4 Pour over the remaining batter. Bake for 30-40 minutes or until a skewer 
comes out clean. Prick all over the top with the skewer.

5 Put the clementine juice and remaining 20g sugar (or less if you prefer) in 
small pan. Heat gently to dissolve the sugar. Spoon the juice evenly over the 
cake.

6 When the cake is ready to handle, transfer to a rack to cool, then to a 
serving plate.

7 Melt the remaining 50g chocolate with the juice and zest of the remaining 
clementine. Drizzle over the cake, letting it fall enticingly down the sides. 
You can decorate with thinly sliced clementines, if you want.
 