
It felt absurd to be cooking a roast, complete with sides and trimmings, just 
to have the leftover ingredients I needed for a bunch of other dishes, but I 
did it anyway. Everything made it into your recipes – except my roast potatoes. 
They were insanely good, so they got eaten. Which, by all accounts, is exactly 
what happens at dinner tables the world over. Roasties are the first things to 
go, and the only things people really want to eat. But what to do with all the 
things they don’t eat? Well, do you want a dish that requires no shopping and 
next to no effort to make? Of course, you will need to plan ahead for such 
indolence. BeforeChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
hits you in the stomach with the biggest meal of the year, make sure you have 
the few things needed for these recipes – pizza bases, a jar of spice paste, a 
roll of filo sheets – so that your post-Christmas cooking is a doddle.

The winning recipe: Brussels sprouts, cranberry and stilton pizza

Light and easy, this is the kind of thing you can rustle up in no time and 
serve to anyone who rocks up on Boxing Day – so long as you’ve had the 
foresight to prep the dough or stock your freezer with some readymade pizza 
bases. Plus it uses the honey-roasted cranberriesAnna Thomson made for her last 
winning swap recipe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/03/cranberries-salad-tart-pickle-sponge-cake-readers-recipe-swap>
 – and they are just as winning this time round.

Serves 4-8 
For the dough
500g strong white bread flour 
1 tsp salt
7g active dried yeast
2 tbsp olive oil
320ml warm water

For the toppings
4 tbsp olive oil
2 garlic cloves, minced
2-4 tbsp creme fraiche, mascarpone or similar – whatever you have left over
100g brussels sprouts, shredded
50-100g leftover roasted squash, carrots, parsnips or other root veg
100g stilton, or blue cheese of your choice
1-2 tbs cranberry sauce or roasted cranberries
50g pecans or walnuts

1 Put the flour and salt in a bowl and make a deep well.

2 Put the yeast, oil and water in a jug and mix well, then pour on to the 
flour. Mix to form a dough. Cover and leave in a warm place for at least one 
hour or until doubled in size.

3 Punch down the dough, then roll into 3-4 thin pizza bases.

4 Mix the olive oil with the garlic and season with salt and pepper, then 
brush on to the pizza base and swirl a little creme fraiche over. Sprinkle with 
the shredded sprouts, dot with roasted veg, cheese, cranberries and nuts. Leave 
the dough to prove for another 15 minutes.

5 Bake in a preheated oven at 220C/425F/gas mark 7 for 10-15 minutes until the 
dough is crisp.

Malay-style curry

Rachel Kelly <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rachel-kelly> always has a 
jar of homemade spice paste in her fridge, which is exactly the kind of thing 
you need for dealing with leftovers, festive or otherwise.

Readers’ recipe swap: nibbles for drinks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/10/nibbles-for-drinks-recipe-swap-cheese-olive-rolls-shortbread-butternut-crisps-recipe>
Serves 3-4
For the spice paste
2 red chillies
5 garlic cloves
4 shallots, or 1 red onion
2cm fresh ginger, peeled
2cm fresh galangal (optional)

For the curry
Vegetable oil
100g brown mushrooms, quartered
2 medium tomatoes, chopped
1½ tsp ground coriander
½ tsp ground black pepper
½ tsp ground cumin
½ tsp ground turmeric
¼ tsp ground cinnamon
¼ tsp ground cloves
¼ tsp ground fennel seeds
¼ tsp ground nutmeg
1 x 400ml tin of coconut milk
Salt
Leftover roast meat

1 First make the spice paste by blending all the ingredients together. If you 
are using a blender, add a splash of water to help the blades turn.

2 Heat about 2 tbsp oil in a heavy-based pan. Add the paste and fry for 30 
seconds, before adding the mushrooms and tomatoes.

3 Stir well and gently fry for 5 minutes before adding the ground spices. 
Continue to fry for 2 minutes before adding the coconut milk. Bring the liquid 
to a gentle simmer for 10 minutes or until the vegetables are softening. Don’t 
boil, as the coconut milk has a tendency to separate.

4 Add the meat and cook for a few minutes until warmed through. Check the 
seasoning and serve with plain steamed rice or bubble and squeak cakes made 
from leftover roast potatoes and cabbage.

Mincemeat pebble tart

Justine Wall uses leftover marzipan and mincemeat for this, and it is terribly 
good – marzipan in a dough is a keeper of a recipe. My one hesitation here is 
that mincemeat and marzipan are such long-lasting foodstuffs that they aren’t 
really leftovers – they’re forward planning. Next Christmas will be here sooner 
than you think …

Serves 8
230g self-raising flour
50g ground almonds
180g chilled butter, chopped
50g caster sugar
20g soft brown sugar
½ tsp baking powder
150g marzipan, chopped
200g readymade mincemeat

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Mix all of the ingredients except 
the mincemeat in a food processor until a dough forms. Wrap the dough in 
clingfilm and refrigerate for about 2-3 hours.

2 Remove from the fridge and divide the dough into two pieces. Line a baking 
tray (I use one about 20cm square) with baking parchment, making sure it comes 
up the sides so you can lift the bake out when it’s done. Press half the dough 
into the bottom of the tin until you have an even layer.

3 Spread the mincemeat over the dough. Then – and this is the fun part – pop 
the other half of the dough into a potato ricer, and rice the dough over the 
mincemeat layer. Make sure the mincemeat layer is well covered. If you don’t 
have a potato ricer, use a grater and grate the dough over the mincemeat layer.

3 Bake at 180C/350F/gas mark 4 for 25-35 minutes, until golden brown on top. 
Cut into squares and serve with cream or custard.

Cranberries: who knew they were so versatile? | Readers’ recipe swap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/03/cranberries-salad-tart-pickle-sponge-cake-readers-recipe-swap>
Leftovers pie

Sally Baines has to make extra of everything to make sure there’s enough for 
this pie on Boxing Day. And my fellow tasters and I certainly got through a lot 
of it. But, we concurred, that’s probably because we haven’t actually had our 
Christmas dinner yet. This is incredible – because it’s everything you love 
about that dinner, in every mouthful – but it’s also incredibly rich.

Serves as many as you have leftovers for
Leftover meat, nut roast, vegetables
Gravy
Filo pastry
Olive oil

1 Cut up all the leftovers into bite-size pieces – all the meat and veggie nut 
roast, then any vegetables. I have to make extra so we have plenty for the pies.

2 Put the pieces into large ovenproof dishes. Add meat or vegetarian gravy, as 
appropriate. Top with scrunched up pieces of filo pastry until completely 
covered. Sprinkle with olive oil.

3 Bake at 180C/350F/gas mark 4 for 45 minutes or until golden, crispy and 
bubbling.

Turkey and mincemeat pastillas

Leftoverliz’s <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/leftoverliz> 
Middle-Eastern munchies are remarkably close to the literal minced meat pies of 
yore, and they work – in the way that roast or stewed fruit will do most meat 
proud.

Makes 12 
1 onion, finely chopped
1 garlic clove, crushed
1cm piece of root ginger, peeled and finely chopped
1 tsp ras-el-hanout
½ tsp cinnamon
200-300g cooked roast turkey
½ jar mincemeat
6 sheets of filo pastry, cut in half
Melted butter 
Toasted sesame seeds, to serve

1 Fry the onion, garlic and ginger in some oil until soft. Add the spices and 
fry for a few more minutes. Meanwhile, heat the oven to 180C/ 350F/gas mark 4.

2 Add the turkey and the mincemeat and stir well. Rinse the mincemeat jar with 
a little hot water, add this to the pan and bring up to a bubbling simmer.

3 Lay out rectangles of filo and brush generously with melted butter. Lay a 
heaped spoonful of meat mixture on each sheet and roll up into a parcel.

4 Brush with more butter and put on a baking sheet. Bake for 10 minutes or so 
until golden and crisp.

5 Serve sprinkled with toasted sesame seeds.

Have a go at our next theme, blue cheese.
Three easy ways to take part:
Upload: theguardian.com/witness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/58492409e4b08659393ba1bd>;
email: recipes@theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/26/recipes@theguardian.com>;
Instagram: @guardian_cook <https://www.instagram.com/guardian_cook/>
by noon on Wednesday 4 January. Selected recipes will appear in Cook and 
online on14 January.
 