
On the edge of a meadow in Yellowstone national park, tourist John Gleason 
crept through the grass, four small children close behind, inching toward a 
bull elk with antlers like small trees.

“They’re going to give me a heart attack,” said Gleason’s mother-in-law, 
Barbara Henry, as the group came within about a dozen yards of the massive 
animal.

Increase in Yellowstone visitors raises park's concerns over wildlife and 
safety
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/24/yellowstone-national-park-visitors-wildlife-safety>
The elk’s ears pricked up, and it eyed the children and Washington state man 
before leaping up a hillside. Other tourists – likewise ignoring rules to keep 
25 yards from wildlife – picked up the pursuit, snapping pictures and forcing 
the animal into headlong retreat.

Record visitor numbers at the nation’s first national park have transformed 
its annual summer rush into a sometimes dangerous frenzy, with selfie-taking 
tourists routinely breaking park rules and getting too close to Yellowstone’s 
storied elk herds, grizzly bears, wolves and bison.

Law enforcement records obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request 
suggest such problems are on the rise, offering a stark illustration of the 
pressures facing some of America’s most treasured lands as theNational Park 
Service marks its 100th anniversary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/25/national-parks-centennial-stories-photos-experiences>
.

From Tennessee’s Great Smoky Mountains to the Grand Canyon of Arizona, major 
parks are grappling with illegal camping, vandalism, theft of resources, 
wildlife harassment and other misbehavior, according to the records. In July 
alone, law enforcement rangers handled more than 11,000 incidents at the 10 
most-visited national parks.

In Yellowstone, rangers are recording more wildlife violations, more people 
treading on sensitive thermal areas and more camping in off-limit areas. The 
rule-breaking puts visitors in harm’s way and can damage resources and displace 
wildlife, officials said.

Often the incidents go unaddressed, as when Gleason and the children 
approached the bull elk with no park personnel around. Gleason said he was 
“maybe” too close but felt comfortable in the situation as an experienced 
hunter who has spent lots of time outdoors.

'I was born to do this': national park rangers on their triumphs and tragedies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/27/national-park-service-100-rangers-interviews>
These transgressions add to rangers’ growing workload 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/27/national-park-service-100-rangers-interviews>
, which includes traffic violations, searches for missing hikers and pets 
running off-leash in parks intended to be refuges of untrammeled nature.

“It’s more like going to a carnival,” said Susan Clark, a Yale University 
professor of wildlife ecology who has been conducting research in the 
Yellowstone area for 48 years. “If you look at the cumulative impacts, the 
trends are not good.

“The basic question is, ‘What is the appropriate relationship with humans and 
nature?’ We as a society have not been clear about what that ought to be, and 
so it’s really, really messy and nasty.”

Recent events at Yellowstone that grabbed national headlines include a 
Canadian tourist putting a bison calf in his SUV, hoping to save it, causing 
wildlife workers to euthanise the animal when they could not reunite it with 
its herd; three visitors from Asia being cited on separate occasions for 
illegally collecting water from the park’s thermal features; and the death of a 
Washington state man who left a designated boardwalk and fell into a 
near-boiling hot spring.

The flouting of park rules stems from disbelief among visitors that they will 
get hurt, said Yellowstone superintendent Dan Wenk. “I can’t tell you how many 
times I have to talk to people and say, ‘Step back. There’s a dangerous 
animal,’ and they look at me like I have three heads,” he said.

Inconsistent record-keeping, including a recent switch to a new criminal 
offenses reporting system, makes it difficult to identify trends that apply 
uniformly across the major parks. But the records reviewed by the AP reveal the 
scope of visitor misbehavior.

In Yellowstone, administrators and outside observers including Clark say the 
park’s problems have become more acute. That threatens its mission to manage 
its lands and wildlife “unimpaired” for future generations. Beyond incidents 
that lead to citations are many more that result in warnings. More than 52,000 
warnings were issued in 2015, up almost 20% from the year before.

Washington state resident Lisa Morrow’s son was among the children Gleason led 
toward the elk. Despite safety advisories – and numerous examples of visitors 
being gored by bison, mauled by bears or chased by elk – Morrow declared 
herself unafraid of the park’s wildlife. She said she was eager to see a 
grizzly up close.

America’s most remote site – the undiscovered side of Yellowstone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/25/yellowstone-national-park-wyoming-bears-wolves-remote>
“I want to see one right there,” Morrow said, pointing to a spot just feet 
away. “I’d throw it a cookie.”

The top 10 parks by visitation collectively hosted almost 44 million people 
last year, according to National Park Service figures. That’s a 26% increase 
from a decade earlier, or more than 9.1 million new visitors combined at Great 
Smoky Mountains, Yellowstone, Grand Canyon, Yosemite and the other national 
parks on the list.

Yellowstone has the most large, dangerous carnivores among those parks, but 
each has its risks. In Rocky Mountain national park, elk become more aggressive 
during mating season. Yosemite has towering waterfalls where visitors insist on 
swimming near the edge. In the Grand Canyon, squirrels habituated to humans are 
sometimes quick to bite an outstretched hand.

Wenk said the rise in popularity of social media has complicated the task of 
keeping visitors safe.

“You take a picture of yourself standing 10ft in front of a bison, and all of 
a sudden a few hundred people see it, and it’s reposted – at the same time 
we’re telling everybody wildlife is dangerous,” Wenk said.

“They get incongruous messages and then it happens. They get too close, and 
the bison charges.”
 