
Royal Bank of Scotland's record-breaking £12bn rights issue closed at 11am 
today, the first of the fundraisings by the high street banks to be completed.

Following the turmoil of the Bradford & Bingley cash call, the three 
investment banks guaranteeing the RBS fund raising will spend the weekend 
counting the number of shares they are left holding.

Merrill Lynch, Goldman Sachs and UBS are likely to be left with 5% to 10% of 
the shares, which are being offered to investors at 200p a share. UBS was one 
of the investment banks involved in the controversial decision to restructure 
B&B's rights issue this week.

The final tally for the RBS's rights issue will not be known until Monday 
morning. However, unlike B&B and HBOS, which posted out its circular to 
shareholders earlier this week, RBS does not have a large number of private 
investors, which should help to put a limit on the number of shares – the rump 
- the underwriters are left with. The bank has around 175,000 small investors 
but B&B has 850,000 and HBOS more than 2 million because they handed out free 
shares when they converted from building societies.

RBS investors were asked to buy 11 new shares at 200p for every 18 they 
currently own. The bank's directors promised to take up their rights, meaning 
that chief executive Sir Fred Goodwin would have needed to find around £850,000 
to pay for his new shares.

The bank needed to raise £12bn to bolster its balance sheet, which had been 
weakened by the acquisition of parts of Dutch bank ABN Amro just as the credit 
crunch started to bite last year, as well as new write-downs on investments 
hurt by the credit crisis. It is also trying to sell its insurance arm, which 
includes Direct Line and Churchill, to raise a further £4bn or so.

RBS shares were trading at 247.5p in the afternoon, down 11.5p, while HBOS was 
21p lower at 337p amid speculation that hedge funds would try to force the 
price towards its 275p a share rights issue terms to test the mettle of its 
investment bank underwriters. B&B edged down 0.75p to 72.5p, above its repriced 
55p cash call price; while Barclays was down 19.5p to 343.5p amid continued 
uncertainty about its plans to raise fresh capital. Alliance & Leicester, down 
15.5p to 384p, was lower amid speculation about its need to raise cash.
 