
My kitchen is … open and spacious. I designed it myself, so it works for me. I 
have a very large island, with a separate dining area that seats about 14 
people. I like everything to be put away, so I have lots of storage. The lower 
cupboards are dark, and the top ones glossy white.

My favourite kitchen tool is … my knife. It’s a Japanese knife, so it’s well 
suited to my cooking. I like the feel of the wooden handle in my hand.

My storecupboard staple is … seaweed. I have many kinds: kombu, wakame, arame, 
hijiki, dulse, nori. It is so healthy – I try to encourage people to use it, 
and not just in Japanese cooking. I use it in my tomato sauce or French-style 
casseroles, where you might use anchovy, to add depth of flavour. I don’t cook 
Japanese food all the time for my family.

When I’m starving I … never just eat anything. I’d rather just go hungry than 
eat something I don’t enjoy. If I could always have something to hand, it would 
be pickles – crunchy freshtsukemono (preserved vegetables) – and rice.

My culinary inspiration is … my mother. She might not realise how inspiring 
she was, cooking everything from scratch. Even herdashi stock: she made it from 
scratch, every day. That was so inspiring to me. I learned about food while 
travelling and, when my children were born, I started to cook every day. Now, I 
never really buy anything ready-made – not even sandwiches. I always have nice 
sourdough in the freezer and something good in the fridge for a filling.

Roy Brett loves his oyster knife and saying it with salmon | Kitchen encounters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/31/roy-brett-chef-patron-ondine-retaurant-kitchen-encounters>
My best kitchen secret is … freezing freshly cooked rice – I cook a big batch 
then divide it into portions, cover them in clingfilm and put them in the 
freezer. Then all I have to do is warm one up in the microwave. It’s what I 
taught my boys when they went to uni – I bought them a rice cooker and taught 
them to use their freezer.

When I’m invited to dinner I always take … wine. I eat out a lot. I don’t 
drink a lot, but I do enjoy it. Having a good drink with a meal enhances the 
whole experience. I also enjoy sake too. I do a gourmet sushi and sake 
masterclass with a sake sommelier.

Everything tastes better with … soy sauce – in Japanese cooking. If it’s 
western food, then salt.

When I go shopping I … am very organised. I like going to the market, when I 
have time. Mostly, though, I order online – it’s more practical and it stops me 
getting things I don’t need, which inevitably happens in supermarkets. I stick 
with what I need.

For dinner tonight … I’m teaching at Divertimenti 
<http://www.divertimenti.co.uk/>, and I won’t actually be cooking anything. I’m 
making canapes – miso mozzarella balls, sesame noodle salad, banban chicken and 
spring rolls.

 * Reiko Hashimoto <https://hashicooking.co.uk/> is a Japanese cookery teacher 
and author. Her second book, Cook Japan: Stay Slim, Live Longer is out on 12 
January.  