
‘The people have spoken ... the bastards,” a waspish Dick Tuck observed 
following his failure to make the California State Senate in 1966. At the end 
of a year in which electorates throughout the UK and beyond have proved time 
and again they simply cannot be trusted to make even the simplest choice, it is 
a sentiment with which BBC panjandrums were happy not to concur at the end of 
theBBC Sports Personality of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year> beano in 
Birmingham on Sunday night.

They had been utterly terrified the Great British Public would select a 
one‑two-three ofAndy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>, Mo 
Farah and Gareth Bale – three sporting high-achievers who it was known would 
not be present in person on the night.

The hot favourite Murray duly collected his third silver camera from Lennox 
Lewis poolside at his Miami training camp, eliciting giggles via video link 
upon revealing his better half had voted for the housewives’ favourite and 
token oldie, the showjumper Nick Skelton, who finished third.

The triathlete Alistair Brownlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee> split the pair, finishing 
second and it was perhaps his place on the podium that was the source of most 
intrigue. Resolutely friendless in the betting for this award after winning 
gold in the triathlon at Rio, Brownlee became a major contender when he 
abandoned his own chance of winning the final race of the World Triathlon 
Series to carry his brother, Jonny, who was suffering from heat exhaustion, 
over the line. While it would be churlish to demean the heroics of a double 
Olympic gold medallist, this was not so much an award for achievement as one 
for slightly grudging fraternal humanitarianism.

The nod to Brownlee’s selflessness continued a fine tradition of British 
contrarianism and appreciation of bulldog spirit which began when the 14,517 
postcard voters in the original 1954 incarnation of this event plumped for 
Christopher Chataway, who was Sir Roger Bannister’s pacemaker. Two decades 
later, considerably more voters went on to bestow the gong upon the cricketer 
David Steele for taking a hideously painful pounding from the Australian pace 
duo Dennis Lillee and Jeff Thomson in an Ashes series England actually lost.

No doubt they were charmed by stories about the Test debut of a bespectacled 
“bank clerk who went to war”, whose famous Spinal Tap moment on debut at Lord’s 
came when he got lost on his way to the Long Room, walked down one flight of 
stairs too many and ended up near the toilets, before rushing back upstairs to 
the crease and narrowly avoiding the ignominy of becoming the first batsman in 
Test history to be timed out.

The Roar of the Greasepaint – The Smell of the Crowd: both were discernible on 
an evening when a glitzy awards ceremony featuring enough inspirational 
montages to power a million Rocky movies kicked off with a rendition of Feeling 
Good from the aforementioned musical by local soulstress Laura Mvula. Like 
Robbie Williams and Gareth Malone’s Invictus Choir, she performed before 1,000 
of the good and the great of British sport and 12,000 fans before handing over 
to the holy broadcasting trinity of Gabby Logan, Clare Balding and “the main 
man” Gary Lineker. With the exception of the Duke of Cambridge, Roy Keane and 
the grandmother of the gold medal‑winning swimmer Adam Peaty, all present 
seemed to be shortlisted for the trophy on which Lineker famously lacerated a 
finger last year.

Before Murray accepted it with a gracious and amusing speech, there were 
cameos from assorted other contenders including Peaty, a vision in his Bernard 
Manning-esque maroon crushed velvet dickie bow, followed by cycling’s most 
successful newlyweds Jason and Laura Kenny. During a revelatory video in which 
the man of the house, by his own admission one of the most boring human beings 
alive, was archly portrayed as ... well, one of the most boring human beings 
alive, the couple made off with the show on the back of a surprisingly 
well‑judged comic turn. Who knew the 2008 Spoty winner Sir Chris Hoy lives in 
the cupboard under their stairs?

There were other winners. Featuring no end of clips from that famous Jamie 
Vardy party, the montage devoted to the Team of the Year Leicester City’s 
preposterous Premier League fairytale clearly moved Lineker and led inevitably 
to Claudio Ranieri being crowned Coach of the Year. The 15-year-old Paralympian 
Ellie Robinson was the obvious choice for young Spoty, while the splendidly 
monikered one‑time ne’er-do-well turned boxing coach Marcellus Baz received the 
Unsung Hero award from the comedian Eddie Izzard and the Hillsborough 
campaigner Margaret Aspinall. Stateside, the American athletes Simone Biles and 
Michael Phelps also got nods in a jamboree punctuated by Icelandic 
thunderclaps, chats with assorted contenders and – oh yes – yet another 
tear-jerking montage featuring Great Britain’s Olympic gold‑winning hockey team 
and their captain, Kate Richardson-Walsh. The ducts were all but dry by the 
time the anti-bullying campaigner Ben Smith picked up the Helen Rollason award 
for running just the 401 marathons in as many days.

As expected on a night of celebration, assorted elephants in the very large 
and crowded room went resolutely ignored. It was perhaps the absence of the 
three-time Tour de France winner Chris Froome, whose record remains resolutely 
unblemished, from the shortlist for the main award on the night before his team 
principal at Sky is due to answer hard questions in parliament that jarred the 
most. But on an evening where excessive mawkishness is not only expected but 
tolerated the last word was always going to go to Murray for scoring his first 
Christmas No1.
 