
Coutts, the taxpayer-owned bank, provided offshore services to controversial 
clients including a member of the Brunei royal family accused of stealing 
billions from his own country, and a banker charged with assisting the sons of 
Egypt’s deposed president,Hosni Mubarak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hosni-mubarak>, in financial crime.

Known as the Queen’s bank after its most famous customer, Coutts is revealed 
to have managed secretive tax haven structures for the Sultan of Brunei’s 
younger brother, Prince Jefri Bolkiah, and the investment banker Hassan Heikal.


The information was uncovered in the Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers>
, a database of 11.5m documents leaked from the archives of the offshore law 
firm Mossack Fonseca.

Emails between Coutts and Mossack show the law firm regarded these individuals 
as presenting a high risk under criteria designed to combat money laundering: 
Jefri was ordered by a UK court to repay an estimated $15bn taken from theBrunei
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brunei> sovereign wealth fund, which he 
chaired; Heikal was charged in 2012 and is awaiting trial for facilitating 
insider trading, which he denies.

Both were clients of Coutts & Co Trustees in Jersey. Their offshore companies 
were active until at least the end of 2015. The bank would not confirm whether 
they remained on its books, saying it did not comment on individual cases.

The revelations raise new concerns about controls at Coutts, which was fined 
just under £9m four years ago for major failures in its checks on high risk 
customers, including those with political connections. Regulators said at the 
time these led to an “unacceptable risk of Coutts handling the proceeds of 
crime”.

Ed Miliband: Panama Papers show that wealth doesn’t trickle down. It gets 
stashed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/apr/17/ed-miliband-panama-papers> 
While it is entirely legal to offer banking services to what are known as 
politically exposed persons (PEP) – politicians, state officials and their 
families and associates – these individuals must be subject to enhanced checks, 
in particular on their source of funds.

Between 1986 and 1998, Jefri served as finance minister of the oil-rich state 
and chairman of its sovereign wealth fund. In a breathtaking spending spree, 
cash from the Brunei Investment Agency was funnelled into more than 500 
properties around the world. Jefri amassed thousands of luxury cars, antique 
paintings by Renoir, Manet and Degas, five boats, and nine aircraft including a 
private Boeing 747 reportedly customised to carry polo ponies.

In a settlement agreed in 2000, Jefri undertook to return the money to Brunei. 
Years of litigation in various jurisdictions followed, with Jefri challenging 
the repayment agreement, saying he had only acted on his brother’s orders, but 
the British courts upheld it.

The legal battles ended in 2014 when Brunei accepted that the prince had 
honoured the original settlement.

Records show Jefri remained a Coutts client throughout this period. Mossack 
Fonseca learned only last year that it was acting as registered agent for two 
British Virgin Islands companies of which Jefri was the ultimate beneficiary. 
Crescent Invest & Trade was incorporated in 1998, the year the prince resigned 
as finance minister.Taurus Estates Limited 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/11/30/150900_coutts_disclosure_to_mossfon_re_taurus.pdf>
 was set up the following year.

Crescent had held shares but became dormant, while Taurus held a bank account 
with Coutts Zurich, a commercial property and seven residential apartments in 
London, Coutts explained in emails to Mossack Fonseca. The UK property register 
showsTaurus owns six floors of a building in London’s exclusive Dover Street 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/11/30/5,_6,_7_Dover_Street_title.pdf>, a 
stone’s throw from the Ritz hotel, acquired in 1999. It is in turn owned by a 
trust, called PJ Settlement.

Jefri’s involvement was effectively masked, because Coutts and its sister 
companies supplied nominee directors and shareholders for Taurus and Crescent, 
and trustees to PJ Settlement. This is a common practice where offshore 
companies are concerned and is not illegal.

When Mossack Fonseca learned of the prince’s involvement, it immediately 
resigned as agent, telling Coutts his companies “present a high risk to us”.

“The proceedings between the Brunei Investment Agency and HRH Prince Jefri 
Bolkiah came to an end in 2014 when the Investment Agency acknowledged that he 
had complied with all the terms of the settlement agreement made in 2000,” said 
Jefri’s lawyer, David Sandy.

Since 2008, BVI law has required company agents to supply information on 
owners to regulators “without delay”. In order to comply, Mossack began a 
housekeeping exercise with Coutts & Co Trustees in June 2014, writing to ask 
for a list of all its Jersey PEP clients with shell companies. The firm also 
wanted supporting information such as passport scans and proof of address.

The email chain shows that thanks to delays on both sides, and a set of 
couriered documents that went astray, it took until September last year – a 
full 15 months after the initial request – for all the required information to 
be supplied.

Coutts declared 11 PEP clients, including Hassan Heikal. Until 2013, he was 
co-chief executive of EFG-Hermes, one of the Arab world’s largest investment 
banks. Heikal is currently awaiting trial alongside Mubarak’s sons Gamal and 
Alaa. He is banned from leavingEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>.

In May 2012, following Mubarak’s overthrow, his sons were indicted for insider 
dealing in a case involving EFG-Hermes. Heikal, along with two colleagues, was 
named as a co-defendant, accused of “assisting in committing the crime of 
profiting”.

Through its trusts division in Jersey, the channel islands tax haven, Coutts 
managed two BVI companies for Heikal – Mmoni Investments Limited and Eydon 
Limited, both of which had bank accounts in London in their name, at least one 
of them with Coutts. As with Prince Jefri’s shell companies, Coutts also 
provided nominees to hold the shares and act as directors.

After Mossack raised concerns about Heikal in 2015, Coutts replied: “We are 
aware of the adverse information and are monitoring the situation, details of 
which are available in the public domain. The group [Coutts] is in regular 
contact with the client [Heikal] and we are comfortable at the present time to 
continue to provide our services.”

Heikal, who resigned as co-chief executive of EFG-Hermes in October 2013, 
denies the charges against him. He is not accused of personally profiting from 
the alleged scheme. He forwarded a statement released in 2012 by EFG-Hermes, 
which asserted that its co-chief executives had “no personal dealings, 
interests or benefits in any transactions related to the trading on Al-Watany 
Bank of Egypt’s shares”.

The Jersey trustees business was put up for sale by Coutts in October, and 
senior management of Coutts & Co Jersey are negotiating to buy it. The bank 
said: “We take our responsibilities under anti-money laundering (AML) and 
anti-corruption regulations extremely seriously and have policies in place to 
ensure compliance with the regulations in the jurisdictions where we operate. 
Our guidelines on working with politically exposed individuals are in line with 
AML regulations and we take a proactive approach to these issues, which impact 
all banks.”

Eleanor Nichol, campaign leader at the anti-corruption group Global Witness, 
said: “It is startling that Mossack Fonseca – of all firms – immediately raised 
a red flag on its relationship with Prince Jefri but Coutts appeared 
comfortable with the level of risk. This is the Queen’s bank, after all – the 
case raises questions as to whether UK banks are applying high enough standards 
for screening their customers before they take their money.”

Additional reporting by Mona Mahmoud and Juliette Garside
 