
Never, ever write him off. Put the tennis obituaries back in the file. Roger 
Federer’s dream of a record eighth Wimbledon title is alive and well somehow 
after one of the most dramatic comebacks, even in his trophy-laden career.

Outgunned in the first two sets by the big-serving Croat Marin Cilic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/marin-cilic>, Federer pulled himself back 
from the dead, saving three match-points before squeezing out a 6-7 (4-7), 4-6, 
6-3, 7-6 (11-9), 6-3 victory to secure a place in the semi-finals for the 11th 
time.

Roger Federer fights back and moves a matter of aces from an 18th major | 
Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/06/roger-federer-fights-back-18th-grand-slam-wimbledon-cilic>
It was a remarkable victory, his 10th from two sets down and one clinched with 
a 27th ace before celebrating with both arms thrust toward the sky.

With his 35th birthday just around the corner and in a year in which he has 
been struck down with knee and back injuries, it may just go down as one of the 
most satisfying wins of his career.

“When you’re saving match points, when you’re down two sets to love, 
three-all, love-40, it’s a moment when it’s not in your control anymore,” said 
Federer, who now plays Canada’s No6 seed Milos Raonic, a 6-4, 7-5, 5-7, 6-4 
winner over the American Sam Querrey in Friday’s semi-finals. “But I fought, I 
tried, I believed. At the end I got it done. So it was great on so many levels. 
This one is definitely huge because it’s Centre Court at Wimbledon, and it 
still gives me the chance to win the tournament.”

Federer is a confident beast; rarely do we get the chance to see inside his 
psyche, any vulnerability kept well under wraps. But having missed the French 
Open with a back injury and having needed knee surgery in February, he arrived 
here lacking sharpness and miles in his legs.

Four easy wins against significantly lower-ranked opponents suggested he was 
playing well but even he has been surprised at his form.

“I was very worried coming here,” he admitted. “I think it was huge for me to 
play the seven matches I did in Halle and Stuttgart. They served me very well. 
They gave me so much information to see what I could do, what I couldn’t do, 
how I could play, how I couldn’t play.

“Then, knowing that I had a week in between, if I get through the first week 
here at Wimbledon … I put myself in that position perfectly without dropping 
sets, which was a big surprise to me. Next thing, you’re in the semis. You’re 
really deep into the tournament. I surprised myself in quite a big way 
actually.”

Cilic beat Federer in the semi-finals at the US Open in 2014  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/07/marin-cilic-roger-federer-nishikori-djokovic-us-open>
on the way to his first grand slam title and for two sets it looked like he was 
about to do the same again. Though he was holding easily enough himself, 
Federer could not get a racket on the Cilic serve and the Croat played a superb 
tie-break, winning it 7-4, to take the first set and then one break, in the 
third game of the second, was enough to double his lead.

The match turned on the seventh game of the third set, which was level at 3-3 
when Federer escaped from 0-40 and then broke in the next game when Cilic 
double-faulted. The Swiss served out the set and though both missed break 
chances early in the fourth, Federer was hanging on.

Cilic had three match points, the first at 5-4, the second at 6-5 and the 
third in the tie-break only for Federer to come up with some clutch serving and 
when he took it 11-9 on his fifth set point, the worm had turned.

Serving first in the deciding set, Federer had the edge and after missing a 
break point at 3-2, he finally broke for 5-3 and clinched victory with another 
ace out wide. Of his 27 aces, 15 came in the final two sets and Federer will 
now prepare to face Raonic, whom he beatat the same stage two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/04/roger-federer-wimbledon-milos-raonic>
.

Cilic was proud of his performance. “It was a huge occasion and I played great 
tennis,” he said. “I was very close to the victory. Obviously it’s not easy to 
deal with [the result].

“But I have to take the positives and [think of] the great tennis that I 
managed to play. It’s the first time in my career I think that I’ve lost the 
match when I was two sets to love up but I haven’t let myself down a little 
bit, physically or mentally. In all three sets [Federer won], I played pretty 
good tennis.

“If we would play again, I would try to be more aggressive on the chances when 
I had them in the fourth. Maybe there was a slight hesitation in some of them. 
The situation made it big. In those situations, I was not getting the best out 
of me.”

As for Federer, who is now the oldest man since 1974 to make the Wimbledon 
semi-finals and draws level with Jimmy Connors’ open era best 11 appearances in 
the last four, the chance of an eighth title lives on. “I feel sorry for Marin 
but for me the dream continues,” he said. “I couldn’t be happier, I thought I 
fought well and played super-great at the end.”

Wimbledon 2016: Milos Raonic beats Sam Querrey to secure semi-final spot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/06/wimbledon-2016-milos-raonic-beats-sam-querrey> 