
I don’t remember eating with Mum or Dad. Dad wasn’t around in Croydon, then 
Mum died while I was evacuated out in Maidford. Afterwards Gran managed to 
bring us up on her £2 and 15 shillings pension and still found spare coins for 
seats at the Croydon Empire every Tuesday evening. I remember seeingDick 
Whittington there and then impersonating a cat for the next fortnight – lapping 
my milk from a saucer, taking my meals under the kitchen table, on all fours. 
And Gran never batted an eyelid. People would say “Roy’s half daft” and she’d 
say “Well, I like him”.

The ingredients of the firm yet gooey slosh which the great clown Charlie 
Cairoli used in “the messiest kitchen scene in history of panto” was top 
secret. When I was on the bill with him at Leeds Empire, he’d have it made each 
day in a locked basement room. But I managed to collect a sample and take it to 
my brother, an analytical chemist. Yet when he opened the box it had evaporated 
completely. So I spent a lot of time mixing and cooking up my own perfect slosh 
and then dyed it brown because when two gallons are tipped down my trousers and 
it trickles out at the ankles the kids especially appreciate the colour. 
Nowadays, I do a kitchen scene even messier than Cairoli’s, I promise you.

I adored condensed milk as a kid. I’d knock back a whole tin in one, if I 
could get my hands on it. Years later, when I was doing national service, I was 
“on jankers” [restricted privileges because of a military offence] one 
Christmas and the guys in the guard room brought me a present in lovely 
wrapping and bound with holly. When I opened it, I discovered a tin of 
condensed milk. I think that was the nicest present I’ve ever received.

I’ve got thousands of books about music hall and tons of old lyrics and sheet 
music. A favourite composer-comedian is Harry Champion, who’s best known for 
Any Old Iron but wrote many great songs about food, includingLet’s Have a Basin 
of Soup,A Little Bit of Cucumber <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OvMFBQgkxrg>, 
Baked Sheep’s Hearts Stuffed With Sage and Onion, Standard Bread, Toasted 
Cheese on Toast, Hot Meat Pies, Saveloys & Trotters, Oh! That Gorgonzola Cheese 
and Put a Bit of Treacle on my Pudding, Mary Anne. Lovely.

When I was courting my wife Debbie, I’d often say: “Come back with me and I’ll 
make you something to eat.” It was always the same meal – a Fray Bentos steak 
and kidney pudding and Angel Delight. When we had a big wedding anniversary 
this year, I phoned the hotel restaurant and arranged for them to ignore her 
order and serve Fray Bentos and Angel Delight instead. Debbie thought it was 
great.

My weight went up to 20 stone, partly because of diabetes, and my doctor said: 
“You’ll never lose enough unless you have a gastric sleeve fitted.” So I did. 
And with a smaller stomach I didn’t have much appetite any more and I got down 
to 13 stone. Now I feel like a million dollars. Seafood, in small portions, is 
my thing. I love prawns, shrimps, cockles and everything except snot-like 
winkles and – oh gawd – jellied eels. I call jellied eels “the Battenberg cake 
of the fish world”, because I once ate Battenberg in a cafe on a day trip to 
Margate and was so ill afterwards that I’ve never been near a slice since 
without feeling bilious.

It’s off-beat lines I’ve liked the most. Bob Nelson from Burnley, who could 
catch a cannonball on his back, would ask the audience “Aren’t plums cheap?” 
out of nowhere. Slapstick-wise, I got on like a house on fire with Mr Pastry, a 
children’s entertainer and acrobat who taught me to fall backwards off a dining 
chair without killing myself. He gave me a Parker pen inscribed with “Thank you 
for a great performance – Mr Pastry”. Which some bastard stole when I was doing 
the clubs.

In a boy’s club, doing Aladdin in 1952, I got the idea of boring a hole in the 
bottom of a teacup and attaching a drainage tube, so I could pour tea endlessly 
into it from a giant teapot. It was a huge thrill, to find a mechanical piece 
of business that got such a laugh. Later I got asked to do Quick Brew’s 
commercials. They went on for some years and paid for my house. When I lost the 
job I told the wife: “We’re drinking Twinings from now on.”

I had one theatrical landlady who served beans and toast, every bloody night. 
Come Christmas Eve, after staying at the theatre until 2am, I got back, 
incredibly hungry and exhausted, and I heard the landlady’s slippers padding up 
the corridor and sure enough she was carrying beans on toast. I felt a bad red 
mist come over me. But I picked at the beans andunderneath the beans I found 
one chipolata sausage. I said, “Hold on there, I think you’ve made a mistake. 
There’s one small chipolata here”, and she said, “Yes, happy Christmas!”

Roy Hudd is in Mother Goose until 31 December, Wilton’s Music Hall, 
<http://wiltons.org.uk/> Graces Alley, London E1 8JB

 