
My kitchen is … very shiny. Recently fitted, it has lovely clean lines and an 
induction suite with three drop drawers underneath. Induction stoves allow for 
more storage than others, and this kitchen has great storage. I can put 
everything away – even my blender. I don’t like clutter or mess. The only thing 
I have out on my counter is my espresso maker.

My favourite kitchen tool is … an oyster knife, from Wright Brothers 
<http://www.thewrightbrothers.co.uk/> in London. It has a beautiful handle, 
which sits very comfortably in your hand. I have been getting the same knife 
for 20 years – I must be on about number 40. When we were doing the Edinburgh 
festival this year, we opened 6,000 oysters over the three weeks and I used the 
same knife the whole time. It still hasn’t broken. 

My storecupboard staple is … long-grain brown rice, usually Uncle Ben’s 
instant. When I come home from work it makes the best quick supper for the 
kids, before dinner service. I’ll cook it up with a little hot water or chicken 
stock, take it on a bit of a journey by the spice cupboard, chuck in some fresh 
herbs or veg, and it’s done: a lovely meal that took all of five minutes to 
make. My son’s a rugby player so I need to feed him a lot! He’s taller than me 
now – I think he could sort me out, so gotta be careful.

Easy Ottolenghi: fish recipes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/apr/18/easy-ottolenghi-fish-recipes> 
When I’m starving I … have canned tuna in olive oil – always MSC-certified 
albacore. I add lemon juice and sea salt and eat it right out of the tin. As a 
chef, you’re always looking for that quick fix. When you’re looking after 
people all day at home and at the restaurant, you are third in the pecking 
order, so you need something beneficial and nutritious.

My culinary inspiration is … hmmm, I have a lot of food heroes. I could never 
say it’s just the one: it’d be unfair on the others. In particular, Keith Floyd 
when I was younger, then Rick Stein and Mark Hix. I learned so much from them: 
their respect for produce and seasonality, the importance of keeping it simple 
and not making make yourself look clever. Running a restaurant has to be about 
satisfying the customer – people come to have a great time, and to feel a 
little bit better when they leave your care.

My best-kept kitchen secret is … to really understand how to cook things 
properly, knowing the traditional methods that have stood the test of time. 
There are still very few people who can do the basics well: how to fillet a 
fish, how to cook it; understanding the produce and how to deliver it to your 
guest at the right point.

When I’m invited to dinner I always take … a whole side of smoked salmon. When 
you hand that to someone, and give them a hug, saying, “This is for you”, it 
means something. Flowers don’t taste so good – not even nasturtiums.

Everything tastes better with … citrus zest and sea salt.

When I go shopping I … get carried away. If I have a bit of time, say for a 
Sunday lunch, I go through the whole journey. I theme the meal – Spanish, 
Italian etc – and I see it all the way through from the starter to the pudding. 
A bit of a romantic journey.

For dinner tonight … I’m not having much. The guys are doing a lentil and 
pancetta soup before dinner service. Just something light – I don’t like 
working on a full stomach.

• Roy Brett is chef patron of Ondine <http://www.ondinerestaurant.co.uk/> 
restaurant, Edinburgh.
 