
Grey skies failed to clear up but at least Greg Rusedski was able to put on a 
happy face at the Foro Italico yesterday, winning for only the second time in 
seven years at the Italian Open.

His German opponent David Prinosil had thumped Rusedksi 6-3, 6-2 six weeks ago 
in the Miami sunshine but on sodden Roman red clay courts, suggestive of a 
tide-swept beach, the reversal was surprisingly stark, with Rusedski winning by 
the same score.

In the morning there had seemed little chance of any play at all. "Good 
preparation for Wimbledon," quipped Rusedski as he hustled away for an early 
lunch.

By mid-afternoon the rain had eased to what Michael Fish refers to as spits 
and spots and the first-round match finally began on the Pallacorda, a sunken 
court encircled by marble steps and huge statues, all pre-war Mussolini 
grandiloquence.

There have been times during the last 12 months when Rusedski has not moved 
much faster than these statues. Since losing in the first round at Monte Carlo 
three weeks ago he has been training hard at a private club north of Barcelona.

Rusedski did not hit a ball for 10 days. "We just did a lot of running, 
weights and conditioning and then last week my coach Brad Langevad came down to 
Spain."

In Spain he hit with another German, Marc-Kevin Goellner, who is based in 
London. "We have played doubles together and we get on well socially," Rusedski 
said.

Prinosil, who in 1999 had the same foot operation as Rusedski, reached the 
quarter-finals of the Italian Open that same year but is not a renowned 
clay-court player, having done better at Wimbledon than Roland Garros over the 
last nine years.

"It was quite a good draw for me," admitted Rusedski, who quickly took a 2-0 
first-set lead. He immediately dropped his serve but thereafter was never 
really stretched.

"I was really looking forward to the match because David beat me pretty badly 
in Miami and I wanted to get my revenge on him. Brad and I sat down and worked 
out a good game plan."

With the court damp and in a decided chill, Rusedski was clearly expecting a 
tougher match but Prinosil was unable to find, let alone sustain, any sort of 
rhythm in an atmosphere of barely suppressed gloom among the scattering of 
spectators, many huddled under umbrellas.

The British No2 now faces a decidedly harder match against Slovakia's Dominik 
Hrbaty or the South African Wayne Ferreira.

There was gloom in bucketfuls for Sweden's Magnus Norman, who won the title 
here last year on his way to the final of the French Open which he narrowly 
lost to Brazil's Gustavo Kuerten, the world No1.

Norman, to the astonishment of most Romans who have long become used to lack 
of home success, was defeated 6-4, 6-3 by Italy's Vincenzo Santopadre, a wild 
card and ranked a lowly No180.

"I played one of the worst matches in my entire career," said Norman, who 
finished No4 in the world last year but is currently suffering from a crisis of 
confidence.

"You really get to know who your friends are at these times, said Norman. "The 
mobile phone doesn't call as much as before. My coach is there, and my family, 
but that's about it."

No amount of practice - and Norman is one of the more assiduous workers on the 
circuit - is currently making any difference. "I'm devastated and I don't know 
what to do. Sooner or later I hope I can find a way of digging myself out of 
this but as soon as I get on court I get so tight."

A small number of Italians were themselves getting tight last night on the 
strength of Santopadre's victory.
 