
Even though he had won his previous five meetings with South Africa's Wayne 
Ferreira, dating back to 1996, Greg Rusedski was in unknown territory when it 
came to winning two successive matches in the Italian Open, and he duly went 
down 6-4, 6-4 yesterday.

The match was played at the Olympic stadium end of the Foro Italico, the 
furthest away from the two main courts, and alongside another second-round 
match between Alex Corretja and Albert Portas. Here was a stark contrast in 
both mood and style.

The two Spaniards were all grunt, groan and epic rallies, each working to 
outwit and outlast the other with varied combinations of power and subtlety, 
Corretja winning 6-7, 6-2, 6-4. But if their table groaned with an array of 
tempting offerings, the meal that Ferreira and Rusedski laid out was 
disappointingly plain and meagre.

It is Rusedski's nature to be aggressive on court, but clay forces him to 
compromise. "It's a tough combination for my style of play: how much to stay 
back, how much to come in. I have to find the right balance, and on this 
occasion I was a little bit too defensive."

The South African, who injured his hand during the Australian Open and has 
played little tennis since, must have been pleasantly surprised how easily he 
won. True, he made hardly any mistakes, but Rusedski was rarely able to do any 
damage, other than with his serve.

Roger Taylor, Britain's Davis Cup captain, was again at courtside, and is 
obviously a man with Ecuador on his mind. In this respect Rusedski's decision 
to base himself just outside Barcelona during the clay court season, where he 
is guaranteed regular practice every day, has been most encouraging.

Rusedski will always be least at home on the surface, but no longer looks like 
a duck out of water. "I'm striking the ball well and doing a lot of things 
right, and hopefully I can progress and improve. This is what both Tim [Henman] 
and I have to do if we are to have any chance against Ecuador this September." 
Victory on the South American clay would put Britain back in the elite world 
group, but it will be a tough ask.

Switzerland's Roger Federer has the ability to make tennis, even on the slow 
clay courts, a remarkably easy looking task, such is his considerable talent. 
But when a player is blessed with such gifts it may put an extra burden on the 
mental side of his game and there are those who wonder whether Federer has 
sufficient fortitide in that department.

Federer has been talked of as a future multi-champion, a Pete Sampras Mk II, 
which places a huge burden of expectation on his shoulders. Last year the 
19-year-old finished ranked No29 in the world, and this February he won his 
first title in Milan and has since moved into the top 20.

Yesterday he was up against the world No2 Marat Safin and beat him 4-6, 6-4, 
7-6. Safin, only 21 himself, has been struggling with a back injury and is 
still not serving at full power, so the moment was ripe for Federer. "Obviously 
Marat is not on top form, but it was still great for me to come out with a win, 
especially on clay."

It was a bad day for the Russians, with Yevgeny Kafelnikov, the No6 seed and 
French Open champion five years ago, losing 7-6, 1-6, 7-5 to the little-known 
Spanish qualifier Jacobo Diaz. No such disasters for Australia's Lleyton 
Hewitt, now without a ponytail after a visit to a Belgian barber, who beat 
Germany's Tommy Haas 7-5, 6-3.
 