
Palm Springs is where corporate Californians come to die, the happy hunting 
ground of the golden state. Time here is measured out in long, air-conditioned 
days behind the high walls and digitally operated drawbridges of country clubs; 
by night the only signs of life are the thousands of automatic sprinklers which 
irrigate the desert's 100 impossibly verdant golf courses. Beyond this 
manicured green belt, snow-topped mountains rise up too high and fast from the 
dusty plain. These peaks form the stage-set backdrop for the city's 
one-week-a-year shrine to eternal youth: the Indian Wells tennis tournament.

The new purpose-built stadium for this ritual event is almost cruelly 
vertiginous too, and each time play gets under way on court some of the more 
elderly locals are inevitably still feeling their way toward their seats, 
shuffling gingerly down steepling aisles, trying to decipher their ticket stubs 
through the wrong glasses, deaf to the patient promptings of an umpire asking 
them to hurry. There is a curious quiet everywhere. The only noise in the hot 
desert air, apart from the low thwack of balls, comes from the tennis village 
outside where a Simon and Garfunkel soundalike duo, Sounds of Silence, run 
through their acoustic repertoire and, every afternoon, Nick Bolletieri, tennis 
guru to the stars, explains on stage how terribly strange it feels to be 
seventy.

In among the taco bars and power juice tents Silicon Valley snake-oil salesmen 
offer wrinkle creams and anti-ageing elixirs to ever hopeful disciples. It 
seems they need hardly bother: out on the practice courts nearby there seems 
enough energetic life force for it to be bottled, or received by osmosis. It is 
perhaps for this reason that a large woman, carrying two giant Slush Puppies, a 
small sack of pretzels and an oversized tennis ball, is breaking into an 
unaccustomed trot down the main concourse in the midday sun. She seems to have 
identified an urgent need to be in close proximity to some of this carefree 
physical power.

As she jogs, sunglasses bouncing on the bridge of her nose, sweat breaking on 
her shoulders, her vast shorts straining to contain the geographical expanse of 
her behind, she calls to her friend, who is a few yards off her pace, to keep 
up. Then, nearing the court, where a crowd of like-minded over-nourished souls 
is already gathering, she half-turns to see her companion dropping back into 
the throng, and stage whispers one last exhortation: 'It's a big Russian guy,' 
she says, holding her place with one vast arm through the swelling crowd, 'and 
he's wearing some kind of pantyhose.'

The big Russian guy in question, Marat Safin, 21 years old, the reigning US 
Open champion, and tennis's undisputed Next Big Thing, is indeed on court 
wearing a flesh-coloured reinforced girdle and baggy check shorts. He stands 
around six foot six in his technologically sculpted trainers, has a crew cut, 
the torso of a heavyweight boxer, and what look like dog tags around his neck. 
The girdle, which could be a surgical bandage, gives him the appearance of a 
war hero, and he is addressing the ball with something like the pent-up 
ferocity of a battle-fatigued conscript, smiling occasionally as if at his own 
easy aggression, and every so often feeling his rib cage where a troublesome 
muscle injury has kept him out of the previous three tournaments and threatens 
his participation in this one.

At courtside, next to me, two teenage girls, giggling, smitten, are also 
concerned about Safin's back; in particular about the passionate provenance of 
a line of five parallel scratch marks just under his shoulder blade.

In one corner of the court, by way of contrast to the intimidating presence of 
the Russian, is Mats Wilander, the winner of six grand slams, who today has 
embarked on a new life as Marat Safin's coach, the latest in a longish line. 
Wilander, a wiry figure, bandy legged, is watching his charge from behind 
Lennon-framed shades with a half-smile on his face, occasionally throwing Safin 
a ball and asking him how his injured ribs are holding up. 'There is pain,' 
Safin mutters darkly, 'but the doctor said there would be pain. Pain is normal.'

Wilander is the only person in the stadium complex, and probably in the whole 
of Palm Springs, who is wearing clothes that do not appear to have been removed 
from their branded packaging that morning: he has on a washed-out khaki sweat 
top and well-travelled green shorts; his rackets are in beaten-up holdall; he 
hasn't shaved. His coaching, in this debut session, is limited to wry glances 
and the odd cryptic comment: 'Sometimes the balls look big here and sometimes 
they look small,' he says at one point. Safin nods agreement. 'They look pretty 
big today,' he says.

When the pair eventually wander back the couple of hundred yards to the locker 
room, they lose each other on the way. Wilander, in his veteran kit, is allowed 
to pass through the crowds unmolested and unrecognised while a gaggle of 
fame-seekers swarms around the legs of the giant Safin, some touching his flesh 
or his corset as if to confirm he is real. The woman with the outsize ball 
holds it up for him to sign, and then studies the signature.

'What's your name?' she yells at him.

'Safin,' comes the smiling reply, 'Marat Safin.'

And she goes off to repeat it, incorrectly, to her friend.

It is a fair bet that it won't be long before most of us know Marat Safin's 
revolutionary name rather well. The day before he arrived here, I watched Pete 
Sampras, whose game Safin dismantled at Flushing Meadow, speak of the young 
Russian with something approaching awe. As he talked about Safin as 'the 
future', Sampras's weary body language clearly remembered the September 
afternoon in New York last year when his young opponent made him look like a 
balding 29-year-old who had just got married and had $100 million in the bank: 
a man who, having overwhelmed the court for a decade, suddenly found himself 
diminishing in stature point by point.

The impression - despite Sampras's protestations to the contrary, and an 
avenging defeat towards the end of last season - has undoubtedly stuck.Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> has long looked for a natural heir 
to the Agassi-Becker-Sampras generation: in Safin, to Sampras's eyes at least, 
it would seem the pretender has arrived.

Off court, showered, and sprawled on a sofa in the player's lounge, Safin 
seems even bigger than he did whacking backhands in the afternoon sun. Though 
he is surrounded here by men of similar gargantuan build - Goran Ivanesevic, 
his hero and role model, is playing table tennis nearby (and losing, 
stylishly), Mark Phillipoussis is checking the draw on a TV screen - Safin 
generates an extra presence born of extreme physical confidence. He seems in no 
doubt he is an alpha male in this exalted company, the challenge now is getting 
the public to realise it, too.

'It's a little bit of a difficult time for us new guys,' he says, by which he 
means Gustavo Kuerten, and Lleyton Hewitt and Juan Carlos Ferrero in 
particular, 'because no one actually knows us very well still. They still think 
that Pete and Andre are the only players to see. They don't realise we are 
around yet.'

So does he think that it's time Sampras and Agassi called it a day? 'No,' he 
says, with his lugubrious Russian inflection, 'we need them for a while longer 
so people still come and the prize money stays high.' He smiles slowly. 'When 
the fans know us, then those guys can go quietly. . .'

There are certain subjects that tennis players traditionally will not talk 
about in interview. These include their interior life; other players; romance; 
money; emotions; politics and ideas. The things they will talk about, in their 
place, generally involve the current trajectory of their ball toss, and the 
particular degree of their focus on the coming match. Among the press corps who 
witness the mandatory post-match interviews, Safin is considered something of 
an exception to this rule. Veterans of a thousand quote-free Q & As with Henman 
('he raised his level at a crucial time') or Hingis ('I raised my level at a 
crucial time') have warmed to the Russian - who doled out irony and vodka to 
the hacks in Flushing Meadow - as something of a raconteur. The distinction, 
you have to say, is a fine one, however.

Safin can rattle off the story of his efforts to hold on to the No 1 ranking 
at the end of last year's Masters race in Muscovite shorthand - 'I make what I 
could; for the final I was unlucky; he was better this day. That's life' - and 
he has off-pat the particular reasons for his sluggish start to the season. His 
back, his back and his back.

But ask him about life off court and he will tend to reply in a series of 
upbeat catch-all catchphrases, generally delivered with a raised eyebrow that 
hints at greater complexity:

'I enjoy my life'

'I just want to people to enjoy themselves'

'I am very happy'

'I just want to make everyone happy' 

In America, People magazine recently named Safin one of the 25 most intriguing 
people in the world, and in a way you can see its point. As an interviewee 
Safin serves up some of the same contradictions he reveals on court: he is both 
relaxed and intense, boyish and self-assured, all-conquering and oddly fragile.

Some of this perhaps has to do with his upbringing. Like nearly all modern 
players, he was born into a tennis dynasty: his mother was a top 10 player in 
Russia , his father ran the Spartak club in Moscow, one of the very few serious 
tennis clubs in the Soviet Union at that time. Safin, who began playing aged 
three, was schooled in the regimen of Eastern Bloc sports stars, but when he 
was 13 his parents decided to take advantage of the liberalised political 
climate and sent him abroad, to a tennis school in Valencia, to develop his 
game further. There, he was taken under the wing of the Spanish coach Rafael 
Mensua, who seems to have instilled in Safin not only those enormous 
groundstrokes, but also a certain flexibility of thought. He was obliged 
nevertheless to fend for himself. Looking back, I wonder if he resented being 
sent away from his family at an early age?

'No,' he says, eyebrow raised. 'I am very, very happy about that.'

Why exactly?

'I think as a guy you need a little bit to be on your own from early on, to 
start to live your own life, and try to understand what is going on around you, 
you have to be able to survive. . .'

He contrasts his situation with that of his 14-year-old sister, who is the 
top-ranked Russian junior in an increasingly competitive field. 'My parents now 
work full-time to take care of her, because the most important thing of course 
is to make a family. They now try to give my sister the things I could not have 
because I was away.'

Does he regret at all not having had that support himself?

'No,' he says. 'I am happy. I am very, very happy that I did not have all 
these things. . .' (Later, when I speak to his sister, Dinara, who is playing 
in Spain, her mother in attendance, she seems to have inherited the family's 
capacity for boundless contentment: 'I am extremely happy to have Marat's 
example,' she says, 'and very happy to be playing my own game here, too.')

When Safin started to achieve a measure of success, he left Spain and went to 
live in Monte Carlo, which is home to about half of the top ranked European 
players on the tour. It is also the power base of Ion Tiriac, the Romanian 
tennis svengali who was Ilie Nastase's doubles partner. Tiriac, whose company 
now manages Safin's business interests, compares him to a young Boris Becker, 
not so much in his style of play - for all his reach, the Russian still tends 
to win his points from the back of the court rather than at the net - but for 
the way he believes in 'the purity and simplicity of just playing tennis'.

This faith seems to manifest itself in different ways: when things are going 
well it gives the Russian's game the promise of an almost beatific ease. But 
when things are going badly, as with Becker, it can unleash demons. At the end 
of his first punishing year on the tour, Safin admitted to having broken 48 
rackets in anger, more than one per tournament. He puts this down now to 'the 
way I am', and the fact that 'no one likes to lose. I'm just trying to do all I 
can to beat the other guy. You get nervous and angry. But if you don't like to 
see the way I play, don't come.' (In fact, so certain are the tennis 
authorities that this violent emotion is, in fact, what crowds do want to see, 
and so anxious are they to create 'characters' in the game, that they have 
relaxed the laws on 'racket abuse', apparently for Safin's benefit.)

For all this ferocious will to win, however, Safin remains the only player on 
the modern tour ever to have been pulled up for 'tanking' in matches: throwing 
games by not trying. He was fined $2,000 for this offence at the Australian 
Open last year: the referee suggesting that he gave up in his first-round match 
against the South African Grant Stafford, and apparently, on one point, caught 
his opponent's serve in his hand and tossed it back underarm. Safin denies this 
incident happened, and claims, still annoyed at the implication, that 'people 
made a bigger story from this than it was. The guy who handed out the fine, 
obviously he knows much more about tennis and much more about me than I do. 
He's a very smart guy. Very smart. . .'

Still, such incidents point to a psychology somewhat at odds with Safin's 
laid-back off-court persona. Does he recognise the contradiction in himself?

'Oh,' he smiles, predictably, these days he's 'very happy off court and on', 
and anyway he has been breaking far fewer rackets of late.

Does he manage to find enough distractions in Monte Carlo? I wonder.

He laughs a little: 'I try to do my best to have fun off the court,' he says. 
'You are only 21 once. I am aware I will never get back to this time. You 
cannot make big parties, you cannot take cocaine or whatever, obviously, but 
there are plenty of other ways of having fun. And anything you can do you ought 
to do I think.'

Such as? 

He searches for an appropriate vice, grinning. 'Oh, cars,' he says, 'cars, 
cars, cars, so many cars.'

Does he ever find it hard to concentrate on playing?

He looks around the room, studies the pool players, smiles at compatriot 
Yevgeny Kafelnikov, who is sitting at the next table, 'No,' he says finally, 
eyebrows raised. 'It's not hard to concentrate. It's all business to me and 
this business is a business I like very much.'

Read part two of Russian revolutionary here 
<http://www.observer.co.uk/osm/story/0,6903,467995,00.html>
 