
Up to 50,000 people braved the cold and snow on Saturday to turn out for the 
largest ever protest against the rule of prime ministerVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>.

Bolotnaya Square, across the river from the Kremlin in central Moscow, was 
filled to overflowing with thousands standing shoulder-to-shoulder on the 
bridges and along the riverfront leading to the site. Tens of thousands of 
police and interior troops were deployed around the area, but protesters had 
been allowed by officials to gather in an unprecedented show of discontent.

Shouts of "Russia without Putin!" and "Freedom!" were mixed with demands that 
the Kremlin annul a disputed parliamentary election that saw Putin's United
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> party gain nearly 50% of the 
vote despite widespread accusations of fraud.

"I demand new elections," said Maxim, 26, an economist. "If they don't agree, 
we will continue to come out. The people have woken up – they see there's a 
point to going out into the streets and expressing what they don't agree with."

Opposition leader Vladimir Ryzhkov said a further protest would be held on 
Christmas eve if the Kremlin refused to cancel the election results. The 
overwhelmingly young crowd organised via social networking sites and exceeded 
early estimates of 30,000.

"I came here so our country doesn't turn into Belarus, so we don't get 
totalitarianism like there is there," said Marina, 25, a public relations 
officer. It was, as for many in the crowd, her first protest. "I was never 
interested in politics until I saw how they violate our human rights – the 
politicians work in their own interest, not for the people."

Protests took place in more than 50 cities, with a reported 7,000 people 
gathering in St Petersburg and up to 4,000 in the Siberian city of Novosibirsk, 
despite the temperature of -20C.

"They have to hear us," said Artyom Loskutov, an artist from Novosibirsk who 
attended the Moscow protest. "The police simply don't understand [that people 
are coming out on their own] – they ask, who are the organisers? They think it 
has to be the west, it has to be [US Senator John] McCain."

Putin has accused the US secretary of state Hillary Clinton of prompting the 
unrest and has cracked down on Russian NGOs that work with foreign funding. He 
made no comment on Saturday, but the country's leadership has called the 
disputed vote a success and given no indication they plan to re-examine its 
results.

The results of the election, which saw United Russia win a 49.32% share of the 
vote, were confirmed by the election commission. The Communists, Just Russia 
and far-right LDPR entered the Duma, the lower house, while the liberal Yabloko 
party failed to pass the threshold – something that particularly stung the 
protesters.

United Russia deputy Andrei Isayev tried to calm the situation: "Without a 
doubt, people have the right to protest against election results or the way 
elections were held." But he added, repeating Putin's line, that people "should 
not turn into 'pawns' in the hands of those who want to destroy our country".

The protesters largely represented Russia's growing middle class – urban, 
educated professionals dismayed with Putin's soft authoritarianism, something 
that became an open subject of discussion after he announced in September he 
would run in the presidential vote on 4 March following four years as prime 
minister. Putin has already served two terms as president, stepping down in 
favour of his protégéDmitry Medvedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dmitry-medvedev> because of a constitutional 
ban on serving more than two consecutive terms.

"My patience has spilled over," said David, 24. "They have to listen to us: 
the leadership takes however much room for manoeuvre we give them and now they 
have less."

Anarchists, marching under red and black flags, and far-right nationalists, 
marching with yellow, black and white ones, also turned out for the rally, 
though in smaller numbers.

Speakers, including former deputy prime minister Boris Nemtsov, environmental 
activist Yevgenia Chirikova, writer Boris Akunin and rapper Noize MC, addressed 
the crowds. Thousands listened, but tens of thousands more chose instead to 
talk among themselves – a show of public discourse unseen since the fall of the 
Soviet Union.

Politics in Russia has become so mistrusted that it will be hard to coalesce 
around a concrete opposition, many protesters argued. Anti-corruption activist 
and blogger Alexey Navalny – popular among many internet-savvy youth but 
mistrusted by some for his nationalist views, remained in jail after being 
arrested at a rally that sparked Russia's wave of protests.

"I demand the release of political prisoners and new elections," said 
Svetlana, 40, a small business owner. It was also her first protest: "I was 
just shocked at the election results. I don't know a single person who voted 
for United Russia."

Many protesters wore white ribbons and carried white flowers, symbols adopted 
to express their displeasure with the vote. Many more waved handcrafted signs. 
One held a sign featuring a photograph of Putin and Medvedev with the words: 
"Dudes, it's time to move over." Another read: "Let our freedom not only be on 
Facebook."

"The middle class, the youth, are just waking up now – it's become 
fashionable," said Alexander, a 28-year-old designer, who doesn't fear a 
potential crackdown from authorities. "We're young: we're probably not that 
scared."
 