
Australian veteran Sam Stosur will head to next week’s Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> without a win in almost 
five months after bombing out in the first round of the Sydney International.

Stosur looked badly out of touch in the first set and didn’t get any better as 
the match wore on, falling to a 6-3, 6-1 pummelling by world No27 Anastasia 
Pavlyuchenkova in just over an hour.

Kokkinakis and Thompson win Brisbane International doubles title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/kokkinakis-and-thompson-win-brisbane-international-doubles-title>
The defeat now stretches the former US Open champion’s losing run to seven 
matches, dating all the way back to a second-round defeat at Flushing Meadows 
in September.

It also includes a disappointing first-round exit in her home Brisbane 
tournament last week, although she was much more competitive then in falling 
7-5, 6-7 (2-7), 7-5 to world No7 Garbine Muguruza.

The 32-year-old won less than 50% of her points on serve and barely got a look 
at her Russian counterpart’s game, winning one of two break points.

Earlier on day two, late Australian entrant Arina Rodionova became the first 
local hope to fall in Homebush after losing her opening match to sixth seed 
Johanna Konta.

The world No184-ranked Rodionova had a number of opportunities to break the 
top-ranked British player but converted on just two of eight to eventually fall 
6-3, 6-4.

In the men’s draw, Australian qualifier Matthew Barton claimed the second 
biggest scalp of his career, edging British No2 Kyle Edmund.

Ranked 153 places below the world No45, Barton went game for game with Edmund 
for the entire match but earned his 7-6 (7-3), 7-6 (7-5) win with timely points 
in both tiebreakers.


He will now face either Gilles Muller or Alexandr Dolgopolov in the second 
round.


The Sydney-born Barton made headlines last year after progressing to the 
second round of his grand slam debut at Wimbledon, and also beat then-world 
No32 Steve Johnson in Auckland.


Barton is one of five Australians in the field at Homebush, including Thanasi 
Kokkinakis, Christopher O’Connell, Jordan Thompson and Alex de Minaur.
 