
Samantha Stosur <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> is on the 
hunt for a new coach after agreeing to end her long and successful partnership 
with David Taylor following next month’s French Open. Taylor, who has a young 
family and lives in Europe for much of the year, says logistically it was 
becoming more and more difficult to continue working with the mostly US-based 
former grand slam champion.

“I absolutely loved all the hard work with Sam and she thoroughly deserves 
everything that she’s achieved so far in her career,” Taylor told reporters on 
Monday. The pair worked together for a total of eight years, with Taylor 
helping transform Stosur from a multiple grand slam doubles winner to US Open 
singles champion in 2011 when she famously upset Serena Williams in the final.

“It’s been a very rewarding job to be given the opportunity to coach a player 
who possessed so much raw ability but, till that point, had been frustrated at 
not being able to put her game together,” Taylor said.

Australia's Sam Stosur crumbles as US take control at Fed Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/16/australias-sam-stosur-crumbles-as-us-take-control-at-fed-cup>
“It’s unusual for a player in their mid-20s who had not been near the top of 
the game to realise all the improvements necessary to become a regular top-10 
player and beat the greatest player of all time in a grand slam final.”

A former mentor of world No1s Martina Hingis and Ana Ivanovic, Taylor also 
guided Alicia Molik to the top 10 before linking with Stosur after the 
Queenslander’s brush with debilitating Lyme’s Disease in 2006. In her first 
major singles breakthrough, Stosur reached the French Open semi-finals in 2009 
and then the final the following year before reigning in New York and soaring 
to a career-best ranking of No4 in the world.

Stosur split with Taylor on the eve of Wimbledon in 2013 but, after stints 
with Simon Rea and Miles Maclagan, reunited with Taylor with instant success 
before last year’s French Open. She won a title in Strasbourg in their second 
tournament back together, then another in Bad Gastein to regain her place in 
the top 25, having earlier wrestled with retirement.

Taylor insists Stosur’s two Fed Cup losses in Brisbane over the weekend had 
nothing to do with their decision to soon part ways, saying they made the call 
in January. “It’s all very amicable and I’m even working with her at finding a 
suitable replacement, which she hasn’t finalised yet,” Taylor said. “I know Sam 
has still got some great tennis left inside her and she continues to work 
harder than anyone.”
 