
Samantha Stosur is convinced she can be a factor at the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> despite her shock 
quarter-final exit from the Sydney International, as a confident Bernard Tomic 
powered through to the last eight of the men’s draw for the fourth consecutive 
year.


Lowly-ranked qualifier Monica Puig wept tears of joy after ousting Stosur 6-4, 
6-4 in a major upset at Ken Rosewall Arena on Wednesday night.


Nick Kyrgios pulls out of Kooyong Classic with foot injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/13/nick-kyrgios-pulls-out-of-kooyong-classic-with-foot-injury>
Puerto Rico’s world No94 had never taken a set from Stosur in four previous 
meetings, but was unable to contain her delight after notching one of the 
biggest wins of her career.


“I’ve been working so hard on every aspect of my game. That’s why I got a bit 
emotional after this win,” the 24-year-old said. “I’ve always had great respect 
for Sam. She’s a grand slam champion.”

Stosur refused to let her surprise loss deflate her, insisting a tough 
three-set second-round loss to world No12 Carla Suarez Navarro in Brisbane last 
week and impressive wins over Daniela Hantuchova and US Open finalist Roberta 
Vinci in Sydney had her well prepared for the season’s first major.


“Overall I’m feeling good,” Stosur said. “Look, three good matches is good. Of 
course you want more and you want to do better and obviously there’s still room 
for improvement, which is I guess normal for anyone.

“I’ve got a few days now to get down to Melbourne and practise and keep trying 
to prepare as best I can and try and play better. I’ve had a lot of tennis 
under my belt, which is a really good thing. Yeah, I can now go to Melbourne 
with probably a bit more confidence than I’ve had previous years.”

Stosur has only progressed beyond the third round twice in 14 visits to 
Melbourne Park – in 2006 and 2010 – and is refusing to publicise her 
expectations. But the 31-year-old believes she can cause some damage.

“I’m not going to say I’ll be happy with making third round or found round. 
I’m also not going to sit here and say I’m going to win the tournament,” Stosur 
said. “I still think my best tennis, and when I’m able to do that, I can 
definitely compete with the best in the world.

Tomic, the 2013 champion and 2014 runner-up, needed just 48 minutes to live up 
to his top seeding with a 6-2, 6-4 win over wildcard Jordan Thompson in their 
all-Australian affair on Wednesday night.

Tomic will play Russian Teymuraz Gabashvili on Thursday for a place in the 
semi-finals as he looks to continue his promising build-up to next week’s 
Australian Open in Melbourne.


The 23-year-old is enjoying a career-high ranking of No17 in the world 
following his semi-final appearance last week in Brisbane.


“I was playing very consistent in Brisbane and went for my shots. I’m very 
confident, which is the most important thing,” Tomic said. “I’m happy to be 
here in Sydney, it’s my favourite tournament. It’s where it all started for me, 
my first title. I have great memories here.”
 