
Samantha Stosur <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> says the 
intense glare of the spotlight she gets put under every Australian summer puts 
an unfair emphasis on her early season form. Stosur has been a notorious 
under-performer during the January home swing of the international season.

Judy Murray ‘to coach Heather Watson on short-term basis in Australia’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/02/judy-murray-coach-heather-watson-australia>
In 13 appearances at the Australian Open, Stosur’s best performance have been 
fourth round showings in 2006 and 2010. The 2011 US Open champion also has a 
mixed record in lead-up tournaments across the country. Despite reaching finals 
on the Gold Coast and in Sydney in 2005, Stosur’s early season form has 
featured more early exits than deep runs.

Last year’s Brisbane International was an example as the Australian fell in 
her opening match against American Varvara Lepchenko. It’s been interpreted as 
frailty by some but the 31-year-old says her inconsistent displays are really 
not much different to many of her rivals’ at this stage of the season as 
players return from a break.

“It’s easy to jump to conclusions,” Stosur said. “It’s one of those things. 
Sometimes it’s hard without match play ... without those kind of things under 
your belt the Australian summer can be very difficult. I’m not the only player 
to have lost early rounds and not have a good start to the season but because 
I’m Australian it gets highlighted.”

This year’s Brisbane International has featured a far more low-profile 
preparation by Stosur, who is desperate to improve on her current world ranking 
of 27. A former top five-ranked player, Stosur said her main aim was to break 
back into the top 20. “It (27th) is still nothing to sneeze at I guess but 
given where I have been in my career it’s certainly a fair bit lower than where 
I necessarily expect myself,” she said.

“This year I’d definitely like to improve on that and try and get myself back 
into the top 20 as soon as possible. The only way to do that is by winning 
matches and doing that consistently. I still feel like I’ve got that well 
within me, it’s just a matter of doing it.”



 