
It’s business as usual for Samantha Stosur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> as she sets about boosting 
her slumping ranking following another premature exit from the Australian Open.

Stosur’s ranking will take another hit after her 6-4 6-4 second-round loss to 
American Coco Vandeweghe, with the one-time world No.4 arriving at the Open at 
21st in the standings.

But with few rankings points to defend between now and the French Open in May, 
Stosur will start afresh - out of the Australian spotlight - with a big 
opportunity to snare an all-important top-16 seeding for Roland Garros.

Stosur’s best results - and most consistent tennis - have come on clay and 
Paris remains the most likely city where the former US Open champion can 
challenge for a second grand slam crown.

Despite another fruitless summer, Stosur departed Melbourne Park upbeat about 
her 2015 prospects.

Vandeweghe, the world No.37 on the rise, lived up to her billing as a star of 
the future with a powerful display to leave Stosur with no answers.

Serving with precision at almost 200km/h, Vandeweghe didn’t offer up a single 
break point in the straight-sets win.

“She obviously had a great night,” Stosur said.

“I didn’t feel like I did much wrong in either set.

“There’s certainly been cases where I felt a lot worse than this leaving 
Melbourne after losing.

“There’s a long year ahead. This is only the third tournament. We’re still in 
January.

“I’ll certainly be ready to keep going for my next event, that’s for sure.”

Stosur’s immediate focus shifts to Australia’s Fed Cup first-round clash with 
Germany in Stuttgart on February 7-8.

Then she’ll contest tournaments in Doha, Dubai, Indian Wells, Miami and 
Charleston before heading to Europe for her favoured clay court swing.

Runner-up at Roland Garros in 2010 and a semi-finalist in 2009 and 2012, 
Stosur lost in three sets to eventual champion Maria Sharapova in the fourth 
round last year and still believes the title is within her reach.
 