
Samantha Stosur <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> will again 
take little form of note into the Australian Open after being dumped from the 
second round of the Sydney International in straight sets.

The Australian, who has typically struggled under the weight of expectation 
each local summer, succumbed to 25th-ranked Barbora Zahlavova Strycova 7-6 
(7-1) 6-2 in ideal conditions at Sydney Olympic ParkTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Centre.

After battling her way back from a break in the first set, Stosur couldn’t 
keep up the pace against the Czech, losing a forgettable tiebreak before 
quickly falling behind 3-0 in the second set.

Following a first-round loss in Brisbane, Stosur has just the one win before 
next week’s Australian Open.

It’s a situation she is well used to. Between 2009 and 2013, Stosur was 
victorious in a total of five matches before the Australian Open. Last year’s 
three-win semi-final run in Hobart was a better performance but in a relatively 
weak field.

Her best performance at Melbourne Park came when she made the fourth round in 
2006 and 2010.

A wry Stosur admitted she had a habit of starting years poorly but finishing 
them quite well, offering a potential solution to her woes.

“I don’t know. Maybe I need to make up a tournament in December and play a few 
matches and pretend that they’re real,” she said.

“No, look, it’s just one of those things. Some people can turn it on really 
quickly and others take a little bit to get going. I’m certainly not feeling 
like it’s all run away from me this summer by any means.”

Stosur said she will now head to Melbourne with “lots to work on” with coach 
Simon Rea.

Zahlavova Strycova, meanwhile, will now take on defending champion Tsevtana 
Pironkova, who is on a 13-match winning streak in Sydney after again battling 
her way through qualifying.

Pironkova won a remarkable eight matches and took out three top 10 players on 
the way to her breakthrough title here last year but, with a high-quality 
field, could not make the main draw in 2015.

The Bulgarian moved through to the last eight when opponent Madison Keys 
retired in the second set of their clash.

The tournament also lost its top women’s seed on Tuesday when Romania’s Simona 
Halep withdrew with gastroenteritis, allowing Karolina Pliskova an easy path 
into the quarter-finals, where she’ll play another of the day’s winners, 
Spain’s Carla Suarez Navarro.

Other winners included up-and-coming Spaniard Garbine Muguruza, a surprise 3-6 
7-6 (7-4) 6-2 victor over third-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska.
 