
There is no place like home for Sam Stosur - unfortunately.

The former US Open champion added another unwelcome statistic to her horror 
home record when she let a 5-1 third set lead slip to crash out in the Brisbane 
International first round on Sunday night.

Stosur unbelievably lost six straight games as seemingly down and out American 
Varvara Lepchenko stormed to a 4-6, 6-4, 7-5 win over the world No.22 at a 
shellshocked Pat Rafter Arena.

Stosur exploded out of the blocks before unforced errors all but handed the 
second set to the world No.35, prompting the Queenslander to call for her coach 
Simon Rea.

Whatever he said worked as Stosur jumped to a 5-1 third set lead, only to be 
broken twice, which prompted another court-side chat with Rea.

However, there was no stopping former world No.19 Lepchenko who emerged 
triumphant in the two-and-a-half hour epic, sealing a superb comeback win.

In four previous outings Stosur has never moved past the second round at the 
Brisbane International.

Then there’s her Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> record - her best finish is 
the fourth round in 2006 and 2010.

Still, Stosur opted to brush off Perth’s round robin Hopman Cup in order to 
experience the cut-throat nature of the Brisbane International for the first 
time in three years to prepare for another Australian Open assault.

Even Lepchenko thought she was gone.

“That was pretty much it. I had nothing to lose,” she said of her third-set 
mindset.

“I thought at least I could get some points out of the match to go to my next 
tournament.”

Stosur had hoped for a pick-me-up in Brisbane after finishing the year outside 
the top 20 for the first time since 2008, ensuring she was unseeded in the 2015 
grand slam opener.


However, Stosur could not have picked a tougher assignment, opting for a 
Brisbane women’s field boasting eight of the world’s top 20 including former 
world No.1’s Maria Sharapova, Ana Ivanovic, Victoria Azarenka and Jelena 
Jankovic.
 