
Lillie, it must be said, is a head-turner. People stop regularly in the 
gridlocked San Francisco traffic to grin goofily, admire her stylish good 
looks, and even snap photos. Being with Lillie, I admit, makes me feel pretty 
cool.

"I get a lot of people taking pictures of me when I'm with her," Erik Hormann 
tells me one weekday morning, as we navigate around the palm tree-lined 
Embarcadero district in downtown San Francisco.

Lillie is a fire-engine-red 1971 Volkswagen bus. She's the first set of 
vintage VW wheels that Hormann and his wife, Amy, acquired for their new tour 
company,Vantigo <http://vantigosf.com/>, which leads small groups on intimate, 
personalised jaunts around San Francisco's Bay Area.

Hormann and his family have had a lifelong love affair with the 
character-filled vans: between them he, his twin brother, and their father, 
have owned more than 25 VWs. Production of the classic model T2 Microbus ended 
in December but the magical machines have endured – the drier, more forgiving 
climate of the west coast keeps many of them on the road – and so has public 
affection for them.

Of course, the quintessential California hippy vehicle is now 
hipster-friendly, and I find riding with Lillie in my home city a disarmingly 
friendly experience. At one intersection in North Beach, historically an 
Italian neighbourhood and the spiritual home of the beat generation, a 
twentysomething couple stroll across the street in front of us and do a 
double-take; they stop, point, wave and smile. At another, a young boy is being 
dragged along by his father. At the sight of Lillie, the boy's face lights up 
and he yanks on his father's hand to get his attention. San Franciscans tend to 
be warmer and more receptive to visitors than folk in many cities, but there's 
something about a VW van – especially a shiny red one – that coaxes out the 
big-time charm.
 The company also runs brewery tours along Highway 1 and the North Bay 
As we cruise past local landmarks including – Levi's Plaza, Chinatown, Lombard 
Street, Fisherman's Wharf and Ghirardelli Square – Hormann chats and hands out 
little bits of history. First is a placard about Lillie Coit, the wealthy 
benefactor of the 1933 Coit Tower, the slim white concrete observation column 
atop Telegraph Hill. She had a colourful history as a supporter of the city's 
volunteer firefighters – and our van is named after her. He also passes round a 
swatch of Levi's denim (first made in San Francisco), squares of Ghirardelli 
chocolate (you can sample the locally made confectionery while enjoying views 
of Alcatraz) and a heavy rust-coloured replica of a rivet from the Golden Gate 
bridge.

The San Francisco itinerary takes guests on a four-hour exploration (Vantigo 
also leads a two-hour evening tour, plus brewery tours along iconic Highway 1 
and the North Bay and a monthly "oyster experience" on Tomales Bay, about an 
hour-and-a-half north of the city).

Hormann is a genial, well-informed guide, self-schooled in fascinating 
snippets of urban history. When pointing out the Condor strip club, which is 
famous for being the world's first topless (on 19 June 1964) and bottomless (on 
3 September 1969) nightclub, he jokes that he did due diligence when 
researching the attraction. (He'll also often email guests after a tour to 
offer additional tips for their continuing travels.)

The tour is accompanied by Hormann's own soundtrack, heavy on great local 
musicians and tongue-in-cheek audio. Bay Area bands on the soundtrack include 
the Grateful Dead and Jefferson Airplane.

We cruise around North Beach to the lavish accordion of That's Amore; on the 
steep climb to Lombard Street, the zigzag road known for its near-vertical 
gradient, a memorable sketch by the comedian Bill Cosby about San Francisco 
narrates our engine-rattling climb: "In San Francisco, they have these hills 
that have got to be the worst hills in the world to build a city around, or in, 
or on. It's fantastic... an insurance company won't cover you if you had a 
head-on collision with a hill, I'll tell you that, buddy."

I begin to think that, for travellers, the VW club is one of the best ways to 
get strangers to talk to you – what better instant community is there to join 
for camaraderie on sight? Especially in San Francisco, where surfers still roll 
up to the Pacific in ancient VW buses; where antique VW campervans are still 
used for, well, camping; and where the good vibes still follow you, wherever 
you may roll.

• The San Francisco 7x7 City Tour costs $60 adults, $35 children, maximum six 
guests, with Vantigo (+1 415 484 5240,vantigosf.com <http://vantigosf.com/>) 
 