
Man of the day


Kelechi Iheanacho scored three for City, bringing his tally for the season to 
nine. He has started five games .

Goals of the day


His side may have lost, but Lewis McGugan’s two for Sheffield Wednesday at 
Shrewsbury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> were special – his 
second in particular.

Spat of the day


After being beaten, at least Plymouth took it well. “Wycombe came here to 
waste time, niggle and get under our skin,” they tweeted. “They did it and they 
won.”@wwfcofficial straight-batted their reply: “Well played and thanks for 
having us.”

Still got it


Barry Richardson, Wycombe’s 46-year-old goalkeeping coach, came off the bench 
after 15 minutes against Plymouth for his first game in 11 years. He kept a 
clean sheet in a 1-0 win, having spent the pre-match warm-up drinking tea.

Cameo of the day


A Woking fan – gamely stepping up as a replacement fourth official after a 
linesman suffered a first-half ball to the face. The fan took up the role after 
a PA announcement asked for qualified volunteers; the match resumed after a 
15-minute delay.

Grudge of the day


When Fabian Delph decided to quit Villa for City last summer, then did a 
U-turn and pledged his loyalty, then did a double U-turn and left, Villa fans 
dubbed him “a snake”. Yesterday one fan went to special lengths to remind him, 
brandishing an inflable serpent.

Sweetest revenge


Sheffield Wednesday beat Fulham in the third round, but their FA Cup ended in 
the fourth round whenJack Grimmer scored a winner for Shrewsbury in the seventh 
added minute. Grimmer is on loan from … Fulham.

Chutzpah of the day


You have to admire the cool dedication to autograph-hunting of the Colchester 
fanwho ran on to the pitch to get his programme signed mid-match. Michel Vorm 
shrugged him off.

Tribute of the day


Cheltenham’s big-scoring No9 Danny Wright scored twice against Bromley – a 
fine way to celebrate last month’s birth of his new son – full name:Ronny 9 
Wright.

Plus: stat of the day


Leo Messi’s goal against Atlético Madrid was the 1,000th that he and Cristiano 
Ronaldo have scored between them.
 