
If environmentalists were to sketch out the government official of their 
nightmares, it would likely look much like Scott Pruitt. The Oklahoma attorney 
general has been a raucous supporter of fossil fuel companies and repeatedly 
sought to hobble the public health regulations hewill soon be responsible for 
as head of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-scott-pruitt-environmental-protection-agency>
.


EPA fears 'unprecedented disaster' for environment over Scott Pruitt pick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/epa-scott-pruitt-disaster-environment-senate-democrats>
Pruitt, 48, grew up in Lexington, Kentucky, and found his niche in 
constitutional and employment law. A Republican, he was elected attorney 
general of Oklahoma in 2010 after a spell as a state senator. Since 2002, 
Pruitt has received more than $300,000 in contributions from the fossil fuel 
industry and in 2014 even allowed Devon Energy, an Oklahoma oil and gas firm, 
to write a three-page complaint to the EPA on his letterhead.

Pruitt has sued the EPA, the agency he is now set to lead, multiple times over 
what he considers to be unwarranted meddling by the federal government. He has 
targeted regulations that limit air pollution haze in national parks, methane 
leaks from drilling, and mercury and arsenic seeping from power plants.

The attorney general even tried to strip protections from the lesser prairie 
chicken, a threatened bird, because it presented a feathered barrier to oil and 
gas drilling. Oklahoma has experienced a huge increase in earthquakes due to a 
boom in drilling over the past decade.

Oklahoma was one of the first states to rebel against the clean power plan, 
Barack Obama’s centerpiece policy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. A total 
of 27 states have joined court action against the plan, which would limit 
emissions from coal-fired power plants. Pruitt has called the plan “unlawful 
and overreaching” and painted it as ruinous for the ailing coal industry. His 
appointment as EPA administrator will likely involve tearing up the central 
planks of Obama’s climate legacy.

Like many elected Republicans, Pruitt has questioned the overwhelming 
scientific evidence that climate change is spurred by human activity. “That 
debate is far from settled,” he wrote in May.

“Scientists continue to disagree about the degree and extent of global warming 
and its connection to the actions of mankind.”

Scientists continue to disagree about the degree and extent of global warming 
and its connection to actions of mankind
Scott Pruitt 
Pruitt has spoken darkly of a “climate change agenda” that threatens the 
economy and even free speech. He has backed ExxonMobil, the world’s largest oil 
company, in its battle with attorneys general from New York and Massachusetts. 
The east coast states are investigating Exxon over whether it misled investors 
by spending years obscuring the risks posed by climate change.

The EPA, which is charged with reducing emissions and protecting clean air and 
water, faces being led by someone who doesn’t believe in its core functions. 
After being nominated by Donald Trump, Pruitt said: “The American people are 
tired of seeing billions of dollars drained from our economy due to unnecessary 
EPA regulations, and I intend to run this agency in a way that fosters both 
responsible protection of the environment and freedom for American businesses.”

Trump said Pruitt is “highly respected” and will counter the EPA’s 
“anti-energy agenda that has destroyed millions of jobs”. The president-elect 
has previously threatened to reduce the EPA to “tidbits”.

Green groups have called Pruitt a “puppet” of the fossil fuel industry and a 
public health menace. “Mr Trump has just declared war on our lungs,” said Peter 
Iwanowicz, executive director of Environmental Advocates of New York.

When he is not battling the agency he has been appointed to run, Pruitt enjoys 
spending time with his wife and two children and watching baseball. Between 
2004 and 2010 he was the managing general partner of the Oklahoma Redhawks, a 
minor league baseball team.
 