
Half a century after Wilhelm Furtwängler's death at the age of 68, on November 
30 1954, the claim that he was the most influential and important orchestral 
conductor of the recorded era (a claim he never made himself) has never been 
stronger.

Daniel Barenboim, who played for Furtwängler in Salzburg in the summer of 1954 
at the age of 11 and who was allowed to attend his Don Giovanni rehearsals, 
must be among the youngest of those who heard Furtwängler play live. Bernard 
Haitink, 75 now, also recalls the special intensity of hearing Furtwängler five 
years earlier.

"I went to Fidelio in Salzburg in 1949 with tremendous expectations. I was 
trembling with excitement. It was in the old Festspielhaus. And into the pit 
comes this strange-looking man who started the overture, and it was not 
entirely together, and I thought, 'Well, is that the great Furtwängler?' Then, 
all of a sudden, with the start of the quartet Mir Ist so Wunderbar, something 
happened, and it was as if there was suddenly electricity throughout the 
auditorium, and it stayed, and it just built up. The next morning there was a 
Furtwängler concert of the Bruckner Eighth and again I had this same fantastic 
experience, and I walked along the Salzach afterwards feeling totally 
emotional."

Furtwängler was overshadowed by the reputation of his older contemporary, the 
Italian conductor Arturo Toscanini. This was partly for historical reasons. 
Seen from the standpoint of the 1950s, a great German inevitably carried more 
baggage than a great Italian, especially one who had remained in his country 
throughout the Third Reich (though, unlike Herbert von Karajan and others, 
Furtwängler refused to join the Nazi party). Toscanini, meanwhile, was one of 
the most implacable of anti-fascist exiles.

The comparison went to the heart of their music-making too. It is hard today, 
now that Toscanini's reputation is slightly eclipsed, to realise just how 
pre-eminent he was considered to be during his lifetime. So it is all the more 
to his credit that Neville Cardus, writing in the Manchester Guardian two days 
after Furtwängler's death, took Toscanini's reputation head-on. "Furtwängler 
conducted in a manner exactly opposed to the Toscanini objectivity," Cardus 
wrote. "He did not regard the printed notes of the score as a final statement, 
but rather as so many symbols of an imaginative conception, ever changing and 
always to be felt and realised subjectively . . . Not since Nikisch, of whom he 
was a disciple, has a greater personal interpreter of orchestral and opera 
music than Furtwängler been heard."

But Cardus was something of a lone voice in 1950s Britain, and certainly in 
1950s America, where Furtwängler was in effect blacklisted in the postwar 
years. (A Berlin Philharmonic tour of the US, under Furtwängler, was planned 
for 1955; ultimately it went ahead under Karajan, a curious irony). For a 
decade after his death, Furtwängler's reputation was in eclipse, preserved on 
the relatively small number of recordings then still surviving in the 
catalogue, and sustained by enthusiasts, of whom Yehudi Menuhin - not least 
because of his Jewishness - was by far the most important.

As a teenage Furtwängler enthusiast in the mid-1960s, I occasionally wondered 
whether there were other sad cases like me, scouring the record stores in 
search of LP rarities such as Furtwängler's Tchaikovsky Sixth or Mozart's Gran 
Partita for 13 wind instruments (both of which are among his finest 
performances), or sitting mesmerised at home listening to his Tristan, his 
Bruckner Seventh or his Schubert Ninth.

In 1967, it transpired that there were. The formation of the Wilhelm 
Furtwängler Society, modelled on its equally reverential but much more 
fanatical - and still existing - American equivalent, marked a significant 
upturn in the conductor's wider reputation. The society had gained access to 
previously unavailable tapes, which they began to issue on LP, notably the 
first issue in this country of the most dramatic of all Furtwängler's Beethoven 
Ninths, recorded in Berlin in 1942 (Furtwängler gave 103 performances of the 
Ninth during his career; nine either are or have been available on record.)

But it took the emergence of a new generation of musicians in the 1960s to 
reclaim Furtwängler's reputation. In this process, no one was as important as 
Barenboim, who not only spoke and wrote a lot about Furtwängler but even 
performed his own music (Furtwängler's second symphony is genuinely worth 
listening to, and not merely as a curiosity). The young Zubin Mehta also played 
a part, although his musicianship was never on a par with Barenboim's, let 
alone Furtwängler's own.

Such championship came at the right time. The individualism of the 1960s was 
more at ease with Furtwängler's subjective approach to the art of 
interpretation than the more disciplined eras of the past had been. The upsurge 
of interest encouraged a more rigorous search for Furtwängler tapes in the 
radio archives and others. As a result, many more examples of the conductor's 
work began to emerge - chief among them two complete Furtwängler Rings, both 
recorded in Italy in the postwar years.

The greater availability of his work fed fresh interest in his life. Books 
about him proliferated as fresh generations became interested in the central 
public failing of the great musician's life: his decision to remain in Germany 
and his willingness to perform at official functions attended by Hitler and 
other leading Nazis. At its worst, this interest degenerated into excessive 
special pleading by uncritical Furtwängler admirers. At its best it produced 
Ronald Harwood's play Taking Sides, a gripping chronicle of Furtwängler's 
questioning by an Allied denazification tribunal in 1945-46, which was made 
into a movie by Istvan Szabo in 2001. It also revealed Furtwängler the man in 
some very new lights. He was, the biographers revealed, a philanderer on an 
epic scale, with a trail of illegitimate children - "Man spricht von dreizehn 
[They say it is 13]," one author wrote.

In the end, though, Furtwängler's importance lies in the impulsive, subjective 
but almost never self-indulgent way that he made orchestral music. In his 
greatest recordings - and almost all of them were live performances - there is 
a sense of space and occasion that no recorded conductor, before or since, has 
matched. Most of these recordings were made with the Berlin Philharmonic, of 
which he was chief conductor from 1922 (the death of Nikisch) to 1934 (when he 
resigned all his official posts), and again from 1952 to his death.

Yet if I were compelled to choose just one Furtwängler recording with which to 
defy the sceptics, it would be a performance he gave in December 1944 with the 
Vienna Philharmonic of Beethoven's Eroica symphony. That is a yardstick by 
which all subsequent performances must still be judged - and in most cases be 
found wanting.
 