
Imagine a sweatshop in Bangladesh, where the workers want to unionise, but are 
scuppered at every turn. Before any request to management is made, the CEO 
informs all staff that the company sees no need for a union. While preparing 
for a meeting to discuss the potential benefits of unionisation, senior 
management insists on editing all communications sent to staff from the 
organisers. After the meeting, staff are intimidated and threatened by 
directors until the plan dies a premature death.

As an NGO worker, you would probably be appalled; you may even take up the 
cause. But what if it’s not a sweatshop in Bangladesh, but instead the London 
office of a global NGO? What would you do? If you’re a worker, you acquiesce 
silently. If you’re a manager, you toe the CEO’s line.

Sadly, this isn’t a hypothetical case. It’s happening in some international 
NGOs in the UK today. People who have tried simply to broach the subject of 
unions in their organisations have faced tactics not dissimilar to those 
workers in developing countries experience every day.

As agencies whose key mandate is to improve social justice abroad, we seem to 
have a double standard here at home, fearing unions rather than embracing them. 
It’s a clear case of “do as we say, not as we do”.

We’re not a human rights organisation, we’re a charity
NGO head of HR 
Why are some of our HR departments so hostile to unions? Shouldn’t they be 
looking to align our values? It seems not. I know of a colleague who argued 
with their HR department about why a development organisation that fights for 
people’s rights should have a union, only to be told by the head of HR: “We’re 
not a human rights organisation, we’re a charity.” Apparently charities don’t 
deserve the same rights as everyone else.

In my own organisation, pay and conditions are imposed while the 
responsibility for “consultation” is allocated to a group of employees who have 
no experience of negotiating on these matters. Nice as they are, they’re 
unelected, unrepresentative and, in my humble opinion, have no skills or 
legitimacy needed to negotiate on the behalf of staff. It’s a far cry from the 
democratic participation normally ascribed to a proper union.

The myths around unions that seem to dominate mainstream media haven’t helped: 
unions are adversarial, they strike at the drop of a hat, the basic rights that 
unions once fought for are now covered by law, unions are outmoded and no 
longer necessary.

Of course, as workers in the UK, we hardly endure sweatshop conditions and we 
are fortunate to enjoy decent employment laws. But it doesn’t make the role of 
unions redundant.

The international development sector is hardly the model employer. In some 
cases our benefits, such as flexible working or maternity and paternity leave, 
are at the bottom of the barrel. Support given to workers, especially those on 
the front line of humanitarian work, isregularly thought of as lax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/05/steve-dennis-court-case-waves-aid-industry>
, and there is a growing discrepancy between senior pay and the rest. Burnout 
is endemic, bullying and sexism isn’t uncommon.

Secret aid worker: your stories of mental health, PTSD and burnout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/23/secret-aid-worker-mental-health-ptsd-and-burnout>
Aside from the basic protection to workers afforded by law, it seems there are 
a number of reasons why unions in our sector should be embraced, rather than 
feared. At best, they will work to tackle some of the issues listed above and 
will certainly help us model our behaviours in practice, giving us stronger 
moral authority when working oversees. At a minimum, they will improve 
communications between staff and management, and could enhance staff morale and 
commitment, something the sector badly needs.

It’s a shame that staff were not able to unionise in my NGO and I don’t see 
things changing soon. Directors are too busy fighting their own internal 
battles to deal with a union, and there’s no way we’d get the requisite 50% 
staff membership to force the issue.

Even if everything was fine between staff and management where I work, it’s 
the principle that’s at stake. We should be living our values, not saying one 
thing and doing another.

Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here areinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 