
I’m back in full-on waiting mode; the period between deciding to venture back 
into the field and being placed on another humanitarian mission. It usually 
comes after the ‘gratitude’ and ‘guilt’ periods, and before the ‘preparation’ 
period.

When I return home from a field assignment, I am exhausted but generally 
content. Life is sweet. I’m consumed by gratitude for everything I have, and 
the life I’ve had the good fortune to be born in to.

Now the espresso martini tastes bitter and as I glance around the restaurant I 
think: ‘God, what a bunch of narcissists'

A morning spent cycling to a market to buy flowers can give me immense 
pleasure. I visit family and old friends, meet new babies, and attend weddings. 
I think about how lucky we are to have concerts, art galleries, and fashion. I 
might treat myself to a new coat, some expensive face cream, or an overpriced 
espresso martini at the end of dinner. After all, I think, don’t I deserve it? 
I’ve been working hard, doing my bit for humanity, and it feels satisfying.


But like most periods of change, the novelty soon fades and I find that the 
delight is replaced by boredom. And guilt. I begin to feel like an outsider in 
my world. Now the espresso martini tastes bitter and as I glance around the 
restaurant I think: ‘God, what a bunch of narcissists. Do they have any idea 
about the bottom billion? It all seems so meaningless.’ I then, of course, feel 
terrible for making such hostile assumptions.


Secret aid worker: Surely NGOs should embrace trade unions, not block them?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/22/secret-aid-worker-surely-ngos-should-embrace-trade-unions-not-block-them>
During this mini-existential crisis I’m desperate to stay connected to the aid 
world. This is my tribe, the people who understand me most. In between shifts 
at the local hospital, I go into town to attend a study day on improving care 
for people with non-communicable diseases in humanitarian settings. Events such 
as these mitigate the frivolousness of my home life. I might not be in the 
field but at least I am making an effort to learn more about helping.

Events such as these, however, can also serve to fuel the guilt. I’m reminded 
that there are currently more than 65 million displaced people worldwide. As we 
debate the difficulties faced in terms of access, medical supplies and 
security, my mind turns to my recent stint in the Middle East. I think of one 
of my patients, an adorable three-year-old who had sustained a serious injury 
when rubble fell on his head after a drone strike. He had been in our care for 
months by the time I left. He was making good progress and I had shared a 
tearful farewell with his mother who nursed him during his recovery, separated 
from the rest of their family in their home country.


During this period of guilt, I also volunteer at a charity clinic, caring for 
people who have difficulty accessing healthcare in my own country. I’m glad to 
be doing something useful but it’s not the same. It lacks the energy, the 
intensity, and the challenges that come from working in a unique and 
potentially volatile field environment.

Secret aid worker: sorry to disappoint you, but we can't all be Mother Theresa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/01/secret-aid-worker-humanitarian-saint-mother-theresa>
At some point, I decide that I can’t possibly listen to one more demanding 
patient moan at me after I refuse to give them antibiotics for their snivelling 
cold. I need to get back out in the field. I contact HR to tell them I’m ready 
and then I have to wait until my skills are matched with the right project. 
This can take anything from a couple of weeks to several months.

And this is where I am now: life suspended between the western world and the 
aid world; not belonging to either, but waiting for the phone to ring and for 
the preparation stage to start.

Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here areinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 