
One of Britain's biggest high street banks has left millions of online bank 
accounts exposed to potential fraud because of a glaring security loophole, the 
Guardian has learned.

The defect in HSBC's online banking system means that 3.1 million UK customers 
registered to use the service have been vulnerable to attack for at least two 
years. One computing expert called the lapse "scandalous".

The discovery was made by a group of researchers at Cardiff University, who 
found that anyone exploiting the flaw was guaranteed to be able to break into 
any account within nine attempts.

Yesterday, after being alerted, HSBC said: "We are always seeking to upgrade 
our online security and we will examine the issues raised here very closely."

The Cardiff researchers are planning to publish full details in security 
journals this year, but decided to go public. "There are serious issues here," 
said Professor Antonia Jones, the computer scientist who led the research team. 
"Banks are in the business of safeguarding your money, and if they tell you 
that it's safe then you assume that's the case. But as long as this flaw 
exists, customers are at risk. For banks or institutions that are making huge 
amounts out of their customers not to protect them is pretty scandalous."

Richard Clayton, an internet security expert at Cambridge University, said 
many people may be affected. "If somebody could automate this process, they 
would be able to compromise this information in a range of ways. In my view it 
is clueless, and what's more, incredibly easy to fix."

The flaw, which is not being detailed by the Guardian, revolves around the way 
HSBC customers access their web-based banking service. Criminals using 
so-called "keyloggers" - readily available gadgets or viruses which record 
every keystroke made on a target computer - can easily deduce the data needed 
to gain unfettered access to accounts in just a few attempts.

Other banks use a different system, which researchers say is more secure.

Although it is reassessing its security arrangements, HSBC sought to play down 
the seriousness of the lapse, describing it as a "supposed flaw", and pointing 
out that it suffers less fraud than most banks. The spokesman said: "HSBC would 
be very interested to hear any expert commentary on the security of its 
personal internet banking service. However, in this instance the supposed flaw 
uncovered is not one we have seen criminals use. It is an extremely 
sophisticated attack that would require a particular and time-consuming focus 
on one individual victim. It is therefore not likely to be a profitable way for 
criminals to behave.

"Online fraud via HSBC's internet banking system is substantially lower than 
the market average and we are satisfied our customers are adequately protected."

Far from requiring a sophisticated hacking operation, however, the Cardiff 
team believes hackers could access accounts with ease once the loophole is 
spotted. "You will most likely get in within five attempts, and definitely 
within nine," Professor Jones said. A hacker would be able to change the 
account information and address, transfer money or arrange big bank loans - and 
even get up to £2,000 in any currency delivered immediately to any address in 
the world, thanks to a new scheme aimed at holidaymakers.

Although a keylogger would need to be installed on a computer to exploit the 
fault, most common computer viruses now include such components, and they exist 
on millions of PCs worldwide.

Keyloggers have even been used to conduct corporate hacking attacks. Last year 
a gang was foiled in an attempt to steal £220m from the London offices of 
Japanese bank Sumitomo Mitsui. The abuse of personal banking details cost an 
estimated £140m last year, according to payment industry body Apacs.

· September 21, letters: Dyfrig John, Chief Executive of HSBC Bank: Security 
is strong for online banking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/letters/story/0,,1877071,00.html>.
 