
A senior Tory has called on Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> to clarify if Britain will 
try to remain a member of the single market and the customs union.


Andrew Tyrie, the Treasury committee chairman, said the sooner the government 
could provide clarity about the main Brexit issues, the better.

The prime minister has played down suggestions that she was ruling out single 
market membership by insisting on the UK regaining control over immigration. On 
Monday she blamedmedia misrepresenation of her views 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/theresa-may-media-is-misrepresenting-my-brexit-views>
 for the drop in the value of the pound to a 10-week low of $1.21.

But Tyrie, in a speech in the City of London on Monday night, said May’s plan 
to set out broad objectives soon was welcome, “if not overdue”.

Ignore this phoney war. Theresa May’s test is yet to come | Matthew d’Ancona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-test-prime-minister-six-months-brexit>
“A document is needed that enables a full and considered consultation with 
parliament and the public,” he added.

He also called for the prime minister to set out whether the government would 
seek a transitional deal as it negotiates Britain’s exit.

He said: “First, there is the question of whether the UK will seek to remain a 
member of the single market, or if not, seek at least to obtain equivalent 
access for trade in goods and services.

“Clarity on this point would enable Britain to start making a crucial point to 
our counterparties: the four freedoms of the single market are neither 
immutable nor irretrievably interdependent. In any case, the EU will have to 
address the consequences of flows of people within its borders on a scale not 
envisaged when the Treaty of Rome was signed in 1957.

“Second, the UK needs to decide whether to participate in a customs union with 
the EU. If not binary, most of the options are relatively clear cut,” he added. 
“From inside a customs union, the UK would continue to share the EU’s common 
external tariff, leaving little scope for global leadership in free trade. From 
outside, the UK would have the freedom to pursue an independent trade policy, 
albeit at the cost of new administrative impediments to UK-EU trade.

“Third, and perhaps most important of all, the government should take the 
opportunity to clarify whether the UK will seek transitional arrangements under 
article 50. This provides that the EU treaties may continue to apply to the UK, 
for an agreed period, after the withdrawal negotiations have been completed. 
This is a very important but apparently misunderstood provision.”

He added: “In her New Year message, the prime minister rightly talked about 
securing a deal with the EU that commanded the support of both leave and remain 
voters. That matters a lot. There is almost certainly a majority in the country 
– and a cross-party majority in parliament – for a continued close economic and 
political relationship with the EU from outside. Safeguarding the economic 
well-being of the country probably requires a relationship that is considerably 
deeper than that provided for under WTO rules.

We need you, Andrew Tyrie. Without you, the bankers will get away with it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/03/bankers-financial-crisis-andrew-tyrie>
“Given the need to build a broad-based support for its position, at home and 
abroad, the sooner the government can provide clarity, the better.”

Making her first speech of the year in the wake of the pound’s sharp falls, 
May was asked by reporters if the markets were getting her vision of Brexit 
wrong, or if she was getting it wrong.

She said: “I am tempted to say that the people who are getting it wrong are 
those who print things saying I’m talking about a hard Brexit, it is absolutely 
inevitable it is a hard Brexit. I don’t accept the terms soft and hard Brexit.

“What we are doing is going to get an ambitious, good and best possible deal 
for the United Kingdom, in terms of trading with and operating within the 
European single market.”
 