
Maria Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> rattled 
and then destroyed the title-holder Serena Williams to score a breathtakingly 
audacious victory - and at 17 years and 75 days become the third youngest 
women's champion in the tournament's history. It was heady, remarkable stuff.

On an afternoon of rare sunshine for these championships, Sharapova held the 
Centre Court crowd in her thrall throughout the 73 minutes - who would have 
dared believe it would be so brief - and at the end the teenager's joy was 
unconfined as she followed Britain's Lottie Dod (15 in 1887) and Martina Hingis 
(16 in 1997) into the record books. The moment Williams, who had beaten older 
sister Venus in the 2002 and 2003 finals, mishit a forehand return into the net 
to hand the Siberia-born Sharapova a 6-1 6-4 victory, the new champion sank 
disbelievingly to her knees, burying her face in her hands. As she rose to her 
feet, Williams, wonderfully gracious in defeat, came around the net to embrace 
her.

In keeping with the trend initiated by Pat Cash in 1987, Sharapova then 
climbed into the stands to embrace her father, Yuri, but what Maria did next 
was unmistakably twenty-first century: she summoned a mobile phone and tried to 
ring her mother, Yelena, in Florida. 'I was trying to call Mum but it kept 
switching off,' she complained later. The Duke of Kent, waiting to present the 
Rosewater Dish, could only stand and stare, drop jawed.

After the presentations, Sharapova seemed overwhelmed to be holding the silver 
salver that was first presented in 1886, two years after the first women's 
championship. That, though, was merely the bauble. The business part of the 
ceremony was the handing over of the winner's cheque for £560,500, a figure 
that will be multiplied many, many times by the marketing men now that they 
have the Wimbledon-champion tag with which to embellish the Sharapova brand.

What a triumph it was, too, for Russia. The country waits for more than 100 
years to produce a female grand-slam champion and then two come along in the 
space of a month. First, Anastasia Myskina carried off the French Open title 
four weeks ago, and now Sharapova, the thirteenth seed, gloriously and 
unexpectedly annexes theWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> 
crown.

Poor Serena. The champion for the past two years, and winner of four other 
grand-slam titles, has been a slightly melancholy figure since her older sister 
Venus lost, controversially, in the second round and flew back to their Florida 
home. If anything, Serena seemed more upset than Venus by the umpiring mistake 
that gave Karolina Sprem an additional and possibly decisive point in the 
second-set tiebreak against her sister. She would have dearly loved to avenge 
that by keeping the title in the Williams family - and also to have secured a 
victory that would have been a tribute to her murdered half-sister Yetunde 
Price, the innocent victim of a dive-by shooting in Los Angeles last autumn. 
But it was not to be as Sharapova responded thrillingly to the greatest 
challenge of her young life.

The manner of Sharapova's victory was very different from that of Myskina's in 
Paris. Whereas Myskina became the first Russian female to win a grand-slam 
title almost by default when her fellow-Muscovite Elena Dementieva played so 
abjectly that even a British female might have beaten her, Williams 
relinquished her title grudgingly, even if she was, finally, overwhelmed.

The statistics showed an unusual number of unforced errors from the Williams 
racket. But that's statistics for you. The real story was the fearlessness with 
which Sharapova carried the fight to the number-one seed. She went for her 
shots, meaty, buffeting groundstrokes, right from the start and knocked 
Williams out of her normally commanding stride. From 1-1 in the first set, 
Williams did not win another game until the second-set opener. Throughout the 
match, she managed to break the Sharapova serve only once.

It was no secret what sort of final it was going to be, a battle of wills and 
power fought mostly from the back of the court and so it proved, but with an 
outcome few could have foreseen. Both players are able to generate tremendous 
power, Williams from an obviously strong physique, Sharapova from one that is 
less so. The Russian's lack of muscle power is amply compensated for by an 
innate ability evident from the fact that she is ambidextrous and at a young 
age had to decide whether to play the game right or left-handed. Her American 
coach, Robert Lansdorp, spotted other attributes when he first met her: 'None 
of the things she did with a racket impressed me that much, but what I noticed 
right away was her intensity, coordination and great tennis instincts.'

These instincts were immediately apparent when Sharapova comfortably held 
serve in the opening game. Williams then held to love and we settled back for 
what we imagined would be a close and prolonged struggle. Instead we were 
treated to a remarkable display of uninhibited aggression from Sharapova, which 
so startled Williams that at times it was she who looked like the fretting 
ingénue, a role that surely belonged to the young Russian.

In the middle of the second set, Williams looked capable of becoming the first 
player since Steffi Graf in 1993 to win a third consecutive Wimbledon crown as 
she demonstrated a champion's will to hold on to her crown. She broke in the 
sixth game for 4-2 and it seemed just possible that she could turn things 
around. Sharapova, though, is a competitor to her young marrow and she rocked 
Williams by breaking straight back.

Williams's last stand came in the ninth game of that second set, a 14-point 
drama in which she successfully staved off three break points, snorting 
high-decibel defiance as she realised the end may be close, before succumbing 
to the fourth when, symbolically, she slipped to the ground as she chased a 
typically forthright Sharapova return. Cool as you like, Sharapova then served 
out the match, Williams's last, lame return suitably representative of what had 
preceded it.
 