
The dominance so commonly associated with Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> was on full display on 
Saturday afternoon at Arthur Ashe Stadium as she cruised to a 6-2, 6-1 victory 
in exactly one hour against Sweden’s Johanna Larsson to book a place in the 
last 16 of the US Open.

That Williams is through to the second week at Flushing Meadows barely 
qualifies as news: the first and only time the American failed to make it past 
the first weekend was when she lost a third-round match to Irina Spirlea of 
Romania back in 1998, the first year she entered. But Saturday’s victory was 
informed with added meaning as it marked her 307th career victory in grand slam 
play, lifting her pastMartina Navratilova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/martina-navratilova> for the most by a 
female player in the Open era – and moved her level with Roger Federer for most 
among men or women.

Kyle Edmund living the dream as Novak Djokovic awaits in US Open last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/kyle-edmund-novak-djovikic-us-open-british-invasion>
“To be up there with both men and women is something that’s super rare, and it 
actually feels good,” Williams said. “In my career I have just been, you know, 
here for so long. Longevity, that already goes unsaid. So it’s just yet another 
thing, I guess.

“Each number I’m definitely most proud of. Like I said, I was really excited 
to reach that, was it 306? 307? I was really excited to do that. Something I 
didn’t even know about until Wimbledon. I was like: ‘Oh, I have a new goal.’ 
That was pretty cool for me. Obviously I want to keep that number going higher 
and see what can happen.”

Williams’s first two points of the match were crunching aces that left the 
47th-ranked Larsson frozen in her tracks, setting the tone for an afternoon 
where the 22-times grand slam champion was dominant in the rallies (24 winners) 
and on her serve (six aces).

“There’s no shot for me that’s more exciting than hitting an ace,” she said. 
“It’s always just fast, easy, fun, and it feels really good.”

But while Williams, wearing a shoulder-baring white dress with cut‑off 
fluorescent pink sleeves that she likened to Wonder Woman, was merely 
commanding in the opener, the world No1 found another gear altogether to close 
the show.

CiCi Bellis throttled by Angelique Kerber as storybook run comes to abrupt halt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/cici-bellis-throttled-by-angelique-kerber-as-storybook-run-comes-to-abrupt-halt>
Larsson managed to win only eight points in the second set as Williams, who 
turns 35 this month, brought her to heel with winner after emphatic winner. 
Best of all for the world No1, there was no outward indication of the shoulder 
ailment that was said to be compromising her play.

“It definitely feels solid,” she said. “I’m doing a lot of work on it so I can 
keep it in this position. Definitely not going to stop doing all the rehab and 
therapy, so I don’t want to go down. It’s pretty good.”

Now Williams moves into the business end of the tournament, where a 
fourth-round meeting awaits with the Kazakh Yaroslava Shvedova, who saw off 
China’s Zhang Shuai earlier on Saturday. The next milestone in sight is perhaps 
the biggest of all: Steffi Graf’s professional-era mark for grand slam titles. 
She drew level by beating Angelique Kerber at Wimbledon. Now Williams can 
eclipse it with four more wins here, 12 months after leaving here disappointed 
in the semi-finals after missing out on a calendar grand slam.

And most disconcerting for the remaining field is the sense that Williams, 
Saturday’s masterclass notwithstanding, has only scratched the surface of her 
potential so far.

“I feel OK,” Williams said. “Obviously I don’t feel like I’m Serena out there 
yet, but hopefully she’ll come around the second week.”
 