
On a night when her best was elusive against a younger, primer challenger who 
bent and bent some more but would not break,Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> was forced to conjure the 
determination, grit and imagination she has made appear routine on the court 
where her legend took flight.

The world No1 was pushed to the limit by the fifth-seeded Simona Halep in a 
thrilling US Open quarter-final on Wednesday under the lights at Arthur Ashe 
Stadium, finally outlasting the game Romanian for a 6-2, 4-6, 6-3 win that 
lifted her into the last four for the ninth straight major.

Karolina Pliskova brushes aside Ana Konjuh to make US Open semis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/us-open-2016-karolina-pliskova-ana-konjuh>
Halep broke Williams for the first time all tournament in the opener. Then she 
did it again. And she warded off all 12 break points she faced during a second 
set where the top seed’s error-strewn play augured disaster. But the 22-times 
grand slam champion righted herself in the decider and survived her sternest 
challenge of the season-ending major so far.

“I’m glad I got tested,” said Williams, who pounded 50 winners to offset 43 
unforced errors. “The best part of it is I think her level really picked up in 
the second, but I had some opportunities that I didn’t take. So what I gather 
from that is I really could have played better in that second set and maybe had 
an opportunity to win in straights.”

When Williams broke an initially sloppy Halep in her opening service game, it 
appeared the match would follow a familiar pattern. But the American mixed in a 
double fault with a pair of unforced errors while serving at 3-2 and was broken 
for the first time in grand slam play since the fourth round of Wimbledon, a 
span of 69 service games.

The momentum proved short-lived as Halep failed to consolidate in the 
following game, double faulting on break point down. That gave Williams all the 
room that she needed, though she broke Halep once more in the final game to 
take the opener in 33 minutes.

But Halep, who two years ago reached a career-high ranking of No2 after making 
the French Open final, was unbowed. She fought back from love-40 down on her 
first service game of the second set for a hard-won hold, hanging with Williams 
in lengthy baseline rallies and wowing the crowd with her adroit shotmaking. 
One game later Halep broke Williams again, getting the best of a 20-stroke 
exchange from deuce before the world No1 double faulted.

The second climaxed in a dramatic 22-point game with Halep serving to force a 
decider at 6-5. The Romanian had already saved eight break-point chances in the 
set but snuffed out four more during the marathon finish, finally taking the 
set when Williams pushed a backhand past the baseline.

“It’s happened to me in the past before, but like I said on the court, I just 
stay positive,” Williams said. “I’m glad I had the break points as opposed to 
not having them. That’s the only thing I can do, and hopefully I can start 
getting more.”

Williams’s sluggish start to the third was briefly ominous, but she fought 
back from 15-40 down on her serve to win the opening game. The pair traded 
holds until the fourth game when Williams rattled off four quick points from 
love-15 down to earn a break that would prove crucial.

Serena Williams beats Simona Halep: US Open quarter-final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/07/serena-williams-v-simona-halep-us-open-quarter-final-live>
When her groundstrokes came up empty Williams flummoxed Halep with variety, 
mixing in drop shots with an uncommonly high rate of approaches to the net, 
where she won 26 of 32 points. The clean play that had marked Halep’s fightback 
began to slip as the match extended past two hours, while Serena’s thudding 
serve – that saw her crunch 18 aces and win 40 of 52 first-serve points – made 
the difference.

“I’m OK with the way that I was fighting till the end,” said Halep, who 
finished with 20 winners against 17 unforced errors. “It’s something normal now 
for me, so it’s a good thing. She played really well. She is the best player, 
so her serve was huge today.”

When Halep sent a forehand past the baseline on match point after 2hr 15min, 
the six-times US Open champion pumped her fist amid roars from the crowd of 
23,771.

“She plays really well on these courts,” Halep said. “She’s home, so I feel 
that she feels very confident. She did a great job. That’s why she’s No1.”

Williams advances to Thursday’s final against the big-serving Karolina 
Pliskova, the tour leader in aces whowon earlier on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/us-open-2016-karolina-pliskova-ana-konjuh>
 against the Croatian teenager Ana Konjuh. The No10 seed, who saw off Venus 
Williams in the fourth round, will attempt to become the fourth player to 
defeat Venus and Serena in the same major tournament, joining Martina Hingis 
(2001 Australian Open), Justine Henin (2007 US Open) and Kim Clijsters (2009 US 
Open).

“We’ll see,” Williams said. “I haven’t played against many big servers 
recently, but she places her serve really well, I think. She definitely gets 
some speed on it, but her placement is really, really nice. Hopefully tomorrow 
I’ll be able to read them and play OK.”
 