
The milestones continue to whizz past for Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams>, who is running out of 
records to break and history to rewrite as she approaches the business end of a 
tournament she has won six times, including three of the past four years.

Should the world No1 prevail in Saturday’s third-round match at the US Open 
against Sweden’s Johanna Larsson, it will mark her 307th career victory in 
grand slam play and lift her past Martina Navratilova for the most in the Open 
era.

“Sometimes I don’t even know that I’m hitting these milestones,” she said. 
“But some of them I’m really proud of. This one’s kind of cool.”

Sam Stosur crashes out of US Open with loss to doubles partner Zhang Shuai
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/sam-stosur-crashes-out-of-us-open-with-loss-to-doubles-partner-zhang-shuai>
On Thursday, the 22-times grand slam champion tied the record beneath the new 
Arthur Ashe Stadium roof with a fairly straightforward 6-3, 6-3 win over her 
countrywoman Vania King. With Jay Z and Beyonce looking on from her players’ 
box, Williams pounded 13 aces and 38 winners compared with her opponent’s four, 
closing the show in a scant 65 minutes.

But the chronic perfectionist was highly critical of her performance 
afterwards, lamenting her 28 unforced errors and inconsistent return game.

“I feel like I made a lot of errors,” Williams said. “I just didn’t have a 
great day today. But it’s always good to get a win when you’re not at your 
best.”

CiCi Bellis must forfeit $140,000 US Open prize money despite another win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/31/cici-bellis-shelby-rogers-us-open-tennis-match-report>
That Williams can perform so highly on an off day should warrant concern for 
the 47th-ranked Larsson, who bowed in straight sets in their only two meetings. 
The 28-year-old has assured herself a career-high ranking after matching her 
furthest journey into a major tournament with Thursday’s second-round win over 
the Czech Denisa Allertova, but will be a heavy underdog against Williams at a 
tournament where she has won 28 of her last 29 matches.

The top-seeded Williams is humbled by her chance to eclipse Navratilova, whom 
she called “one of the best players to ever play tennis, someone that I never 
even thought I could be as good as numbers-wise”. But it is a milestone that 
pales compared with Steffi Graf’s professional-era mark for grand slam titles, 
which Williams can eclipse with five more wins here.

“I knew it was on the horizon,” said Williams of Saturdays potential 
history-making win. “I knew at Wimbledon that I wanted to get there. Obviously 
I’m excited about that. I would like to take one more step, several more steps.”
 