
Sexual harassment <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sexual-harassment>, 
bullying and other misconduct are rampant among employees at national parks 
across the country, including at iconic sites such as Yosemite, Yellowstone and 
the Grand Canyon, a congressional committee was told on Thursday.

At Yosemite, at least 18 employees have come forward with allegations of 
harassment or other misconduct so severe that a recent report labeled working 
conditions at the park “toxic”.

 At Yellowstone, officials are investigating complaints of sexual 
exploitation, intimidation and retaliation.

Grand Canyon threatened despite win against developers, conservationists say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/13/grand-canyon-commercial-development-tusayan-conservation>
The complaints follow a report by the interior department’s inspector general 
that found male employees at the Grand Canyon preyed on female colleagues, 
demanded sex and retaliated against women who refused.

In a separate case, the park service has temporarily reassigned the 
superintendent of a Florida park where female employees long complained of 
sexual harassment and a hostile workplace.

“There seems to be some patterns here that are just not anything we should 
come close to tolerating,” said Jason Chaffetz, chairman of House oversight and 
government reform committee.

Michael Reynolds, deputy director of operations for the National Park Service, 
acknowledged problems at many of the agency’s 413 park sites, which are visited 
by millions of people each year.

Widely reported problems at the Grand Canyon and the Canaveral National 
Seashore in Florida “were more than a wake-up call”, Reynolds told lawmakers. 
“They presented us with clear and undeniable evidence that … we must extend the 
same commitment to the employees of the National Park Service as we make to the 
protection of our nation’s most extraordinary places.”

Asked if he agreed the agency has a problem with harassment and hostile work 
environments, Reynolds said yes.

Kelly Martin, Yosemite’s chief of fire and aviation management, told lawmakers 
that she has been sexually harassed throughout her 32-year career at the park 
service and US Forest Service.

Early in her career, a Grand Canyon park ranger stood outside her bathroom 
window and watched her shower, Martin said. After she reported the incident, he 
apologized and no further action was taken. The ranger “was repeatedly caught 
engaging in voyeuristic behavior, all the while receiving promotions around the 
agency until his recent retirement as a deputy superintendent” at a national 
park, Martin said.

At Yosemite, dozens of people, mostly women, “are being bullied, belittled, 
disenfranchised and marginalized from their roles as dedicated professionals”, 
Martin said. She and other employees said the park superintendent, Don 
Neubacher, had “publicly humiliated” workers, intimidated them and questioned 
their professional credibility.

Yosemite employees described “horrific working conditions [that] lead us to 
believe that the environment is indeed toxic, hostile, repressive and 
harassing”, the park service said in a preliminary report last month.

Chaffetz and other lawmakers said problems at Yosemite are exacerbated because 
Neubacher’s wife, Patricia Neubacher, is deputy director for the Pacific 
region, which includes Yosemite.

Scott Gediman, a spokesman for Yosemite, declined to comment, referring 
questions to the agency’s Washington headquarters.

Spokesman Jeremy Barnum said the park service is implementing “a comprehensive 
plan to identify and stop harassment, educate our staff at all levels about 
their rights and responsibilities, and create a safe and respectful work 
environment for every employee”.

The agency has set up a hotline for complaints, improved training and is 
conducting a survey of employees, Barnum said.

The park service director, Jonathan Jarvis, “has made clear to all NPS 
employees that when incidents of harassment are reported, NPS managers must 
take the allegations seriously” and ensure the harassment stops, Barnum said.

If allegations are verified, “disciplinary action will follow”, he said.

Representative Elijah Cummings of Maryland was dubious, noting that an agency 
taskforce reached many of the same conclusions 16 years ago.

“Sixteen years later, allegations have been made at Yosemite and Yellowstone 
national parks about possible harassment, hostile work environments and even 
sexual exploitation,” Cummings said.


 