
Sudden boardroom change is always unnerving, and so it was when Standard 
Chartered <https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered> yesterday 
announced a complete and unexpected senior management shake-up. Out goes the 
bank's chairman of three years, Bryan Sanderson, and in his place comes the 
chief executive, Mervyn Davies. The finance director moves up to become chief 
executive, and another director becomes the money man.

All very neat. But actually all very odd.

Banks are august institutions that normally cogitate and ruminate at length 
over such big moves. They certainly do not announce the name of a new chairman 
on the day they start the job - which is what Davies did yesterday. Standard 
Chartered recognised that much when its reshuffle statement included a line 
saying that the bank was trading in line with guidance.

Sanderson, meanwhile, is staying on until March to smooth the handover, even 
though both men have worked together for years. He will then take a pay-off 
worth £750,000, even though he is evidently standing down at his own request 
because at 66 he finds the role too taxing.

Mr Davies's appointment also contravenes the corporate governance code, which 
recommends that companies do not promote their chief executives to the role of 
chairman, in order to guarantee the independence of the position.

Banks have made it something of a tradition to thumb their noses at that 
recommendation. Stephen Green at HSBC and Matthew Barrett at Barclays both made 
the same move.

Those who choose to ignore the guidance have to explain why to their 
shareholders and Standard Chartered made the usual excuses about it being a 
very big company operating in a complex sector and there being "significant 
benefits to continuity". The bank sounded out 40% of its shareholders by value, 
got the nod, and moved like lightning.

The charitable explanation is that the bank, a regular subject of takeover 
speculation, decided to move fast to ensure there was never any suggestion of a 
senior management vacuum.

Analysts, however, and those investors who had been kept in the dark, are 
understandably rather perplexed.

Fidelity has its limit

When Sir Peter Burt was appointed chairman of ITV in February 2004, the 
announcement included a special note of approval from Fidelity, the 
broadcaster's largest shareholder. It is safe to assume the fund manager - who 
last Friday took Sky's money and ran - is no longer a fan.

Fidelity is understood to have made it clear, after the failure of the 
putative Apax bid this year, that it wanted a new management team and thought 
it had Sir Peter's full agreement.

The fund manager is said to have suggested Sir Christopher Bland and Greg Dyke 
as a possible top team. If Sir Peter agreed - and continuing speculation that 
he was looking for his own exit suggests that he did - why could he not get the 
ITV board to agree?

Put aside the issue of whether these two men were right for the task for a 
moment and think instead about the fact that the board seemed utterly incapable 
of agreeing as much as a shortlist.

The NTL bid may have delayed the process, but only for the past fortnight, and 
Charles Allen left the post back in August. So enter James Murdoch, a chip off 
the old block, who spots an opportunity and moves in to deliver a perfect exit 
for Fidelity's Anthony Bolton, just ahead of his retirement and just as he had 
lost all confidence in the ITV board.

One of the worst aspects of the entire ITV saga is that its non-executive 
directors - roundly condemned by investors as among the most ineffectual in the 
FTSE 100 - will probably all survive.

Clara and her beaux

With the LSE share price hit by last week's announcement by a group of 
investment banks that they were considering setting up their own exchange, 25% 
shareholder Nasdaq moved swiftly to table its £12.43-a-share £2.7bn bid.

The LSE swung into rapid-rebuttal mode, insisting the 2% premium to Friday's 
close was miserly given its growth and prospects. Nasdaq has said its offer is 
final, unless the LSE provides a recommendation or another bidder emerges. The 
shares ended at £12.91, up 73p, indicating investors think there could be 
another bid in the wings. But the Exchange's long-standing investor, Scottish 
Widows, took the Nasdaq offer immediately.

LSE's boss Clara Furse has wriggled free of several suitors in recent years. 
But will she be able to do so again?

There is broad consensus that the world has too much exchange capacity. 
Consolidation is under way and the LSE looks isolated. Ms Furse will have 
problems showing the door to a group she has approached to be a white knight 
and obviously regards as a good fit.
 