
Australia’s squad for the summer-ending Sydney is often anomalous. A turning 
wicket, a dead series or even a new year can lend an incongruity to the summer 
preceding it. Mitch Marsh and Peter Nevill batted at three and four 
respectively at the SCG last year. It’s where Colin Miller once opened the 
bowling and Stuart MacGill would always get a game. Of all home Tests, this is 
the one where the course, broadly speaking, truly appears to dictate the horse.


In that sense it’s a convenient setting for selectors to mask the abandonment 
of its short-lived “six specialist batsmen” policy, instead racing back into 
the arms of the all-rounder who can “do a bit of both”. Their fondness for the 
player who serves as insurance against fast bowling fatigue and injury is well 
understood, even if said player’s actual effectiveness isn’t. Australia’s 
recent series losses to England, Sri Lanka and South Africa were largely built 
on paltry batting returns; securing twenty wickets was rarely an issue. Hilton 
Cartwright might promise the fast bowling cadre an extra breather, but at what 
cost to Australian runs?

Glibly speaking, cricket teams have 11 players and the sixth spot is its 
mathematical middle. As such, the style of player selected there reveals much 
about the team’s approach. Amid the extensive praise for Asad Shafiq’s superb 
innings in Brisbane laid an uncomfortable question for Australia: when was the 
last time a number six influenced a match so heavily for the men in green and 
gold? Beneath it sits a deeper question at the heart of Australia’s approach to 
its number six role: what does the team need more help with? Batting or bowling?

Ricky Ponting named assistant coach of Australian Twenty20 team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/ricky-ponting-named-assistant-coach-of-australian-twenty20-team>
Australian cricket – so often purveyor of confidence and simplicity – is 
unaccustomed to tying itself in philosophical knots, though something shifted 
about ten years ago. After a reasonably stable commitment to six batsmen, four 
bowlers and a keeper, selectors uncharacteristically uprooted policy.

Maybe it was Adam Gilchrist’s retirement, maybe it was Andrew Flintoff’s 
destruction, maybe they were scared of life post-Warne (some of us still are), 
but from late 2005, selectorial orthodoxy was abandoned in a desperate search 
for an Australian all-rounder to call its own; someone to win matches with 
profound contributions in both disciplines, who could compound that value by 
shouldering a load that would leave their specialists fresh. In other words, 
someone approaching the perfect cricketer. Throughout history, there hasn’t 
been many.

Of course, Australia never found its Freddie. It found Shane Watson, though to 
most he never seemed enough. As the search continues, history will be 
increasingly kind to him. The futility of Australia’s search revealed more 
about the rare brilliance of Flintoff than anything else. Unable to find an 
antipodean equivalent Australia lowered its bar a little. Instead of an 
intense, passionate, match-winning heartthrob with bat and ball, it’s since 
sought players who can “help out a bit” in both parts of the game; the real 
“chip in” Test cricketer.

After Watson, Mitchell Marsh was bequeathed the role. He proved able-enough 
foil with the ball, providing those so-treasured 10 to 15 overs to relieve the 
bowling cartel. But he didn’t score enough runs and people started to pine 
again for a Real Australian Number Six. And besides, what good was a potent 
attack if it had no runs to bowl to? Marsh, as bowling all-rounders are wont to 
do, bolstered the bowling but robbed the batting. The role has always had the 
feel of robbing Peter to pay Paul.

So selectors reverted to the pre-2005 convention. Six batsmen, four bowlers 
and a keeper. Callum Ferguson and Nic Maddinson – earmarked prodigies from 
successive generations – were brought in to once again uphold the lofty 
traditions of the position once held by proper run scorers: Walters, Waugh, 
Ponting and Martyn, to name a few. Both selections polarised opinion, but there 
was a deeper point beneath. Australia had shifted strategy. Once again, they 
would select the best players in each of cricket’s primary disciplines. The 
role-player was vanquished.

But the break-up always felt temporary. Unhelped by Maddinson’s quadruple 
failures, Australian bowling coach David Saker’s recent comments suggested the 
all-rounder – once it got its act together – would always be welcomed back in 
the house. Put forward by Cricket Australia to speak at a Test match press 
conference on behalf of the AustralianCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> team, in Australian cricket 
uniform, as one of its senior coaches, he claimed to be an outsider without 
influence as he unequivocally plumped for another bowler to help the quicks.

“We are desperately looking for that all-rounder who can bowl some overs for 
us,” Saker said.

The comments arrived after Pakistan had posted 450 in Brisbane followed by 443 
on a comatose MCG wicket. Naturally, if you’re overworked and unsupported you 
appeal for help. Nurses, teachers and anyone who’s ever had a tough job will 
empathise. It’s uncertain whom Saker was referring to by “we”. Further, how Nic 
Maddinson was to interpret those comments ahead of his final, and failing, shot 
says much about how temporary he really was, and how wedded Australia is to the 
all-rounder number six.

So Australia returns to the role player. It’s a curious phenomenon in long 
form cricket. For a game requiring such exclusive expertise in two separate 
disciplines – where being proficient at even one is hard enough – how teams can 
contrive to find a place for someone not singularly expert in either appears 
counterintuitive.

And whereas Australia’s batting group waited years for a policy shift, two 
long innings’ was all it took for a reversal. This turnaround reveals much: how 
important Australia’s fast bowlers are to winning, how little it trusts its 
spinners, and how reliant it is on the triumvirate of Smith, Warner and Khawaja 
to post competitive totals.
 