
Ashleigh Barty’s tennis comeback has been dealt a blow with the young 
Queenslander forced to withdraw from her campaign at the Hobart International 
as she puts herself on ice ahead of the Australian Open.


After winning two qualifying matches against higher-ranked players, the 
20-year-old cited shoulder soreness as she pulled out of Sunday’s final-round 
clash that could have put her into the main draw.


Ash Barty gives world No1 a big scare during Brisbane International comeback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/barty-world-no1-scare-brisbane-international-comeback>
Barty’s hopes to push on and partner fellow Aussie Casey Dellacqua were dashed 
later in the day. “Barty has not overcome shoulder soreness to play doubles,” 
the tournament tweeted.

It’s a setback for the 2012 junior Wimbledon champion who is trying to get her 
tennis career back on track and climb from her world No271 ranking after taking 
time out to try her hand at cricket in the WBBL.


There were no signs of fatigue for Barty after her 4-6, 7-6 (7-4), 6-4 win on 
Saturday over world No88 American Nicole Gibbs.


“It’s nice to tick off another top-100 win coming into the first grand slam of 
the year,” the Queenslander told reporters after play, clear in her intention 
to contest the Australian Open.


The win followed Friday’s 6-3, 2-6, 6-4 defeat of South Korean Su Jeong Jang, 
ranked 143rd.


Barty’s withdrawal is one of many from the Hobart tournament including 
reigning champion Alize Cornet. The Frenchwoman said a sore back after playing 
in the Brisbane International final would prevent her defending her title.

“So sad I can’t even try to defend my title @HobartTennis this year, but I 
need to take care of my back before the AO,” Cornet tweeted, indicating her 
intention to contest the Australian Open.

There were also high-profile casualties at the Sydney International, with 
world No14 Elina Svitolina joining Pliskova in pulling out of the tournament. 
The sixth seeded Svitolina cited a viral illness for her decision to pull out 
on the opening day of the Australian Open warm-up.

“I’ve had constant headaches for the last two days and unfortunately in 
today’s hot weather it got even worse when I was warming up and my body wasn’t 
ready to compete,” Svitolina said. “I love playing in Sydney, it’s one of my 
favourite stops during the season. Hopefully I can come back next year and play 
in front of the amazing fans here.”

Svitolina’s withdrawal comes on the back of recently-crowned Brisbane 
International winner Pliskova’s resignation on Sunday morning due to a thigh 
injury.

Kokkinakis and Thompson win Brisbane International doubles title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/kokkinakis-and-thompson-win-brisbane-international-doubles-title>
Thanasi Kokkinakis will not be the only man flying the flag for Australia in 
the Sydney International, with two local qualifiers winning through to the main 
draw.


Matthew Barton and Christopher O’Connell ensured there would be a strong local 
flavour at the Australian Open warm-up event at Homebush with strong victories 
on Sunday’s opening day.


With David Cup captain Lleyton Hewitt in the stands on show court one, world 
No196 Barton served strongly in a 6-3, 6-1 win over Mathias Bourgue. Then world 
No237 O’Connell made it a five-man contingent after toppling Spaniard Enrique 
Lopez-Perez 6-3, 7-5.

The pair join Kokkinakis, Jordan Thompson and Alex De Minaur in a weak field 
that boasts just one top-20 player in world No8 Dominic Thiem.

At least one Australian will progress to the second round after doubles 
partners Thompson and Kokkinakis, who won the doubles final in Brisbane on 
Sunday night, face off in round one.

 