
The collapse of the UN negotiations on climate change in The Hague is a moment 
of inexcusable shame for the few nations, led by America, who refused to change 
their polluting habits for the sake of the long-term survival of the world. 
Unless there is a change of heart this meeting will go down in history as the 
moment when governments jettisoned the concept of global cooperation when it 
was most urgently needed: to save the planet itself. Ostensibly, the meeting 
broke up because European countries, led by France, refused to accept a last 
minute compromise brokered by John Prescott. If agreed, it would have required 
the US to give up its plans to offset forests planted abroad (or simply saved 
from extinction) against its domestic targets for the reduction of carbon 
emissions. It could be argued that in terms of practical politics - not least, 
the imminence of an ungreen, isolationist Bush administration - that it would 
be better to accept a slice of bread rather than no loaf at all. And it could 
certainly be argued that Mr Prescott was ill- advised to raise premature hopes 
of a settlement. But that's not the point.

Even if the compromise had been accepted, it would have done little or nothing 
to tackle the main problem - the refusal of the US, the wealthiest nation on 
earth, to curb its ravenous appetite for gas guzzling. The US has 4% of the 
world's population but is responsible for almost 25% of the carbon dioxide 
unleashed into the atmosphere, which is the main cause of global warming. The 
US wants to meet its target, agreed at Kyoto, of 7% cuts in emissions by 
creating "carbon sinks" under which tree planting and changes in ploughing 
methods would help to absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Such 
initiatives undoubtedly have a place but they are no substitute for government 
action to curb US profligacy, including the ludicrously cheap price of gasoline 
at the pumps, which encourages the use of large, energy guzzling cars. If 
Americans can't be persuaded to curb their excesses then what moral authority 
will they have to dissuade the world's most populous country, China, from 
following the same path of conspicuous consumption?

There are some straws in the wind. Subtle changes are taking pace in American 
public opinion. In a recent poll 56% of Americans expressed a willingness to 
see taxes rise to preserve the environment. Corporations are realising that to 
be excluded from the Kyoto project could be bad for business, because they 
won't have a stake in the booming opportun-ities conservation will bring, of 
which emission trading is a key part.

It is possible, even under a Bush administration, that public and corporate 
pressures will wring changes where external pressures have failed. Meanwhile, 
the rest of the world must push ahead to ratify the Kyoto agreement with or 
without the US and the other "umbrella" countries, including Japan, who have 
argued that they cannot reach their targets without counting carbon sinks. The 
Kyoto programme for the survival of the planet is too important to be torpedoed 
by the parochialism of the US. Now that the cold war is over there is no area 
of policy that would benefit more from US leadership. Americans have a very 
strong self interest in changing their habits. If the world's biggest consumers 
were to cut down on gasoline use, it would postpone the time when diminishing 
world oil supplies push prices up and restore political control of energy to 
the Middle East. And, as the recent forest fires in the US reminded everyone, 
global warming knows no geographical barriers.
 