
South Beach, Miami

Still the place to see and be seen, South Beach is where you'll find 
bikini-clad beachgoers, models doing photoshoots by the sea, and lots of 
plastic surgery ... There are more plastic surgeons in this part of the US than 
anywhere else. At night the neon lights and beautifully restored art deco 
architecture are really something. There are also jetskis, powerboat rides and 
all sorts of activities. The beach is so wide they play polo with horses on the 
sand. You never really know what's going to be going on there, but you can 
guarantee that it will be over the top.

Cape Florida, Key Biscayne
 Photograph: Alamy 
This is my favourite beach for a family trip. It's beautiful and spacious, 
with a lighthouse at the south end. There's always a wind, which means it 
doesn't get as hot as some other Florida beaches. Don't bring a surfboard, 
though – there are almost no waves. The water drops off so gradually it's safe 
for children to swim or paddle. There's a restaurant on the beach, as well as 
toilets and showers, and the state park does a great job keeping it in good 
shape. You can't stay there but it's perfect for a day trip. As we say, it's 
still Miami but it's a world away.

Siesta Beach, Siesta Key
 Photograph: Alamy 
Currently number one in my annual top 10 list, this tranquil beach claims to 
have the finest white sand in the US and I have to agree. In fact the sand is 
so clean and soft, it almost feels sacrilegious walking on it with shoes on. 
The beach is a big crescent, the sand is like sugar and the sea is emerald 
green. It's so calm the surf is measured in inches. A lot of people think it's 
coral sand but actually it's quartz crystal, and it stays cool even when the 
sun's at its peak. As the name suggests it is a great place for a siesta. 
People like to get a glass of wine and walk down from the town area to watch 
the sunset over the Gulf. Those who live there do it almost every night.

Sanibel Island
 Photograph: Robert Browman/Corbis 
If you collect shells, this is the best place for it in Florida. So many 
people bend down to pick up shells here that the posture even has a name – the 
"Sanibel stoop". Likewise, the presence of stingrays around the beach has led 
to the "Sanibel shuffle" – where you stomp and splash on entering the water to 
startle them away. The nearbyBailey-Matthews Shell Museum 
<http://www.shellmuseum.org/> has specimens from all over the world and is a 
handy place to identify the ones you've picked up on the shore. The wildlife is 
well-preserved; if you walk over the boardwalks you can sometimes see gopher 
tortoises, and there are "gator crossings" on the bayside.

New Smyrna
 Photograph: Alamy 
This is a real funky, laid-back beach. Kind of the opposite of South Beach. 
The north end has the best surf in the state. It also has the most sharks in 
the state. Go up above the beach and you'll see 100 kids surfing and about 100 
shark fins swimming around too. But they're not big sharks, and they're not 
here to eat us; if they were they would have eaten a load of kids by now.

Knight Island
 Photograph: Alamy 
Also known as Palm Island, after its best-known resort, this is a real getaway 
beach in Charlotte County – you can only get here by ferry or private boat. The 
ferry (palmislandtransit.com <http://palmislandtransit.com/>) costs $60, so 
stock up on food beforehand because you'll want to stay for a week. There are 
no hotels but you can stay in rental homes (trymycapehaze.com 
<http://www.mycapehaze.com/Palm_Island_Rentals.html>). The price puts people 
off day trips and keeps the crowds away. It's very exclusive. Every rental home 
comes with an electric golf cart and there are lots of sand roads to drive 
around. It's a fisherman's heaven. The beach is about 10 miles long, and you'll 
always come back with a handful of black shark teeth you've found in the sand. 
It's a safe place too – people who live there don't even lock their doors. 
You'll hate it if you like action, but you'll love it if you want to escape the 
buzz of Florida's cities.

Stephen P Leatherman, aka Dr Beach, is director of the Laboratory for Coastal 
Research at Florida International University. Each year he compiles a list of 
America's top 10 beaches. For more beaches visitdrbeach.org 
<http://drbeach.org/>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 