
I’m standing in the storage closet at the Mütter Museum of the College of 
Physicians of Philadelphia <http://muttermuseum.org/>, surrounded by wire 
shelves stocked with biological specimens. The room is kept at a relatively 
high humidity and regulated by an exhaust system that performs six air 
exchanges an hour to eliminate unpleasant odors. Although this closet is 
located above a boiler room, it’s cold and crisp, like a restaurant’s walk-in 
fridge.

In one cylindrical jar floats a cream-colored hand infected with cellulitis. 
The curve of the jar is distorting, so when I peer in from the side, the hand 
looks enormous.

The museum’s curator, Anna Dhody, explains that square containers are best for 
storage because you can see the specimens more clearly. This statement might be 
a metaphor for one of the goals of the Mütter Museum more generally: to strive 
to see things clearly – particularly things that some would prefer not to see.
 The Hyrtl collection of skulls. Photograph: Mütter Museum 
Founded in 1858, the museum gathers together materials from the seventh 
century BC to the present that reflect the human history of anatomy and 
medicine.

The original collection was donated by Dr Thomas Dent Mütter to further 
research and education in a city known for its medical advancements. Most of 
the museum’s objects are medical instruments and human specimens: both “wet”, 
or biological specimens stored in fluid, and osteological, or skeletal, 
specimens.

Among the most beloved objects are the Hyrtl collection of 139 skulls; the 
giant colon of a man who appeared in a sideshow; a wax bust of Madame Dimanche, 
who had a nearly 10-inch cutaneous horn on her forehead; and the liver of 
conjoined twins Chang and Eng Bunker.

As a small museum with a large object-to-square foot ratio, the Mütter must 
make difficult choices about what to place on view. Because only 10%-15% of its 
collection is on display, the climate-controlled storage closet offers a 
glimpse into a hidden world of the macabre.

I’m here to see four new acquisitions that will be part of an exhibit about 
skin, scheduled to open this December. Like many objects in the museum’s 
collection, they are fragments of human bodies. They are also works of art.

They are tattoos.

These tattoos were found at the University of Pennsylvania during a purge of 
the pathology department’s storage spaces, and soon they will be officially 
gifted to the museum. The slightly discolored slivers of skin have been sewn to 
clear panels inside their jars to keep them taut. It is not yet known what the 
storage fluid might be, but the specimens are in excellent shape. They vary in 
size and design.
 A preserved tattoo in a jar. Photograph: Mütter Museum 
Dhody and museum educator Marcy Englemen are charged with filling in the 
histories of these mysterious objects. When did the University of Pennsylvania 
acquire them? What can be determined about the cadavers from which they were 
excised? Are the tattoos from the same time period? Each has a number 
associated with it, which may be traceable, if the correct database can be 
located. The containers in which they are stored will be dated, and the style 
and imagery of the tattoos will be researched.

Engleman, who teaches a class on body modification at the museum, is 
interested in the “universality” of tattooing. But she also notes that tattoos 
reveal personal identity and individuality; they each have a story. They are 
thus well suited to an exhibit that will engage not only medical concerns – 
“the ‘ology’ part of dermatology”, as Dhody terms it – but also wider cultural 
understandings of what skin reveals.

“It’s our largest organ, and it’s what we present to another person,” Dhody 
says.

The tattoos also resonate with other objects in the permanent collection, 
including a bookbound in human skin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j3QFIoCoy0M> and two jars of human skin, one 
of which is on display in the galleries.

These jars were donated by a woman with dermatillomania, or compulsive picking 
of the skin. This object affects visitors more than almost any other, and the 
museum hopes it will be a tool for education. Although the exhibit is still a 
work in progress, it will also likely include skin cancer slides, 
dermatological wax models and stereographs of dermatological conditions such as 
syphilis and ringworm. Madame Dimanche will be in attendance, as well.
 