 Has, Pendennis wonders, safe in the knowledge that a knighthood was never his 
for the taking, Camilla Parker Bowles had surgical assistance? Photographer 
Alison Jackson, who has taken a series of lookalike portraits of the Duchess of 
Cornwall, is convinced CPB has had Botox treatment. 'I have spent a great deal 
of time studying photos of Camilla in order to get her look just right. There 
is no doubt that she has had work done,' Jackson tells Pendennis. 'Until 
recently, her face was heavily wrinkled. Now, look how the creases have 
disappeared from the area around her eyes, and her face has all been smoothed 
out. That must be Botox.' And Pendennis thought it was just a great hairdo.
· Perhaps it was inevitable, given the way this nation genuflects before the 
altar of celebrity: the Grosvenor House hotel is looking for a TV chef. This 
week's Caterer and Hotelkeeper magazine says leading personalities from the 
world of gastronomy, including Heston Blumenthal and Gordon Ramsay, have been 
approached to open a new fine-dining restaurant at the hotel. Whether the 
genteel Mayfair set is ready for the delights of snail porridge or 
expletive-ridden cooking is open to conjecture.

· Exciting news for fans of canine-produced literature everywhere: Roy 
Hattersley's dog, Buster, is to write a follow-up to his bestselling Buster's 
Memoirs. The mutt, famous for getting Hattersley a criminal conviction after it 
mauled a goose in a public park, is retreating to the Highlands with its master 
this summer to begin work on the sequel. 'Trouble is, the first one was rather 
popular so I think Buster is feeling the pressure. He gets more fan mail than I 
do. About three or four letters a day. But I am not jealous,' Hattersley 
insists. Rumours that David Blunkett's guide dog, Sadie, is looking to mirror 
Buster's success and is in talks with publishing agents have yet to be 
confirmed.

· Even before the PM has shuffled off to pastures new, history has spoken. And 
history, it appears, is unimpressed. A forthcoming book, The Unfulfilled Prime 
Minister: Tony Blair's Quest for a Legacy, by Times grandee Peter Riddell, a 
man whose views hold considerable sway in the corridors of Number 10, is 
unlikely to make happy reading in the Blair household. 'On that sunny Friday 
morning back in May 1997, Tony Blair promised so much, but eight years later 
his premiership seems to be a disappointment to many people in Britain,' runs 
the blurb for the book which will be published just in time for party 
conference season.

· To the Imperial War Museum last Monday for a ceremony to mark VJ Day 
attended by the Duke of Edinburgh, Vera Lynn and Joanna Lumley. Amid the 
throng, Pendennis overheard one of Prince Phil's minders lecturing two 
policemen who had been assigned to be part of the security: 'When he comes in, 
you exit stage left since he doesn't like to see uniforms.'

· Rumours of a dressing-room bust-up between captain Ricky Ponting and star 
player Shane Warne have been hotly denied by the Australian cricket side. 
Team-mate Glenn McGrath explained: 'It's disappointing that it's actually in 
the papers when it never happened. We're happy to take criticism but when it's 
a blatant lie, it gets a bit tough.' But where could these have rumours have 
come from? Possibly from the Mail on Sunday which broke the 'story': 
'Australia's Ashes campaign has been rocked by a stand-up row between Shane 
Warne and skipper Ricky Ponting.' What a shame the MoS wasn't able to 
cross-check the report with its new cricket columnist, one Glenn McGrath.

pendennis@observer.co.uk <mailto:pendennis@observer.co.uk>
 