 Our letter's editor here at The Observer is patience personified, but even he 
has been known to grow a little purple at the meanderings of correspondents as 
they navigate their way around, above, and under the nub of their argument. So 
in an attempt to control his blood pressure here's a small guide to writing to 
your favourite Sunday newspaper.
We receive between 150 and 300 letters for publication each week, and a 
similar number of emails. The space devoted to these is limited, with the 
result that only about a dozen get printed, the vast majority ending up on what 
we used to call the spike. (It was literally that: a sharpened metal rod on 
every desk where discarded paper could reside and yet still be accessible 
should we suddenly change our minds. I had a colleague on the Evening Standard 
who would never use one, having seen a sub-editor at another newspaper trip and 
only narrowly avoid losing an eye.)

Correspondents should, perhaps, heed the words of Dorothy Osborne (1627-95), 
wife of author and diplomat Sir William Temple, who wrote to her husband: 'All 
letters, methinks, should be free and easy as one's discourse, not studied as 
an oration, nor made up of hard words like a charm.'

So, to give your letter a better than average chance of avoiding today's 
electronic equivalent of the spike, here are some simple rules:

1. Don't start your letter 'So,'. 

2. Follow the guidelines set out every week on the letters page (it's amazing 
how many people ignore them).

3. Be brief. It takes time for us to read several hundred communications. Try 
to keep the length of your letter to a maximum of 300 words.

4. Stick to the point. 

5. Be legible. Obviously, typed letters and emails are easy to read, but those 
who enjoy the sensation of pen on Basildon Bond should try to control those 
spiders with their legs dipped in ink. Our letters' editor sometimes feels like 
a pharmacist faced with scores of illegible prescriptions.

6. Avoid green ink. 

While I wouldn't dream of telling you what to write, it is worth noting that 
the letters that stand most chance of success are those that take an issue 
forward. Those that merely disagree with a point in the paper or complain and 
carp without substance to their argument usually get short shrift; those that 
throw new light on a subject are the ones that fight to get in the paper.

Don't be afraid to be passionate; we thrive on vigorous argument - and a touch 
of deft humour never does any harm - but avoid the temptation to hurl insults 
at our writers; it may make you feel better but this form of instant therapy 
only ever gets in the paper (minus vituperation) if accompanied by a valid 
point.

Try to tailor your letter for the paper. Correspondents who proudly announce 
that they have sent the same communication to 10 other publications are 
unlikely to see them used: no newspaper likes printing letters seen in other 
publications. Resist the temptation to go into verse. Somewhere out there are 
several hundred aspiring poets who believe that newspaper editors will clear 
space on the letters page for their efforts. They won't.

All this may make you feel that your letters are unwelcome. Not so. This is 
your forum, and we need to hear your ideas and opinions. We have an open policy 
here; all staff have access to letters to the editor, both in paper and 
electronic form. They are widely read, so even if your letter doesn't appear in 
the paper you can be sure that many people here will have seen it.

We don't ask you to be brief for our own convenience; a long letter will 
inevitably have to be cut and runs the risk of becoming unbalanced, even after 
careful editing. And editing takes time, which is why we set a deadline of 5pm 
on Thursday. Don't be tempted to emulate some of our staff writers by going 
beyond the deadline: you'll be too late. Please include your name, address and 
daytime telephone number. We don't publish unsigned letters, however succinct, 
but if you want us to withhold your name and address please supply them anyway 
so we can verify your letter.

Emailers should insert 'Letter to the Editor' in the subject field. This isn't 
a piece of mindless bureaucracy. Our email address, in common with many 
thousands, gets bombarded with all manner of commercial junk. We don't have the 
time or the inclination to read it, so a clear label on your letter helps us 
sort your golden wheat from some very irritating chaff.
 