
“Dear Lifehacker,” a correspondent to the advice website writes. “How do I 
deal with someone who is completely irrational? Every time we disagree ... I 
try to present evidence and information to support my position, and he ... gets 
really angry, as if I’m attacking him personally.

“He has been known to dismiss scientific studies and encyclopedia articles 
because of typos, or because they were from last year and not this year, and 
chosen to reject evidence out of hand just because he disagrees. How do I get 
out of heated arguments with him without just throwing up my hands and letting 
him think he’s right? Signed, Frustrated Debater.”

It’s something of a surprise to discover that bookish Federal Reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve> chair Janet Yellen 
writes to internet agony aunts about her battles with the president-elect. But, 
as she prepares for a big set piece this week, part of the dilemma of dealing 
with Donald Trump may be evaporating.

In September, the then presidential candidate said Yellen should be “ashamed” 
of what she had been doing to the US by maintaining low interest rates. He then 
railed about the Fed’s supposed lack of independence and suggested that rates 
would not change while Barack Obama remained in the Oval Office, in order to 
protect his legacy. We’ll see. But this week the Fed is widely expected to, er, 
increase rates.

Italian visit gives RBS boss a brief respite

Next week should be a good one for Ross McEwan, chief exec of Royal Bank of 
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>. For a 
brief moment he will cease to be the boss of the wobbliest financial 
institution in London.

Yes, Jean-Pierre Mustier, chief exec of Italy’s UniCredit, will be in town to 
host a capital markets day and press conference. The point of all that is not 
just to make McEwan feel better, but rather for Mustier to outline how he is 
going to turn around an institution that is, according to Bloomberg, “the worst 
of the large European banks” (and it’s a competitive field).

But why do that in London? Well, Italian banks are currently looking about as 
steady as Luciano Pavarotti riding a Vespa, and the gossip is that Unicredit 
will have to raise up to €13bn to straighten matters out.

This week’s events are being seen as preludes to a UniCredit rights issue, 
possibly early in the new year, and coming to London gives Mustier a chance to 
schmooze the City, gatekeepers to pools of international capital. And there 
lies the irony. The crisis in Italy’s banks means showcasing one of the UK’s 
top selling points. So Mustier’s visit is timely for both McEwan and a host of 
Brexiters.

Inflation has lots to do with the price of fish

Economists spout so many statistics that a layperson often wonders what all 
the numbers have to do with the price of fish. This week excepted.

Tuesday brings us inflation data, and suddenly this topic is getting 
interesting. Not the numbers bit, obviously – for the record, economists are 
expecting the rate of inflation to have risen last month to 1.1%, from 0.9% in 
October. However, the direction of travel is not only intriguing but intensely 
political.

The Brexit vote has weakened the pound, and this should push prices up as the 
cost of imports rise. So industries such as food production have three options: 
take a hit to margins, cut your own costs or pass on the price rise to the 
supermarkets. If it’s the last of these, the retailers then have to make a 
similar choice, and as there’s only so much pork you can substitute with rusk, 
even in a supermarket sausage, some price hikes look likely to be borne by the 
consumer.

That’s not necessarily a bad thing – but here comes the crux. Wednesday will 
see more data on wages, when the question will be how much longer pay rises can 
outpace the rising cost of living. The fear is that if wage growth goes one way 
and inflation the other the “just about managing” families will find they no 
longer are.
 