
The left’s use of social media is emboldening group mentalities and 
disconnecting activists from the views of the wider electorate,Tristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt> will say in a major speech 
urging Labour to remember its role as a party of government and not street 
protest.

Hunt, one of the moderates in the group of former shadow cabinet members that 
declined to join Jeremy Corbyn’s frontbench, also rejected claims inDavid 
Cameron’s Tory conference speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/07/david-cameron-accuses-jeremy-corbyn-of-britain-hating-ideology>
 that the Tories were now the voice of the centre ground and social reform.

“This week we have watched, with our face pressed against the glass, not only 
a Tory victory parade at their conference in Manchester, but also the sight of 
them manoeuvring for succession and laying the foundations for their next 
election campaign too,” the former shadow education secretary will say at the 
University of Sheffield on Friday.

Highlighting the attacks on tax credits, trade union rights and Sure Start 
centres, he will warn: “Our country cannot afford to haveLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> left on the street outside, 
protesting about the decisions of the powerful within.”

Hunt will say Corbyn’s leadership represents an opportunity for Labour due to 
the new energy, growing membership and intellectual renewal, but also a threat 
if the party is lured into a position of “perennial demonstration and the 
thrill of being the relentless outsider”. Labour has a duty to form a 
government, he will say, but it will only be trusted to do so if the party 
listens to the “real and not the imagined concerns of people’s lives”.

He will argue that since 2010, the party has distanced itself from voters 
concerns. “Labour has marched decisively away from the views of voters on 
issues that are fundamental to our electoral prospects: immigration, personal 
financial interest, welfare, public services, and business.”

Warning against “algorithm politics” where activists gravitate only to views 
that confirm their own, he will say: “If social media were politicising the 
many as well as radicalising the few; were it significantly growing the number 
of people engaged in politics in the first place, rather than confirming 
pre-held bias, then Ed Miliband might now be sitting in 10 Downing Street.”

“What people say to each other on the internet – and social media in 
particular – rewards strong, polarising opinions and primary coloured politics.

“Far from broadening the mind through access to the greatest library human 
beings have ever created, people’s experience of the internet is increasingly a 
narrow online world where anyone who puts their heads above the parapet can be 
the target of an anonymised digital mob.”

Hunt, one of the defeated party modernisers attempting to map out a new 
agenda, will call for a contributory welfare system, an affirmation of the 
English left identity and new thinking on what forms of corporate governance 
finance and ownership might suit the digital age.

“When the British chancellor flies to Beijing to offer government securities 
to Chinese investors to support the French state in building a UK nuclear power 
station, our economic model is bust,” he will say. “On housing, asset 
inflation, pension and mortgage policies for the self-employed, land tax rates 
and even basic income guarantees, there are so many radical options to explore.”

Hunt will likely cause anger among more leftwing MPs by sticking to his belief 
that the party cannot just defend the status quo on welfare, saying in the 
run-up to the election that Labour “gave the impression we were against every 
and any new idea on welfare. We offended the British people’s sense of fairness 
by appearing to oppose the benefits cap – but we didn’t have any new ideas.

“More important than ever in an age of mass migration, as a sense of 
unfairness about welfare contributes to resentment towards new arrivals, the 
rule should be: You pay more in. You get more out.

“If you have a strong record of work, you should receive more help and 
protection for your home when you fall on hard times. Because right across the 
world countries with an entitlement based system such as ours are gripped by 
diminishing social support for the welfare state.”

He urges the party to embrace city region devolution, saying he finds it 
infuriating that a form of government first championed by Labour had been 
stolen by chancellorGeorge Osborne as the centre piece of his conference speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/05/osborne-to-allow-local-councils-to-keep-26bn-raised-from-business-rates>
. He will urge the party not to retreat back to statism, saying: “We must 
shelve our timidity, match Osborne’s offer and go beyond it by giving city and 
country regions the power to vary local taxes, including business rates from a 
baseline which takes account of regional disparities of wealth.”

He will also press the party to support the family saying it is “the most 
powerful institution for early child and, as such, long-term wellbeing and 
achievement”. Although he criticises the abolition of the old income based 
child poverty target, he argues the party “needs to go beyond a belief that 
child poverty can be solved largely or even entirely through material 
redistribution”.

“We need institutions that tackle inequality at source – by raising parents’ 
opportunities to work, children’s opportunities to learn and families’ 
opportunities to plan their time together.”
 