
Mousa Dembélé has been hit with a six-match ban by the Football Association 
for gouging the eye of Chelsea’s Diego Costa while the fallout from Monday’s 
Battle of Stamford Bridge continued with theTottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> manager, Mauricio 
Pochettino, accusing Cesc Fàbregas and Eden Hazard of lacking professionalism.

Dembélé was caught on camera pushing his finger into Costa’s eye and, with the 
referee, Mark Clattenburg, having missed the flashpoint, the way was cleared 
for retrospective punishment.The Tottenham midfielder accepted the FA’s charge 
of violent conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/06/tottenham-mousa-dembele-accepts-fa-charge>
, which carried a three-game suspension but he contested the governing body’s 
claim that he ought to be banned for longer.

Mauricio Pochettino praises Tottenham character in Chelsea battle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/06/mauricio-pochettino-tottenham-character>
Tottenham argued that three matches would have been sufficient and it is known 
they were bemused that Costa, having been poked in the left eye, initially 
grabbed his right one. The club also cited Dembélé’s lack of previous for 
violent conduct during his six seasons in English football. But the FA’s 
independent regulatory commission rejected their arguments and ordered that the 
three extra games were appropriate. Dembélé will miss the final two fixtures of 
this season – against Southampton and Newcastle United – and the first four of 
the next domestic campaign. Tottenham have no right of appeal.

Dembélé is known as a mild-mannered character and his only previous brush with 
authority during his time in England was the harsh red card that he received 
for his previous club, Fulham, in a Europa League tie at Wisla Krakow in 2011. 
Dembélé pushed Wisla’s Gervasio Núñez, who went to ground theatrically.

The game at Stamford Bridge, however, was no ordinary one and Dembélé, like 
many of the players, was keyed up to the point of combustion. He squared up to 
Mikel Jon Obi in the early running and he lost his head during the melee at the 
end of the first half, in which he gouged Costa. Tottenham were 2-0 in front at 
the time but they would draw 2-2 – a result that ended their Premier League 
title hopes and saw Leicester City crowned as champions. There was frustration 
at Tottenham before the game when theChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> players Fàbregas and Hazard said 
that they hoped Leicester would win the title and there has since been a 
feeling at White Hart Lane – although it was not articulated by Pochettino – 
that their comments helped to set the volatile tone. It was perhaps not a 
coincidence that Fàbregas and Hazard would come in for heavy challenges.

There have been other figures within the game who said that they would prefer 
Leicester to finish as the champions, including the Swansea City manager, 
Francesco Guidolin. He said so on the eve of his club’s game at Leicester on 24 
April, in which Swansea slumped to a 4-0 defeat. Pochettino believes that all 
of them have been unprofessional and he wants the issue to be raised and 
discussed at the next Premier League meeting.

“In football, our responsibility is to be professional,” Pochettino said. 
“When you are professional, it’s not to give your personal opinion. It’s always 
dangerous when something happens like that. Maybe in the last few weeks or 
months, we know the football people who maybe don’t behave like professionals. 
Maybe, in the next few meetings of the Premier League, the managers and also 
the staff, we need to say that, in future, we must be careful with all these 
comments in public.”

Pochettino made the point that he did not want to single out Fàbregas and 
Hazard. “I don’t blame them,” he said. “It’s a general opinion. Sometimes my 
press conferences are boring because I’m very polite or political. No, I am 
professional. That’s a big difference. I don’t want to be popular. I want to be 
professional. It’s easy to say big things against our enemy. ‘Oh, the people 
love me, I’m very strong, so I’ll say things like this.’ Come on! We are 
professional.

“The managers, the league, the players’ association – they need to say that we 
must behave professionally. We need to play, be honest and show integrity and 
be professional always. I like that when our opponent fights and tries to win 
but, for me, if we want to keep healthy football in the future, and not to be 
cynical and dishonest, we need to behave in a different way.”
 