
Stan Wawrinka beat the best when it mattered, yet the quietly spoken Swiss 
with a hint of devil in his eye is reluctant toclimb up on the podium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/stan-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-us-open-final-2016>
 alongside the vanquished Novak Djokovic and the trio who constitute the Big 
Four of tennis.

He has beaten them all at some stage – his absent compatriot Roger Federer, 
Andy Murray, Rafael Nadal and, in two of his major finals, the best player in 
the world. So his victory over Djokovic to win the US Open in four sets of 
extraordinary passion and anxiety – his third major – , with just Wimbledon to 
conquer –surely gains him entry to this elite club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/french-open-2015-stanislas-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-win>
.

He will not have it. His voice croaking a little from a solid night’s 
celebrating in New York, one of his favourite cities, he explained why in a 
spectacular setting at the top of the Rockerfeller Center in Manhattan on 
Monday morning. “Because first I think it’s not fair for them to put me there,” 
he said. “They have been there since more than 10 years. They have been in all 
semi-finals of grand slams, all finals, all semi-finals of Masters 1000, all 
finals.

“They have been winning everything and I think it is just not fair. The big 
four stay the big four, like that. I am me. I have been achieving something 
that I never expect the last three years,I have been winning three grand slams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/26/stanislas-wawrinka-rafael-nadal-australian-open>
 and it’s more than amazing. But I don’t want to keep talking about being part 
of them or close to them. The big four stay the big four. It’s part of tennis 
history, and it will always be like that and I think it’s great like that.”

Such self-effacement is touching. It also makes the world No3 and triple-slam 
champion dangerous among his peers because they never know quite what to 
expect. A close friend of the player said there was a feeling around his camp 
before the tournament, and especially before the final, that this could be 
Wawrinka’s Open.

Stan Wawrinka beats Novak Djokovic in four sets to take first US Open title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/stan-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-us-open-final-2016>
He agreed. “When I arrived before the tournament I knew I was ready, I knew I 
was playing really well, moving the best I have ever moved before on a tennis 
court. I was practising great. Then I checked the draw and saw my first match 
it was Fernando Verdasco and I knew I had to be ready. When the tournament 
starts I don’t think about whether I’m ready to win or not. I just think about 
match after match.

“Yesterday was the same in the final against Novak. I told Magnus [Norman, his 
coach] before the match I had a feeling, but this time I have even more 
confidence to beat him. I feel better than him. It was the first time ever I 
had this feeling in a tournament and in a match.Maybe that’s also one of the 
reasons I played so well again.”

Nor was he keen to criticise Djokovic for what many regarded as blatant 
gamesmanship when he took two medical time outs for repairs to his feet after 
being broken in the fourth set, although Wawrinka admitted he was confused by 
the timing of it. “I think some times some players abuse the rules, for sure,” 
he said. “But I think also you need to understand that sometimes you have real 
pain but you try to push, to push. You play a few points and then you stop.

“Yesterday I don’t know exactly what happened but the second they told me – 
because normally you have only one – they told me it was because he was 
bleeding. For me it’s normal the guy is bleeding and you have to do something 
and I have no problem with that.

“Sometimes I feel also from outside no one tells people what’s happening. When 
he took the second one they come to me and they say, ‘I’m sorry, we have to 
take three minutes because he is bleeding and we don’t want to leave it like 
that’ and I have no problem with that – but people outside or behind, they 
cannot see.”

What they did see was a gracious and humble champion getting the result he 
deserves. He might never win Wimbledon to complete a set of all four majors but 
he has already done enough to be considered alongside the best of his 
generation – whatever he thinks to the contrary.
 