
Lukas Rosol might not be the most popular player in tennis, but he will always 
be one of the most dangerous, as the defending French Open champion,Stan 
Wawrinka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka>, was reminded 
when, just two days after arriving in Paris from Geneva, he took five gruelling 
sets to get rid of the most stubborn Czech since Vaclav Havel.

French Open 2016: Murray, Watson in action on day two – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/23/french-open-2016-andy-murray-heather-watson-and-stan-wawrinka-in-action-on-day-two-live>
Wawrinka, seeded third here after the withdrawal of his compatriot Roger 
Federer, beat Rosol last week on the way to winning the Geneva Open, his first 
on home soil in 11 years and just 28 miles from where he grew up. As he 
remarked after arriving at Roland Garros, he very much enjoyed the hospitality 
of his Swiss fans.

However, it put enormous pressure on his schedule, and he was caught cold in a 
stuttering first set before grinding out a 4-6, 6-1, 3-6, 6-3, 6-4 win against 
a player who, as a junior, was regarded as not far behind Rafael Nadal and 
Richard Gasquet.

Rosol, who famously beat Nadal  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/rafael-nadal-lukas-rosol-wimbledon-2012>
in the second round at Wimbledon four years ago and put out the then world No8, 
Jürgen Melzer, here in 2008, has slipped a bit since, and came to the draw 
ranked 68 in the world, but he invariably brings an unsettling edginess to his 
tennis.

In the space of a week last summer, he snubbed Guillermo García-López at the 
net after their match in Bucharest, then so angered Andy Murray in Munich that 
the Scot was heard to say to him at one changeover, “Everyone hates you.”

For three hours and 11 minutes on Court Philippe Chatrier , Wawrinka probably 
did not harbour the warmest of feelings towards Rosol, although there was no 
discernible rancour beyond the usual sulking that professionals indulge in, on 
a cool day of whipping wind and drizzle.

Indoors, meanwhile, the tournament director, Guy Forget, played as deft a hand 
in front of the microphone as he once did with a racket when addressing the 
sluggardly progress on putting a roof over the main court, as well as extending 
the space of the game’s most cramped slam tournament.

“While Wimbledon, Melbourne and New York have the new roof, we’ll have to wait 
until 2020 to have ours,” Forget admitted. As fans crammed into any available 
covered space outside to shelter from the elements, Forget offered a not 
altogether novel excuse for the delayed project: “Welcome to France.”

Rain on day one had wiped out eight men’s matches and interrupted three more, 
while 22 of 32 women’s matches were incomplete. The forecast is better for the 
next couple of days, then dire again on Friday, Saturday and Sunday. While clay 
is a more accommodating surface than either grass or hardcourt in bad weather, 
the lack of a covered court was again embarrassing for the hosts.

Wawrinka took time to warm-up (in common with everyone in a 50-mile radius, it 
has to be said) and looked grooved in dismissing Rosol for the loss of just one 
game in the second set. But his level dipped again and he looked anything but a 
slam champion as Rosol went ahead after three sets.

Just as Rosol contemplated another upset, Wawrinka unfurled a glorious 
backhand that almost sliced his static opponent in two to break for 5-3 in the 
fourth, and he went on to level at two sets apiece.

The deciding set began two and a half hours after the first delayed exchanges, 
as the light picked up, in keeping with Wawrinka’s spirits.

Andy Murray admits feeling ‘embarrassed’ at on-court behaviour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/andy-murray-embarrassed-on-court-behaviour>
Trusting that powerful right arm and his single-handed backhand – much as he 
did by ignoring a ragged start toblast Novak Djokovic off the court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/french-open-2015-stanislas-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-win>
 in last year’s final – he broke the temperamental Rosol in the third game and 
forged on to the line in style, although he could have done without blowing two 
match points in the ninth game and another in the 10th before an angled 
backhand volley finished the job.

In the second round, Wawrinka might have a less stressful engagement against 
the American-based Japanese Davis Cupper, Taro Daniel, who came from two sets 
down to beat the experienced Slovakian clay-courter, Martin Klizan, on a 
retirement when leading 3-6, 4-6, 7-5, 6-4, 3-0 on Court No4.

On Court No3, what might have been a genuine surprise a year or so ago – 
Viktor Troicki beating Grigor Dimitrov 2-6, 6-3, 5-7, 7-5, 6-3 in three hours 
and 45 minutes – passed with barely a murmur. The Bulgarian has won 29 and lost 
20 matches since he split with Maria Sharapova after Wimbledon last year. He 
was No11 in the world mid-summer, 2015, and has tumbled to No36.
 