
George RR Martin has released a video of him interviewing Stephen King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking>, who issues a fierce demand for 
greater gun control. At the public event in Albuquerque last week, King 
suggested that if the man who killed 49 people in the Orlando terror attack 
“had gone in there with a knife, he would have been overpowered before he’d 
stabbed more than four people”.

“As long as anybody who’s got only two wheels on the road can walk into a 
store and buy a … killing machine like an AR-15 or something, this is just 
going to go on. It’s really up to us,” said King, to applause from the audience.

Martin was interviewing King about his new novel End of Watch, which concludes 
the story of the serial killer Brady Hartsfield. Describing Brady, who drives a 
Mercedes-Benz into a line of people waiting for a job fair, King said that “a 
lot of these guys are nobodies who see their way to some kind of stardom by 
creating an act of mass terror. And, of course, the sad thing about this is 
that we remember the killers long after their victims are forgotten, and that’s 
one of the things that makes this a self-perpetuating act.”

King pointed to gunman Omar Mateen, who killed 49 people at Orlando’s Pulse 
nightclub on 12 June. “I would argue that someone like the man who shot all 
these people in Orlando, he may have pledged allegiance to Isis but before that 
he was a spouse abuser and somebody with a lot of anger.”

The novelist has long been an advocate of gun control, writing an essay, Guns, 
in 2013, in which he called for a ban on automatic and semi-automatic weapons 
following the shooting of 20 children and six adults at Sandy Hook elementary 
school.

“Autos and semi-autos are weapons of mass destruction. When lunatics want to 
make war on the unarmed and unprepared, these are the weapons they use,” King 
wrote at the time.

Last year, after nine black churchgoers were shot in Charleston, South 
Carolina, the author repeated the call, writing on Twitter that “until 
responsible gun owners support responsible gun control laws, innocent blood 
will continue to flow. How many times must we see this?”

Martin and King went on to discuss the nature of evil in fiction. Martin said 
that in the works of JRR Tolkien, to whom he is often compared, “evil is 
externalised”, but that in King’s writing, “the real villains are the people”.

“In a way, outside evil is a more comforting concept. The idea that ‘the devil 
made me do it’ is a way of shucking responsibility,” said King. “What a lot of 
horror fiction does … is it allows us to grapple with the outside evil that 
strikes us.”

Martin said that he had always been more attracted to grey characters. “I do 
think the battle between good and evil is a great subject for fiction but in my 
view the battle … is waged within the human heart. We’re all partly good and 
partly evil.” Martin ended the interview on a light note when he asked the 
prolific King: “How the fuck do you write so many books so fast?” Martin is 
currently writing the sixth book in the A Song of Ice and Fire sequence, with 
the hit HBO series based on his novels overtaking his writing.

“I think, ‘I’ve had a really good six months, I’ve written three chapters’, 
and you’ve finished three books in that time,” said Martin. “You don’t ever 
have a day when you sit down there and it’s like constipation, you write a 
sentence and you hate the sentence, and you check your email and you wonder if 
you had any talent after all and if you should have been a plumber?”

King responded that he works for three or four hours a day and aims to produce 
six “fairly clean” pages. “So if the manuscript is, let’s say, 360 pages long, 
that’s basically two months’ work.” But he expressed sympathy for Martin over 
the pressure that fans are putting him under to finish his series. “People yell 
at you and say: ‘We want the next book right away.’ They’re like babies,” he 
said.
 