
Venus Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/venus-williams> issued a 
typically vivid warning that she is capable of adding the French Open to her 
triumphs at the US Open and Wimbledon by capturing the third clay court title 
of her career here yesterday, demolishing her steadily improving 21-year-old 
American compatriot, Meghann Shaughnessy, 6-3, 6-0 in the final of the Betty 
Barclay Cup.

A giant tarantula of sprawling braids and four-inch long pendulum ear-rings 
was matched by an almost as eye-catching way of dealing with the sport's 
slowest surface. Increasingly Williams stepped forward to finish rallies off 
from mid-court with swinging drive volleys which made the ochre dust look 
anything but slow and the opposition anything but respectable.

"I am a little bit upset: I felt a bit hopeless today," admitted Shaughnessy, 
who has just climbed into the world's top 20. "Even if I had played really well 
I don't know how long I could have held her up."

In fact the WTA Tour event final lasted only 54 minutes and there were only 
about 20 of those when the outcome was in doubt. Shaughnessy risked a 
hit-or-bust policy to break back for 2-2 but immediately lost her service again 
and, by dropping serve for a third time at the start of the second set, trying 
to do too much and double-faulting on break point, she allowed herself to run 
into the eye of a storm.

That was because it gave the world No2 a cushion to have a whirl at almost 
anything and when she did it usually came off. Whether Williams can prevail 
against the best clay-courters on the biggest occasion is unproven, but she 
talks as if she can.

"I dreamed about winning Roland Garros. I dreamed about it a little bit more 
than my dream of winning Wimbledon," she claimed. "And I think I have as good a 
chance as I do on hard or on grass."

Not everyone agrees. However, Williams completed the week by conceding a mere 
12 games in eight sets, and 10 of the last 14 Hamburg finals have produced at 
least one of the Paris finalists. The crux may be whether she has the hang of 
sliding into the shot on the loose top without undue stress to the knee which 
caused the furore in Miami when she withdrew.

This week in Berlin, Martina Hingis should provide tougher opposition. If 
Williams wins again, she will be within striking distance of another big goal - 
only a couple of hundred ranking points behind the world No1.
 