
Newfound agility and improved stamina is behind French Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/frenchopen> semi-finalist Samantha Stosur’s 
reappearance in the world’s top 15 after a near three-year absence. Stosur 
surged to a provisional rankings rise to 19th in the world following her upset 
victory over 11th seed, and last year’s runner up, Lucie Safarova.

She jumped two more places, to 17th, following Tuesday’s ultra-impressive 
straight sets win over sixth seed and tournament dark horse Simona Halep and 
rose higher still – to 14th – after downing Bulgaria’s Tsvetana Pironkova as 
she locked in a semi-final berth and guaranteed pay day of A$773,500.

It is the first time the veteran Australian, who entered Roland Garros ranked 
24th, has seen the top 15 since August 2013 and puts her well and truly in the 
frame for a top-16 seeding at Wimbledon. That would mean Stosur would not be 
drawn to play one of the top eight seeds at the All-England Club before the 
fourth round.

Nick Kyrgios pulls out of Rio Olympics due to 'unfair and unjust treatment'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/03/nick-kyrgios-pulls-out-of-rio-olympics-due-to-unfair-and-unjust-treatment>
And the key to the rise, according to coach David Taylor, can be boiled down 
to the incredible fitness of Stosur, who jokes this is the first time in five 
years that she’s felt quite so fit and healthy. While the 32-year-old has 
always been a physical player and a fitness freak, since November she has been 
working withTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Australia’s 
Stefano Barsacchi who has put the 2011 US Open champion on an altered program.

Lifting weights – a practice which helped develop some of the most fearsome 
biceps and powerful groundstrokes in women’s tennis – went out the window in 
favour of more running. The result has been that Stosur is lighter on her feet 
and able to stay in rallies longer. On the evidence of her form throughout the 
clay court season, she hasn’t lost the power game which has served her so well.

“She’s moving a lot better and when someone as powerful as Sam is set up she 
can really deliver,” coach David Taylor said. “When she’s a little bit off 
balance she’s not the same player. That’s just given her a bit more confidence 
to be aggressive when it counts.”

Taylor says the work Stosur has been doing with Barsacchi has been key to her 
renaissance this year. “Fitness has been a big part of her tennis. Fitness is a 
big part of everyone’s tennis now,” he said. “I just think the way she slides 
to balls, defensively is a little bit better than she used to be. She can stay 
in points a lot better now.”

“She’s always been very good offensively, but her defence now is getting a 
little bit better. That’s where women’s tennis is a little bit behind the men – 
defensive skills – because of the superior movement. That area there’s a lot of 
improvement to be made and she’s making that improvement, and that’s why she’s 
feeling good.”
 