
Sunderland have turned down a £6m bid for Jermain Defoe from West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> and have reiterated that 
they have no intention of selling their leading scorer.

It is the second offer from West Ham that Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> have received since the 
transfer window opened – the opening salvo was £5m – and West Ham officials are 
understood to have encouraged David Moyes to name his price for the 34‑year‑old 
former England striker.

Unfortunately for Slaven Bilic, Sunderland’s manager described Defoe as 
priceless as recently as the week before Christmas and refused to countenance 
the idea of allowing his prize asset to return to the club he played for 
between 1999 and 2004.

Defoe has scored 11 goals in 21 appearances for Sunderland this season, 
thereby sustaining the Wearside club’s hopes of escaping relegation.

Liverpool drop two points as Jermain Defoe strikes twice from the spot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/sunderland-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
Bilic has concerns of his own – which he clearly feels could be eased by his 
prime transfer target. “He’s a very good player,” West Ham’s manager said 
recently. “I have a few midfielders from different countries telling me his 
movement is the best of the strikers they have played with.”

Defoe left West Ham in 2004 on a sour note, forcing through a £7m move to 
Tottenham Hotspur after West Ham’s relegation from the top tier, but later 
conceded he had made a mistake in agitating so hard for the transfer. Signed 
for Sunderland by Gus Poyet two years ago following an unhappy stint in Canada 
with Toronto, Defoe has defied received wisdom that he was incapable of playing 
the lone striker role by frequently excelling in that capacity.

Although a Londoner, and frustrated by Sunderland’s enduring struggles, he has 
often emphasised how much he enjoys playing and living in the north-east with 
the chance to appear before consistently large, loud, crowds at the Stadium of 
Light a particular attraction.
 