
Nick Kyrgios’ racquet is in his bag for 2016 but that hasn’t stopped the 
Australian soaring to a new high. The 21-year-old, who iscurrently serving a 
suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/nick-kyrgios-suspended-atp-shanghai-conduct-tennis>
 for “conduct contrary to the integrity of the game” after throwing his 
second-round match at the Shanghai Masters, will slot in as the world No13 when 
the latest ATP rankings are released.

He jumped a spot when Roberto Bautista Agut failed to defend rankings points 
at the Kremlin Cup this week. The Spaniard was a finalist in 2015 but crashed 
out in the second round this year.

Nick Kyrgios pulls out of Rotterdam Open to play in NBA celebrity game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/19/nick-kyrgios-pulls-out-rotterdam-open-nba-celebrity-game>
Kyrgios earned his biggest tournament win of his career earlier this month, 
winning the Japan Open. The following week, his conduct in Shanghai brought 
another wave of controversy, with the tour sidelining up to the start of the 
2017 Australian Open unless he seeks counselling.

Kyrgios was roundly condemned for his actions but found a supporter in 
Australian former player Mark Philippoussis. The 39-year-old Philippoussis told 
the ATP website the youngster deserved the chance to make amends.

“People are afraid of and quick to criticise things they don’t understand,” he 
said. “That doesn’t excuse certain actions, which I’m sure he’ll agree to, but 
the only thing you can hope for is that he learns from this. He’s still only 21 
years old and it’s not easy being on the world stage with tennis ...it’s been a 
solid year for him.”

The 2003 Wimbledon finalist said Davis Cup captain and 2002 Wimbledon champion 
Lleyton Hewitt would provide the best support that Kyrgios could ask for.

“His career was incredible and very inspiring, so he definitely has a lot to 
offer to the young guys,” he said. “That said, you can have the most qualified 
guy in the world, but it makes no difference if the other person isn’t 
listening.”

Kyrgios has earned enough rankings points to be seeded at the Australian Open 
despite his year-ending suspension.
 