
The Sutton United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sutton-united> 
manager, Paul Doswell, was so excited he didn’t know which badge to kiss.

Their striker Roarie Deacon shook a joyous fist in the air. The defender Dean 
Beckwith was still ensconced with the travelling fans. So it was up to 
non-league Sutton’s celebrity fan, the comedian Tim Vine, to sum up this match 
with a simple one-liner. “Sutton three”, he said, “Wimbledon one.” Two teams 
who had felt slighted bya lack of interest from the TV cameras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/sutton-united-doswell-bbc-wimbledon-fa-cup>
 turned in a pulsating, full-blooded contest that was a throwback to classic FA 
Cup ties of the past. In the end Sutton replicated their giant-killing of 1989, 
when they knocked out top-flight Coventry City, with a late salvo of goals to 
beat a League One side who had been reduced to 10 men from the 11th minute.
 See the full visual 
“It’s an emotion of absolute, unadulterated joy,” said Doswell once he had 
(partly) recovered his composure. “We’re a volunteer board and management 
committee, we brought 1,000 fans with us tonight. But I’m so proud of the 
players. They needed to show their togetherness tonight and I thought they did 
that. Three-one probably overdoes the result, but that’s a fantastic 
achievement for this football club.”

Tom Elliott gave Wimbledon the lead in the 10th minute only for the home side 
to have their defender Paul Robinson sent off shortly afterwards. The Dons 
continued to look in control, however, until 15 minutes to go when Deacon 
thrashed in an equaliser from the edge of the box for his fourth goal in the 
competition. With the clock turning to 90 minutes Maxime Biamou touched in at 
the far post before the substitute Dan Fitchett’s header sent the Sutton 
contingent crazy.

The Dons manager, Neal Ardley, was slightly lost for words afterwards. “It’s 
difficult to know what to say because we had a plan to play the game with 11 
men and spent most of it with 10,” he said. “I thought we did that brilliantly 
for 76 minutes but, credit to Sutton, they kept going and got their just 
deserts in the end.”

Elliott had found himself unmarked on the penalty spot when he gave Wimbledon 
the lead, heading in Dean Parrett’s free-kick past Ross Worner at the near 
post. The red card came barely 60 seconds later. The Kingsmeadow pitch’s divots 
were causing a problem for both teams and, sadly for the Dons centre-half 
Robinson, he misjudged the bounce of a ball when in position as the last 
defender. Robinson swiped and missed, Matt Tubbs nicked it off him and did not 
need much by the way of subsequent contact from his opponent to go sprawling on 
to the ground. The referee, Chris Sarginson, did not hesitate in handing 
Robinson an early bath.

Still, Wimbledon stayed calm. Ardley withdrew Elliott’s strike partner Dom 
Poleon for another defender, Chris Robertson, and while the home side lacked 
numbers going forward they weren’t short of endeavour. At half-time it looked 
more likely that they would add a second goal than concede.

But with 20 minutes to go, Wimbledon’s Lyle Taylor was injured by a strong 
Sutton challenge. The midfielder was withdrawn and suddenly the visitors gained 
the upper hand, making their pressure tell with 15 minutes remaining. A 
free-kick on the left was taken quickly, too quickly for the Dons defence. The 
ball came to Deacon on the edge of the box who shifted the ball, made himself 
space and smashed a shot past the goalkeeper James Shea.

After the match, Doswell called Deacon his “magic man”.

Related: Nathan Arnold’s late winner sends ecstatic Lincoln City into fourth 
round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/17/lincoln-city-ipswich-town-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report>

The Dons looked shocked by that goal and suddenly the visitors got the scent 
of shock in their nostrils. As the clock turned to 90 minutes Biamou connected 
at the far post with substitute Fitchett’s cross. For a moment there was 
stunned silence, then a riot of noise as the Sutton bench, players and fans all 
went wild together. Fitchett struck again with seconds remaining, his header 
looping into an empty net as Wimbledon desperately pushed forward. The fans, 
already delirious, almost didn’t know what to do with themselves.

Leeds United now await Sutton in the fourth round, for a game that will be 
live on TV and worth £300,000 to the club. For Doswell, who is a property 
developer by trade and does not take a salary from the club, the financial 
boost was reward for a combined endeavour. “It’s not about what I do, the 
chairman puts in 40 hours a week for free and I was drawn in by how much 
everyone else gave to this club. I didn’t dare to dream about the fourth round, 
but the fact is it’s a reality now and there’s a lot of things we’d still like 
to do at the club. We’d like a new entrance hallway for example, and we can 
afford it now. Plus I know a good tiler.”
 