
Swansea City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> have signed the 
Holland winger Luciano Narsingh from PSV Eindhoven for £4m.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in Europe's top five leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
The 26-year-old becomes Paul Clement’s first signing at Swansea, having been a 
target for the former manager Bob Bradley. Narsingh has signed a 
two-and-a-half-year deal. “It took me two minutes to decide to come here,” the 
16-times capped Narsingh said. “It is a dream to come true playing in the 
Premier League, playing for a big club like Swansea, it was not difficult to 
think about it. PSV was good for me, but I think it was time to leave.

“We were two-times champions and it is good now to get the chance to play in 
the Premier League.”

Formerly part of the renowned Ajax youth setup, Narsingh joined fellow 
Eredivisie club Heerenveen at the age of 18.

He moved to PSV in the summer of 2012 and went on to play more than 100 times 
for Phillip Cocu’s side, scoring 23 goals and helping them win Eredivisie 
titles in 2015 and 2016. Narsingh made his Holland debut in May 2012 and was a 
member of the Dutch squad at Euro 2012.

But he had to drop out of the 2014 World Cup in Brazil through injury and was 
replaced by current Swansea team-mate Leroy Fer.

Narsingh has scored four goals for Holland, including the match‑winner in 
their 2-1 victory against England at Wembley in March 2016.

“This is one of the best leagues, and if I play here and do well it is also 
good for the international team,” said Narsingh. “It is a big step up – 
everybody says so who comes from the Eredivisie – but I like a new challenge 
and I am going to work hard.

“It will be a battle [to stay in the Premier League], but I believe everything 
is going to be all right. That is why I came because I have the belief in this 
team.

“My agent talked with more clubs, but when Swansea came in I said to him I 
wanted to play here.”

Swansea fans, however, will have to wait to see Narsingh, as a calf problem 
rules him out of the home game against Arsenal on Saturday.

Clement, meanwhile, has confirmed that Swansea are in talks to sign the 
Norwich City defender Martin Olsson and the Tottenham midfielder Tom Carroll 
during the January transfer window.
 