
At this time of the year, citizens of Tehran are accustomed to a thick curtain 
of fog that falls across the city, veiling everything from the 435 metre-tall 
Milad tower to the nearby Alborz mountains.

This week, however, the blanket of smog smothering the Iranian capital has 
been blamed for a string of deaths and prompted unprecedented emergency 
measures by the city’s authorities.

Habib Kashani, a member of Tehran’s municipal council, said on Tuesday that 
pollution in Tehran had led to the death of 412 citizens in the past 23 days, 
according to the state news agency, Irna.

City authorities announced that all schools would be closed on Wednesday. 

The concentration of ultra-fine airborne particles (known as PM2.5) reached 
more than 150 this week, setting a new record. These particles of less than 2.5 
micrometres in diameter can penetrate the lungs and pass into the bloodstream 
and have been linked to increased rates of chronic bronchitis, lung cancer and 
heart disease.

Irna reported that on four of the past six days, air quality reached dangerous 
levels for people suffering from respiratory diseases, and on two days it was 
dangerous for everyone.

PM2.5 levels are seen as the best measure of the impact of air pollution on 
health. The new World Health Organisation database of worldwide air pollution 
measures,released in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/which-are-the-worlds-two-most-polluted-cities-and-why>
, put the Iranian city of Zabol, on the eastern border with Afghanistan, as the 
world’s most polluted city, based on PM2.5.


Pollution is a perennial problem in Tehran, which is surrounded by mountains 
and has little wind to disperse the smog. Millions of cars throng the city’s 
congested streets, and locally refined petrolhas also been blamed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/09/iran-tehran-pollution-petrol-sanctions>
 as a key polluting factor.

The issue dominated newspaper front pages in Tehran on Tuesday. Ebtekar 
<http://www.ebtekarnews.com/> daily published a large picture of a smog-cloaked 
Tehran, carrying the headline “My city has been lost”, and called for a 
reduction in the number of cars.


“Every day 3m inner city commutes by the metro and 4m such journeys by taxi 
have not resolved the capital’s air pollution crisis,” it said. According to 
Ebtekar, at least 1.25m obsolete cars were still in use in Tehran and 60% of 
cars in the city normally carry just one person.

The reformist daily Etemaad published a black column on its front page saying 
that “We are all to blame”. It said Tehran was suffocating because “we [the 
media] are not able to hold the authorities accountable”, “you are not 
switching off your cars” and “they [officials] are only capable of closing 
schools”.

The celebrated film-maker Dariush Mehrjui told Isna news agency that he had 
moved out of Tehran because of its pollution. “I can’t breathe in Tehran, 
simple as that. Everyone is fleeing Tehran ... everyone is choking, look at 
cancer rates. Who can live [in Tehran] under these circumstances?”
 