The following apology was printed in the Observer's For the record column, 
Sunday August 28, 2005 

 Pendennis reports below that broadcaster John Humphrys's company ACE Editing 
is about to be struck off at Companies House. We now understand that Mr 
Humphrys sold his 12 per cent stake in the company two years ago. Apologies.



Labour's one-time, would-be spin king, Derek 'Dolly' Draper, and his 
bride-to-be, GMTV presenter Kate Garraway, are selling the photos of their 
forthcoming nuptials to Richard Desmond's OK! magazine. Quite why Derek and his 
lovely partner have taken the shilling of one of the Tory party's chief 
cheerleaders is open to question. So, in an attempt to seek clarification, 
Pendennis draws on a recent observation by Dolly who, these days, earns a crust 
as a psychoanalyst. 'The frequency with which the briefer makes the headlines 
is, I believe, down to something that even the protagonists themselves aren't 
conscious of: a secret desire to be recognised and seen to be important,' Dolly 
opines in a recent column on spin doctors. 'That is why, so often, the spinner 
becomes the story.' A truism Dolly is evidently set to confirm over numerous 
glossy pages in September.

· Gulp. Associated Newspapers, owner of the Evening Standard and the Daily 
Mail, is looking to rent out a section of its vast atrium in London, W8. Such 
belt-tightening does little to suggest that good times lie ahead.

· Go figure. The government intends to ban smoking in all pubs that serve food 
while simultaneously relaxing the laws governing licensing hours. The 
inevitable result? Thousands of pubs are set to stop serving food so millions 
of drinkers can sup on empty stomachs for longer. As one Whitehall mandarin 
observes: 'It's a recipe for binge-drinking. It's hardly joined-up government.'

· Robin Cook's demise has cruelly thwarted his plans to become a star of the 
small screen. The man who once said he wasn't good looking enough to become 
Prime Minister was in talks with Channel 4 to present a series examining why 
people are turned off by politics. He also had plans to publish a book, a 
perfect springboard, friends say, on which he intended to launch his return to 
a Labour cabinet, once Tony had moved on.

· Perhaps fatherhood, the demands of the Today programme, his commitment to 
organic farming and his various newspaper columns, means the arch inquisitor 
John Humphrys has too much on his plate at the moment. It appears Ace Editing, 
Humphrys's media company, is so late in filing its accounts it is due to be 
struck off by Companies House. Fortunately, records show an 11th-hour objection 
has been filed against the decision to strike the company off, so perhaps the 
Humph is now getting his act together.

· Oh, to have been in the audience. The current series of University 
Challenge, featuring 'professionals' rather than students, saw a number of 
teams compete against each other in non-filmed rounds, the winners of which 
progressed through to the televised competition. As such, history was unable to 
record the Lady magazine's victory over not-so-arch rival Loaded in its full 
Technicolor glory.

· Pendennis wonders whether Prezza's 'impromptu' tour of Number 10 last week, 
when he took it upon himself to escort a bemused family around the PM's 
offices, included a peek into the great man's study. This, according to Downing 
Street minions, is a serious no no. Rumour has it that TB banned visitors from 
being shown around the room after an uncouth trade union brethren left a rude 
note on his desk.

Pendennis@observer.co.uk <mailto:Pendennis@observer.co.uk>
 