
It is 25 years since the Berlin Wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/berlinwall> fell and a new Germany was 
born. In the last quarter of a century the country has seen an unprecedented 
opening up of archives and a programme of national education and much public 
debate about the different inheritances of East and West Germany. There has 
also been an unprecedented building of monuments marking the horrors of the 
recent past. But what are the memories that German citizens bring to their new 
state? What, in short, does the world look like if you are German?

At the forefront of that memory is the Third Reich and the Holocaust.

But there is more than that, and one of the ways that German history is not 
like other European histories is that Germans consciously use it as a warning 
to act differently in the future. As the historian Michael Stürmer says, "for 
a long time inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, history was 
what must not be allowed to happen again". This is very different from Britain 
or France, where most public engagement with history, in terms of monuments and 
memorials, is to honour valour and heroism, with little public recognition 
of any wrongdoing, or of follies that might have led to the wars in which 
the valour had to be demonstrated. What is striking about German war memorials 
is that they look forward not back – a characteristic clearly visible in their 
parliament building.

The historic Reichstag was burnt out in 1933, with the fire blamed on 
the communists and used to advantage by the Nazis. During the war it was badly 
damaged, then occupied by the Russians. After reunification the decision was 
made to restore it, but the marks of the 1933 fire, as well as graffiti made by 
Soviet soldiers, were left untouched, as a reminder to legislators that if you 
get things as wrong as Germany did then the consequences are unimaginably 
terrible. An MP travelling to the Reichstag today will pass not only the 
Holocaust memorial but also memorials to the killing of homosexuals, disabled 
people and Roma. When they get to the building, they find it topped by a huge 
glass dome, to which the public have access. So not only do you have an emblem 
of a transparent legislature, but the public can literally exercise oversight 
over their government – a direct reversal of the situation under both the Nazis 
and the Stasi.

In effect the building is a meditation on different aspects of history. I 
can't think of another country in the world that lives so closely with the 
acutely uncomfortable reminders of its past in order to help it act more wisely 
in future.

In making our radio series, British Museum exhibition and book we have tried 
to look at objects that evoke memories of which pretty well all Germans can say 
"this is part of me". Some are obvious, such as the Gutenberg Bible. Every 
German knows that Germany invented printing and, in that sense, made the modern 
world. But we have also tried to focus on elements that the British public 
might not be so familiar with, as well as areas of German history about which 
there is still a reticence in Germany. People talk about the Holocaust very 
honestly and fully, but subjects such as the huge civilian losses from allied 
bombing raids are little discussed, unlike in this country. Yet it remains 
a potent memory.

It has always been the British Museum's job to present the history we need in 
order to make sense of now. Germany is the European state we most need to 
understand if we are going to comprehend both Europe, and the world.

Taucheranzug (Wetsuit)

'An instrument of state surveillance'
 The wetsuit used in a failed escape attempt from East Germany. Photograph: 
Richard Ansett/BBC 
The official account of oppression in East Germany does exist in the state 
archives, but it is written in such a deliberately bland and concealing way as 
to give very little impression of what actually happened. This cheaply made 
blue wetsuit with white zips, probably worn only once, tells you far more. 
Breaching the Berlin Wall wasn't the only route to the west. A hundred miles 
north was another favoured crossing point, if you were willing to sail across 
the Baltic in a rubber dinghy, as the owner of the wetsuit had intended to in 
November 1987 – despite the likeliest outcome being either dying of hypothermia 
or being shot. In this instance, the man was arrested before he even set off, 
but the fact was that people were still willing to risk their lives just two 
years before the Berlin Wall came down. Equally revealing is what happened 
after the man was sent to prison and the wet suit was confiscated by the Stasi. 
They used it as a training prop to instruct their informants as to what sort of 
products they should watch out for. Why would anyone need a wetsuit, or 
plastics or rubber that could be made into a wetsuit, or a dinghy, or anything 
that could be turned into a flying machine, or used as tunnelling equipment? 
And so on. If you saw your neighbours buying, or possessing these things, you 
were to let the Stasi know. So the wetsuit is not only evidence of one citizen 
wanting to flee, it also became an symbol of state surveillance, designed to 
prevent others from trying to escape.

One of the most remarkable things to come out of opening the Stasi archives 
was evidence of the extent of this surveillance. It is reckoned that one in 
three of the population of the GDR was at some time, in some way, informing on 
their friends, neighbours or families. The memory of that has had profound 
implications for the new German state. If you walk round Berlin today you will 
see – in stark contrast to Britain – almost no CCTV cameras. Edward Snowden's 
revelations of state surveillance made him, again in contrast to the UK, 
something of a national hero in Germany, with effigies of him paraded in the 
streets during Mardi Gras carnival processions. Germany's assiduous public 
study of its uncomfortable modern history has ensured that every adult knows 
what happened under both the Nazis and the Stasi. They know these things were 
done by the state in the name of the people. This wetsuit is a reminder of what 
can happen if the citizen fails to keep the state under control.

Tischbein's Goethe

'A citizen of the world'
 Tischbein’s Goethe in the Roman Campagna (1787). Photograph: U 
Edelmann/Städel Museum/Artothek 
We tend to think that all the great writers are somehow the same: Dante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dantealighieri>, Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare>, Cervantes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/miguelcervantes>. But Goethe is different. 
Of course, he is the great writer that every German schoolchild learns and 
reads as we do Shakespeare, but more than that he represents a German belief in 
openness to the world. The 1787 Tischbein portrait is the most famous portrait 
in the whole of Germany. It shows Goethe in Italy. He had just become a 
European celebrity after the publication ofThe Sorrows of Young Werther 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199583027>
 (theClockwork Orange 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141197531>
 of the 18th century), and he was the first to make German a literary language 
read by foreigners. There is a wonderful German word – Weltbürger – a citizen 
of the world. That is how Goethe is shown here. Engaged with, appropriating and 
interpreting the whole world, he makes clear that you need to know about 
Britain and France, about Greece and Rome – you cannot have a culture that is 
only German. He also, strikingly, engaged with Islam in a way that is 
a significant part of the contemporary debate about how Germany should respond 
to its Muslim population.

Understandably, the Nazis were ambivalent about him. He was, of course, a 
hero, but they didn't like the indecisiveness of his protagonists (most of his 
heroes can't make up their minds), and, above all, they didn't like his 
willingness to look for models of behaviour outside Germany.

Würstchen

'A memory of their local sausage'
 Photograph: Getty 
De Gaulle once complained about how difficult it was to govern a country 
with 246 different cheeses. He did not know how lucky he was. Germany has more 
than four times as many types of sausage. What those sausages tell you is that 
the regional identity of Germany is still flourishing in a way that has 
probably never been the case in England, where there has been a centralised 
government in a dominant London for 1,000 years. Because of Germany's political 
fragmentation until 1870, and the deep differences in dialect and local 
history, there is a lively regional variety in Germany, expressed 
gastronomically through wine, beer and sausages, and politically through the 
Länder system. Each Land, or state has its own two-house parliament. Hamburg, 
for example, has survived unbroken as a city state since the early Middle Ages.

One of the big questions for a country that has never had fixed frontiers at 
its edges, and contains an extraordinary range of diversity, is: what does it 
share? Language, beer and sausages are among the shared things, and all have 
pronounced local flavours. Even today you can tell where you are in Germany by 
what kind of sausage you are offered and the way people – of every class – 
pronounce their German. Pretty well all Germans carry both a local accent, 
and a memory of their local sausage.

Dürer

'National artist of Germany'
 Detail from Dürer’s Knight, Death and the Devil (1513). 
Within a generation of the invention of printing, the Germans had done 
everything you can do with print; books, broadsheets, pamphlets and images. The 
great concentration of autonomous cities linked by rivers in south Germany 
provided the ideal communications and distribution network for a large, 
literate and prosperous population. Albrecht Dürer, working in one of the great 
trading centres, Nuremberg, realised that as a maker of prints he could sell 
his art across the whole of the continent, and, just as Goethe was the first 
German writer to be read across Europe, Dürer was the first major artist 
anywhere to make his work for a pan-European market. To protect his 
continent-wide success, he invented his own logo, in the form of the famous AD 
(which he later successfully defended in Venice). His work is familiar to every 
German, in particular his two great engravings,Knight, Death and the Devil 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/highlight_image.aspx?image=ps099783.jpg&retpage=21360>
, andMelancholia 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/highlight_image.aspx?image=ps342975.jpg&retpage=21363>
, which were long taken as two aspects of one national self-portrait: the 
knight riding bravely out to do what must be done; the figure of creative 
genius slumped on the floor, aware of so many creative possibilities that he is 
unable to act at all. The different sides of the German spirit.

Dürer is a national artist of Germany in a different way from Turner or 
Constable in Britain, who explore landscape. Dürer, working in the early 16th 
century, is focused on character; you may explore your own – and Germany's – 
experiences in the light of his images.

Meissen

'The celebrated porcelain menagerie'
 Dürer’s Porcelain Rhinoceros (1515). 
All Germans know their country is one of the great centres of technological 
innovation. And one of the great technological breakthroughs ever was made by 
Johann Böttger, a man who was something between an alchemist and a chemist 
working in Dresden in around 1710. He was the first European to discover how to 
make porcelain. At the time, Chinese porcelain was one of the most precious 
things in Europe, but nobody in the west knew what it was made of. After a long 
process of trial and error, Böttger worked it out. The result was that 
his patron, Augustus the Strong, ruler of Saxony, now had something that 
no other European head of state had, or could give as a present to potential 
allies. For a few decades Dresden porcelain was Saxony's equivalent of panda 
diplomacy.

The Chinese had used porcelain in quite limited ways, for vessels and dishes. 
Dresden flamboyantly made sculptures, especially of animals, demonstrating 
total mastery of a very difficult medium and technique. In the celebrated 
porcelain menagerie in the royal palace, the figures of the hen, fox, peacock 
etc were modelled on real animals. But for the rhinoceros the craftsmen went 
to Dürer, who had never seen a rhinoceros, but nonetheless produced a print 
based on reports sent from Lisbon. By the early 1700s, real rhinoceroses had 
been seen, but, like many Germans before and since, they preferred to see the 
world through Dürer's eyes. The Dresden porcelain rhinoceros, with its 
pugnacious charm and its anatomical oddities, is completely unforgettable.

After the second world war, Meissen found itself in the Soviet zone, but the 
Russians kept the industry going, and so the factory set up by Augustus the 
Strong received commissions to make official portraits of the leaders of the 
communist East German state. You can't be a ruler of Germany, control Dresden, 
and not mind about porcelain.

Volkswagen

'Supremacy in precision engineering in metal'

The Germans are masters of metal. In the Saarland and the Ruhr there is a 
metallurgic tradition that goes back thousands of years, and the country has 
long defined itself through high-end metal engineering in every field. By 1500, 
precision instrument making was dominated by south Germany and that is where 
buyers still go today. Gutenberg could make movable type only because there 
were people nearby who knew how to manufacture hundreds of identical pieces of 
metal. Shakespeare talks about expensive German clocks. Despite what Harry 
Lime, the third man, said, it was Germany not Switzerland that almost certainly 
invented the cuckoo clock.

Unsurprisingly, the Germans were also the first people to dominate the top end 
of the car market with Daimler-Benz and Mercedes. But one of the extraordinary 
developments of the 1930s was that Hitler decided he wanted Germany to be like 
the US and produce cars for everybody. The Volkswagen was an attempt to 
do something odd in German history, produce a low-cost, mass-market engineering 
product. But it was not an economic proposition, war was approaching, metal was 
needed for other things, and production was stopped.

After the war the British took over the plant, but no British car manufacturer 
liked the design and so the Germans resumed ownership. Reverting to their 
high-skill traditions, they then turned what had been meant to be a cheap 
mass‑market car into something of extremely high quality, but with as low a 
price as possible. The Volkswagen became the emblem of both the long German 
tradition of supremacy in precision engineering in metal, and also of the 
postwar economic miracle of the Federal Republic.

Kollwitz

'The grief of the survivor' 
 Käthe Kollwitz’s Pietá (1937). 
In Britain, France and elsewhere, most war memorials are designed to honour 
the dead. What is striking in Germany is the focus on those who are left; 
monuments that depict the grief of the survivor. And in the 20th century, with 
its many catastrophic killings, there have been many grieving survivors. Käthe 
Kollwitz explored all through her life how the image of one mother's pain can 
carry the sorrow of a continent.

Kollwitz was a mother whose son had died in October 1914. Peter had been too 
young to join up for the first world war and needed his father's approval. The 
father was reluctant, but Kollwitz persuaded her husband to let the boy go. He 
was killed 10 days later. So she had not only a profound sense of loss, but 
also of guilt and responsibility. When she was asked to provide the memorial at 
the cemetery where her son was buried, she turned that mix of emotions into an 
exploration of the cosmic tragedy of the first world war. She made a simple 
image of two parents, on their knees, separate, isolated in their own grief, 
looking over the cemetery full of the young dead. There is no image of the son.

In 1937, Kollwitz was still working through the sorrow of 1914 and on the 
anniversary of her son's death that year she wrote in her diary about making a 
small sculpture that has "become something like a Pietà [a depiction of Mary 
with the dead Christ]". But she had moved far away from any Christian tradition 
or convention and found a powerful way of articulating the desolation of those 
who are left. Nothing in this later sculpture suggests sacrifice to achieve a 
higher purpose. There is no hint of salvation, merely a silent response 
to slaughter.

After the reunification of Germany in 1990, Chancellor Helmut Kohl proposed a 
National Monument to all Victims of War and Tyranny in the Neue Wache in 
Berlin. The image he chose was an enlarged version of that sculpture created in 
1937 by Kollwitz, herself both witness and victim. It was a striking, brilliant 
insight on the part of Kohl to see the analogy between Kollwitz's mother 
protecting her child, and the state's recognition of its duty to defend all 
those over whom it has power – and in either case, the terrible cost of failure.

Buchenwald

'A quiet, profound protest'
 Buchenwald Gate. Photograph: Corbis 
All the concentration camps had slogans on their gates. Often it was Arbeit 
Macht Frei (Work makes you free). However, in Buchenwald, a labour (not a 
death) camp – although many thousands of people were worked to death or 
deliberately killed there – the Nazis chose the mottoJedem Das Seine (To Each 
What They Are Due). It was placed on the inside of the gate rather than the 
outside, so that every prisoner was reminded of it as they looked to the world 
outside.

The words are a powerful statement – and in this context a complete and 
provocative perversion of any notion of justice. They are the German 
translation of the Roman law maxim Suum cuique, incorporated not just into 
German law but legal systems across Europe. They are the title of a Bach 
cantata performed in Weimar, the city of Goethe and Schiller, just 10 miles 
from Buchenwald. And this gate, so close to Weimar, raises the unanswerable 
question of modern German history: how can these different components of the 
German story fit together? How could all these humane traditions of justice and 
scholarship, music and law – of a civilised society – all collapse in the Nazi 
abyss?

The Nazi authorities conscripted one of the inmates of the camp to design the 
words. Franz Ehrlich had been interned as a communist on trumped-up charges of 
treason. He had trained at the Bauhaus, the famous school of design, also in 
nearby Weimar, which was loathed by the Nazis for its internationalism and 
modernism. Ehrlich nonetheless used a beautiful Bauhaus typeface of the sort 
that the Nazis categorically disapproved of. Astonishingly, they didn't seem to 
notice. It is impossible not to read the sign as a quiet, profound protest. 
Ehrlich was compelled to design this hateful, callous motto, but he did it in a 
way that showed that another Germany, a humane, international Germany, 
survived. These shocking words in that typeface suggest that people, even in 
terrible circumstance, may sometimes find a way of asserting dignity.

Trümmerfrauen

'The rubble women'
 Lachnit’s Trümmerfrau (1945-46). 
WG Sebald has written about the striking gap in German public and literary 
discourse about what the allied bombings did to the civilian population. There 
is probably more debate about the fire-bombing of Dresden in this country than 
in Germany. Sebald suggests this may be because the bombing was seen as 
deserved retribution and therefore the victims were not entitled to talk about 
their suffering. But the memory of the bombings and the losses is strong, and 
Dresden is a very particular case and memory. The same Augustus of the 
porcelain rhinoceros also built the beautiful 18th-century city and filled it 
with supreme art treasures . Then, on the 12th and 13th ofFebruary 1945, the 
city was, reduced to rubble by British and American bombers. Later In July and 
August that year the Soviets removed the entire art collection. Every part of 
Dresden's identity had been lost. But how did you start clearing up the 
colossal mess? All able-bodied women – there were few men – were conscripted to 
clear the rubble, mostly with their bare hands. And with astonishing speed the
Trümmerfrauen (the rubble women) made Dresden, and Germany, habitable again by 
clearing away not only the destroyed buildings, but also the thousands of 
bodies that had been incinerated within them.

The sculptor Max Lachnit, who worked in Dresden, lost all his work in the air 
raid. He made this little statue of one of theTrümmerfrau from bits of coloured 
stone he found in the ruins. She is young, looking steadfastly forward, totally 
impassive. We have no idea who she is – she stands for thousands. It is not 
a great work of art, but it encapsulates one of the deep memories of many 
Germans, of the endless rubble, of the late 1940s, and of the huge army of 
women who cleared it. Only then could the reconstruction of the cities, and the 
economy, begin.

Barlach's Angel

'The quest for resolution and reconciliation'
 Barlach’s Angel (1927). 
The biography of Ernst Barlach's sculpture is the biography of Germany in the 
20th century. Barlach had joined up for the first world war as a committed 
patriot who wanted to fight. His experience of the trenches had made him 
a pacifist. He built this memorial to those killed in the war and to remember 
those who remained – using the face of his friend the artist Käthe Kollwitz – 
for the Protestant cathedral of Güstrow, a small town just over 100 miles to 
the north of Berlin. HisHovering Angel, suspended from the ceiling – so 
elevating individual grief into general mourning – is an evocation of a mother 
looking west, to the killing fields of Flanders, grieving serenely, 
perpetually, for her dead son. It is about reflecting on responsibility for the 
war, and sorrow for its consequences.

Of course, the Nazis hated its pacifism. Eventually they took it away and 
melted down the bronze to use as material for the next war. After it was 
removed from the cathedral in 1938, Barlach's friends, assisted by a dealer who 
had suspiciously good relations with the authorities, located the original 
plaster mould and made a second bronze, which was buried for safe-keeping. When 
that emerged after the war, it was in the west, and the angel's previous home 
Güstrow, a small town just over 100 miles to the north of Berlin was in the 
east. So the second bronze went to the Antonite Church in Cologne. There, 
on the slab in the floor below it, they added to the dates 1914–1918, the years 
1933-1945. The strength of theAngel's symbolic power, they believed, was able 
to carry not just the sorrow of the first war, but the added burden of the 
further millions of losses and deaths of the entire Nazi period.

In the early 50s, against the backdrop of the cold war, another cast of the 
version in Cologne was made, and sent to Güstrow, as an act of reconciliation 
and friendship. So another layer of meaning was added to Barlach's image. When 
in 1981 West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt made an official visit to East 
Germany, he stood beneath the angel in Güstrow with GDR leader, Erich Honecker 
and talked of what the two German states might share. When we asked to borrow 
it for the British Museum exhibition, the congregation of Güstrow Cathedral had 
to give their agreement. After much reflection they eventually decided that the 
purpose of the object was to promote healing and reconciliation, and that, 100 
years after 1914, reconciliation was still needed between Britain and Germany. 
So it will come to London. In the exhibition here, this third version of 
Barlach'sAngel will embody the war fever of 1914; pacifism in the 1920s; 
the humane art of Käthe Kollwitz; the destruction of "degenerate art" by 
the Nazis; the western front in the first world war and the bombing of Berlin 
in the second; the postwar division of Germany and the dialogues that were 
possible in spite of it; the millions of victims of 20th-century conflicts; the 
continuing painful and difficult conversations between Germany and the rest of 
the world in the quest for resolution and reconciliation; and unquenchable hope.

I can't think of any other exhibit that has such profound resonance. I hope 
people will respond to the generosity and earnestness of the people of Güstrow, 
who, by allowing it to come to London, have added yet another new dimension to 
this remarkable sculpture.

• Germany: Memories of a Nation is on BBC Radio 4, Monday to Friday at 9.45am, 
for six weeks from 29 September. The exhibition opens at the British Museum on 
16 October,britishmuseum.org <http://www.britishmuseum.org/germany>. 
Germany: Memories of a Nation 
<http://www.penguin.co.uk/nf/Book/BookDisplay/0,,9780241008331,00.html?/Germany_Neil_MacGregor>
 by Neil MacGregor is published by Allen Lane on 6 November (£25).
 