
A young British man described as "the world's worst tennis pro" appeared at 
the high court in London today to sue the Daily Telegraph for ruining his 
professional reputation.

Robert Dee, 23, from Bexley in Kent, has already secured more than 30 
apologies and tens of thousands of pounds in damages from media organisations 
that made similarly disparaging allegations about his sporting prowess.

But the Telegraph refused to back down over two articles on the front page and 
in the sports section on 23 April 2008 under the headlines "World's worst 
­tennis pro wins at last" and "A British sensation – the world's worst". The 
newspaper is ready to call high-profile ­witnesses, including Boris Becker and 
John Lloyd, the former British No 1 who is now captain of the Great Britain 
Davis Cup team.

The offending stories said Dee did not win a single match during his first 
three years on the professional circuit but finally ended this "dismal run" by 
beating an unranked 17-year-old in Spain in April 2008. One article, claiming 
Dee had lost 54 matches in a row, compared him to the ski jumper Eddie "the 
Eagle" Edwards and Eric the Eel, the Equatorial Guinea swimmer who struggled at 
the Sydney Olympics in 2000.

Dee argues that the reports suggested "that he unreasonably and 
unrealistically persists in a career as a professional ­tennis player which is 
an expensive waste of money and doomed to failure".

He admits he indeed lost 54 successive matches in international contests, but 
claims that over the same period he played in professional national tournaments 
in Spain with "modest success". To suggest he had suffered "an unrelieved 
catalogue of failure" was untrue and defamatory.

The Telegraph articles not only ridiculed and embarrassed Dee, but could deter 
people from employing him as a professional coach, said his barrister, Andrew 
Caldecott QC.

In court the Telegraph continued to insist that Dee did indeed hold the 
dubious honour of having had the world's worst losing run in professional 
tennis. A Guatemalan player had also lost 54 consecutive matches, but unlike 
Dee, had once managed to actually win a set, said David Price, for the 
Telegraph. Dee, on the other hand, lost 108 sets in a row.

But Dee argues that as he did not have a world ranking in 2008, he cannot have 
been deemed the world's worst.

Caldecott said: "The claimant has a serious and substantial complaint … The 
complaint in this action is that in the interests of entertaining readers he 
was wrongly branded as the world's worst tennis professional, and his record 
and ranking were wholly misinterpreted on the front page of a national 
newspaper, which would have been widely read by his friends and acquaintances."

The BBC, Daily Mail, Guardian and Sun were among the news organisations that 
apologised to Dee, avoiding litigation.

The hearing continues today.
 