
Springtime in New Orleans – a joyful, meteorological sweet spot before the 
bullying humidity of the summer arrives – is the city’s festival season. Still 
somewhat groggy from the hedonistic excesses of Mardi Gras and St Patrick’s Day 
(which lasts a week here), the city culturally elevates itself this week with a 
somewhat more cerebral celebration.

The 29th Tennessee Williams/New Orleans Literary Festival began on Wednesday, 
honouring the life and works of one of the city’s most loved sons. However, 
this is New Orleans, and literary festivals in this city celebrate all facets 
of life – the artistic, the culinary and even the visceral complementing the 
intellectual.

The festival is eclectic, loosely hung as it is on the undeniable love that 
Williams had for the Crescent City. He resided at several addresses in and 
around the historic French Quarter between 1939 and the early 1980s, and 
there’s many locations that proudly boast about his completing one of his 
famous plays while staying there.

Reading American cities: books about New Orleans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/mar/26/reading-american-cities-books-about-new-orleans>
The grand opening brought a lesser-known facet of Williams’ creativity to the 
fore – 19 of his paintings were displayed at the Ogden Museum of Southern Art, 
serenaded by the legendary singer Allen Toussaint while local celebrity 
super-chef John Besh served up suitably striking hors-d’oeuvres.

New Yorker drama critic John Lahr is one of the more prominent guest speakers 
over the next few days. Lahr took a decade to write his biography, Tennessee 
Williams: Mad Pilgrimage of the Flesh, and he’ll be discussing the book and the 
journey he took to complete it in the elegant surroundings of the Monteleone 
hotel – a favourite haunt of Williams.

Madness and flesh are two themes likely to figure highly on the list when 
another well-known speaker opens his fabulously filthy mouth. Film director, 
author and provocateur John Waters wrote the introduction to Williams’ memoirs, 
published in 2006. The “Pope of Trash” performs a revitalised version of his 
one-man show This Filthy World and submits himself to interview by fellow 
author Laura Lippman.

Literary panels abound over the five days, as do staged readings, full 
productions of Williams’ plays, seminars and walking tours that take in 
Williams’ former residences. Lesser-known works get the opportunity to stretch 
their legs – one such production being Hotel Plays, written to be performed in 
small hotel rooms. The annual writing competitions have become hotly contested 
affairs, and prizes will be awarded to the winners over the weekend.

There is a wealth of events that fall within the festival’s schedule that are 
more to do with the general culture of the city rather than being specifically 
related to Williams’ life. This year’s 10th anniversary of Hurricane Katrina 
and the failure of the federal levee system are remembered in talks such as 
Writers of the Storm, which looks at journalistic responsibilities during 
disasters.

Add to this cookery classes, a premiere of a film adaptation of one of 
Williams’ short plays, The Palooka (starring local resident and Mad Men star 
Bryan Batt) and a talk about Jerry Lee Lewis and you get a sense of the 
esoteric flair of the festival.

The climax is always satisfyingly dramatic, and only its ridiculousness is 
taken anything like seriously. The Stanley and Stella Shouting Contest is all 
about letting loose those primal screams, as people line up to fall to their 
knees and empty their lungs as they mimic Stanley Kowalski’s immortal cry. In 
the interests of equality, women can subvert the scene and shout for Stanley.

Theatre, academia, history, filth, discussion, literary competition, food, 
music and a healthy dose of melodramatic shouting. Yes, that sounds about right 
for a festival in New Orleans.

The full festival programme can be found here: www.tennesseewilliams.net 
<http://www.tennesseewilliams.net>
 