
The cynics were right: the excitement generated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-plan-workers-boardroom-reform-extraordinary-tories>
 by Theresa May’s early enthusiasm for reforming the way companies are runturns 
out to have been misplaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-cbi-speech-workers-in-boardrooms-u-turn>
. Her promises of employees and consumers on boards are dust. Her rethink of 
governance that might spell the end of the short-termist interpretation of 
shareholder value, so destructive to sustainable prosperity, is consigned toa 
distant green paper 
<https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/economy/taxation/news/80965/full-text-theresa-mays-speech-cbi>
. Reform of corporate governance may reappear, one day, but it doesn’t seem 
likely this side of Brexit. That is a serious misjudgment. Mrs May has not only 
betrayed a promise that she made in July and again in October, she has missed a 
big chance to build stronger companies by boardroom diversity.

What makes the prime minister’s U-turn even more disappointing is that this is 
not some adventure in alternative economic management, but a modification of 
the UK system of corporate governance that would bring it into line with the
majority of EU member states 
<http://www.worker-participation.eu/National-Industrial-Relations/Countries/Germany/Board-level-Representation>
, including all the larger economies except Italy. Almost the only European 
countries as dismissive of a workers’ voice as the UK are the new Baltic 
democracies. Even Romania allows employee representatives to attend board 
meetings on some occasions.

The employee-director argument goes to the heart of what, and who, a company 
is run for. Most countries in Europe treat stakeholder interest with respect. 
It is nearly 40 years sinceLord Bullock’s report 
<http://www.ipa-involve.com/news/the-bullock-report/> into industrial 
democracy, conducted at a time of aggressive confrontation. He concluded that 
regarding the company as only the property of shareholders was out of touch 
with the reality of the company as “a complex social and economic entity, 
subject to a variety of internal and external pressures”, controlled by 
professional management. Yet still shareholders rule. Even when Labour 
overhauled corporate governance in 2006, it was investor interest that came 
first and last. Then the financial crash in 2008 illustrated two important 
things: first, what catastrophic decisions were taken in some bank boardrooms, 
and then how industrial relations had been transformed.

Pay freezes and cuts in hours largely took the place of the kind of 
devastating jobs shakeout that led to more than three million unemployed after 
the 1981 recession. But where there was restraint on the shop floor, at the top 
there were grotesquely inflated salaries and bonuses, accompanied by a 
revolution among shareholders when the proportion of British-based shareholders 
fell sharply while the number of overseas investors rose. As a TUC survey of 
fund managers found, overseas investors are significantly less interested in 
how a company is run in terms of its workers, or its environmental impact, or 
executive pay. Nor is there any control over shareholders or fund managers who 
are interested in what profits they can make from share trades rather than the 
long-term prosperity of the company. These “ownerless corporations” have no 
practical obligation to pay attention to the interests of their workforce at 
all.

Putting workers on company boards would not end all these problems. But, as 
Vince Cable argued when he was business secretary in the coalition, they would 
be a good start. It is hard to understand why the CBI is so resistant. Its best 
arguments, as it welcomed its triumph, concerned confidentiality (although why 
employee directors should be more inclined to breach it than other directors 
isn’t clear) and a claim that international companies would struggle to ensure 
representation, a feeble argument when shareholders can, and often do, hide in 
opaque ownership structures.

Europe’s strongest economies prosper under diverse arrangements for workers’ 
representation. The arguments in its favour in terms of resilient, productive 
companies are unambiguous. Yet what looked as if it might develop into an 
important strand of Theresa May’s version of Conservatism has been abandoned as 
soon as the CBI said “boo”.
 