
Boris Johnson’s provocative public criticism of Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/boris-johnson-accuses-saudi-arabia-of-twisting-and-abusing-islam>
 has given additional ammunition to those within and without Theresa May’s 
government who believe he is unsuited to the post of foreign secretary. 
Johnson’s appointment, in the febrile aftermath of the Brexit referendum and 
David Cameron’s resignation, always seemed a trifle bizarre. He brought no 
obvious qualifications or experience to the role, and plenty of awkward 
baggage. Unsurprisingly, given his reputation for buffoonery, his brief tenure 
has seen numerous gaffes. Johnson’s more egregious blunders include his 
hypocritical championing of Turkey’s EU membership bid after he had mocked its 
president and vilified would-be Turkish migrants, his arrogant description of 
Europe’s founding principle of freedom of movement as“bollocks” 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/boris-johnson-free-movement-as-a-fundamental-freedom-bollocks-brexit-trump/>
, and his ridiculous remarks aboutItalian prosecco imports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/16/european-ministers-boris-johnson-prosecco-claim-brexit>
. Now there is his Saudi solecism. Johnson has already done more than enough to 
convince observers, here and across the EU, that he is the wrong man for the 
job, especially at this critical juncture. One more big foot-in-mouth moment 
and May may feel obliged to sack him.

It is a sign of the dislocated, schismatic times in which we live that 
Johnson’s political allies do not view this latest controversy in terms of the 
damage it may do to UK-Saudi relations. For them, that is a sideshow. What 
matters most for the hard Tory Brexiters, for whom Johnson is chief 
standard-bearer, is their bid to deflect the more sensible, less doctrinaire 
approach to Brexit associated with Philip Hammond, the chancellor, and, 
increasingly, with David Davis, the Brexit minister. In this war for May’s ear, 
Johnson’s defenders say he is being deliberately undermined – typified by the 
swiftDowning Street rebuke 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/12/08/boris-johnson-theresa-may-odds-pm-rebukes-foreign-secretary/>
 issued after his Saudi critique. For hard Brexit’s blinkered Little 
Englanders, the current, epic Middle East crisis clumsily highlighted by 
Johnson’s speech in Rome last week is of secondary importance.

Yet what is happening in Saudi Arabia, and by extension in Syria, Iraq, Iran, 
Yemen, in the Islamic State’s “caliphate”, and throughout the lands of Islam 
matters very much indeed to Britain’s future security and prosperity. Johnson 
was broadly correct when he accusedSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> of prosecuting proxy wars with 
its regional rival, Iran. He was right to draw attention to the deepening 
Sunni-Shia divide within the Muslim world and the lack of credible leaders able 
or willing to overcome it. Taken together, these issues amount to an 
existential struggle for the future of the Middle East.

The war in Syria has exposed the failings and self-interestedness not only of 
regional states but of the US, Russia, the European powers and UN system, too. 
Last week saw the battle for Aleppo enter its final, grisly endgame. As 
predicted, thousands more civilians were displaced as the Syrian army, 
reinforced by Iranian-orchestrated Shia Muslim fighters from Iraq and Lebanon, 
plusRussian airpower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/aleppo-bombardment-syria-questions-over-russia-ceasefire-pledge>
, advanced into eastern rebel-held areas.

As predicted, their awful suffering went largely unrelieved while Moscow and 
Washington bickered over who was to blame. UN envoys throw their arms up in 
despair. Nobody, it seems, has the power, the vision and the moral drive to rid 
Syria of its bloody dictator, Bashar al-Assad. And nobody inside or outside 
Syria, it seems, has the ability, or cares enough, to impose a settlement to 
end the war.

The absence of strong, unifying regional leadership to which Johnson alluded 
is evident, too, in Yemen, where the Saudi-led coalition is accused of war 
crimes. More thana year of fierce attrition 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/08/10000-killed-yemen-conflict-160830173324902.html>
 has failed to end the conflict. As in Syria, millions are displaced, and 
little has been achieved. And the principal reason for this stalemate is Shia 
Iran’s support for Yemen’s Houthi forces, part of Tehran’s wider, multi-fronted 
challenge to the traditional regional dominance of Sunni Muslim Saudi Arabia.

Although this is not the whole story, Syria and Yemen are the kind of proxy 
wars of which Johnson spoke. And yet, truly dreadful though these conflicts 
are, the ultimate, awful expression of the Sunni-Shia schism, of (in Johnson’s 
words) this “abuse of religion”, is not to be found there but in Islamic 
State’s encircled fiefdoms in Mosul and Raqqa. The defeat of the Sunni jihadi 
fanatics of Isis has been forecast many times. Still they cling on. Their 
continuing, ghastly depredations symbolise the region’s crisis.

Johnson identified the problems. But he did not offer answers. Nor did he 
acknowledge that British double standards have contributed to present problems. 
Downing Street’s anger with him was sharpened by the fact that May spent some of
last week in the Gulf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/theresa-may-calls-on-gulf-leaders-to-press-on-with-economic-reforms>
, currying favour with Saudi royals and the unelected, Sunni autocrats of the 
Gulf Cooperation Council. Their lucrative arms contracts and investments are 
considered vital. And May knows continuing bilateral business and free trade 
deals in the Gulf will be of even greater importance once Britain has cast 
itself adrift from the EU.

Johnson’s intervention drew overdue attention to Britain’s two-faced attitude 
to the Saudi regime’s human rights abuses, its eternally unfulfilled promises 
of internal reform, its ugly addiction to public executions and lashings, its 
export ofextremist Wahhabist ideology 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/26/world/middleeast/saudi-arabia-islam.html?_r=0>
, and its use of oil money to, in effect, buy British silence.

In a speech in Bahrain on Friday, Johnson expressed his “profound concern” 
over the suffering of the people of Yemen. He made the obvious point that force 
alone cannot end the war there. It would be churlish to characterise his 
statements as anything other than sincere. But if Johnson is serious about 
tackling such issues, he should use his visit to Saudi Arabia today to 
reiterate concerns, aired last year by Germany’s BND intelligence agency, that 
Saudi policies are destabilising the region. Johnson should say parliamentary 
demands that Britain suspend arms sales to Saudi Arabia pending UN 
investigations of its actions in Yemen cannot be resisted indefinitely.

Johnson should focus on human rights, including the atrocious treatment of 
activists in Bahrain. He should speak out against the death penalty and in 
support of women’s rights. And he should make the point again that the venomous 
stand-off between Tehran and Riyadh is damaging to regional as well as British 
and western security interests. It feeds instability. It is self-defeating. And 
it gives space and oxygen to the anti-religious nihilism of terrorists.

If Brexit really does mean that a more independent Britain will have the 
chance to reboot its foreign policy and build healthier, equitable and ethical 
bilateral relationships with its international partners, then the Middle East 
would be a good place to start. If he were to initiate a more demanding, less 
subservient British approach to Saudi Arabia, Johnson could begin to justify 
his continuing role as foreign secretary. He might even be taken seriously.
 