
No one who has a relative or friend who has required a care or nursing home 
bed in recent times can be unaware of the problems now being set out so 
graphically (“Overstretched, underfunded. Care of the elderly is in crisis”,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/10/care-for-elderly-crisis-how-to-improve-quality-of-life>
Special Report).

It is the consequences of the “overstretched” that must be of greatest worry 
for both current and future residents. There will be increasing pressure to 
rush personal care, resulting in possible mishandling and injury, along with 
the potential for psychological intimidation and more general abuse.

In policy initiative and operational terms, it should be assumed this is more 
likely to happen than not in a closed environment. Just look at the scandals 
involving prisons, boarding schools, children’s residential facilities and even 
football clubs.

The Care Quality Commission cannot be expected to do more than touch the 
surface in trying to prevent abuse. The time lapse between inspections will 
always leave it with the “day after” worry – the risk that something might 
happen just after the inspection. Last week’s report also showed that staff and 
relatives have difficulties in bringing attention to abuses.

What is needed is an opening up of the closed care environment. To do this, 
why not make care home placements a standard part of the nursing curriculum? 
Nearly 20,000 young optimistically minded beginning professionals, supported by 
their trainers, would make a huge difference by their presence in care homes.
Morton Warner
Emeritus professor of health policy and strategy
Welsh Institute for Health and Social Care

Vale of Glamorgan

You rightly point out that raising the council tax even by a further 2% will 
not cover the additional cost of adult care or greatly relieve the pressures on 
bedblocking. In Nottingham, the additional pressures are around £16m.

They are due simply to the increase in the number of elderly and the 
prolongation of life of both elderly and disabled people. A government proposal 
for a further 2% increase in council tax brings in about £2m, which is 
one-eighth of the pressure.

However, what your coverage did not address are two other factors that make 
the government proposal totally inadequate. First, unlike the NHS, which has 
had its cash allocation preserved in monetary terms, councils have had severe 
cuts and the poorer the area the greater the cut. This means that in poorer 
areas the burden of paying for greater demand has meant greater pressures on 
other council services than in better-off areas. Second, the poorer the area, 
the greater level of dependency on social care, the less council tax there is 
to be raised by the 2% to deal with the issue.


Graham Chapman
Deputy leader, Nottingham city council

Congratulations for daring to raise the question of increasing income tax and 
national insurance to pay for a proper public care service (“The crisis in 
social care is clear: so is the solution” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/10/observer-editorial-government-must-increase-funding-social-care>
, leader).

It can’t be a coincidence that this healthcare crisis has been mounting over 
the last four decades during which the standard rate of income tax has been 
cut, by successive administrations, from 33% to 20% and the top rate from 83% 
to 45%. None of which means that we taxpayers don’t pay as much for our care: 
it simply means we pay – privately or in reduced services – in a different, 
more socially regressive and (for some) more expensive, way.

However, little will be done to implement the tax “solution” until it is 
recognised once and for all that raising revenue to employ people to provide 
health and social care – as well as being much more important – is as 
productive and wealth-creating as any other kind of economic activity.

Turning round the ingrained wisdom on this will be a massive task. So, having 
raised the issue, please don’t let things slide but keep up the good work. 
There is little more important today.
Bernard Colin Cummings
Erith, Kent
 