
The understandable desire of many Labour MPs and activists to evolve clearer, 
concisely presented party policies on key issues has led some to argue for a 
two-tier system of immigration controls (“Labour has sidestepped concern on 
immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/07/labour-mps-urge-jeremy-corby-to-back-controls-on-immigration>
”, News). They suggest this represents a reasonable balance between yielding to 
widespread resentment of immigrants and the EU’s liberal tradition of the free 
movement of labour and hope this approach will win back Labour voters who 
supported Leave in last year’s referendum.

The difficulty is popular prejudices against migrants are partly irrational in 
nature and closed to balanced debate.

Hostility to immigrants, for example, is identifiably stronger in areas where 
very few of them live and an “anti-elitist” rejection of informed advice on 
their actual economic impact has long preceded Michael Gove’s scorning of 
experts in the referendum campaign.

Factors such as social class, education and geography have shaped deep 
prejudices, now regularly reinforced by rightwing politicians and newspapers 
and by social media. The deliberate and consistent promotion of a 
counterculture, based on egalitarian values that recognise the real worth and 
potential of all human beings, has to form part of Labour’s response if “common 
sense” resentments are ever to be overcome.
John Chowcat
Herne Bay, Kent

Stephen Kinnock and Emma Reynolds (“People are worried about the pressure on 
jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/labour-must-introduce-fair-immigration-system>
”, News) argue that “the EU referendum was a vote for change on immigration”. 
Like many commentators, they present this statement as fact. It is anything 
but. Immigration was not the question on the ballot paper. And doesn’t British 
Euroscepticism predate – by decades – EU enlargement to the east and freedom of 
movement?

You could argue instead that the referendum was a vote on extra funding for 
the NHS. Or on technocratic EU federalism. Or on the people’s opinion of the 
ruling “elites”. Or on doing more free trade. Or on doing less free trade. It 
is anyone’s guess. A fundamental flaw of the referendum was to present voters 
with a choice between a well-defined option and a totally undefined 
alternative. We can only speculate on what the 52% voted for and chances are 
they voted for very different things.

There is no doubt that many voters feel strongly against (all) immigration. 
That was true 20 years ago and will remain true 20 years from now. To argue now 
that the referendum was one on EU immigration is conjecture, and one that 
accepts the frame of the debate set by Theresa May.


François Chabat
London SE11

MPs Emma Reynolds and Stephen Kinnock undermine their own argument. If “many 
of the areas that voted Leave on 23 June have little or no EU immigration” then 
no rightward swing by Labour on immigration controls will make any difference.

The horse has already bolted. Kinnock and Reynolds are about 10 years too late 
in recognising that there existed a vacuum in working-class communities for the 
right to fill. The right, from the BNP through Ukip to the Conservative party, 
have successfully racialised what are really questions of class. Labour cannot 
now win back the space lost by echoing its opponents. Politics is a battle of 
ideas. By choosing to fudge the battle, Kinnock and Reynolds just show the 
paucity of coherent thought within the Labour party.

The real issue is that Labour took its working-class base for granted and 
thereby lost it. Either it can now choose to do the hard work of reforging a 
coherent class-based politics or it can pass itself off as “Ukip-lite”. But who 
will vote for the copy when the real anti-migrant beast is standing?
Nick Moss
London NW10
 