
In the summer of 1920, F Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/f-scott-fitzgerald> and Zelda 
Fitzgerald, three months married, decided to flee the ennui of the New England 
noon, and so they fired up their dilapidated car and embarked on a mock odyssey 
from Connecticut to Alabama to rediscover the "biscuits and peaches" of Zelda's 
youth. Documented inThe Cruise of the Rolling Junk, their hapless but 
good-natured picaresque is punctuated by moments of comedy, despair and mortal 
peril, in which the car proves to be every bit as recalcitrant and impulsive as 
its passengers.

Engagingly introduced by Paul Theroux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/paul-theroux>, this first UK edition of 
Fitzgerald's song of the road reflects a perennial American fascination with 
the automobile, and a personal interest in the space between fact and fiction. 
Many elements of the account are embellished for dramatic effect: in fact, the 
actual journey started from New York, and was conducted in a rather less 
ostentatious vehicle than the much-vaunted "Expenso".

But if Fitzgerald's style occasionally smacks of affectation, it also 
illustrates his subsequent development. Though he exhibits all the debonair 
ebullience befitting a young man in possession of a successful first novel and 
a spirited wife, beneath the patina of gaiety there are intimations of a 
deeper, more inscrutable tragedy. The couple are helped along their way by a 
young war veteran "still wearing part of his uniform" and bowl merrily across 
fields once stained with Confederate blood. On entering Montgomery, Zelda weeps 
"because things were the same and yet were not the same… for her faithlessness… 
and for the faithlessness of time". Though verging on mawkish, Fitzgerald's 
observation anticipates the deep romanticism that comes to maturity inGatsby: 
the ambivalent attitude to the past; the desire, innate and imperfect, for not 
only the antebellum world, but the impossible future which Gatsby strains to 
see.
 