
Sam Groth lolls his head as he looks exasperatedly at the umpire. The last 
thing he wants to do at this stage of the match is servethat second serve. He’s 
annoyed with the close line calls that have gone against him and the last one 
has bamboozled him into a double fault.

In this best-of-five tussle with Australian world No240 Chris O’Connell, the 
score sits at 5-7, 6-3, 5-6 (15-40). It’s not just a critical point in this 2017
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> wildcard 
playoff match. You could say it’s a critical point in Groth’s 2017 Australian 
summer.

Sport in 2016: a dichotomy of soaring highs and desperate lows | Richard 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/23/2016-review-sport-dichotomy-soaring-highs-desperate-lows>
While the 2015 Newcombe Medalist has been a fixture on the Australian summer 
circuit for the previous two years, his current ranking of 180 signifies an 
injury-stricken 2016 that precludes him from direct entry to Brisbane, Sydney 
or Melbourne. His schedule for the Australian summer of tennis is unclear, but 
contesting the January lead-in events that constitute the Australian Open (AO) 
Series is a big priority.

“For me it’s huge,” Groth tells Guardian Australia. “I’ve done well in the 
past at those events … we only get to play in front of our home crowd a few 
times a year and maybe a few more times during Davis Cup.”

It also gives home-grown talent a chance to garner an edge over their 
international opponents. “We practice here for the entire month of December at 
the national academy withTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> 
Australia so it’s a huge advantage to us that we get to hit on the courts that 
will be used for the tournaments.”

The AO Series comprises five tournaments leading into the Australian Open: the 
Hopman Cup (Perth) and Brisbane International in week one, followed by the 
World Tennis Challenge (Adelaide), the Hobart International and the Sydney 
International in week two. 2017 is distinct in that its the first Australian 
summer in a decade to simultaneously feature both Roger Federer and Rafael 
Nadal in the draws for the official lead-in tournaments.

Federer and Nadal’s appearances in the AO Series (Federer is competing in the 
Hopman Cup and Nadal the Brisbane International) also signal their return to 
competition after injuries that kept one or both of them absent from the bulk 
of the major tennis tournaments in the second half of 2016.

Geoff Quinlan, tournament director of the Brisbane International, says Nadal’s 
absence from tennis in general this season will stimulate extra anticipation 
when he arrives for tournament play in Australia at the start of the new year. 
“The other part is Rafa hasn’t played in Brisbane previously,” says Quinlan. 
“That means he’ll start far earlier in Australia, which is great for us and the 
fans.”

In terms of star power and top ten players, the Brisbane International is the 
standout of the AO Series tournaments, with its deep ensemble cast of A-list 
men’s and women’s players.

Federer, who Forbes ranks as the highest-paid tennis player in the world by 
way of endorsements and appearance fees, buoys the Hopman Cup alongside Nick 
Kyrgios, and the Sydney International women’s field is stacked with six players 
from the top ten, including world No1 Angelique Kerber.

But the men’s draw at the Sydney International continues to struggle to 
attract mainstream men’s tennis stars, while the Kooyong event (formerly part 
of the AO Series) is a shadow of past glory when it staged finals regularly 
contested by the likes of Andre Agassi, Pete Sampras, Andy Roddick, Federer and 
Lleyton Hewitt.

Rival January tournaments in Auckland (featuring Serena and Venus Williams), 
Chennai, Qatar and Shenzhen mean that the status and star power of the AO 
Series, like any other swing on an ever-globalising tournament calendar, is 
transient. To attract crowds, viewers and sponsors, the modernisation of the 
Australian summer of tennis is a perennial endeavour for Tennis Australia.

Professor Hans Westerbeek, Dean at the college of sport and exercise science 
at Victoria University, says sports generally are innovating in response to the 
saturation of sporting events on the annual calendar. “If you don’t buy a 
ticket to this, there’s always the option to buy a ticket to something else,” 
he says. “It’s all about going beyond what historically for the last 20 or 30 
years has been the primary product.”

The ‘True Blue’ plexicushion prestige court surface that’s been universal at 
the AO and AO Series events since 2008 is an emblem of how Australia’s summer 
swing has evolved in this Big 4-dominated decade.


Ana Ivanovic fuels retirement rumours with cryptic Twitter post
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/27/ana-ivanovic-retirement-rumours-twitter>
In the present era, IBM’s big data and real-time analytics are profoundly 
deepening fan engagement with the sport – you almost need a phone in your hand 
to appreciate the full coverage of a tennis contest now as fans consume the 
sport through traditional broadcast television channels alongside enhanced 
digital content streams and social media platforms.

The multi-purpose Pat Rafter Arena and Perth Arena mean that the AO Series is 
increasingly becoming an enclaved arena-tennis spectacle for prime time, and 
trials in Fast 4 Tennis signpost the need to innovate and experiment with the 
format to ensure contemporary fans’ attentions.

The AO Series – which lacks the prize money and points standings of the 
longer-standing US Open Series – offers players an opportunity to acclimatise 
to Australian conditions, get match-hardened and pick up rankings points, 
according to Tennis Australia.


It’s one of the many diverse series of swings on the tour with its flavour, 
according to ATP World Tour spokesperson, Simon Higson. “I think if you asked 
the players, they would also identify the Australian tournaments as presenting 
some of the toughest playing conditions, especially with the extreme heat we’ve 
seen on occasion in recent years,” he says.

Quinlan likens the AO Series relationship to the AO with the way the Spring 
Racing Carnival leads into the Melbourne Cup. “It promotes the sport and the 
event and it’s a bit of form guide that creates a patchwork quilt of stories 
within stories leading up to these iconic events,” he says.

Back at Melbourne Park, there’s a muddy sky looming over court eight and the 
yellow and blue ‘AO’ flags peppering the grounds are whipping thornily. Groth’s 
damp green and gold T-shirt is pasted to him and his cap is fashionedau 
contraire enough to oxygenate suspicions he’s dressed by Lleyton Hewitt. He 
rolls in his second serve and the five-shot rally ends meekly when his 
malnourished topspin forehand dips into the bottom of the net.

At the change of ends, Groth smashes his racquet into the True Blue surface 
five times and tosses it into the fence behind him. The match isn’t tilting in 
his favour and the big-serving Groth ultimately succumbs to his opponent. He’s 
done enough to impress TA managing director Wally Masur however and it’s 
decided that Groth will receive a discretionary wildcard into the 2017 
Australian Open on the basis of his Davis Cup performance in 2016.

And after a run of frustrating injuries participation in the AO Series could 
just be the kickstart Groth needs – for the Australian summer of tennis, and 
for 2017.
 