
Bartenders, as a breed, are not overly concerned with political correctness 
when it comes to cocktail names. Many tips have been culled by serving Slippery 
Nipples, Screaming Orgasms and Between the Sheets. The latter actually dates 
back to the 1930s, showing that barkeeps have long been comfortable with 
cocktails that come with a wink and a nod.


But barroom banter can descend into a deep freeze when one popular St 
Patrick’s Day drink is called for: the Irish Car Bomb, which consists of a shot 
of Irish whiskey, Bailey’s Irish Cream and sometimes Kahlúa, served alongside 
(or dropped into) a pint of Guinness.

While the Troubles that long plagued Northern Ireland and Britain may be a 
distant memory to US millennials, the mere mention of the cocktail can still 
get some drinkers’ backs up. The drink is least popular in the UK, where many 
still keenly remember the violence and deaths provoked by the decades-long 
conflict.

Perhaps more than any other cocktail, the Irish Car Bomb is a drink with a 
split reputation dictated entirely by nationality. In 2014, a bar in Oxford, 
England, was compelled to rescind a promotion featuring the drink in the face 
of public outcry. In the US, meanwhile, it is consumed by feckless millions who 
harbor no qualms about the indelicacy of the name. (So accepted is the drink on 
these shores that Irish Car Bomb cupcakes are popular seasonal treats.)

In the US, it is consumed by feckless millions who harbor no qualms about the 
indelicacy of the name

“The drink gets some bad press to this day,” said Charles Oat, the Connecticut 
bartender who invented the drink. “It wasn’t done to celebrate car bombs,” he 
added. “It was done to celebrate Irish families here in America.”

Although Diageo, the British liquor conglomerate that owns Guinness and 
Baileys, has no doubt profited from the cocktail’s popularity, it does not 
support the drink.

“We are proud of the role our brands play in celebrating occasions such as St 
Patrick’s Day,” said Emily Hallie, a Diageo spokeswoman, in a prepared 
statement. “We have a stringent marketing code which ensures that we promote 
only the responsible consumption of our brands. As such we do not seek to 
support drinks such as the Irish Car Bomb.”

“I remember many a time when working in Covent Garden bars, we would often be 
evacuated after bomb scares. So yes, the name of this drink would cause 
offense,” said Wayne Collins, a British bartender and drinks consultant. “Even 
though there has been some long peace in Northern Ireland, we have seen a few 
splinters of troubles arising again recently as this year is the 100-year 
anniversary of the Easter uprising, so I wouldn’t imagine it being seen on bar 
menus today.”

“It would be a brave and stupid person who ordered such a drink in the UK,” 
added Simon Difford, the longtime publisher of Class, the British bar trade 
magazine. “For many of us older Londoners, the ‘Irish Troubles’ were our 
equivalent to 9/11.”

On St Patrick’s Day in New York City, however, the Irish Car Bomb is a barroom 
staple. “It’s St Patrick’s Day,” said Dermot, the owner of the Abbey Tavern in 
the Murray Hill neighborhood of Manhattan, with a shrug. “Everyone wants an 
Irish Car Bomb.”

Though Dermot (who declined to give his last name) is originally from Ireland, 
he is not irked by calls for the potion. “It doesn’t bother me,” he said. “It’s 
a fucking cocktail.” He said he hadn’t heard of any New York bars that refused 
to serve it but guessed if they did, it was probably the individual bartender’s 
decision, not the bar’s.

Anthony Malone, an owner of the urbane, well-loved Swift Hibernian Lounge in 
the East Village, said his bar doesn’t get that many orders for the cocktail. 
But his bartenders would not refuse to make one – even if they admit to holding 
a low opinion of any patron who makes the request.


“They reserve the right to add an idiot tax to the few who dare order such a 
terrible drink,” Malone said.

Oat never intended to stir up such a fuss. The drink came about accidentally 
on St Patrick’s Day in 1976 when he was drinking with some friends in Billy 
Wilson’s, his Norwalk, Connecticut, bar.

My bartenders reserve the right to add an idiot tax to the few who dare order 
such a terrible drink
Anthony Malone 
“Baileys Irish Cream had just come to America,” he recalled. “We were drinking 
and the bartenders were putting Baileys in everything. I was having Baileys 
with Kahlúa. I realized we weren’t getting anywhere because both Baileys and 
Kahlúa are pretty low in alcohol. I asked for some Irish whiskey and poured it 
in the shot and it boiled up.”

He called the impromptu concoction an IRA, and enjoyed it with a Guinness on 
the side.

“We didn’t think anything of it,” he said. “Then I was looking down the bar an 
hour later and people were saying, can I have one of those IRAs they’re 
drinking?” A couple of years later he got the idea of dropping the shot inside 
the pint. “We just said ‘Bombs away!’,” he said. The Irish Car Bomb was born.

Philip Duff, an Irish-born, New York-based cocktail expert and consultant, is 
unsure why the drink is considered any more offensive than other drinks with 
provocative names.

“On the Offend-O-Meter, it’s about as offensive as a Kamikaze,” he suggested, 
“which you do find served in Japan.”

Simon Ford, a former British bartender and brand ambassador who is now a 
partner in the 86 Co spirits producer, agrees.

“I don’t think the name offends people anymore,” Ford said. “The British and 
the Irish have a long tradition of using humor and satire to deal with serious 
issues. Putting some satire to the name of a drink would be a coping mechanism 
rather than something that is offensive.”

Meanwhile, Dermot at Abbey’s Tavern suggested a different reason why the drink 
is not popular in Ireland. And it has nothing to do with politics.

“Over there, if you have a glass of Guinness, you’re not going to be dropping 
any shots into it,” he said. “You’re just going to drink your Guinness.”

 * This article was changed on 17 March 2016 to remove a phrase describing the 
Troubles as decades-long conflict between Northern Ireland and England.  