
I don’t do it for the money. I’ve got more money than I’ll ever need. Some of 
it yours. Let’s face it, you don’t file for bankruptcy six times if you’re 
planning on paying your dues. The key to making the best deal is to let others 
take the hit. I do it because I can. If you can get away with losing over $1bn 
on a deal, you’d have to be a schmuck not to. There’s no way that Donald J 
Trump is ever going to let himself be one of those deadbeat Americans with no 
hope and no prospects. No sir. And that’s why we’re shamelessly republishing 
this load of tosh from 1987. Here’s a diary of a typical Trump week.

Monday 9am. Call my broker, Alan Greenberg, to buy $25m worth of stock in 
Holiday Inns. I sense it’s undervalued. As we speak, its value increases to 
$30m. My cock goes hard and I decide to sell.

Tuesday 3pm. Try to evict Carly Simon and Mia Farrow from their 
rent-controlled apartments, but both want to play hardball. Their loss. When 
you do battle with the Trumpster, there’s only one winner.

Wednesday 1pm. Lunch with Ivana. Try to grope her pussy. Probably not the best 
time to tell her about Melania.


Thursday 5pm. Some kid at the door says he’s my son. Tell him to come back 
when he’s made his first $10m.

Friday 10am. The banks foreclose on Trump Taj Mahal casino putting thousands 
of people out of work. But at least I come away with $50m. My cock goes hard 
again.

My style of dealing is quite straightforward: 1) Get as much as you can for 
yourself; 2) There’s always somebody stupider than you out there; 3) Any 
attention is better than none; 4) Promise people the Earth even if you know you 
can never deliver; 5) Get yourself a top haircut.


The most important influence on me when I was growing up was my father, Fred 
Trump. He taught me everything I needed to know about making money. If he had a 
fault, it was that he was not narcissistic enough. Fred never named a tower 
after himself. He also wasted too much time buying properties for deadbeats. If 
there’s one thing I’ve learned from real estate, it’s that poor people on 
zero-hours contracts just don’t know how to look after themselves.

My first deal in Cincinnati taught me that lesson. Having persuaded the banks 
to lend me the money, I put the day-to-day management of the rebuild in charge 
of a man I knew to be a conman. I figured he would con the contractors far more 
than he would con me, so I would end up ahead on the deal. No flies on the Don! 
Though I was glad to sell the houses off for a $10m profit before the market 
crashed.

In 1974, I moved into the New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> property market when I bought 
the Commodore Hotel near Grand Central Station. It was rundown and operating at 
a loss and everyone thought it was a turkey, but I could immediately see its 
potential. As usual, I was proved 100% right and made $280m in an afternoon 
after renaming the hotel Trump Plaza.

I then built Trump Tower after buying a department store whose owner didn’t 
understand its true worth. That project taught me that most politicians are 
just in the game for themselves. It’s a mentality I just can’t understand. With 
Trump Tower, I was determined to build as big as possible and the results speak 
for themselves. I have my own apartment on the top three floors and employ some 
limey called Nigel Farage as my lift attendant. It could be worse. I could have 
had Piers Morgan working for me. Can you believe that man? I met him once for 
five minutes on a reality game show and he hasn’t stopped going on about it 
ever since. The guy must have nearly as big a personality disorder as me.


After Trump Tower came Trump Castle, Trump Palace, Trump Island, Trump White 
House and Trump Great Wall of Trump. Basically, it was the same deal every 
time. I was fabulously brilliant and made a huge amount of money for myself 
while everybody else lost big time. I was living the American dream. Bankrupt 
one day, rich the next. But my biggest success is the 120-storey Trump Toilet 
that can flush every Muslim, Mexican and gay back into the sewers where they 
belong. It might even come in useful for this book.


Digested read, digested: The American nightmare.

 