
In her first conference speech as prime minister, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> pledged to put her government 
“squarely at the service of ordinary working-class people”. Keenly aware that 
the Brexit vote was driven in part by the economic concerns of some voters, she 
has emphasised her commitment to help “just about managing families” who “work 
around the clock”.

Rhetoric comes easily. But Wednesday’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/08/philip-hammond-announces-autumn-budget-statement-for-23-november>
 will be the first true test of the extent to which she is committed to 
translating warm assurances into concrete action.

“Just managing” families have struggled over the past decade. The Resolution 
Foundation estimates there are almost six million working families with net 
incomes of between £12,000 and £34,000. Most of these families have children 
and four out of five adults in these families will be earning less than average.

This group has suffered from stagnating, then falling, incomes over the last 
10 years and steep increases in the costs of housing. Many young “just 
managing” families have found it impossible to get on the housing ladder: they 
are more than twice as likely to privately rent than to own their homes; 20 
years ago, the reverse was true.

Easing the strain on these families will require the chancellor, Philip 
Hammond, to radically shift course from that mapped out by his predecessor, 
George Osborne. Like May, David Cameronclaimed to have low-income working 
families’ interests at heart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/11/observer-editorial-david-cameron-legacy-social-reformer>
.

Yet the reality is that, over six years, Cameron and Osborne chose to load the 
burden of austerity on low-income working families with children through cuts 
to working-age benefits, while delivering significant tax cuts for businesses 
and the more affluent. Far from alleviating their effects, government policy 
since 2010 has compounded the impact of poor wage growth and rising living 
costs for these families.

There may be a new chancellor installed in Number 11, but the legacy Hammond 
inherits from Osborne is a further planned £12bn of welfare cuts during the 
course of this parliament, which will mean “just managing” groups will see 
their incomes fall further by 2020. Cuts to universal credit alone will cost a 
single working parent £2,800 a year by 2020 and the benefits freeze will be 
felt even more sharply in the context of rising inflation.

Together with the worsening economic outlook in the wake of Brexit, forecast 
to result in continued poor wage growth and rising prices, these benefit cuts 
will leave many “just working” families thousands of poundsworse off  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/29/theresa-may-just-managing-families-worse-off-brexit>
by the end of this parliament. A single parent with one child under the age of 
four, working full time on the minimum wage, would be a staggering £3,800 worse 
off a year by 2020, according to the Resolution Foundation.

Osborne’s planned welfare cuts are so steep they considerably outweigh any 
gain “just managing” families will see from the higher national living wage. 
While Osborne claimed to be cutting taxes for low-paid workers with further 
increases in the personal allowance, “just managing” families will see very 
little benefit: according to the Resolution Foundation, 85% of the gains of his 
cuts to personal taxation will be reaped by the richest half of households.

In the face of Brexit and its impact on the worsening public finances, Hammond 
might argue his hands are tied. The Institute For Fiscal Studies has suggested 
that the £10.4bn surplus pencilled in for 2019-20 by the Office for Budget 
Responsibility is likely to turn into a £14.9bn deficit. Independent economic 
forecasts have predicteda £100bn deterioration 
<https://www.ft.com/content/acb33786-ac16-11e6-9cb3-bb8207902122> in the public 
finances over the course of this parliament.

But make no mistake, Hammond, like his predecessor, has a choice. If he 
continues with Osborne’s promised tax cuts, Tory chancellors will have cut 
taxes to the value of £40bn a year since 2010. Increases in the personal 
allowance, disproportionately benefiting higher earners, will have cost £21bn a 
year by 2020; cutting corporation tax to Osborne’s planned 17% rate in 2020 
will have cost £12bn.

Instead, Hammond could choose to halt any further increases in the personal 
tax allowance and 40p tax threshold, saving up to £4.5bn a year by 2020, and 
keep corporation tax at its existing low rate, saving £2bn. He could also 
reverse Osborne’s £1bninheritance tax cut  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/03/inheritance-tax-giveaway-welfare-cuts-budget-conservatives-george-osborne>
for the very small proportion of families that own homes worth between £650,000 
and £2m. Together, these measures would free up cash that could be used to 
reverse the universal credit cuts and benefits freeze that will hit just 
managing families so hard.

Hammond should also earmark funds to increase the affordability of housing in 
the private rented sector. The Conservative-leaning thinktank Renewal has set 
out proposals for 75,000 homes a year  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/03/theresa-may-should-build-75000-homes-a-year-for-low-paid-workers-says-thinktank>
to be made available at a “living rent” that would be capped at no more than a 
third of average low earnings in a local area. But there have been signs that 
the government is instead considering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/05/rising-rents-force-housing-policy-change-homes-tory>
 launching a “buy as you go” scheme that caps rent at a much higher level, but 
gives families the chance to own their home after 25 years of paying rent.

Analysis from Shelter suggests that these homes would be unaffordable to 
people on low incomes in 60% of local authorities. Such a scheme would be in 
the same vein of Osborne’s “affordable” housing scheme such as starter homes 
and help to buy, which in practice are unaffordable to many struggling to buy, 
instead providing subsidies to middle earners who could afford to buy without 
them.

Perhaps the defining characteristic of six years of Osbornomics has been the 
way it has deployed symbolic policies such as the national living wage, and 
reassuring rhetoric on working families, to obscure the reality of a conscious 
decision to force low-earning parents to pay for tax cuts for businesses and 
the better off.

Will Hammond continue along the same track? The budget giveaways that have 
been trailed in the runup to the autumn statement – a freeze in fuel duty, cuts 
to air passenger duty – sound a warning note. They would make only the most 
marginal of differences to “just managing” families, while allowing the 
chancellor to claim he is doing something to ease the pain.

“When it comes to tax, we’ll prioritise not the wealthy, but you,” May 
promised working families on the steps of Downing Street in her first speech as 
prime minister. Wednesday will be our first opportunity to judge her government 
by deeds rather than words.
 