
Last week’s BBC interview with Andy Woodward, Steve Walters, Jason Dunford and 
Chris Unsworth wasdevastating to watch <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38103811>. 
Sometimes weeping, these men displayed incredible bravery in sharing the 
horrific, painful story of how their football coach, Barry Bennell, took 
advantage of their childhood dreams to manipulate, groom and sexually abuse 
them.

In recent days, as more of those abused by Bennell have come forward, further 
details have come to light about how this was allowed to happen. One former 
board member of Crewe Alexandra, the club where Bennell spent much of his 
career as a coach, said the club was warned about Bennell, but theytook no 
action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/crewe-barry-bennell-former-board-member>
 to remove him from his post.

It is a sickeningly familiar tale. Report after report has revealed how 
institution after institution – the Catholic church, the BBC, the NHS, councils 
acting in loco parentis for children in care – have chosen to look the other 
way when signs emerged of child abuse within their walls.

Too often, these institutions put their corporate reputation above the welfare 
of the children to whom they had a duty of care. We should steel ourselves to 
hear the same story again: Simon Bailey, the national police lead for child 
protection, has said he expectssimilar allegations will surface in other sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/football-abuse-scandal-police-warn-allegations-likely-to-spread-to-other-sports>
.

Those who suffered at the hands of abusers deserve to know why and how they 
were failed by the institutions that were supposed to protect them. 
Establishing this truth was surely the most important objective of the 
independent inquiry into child sex abuse, set up two years ago. Yet it has been 
plagued by senior resignations and allegations of bullying and sexual assault. 
It has never provided sufficient clarity about its objectives and how it will 
seek to meet them. It has failed to be transparent and open about timescales, 
processes and witnesses.

Progress has been unbearably slow: its first public hearing will not take 
place until early next year. The home affairs select committee last week rightly
criticised it <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38103811> in the strongest of 
terms. Professor Alexis Jay, the inquiry’s fourth chair in two years, must 
urgently address the committee’s criticisms in the review she is currently 
undertaking.

But we owe survivors not just truth and justice. We owe them the knowledge 
this will not be allowed to happen again. To focus on the past to the exclusion 
of the present and the future would be to fail them.

And it brings a risk of complacency: that these are old institutions, old 
cultures, old attitudes, old sexual mores.

This complacency is dangerous. It means our collective outrage about what has 
happened in the past never quite turns into a commitment to better protecting 
children in the future.

In Rotherham, Alexis Jay’s forensic report documented how a string of 
institutions was complicit in failing to prevent the sexual abuse of white, 
working-class girls, many of whom were in the care of the state. The sense of 
moral outrage in the weeks that followed its publication was palpable. Yet more 
than six months later, a second review by Louise Casey found many in the 
council and other agencies were continuing to deny the scale of the problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/feb/04/rotherham-council-denial-child-sexual-exploitation-failures-report>
, and not enough action had been taken to stop the abuse from continuing.

Inquiry reports, while critical in establishing the truth of what went on, can 
only ever be a starting point for ensuring these heinous crimes against 
children are not committed in the future.

But there is a risk that they are regarded as the last word on the matter, 
shutting the book on the rotten institutions of the past. There is now a whole 
apparatus that exists to prevent abuse on the scale seen in the past: sex 
offender registers, safeguarding legislation, criminal record checks for all 
those who work with children.

Yet we have not succeeded in stamping out the child sex abuse that Sarah 
Champion MP, a tireless campaigner in this area, has called “our nation’s dirty 
little secret”.

Far from it. One in 10 young adults says they experienced contact sexual abuse 
during childhood: that’s the equivalent of two or three children in every 
class. Up totwo-thirds of all child sexual abuse  
<http://www.childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/learn-more/child-sexual-exploitation-abuse/protecting-children-harm>
happens in and around the family home.

It remains hugely under-reported: the Office of the Children’s Commissioner 
estimates only one in eight victims comes to the attention of the police or 
children’s services. Even where it does, there is no guarantee action will be 
taken.

Last week, a new report from the police inspectorate exposed a shocking level 
of systemicfailings in the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/25/report-exposing-met-police-failings-on-child-sex-abuse-shocking>
 on child protection, leaving hundreds of children at risk of sex abuse.

There clearly remains a long way to go in improving the response of law 
enforcement. But we cannot stop there. In an ideal world, we would not need to 
educate children, parents and schools about the risks of sex abuse. Yet in a 
world where paedophilia exists, it is utterly irresponsible not to be doing 
more to prevent sex abuse from happening in the first place.

This must mean compulsory and age-appropriate sex and relationships education 
for all children from primary school onwards, which helps children recognise 
sex abuse as wrong and encourages them to report it.

The government should run a public health campaign aimed at parents and whole 
communities on how to spot the signs of abuse and how to report it. There must 
be proper training for all professionals working with children to increase 
their confidence in how to deal with disclosures of child sex abuse.

Last week, Andy Woodward, the first footballer abused by Bennell to come 
forward, said: “If we can prevent anything else happening to any other young 
children… I’ll die a happy man.”

We owe it to those who find the strength to speak out to heed his words. It is 
not enough to feel outraged. We should feel ashamed that, despite revelation 
after revelation about institution after institution, we still don’t yet do 
enough to prevent the evil, destructive, life-ruining crime that is child sex 
abuse.

What else will it take to get us to act to prevent child sex abuse in the here 
and now?

• Comments will be opened later

CHILD ABUSE
 