
'Today you're going to eat food that will make you cry!" shouted Fernando 
Rueda by way of introduction. I was buckling my seatbelt. I don't think I'd 
even offered my hand or my name. He was shouting because Málaga's late-morning 
traffic was loud, and because he liked shouting. "It will take you back to your 
grandma, and her house, and her kitchen," he said. "Welcome to the white magic 
of Andalucían gastronomy!"

Fernando is a food historian and sociologist, author of a 12-volume guide to 
Málaga's cuisine, and head of Gastroarte, a union of 30-odd chefs and producers 
created in 2012 to celebrate Andalucía's food.

Málaga, he told me, is the food hub of southern Spain, in terms of produce and 
dining: "It has the most important goat-breeders in Europe. The French take 95% 
of the milk to make their cheeses. Andalucía produces half of the world's olive 
oil. Know where it all ends up? Shipped to Italy for bottling as Italian extra 
virgin."

But it wasn't all about cross-border trafficking. "Málaga has fantastic 
sardine andboquerón [anchovy], amazing shellfish, tropical fruits like mango 
and avocado. It has the last cane honey [molasses] to be produced in Europe. 
It's the second most mountainous area in Spain and has all the climates and 
conditions you need for every kind of produce."

We were leaving the city's outskirts and I commented that the land looked very 
dry and steep for growing, say, wine. Fernando scoffed. "They are ideal for our 
moscatel. This is the only region in Spain that produces red, white, rosé and 
dessert wines." We hit a corner at 120kmph. "And sherries."

Despite all this, both city and region have been undersold for decades. Part 
of the blame lies with years of package tourism that have seen the city of 
Málaga as the "airport place".

Fernando also pointed to underlying psychological reasons. "Until recently, 
Andalucíans were almost ashamed to talk about their cuisine and offer it to 
visitors. From the 1960s, restaurants trying to please the tourists started 
serving a few stereotypical dishes, and buried the old recipes, which they 
associated with the past, and with being poor. "Now – and this is a long 
consequence of the return to democracy – they're beginning to realise this 
cuisine is part of their identity, their culture and the landscape they see 
every day."

I said part of the blame might lie with visitors to the Costa del Sol asking 
for full English breakfasts.

"How can they print menus in English only?" he sputtered, as if the fact was 
still shocking.

Heading inland
 Victor Perez Serrano with his prize-winning oil. Photograph: Chris Moss for 
the Guardian 
Before lunch, I got to sample some of the olive oil not sold to the Italians. 
Finca La Torre <http://www.fincalatorre.com/> (fincalatorre.com), near the 
small town of Bobadilla, 60km north of Málaga, has just won the Spanish 
ministry of agriculture's prizes for both best olive oil and best organic olive 
oil of 2012-2013.

Victor Perez Serrano, 31, who makes it, showed me around his hi-tech plant 
overlooking 57 acres of gnarly, grey-green olive trees. For me – as for most 
people – olive oil is just a little dip for before a meal or something to 
splash on a salad. But Victor, presenting me with a cup of dark-green oil drawn 
from a huge metal tank, told me to sniff it first. "Can you smell banana, 
almond, and recently-cut grass?"

With a little imagination, I could, and there was a sharp aftertaste, an 
almost chilli-like bite. "We like it to have a kick here in Andalucía," he 
said, seeing my eyes watering.

Nearby Antequera is an ancient town surrounded by olive groves. Fernando said 
it was known as the "Florence of Andalucía" because of its many old churches 
and civic buildings. But our minds were on Arte de Cozina, a rustic, 
traditional-looking restaurant, where we were to have lunch with Álvaro Muñoz 
García, the business brain of Gastroarte. Beside us on the patio, a group of 
oldish Spaniards were tucking into a banquet of tapas.

"I'm trying to make Andalucían food into something like a brand," said Álvaro. 
"It should be something people recognise and value. We want to spread the word 
and take on the likes of Catalonia and the Basque country, which have a solid 
regional identity."
 Dips at Arte de Cozina. Photograph: Chris Moss for the Guardian 
Arte de Cozina was where Gastroarte started and it holds a special place in 
the members' hearts. Chef Charo Carmona told me she learned everything from her 
mother. Instead of a menu, she handed me a set of beautiful facsimiles of 
vintage recipes detailing the history and ingredients of each dish: three 
deliciousporras (dips), quails in gazpacho, chicken escabeche, a buttery beef 
dish calledpelona de lomo and a hearty empedraillo (chick-pea broth). I've 
eaten well all over Spain, but this was special, like eating peasant fare from 
the pages of Joseph Townsend's 1791 travelogue A Journey Through Spain in the 
Years 1786 and 1787, reimagined for a modern diner.

The meal ended with no fewer than four desserts, outstanding among which was 
the Moorish-soundingalmojábana, a kind of cheesecake. Álvaro told me: "Eight 
centuries of Islam, a unique feature of this region, are all there in the food."

I could see in that the food stirred deep emotions in Fernando, who ate 
carefully, reverently. Álvaro uttered hyperbolic benedictions: "Fatally 
delicious", "scandalously good". For Andalucíans, food is often a complicated 
conflation of raw – almost erotic – pleasure, with friendship, family and 
nostalgia.

Charo told me of a nonagenarian who had come back to Antequera to die after 
living elsewhere in Spain for decades. "He asked me to make amaimones (garlic 
soup) just like his mother did," said Charo. "I told him I had no idea how his 
mum cooked, and anyway, we were talking about nearly a century ago. But I 
prepared some soup and he ate two bowls. He never stopped weeping while he was 
eating."

Málaga city
 Malagatheseen from Alcazaba castle. Photograph: Wolfgang 
Weinhäupl/Westend61/Corbis 
In Málaga itself, things were more modish. I visited the Picasso museum, 
strolled around the new harbour district, and decided that Málaga was, like 
most medium-sized cities in Spain, convivial and likeable. I tried prize-winning
raciones of swordfish and cod at a tiny, madly busy tapas bar, Uvedoble 
(Spanish for W). At Oleo, a stylish white cube of a restaurant, I had a 
delicious tasting menu that featured rib of slow-cooked pork in garlic, 
mackerel sushi and meat-and-bechamel croquettes with mint.

Andalucian food is held together by what Fernando called the "Roman troika" – 
olive oil, wine, wheat. Saffron, coriander and rice, introduced by the Moors, 
also pop up. What I felt above all was the social and emotional value of food – 
pleasure before pretentiousness – and that even the high-end places had deep 
connections with traditions, enhanced by the edible riches of the two seas – 
Mediterranean and Atlantic – and the sun-baked land of the south. This was 
localism without any banner being waved.

West of Málaga
 Sollo restaurant 
At Sollo, a restaurant that opened in late September in the hilltop town of 
Benalmádena, just outside Málaga, Diego Gallegos cooked the most memorable meal 
of my three-day trip. Diego, just 29, has Peruvian and Brazilian heritage but 
grew up in Andalucía, and runs the small restaurant with his wife, Susana, and 
one assistant cook. He regards Gastroarte as a sort of mentor.

"Fernando believed in me when I was a novice. Now I feel we can speak on equal 
terms with people from established food regions. Here in Andalucía we've not 
valued our creativity. There's still a tendency, especially in the north, to 
look to France for ideas. This region has long been the poor relation of Spain."

Last year, Diego spent €12,000 (saved up while working for a local hotel) on 
travels to Brazil, Peru and San Sebastián. He worked as an unpaid intern at 
some of the best restaurants in the world, includingAlex Atala's D.O.M. in São 
Paulo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/03/sao-paulo-dom-restaurant-brazilian-food>
. "Diego is an innovator," said Fernando, "not an imitator. He wants a Michelin 
star inside two years, and he'll get one."

He may get more than that. Diego works with a local fish farm, experimenting 
with sturgeon meat and caviar. He served us tiny tastes of some of the most 
exquisite food I've ever had, including eccentricities such as water melon 
roasted in red fruit and vermouth, and a dessert of extra virgin olive oil 
yoghurt.

Susana, learning the ropes of fine-dining service, juggled cutlery, talked 
about the wines, presented everything just so. I thought of places on the 
coast, serving so-so paellas and sangria.

"One of the main purposes of Gastroarte is to stop visitors getting ripped 
off, too," said Fernando. "Málaga is a port: it's outward-looking and we've 
always liked foreigners. Now you can tell people that you ate caviar near 
Torremolinos!"

I also want to tell people about what I ate next. The high point of the meal 
was a dark, mysterious-looking truffle. It was all I've ever dreamed of in a 
dish. It was a bit like chocolate, but with an acidic quality. It looked like a 
dessert and was sweet, but also savoury. It had the texture of damp coal dust, 
and legs like a glass of vintage wine. My face told them I had no idea what I 
was eating. It was amorcilla, they said, made with sturgeon's blood. A black 
pudding. Fernando's "white magic". My Lancashire roots. My favourite food. 
Grandma's kitchen! It was my cue to cry, but another course arrived.

Where to stay

Room Mate Larios, Málaga 
On one of Málaga's main squares, this hotel has been given a bold refurb that 
works well with the original art deco fittings. The ground-floor bar is a 
beauty, and the roof terrace a popular meeting place.
• Doubles from €79 B&B, larios.room-matehotels.com 
<http://larios.room-matehotels.com/#> 

Molina Lario, Málaga 
This smart hotel with neutral décor is close to the centre of Málaga and the 
cathedral, just across from the harbour. It has a rooftop pool, a good 
restaurant and outstanding breakfasts.
• €148 B&B, hotelmolinalario.com <http://www.hotelmolinalario.com/>

Where to eat

Arte de Cozina, Antequera 
This traditional restaurant is in the servants' quarters of a 17th-century 
mansion. The homey feel belies the artful and lovingly prepared dishes; it's 
also a hotel, with doubles from €40.
• two-course lunch €20-€25, drinks extra, artedecozina.com 
<http://artedecozina.com/>

Oleo, Málaga 
Asian and Andalucían tapas are the speciality of this restaurant in the CAC 
modern art gallery. But it does not compromise its quality with any daft 
fusions or faddy ideas.
• €25-30, facebook.com/OleoRestaurante 
<https://es-la.facebook.com/OleoRestaurante>

W (Uvedoble), Málaga 
It is easy to walk past this place if you don't know the address, but it is 
one of the best tapas bar in Málaga. It's small and very popular, so go early 
(7.30pm is early) and grab a table on the street.
• €20, uvedobletaberna.com  <http://uvedobletaberna.com/>

Restaurante Sollo, Benalmádena 
Extraordinary, ambitious dishes at this out-of-town restaurant feature 
sturgeon meat, caviar, trout ceviche and ox-steak – all beautifully presented. 
Open for dinner only.
• Tasting menu €49.50, sollo.es <http://www.sollo.es/>

Traga Tapas, Ronda 
In spectacular Ronda, this friendly, fun place is where former El Bulli chef 
Benito Gómez serves some of the most innovative tapas in Andalucía. They can be 
washed down with localSchatz  <http://f-schatz.com/> organic wines, too.
• €25-30, Calle Nueva 4

• The trip was provided by the Spanish and Andalucían tourist boards (
spain.info <http://www.spain.info/>; visitacostadelsol.com 
<http://www.visitacostadelsol.com/>) and Gastroarte (gastroarte.es 
<http://gastroarte.es/>). For tailormade guided tours of Andalucian 
restaurants, seemadridandbeyond.com 
<http://madridandbeyond.com/experience/food-tours>. Easyjet 
<http://www.easyjet.com> flies to Málaga from 10 UK airports from £56 return
 