
Say what you like about Barack Obama, but he has a way with words. At his 
final White House press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/obama-syria-assad-aleppo-final-press-conference>
 on Friday, the president eloquently summarised the dreadful human situation in 
Syria following the fall of its most important rebel stronghold, the city of 
Aleppo, to the combined forces of Russia, Iran and the Syrian regime.

“The world as we speak is united in horror at the savage assaults,” Obama 
said. “We have seen a deliberate strategy of surrounding, besieging and 
starving innocent civilians. We’ve seen relentless targeting of humanitarian 
workers and medical personnel and entire neighbourhoods reduced to rubble and 
dust. There are continuing reports of civilians being executed. These are all 
horrific violations of international law.”

Obama’s revulsion is fully justified. UN aid organisers, charity workers, 
Syrian community leaders, hospital doctors, foreign diplomats, reporters and 
editorial writers have run out of adjectives to adequately describe the full 
extent of the suffering experienced by ordinary people whose lives have been 
destroyed in the six-year-old war. Statistics, although difficult to digest, 
are still shocking: at least 500,000 killed, 1.9 million injured and more than 
half the country’s 23 million population forced to flee their homes.

This is a tragedy on a scale that beggars belief. Because it is so hard to 
comprehend, so horrific, so alien, the temptation is to turn away. But Syria 
and its people cannot be ignored, if only because their plight keeps getting 
worse – and because, in our modern, connected, globalised world, responsibility 
is shared. At a human level, there is no excuse for not knowing what is 
happening. At government level, there is no escaping a shared duty to try to 
make it stop. Obama had not finished his remarks before the politician in him 
took over. “Responsibility for this brutality lies in one place alone, with the 
Assad regime and its allies, Russia and Iran, and this blood and these 
atrocities are on their hands,” he said. The apportioning of blame is a 
principal reason why the conflict is so intractable. It is certainly true that 
the homicidal intransigence of Bashar al-Assad, Syria’s gormless dictator, lies 
at the heart of this catastrophe. Since initially overreacting to the local, 
non-violent protests against his minority Alawite regime in 2011, he has used 
systematic murder, torture, the terrorising of civilians, barrel bombs and
chemical weapons 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/08/25/un-proves-assad-regime-dropped-chemical-bombs-on-civilians/>
to ensure his survival. The ultimate terrorist, Assad took his own nation 
hostage.

It is true that Russia, led by Vladimir Putin, has cynically exploited the war 
for its own purposes since intervening militarily in 2014. Putin sought to 
shore up Moscow’s only significant Arab ally and secure Russian naval and air 
bases. He sought to restore Soviet-era power and influence across the Middle 
East. He aimed to outflank Obama and has tried to curb the excesses of the 
Sunni jihadis of Islamic State, whose warped ideology threatens Russia as well 
as the west. In pursuing these objectives, Putin has demonstrated a degree of 
ruthlessness, and utter indifference to human suffering, that soshocked western 
leaders 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/25/britain-accuses-putin-of-war-crimes-in-syria-at-bitter-un-meetin/>
as to render them almost incapable of a coherent response.

It is also true that the Syrian war has enabled Iran to break free from the 
shackles imposed by decades of isolation and sanctions. Shia militias from 
Lebanon, Iraq and Afghanistan, organised by Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, have 
increasingly spearheaded the ground war. Pursuing a vengeful sectarian 
reckoning with Aleppo’s Sunnis, these same militias committed the atrocities 
reported last week by the UN. Iran’s leaders, in triumphal mood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/iran-aleppo-syria-shia-militia>, 
see in the rebel defeat a victory over their Saudi rivals and the Great Satan 
itself. They hail a widening “Shia crescent”. Obama hoped last year’s nuclear 
deal with Tehran might encourage a more collaborative approach to Syria. He 
hoped in vain.

But it is unconvincing, and far too comfortable, to say, as Obama did, that 
these partners in crime – Russia, Iran and Assad, the three horsemen of the 
Syrian apocalypse – bear sole responsibility. Obama must take a share of the 
blame, for ignoring his own red lines on chemical weapons and creating a 
strategic vacuum into which Putin opportunistically advanced. So, too, must the 
US Congress, which opposed any meaningful Syrian military intervention, further 
tying Obama’s unwilling hands. Britain’s government and MPs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-23892783>, and their European 
counterparts, also have good reason to ask themselves if they fulfilled their 
wider responsibilities as guardians and representatives of the international 
order and international law. Over Syria, to varying degrees, everyone has blood 
on their hands.

All this is a matter for immense sadness and regret. But in truth, there is 
little time for backward-looking recriminations. Despite what Assad says, the 
war is not over. It is entering a new, extremely dangerous phase. The next 
likely flashpoint isIdlib province 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-mideast-crisis-syria-idlib-idUKKBN13U0Q3>, 
where Aleppo fighters are regrouping. Idlib is a base for hardline Sunni 
salafists linked to al-Qaida. With the more moderate, western-backed rebel 
forces in disarray, there is a very real risk of the conflict morphing into a 
zero-sum sectarian struggle between increasingly radicalised Sunni insurgents 
and Iran’s fanatical Shia militias bent on extermination, not reconciliation. 
Iran’s aim seems to be to dominate postwar Syria politically and physically, as 
it now dominates post-invasion Iraq. This is a perilous prospect.

A second flashpoint may be Syria’s disputed Golan Heights border with Israel. 
Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel’s bellicose prime minister, warned Tehran last week 
not to threaten his country. But the possibility that Lebanon’s Hezbollah, with 
Iran, could deploy close to Israeli territory, with all that implies for the 
Palestinian tinderbox, cannot be ignored. Netanyahu will not ignore it. When he 
meets Donald Trump and his hawkish, pro-Israel, anti-Iran national security 
team in Washington, Netanyahu will doubtless highlight the growing Iranian 
threat fromSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. For him, 
cancellation of the nuclear deal and reimposition of oil sanctions might be a 
good start. For Tehran’s leaders in an election year, it would be an incendiary 
provocation.

The third aspect is diplomatic: namely, Russia’s bid to take charge of peace 
negotiations that until now have been overseen by the UN and largely driven by 
the US and the EU. Putin’s unilateral announcement of ceasefire talks in 
Kazakhstan later this month, co-sponsored by Turkey and excluding the western 
powers, illuminates his ambition to elevate Russia as the Middle East’s premier 
power-broker and sideline the US and Europe. By posing as peacemaker, Putin 
hopes to confound those who accuse him of barbarism and war crimes. In Putin’s 
old KGB playbook about ends and means, a Russian-imposed settlement in Syria 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-syria-putin-truce-idUSKBN1450NQ>
, however crude, would justify his brutal and illegal methods. For the world at 
large, that is the most dangerous outcome of all.
 