 Laura Claycomb as Zerbinetta (centre), in Glyndebourne's current production. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
There are two versions of Strauss's Ariadne auf Naxos. Although they share 
much of the same music, they are really two separate operas. The first, 
completed in 1912, was the second collaboration between Strauss and the 
Austrian poet and playwright Hugo von Hofmannsthal (if one excludes the extra 
lines Hofmannsthal added at Strauss's request to the libretto of Elektra in 
1908). The subject of Ariadne was chosen by Hofmannsthal as a thank-offering to 
the theatrical producer Max Reinhardt, who happened to be in Dresden in 1910 
when the first Strauss-Hofmannsthal collaboration, Der Rosenkavalier, was in 
rehearsal. The local producer was all at sea and Reinhardt took over tactfully, 
anonymously and without fee. The result was that the premiere on 26 January 
1911 was a triumphant success.

Hofmannsthal suggested that he and Strauss should write a '30-minute opera for 
small chamber orchestra called Ariadne auf Naxos, combining heroic mythological 
figures in 18th-century costumes with characters from the commedia dell'arte.' 
He then went to Paris, where he saw Molière's play Le bourgeois gentilhomme and 
decided to adapt it. Strauss could write incidental music and, in place of the 
Turkish ceremony with which the play ends, the bourgeois gentilhomme, Monsieur 
Jourdain, would command an after- dinner performance of Ariadne auf Naxos.

Strauss was unimpressed. He could write 'some pleasant salon music' for the 
dances of the Dancing Master and others, but he showed interest only in another 
Hofmannsthal project: 'a magic fairytale with two men confronting two women and 
for one of the women your wife (Pauline) might well ... be taken as a model.' 
This was later to become Die Frau ohne Schatten. As for Ariadne, in the summer 
of 1911 Strauss sent Hofmannsthal a plan of the set numbers. Ariadne was to be 
a contralto but the role that caught his fancy was that of Zerbinetta, leader 
of the commedia dell'arte characters. She was to be a coloratura soprano with a 
long aria in the form of a rondo, with all the coloratura tricks (if possible 
with flute obbligato, like the heroine in Donizetti's Lucia di Lammermoor).

Horror for Hofmannsthal! Obviously, he told Strauss, he had not explained 
strongly enough the importance of Bacchus and Ariadne if Zerbinetta was 
regarded as the leading lady. He pointed out that the opera was about fidelity 
and had the same fundamental theme as Elektra: 'the voice of Elektra opposed to 
the voice of Chrysothemis, the heroic voice against the human'. While 
Zerbinetta was happy drifting from one man to another, Ariadne could be wife or 
mistress of one man only. Just as she can be only one man's widow, she can be 
forsaken by only one man.

This meant nothing to Strauss and his refusal to capitulate took the 
partnership to the brink of dissolution. Hofmannsthal wrote, 'I find myself 
misunderstood and injured by you at the most vulnerable point in our 
relationship as artists ... How in such circumstances am I to devote myself to 
writing another similar project?' Fortunately for posterity, Strauss kept his 
cool and poured out soothing syrup. He thanked the aggrieved Hofmannsthal for 
his 'beautiful letter' and for describing the action so wonderfully that 'A 
superficial musician like myself could tumble to it. But if that was the case, 
what about the audience and the critics? Shouldn't the piece itself be as clear 
as your explanation?' 'Perhaps', Strauss added, 'I am out of sorts. I have been 
alone in Garmisch for four weeks while my wife is away and haven't touched a 
cigarette for all that time. Let the devil himself be cheerful in such 
circumstances!'

What is now known as the first version of Ariadne was produced by Reinhardt at 
Stuttgart on 25 October 1912. It was a fiasco, as could easily have been 
predicted. 'The play-going public felt it did not get its money's worth', said 
Strauss, 'while the opera public did not know what to make of Molière.' Strauss 
was by now more convinced of the quality of the work, for which he had 
virtuosically used an orchestra of only 37 players (including important parts 
for piano and harmonium, which impart a Wagnerian sound to the ecstatic final 
duet for Bacchus and Ariadne).

In 1913 Hofmannsthal decided that the Molière should be jettisoned and an 
operatic prologue substituted, but Strauss was not interested. Besides, he was 
now composing the ballet Josephslegende and after that he became immersed in 
Die Frau ohne Schatten . Not until late in 1915, when World War I had held up 
progress on Die Frau ohne Schatten because Hofmannsthal could not find time to 
complete the libretto, did Strauss decide to compose the Ariadne Prologue. The 
Prologue was based on a scene in the first version with which Hofmannsthal had 
linked the Molière play to the opera, in which the young composer of the opera 
appeared in a spoken part. M. Jourdain was converted into 'one of the richest 
men in Vienna', who has engaged an opera company and a troupe of comedians to 
entertain his guests. But he wants the fireworks to begin precisely at 9.00pm 
so he orders, through his majordomo, that the two entertainments must be 
performed simultaneously. The Composer is scandalised, but agrees to revise the 
opera on the advice of his Music Master. He composes a new melody based on his 
discarded incidental music and he falls in love with Zerbinetta. The tenor and 
soprano who are to sing Bacchus and Ariadne each plead for cuts in the other's 
part. Zerbinetta calmly and professionally works out how the entertainment can 
be satisfactorily presented. Not so the Composer, who is in despair, insisting 
that 'Musik ist ein heilige Kunst' ('Music is a sacred art').

It is extraordinary that Strauss took nearly five years to agree to set the 
Prologue. Backstage theatre, with its love affairs, backbiting, jealousies and 
friendships, and with the agonies of composition, was the world in which he 
lived, and he knew it intimately. Miraculously, it might seem, the Prologue is 
one of the greatest passages in all Strauss, yet at no point did he show much 
enthusiasm for this 'serious trifle'. The Composer is a trouser role, a male 
character sung by a woman.

This was fairly common practice in 17th- and 18th-century operas and became 
even more widespread as the castrati, the neutered male trebles of the Baroque 
era, began to disappear. Judging by the 18th-century setting of Der 
Rosenkavalier and the commedia dell'arte style of Ariadne auf Naxos, Strauss 
clearly felt that his ardent young heroes like Octavian should be in the 
travesti tradition. Strauss's conducting colleague in Berlin, Leo Blech, is 
credited with the suggestion that the Composer should be sung by a woman. 
Strauss chose Désirée Artôt, who had sung Octavian in Berlin's Rosenkavalier, 
but she was not available. Hofmannsthal was appalled: 'To prettify this 
particular character, who is to have an aura of "spirituality" and "greatness", 
strikes me as odious'. But Strauss refused to budge. The mezzo-soprano, he 
said, 'as a rule is the most talented woman singer in the theatre.' He had his 
way and Lotte Lehmann created the part at the successful premiere in Vienna on 
4 October 1916, with Franz Schalk conducting.

Ariadne auf Naxos has a crucial place in Strauss's operatic development and 
output. Its popularity today is all the more remarkable in view of the 
vicissitudes through which it passed on its way to the more-often performed 
second version. (The first version has received the occasional performance. In 
1950 the Glyndebourne Festival produced it in Edinburgh, with Sir Thomas 
Beecham making his only appearance under theGlyndebourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glyndebourne> flag.)

The musical importance of Ariadne auf Naxos is twofold: as a combination in 
one work of opera buffa and opera seria and as a stage in Strauss's conversion 
of Mozartian recitativo secco into the continuously melodic conversational 
style that he had begun to develop in Der Rosenkavalier and would perfect a few 
years later in Intermezzo.

We do composer and librettist an injustice if we judge the creation of Ariadne 
only through their published correspondence, which has misled some writers to 
assume that Hofmannsthal was Strauss's intellectual superior and that this was 
a partnership between a Viennese man-of-letters and a Bavarian musician baffled 
by his collaborator's metaphysical flights of fancy. Strauss certainly acted as 
a brake on these, but he understood totally what Hofmannsthal was aiming for, 
even if he sometimes thought it unnecessarily obscure. His annotation of 
Hofmannsthal's Ariadne text is in the archive at the Villa Strauss, the 
composer's home in Garmisch, and so are Hofmannsthal's suggestions – almost 
instructions – on how the text should be treated musically. Strauss for the 
most part followed these recommendations. He also made rough sketches outlining 
the harmonic, melodic and rhythmical structure of large tracts of the text. He 
indicated keys, which he allocated to characters or crucial words.

In his treatment of the commedia dell'arte element, Strauss was, as ever, up 
with or even ahead of contemporary fashion, for 1912 was also the year of 
Schoenberg's Pierrot Lunaire, and the 17th/18th- century recreations by 
Stravinsky, Respighi and Casella were to follow. Ariadne auf Naxos is as 
innovative and advanced an opera as any Strauss composed, a new branching out, 
and it is the complete refutation of the discredited belief that after Der 
Rosenkavalier he went into decline.

Michael Kennedy has been a music critic since 1950 . Among his several books 
are two on Richard Strauss: Richard Strauss (Master Musicians Series, 1976) and 
Richard Strauss, Man, Musician, Enigma (CUP, 1999).

This article is taken from the Glyndebourne 2013 Festival programme and is 
reproduced with kind permission.

 