
By my bed is a book called Kitchen Essays by Agnes Jekyll. Published in 1922, 
and now reprinted by the Persephone Press, Kitchen Essays is a series of 
articles on entertaining by a woman who, in her day, was a celebrated hostess. 
If her sister-in-law, Gertrude Jekyll, was, as her biographer put it, 'an 
artist-gardener', then Agnes was 'an artist-housekeeper'.

Her pieces first appeared in the Times, where she was persuaded to pass on her 
'rare gift for clever housekeeping', and they still make for delicious reading. 
One, entitled 'Luncheon for a Motor Excursion in Winter', includes a recipe for 
potage à l'ecossaise, to be stored in a screwed jar and kept warm in a hay box. 
Another, 'A Shooting Party Luncheon', recommends game pie and Boston baked 
beans. But my favourite is 'For the Too Fat'.

'No one likes to be fat,' writes Mrs Jeykll. 'It is unbecoming, fatiguing, and 
impairs efficiency.' She then provides recipes for meat jelly and salad à la 
Americaine.

I thought about Kitchen Essays last week, when I heard that Simon Hopkinson's 
Roast Chicken and Other Stories had been voted the most useful cookbook of all 
time by a panel of leading chefs, restaurateurs and writers. There is no doubt 
that Roast Chicken is a brilliant book: straightforward, readable and full of 
good things (I can vouch for Hopkinson's poached cod with lentils and salsa 
verde, which is easy to pull off and yet makes you seem, in the eyes of your 
guests, so wonderfully accomplished). It is very useful, but would I love it 
any the less if it were not? Only marginally.

Just as I do not necessarily want to read novels about lives like my own 
(anxious girl in big city with nice, middle-class friends - yawn), the most 
enjoyable cookbooks tend to be about more than merely getting food to the table 
after a day at the office; I already know how to cook pasta, thanks.

Whatever people say, the true joy of cookbooks lies not only in whether their 
recipes work. It also has to do with scholarship, social history, good writing 
and - most important of all - vicarious pleasure.

In the case of Agnes Jekyll, I'm about as likely to rustle up a camembert in 
aspic as I am to marry the Duke of Buccleuch. But that doesn't mean I don't 
relish the thought of some long-forgotten, sausage-fingered cook making merry 
with the gelatine and cheese. Equally, the most deeply satisfying dishes in 
Roast Chicken and Other Stories are the ones I'm least inclined to make.

I cannot see myself asking my butcher for tripe, which even Hopkinson, a son 
of Lancashire, admits does not look particularly like food. But for reasons I 
cannot quite explain, I like the idea of it. His recipe for deep-fried tripe 
with green paste reads like an odd kind of poetry. It sounds delicious.

Roast Chicken and Other Stories is, then, useful and lovable. Alas, one does 
not always equal the other. Several very utilitarian cookbooks have been 
published recently, notably Rose Prince's The New English Kitchen and Tom 
Norrington-Davies's Cupboard Love. I own both and use them regularly. But I do 
not devour them in the dead of night, the way I do some others.

Where's the pleasure in being lectured about stock and sustainable fish 
(Prince)? Where's the poetry in a can of chick peas (Norrington-Davies)? I like 
a spoonful of whimsy and a dollop of excess with my recipes. I like a writer 
who smacks their lips and emits a loud belch even as they supply you with a 
list of organic greengrocers. Being able to concoct a basic potato soup is a 
fine and noble thing. Every now and then, however, it is fun to conjure 
ingredients so arcane that you must visit Beirut or Bombay to find them.

Simon Hopkinson is now outselling JK Rowling. This, as Martha Stewart would 
say, is 'a good thing'. But why should he get all the action? In the days since 
the poll, I've been thinking about cookbooks nonstop. The following are all 
very useful, but they also have an extra something that means you're as likely 
to be wearing pyjamas as an apron when you read them: MFK Fisher's With Bold 
Knife and Fork, because John Updike likes it, and it has chapters with titles 
such as 'How to Spring Like a Flea'; Rosemary Barron's Flavours of Greece, 
because it will take you back to that week in Mykonos; Jane Grigson's English 
Food, because it includes a recipe for 'brawn or head cheese'; Claudia Roden's 
Book of Middle Eastern Food, because it is simply the best; and last, but not 
least, Agnes Jekyll's Kitchen Essays, in which she quotes Meredith and thus 
seems to sum the whole thing up: 'When we let Romance go, we change the sky for 
the ceiling.'
 