
Judy Chicago <http://judychicago.com> isn't a great one for false modesty – or 
modesty of any kind, come to that. When she talks about her work, words such as 
"monumental" and "major" fall quickly and easily from her lips. As a young 
woman, she says, she wanted not only to paint and draw, but to "set her sights 
on history" – her aim was to bag herself a place in the canon. As for her 
elaborate 1979 megasculptureThe Dinner Party, a provocatively feminist work 
which celebrates the lives and work of 1,038 notable women, you can forget what 
the critics say (the late Robert Hughes called it: "Mainly cliché… with the 
colours of a Taiwanese souvenir factory"; Hilton Kramer of theNew York Times 
<http://nytimes.com> called it: "Very bad art… failed art… art so mired in the 
pieties of a cause that it quite fails to capture any independent artistic life 
of its own"). They're just plain wrong. "I've watched it change people's 
lives," says Chicago. "And the fact that theElizabeth A Sackler Center 
<http://brooklynmuseum.org/eascfa/> [for Feminist Art, where The Dinner Party 
is permanently housed] accounts for a third of all the traffic to theBrooklyn 
Museum <http://brooklynmuseum.org> is testament to the importance of it."

To be fair, this is what a life spent working with your back against the wall 
does for a girl: either you crumple and disappear, or you develop a Teflon 
exterior, a shiny veneer of undentable confidence. Chicago is 72. She began her 
career in the 60s, long before political correctness and women's studies 
classes were invented, and her "dinosaur" professors at the University of 
California, Los Angeles, pretty much hated what she was doing right from the 
start.

Her early working life was lonely and she was mostly broke. "I didn't make 
myself an outsider," she says. "The art world made me an outsider. Of course, 
isolation is essential to the creative act. You have to be with yourself, with 
your ideas. Virginia Woolf talked about it as fishing: you sit on the shore, 
you drop your line, and you wait for the fish to jump. But I also had to 
protect myself from the craziness, all the antagonism, around me. It was 
difficult. I'm not going to say it was anything else. Not everybody could have 
managed it."

What did she sacrifice along the way? "Children. There was no way on this 
earth I could have had children and the career I've had. But you know what? 
I don't care how much I had to give up. This was what I wanted. You have to 
make choices. You can't have everything in life."
 Judy Chicago 
Bigamy Hood 
1965/2011 Photograph: courtesy of Donald Woodman 
Chicago is speaking to me from her home in New Mexico – a historic railroad 
hotel that looks like it has come straight out of an old western – and the 
delay on the line is contriving to make our conversation sound even more 
earnest than it would be if she was sitting opposite me. A portentous pause 
precedes her answers; jokey comments (on my part) are out of the question, 
being more likely to misfire than cheap Catherine wheels.

We're talking ahead of what you might call her British moment. Next month will 
see no fewer than three shows of her work in the UK. The biggest of these will 
be at the Ben Uri Gallery in north London – better known as the London Jewish 
Museum ofArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> – which will house 
the first British museum survey of her work, featuring pieces from Chicago's 
personal archive as well as loans from public collections in the US. Meanwhile, 
there will be two smaller shows at Riflemaker in Soho (Deflowered, an 
exhibition of early work includingBirth Hood, Flight Hood and Bigamy Hood – 
depictions of male and female genitalia sprayed in automotive lacquer on to a 
car hood) and The Black-E in Liverpool (Voices from the Song of Songs, a series 
of paired prints).

Is she thrilled by this interest? Yes, in her own somewhat cool way. "One of 
my goals since the permanent housing ofThe Dinner Party in 2007 has been to 
develop an awareness that it is only one piece in a really large body of work. 
In the UK there's not a lot of understanding of my work, except forThe Dinner 
Party."

This is certainly true. But with Chicago, all roads lead inevitably to The 
Dinner Party, the monumental installation she created between 1974 and 1979, 
with the help of numerous volunteers and at a cost of about $250,000. This is 
what she will be remembered for, and she knows it. The piece consists of a 
triangular table, 48ft long at each side (the triangle is a symbol of 
equality). The table is laid with 39 place settings, each one designed to 
reflect the accomplishments of the woman whose name is embroidered on the 
runner beside it – among the women included are Hildegard of Bingen, Mary 
Wollstonecraft and Virginia Woolf. Beneath the table is a "heritage floor", the 
names of a further 999 women (Catherine of Aragon, Colette, Clytemnestra) 
inscribed on its tiles. It sounds uncontroversial, celebrating, as it does, the 
history of women through applied arts such as embroidery and china painting. 
But then you look at the plates. Each one is decorated with a symbol that 
resembles a vulva. Depending on your point of view, this is either reductive, 
vulgar and semi-pornographic, or it's celebratory, taboo-breaking and bracingly 
political.
 Judy Chicago 
The Dinner Party – Detail: Mary Wollstonecraft Placesetting Photograph: 
collection of the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art Brooklyn Museum 
of Art 
Is Chicago tired of talking about it? Not at all. Her abiding relationship with
The Dinner Party is, for her, simply another aspect of its legacy. "It's 
unusual for an artist to stay involved with a work after they've finished it 
for as long as I did. It took 26 years to find a permanent home for it, but 
unless that happened, it was in danger of repeating the story it recounted– by 
which I mean the repeated erasure of women from history. I was not released 
from the piece until it was housed."

And since it went to Brooklyn, have attitudes to it softened? In 1979 some 
galleries refused to show it at all. "Well, it doesn't have the charge it had 
for the dinosaur critics of my generation," she says. "The Dinner Party marks 
the moment when history changed, and we reclaimed the right to deal with our 
own subject matter, in our own way – and young people take all that for 
granted."

This doesn't mean its work is done. "I read Caitlin Moran's How to Be a Woman
," says Chicago, her twangy voice rising indignantly. "There's a chapter where 
she says: let's admit it, girls, for the last 100,000 years women have 
basically done fuck all. I'm like: excuse me? She's a smart girl and yet so 
ignorant. So, yes, there's been change, and no, there hasn't been change."

Art-world statistics, in particular, still make for depressing reading. Work 
by women artists comprises just 3-5% of major permanent collections in the US 
and Europe. "It's alarming. In our institutions, women are still an add-on to a 
male-centred curriculum," she says.

Chicago was born Judith Cohen in – you guessed it – Chicago (she changed her 
name in the 60s by way of a feminist statement, though it was galling to 
discover that she required her husband's signature for this to be legal). Her 
father, Arthur, worked nights at the post office; her mother, May, was a 
secretary. Arthur was active in the Communist party, and in the 50s found 
himself a victim of McCarthyism.
 Judy Chicago 
Birth Hood 
© Judy Chicago, 1965 (finished 2011) Photograph: Donald Woodman 
"Starting out, several things sustained me. One was my burning desire to make 
art. Another was when I realised what women before me had gone through in order 
for me to have the opportunities that I had. When I felt rejected, I thought 
about Elizabeth Blackwell [the first woman in the US to receive a medical 
degree]. At medical school, no one spoke to her for two years.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> used to spit on her in the 
street. I thought: if she can do it, I can. But the most important thing was 
the family. I had a wonderful father, with wonderful values. He believed it was 
possible to change the world. Yet at school, children's newspapers portrayed 
people like him as evil. There was a contradiction between my experience and 
what the world was saying, and I had to learn to trust my experience."

At three, she began to draw. At five, she started attending classes at the Art 
Institute of Chicago. She studied for her degree at UCLA, but it wasn't until 
graduate school that the themes that have dominated her work since began to 
emerge. Her professors were dismayed-bordering-on-horrified by works such as
Bigamy, in which an abstract penis was "stopped in flight" before it could 
unite with its vaginal equivalent (this work connected to the death of her 
first husband, who had died in a car crash).

Chicago, though, was not to be put off. She did exactly what she wanted to do. 
Her career is categorised not only by its content, but by the way she jumps 
from medium to medium (she went to car-body school to learn how to use an 
airbrush; more recently she has worked in glass). "I'm not like most artists," 
she says. "I'm not career driven. Damien Hirst's dots sold, so he made 
thousands of dots. I would, like, never do that! It wouldn't even occur to me." 
Nor would it occur to her to minimise the importance of those who help her in 
the studio. "The difference between me and other artists is that I acknowledge 
the people who work with me. Henry Moore had hundreds of 'assistants'. But they 
were really collaborators. They brought their skills and knowledge, but when he 
was interviewed, he made them leave while he jumped in front of the best 
sculpture in the room. It's a whole unexamined area of the art world, this 
hidden collaboration."

Before we hang up, I must ask: has she read Vagina, Naomi Wolf's new book? 
"Yeah, I've read it. The reviews were so vitriolic, I wondered: what in God's 
name did she say that set off such a firestorm? It was exactly the same kind of 
vitriol that metThe Dinner Party."
 Judy Chicago 
Aging Woman/Artist/Jew 
From Retrospective in a Box Photograph: Donald Woodman 
And what did she think? "It could have been an important book. Some of the 
issues she raises about how women view their bodies are important, and some of 
the fury about that comes out of shame. But it's not an important book because 
she completely avoided the subject of genital mutilation."

Is she likely to return to the subject of the vagina herself? "Probably not. I 
say this all the time. When I was young in the 70s, we cast the dialogue 
entirely around gender. We assumed all women were our friends and all men were 
our enemies. That was a completely erroneous assumption. It has to do with 
values, not gender. Some of the best feminists are men. Gender is part of a 
larger structure of oppression and injustice." A dry laugh. "I guess you could 
say that my eyes were lifted from my vagina."

Judy Chicago is at the Ben Uri Gallery (benuri.org.uk <http://benuri.org.uk>) 
in London from 14 November 2012 to 10 March 2013; at the Riflemaker in Soho (
riflemaker.org <http://riflemaker.org>) from 13 November to 22 December; and at 
Liverpool's The Black-E (theblack-e.co.uk <http://theblack-e.co.uk>) from 8-30 
November
 