
In the spring of 1988, I went to Paris to meet Ellen Wright, the widow of the 
American novelist Richard Wright, at her home in the heart of St-Germain des 
Prés. The purpose of the visit was to discuss James Baldwin, about whom I was 
writing a book and with whom Richard Wright had had a fractious, father-and-son 
relationship. The Wrights had moved from New York to Paris in 1947, and 
Baldwin, 14 years Wright's junior, arrived the following year. Whereas Wright 
was the author of several outstanding books, including the novel Native Son and 
the memoir Black Boy, the story of his gruelling Mississippi childhood, Baldwin 
was practically unpublished. One of the first things he turned his mind to, on 
settling in Paris, was an essay ostensibly about Harriet Beecher Stowe and 
Uncle Tom's Cabin, which ended by attacking the continuation of "protest" 
fiction in contemporary black literature. The prime example of the sterility 
cited by Baldwin was Native Son. Wright never forgave him.

The talk in Mrs Wright's living-room that afternoon turned naturally to the 
friendships within literary circles in Paris in the 1950s, when many other 
African-American writers and artists followed Wright to France, and to the 
climate of suspicion and resentment that gradually dissolved those alliances. 
The subject arose of a novel Wright had left behind when he died in 1960, set 
amid a fictionalised black community that congregated at the Café Tournon, in 
the rue Tournon, between Odéon and the Luxembourg Gardens. Island of 
Hallucination is mentioned in biographies - Michel Fabre offers an account of 
it in his excellent book The Unfinished Quest of Richard Wright (1973) - but it 
has never been published.

Mrs Wright spoke vivaciously about most things as we drank a bottle of what 
she delighted in calling "plonk". She briefly flattered me with the notion that 
I might write an introduction to a reissue of one of Wright's books. But when 
it came to Island of Hallucination she frosted over. The book would "never be 
published in my lifetime", she said, her eyes rising towards the ceiling as if 
a copy were stored in the attic above our heads. The story involved characters 
based on people still alive, who might view their presence in the novel as 
defamation. The Wright estate had fought, and lost, an expensive legal action 
over the use of unpublished material in a biography by Margaret Walker (Richard 
Wright: Daemonic Genius, 1988). Ellen Wright did not say so outright, but I 
left with the impression that the presence in Island of Hallucination of a 
character based on one member of the Café Tournon circle in particular, an 
African-American writer and journalist called Richard Gibson, was largely 
behind her decision to withhold the novel.

Island of Hallucination, begun in 1958, represented a late departure for 
Wright: it was the first time he had written about Paris, his home for the past 
11 years. Dispatching a completed draft to his agent, Paul Reynolds, at the 
beginning of 1959, he sounded pessimistic about its chances: "I can readily 
think of a hundred reasons why Americans won't like this book. But the book is 
true. Everything in the book happened, but I've twisted characters so that 
people won't recognise them." Wright's most recent published novel, The Long 
Dream (1958), had had a poor reception, with critics repeating the charge that 
he was out of touch with the subject matter that paradoxically most inspired 
him, the "Negro problem". He had recently turned to non-fiction, producing 
books about the Far East, Spain, and the newly independent Ghana, for the title 
of which he coined the term "Black Power". Island of Hallucination is a sequel 
to The Long Dream, in which a character from the earlier novel, Fishbelly, 
flees to Europe to escape the racial nightmare in his homeland, as Wright had 
done after the war. By the time he mailed the typescript to Reynolds, he was in 
frail health and living apart from Ellen and their two daughters. Each book 
having made a poorer show than the one before, his financial affairs were in a 
bad way. If Island of Hallucination should "get the same press that The Long 
Dream did", he told Reynolds, "then I must seriously think of abandoning 
writing for a time. One has to be realistic."

Apart from a brief stopover on his way to Argentina to make a film of Native 
Son at the end of the 1940s, Wright never returned to the United States after 
moving to Paris. The reasons for his estrangement are not hard to illustrate. 
Shortly before leaving the US, the couple - Ellen Poplar was from a Polish 
immigrant family - had been obliged to form a bogus property company to buy the 
house they desired, not in Mississippi, where Wright was born in 1908, the 
grandson of former slaves, but in bohemian Greenwich Village. Paris would spare 
them such bruising indignities. In the letter to Reynolds that accompanied 
Island of Hallucination, in which he brooded on his hobbled career, Wright 
endorsed his decision to live in France, which had brought him "such a bad 
press in the United States". His daughters would become "emotionally ill" if he 
were to take them back across the ocean. "I'd be a criminal to do so."

The motives behind Wright's departure from America were not exclusively 
racial. At the time of his success with Native Son, he had been a member of the 
communist party. Although he broke with his increasingly oppressive comrades in 
1942 and wrote a well-publicised account of his reasons ("I Tried to Be a 
Communist", included in Richard Crossman's famous anthology The God That 
Failed), the allegiance was neither forgotten nor forgiven at home. Almost 
every entry in Wright's FBI file after 1944, when the essay was first 
published, makes reference to his party membership, continuing into the 
mid-50s, by which time he was a committed anti-communist.

In Paris, on the other hand, where literary life was flourishing in the new 
conditions creation by the liberation, and where modern American fiction was 
widely read, Wright was welcomed as the representative "Negro writer". Parties 
arranged in his honour were attended by Albert Camus, André Gide and others. 
Publishers competed to obtain his books. Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de 
Beauvoir befriended the Wrights, and Ellen became De Beauvoir's literary agent, 
a position she still held at the time of our meeting. Wright's stories were 
translated by the mischievous writer and musician Boris Vian, and Native Son 
formed the basis of a scandalous policier, I Will Spit on Your Graves, written 
by Vian under the guise of being a black American.

However, Wright soon began to feel he was under threat from an unexpected 
source: the black American writers and artists who had travelled to France in 
his footsteps. The first blow was struck by Baldwin's essay about Uncle Tom's 
Cabin and Native Son, to which he gave the title "Everybody's Protest Novel", 
publishing it in the first issue of a Left Bank magazine called Zero (spring 
1949). Wright's pain at the assault could only have been exacerbated by the 
fact that the accusatory piece appeared directly after a short story by Wright 
himself. "The Man Who Killed a Shadow" is the tale of a black cleaner who 
murders a white schoolteacher and hides her body, after she attempts to seduce 
him and falsely accuses him of rape when he refuses her. Baldwin argued that 
fiction such as Wright's - including, by implication, the story that readers 
had just read - perpetuated a self-spinning web of "lust and fury" which, 
instead of unshackling the black spirit, continued to imprison it. Because of 
its grisly action and tangled moral outcome, Reynolds had failed to place the 
story in the US, but it was welcomed by the editor of Zero, Themistocles 
Hoetis, who relished the idea of launching his magazine with a spat between 
"the old black writer and the new black writer", as he put it to me during a 
recent interview at his home in south-east London.

Hoetis recalls receiving "The Man Who Killed a Shadow" in person at Wright's 
apartment on rue Monsieur le Prince, close to the Odéon, where the successful 
author was once photo-graphed with his family at the dinner table, while a 
uniformed maid waited in attendance. Wright was "a bit staid, but very 
friendly", Hoetis says. "I remember thinking at the time that he seemed pleased 
that a Yank would even come and visit him." Baldwin did not visit Wright at 
home, in Hoetis's recollection. "He was going to chop him down."

"Everybody's Protest Novel" was followed by even more withering attacks from 
Baldwin's pen. Later, Wright quarrelled with another African-American writer 
and one-time friend, Chester Himes, after seeing himself portrayed in what he 
considered to be an unkindly light in Himes's novel, A Case of Rape. A younger 
novelist, William Gardner Smith, author of The Last of the Conquerors and Stone 
Face, was alleged by Wright to be in the pay of the CIA, for whom he was 
supposed to be spying on what Wright called the "black church" at the Café 
Tournon. Wright himself was not above suspicion of a similar kind. In 1956, the 
American writer Kay Boyle, a veteran of Paris of the 1920s, wrote to tell him 
that "there is a story, a rumour, about you that is going about ... that you 
give information about other Americans in order to keep your passport and be 
able to travel". Wright must have blushed when he received this, for there were 
grounds for the rumours. Two years earlier, he had had difficulty in obtaining 
a passport from the American embassy to cross the Pyrenees to research his book 
Pagan Spain. After a visit to the embassy on September 16, 1954, when he 
provided or confirmed the names of more than one person "known to him as a 
member of the communist party", the passport came through. (A record of the 
interview is in Wright's FBI file, available under the US Freedom of 
Information Act.) The English poet Christopher Logue, who was in Paris in the 
1950s, and was friendly with William Gardner Smith, says of the atmosphere at 
the Tournon: "Everybody thought everybody else was spying on someone or other 
for somebody."

This was the situation Wright set out to dramatise in Island of Hallucination, 
representing in fictional form the web of false friendship, deception, 
corruption and betrayal that increasingly threatened to ensnare him, or so he 
believed. By the time he entered the Eugène Gibez clinic, where he died of a 
heart attack at 52 on November 28, 1960, the project was in abeyance. Reynolds 
had forwarded the manuscript to Wright's editor at Doubleday, who had asked for 
cuts and changes that appear to have been beyond the author's energies. After 
his death, Ellen permitted a small section to be printed in an anthology, but 
then withdrew the manuscript. It now sits among the Richard Wright papers at 
the Beinecke Library at Yale. For many years, Wright scholars were not 
permitted to read it. One biographer, Addison Gayle, stated in a footnote in 
his book, Ordeal of a Native Son, that his request to read Island of 
Hallucination "was denied".

Ellen Wright died in 2004, at 92. Not long before, a photocopy of Island of 
Hallucination, more than 500 pages in Wright's typescript, came into my hands, 
by an unexpected route: it was lent to me by Richard Gibson, whose presence in 
the novel is thought to have been behind its suppression. Now in his 70s, 
Gibson, who was born in Los Angeles and raised in Philadelphia, has lived in 
west London for many years. He talks readily about a colourful past that 
involves various political affiliations and adventures, disgraces and 
protestations of innocence. In the early 1960s, he was head of the Fair Play 
for Cuba Committee in the United States, in which capacity he met Fidel Castro 
and Ché Guevara on several occasions. When John F Kennedy was assassinated in 
1963, Gibson was approached by the CIA for information on Lee Harvey Oswald, 
who also had links with the FPCC. He is the author of the book African 
Liberation Movements, and was for a time English-language editor of the 
Algiers-based magazine Révolution Africaine, run by the French lawyer Jacques 
Vergès, who later denounced Gibson in the magazine (July-August 1964). Since 
his Paris days, when he was a regular at the Café Tournon, Gibson has had to 
fend off suggestions of egregious activity, including spying for the US 
government, allegations he has consistently denied, sometimes in the law courts 
and sometimes with a touch of humour. "If I'm CIA, where's my pension?", he 
once quipped to me.

Of the many things that vexed Wright in Paris in the 1950s - Baldwin's 
perceived treachery, Smith's snooping, Himes's unfaithfulness - it was the 
sequence of events that became known as the "Gibson affair" that exercised him 
most. In 1957, Gibson and Smith, acting in concert, sent a letter to Life 
magazine criticising French policy in Algeria. Such a gesture could only be 
seen as foolhardy on the part of an American, provoking the risk of deportation 
from France. Gibson wrote the letter, but signed it in the name of the 
newspaper cartoonist Ollie Harrington, a popular figure at the Tournon and one 
of the few members of the "church" whom Wright did not regard with suspicion or 
contempt. Wright and Harrington were furious when the letter appeared over the 
latter's signature in Life (October 21, 1957). Gibson was questioned by French 
police, and admitted his part in the forgery. He was released without charge 
but lost his job at Agence France Presse and returned to the US to take up a 
post with CBS News. Gibson claims he wrote the letter as part of a scheme 
concocted with Smith, involving a series of communications to various 
publications, each signed in a false name by a different member of the black 
community. (His own account of the episode will be published later this year in 
the journal Modern Fiction Studies.)

A version of the Gibson affair, and the related disagreement between Gibson 
and Harrington over the lease to a Left Bank apartment which led to a violent 
fight between the two men, features prominently in Island of Hallucination. 
There is an unpleasant character in the novel called Mechanical, who reflects 
certain aspects of Baldwin, notably his homosexuality, which disgusted Wright. 
At one point, in a nightmare, Fishbelly opens a coffin to find Mechanical 
dressed as a woman. Other composites display fragmentary resemblances to Smith, 
Harrington, Gibson himself, and figures more peripheral to the black literary 
scene in Paris, such as the West Indian writer CLR James, who appears to have 
been used as the basis for the character called Cato. When I first met Mrs 
Wright, James was still alive.

Island of Hallucination is not the roman à clef that admirers of Wright who 
know of its existence might expect, however. As with the characters, events are 
distorted. There are story lines that appear to be pure products of the 
imagination, such as the opening scene involving Fishbelly and his entrapment 
by French con artists who rob him of $2,000 on the flight to Paris. There are 
ample examples of the "lust and fury" that Baldwin objected to in Wright's 
fiction. And there is evidence of the numbing of his talent that Wright himself 
feared, in thumping dialogue among characters that are two-dimensional 
personifications of various vices.

The novel is at its strongest in dramatising the psychology of the black 
exile. On arrival in Paris, Fishbelly sits in a boulevard café and marvels at 
the lack of attention from surrounding whites: "'I've been toting a 
hundred-pound sack of potatoes on my back all my life and it's goddamned good 
to get rid of it,' he told himself." A woman called Irene who has tricked 
guilty whites out of thousands of dollars by begging money to enable her to 
feel "the good old sweet ground of the United States under my old black feet" 
is said, in a brilliant phrase, to be "bitter, but completely happy about it". 
Only one figure, Ned Harrison, based partly on Harrington, rises above the 
moral swamp, acting at times as a sane chorus on the insane action. "No man can 
stand absolutely alone and make any meaning out of life," Ned says at one 
stage, speaking for the author as much as for himself. "When you begin 
distrusting the images that make your world, you're standing alone. Soon you'll 
begin to doubt everything. Your world turns into a dream. It's as though you 
were having a hallucination." The action comes to a close with Mechanical 
hurling himself off the tower of Notre Dame cathedral, only to be caught in a 
net spread by the police below, in which he succeeds in hanging himself.

Wright had always been a writer with a preference for the broad brush, but his 
early books emerged from a conviction that he was in possession of an original 
subject matter: the fiery passage of the "black boy", striving to become a man 
in a society bent on suppressing his masculinity. In Wright's hands, the 
odyssey was likely to have a bloody outcome, as Baldwin perceived. In a letter 
to his New York publicist Bill Cole about Wright's novel The Outsider (1953), 
which attempts to yoke the tenets of French existentialism to the psychic state 
of emergency of the black male in pre-civil rights America, Baldwin said it 
struck him "as though Native Son had read a few books which, far from changing 
him, simply affords him some kind of half-assed intellectual justification for 
his unhappy brutality".

Gibson has had to wait for more than 40 years to read the novel in which he 
and others were assumed to feature so significantly that the author's widow 
chose the safe course of deferring publication (Gibson prefers not to say how 
he came into possession of a copy of the manuscript). "I turn up as Bill Hart, 
the 'superspy from Rome who spied on spies'," he told me. While he believes 
that "the motor of the book's plot comes straight from the Gibson affair", he 
was surprised to discover that Bill Hart is cast not as the forger of the 
offending letter to Life, but as the person in whose name the letter is signed. 
The fraud is ascribed to Mechanical, the Baldwin figure, though when the events 
of the Gibson affair "rocked the African-American community in Paris" in 1957, 
as Gibson puts it, Baldwin was on his way to the American South to report on 
the civil-rights movement.

In Gibson's opinion, Island of Hallucination should now be published. "It's a 
curiosity. It would attract attention as a document, even if not for its 
literary value. Anyway, Wright wanted it published." Asked if aspects of his 
personality in the character of Bill Hart would be likely to prompt him to seek 
legal redress, Gibson scoffs. "You wouldn't even know it was me. All the 
characters are composites." In his view, the book "is a reflection of the 
nightmare that Wright was living in by then".

It would not be the first posthumous publication of a book by Wright. In 1963, 
the estate released a lively novel set in the offices of the Chicago Post 
Office, Lawd Today!. Written in 1935, it makes use of the "newsreel" technique 
pioneered by John Dos Passos in his U.S.A. trilogy in the same decade. Near the 
end of his life, Baldwin, who had long since played down the old enmity, cited 
Lawd Today! as his favourite among Wright's novels. Ellen Wright told me he had 
agreed to provide an introduction to a new English edition, but he died, in 
1987, before he could fulfil the promise. Plans to reissue the book 
subsequently collapsed.

Two years before Lawd Today!, a collection of short stories appeared, under 
the title Eight Men, which Wright had prepared for publication during what 
turned out to be his final weeks of life. It contains "The Man Who Killed a 
Shadow", and is dedicated to friends "whose kindness has made me feel at home 
in an alien land".

· James Campbell's book Paris Interzone: Richard Wright, Lolita, Boris Vian 
and others on the Left Bank (1994) has recently been reissued in the US, under 
the title Exiled in Paris.
 