 Michael Howard was caught out when being interviewed on the Today programme 
last week. He insisted that he had not used the phrase 'aggressive judicial 
activism' in an article he had written for the Daily Telegraph attacking the 
judiciary. But when it was quoted back to him, he was forced to admit he was 
wrong.
The probable reason for his not being able to remember what he had written was 
that he had not written it in the first place. Like most articles which appear 
under a politician's byline, it had more than probably been penned by a party 
hack.

Whatever the explanation, the fact remains that very few politicians are 
capable of writing their own speeches, let alone articles for the press.

This was where Robin Cook, whose funeral took place on Friday in Edinburgh, 
was exceptional. He was not only clever, but he could express himself clearly 
on the page, as readers of his regular press columns or his book, Point of 
Departure, would testify.

In all the tributes to him, I was unable to discover why it was that this 
brilliant man, acclaimed by colleagues and obituarists as a Foreign Secretary 
of exceptional ability, was relieved of his post in 2001.

But recent books by James Naughtie and New Statesman editor John Kampfner both 
suggest that Cook was not popular in Washington, where he made no secret of his 
aversion, in particular to Vice-President Dick Cheney, a feeling that was 
mutual.

'Blair had been picking up misgivings,' Kampfner writes, 'ever so gentle, from 
the Bush administration.'

It is interesting to speculate what would have happened if Blair had stood by 
his man and Cook had remained at the Foreign Office. If the Foreign Secretary 
had resigned on the brink of war, it is doubtful British troops would be in 
Iraq or if Blair would still be at Number 10.

Is he bonkers?

It was the buccaneering Labour backbencher Bob Marshall-Andrews QC who 
publicly expressed doubts recently about the mental condition of the former 
Home Secretary, David Blunkett.

Recent events involving Blunkett, now Pensions Minister, could well inspire 
further speculation about the possible involvement in the near future of the 
men in white coats. For it is clear that Blunkett considers the Ministry of 
Pensions to be a role unsuited to a man of his extraordinary ability and talent.

This was borne out when, after the bombings in London on 7 July, he sent a 
bouquet of flowers to the shrine near King's Cross, along with a card that 
said: 'In sorrow that I was not able to do more to save you.'

The clear implication was that if only Blunkett had been kept on at the Home 
Office those poor people might never have died.

Not surprisingly, when the new Home Secretary, Charles Clarke, went on holiday 
the other day, Blunkett clearly thought that the nation would be safer if he 
stepped in to hold the fort. 'I am helping out,' he announced, 'while other 
good colleagues are taking a break. I obviously have the experience and the 
knowledge.'

But it transpired that this was not in fact the case. The official 
fort-holder, John Prescott, issued angry denials that Blunkett was involved in 
any way.

Unabashed, Blunkett then issued a statement on the subject of 24-hour drinking 
which he was against, though in what way the issue was connected with pensions 
was not immediately clear.

Private grief

I got another ticket last week for parking my car in the wrong place at the 
station. But there's no point in my taking it up with the nice man in the 
ticket office. Parking has been farmed out to a private company which has 
nothing to do with Network Rail.

A similar sort of situation seems to have arisen at Heathrow airport where 
British Airways has been faced with chaos brought about by an unofficial strike 
by the ground staff.

But a BA spokesmen, called upon to explain, can only repeat: 'It's nothing to 
do with us.' Like the station parking, the catering has been farmed out, in 
this case to an organisation called Gate Gourmet. One report says this is not 
even a British concern but one based in Switzerland. Another claims it is owned 
by an American venture capitalist, Texas Pacific.

So the fate of thousands of British holidaymakers is in the hands either of 
men in Switzerland or possibly in Texas.

Maybe you save money by doing it this way and I hesitate to tell all these 
businessmen how best to run their businesses, but from the outside it doesn't 
look very sensible if your whole business can be brought to a halt by people 
whose identity is not clearly known.

The lesson of the hospitals is a little more serious. Here, the cleaning has 
likewise been farmed out to private companies with the result that most 
sensible people will now think twice about going to hospital in case they are 
infected by MRSA.
 