 As a member of 'today's middle-class left', I didn't know whether to laugh or 
cry at Nick Cohen's sad diatribe (Comment, last week). The position I, and I'm 
sure many others on the left, hold is one that he must be aware of but chooses 
not to mention. There are two powerful fundamentalisms rampaging across the 
world and we oppose them both.
One is the neoconservative Bush/Blair position that tries to impose an extreme 
and destructive economic model on all countries, and holds that pre-emptive 
wars of aggression are permissible. The other is a fundamentalism rooted in an 
austere, medieval interpretation of Islam, which is, as Cohen says, 
'tyrannical, homophobic, misogynist, racist and homicidal'.

Because I oppose them both, I can see, as Cohen can't, that the 
neoconservative fundamentalism provides the optimum conditions for Islamist 
fundamentalism to flourish.
Richard Barnes
Windermere
Cumbria

Nick Cohen's fight against oppression is just as selective as that of those in 
the left whom he criticises. Where, for instance, is the evidence that he has 
fought the oppression of the people of the Caucasus by the Russians? If what 
Putin has done in Chechnya had been done to the Jews of Russia, Cohen, like 
Auden, would have 'screamed his head off'.
Saadi Haeri
London SE5

Nick Cohen is being offensive in categorising everyone who opposed the war as 
an apologist for right-wing dictators and religious bigots. I am committed to 
the principles of secular, tolerant, liberal democracy. But I don't think the 
way to achieve it is by bombing, torturing prisoners and riding roughshod over 
human-rights legislation.
Jane Teather
London

While agreeing with Nick Cohen that the left has failed to support progressive 
politics in post-Saddam Iraq and has allowed the imposition of a Milton 
Friedman utopia by the US, the primary objection to the war was its illegality. 
You do not commit a crime resulting in thousands of deaths and then try to 
justify it on the basis that the critics are not facing up to the 
fundamentalism that your actions have helped create.

A consensus at the UN would have prevented the isolation that has allowed the 
US and UK to engage in this rape of Iraq.
Stephen Black
Kettering
Northants

No, Nick. You say that the liberal-minded are fellow travellers with Saddam's 
Baathists because they opposed the Iraq war. In many cases, supporters of the 
anti-war movement felt the way they did because they felt that to wage war 
without UN approval was the first step in the breakdown of international order.

The UN Charter bans the waging of war on a country that is not threatening the 
warmakers. The UN inspectors could find no threat, the Security Council would 
not approve the war and the Secretary-General said the war was illegal.
David Cunliffe
Hanley Swan
Worcestershire
 