
The torture of seeing films intended for 30ft cinema screens being squeezed 
into a 2.5in space has done nothing to deter millions ofiPod 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipod> users from downloading those 
burnt offerings. But now the traffic is heading in the opposite direction for 
the first time, with the screening next Sunday at the Boston International Film 
Festival of a 43-minute movie that was only ever made to be watched in the palm 
of the hand, and even then in bite-sized, site-specific instalments.

Murder on Beacon Hill is an interactive iPhone app that guides the viewer 
around locations in Boston pertaining to the killing in 1849 of Dr George 
Parkman. Download the app, put on your comfortable shoes and head into the 
streets of the old Beacon Hill neighbourhood, where you can relive the 
unearthing of a dismembered body beneath Harvard Medical College, the manhunt, 
and the arrest and trial of the victim's former classmate, Professor John 
Webster. "The story begins at Massachusetts General Hospital," intones 
narrator-cum-sleuth Alexandra McDougall before instructing you to "Press Wax 
Seal number 1" or "Come with me inside the Ether Dome."

Even those who have resisted the lure of the iPhone will recognise the 
principle from the audiotours that are part of any museum visit. But plodding 
through Bath's ancient spas, being told by the electronic guide that you're 
looking at the Spring overflow when all you can see in front of you is a party 
of German schoolchildren in Korn T-shirts and bumbags, surely has nothing on 
the experience of living through Murder at Beacon Hill.

It remains to be seen whether the app will retain its pulp allure on the 
larger screen, when the distinction between viewer and participant will be 
clearer, though the subjective camerawork and mystery-stoking score already 
embrace traditional filmmaking technique. That this is a landmark moment is 
indisputable. If it's not quite the Lumière brothers at the Grand Café in 1895, 
it will at least be a night to recall once the inaugural Oscar for Best 
Original App is handed out.
 