
Your front-page piece (“Elderly care ‘close to collapse’ as council funding 
runs out” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/26/nhs-elderly-care-close-to-collapse>
, News), coupled withJennifer Dixon’s and Anita Charlesworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/shameful-autumn-statement-social-care>
’s analysis of the autumn statement’s implications for social care (Comment) 
and theletter from the cross-party group of local government leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2016/nov/27/observer-letters-nigel-kennedy-royal-collage-of-music>
, highlight a massive crisis that goes beyond social care. It threatens the 
viability of every social welfare market, including childcare.

The Department for Education’s 2013 childcare and early years providers 
survey, for instance, showed 46% of respondents either operating at a loss or 
just breaking even. Running a business on this basis is unsustainable and the 
situation has likely deteriorated since then. We might be able to maintain a 
sense of national and community responsibility for services if we could turn 
our mixed economies of social welfare into “social markets”. In such markets, 
partnerships with the private-for-profit and not-for-profit/social enterprise 
service sectors would not only be adequately subsidised by the state, but also 
more rigorously regulated.

Above all, we should have a major national debate about a fair and transparent 
way of assigning costs between social welfare service users, providers and the 
state.
Eva Lloyd
Professor of early childhood 
Cass School of Education and Communities
University of East London

It saddens and depresses me that most articles referring to the crisis in care 
homes refer only to the elderly. People with severe learning disabilities and 
complex needs are a hidden group and there is a huge crisis in their care. I 
have a 39-year-old daughter with severe complex needs who has minimal funding 
for her care and is left isolated and alone for many hours in a care home in a 
package known as “supported” living.

She is non-verbal, is becoming increasingly immobile and has now developed a 
severe skin condition. When she was born, I was told I was lucky that the 
institutions that locked people away for lifetimes were closing and a more 
enlightened approach was in place. Since then, there has been a lot of research 
and good intentions but these are never backed up by funding to implement these 
possible improvements.

Carers are usually on a minimal wage and the stress and long-term sickness 
level among “professionals” working in this industry is abysmal. The cost of 
sick pay in the social care system could surely be better used employing more 
staff to be on call. I have lost count of the number of cancelled meetings 
because social workers/health professionals are off sick or on long-term sick 
leave.

It is time governments started to realise that ignoring the most vulnerable – 
who will always be with us – will always ultimately cost more in the long run, 
and spreads discontent and depression to most people who try to help.
Gill Skelton 
London

While there is a clear need for additional emergency funding for social care, 
this should not distract us from pressing ahead with more radical change. 
Social care should be nationalised. Part of the remit of a newNational Health 
and Care Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/20/lib-dems-will-turn-nhs-into-national-health-and-care-service-says-farron>
 (NHCS) would be to deliver high-quality, publicly funded preventive and 
ameliorative care services to all citizens in need within their own homes or, 
where necessary, in specialist residential units.

This would require significant new investment in buildings, equipment and 
staff. A workforce plan would need to be developed to ensure that all NHCS 
staff are well paid, well trained and have proper career paths. Siren voices 
suggesting that such organisational change is neither desirable nor affordable 
should, like critics of Labour’s welfare plans after the Second World War, be 
resisted. This is not a time for tinkering. A bold and imaginative new deal for 
social care is needed now.
Robert M Page
Birmingham
 