
It's unusually cold and wet on my first evening in New Orleans. In the 
gathering dark I'm lost and just a little scared as I cycle around the empty 
streets of the rundown Tremé district, looking for the Candlelight Lounge. 
Finally I see a man carrying a bass drum into a small building and realise I've 
found the legendary music club. I follow him in and within two minutes my fears 
are blown away by The Abney Effect, a funky jazz band led by trumpeter Mario 
Abney, who are – if you'll excuse the jazz speak – ripping the joint up.

I'm here to meet Bob Rodrigue ("I'll be the guy in the white hat"), leader of 
theIt's All About The Music bike ride 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/276113752525853/>, a Facebook group that meets 
on Tuesday nights to tours gigs all over the city. Bob, who moonlights as DJ 
Old Man River on New Orleans'WWOZ radio station <http://www.wwoz.org/>, tells 
me to grab a bowl of crab gumbo, laid on free to all tonight's customers.

I've barely had a spoonful of the spicy Cajun soup before the smiling waitress 
pulls me to my feet. "Gotta come dance, baby! I got your partner right here," 
she says, leading me towards an unsuspecting woman. Like most Englishmen, I 
need a healthy intake of alcohol before joining in with such merriment (it's 
not even 6pm) but the band is so damn funky my feet start dancing all by 
themselves.

I'm keen to stay for the second set but Bob says it's time to meet the rest of 
the group of cyclists in Congo Square (the birthplace of jazz) in Louis 
Armstrong Park. Tonight's gathering is smaller than usual because of the rain, 
but thanks to the sound system strapped to Bob's bike and the case of beer on 
the back of someone else's, we've got a little party on wheels going on. And 
everyone is so friendly I already feel like one of the gang. (Anyone with a 
bicycle is welcome to ride with the group, and there's no charge.)
 The Candlelight Lounge, Tremé's last surviving jazz club. Photograph: Derek 
Bridges/flickr <http://www.flickr.com/photos/84949728@N00/5458839495> 
Our next stop is an acoustic set by indie-folk band Hurray for the Riff Raff 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GsfNmg9dGpM> at Euclid Records 
<http://www.euclidrecords.com/index.jsp>, a shop next to the levee on the 
corner of Desire Street – immortalised by Tennessee Williams' Streetcar – in 
the Bywater neighbourhood.

The store is packed with rare and affordable vinyl, and young hipsters who 
have come to hear one of the city's most talked-about new bands. It's so full I 
can't even see them, but within minutes the soulful bewitching voice of singer- 
songwriter Alynda Lee Segarra has me close to tears. (And by the end of the 
week, after I've begged for a ticket to her sold-out show, bought the new CDand 
the concert poster, I realise I'm smitten.)

As we head to our last gig of the night on Frenchmen Street, the rain is so 
heavy it feels like we're cycling through a Louisiana swamp – and I'm loving 
it. We pay the $5 charge (the first of the evening) and pile into theDBA club 
<http://www.dbaneworleans.com/> to catch the legendary Tremé Brass Band bang 
out jazz standards. The set is not as fresh as the first two acts we've seen 
but – like everyone else in this town it seems – man, can they play. By the end 
of the night I'm drunk, soaked to the skin and already head over heels for New 
Orleans.

In one night I've seen a large swath of this compact, bikeable city, visiting 
three neighbourhoods that represent its past, present and future. Tremé was not 
only the birthplace of jazz but is the oldest African-American neighbourhood in 
the US, where free people of colour worked and owned property decades before 
the end of slavery. Sadly the Candlelight Lounge is the last remaining club in 
a once-thriving musical neighbourhood. The Frenchmen Street area east of here 
(not to be confused with the touristy French Quarter) is the jumping musical 
heart of the city right now. On any night of the week you'll find world-class 
jazz, blues and funk for $10 or less at clubs such as Snug Harbor, the Spotted 
Cat and the Blue Nile – some of the best musicians have weekly residencies. 
Further east again, the Bywater is the neighbourhood most synonymous with 
post-Katrina gentrification.
 The It’s All About the Music Ride group following a brass band 
Of course, there's nothing new about falling in love with New Orleans. Its 
easy charm and magical mix of cultures have been beguiling visitors almost 
since the day the French founded it in 1718. But post-Katrina (a phrase that is 
now part of the lexicon), a new wave of outsiders have been seduced by the 
city, while New Orleanians, many of whom were forced to live in exile for 
months or even years, have come to love and appreciate it more than ever – like 
getting a second chance with a beautiful lover you've taken for granted all 
those years.

This city has always been a magnet for artists, musicians and writers, but its 
pull now seems stronger than ever. Among the many who have recently brought 
properties in the Bywater, a virtual no-go area pre-Katrina, are model and pop 
star Solange Knowles (Beyoncé's little sister). Thanks to tax breaks the state 
of Louisiana is now an attractive alternative to Hollywood and some 
film-makers, including Court 13, the collective that made Beasts of the 
Southern Wild, about a Mississippi delta community cut off by a levee, 
relocated here permanently. Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt (a genuine local hero 
after pumping millions of dollars of his own money into a rebuilding programme) 
have a house in the French Quarter.

According to some locals, including Bob, who has lived in Louisiana nearly all 
his life, there is a flipside to this: "I had to leave the Bywater because so 
many hipsters are too cool to say good morning – and that ain't the New Orleans 
way [expletives deleted, most of them prefixing the word hipster]."

There's a much-quoted story about a New Yorker suing a New Orleans restaurant 
because his gumbo was too spicy. This was actually an internet hoax, but to me 
places like theSatsuma Cafe <http://satsumacafe.com/>, Bywater's hipster hub, 
serving kale juice and organic soups, do feel more like Brooklyn or Shoreditch 
than New Orleans.
 The fabulous Hurray for the Riff Raff performing in New Orleans earlier this 
year. Photograph: Josh Brasted/Getty Images 
But there is no denying that the city has been re-energised and cleaned up. 
The week I'm there, Ray Nagin, the mayor during Katrina, isfound guilty on 20 
counts of bribery and corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/12/ray-nagin-corruption-new-orleans-mayor>
. As Bob puts it: "While this city was on its knees after the hurricane, that 
[multiple expletive] was sitting on his ass in the Caribbean on a holiday paid 
for by kickbacks." Nagin was the first New Orleans mayor to stand trial for 
public corruption, so the decision was a real landmark.

One sector benefiting from the revival is the restaurant trade. This corner of 
Louisiana is home to the only cuisine truly born in the US – a rich mix of 
rustic Cajun, sophisticated Creole (itself a blend of French, Spanish, German 
and Italian), Caribbean and African influences. Mark Twain said: "New Orleans 
food is as delicious as the less criminal forms of sin", and the city has 
always been proud of its culinary history. There are now more restaurants than 
ever, even though the population of the city is still not back to pre-Katrina 
levels. Donald Link, one of the city's leading chefs, tells me: "They have 
fantastic restaurants in New York, Chicago and San Francisco, but if you closed 
your eyes you might not know which of those cities you were eating in."

You could never say that about New Orleanian cuisine, which is clearly one 
Link thinks is worth fighting for. When Katrina struck he was in the process of 
setting up two new restaurants, and friends advised him to take the insurance 
money and run. He did the opposite, forging a security pass so he could return 
to the city only a week after the hurricane, when the place was still deserted, 
and start rebuilding.
 Grilled Louisiana shrimp at Cochon restaurant 
Since then he hasn't looked back, now owning five restaurants, including Cochon
 <http://www.cochonrestaurant.com/> in the Warehouse District, which serves 
sophisticated versions of the southern-Cajun dishes he grew up with. Cochon 
(which in Louisiana means roast pork: they serve it with cabbage and plenty of 
crackling) specialises in nose-to-tail pig dishes, including Link's signature 
spicy sausages. For one of the best restaurants in town it is pleasingly down 
to earth – the music loud, prices fairly reasonable. If you can't get a table, 
the annex,Cochon Butcher <http://www.cochonbutcher.com/>, is a "swine bar and 
deli", offering sandwiches of pork belly, oyster and bacon or the fantastic
muffuletta.The latter is a sarnie invented by Italian immigrants to New 
Orleans: layered with mortadella, salami, mozzarella, ham and provolone, it 
will do you in for the day. Yes, it's all about the hog here, but the cooking 
is so good they even make Brussels sprouts taste sexy – flash-fried and dressed 
with olive oil and red chilli.

Like many people I speak to, Link is adamant that the city is in much better 
shape than before Katrina. "You've heard of the Big Easy?" he says. "Well a lot 
of that is just bullshit that stood for corruption and laziness. That's 
changing now, partly because people are bringing a new energy with them."

One New Orleans native who did just that is Neal Bodenheimer. While many 
people were forced to leave the city to rebuild their lives after Katrina, 
Bodenheimer, a mixologist who had been working at high-end bars in New York, 
felt a call to return and do his bit for his devastated hometown.
 Cure cocktail bar. Photograph: Kevin O'Mara 
With two associates, he opened the Cure <http://curenola.com/> cocktail bar on 
Freret Street in Uptown, in 2009. Every bar in New Orleans does cocktails – 
there's even anannual cocktail festival 
<http://talesofthecocktail.com/tales-of-the-cocktail-2014/> attended by 
bartenders from around the world – but until Cure there was nowhere that 
applied such microscopic attention to detail (one of the barmen even has a 
cocktail manifesto). The Ramos gin fizz I tried was like boozy lime soufflé, so 
delicious I scraped the glass clean with my finger to finish off the creamy 
whipped egg white.

Cure is housed in a beautiful former fire station with exposed brick walls and 
an entire back wall lined with hundreds of bottles of all shapes and colours, 
backlit and rising towards the high ceiling like an altar to drinking. When the 
bar opened, the surrounding area had almost been abandoned.

"People said we were a little crazy to open here but it was the only place we 
could afford," says Bodenheimer. The leap of faith has proved successful and 
Freret Street is today buzzing with restaurants and businesses, thanks largely 
to Cure's pioneering success.

The owners have just opened a restaurant, Cane and Table 
<http://www.caneandtablenola.com/>, in a dilapidated, atmospheric building in 
the French Quarter, which specialises in rum (obviously there are cocktails) 
and Caribbean-inspired sharing plates. It's sophisticated drinking food really, 
and as I'm several cocktails in to the evening when I arrive, dishes like the 
yummy crispy rum ribs, coated in rice flour and fried, really hit the spot.
 A barbecue restaurant in the Bywater. Photograph: Alamy 
Some of the best food I eat is at Sylvain, <http://www.sylvainnola.com/> in an 
18th-century carriage house and former brothel in the French Quarter. The owner 
pays homage to the old, mystical New Orleans: each night the bartender leaves 
out a glass of sazerac, the city's signature cocktail, and lights a candle for 
Aunt Rose Arnold, the former madame who is said to haunt the building.

And while the food is rooted in the Cajun and Creole tradition, it comes with 
a modern twist. Veal sweetbreads melt in the mouth like warm butter, beef 
cheeks are just as tender, and the Gulf of Mexico prawns are as juicy as fresh 
fruit. And like everything I eat here, it is deliciously rich, and the there's 
no holding back on spices and seasoning – or the volume level.

They don't do background music in New Orleans; they do foreground music. Even 
in my classy, old-school hotel, the Bourbon Orleans, the music playing over 
breakfast (fried oysters or steak and eggs with shrimp sauce) is a notch or two 
louder than you'd expect, and it's proper pumping bebop rather than elevator 
jazz. And even in such grand surroundings there's a wonderful informality. As 
the hotel has no garage, I'm worried about where I can leave my bike at night, 
but the staff tell me to wheel it through the white marble lobby, with its 
sparkling chandeliers, to my room – as if it's the most natural thing in the 
world. I could't see that happening in London or New York.

Hiring a bike for the week was a great decision. The city is flat and small 
enough to cycle across in a day. I got mine, a single-speed, funky black 
cruiser with chunky whitewall tyres and chrome and red trim, from theAmerican 
Bicycle Rental Company 
<http://www.bikerentalneworleans.com/bicycle-rental-rates/> (+1 504 324 8257, 
bikerentalneworleans.com, $36 a day or $165 a week). The company also runs
guided historical bike tours <http://www.neworleansbiketour.com/> , which are a 
great way to learn about the city as you can see so much on a gentle three-hour 
ride.
 An historical ride of the city with New Orleans Bike Tours 
My man Bob also leads cycle tours of the city (bigeasybiketours.com 
<http://www.bigeasybiketours.com/Home.html>), and though I didn't get the 
chance to take one, on my last day in town he takes me on a ride down to the 
Lower Ninth Ward. This is the poor neighbourhood that was devastated by 
Katrina, where the harrowing images beamed around the world of people stranded 
for days on their roofs were taken, and where many properties still lie 
abandoned.

Most people told me to stay clear of the area but on this Sunday morning it's 
a carnival, with half the neighbourhood out on the street to see the CTC 
Steppers Parade and their marching band warming up for Mardi Gras. We park our 
bikes and join the crowd almost running alongside them (the band really does 
quick march) down the main drag lined with barbecue trucks and beer sellers. 
With everyone dancing and having such a good time it's impossible to imagine 
the horrors seen here less than a decade ago. Today, like every day I've spent 
in this magical city, it feels like the air is filled with joy.

• The trip was provided by America As You Like (020-8742 8299, 
americaasyoulikeit.com <http://www.americaasyoulikeit.com/>), which offers 
seven nights in New Orleans from £1,195pp or four nights from £930, including 
accommodation and flights with United Airlines. Doubles at the Hotel Bourbon 
Orleans (+1 504 523 2222,bourbonorleans.com <http://www.bourbonorleans.com/>) 
from $179 room-only, and at the Hotel Le Marais (+1 504 525 2300,
hotellemarais.com <http://www.hotellemarais.com/>) from $179 B&B. For visitor 
information seeneworleanscvb.com <http://www.neworleanscvb.com/> and 
DiscoverAmerica.com <http://www.discoveramerica.com>. For New Orleans music 
listings, and to tune in to the city, check out theWWOZ radio station 
<http://www.wwoz.org/>
 