
This month, Costa Rica’s state-run electricity company announced that the 
country had gone75 days using only renewable resources for electricity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/mar/26/costa-rica-only-renewable-energy-first-75-days-of-2015-video>
. Costa Ricans are the first in the world to power their country for so long 
without the use of fossil fuels, and the record-breaking achievement was 
quickly picked up by news agencies all over the world.

Costa Rican residents have certainly benefited from the clean energy, with 
electricity pricesset to tumble 
<http://www.ticotimes.net/2015/03/19/regulatory-authority-approves-rebates-in-electricity-rates>
 between 7% and 15% in April. But despite the world’s congratulatory backslaps 
for the renowned green country, its clean energy production is not likely to 
last at this scale, nor is it a model that would work in many other parts of 
the world.

Conservationist murders threaten Costa Rica's eco-friendly reputation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/19/conservationist-murders-costa-rica-threaten-eco-friendly-reputation>
Costa Rica gets most of its electricity from hydroelectric plants and a recent 
period of unusually heavy rain allowed the country to reach the milestone. This 
clean power is bolstered by geothermic energy from the country’s volcanoes and 
a small amount of wind and solar power. Most years, these sources allowCosta 
Rica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/costa-rica> to generate approximately 
90% of its electricity without burning fossil fuels.

The abundance of natural resources, combined with Costa Rica’s strong 
commitment to environmentalism, spurred policymakers to set a goal for carbon 
neutrality by 2021. If Costa Rica meets the target, it will likely become the 
first carbon-neutral country in the world, but there are obstacles.

The downside to hydropower is that it requires consistent rainfall. Though the 
dams in Costa Rica are now full, just months ago the country wassuffering 
<http://www.ticotimes.net/2014/10/01/costa-rica-declares-national-emergency-over-drought-in-northwestern-province-of-guanacaste>
 one of the worst droughts in its history. This forced Costa Rican utility 
companies to burn fuel to generate power, releasing greenhouse gases and 
causing rate rises.
 ‘While there is plenty of clean power today, it could just as easily be gone 
tomorrow.’ Photograph: Corbis 
This unpredictability in rain patterns isn’t unique to Costa Rica and is 
considered to be one of the primary effects of climate change. Ironically, this 
means that the bulging reservoirs that gave Costa Rica its green energy surge 
are likely to be attributable, at least partially, to climate change. And while 
there is plenty of clean power today, it could just as easily be gone tomorrow.

Even if Costa Rica were able to sustain 100% clean electricity production, the 
country still relies on petroleum for transportation, and emissions from this 
sector are the largest hurdle the country faces in reaching its carbon 
neutrality goal. The environment ministry reports that fuel burned by cars, 
buses and trains accounted for almost 70% of the country’s carbon emissions in 
2014. According to customs there are only 200 or so hybrid cars in Costa Rica 
to take advantage of the energy produced by renewables on the grid.

The fact that even a country like Costa Rica, which has made major investments 
to produce clean energy, still struggles with these obstacles, shows just how 
difficult it would be for larger, more industrialised nations to follow in its 
footsteps.

With a population under 5 million and no major industry, Costa Rica uses much 
less power than most developed countries, and its geography of tightly packed 
volcanoes, rivers and mountains is more suited to producing clean power than 
most. Though small, Costa Rica is able to produce enough energy to power itself 
while leaving much of its wilderness intact.

To tap into all of the natural resources in the rest of the world would 
require environmental loss of a different kind, by altering rivers, displacing 
people and animals, and destroying vegetation. Solar and nuclear power offer 
other alternatives for clean energy but need more research and investment to 
make them cost-effective and safe. Even if it were possible to power the 
world’s largest countries with renewable energy, the destruction required would 
be unfathomable with only the current technologies.

These limitations, along with a lack of political will, are what has meant the 
world relied on fossil fuels for almost 90% of its energy since 1999. As 
admirable as Costa Rica’s feats in energy production may be, its model is not 
realistic for the world’s largest energy consumers.

But what most of the industrialised world lacks in natural resources, it more 
than makes up for with other assets. To seriously make a difference in global 
energy consumption would require significant investment in the research and 
design of new sources of non-polluting energy, a task most easily funded by 
richer nations.

While the world may not be able to tailor its energy programmes to Costa 
Rica’s geography-specific model, the lesson here is not about science and 
infrastructure, but about volition and ideals.
 