
On the upper deck of the trans-Andes bus, the gap-year backpackers from every 
advanced economy of the globe did not appreciate the danger we were in. Not 
yet. When I looked back from my seat at the front, I saw that many of them were 
busy with iPads and iPhones, a few were asleep and the rest were chatting.

No one was watching the digital display that recorded the outside temperature. 
It had been falling ever since we left behind the last human habitation, in 
Argentina. Now it was below zero and still dropping. Rolling sheets of ice 
particles were scouring the road, while the midday sky remained an 
imperturbable blue.

We had spent several hours winding westwards towards Chile, up into 
inhospitable realms, passing vast salt lakes presided over by snow-capped peaks 
and seeing signs of life disappear. Now there were no more vicuña and guanaco, 
the wild llamas of the Andes, no suri, the giant flightless bird. At 4,800m, 
even the golden tussock grass had given up and there was nothing, only the 
jagged peaks rising from a barren plain. The bus lowed, then gave a shudder as 
an icy blast hit it broadsides.

Crossings are often the best part of any journey, whether it's over a border 
or pass, or through straits. Humans have long known that such moments require 
the greatest concentration, for in those crossings comes the greatest danger – 
and the greatest pleasure. My favourites have always been mountain passes: the 
modest Lake District, or the dizzying Rockies or Himalayas.

I was looking forward to my first journey over the Andes, and to this pass, 
from Purmamarca in Argentina to San Pedro de Atacama in Chile. I was expecting 
something special from the 10-hour bus ride. But I had not considered that a 
journey over a barrier like the Andes can take a traveller over subtler 
barriers too – like the one that separates you from the local culture.

The woman across the aisle let out a howl of frustration: "No signal!" Along 
the deck, headphones were flung aside, screens tapped, phones raised. The bus 
kept grinding upwards and the temperature gauge settled for -10C. The sheets of 
ice had become storms of blinding white. Then, with a lurch, we stopped. Ahead 
of us a lorry was jammed into a bank of driven ice. There was no way past, and 
our coach could not reverse or turn around. I saw the driver, or one of his 
assistants, struggling through the blizzard.
 Lorries struggle through icy winds. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
"There's this girl I know on Facebook," said someone behind me, "she was stuck 
for two days and then they went back to Purmamarca."

This news caused alarm: "They shouldn't allow the buses to go if it's 
dangerous!" "I've got a flight to catch."

I pulled on my boots and jacket, grabbed my camera and set off to the lower 
deck. On the stairs the transition from tourism to adventure travel was drawing 
differing responses. A few passengers were embracing the excitement, but most 
were grim-faced. "The toilet's blocked." "I'm cold." We'd been stopped less 
than 10 minutes.

Fortunately for me the adventure had started a day earlier and I was already 
in the mood. Sometimes a trip does that: jumbling any plans and demanding that 
you leap from tourist to traveller. My plan had read: "Transfer by car from 
Salta to Purmamarca via the famous tourist attraction of Humahuaca Gorge, then 
take the bus across the Andes to San Pedro de Atacama in Chile." That was not 
exactly what had happened.

I'd driven out of Salta early the previous morning with Edgar, my guide there. 
We were talking about the astonishing Museum of High Altitude Archaeology in 
the town square.

"It's still controversial with some people," Edgar had said. "They don't like 
their ancestors to be disturbed."

Five centuries ago the Incas, revering the eternal sun and the restless 
volcanoes, had sacrificed children by leaving them to die on the top of 
particular mountains.

"It's not a human sacrifice," said Edgar. "Don't call it that."

Their diminutive corpses were discovered in 1999 – preserved by severe cold 
and depleted oxygen – and removed to Salta. In the museum the story of how they 
came to be on a remote, 6,700m mountaintop builds to a remarkable moment of 
ghastly drama, when you come face to face with one of the children. It is a 
moving experience, giving a glimpse into ancient times, when people believed 
that mountains were living beings who made war on each other. In those times 
the few humans who passed that way came as supplicants, filled with a sense of 
awe and magic.

"Some people still revere the mountains," said Edgar. "They wanted those 
children to be left alone."
 Falklands war veteran Nicolas Toconas. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
Edgar had been going to show me the gorge then drop me in Purmamarca, the last 
town before the high Andes, but after some hours we'd come to a long queue of 
traffic. A crowd of students had blocked the road, demanding that their 
half-built campus be completed. A tired government representative was 
negotiating. No one expected an early resolution.

"We could be sitting here for hours," I said. "Can't we turn around and do 
something else?"

Edgar thought about it. "I heard about a man who lives in the mountains – a 
veteran of the Malvinas war and a famous singer. They say he's got some kind of 
museum going."

Here was a border that I'd been wanting to cross all the time I'd been in 
Argentina, the one that separates our Falklands war from their Guerra de las 
Malvinas, the barrier between Argentinian understanding and British. Here was 
the perfect opportunity to turn tourism into real travel.

We drove back to the town of Tilcara for directions, then took a dirt track 
west into the Andean foothills, climbing a gorge past dry cliffs and stands of 
giant cactus. An electricity line led us to a shack in a grove of poplars. We 
parked and walked closer. A man appeared and beckoned to us.

Nicolas Toconas proved to be a jovial middle-aged character who was building a 
palace for himself "outside the system". He showed us the half-finished living 
area, temporarily roofed by camouflage netting and tin. On the walls were 
photographs of his wartime experiences, which he began to explain in great 
detail.

In Nicolas's war, the British had spectacularly failed to achieve any military 
objective. He had seen it with his own eyes: ships sunk, infantry attacks 
repelled, aircraft downed. In the end the "colonialists" had been bailed out by 
the Americans, who had then tricked the victorious Argentines into leaving. It 
was a cogent, believable account, a view of history I could never have found in 
Britain.

Nicolas grinned at my reaction: "Not the history you learned in school, is 
it?" He took my arm. "Let's forget about war. I want to show you something."

He guided me through a doorway, and when my eyes had accustomed to the gloom, 
I looked in surprise at a kingsize bed covered in dark velvet, drapes hanging 
over ornamental mirrors and a vast karaoke system.

"Now, I will sing for you."

He pulled out a microphone and a plasma screen came to life with a shot of a 
couple strolling on a beach. "Bésame, bésame mucho," crooned Nicolas in a voice 
as smooth as wild pampas honey. "Como si fuera esta noche la última vez."

The song ended on an emotional warble, then Nicolas rummaged in a drawer and 
handed me a small circle of cloth. "A souvenir for you!" It was an Argentinian 
parachute regiment badge, decorated with a map of Las Malvinas.

After sunset, Edgar dropped me in Purmamarca, in the Andean foothills. It's an 
attractive waystation, surrounded by cliffs and gorges in an astonishing 
variety of mineral colours. In the morning, I walked around the town to admire 
the multicoloured rocks in the rising sun. I sent Edgar a mental thank you for 
insisting I stop the night, then strolled to the bus stop.
 Pouring maté on the coach. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
I had thought my adventure was over at that point, that being crooned to by a 
Falklands vet would be the high point. Five hours later, with the bus stuck in 
a blizzard at almost 5,000m, I was trying to open the outer door and take 
photographs.

"They won't let anyone out," said an American traveller. "People would freeze 
to death."

I tapped on the door that separated the passenger compartment from the 
driver's cab. There was no answer. I opened it and peeped inside. The cab was 
empty. Two steaming containers of maté, the local tea, stood on the dashboard. 
Finding the outer door ajar, I pushed it open and stepped out and was struck by 
a blast of cold air. The driver came staggering across.

"Aha! You like our weather?"

The thermometer read -10C.

"With the wind, it is much worse. Here, come inside and drink maté."

We stepped back into the cab and he offered me the container of thick herbal 
goo, with an enamel straw. Maté is almost a way of life in parts of South 
America, a mildly addictive stimulant mashed from yerba leaves.

I'd drunk it made from a teabag, without much pleasure, but this was my 
initiation by an aficionado. I sucked and got something like a slurp of sweet 
silage. The driver grinned. "Good?"

I nodded. "It's warm."

Perhaps it was an acquired taste. I took another slug. Definitely silage.

"Will we be here long?"

He laughed. "We are at almost 5,000m. Summer is short. We usually get through. 
They are trying to dig that truck out."

I took another sip of maté.

"This is the best road for seeing the Andes," he said. "Even up here there are 
living creatures: vicuñas, rheas and vizcachas. But you know the mountains are 
alive, too."
 Licancabur and Juriques. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
He pointed to the dark peaks just visible above us: one a classic cone, the 
other lower and less defined: "That is Licancabur and next to him is his 
headless brother, Juriques. Both brothers were in love with another mountain, 
Quemal, but she loved only Juriques. She threw a rock at Licancabur but it 
missed and hit Juriques, knocking his head off. Now they stare at each other 
across the Atacama."

"Can mountains be in love?"

He laughed. "Of course. And they can be angry – like today."

I sucked on the silage, beginning to like the sweet grassy bitterness. The 
driver's assistants returned, blowing on their fingers and laughing. Ahead of 
us, the lorry's brake lights came on, then the vehicle shuddered and began to 
move forward.

"Licancabur has decided that we can pass," said the driver.

It was over. We were not going to be modern sacrifices, entombed in some 
future museum, still clutching our votive digital gadgets. We were simply 
travellers on one of the world's most magnificent bus rides.

I made my way back to my seat. As we started, the passengers relaxed. The 
Australian girl next to me laughed. "I can't wait to post this on Facebook." 
Others put their headphones back in, but most were notably more attentive to 
their surroundings. Perhaps this was all the mountains had wanted.

In a few minutes we had cleared the blizzard, the sky became deep tranquil 
blue again and away to our right were the brothers, the two magnificent 
volcanic cones. As our crossing of the Andes ended, this panorama opened out to 
reveal a staggering array of snow-capped mountains to north and south. All of 
them, I guessed, alive with their own stories, should any traveller care to 
listen.

The trip
This trip was provided by Sumak Travel (020 3642 4246, sumak-travel.org 
<http://www.sumak-travel.org/product/incredible-argentina-and-chile-adventure/>
) a specialist in community-based ecotourism. A 20-day private tour, including 
Buenos Aires, the Iguazu Falls, rural tourism in Salta, the Quebrada de 
Humahuaca, Atacama desert and Santiago, costs from £3,180pp, including 
accommodation, guided activities and excursions, all breakfasts and most other 
meals, transfers and contributions to the social projects visited, but not 
international flights

Getting there
Flights were provided by Netflights (0844 692 6792, netflights.com 
<http://www.netflights.com>), which has return flights to from London to Buenos 
Aires with KLM from £699

Further information
Rail Travel Grand Central (0844 811 0071 grandcentralrail.com 
<http://www.grandcentralrail.com/>) provided transport between York and London. 
Advance tickets from £13.60
 