
The battle for the Christmas number one spot is usually contrived nonsense, 
but this time it might just be saying something worth hearing. Following 
tradition, the bookmakers assumed thewinner of this year's X Factor, Little Mix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/dec/20/x-factor-final-royal-wedding>, 
would come out on top. But that hastily assembled quartetappears to have been 
overtaken 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2076362/Christmas-number-2011-Military-Wives-fastest-selling-single-6-years.html>
 by a girl group of a rather different kind: a choir of military wives, praying 
in song for the safety of their husbands serving in Afghanistan.

We've been told endlessly how shallow and materialistic, trivial and 
celebrity-obsessed, our society has become. It's another source of gloom, along 
with everything else life has thrown at us this year: earthquakes, war and 
scandal – all under a darkening sky of economic crisis. But this is the season 
when we try to focus on the twinkling lights amid the darkness, the causes for 
optimism, among them some small signs that our culture does not only elevate 
consumerism, cheap fame and a lust for riches, but other values too. And those 
signs can be found in the unlikeliest places, including the heart of crassness 
itself – reality television.

For the military wives whose record is selling so fast are themselves a 
product of reality TV, the BBC seriesThe Choir 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b008y125>. The programme could not be more 
different from The X Factor. It is slow and gentle in style, but that's not the 
key difference to be celebrated.

Now I don't want to get all Ed Balls-Antiques Roadshow 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/labour/8905437/Ed-Balls-admits-Antiques-Roadshow-makes-me-cry.html>
 on you, but I defy any sentient creature to remain dry-eyed watching 
choirmaster Gareth Malone transform a few dozen women on a Devon military base 
into a group able to sing together in beautiful harmony. There are lots of 
obvious pushes towards the box of Kleenex: the sense of lost time, lives put on 
hold as women and children wait for husbands and fathers to return, the wife 
anxious that the next knock on the door might bring fatal news, the child who 
knows his dad has been gone for exactly 193 days.

But that is not the only or even chief reason why the programme touches an 
emotional raw spot. Instead, it is the change Malone brings to the women's 
lives. When he arrived at the Royal Marine Barracks in Chivenor, most of the 
partners of the men who were about to be sent to Afghanistan hardly knew each 
other. "You make acquaintances, not friends," said one, admitting that she had 
never so much as met the wife of her husband's commanding officer, even though 
they lived so near each other. The impression was of a collection of 
individuals, each going through her own private hell, communication between 
them only possible when they had all got sufficiently drunk to do a turn of 
karaoke.

But the months of rehearsal together turned them into something else. They 
started meeting at each other's houses, having informal rehearsals. They became 
bound together by the shared pressure to perform, whether at the local town or, 
eventually, at the homecoming ceremony for their returning men. "We feel like 
sisters now, helping each other out," reported one. UnlikeThe X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> or its imitators, The 
Choir is not a competition: the only prize is a sense of camaraderie and 
communal connectedness, a prize everybody wins.

At one point Malone auditions the women looking for a soloist, but the process 
comes without the cruelty and mockery that is the staple of those early X 
Factor rounds. The choirmaster never tells anyone they cannot sing. The result 
is not just a sense of solidarity that was previously missing but a boost to 
individual self-esteem. One woman after another tells their young instructor 
that they have found a confidence through singing that they had lacked before – 
that at last they had done something in which they could take pride.

This was not peculiar to the military wives. In an earlier programme, Malone 
pitched his music stand and electric keyboard in the rather desolate 
Hertfordshire town ofSouth Oxhey <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_Oxhey>. 
Casting children, he gave a solo to a young girl with special needs who visibly 
blossomed in the sunlight of the choirmaster's faith in her. Among the adults, 
he chose as soloist a black woman who had often felt on the margins of the 
mainly white town. He took a gaggle of young men, who previously thought they 
could do nothing with aplomb except drink, and turned them into a tenor 
section. There, as on the military base, he took what were fractured groups and 
turned them into a community – and gave them a voice.

Naturally, some will be cynical. They will suspect that the programmes are 
manipulated. They are, of course, edited for maximum tear-jerking effect, 
highlighting the most touching stories and the most dramatic "journeys". That's 
television. Others will say that Malone himself has done pretty well out of all 
this, that he has a hit format on TV and a Christmas No 1 and that he is, 
therefore, little more than an upmarket Simon Cowell, albeit one catering for 
the Ocado rather than Iceland demographic.

I would strongly dispute that. Malone's earnest belief in music and its power 
to transform, his patience with volunteers who have never sung a note, and 
their clear, expressed gratitude to him for changing their lives, is impossible 
to fake. More impressive still, it emerges that after the earlier programme was 
made, when most TV presenters would have been itching to move on to the next 
project, Malone stayed on as choirmaster in South Oxhey for another 18 unfilmed 
months.

In among the rough of reality TV and the like, it's good to know there are 
diamonds like Malone – but he's not the only one. I won't pretend he's a 
personal favourite, but Gok Wan with his how-to-dress shows is in a similar 
business, taking women who have lost all self-belief and pushing them to see 
themselves in a new, more generous light. There are no withering one-liners, no 
pantomime villain judges, no losers – and no prize but an injection of 
confidence.

The pioneer of this sub-genre of reality TV, aimed at lifting up rather than 
putting down, may well have been Jamie Oliver. The Jamie's Kitchen series in 
2002 followed the chef as he trained 15 disadvantaged young people, with the 
lure of a job in his new restaurant. While Gordon Ramsay made his name swearing 
into the face of those who had not come up to scratch, Oliver would be seen 
with head in hands, willing his young charges to do better. He followed it with 
similar ventures, persuading both school drop-outs and school dinner ladies 
that they could raise their sights.

It would be cheery to see a trend here, with Malone's chart victory over 
Cowell presaging an era in which nice prevails over nasty, when the joy of 
collective solidarity edges out the cult of the narcissistic individual. Such a 
trend might even be a function of the age of austerity: after all, when there's 
so much real pain all around, who wants to see fake malice on TV?

But even if it reveals no such wider phenomenon, the military wives – freed at 
last to express through music the pain and yearning they had long held within – 
and their success, along with the man who made it possible, are something to 
celebrate. And in these straitened times, we need all the causes for 
celebration we can find.
 