
Having last week made a cycling tour through the North of England (writes a 
correspondent), I can confirm the testimony from various quarters that, with 
the present decay of motoring, the “push-bicycle” has temporarily returned to 
its own. The road hog is almost extinct; the big touring car is going, so is 
the fussy, noisy little two-seater, while the motor-bicycle with sidecar is all 
but gone. Starting from Leeds on Monday, July 24, and going north by way of 
Northallerton, Darlington, Newcastle, and Morpeth to Wooler, then coming 
westward through the Yetholmes, and south again to Liverpool by way of Hawick, 
Carlisle, Lancaster, and Ormskirk, I reckoned I encountered a motor every 
twenty miles. Three years ago the average was nearer a motor for every mile, 
and by the term “motor” I indicate anything from a Rolls-Royce to a 
motor-bicycle. It is now possible for the weary cyclist to push uphill, taking 
the whole width of the road in his meanderings, without being irritated from 
the rear by the snappy snort of a car while he is smothered at the front by a 
plunging motor-bicycle.

Three years ago the “push bicycle” had become a mere hack, mostly a 
countryman’s hack. To-day it is once more a touring vehicle. In 1913 (adds our 
correspondent), on practically the same run, my companion and I encountered 
only two other cycle tourists – and they were Germans! This year I saw about a 
dozen to twenty cyclists, whose bronzed faces and heavy packs showed that they 
were out for more than a day. With the restoration of our highways and byways 
to civilisation, the old “tandem” for man and wife has awakened from its sleep; 
while children, “flappers,” and timid-looking ladies are once more to be seen 
on their “wheels” as they were about a decade ago, there being little to scare 
them. But all this is only for the duration of the war, unless road reform 
includes, as it might, special tracks for bicycles like those that run along 
many roads in Germany and some other Continental countries.

 