
In September last year, David Cameron wrote to the leader of Oxfordshire 
county council expressing concern at cuts to services being proposed to cope 
with a reduction in its funding. It was a bizarre intervention, in which the 
then prime minister appeared oblivious to the impact of the 40% cut his 
government made to local government funding on local services.

Last week’s local government finance settlement continues this miserable 
charade. Like her predecessor, Theresa Maydeploys the rhetoric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/20/theresa-may-confirms-commitment-northern-powerhouse-george-osborne>
 of giving power away. But the reality is different: councils’ powers over the 
provision of local education have been steadily eroded, while it is has been 
the painful decision about what to cut that has been cheerfully devolved 
downwards.

Core government funding to councils will be sliced by a further 28% this year 
and 30% next year. The public accounts committee today warns devolution should 
not be used as an excuse for Whitehall to “wash [its] hands” of the need to 
sustain decent local services.

These cuts have manifested themselves very differently in different parts of 
the country. Councils rely on a mixture of central government grants and 
revenue raised locally through business rates and council tax. Central 
government has historically used grants to redistribute funding from richer to 
poorer areas, which can raise much less through local taxation.

Poorer councils therefore rely much more heavily on the government grants that 
have been mercilessly slashed. As a result, they have had to cut local services 
by up to nine times as much as more affluent areas in the last seven years. 
Salford, South Tyneside and Oldham have cut spending on local services by 45%, 
44% and 42% respectively,according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8780>; Surrey and Hampshire just 6% and 
5%. Out of this emerges a two-tier state, in which leafy shires are able to 
maintain a decent level of service provision, while the poorest councils are 
forced to massively scale back.

Councils are responsible for maintaining the safety net of last resort for 
older people, vulnerable children and the homeless. Yet it is in the poorest 
areas with the greatest need that this safety net is being frayed the most. The 
impact on social care is at last getting attention:fewer older people are now 
getting support, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/10/care-for-elderly-crisis-how-to-improve-quality-of-life>
 despite rising levels of need. The same story is playing out in services for 
vulnerable children – shockingly, just a quarter of council children’s services 
are now rated as good or outstanding – and the homeless, with many cities 
experiencing huge rises in thenumbers of rough sleepers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/12/birmingham-council-chief-years-of-cuts-could-have-catastrophic-consequences>
.

Councils are also responsible for providing the services that make up our 
municipal fabric: libraries and leisure centres, youth services, bus services, 
parks and bin collection. In worst-hit areas, these have been completely pared 
back. More than half of councils have had to sell off or transfer ownership of 
green spaces and many are being forced to sell listed municipal buildings such 
as town halls and libraries.

This gap between poorer and richer areas is set to get even worse. The 
government is due to phase out core grant funding for councils altogether by 
2020, leaving councils to rely more than ever on local tax revenues. Ministers 
have claimed this is to give councils greater incentive to boost local economic 
growth. But how will this work in areas such as Tyneside or Oldham, which have 
already been forced to slash spending on local services and infrastructure, and 
so are at a huge competitive disadvantage when trying to attract new businesses?

The government has said there will continue to be some form of redistribution 
in this new system. But there is a warning signal in the approach it has taken 
to social care funding: allowing councils to raise council tax to go some way 
to filling the funding gap leaves the biggest gaps in the poorest areas. It is 
hardly a sign of a government that cares about our emerging two-tier state, in 
which those who live in Salford have a radically different level of service 
provision compared to those who live in Surrey.

We are heading for a world in which the affluent will enjoy the libraries, 
care services and green spaces that will be simply unavailable to those who 
live in the poorest parts of the country.
 