
In a sense, it was surprising that 2016 was the year in which the social 
threat posed by rapid technological progress became a topic of serious and 
widespread discussion. It was, after all, the first year since 2007 when all of 
the world’s advanced economies managed to grow and in which unemployment rates 
fell across the rich world.

Yet those bright spots could not distract from other worries. Pay rises remain 
elusive for many workers, despite economic growth. Each day seems to bring new 
evidence of the massive economic disruption to come: from self-driving vehicles 
deployed byTesla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/20/tesla-releases-video-of-fully-autonomous-model-x-electric-car>
 andUber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-defies-california-self-driving-cars-san-francisco>
 to experimentation withcashier-less shops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/amazon-go-store-seattle-checkouts-account>
 by Amazon.

But the biggest warning signs that something in society has gone awry were the 
political shocks ofBrexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> 
andDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-barack-obama-white-house-us-election-live-updates>
. These votes seemed to reflect not just a resentment at the elites who have 
captured most of the gains from recent economic growth, but also the dawning 
realisation that the economic and social marginalisation of whole classes of 
people might, thanks to technological change, become a permanent feature of the 
landscape.

The Digital Revolution has been growing in its transformative influence for 
decades, in the process undermining the economic power and indeed the very 
purpose of much of the workforce. Technology has allowed companies to move jobs 
to countries where wages and labour rules are more favourable, to automate away 
jobs altogether or to change the structure of markets in ways that reduce 
labourers’ autonomy and power.

As workers’ economic circumstances change, they have little choice but to try 
to get by – to compete against machines and against other similarly vulnerable 
workers – in an attempt to maintain a tenuous grip on the employment ladder. 
The intensity of this competition has held down wages. Stagnant rates of pay 
have in turn hobbled the economy, by making it harder for governments to manage 
the business cycle and by reducing the incentive within firms to invest in 
labour-saving, productivity-enhancing equipment.

Now we have begun to see how this stress translates into political conflict. 
It is increasingly clear to economists and technocratically minded politicians 
that economic growth alone is not nearly enough to satisfy the median voter. 
People also want secure, meaningful, well-compensated work. What is in doubt is 
whether the digital economy is capable of providing such jobs.

Hopes that tech startups might create new categories of good, mass employment 
for workers without university degrees have been dashed. Optimism that the gig 
economy might provide enough satisfying work to fill the gaps created by the 
disruption of the traditional economy has also met with disappointment.

It is increasingly apparent that a better world of work is not going to appear 
without a big helping hand from government policy. Shocking electoral results 
are the first evidence that political systems built for a different era are 
cracking under the demands of the digital economy.

In a world in which technology makes employment more precarious and less 
remunerative for many workers, redistribution will need to become much more 
generous and ubiquitous. But building a social consensus around that view, and 
building the political movement to bring it into being, is the work of 
generations. Meanwhile, the prospect of much greater redistribution can 
exacerbate tensions between different groups within society; those already of a 
mind to be suspicious of outsiders are anything but pleased at the possibility 
that more public money will flow to those unlike themselves.

Other market interventions – such as a more creative approach to education and 
training, a more ambitious response toregional inequities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/30/north-of-england-economy-review-radical-change-wealth-gap>
, or even efforts to provide work directly through public works projects – 
could help. Yet existing political parties and leaders appear to be unable to 
move forward on measures anywhere close in scale to what seems to be necessary.

And so different sorts of radicalism have flourished: the radicalism of 
opposition to economic liberalism, the radicalism of nationalism and the 
radicalism of mistrust in basic democratic institutions. History tells us that 
this is what we ought to expect in times of dramatic technological change. The 
Industrial Revolution fundamentally altered the role of the individual worker 
in society. That, in turn, led to decades of social and political mobilisation 
and conflict, which had to be sorted through before the world could enjoy a 
peace and prosperity built on those industrial technologies.

Here we are again. The Digital Revolution is only going to continue to change 
the economy and to cause it to work in ways quite different to what we had 
become accustomed. If, in the next decade or two, driverless cars become common 
on our city streets and the grab-and-go retail model of Amazon Go takes over 
our shopping centres, those two changes alone will put millions of jobs at 
risk, jobs typically filled by people without much education or training.

Even as those changes are occurring, machines are becoming ever better at 
understanding human speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/amazon-echo-voice-controlled-speaker-alexa-assistant-uk>
and atperforming human sorts of reasoning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/15/googles-alphago-seals-4-1-victory-over-grandmaster-lee-sedol>
. They will find applications across the economy and fill roles now occupied by 
people of all backgrounds and skill levels.

If workers are going to thrive in this world, we will have to change the 
definition of work, change the way we think about preparing people to work and 
change the level and type of support people can expect to receive from society. 
There is no resolving these issues except through the political system. 
Resolving them through the political system means the emergence of new 
political movements that must then battle over the merits of their particular 
proposals and that must fight to obtain the leverage to implement their 
particular vision for society.

It may be that 2016 was the year when we realised that our existing political 
institutions are not built to handle this kind of radical change. Next year 
will bringmore opportunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/08/marine-le-pen-says-no-free-education-for-children-of-illegal-immigrants>
 for people to express their discontent with the status quo and perhaps to 
continue the work of dismantling it. This process is taking on a momentum of 
its own and it is beginning to dawn that the process of adapting to economic 
change will be both protracted and very messy.

Perhaps 2017 will be the year when we realise, to our horror, that the social 
battles and geopolitics that roiled the world in the 19th and early 20th 
century have not in fact been banished forever. But perhaps it will also be the 
year when we discover that inaction and complacency are poor responses to these 
challenges and in which those determined to realise the potential of new 
technologies to make people’s lives better get their act together and start to 
fight.

Ryan Avent is senior editor and economics columnist at the Economist and 
author ofThe Wealth of Humans: Work and its Absence in the Twenty-First Century
 