
Howard J Curtis of Liverpool asks why the shale gas and oil under the South 
Downs national park is not being exploited (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/16/in-their-clamour-for-shale-gas-ministers-forgot-the-climate-agreement>
, 17 October). He needs to check his facts. Oil is being extracted from under 
the South Downs (in Lidsey, Markwells Wood, Singleton and Storrington, for 
example), there are applications for four wells, including horizontal drilling 
at Markwells Wood, and there is a site at Broadford Bridge that was prepared by 
one company, and which is now on the action list by another to bring in a 
drill. The issues haven’t gone away from Balcombe either.

And I do object to such activity taking place, not only here in West Sussex 
but also elsewhere, including Lancashire and North Yorkshire, when the climate 
change issues need to be addressed, and quickly.

Why are we going after the most difficult fossil fuels to obtain, when they 
need to stay in the ground and when the economic return on investment is so 
low? When drills leak and materials can contaminate water supplies? When the 
Weald area has so many faults that chemicals can easily move towards streams, 
and when there are no facilities in the south (unlike the five in the north) to 
deal with the issues of waste water involving large amounts of contaminated 
materials that cannot be dealt with by sewage treatment works.

A workshop held in the US last November to look at fracking, and attended by 
some 50 of the top US and UK scientists, found more than 140 questions that 
needed to be answered.
Dr Jill Sutcliffe
Wisborough Green, West Sussex

• The South Downs has several small oilfields, including Singleton, in the 
middle of the national park, quietly producing oil. While natural gas was used 
to light Heathfield, East Sussex, after it was discovered in water wells in 
1896, an initialassessment by the British Geological Survey 
<http://www.bgs.ac.uk/research/energy/shaleGas/> suggests the Weald has only 
limited potential for shale oil. The Jurassic clays contain around 4.4 billion 
barrels of oil, compared with 37.6 trillion cubic metres of shale gas, which 
may be trapped within theBowland shales 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/bowland-shale-gas-study>, 
equivalent to 2,210 billion barrels of oil.

Though only a small fraction of this can ever be recovered, it is simply 
selfish to continue importing hydrocarbons from laxly regulated countries, 
which are left to suffer from the resulting pollution. What worries me most in 
the planning applications is the absence of detailed geological mapping – even 
when at Wisborough Green in West Sussex 1:10,560 maps existed to help to assess 
the surface impact of such sites.

Even if we cut back drastically on consumption, we cannot afford to reject 
cleaner forms of transitional carbon technologies, including coalbed methane 
and carbon capture. Given that the UK has a dire balance of payments, these 
savings are needed to pay for the alternative energy we desperately need.
David Nowell
Fellow of the Geological Society

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 