
I have been trying – so far, I confess, without success – to discover who 
minted the phrase “political honeymoon”. It is a strange expression: marriage 
is rarely an appropriate metaphor for a country’s relationship with its leader. 
It describes an odd quirk of electorates. The public tell pollsters that they 
are most enthusiastically in favour of a leader in his or her opening period in 
office, precisely the time when voters know least about the person who has just 
taken charge.

Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is benefiting 
from this irrational phenomenon and enjoying much higher approval ratings than 
those of David Cameron during his final chapter at Number 10. The British are 
often held to be a cynical bunch, but this country usually awards some sort of 
honeymoon to a new prime minister. John Major had one when he succeeded 
Margaret Thatcher and pulled off the clever trick of making the country think 
that they’d got a new government as well as a new leader. Tony Blair had a long 
and even intense one after he won his first election in 1997. Hard though it 
may be to recall now, Labour didn’t lose a seat at a byelection in his first 
six years at Number 10. At one point, his pollsters were telling him that Mr 
Blair had an approval rating of above 90%, the sort of numbers you would 
usually only expect for the leader of North Korea.

Gordon Brown had such a hot romance with the electorate when he first moved 
into Number 10 that he was tempted to call a snap general election. Then he got 
cold feet and that was the end of his honeymoon. David Cameron had a relatively 
long period of grace with the electorate after 2010, partly because a lot of 
the flak for unpopular decisions in the early years of the coalition was 
deflected on to the Lib Dems.

The honeymoon being enjoyed by Mrs May has some features specific to her 
personality and circumstances. Since she arrived at Number 10, she has combined 
the novelty of change with the reassurance of the familiar. She was a 
well-known, if not that well-understood, figure after a long stretch as home 
secretary. She looks the part as prime minister. After all the turbulence 
around the Brexit referendum and its aftermath, she has come across as a 
stabilising presence. At the same time, she is also something different, the 
first female prime minister in more than a quarter of a century and only the 
second woman at Number 10 in our history. The media, as is usually the case 
with a new prime minister, are being reasonably well-disposed towards her. In 
her honeymoon period, she can get a positive headline out of the admission that 
she doesn’t like the shape of her nose. The Tory press like her, at least for 
now. They never really warmed to her predecessor; the rightwing tabloids hated 
Mr Cameron for the Leveson inquiry and they then went to war against him over 
Europe. The leftish media are still calibrating their gunsights or too 
preoccupied with the self-immolation of the Labour party to be concentrating on 
Mrs May.

Defining yourself against your predecessor, even when they were of the same 
party, is one of the oldest tricks played by new prime ministers. John Major 
extracted a lot of mileage out of not being Margaret Thatcher. Gordon Brown did 
well for a short while by not being Tony Blair. Mrs May has scored some quick, 
easy hits by striking contrasts with Mr Cameron. She has – at least in words, 
we will see about the reality – junked the austerity agenda. She has talked 
some one-nation language about social reform. Many of her statements since she 
moved into Number 10 have been implicit, and sometimes explicit, rebukes of the 
Cameron government for being too posh, too privileged, too metropolitan and too 
obsessed with what she likes to disparage as “political games”. Her people 
often refer to the Cameron cabinet as “the previous regime” as if it was a 
government of a different party and conveniently forgetting that Mrs May sat in 
that cabinet for six years.

Nick Clegg’s forthcoming memoir  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/03/nick-clegg-did-not-cater-tories-brazen-ruthlessness>
is not friendly – he accuses her of misrepresenting immigration statistics – 
but the more wounding revelations are probably those at the expense of David 
Cameron and George Osborne. The former deputy prime minister gives an example 
of their games-playing when he reports that they weren’t interested in building 
more social housing on the grounds that it “just creates Labour voters”. Mrs 
May has also been helped because the vote to leave the European Union has not 
had the immediately traumatic economic consequences that some forecast. This 
doesn’t tell us anything about the long-term impact, but it has been a 
short-term fillip for the government. The bounce on the stock market has been 
accompanied by a rally in the Tory party’s poll rating, which currently hovers 
around the 40 point mark, an improvement on their vote share in the 2015 
election. Then there is the competition – or lack of it. Having achieved what 
it existed to get, Ukip is trying to work out its continuing, post-Farage 
point. The Lib Dems struggle to get their voice heard. Labour is going through 
its own special kind of existential hell. No wonder some of Mrs May’s senior 
colleagues are bewildered that she has ruled out an early election to 
capitalise on all these advantages while she still has them.

For when parliament returns this week it will be a reminder that her 
structural position is weak. TheConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> have a working majority of 
just 17, which is smaller than the number of people she sacked from the 
government when she culled the Camborne circle. If there was a common 
denominator to her purge, it was that the sacked were allies of the previous 
prime minister or friends of the former chancellor. The dispossessed may have 
lost their ministries, but they are still MPs. They will bide their time and 
nurture their wrath, waiting to unleash it when Mrs May starts to trip and 
fumble.

She has so far defined herself more in words than deeds. Mrs May is a 
relatively blank canvas on which Tories of different persuasions can paint 
their hopes, their dreams and their fantasies. Trouble will start when she 
starts to put flesh on Mayism. We have had a couple of harbingers. One was the 
negative reaction to the decision to water down the government’s anti-obesity 
strategy. Another was the recent revelation that£3,150 will buy you into a 
“business day” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/01/lunch-with-theresa-may-thatll-will-be-3150>
 at the Tory conference, Mrs May’s presence included in the price of the 
ticket. People make the point, no less potent for being obvious, that offering 
companies the chance to purchase access to the prime minister sits badly with 
her rhetorical flourishes about being on the side of the many, not “the 
privileged few”.

Labour’s travails are a mixed blessing for the Conservatives. A weak 
opposition encourages two dangerous traits of the Tory beast: arrogance and 
ill-discipline. When I recently suggested to one of Mrs May’s cabinet that the 
implosion of the Labour party was not good news for the Tories over the longer 
term because it would foment their own divisions, he replied: “I regret to say 
that I think you are completely accurate.”

Mrs May has a thing about discipline. As home secretary, she was not famous 
for being either a delegator or a sharer of information with colleagues. This 
style is clearly being imported into her Number 10. She has told civil servants 
that she wants a more formal style of decision-making. Unlike her predecessor, 
she will not make the first announcement of a parliamentary vote on a military 
intervention via Twitter. Number 10 has issued an edict around Whitehall that 
all media bids for interviews with ministers, and on whatever topic, however 
significant or inconsequential, must now be cleared through Downing Street.

This will frustrate the broadcasters, who have all those hours of airtime to 
fill, and is already generating consternation, annoyance and resistance in 
departments. One minister, speaking to us without clearance from Number 10, 
describes this control order as “completely ridiculous”. Mrs May is not the 
first prime minister to try this and I suspect that, like others before her, 
she will discover that it is just not achievable for Number 10 to try to impose 
this level of domination. Some will put it down to control-freakery. Others 
will see it as an angry reaction to the cabinet leaks and spats about Brexit 
over August. A third explanation is nerves. Mrs May and the new team at Number 
10 sit atop a government with a slender majority, a cabinet with some extremely 
combustible egos and a party with deep divisions that cannot be long disguised 
by the meaningless mantra of “Brexit means Brexit”.

Mrs May has had just over 50 days in Number 10, during which she has done a 
deft job of obscuring her vulnerabilities by projecting herself as a fresh yet 
solid leader serenely stepping in to take charge. But she, more than anyone 
else, will understand how shaky is the ground beneath her feet, how uneasy lies 
the head that wears the crown. She’s also been around long enough to know that 
the one certain thing about honeymoons is that they come to an end.
 