
The government is being urged to clinch a transition arrangement for the City 
ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> during Brexit negotiations to 
assuage concerns of employers who are delaying business decisions because of 
the uncertainty created in the run up to the UK’s departure from the EU.

The City of London Corporation, the local authority that covers much of the 
financial district, urged Theresa May to arrange transition arrangements “as 
soon as possible”.

Mark Boleat, policy chair of the City of London Corporation, said: “Brexit has 
brought with it a significant amount of uncertainty for businesses in the 
services sector.

“Important strategic business decisions are being delayed and much needed 
investment postponed or withdrawn altogether. Firms’ nervousness can only be 
allayed if they know how they can continue running their business. A 
transitional arrangement should be agreed as soon as possible.”

There are suggestions that triggering article 50 in March – signalling the 
formal process of exiting the EU – could prompt firms to start implementing 
contingency plans to ensure they are able to continue conducting business while 
a Brexit deal is agreed.

Boleat said: “Theresa May’s government has the most complex and nationally 
important international negotiations since the end of second world war ahead of 
it, and for the good of British business and workers in Britain we must get 
this right.”

Despite his urge for clarity, Boleat added: “I have no doubt that whatever 
happens in 2017 that the City of London will remain the world’s leading 
financial centre. However we cannot be complacent and must continue investing 
in infrastructure and education while working to secure the best possible 
business links with the European Union and the world.”

The corporation has published data showing that financial and professional and 
financial services employ more than 2.2 million people across the UK, not just 
in the City.

Boleat did not outline the detail of what he thought a transition agreement 
should contain. He is not alone in calling for such a deal. Sam Woods deputy 
governor of the Bank of England,told MPs on the Treasury select committee 
earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/transitional-deal-would-reduce-brexits-risks-to-financial-stability-bank-of-england>
 that details of that arrangement would be needed within nine months of article 
50 being triggered. Woods told the MPs that firms could roll out their 
contingency plans in a few months.

Chancellor Philip Hammond has said the government would seek a transitional 
deal to help smooth the Brexit process in order to avoid disruption that could 
risk Britain’s “financial stability”.

The Lloyd’s of London insurance market is said to be preparing to open a 
subsidiary in another European country in preparation for Brexit and other City 
institutions are expected to follow suit.


The vote for Brexit is thought to be among the reasons that the UK arm of 
Santander has revised the way it intends to implement the ring fencing rules 
designed by Sir John Vickers.

Banks must comply with these requirements to separate the high street and 
investment banking arms by 2019. Nathan Bostock, chief executive of Santander 
UK, said: “The newly approved business model retains the majority of our 
operations within one ring-fenced bank, providing greater certainty for our 
customers and flexibility for the future.”
 