
Britain is suffering the worst air pollution episode since 1991 and thousands 
of elderly people and asthmatics are at risk over the weekend, the Department 
of Environment warned last night.

The high pressure of the past week has allowed traffic and power station 
pollutants to concentrate to dangerous levels - conditions which are expected 
to increase hospital admissions, and bring the premature deaths of hundreds of 
people suffering heart and lung problems.

Last time conditions were as bad, in December 1991, deaths rose 10% in London 
during four days.

Michael Meacher, the environment minister, appealed last night for people to 
use their cars as little as possible and when they did drive to avoid revving 
engines and causing unnecessary exhaust fumes.

Worst affected areas today are expected to be Northern Ireland, central 
Scotland, central England and London. Yesterday east Belfast and Derry were 
already in the "very high" category of air pollution for the number one killer 
particulates (PM10s) - the tiny aerosols from vehicle exhausts and power 
stations that inflame the lungs.

Northern Ireland is particularly vulnerable to air pollution because it has 
two large coal burning power stations which are surrounded by hills which 
naturally trap the fumes if there is no wind.

London had high levels of particulates yesterday from traffic, and all large 
urban areas are at risk today, the department warned.

The government has been gradually reducing air pollution by measures to 
encourage cleaner engines and the fitting of particulate traps to commercial 
vehicles. Clean diesel is also reducing the danger.

However, government scientists estimate that despite these measures, 10,000 
deaths are brought forward each year in Britain by air pollution, because the 
peaks in death rates coincide with higher air pollution. The Europe-wide figure 
is 40,000.

Advice to vulnerable people is to stay indoors whenever possible. Joggers and 
outdoor sports enthusiasts are also advised to cut down on activity.

Mr Meacher said: "The prolonged cold, still weather has caused pollution 
levels to rise throughout the week. I have therefore taken the precautionary 
step of making sure vulnerable people, such as those with heart and lung 
disease, are aware and can take appropriate measures to reduce their exposure."

He said people with asthma and others affected might need to consider 
modifying their treatment, and consulting their doctor as necessary.

The weather is expected to change tomorrow, when a spell of wet and windy 
conditions should clear the air.
 