
Three people in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> have died after 
overdosing on a “bad batch” of MDMA, a court has heard.

Police said 20 people were taken to hospital on Friday and Saturday after 
buying the drug in Chapel Street nightclubs on Friday night.

At a court hearing for a man charged with selling MDMA capsules, a police 
prosecutor said that three of the people who had overdosed, including a 
30-year-old Elwood man, had since died.

Five of the reported overdoses occurred at Revolver Upstairs nightclub on 
Chapel Street.

Sebastien Verger-Giambelluco, a 30-year-old French national, was charged with 
selling MDMA at the club, and police say they believe drugs allegedly found in 
his possession were of a “toxic quality”.


However defence lawyer Will Collins-Putland said the drugs had not yet been 
tested.

Magistrate Andrew Capell said evidence that Verger-Giambelluco sold drugs that 
“may have affected or caused overdoses” was “tenuous at best”.

He added: “[But] you don’t know what you’re selling and the harm that can 
create is enormous to the community.”

The president of the Australian Drug Law Reform Foundation, Dr Alex Wodak, 
said having three fatal overdoses in one weekend was a “tragedy” and 
strengthened the case for pill testing, which he said could potentially prevent 
future overdoses.

At the moment, Wodak said, there was no commercial pressure on drug dealers to 
ensure their products were safe.

“But if we had testing and 10% of drug dealer A’s supply was getting rejected 
at the drug testing counter, then word would get around,” he said.

Wodak said giving people an amnesty to test illicit drugs would not reduce 
drug taking, but it would reduce the risk of ingesting a bad pill.

According to the 2016 report of the ecstasy and related drugs reporting system 
<https://ndarc.med.unsw.edu.au/project/ecstasy-and-related-drugs-reporting-system-edrs>
, one in four ecstasy users take the drug weekly, and 44% take it in nightclubs.

The report said ecstasy or MDMA was more readily available and more widely 
used than it was six years ago, and also warned that a third of ecstasy users 
had tried it in crystal form, which is more potent and carried a greater risk 
of overdose.

Prof Alison Ritter, the deputy director of the National Drug and Alcohol 
Research Centre, which produced the report, said a lack of public information 
about the content of specific pills meant drug users could not make informed 
choices.

However she said there was little appetite among governments to introduce a 
pill-testing program in Australia, because of the perception that it would 
encourage illegal drug-taking.


It was similar to the argument that preceded needle exchange trials, Ritter 
said.

“The concern is putting out this type of information says that using other 
forms of ecstasy would therefore be safe,” she said. “That would be a little 
bit disrespectful to people who use illicit drugs - I don’t think they are that 
stupid.”

Detective Senior Sergeant David Newman said police believed the overdoses were 
all linked to the same “bad batch” of the drug and urged people who might have 
had an adverse reaction to contact emergency services immediately.

“There is no reason to hesitate if someone you’re with has taken drugs and 
starts to have an adverse reaction,”Newman said 
<https://www.vicpolicenews.com.au/news/police-investigate-concerning-drug-incidents-chapel-street-precinct>
. “You might be worried to call triple zero because you think you’re going to 
get in trouble, however any delay could mean the difference between life and 
death.

“It’s important that people look out for their mates and, if they have taken 
something and things go wrong, that you seek medical treatment immediately.”

Newman told the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-15/20-hospitalised-after-bad-batch-of-drugs-hits-chapel-street/8183854>
 it was possible the batch of drugs had already been distributed around 
Melbourne and could be sold at other night spots.

“As we know, this sort of drug, when we get a batch like this, it comes 
through the tentacles of the drug-dealing world [and] they aren’t going to be 
confined to one area, they’re going to spread out and we don’t really know 
where it’s going to become evident next,” he said.

With Australian Associated Press
 