
After years of economic uncertainty and falling living standards, the 2015 
election will have a defensive feel to it. The electorate will want 
reassurance, not big change. Whoever ends up in government will be pursuing 
small "c" conservative ends: stability and security.

The 2010 general election was not a cautious one. The banking crisis required 
national renewal and David Cameron, in optimistic mode, issued a manifesto 
invitation for the public to "join the government of Britain". All three 
parties promised "revolutions" in green technology.

But 2015 will hear of no revolutions, and little of what Sarah Palin called 
the "hopey changey thing". The winner will be whoever offers the best parenting 
for a fragile and unbalanced economy.

So what might an environmental agenda for stability look like? First, it would 
find ways of supporting those struggling with the rising cost of living. 
Nothing is as destabilising as rising inequality. Finding common cause with the 
fuel and resource-poor requires a different approach, as pioneered by theEnergy 
Bill Revolution <http://www.energybillrevolution.org/index.php>, which has 
corralled hundreds of NGOs behind its campaign to eradicate fuel poverty.

Second, an environmental agenda would focus on making Britain more resilient. 
It would target infrastructure, which appears to collapse every winter, and the 
economy, which is currently driven by volatile consumption rather than steady 
investment. And it would address the stagnation of large parts of the country 
outside the south-east.

Finally, it has to protect the everyday urban and suburban places that people 
love, as well as the best rural habitats, as these are the environments that 
most of us inhabit and cherish.

Three ways to reassure voters

Cost of living

Politicians haven't been straight with the public about how vulnerable the UK 
is to international commodity markets and rising global resource prices have 
played a big role in falling living standards.Green Alliance's analysis 
<http://www.green-alliance.org.uk/.../Green_affordable_Pol_Ins_singles.pdf%E2%80%8E>
 (pdf) shows that real wages could have actually risen over the past decade 
without the extra inflation caused by faster rises in international energy and 
food prices. The great resource price shock means that the average British 
household has paid an extra £1,000 a year for food and energy.

Global trade may help to smooth the upward price curve, but only resource 
stewardship can help to bring it down if global demand keeps on rising. We must 
support homes and businesses to conserve more energy, help farmers sell the 40% 
of food supermarkets reject on cosmetic grounds, and keep the £3.5bn of 
materials thrown away every year out of landfill. A coherent resource 
stewardship programme could start by encouraging councils to become resource 
entrepreneurs, recovering more of the waste we throw away and reinvesting the 
income generated into reducing household energy bills.

Economic resilience

All parties are committed to multibillion pound capital expenditure on 
infrastructure, but new runways and the dualling of more A roads will make the 
UK less resilient to increasing energy prices or efforts to rebalance the 
economy.

Obama's 'fix it first' approach in the US (fill potholes, make the railways 
more robust, refurbish old leaky homes and strengthen flood defences) gives a 
much greater return on investment than new infrastructure, and could benefit 
all parts of the UK.

Another approach would be to invest in smart systems that make our 
infrastructure more efficient.

London's smart-ticketing system should be rolled out to our eight core cities. 
Microchips that allow electrical products to turn off at periods of high demand 
could be interconnected with the not-yet-smart meters that we are about to have 
installed in our homes. Negawatt (energy saving) incentives for business and 
homes could be scaled up to reduce demand on power stations.

Every government loves to champion some big kit because they want to be seen 
as visionary. They often struggle to deliver large-scale low-carbon 
infrastructure because it requires them to commit unequivocally to the long 
term. But low carbon already makes up the biggest chunk of the Treasury's 
pipeline of planned infrastructure projects. These clean energy projects are 
largely going to be delivered by the private sector and could stimulate the 
growth of new industry outside London. The electoral benefits are considerable.

If the next government is really serious about infrastructure it should hand 
over its capital spend to the green investment bank, which has already proven 
it can work with the private sector, and thus avoid jeopardising the programme 
through ministerial interference.

Beauty

Because of the sense that all of Britain land is up for grabs, the first party 
to identify a non-negotiable area of beauty will stand out. As Oliver Letwin 
wrote in his essay Why beauty matters in 2007, "a life amid ugliness is one of 
the most important forms of deprivation and the search for beauty is one of the 
great motivations of the human spirit."

Any party that promises some real protection for village greens and beautiful 
views will win plaudits.

The next government will reflect the public's mood by being cautious in its 
ends, but it could deliver greater stability and wellbeing through muscular 
green means. It's time to develop positive proposals for protective government, 
whoever that turns out to be.

• Matthew Spencer is director of the thinktank Green Alliance
 