
Having arrived to the office late, today's Rumours grabbed a sheaf of 
newspapers, glanced frantically across the front pages in a desperate search 
for an entertaining hook on which to hang today's football speculation, then 
settled for the following instead.

If single-sex schools are not the answer, as "street-smart twentysomething 
features writer and columnist" Bryony Gordon (speciality: the irritations, 
absurdities and occasional epiphanies of modern life) opines in today's 
Telegraph, then what is the question?

Well, it could be any number of the following multiple choice teasers, as long 
as that number is 14.

Question: What two letters link a unit of Avoirdupois weight equivalent to 
437.5 grains witha magazine indicted in 1971 on charges including "conspiracy 
to corrupt the morals of liege subjects of Her Majesty the Queen by raising in 
their minds inordinate and lustful desires"?
(a) Single-sex schools
(b) OZ

Question: Which Sevilla striker with a year left on his contract, whose 
previous clubs include Tottenham Hotspur and West Ham, has claimed that several 
Premier League clubs are queueing up to sign him?
(a) Single-sex schools
(b) Frédéric Kanoute

Is this the Road To Amarillo?
(a) No
(b) Single-sex schools

Question: To which Dutch club is Blackburn defender Andre Ooijer returning at 
the end of the season on a free transfer when his contract expires in the 
summer?
(a) PSV Eindhoven
(b) Single-sex schools

What percentage of a chimpanzees DNA is identical to that of humans?
(a) Single-sex schools
(b) 98%

Question: Which much-maligned defender's marvellous play are Wigan Athletic 
reward with a contract extension and a pay rise?
(a) Titus Bramble
(b) Single-sex schools

Which of the following is not a famous Slade No1?
(a) Single-sex schools
(b) Cum On Feel The Noize

Why have Stoke City got the edge on West Brom and Reading in the race to sign 
Bristol City's 22-year-old midfielderCole Skuse?
(a) Single-sex schools
(b) Skuse is a Stoke City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> fan

In what part of London would you find Electric Avenue and Coldharbour Lane?
(a) Single-sex schools
(b) Brixton

Why is Newcastle defender Sebastien Bassong stalling on signing a new and 
improved deal at St James' Park, saying "Newcastle want me to sign a new 
contract extension but nothing has been agreed. It's down to me to weigh up the 
pros and the cons. I'll take time to make up my mind"?
(a) Single-sex schools.
(b) Arsenal are interested in buying him
(c) Wouldn't you be?

What horse won the 1990 Grand National, breaking the course record in the 
process?
(a) Single-sex schools
(b) Mr Frisk

Why are a safe-cracker, a get-away driver and a stick-up man from Sheffield 
dressed in blue-and-white striped replica shirts and stocking-masks currently 
sitting in a car parked outsideLincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> City's Sincil Bank stadium?
(a) They're plotting a £200,000 raid for midfielder Danny N'Guessan
(b) Single-sex schools.

Which miserly broadcasting icon, best known for presenting shows about Italian 
football on Channel 4, has just pulled up a chair beside today's Rumours after 
ambling into the office carrying a cardboard tray with only one cup of coffee 
on it?
(a) Single-sex schools
(b) James Richardson

Chelsea sporting director Frank Arnesen is planning to give a 15-year-old 
Czech goalkeeper, whose progress is also being monitored by AC Milan and 
Juventus, a trial at the end of the season. What is the boy's name?
(a) Jiry Kreck
(b) Single-sex schools

Heard any transfer speculation of your own? Feel free to post it beneath the 
green line. Don't worry if you think it's not worth publishing, it never stops 
us
 