
Millions of tonnes of contaminated waste are being illegally dumped across 
Britain - on golf courses, farms, beaches and in city centres - to avoid the 
new landfill tax, an investigation by the Guardian and the Channel 4 programme 
Dispatches reveals today.

The situation has become so bad that the environment agency now admits it has 
lost control of policing and monitoring one Britain's biggest environmental 
problems.

Illegal dumping is on such a huge scale that official figures from the 
Department of the Environment, which claim the landfill tax has led to a 10m 
tonne drop in officially buried waste, are being challenged by reputable waste 
companies.

The companies claim that illegal dumping operates on a massive scale, 
affecting almost every corner of the country.

Peter Jones, a director of Biffa, the waste arm of the Seven Trent water 
company, told the investigation: "I believe 3m tonnes of material which would 
otherwise have come to properly controlled and regulated landfill sites has 
been disposed of as land-raising material at golf courses, retail development 
parks, sports facilities and even private residential developments."

Companies are allowed by law to dump what are known as "inert materials" - 
earth and building rubble - on unregulated sites, provided they pose no health 
risk to humans or animals. Until recently, the environment agency, which is 
responsible for policing unregulated dumping, believed there were 14,000 such 
sites in the country. However, a report commissioned from Ecotech, an 
independent environmental consultancy, to be published this month, will reveal 
there are now 32,000 such sites - most of which are never checked - in England 
and Wales alone.

The environment agency admits it has neither the money, resources nor the 
expertise to ensure that all these sites comply with the law. The agency is 
only given money to inspect regulated sites - unregulated site inspections are 
funded from its limited budget.

"We do not have the money", a spokesman told the Guardian and Channel 4. 

Councils, which are responsible for giving consent for inert waste to be 
dumped, admit they are in a similar position.

Roger Hockney, the chair of the waste planning advisory group of the Planning 
Officers Society, said he had no national picture. "Our group has members 
representing only 20 different authorities - so there are about 300 other 
councils we have no information about. From the information we do have, it is 
clear that there is widespread dumping against the regulations."

Harold Collins, a planning officer for Cheshire county council, and a member 
of the group said: " Often the first indication of something going wrong is 
when a resident rings up to say a cricket pitch has risen 10 feet overnight."

Information gathered in Cheshire has revealed three golf courses - at 
Mollington, Capenhurst and Hankerlow - where illegal dumping has taken place. 
At Hankerlow 500,000 cubic metres of waste were dumped when planning permission 
was given for only 80,000 cubic metres.

Other golf courses where waste was dumped include the former municipal course 
in Sunderland; Hinksey Heights near Oxford and Waterstock in Oxfordshire. 
Altogether 30 golf courses are under investigation for illegal dumping.

A similar picture emerges of illegal dumping on farms. In Cornwall, 120 
suspected illegal sites are under environment agency investigation. In 
Hertfordshire, at Valley View farm, near South Oxhey the agency is planning to 
prosecute 240 hauliers after they discovered hospital and household waste had 
been dumped to a height of 40 feet. The county council tried to stop the 
dumping by blocking an access road - but the lorries smashed though a barrier 
to continue their work.

Enforcement is a big problem. Hertfordshire, which has pursued two illegal 
dumpers - at Bricket Wood, near St Albans and Valley View farm - says the 
penalties are too low to be effective. When enforcement orders are made they 
are often ignored until expensive court procedures have been exhaustively 
followed. On conviction, magistrates can fine people up to £20,000, but most 
fines are about £1,000, which is no deterrent.

Michael Meacher, the environment minister, was challenged on Dispatches to act 
on the problem - particularly the environment agency's inability to police 
dumps because of a lack of cash.

"Those who have the advantage of the exemption [from using regulated sites] 
certainly ought to pay the costs of the agency to ensure that a sufficient 
sample of sites can be properly inspected. That is one of the changes that we 
will look at very carefully," he said.

No moves are in hand to increase fines or use to customs and excise powers to 
pounce on firms that evade landfill tax.

Mr Jones from Biffa said: "There should be tougher fines for illegal dumpers. 
If firms have to lose a huge amount of their turnover for breaching the law, 
that would be a real deterrent to stop this - £1,000 fines mean nothing."

Dispatches: Dirty Money, Channel 4, 9pm tonight
 