
Sam Stosur battled into her fourth French Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/frenchopen> semi-final on Wednesday, beating 
102nd-ranked Bulgarian Tsvetana Pironkova in straight sets after a dramatic 
tiebreak turnaround.


 Pironkova, keeping Stosur on the move early on with powerful backhand 
groundstrokes to both wings while the number 21 seed’s signature forehand often 
misfired, came close to taking a grip on the match when she held three break 
points for a 5-2 lead in the first set.

Sam Stosur and coach David Taylor set to part ways after French Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/18/sam-stosur-and-coach-david-taylor-set-to-part-ways-after-french-open>
 But Stosur won the next five points to launch an impressive comeback and win 
the set 6-4. Referring to the key seventh game, the 32-year-old Australian 
said: “That was really big to get out of that.. I was able to get on a bit of a 
roll from that point on.”

 Stosur, who lost the 2010 Paris final to Italy’s Francesca Schiavone, also 
showed her greater experience in the second set. Pironkova again began well, 
breaking Stosur in the second game before taking a 3-1 lead and then tying the 
set at 5-5 with an ace.

 The Bulgarian looked to have done enough to take the match into a third set 
decider when she led 5-1 in the tiebreak, but Stosur chased down that deficit 
with a succession of deep but steady groundstrokes and saved two set points 
before winning the breaker 8-6.

 In all, Stosur converted four of six break points while her opponent made 
just three out of 13.

 “I was nervous. I did some silly mistakes here and there. She did some good 
rallies,” a rueful Pironkova said when reflecting on the final few points of 
the match, acknowledging that Stosur had a realistic chance of going one better 
than in 2010.

 “Sure. Why not? I don’t think age is a factor that much anymore. She looks 
fit, she’s playing well, she’s hitting well.”

 Before getting a shot at adding a second major title to her 2011 US Open win, 
Stosur faces a semi-final against Spanish fourth seed Garbine Muguruza, who 
ended the run of another player outside the top 100, 108th-ranked American 
Shelby Rogers.

 “It’s going to be a tough one against Garbine,” Stosur said. “I will have to 
play well, and if I’m not playing my best I will have to find a way and do 
something that’s going to hopefully put me in a position to do well.”
 