
The Lincoln <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> manager, Danny 
Cowley, hailed a “heroic” performance from his players after they were just 
four minutes away from knocking Ipswich out of the FA Cup in an entertaining 
2-2 draw.

Theo Robinson twice gave the Imps the lead as they threatened to create the 
biggest shock of the day. But Tom Lawrence scored two cracking equalisers, the 
second in the 86th minute, as Lincoln were forced to settle for a replay, which 
was the very least they deserved following a performance high on energy, 
passion and guile.

A proud Cowley said: “My players were heroic for me today, absolutely heroic. 
There was a tinge of disappointment at the end, but the overriding emotion in 
the dressing room is one of pride. We went toe-to-toe with a good, experienced 
Championship side and gave a very good account of ourselves.

“We wanted to give our supporters something to remember and for a National 
League club to have 5,000 supporters away from home says everything about them. 
If we can be half as good as our supporters, we will be a very good team.”

The Ipswich manager, Mick McCarthy, was again booed at the final whistle and 
said: “Tom Lawrence got us out of jail with that goal. I thought Lincoln were 
excellent and are probably feeling very unlucky.

“With so many Lincoln fans, it was a brilliant atmosphere and it is one we 
should have really embraced. The boos will stop if we get players to play well 
and win, or maybe they won’t. I don’t think we gave the best account of 
ourselves, but the positives for me is that we didn’t lose and we are still in 
the Cup.”

Despite the fact there were 57 places separating the two sides, Lincoln 
started like a team who had tasted defeat only once in 19 matches and after 
seven minutes they took a shock lead to send the away fans into ecstasy. 
Robinson played the ball out to Nathan Arnold and his devilish low cross was 
turned in by the onrushing striker from close range.

But within five minutes Ipswich were level after a fantastic run from 
Lawrence, which started just inside the Lincoln half and ended with him 
drilling a low shot beyond the legs of Paul Farman.

Ipswich went close just before the break when a powerful run forward by the 
right-back Josh Emmanuel teed up Andre Dozzell and the 17-year-old’s shot 
whistled past the far post, via a deflection off Lincoln’s captain, Luke 
Waterfall.

Lincoln almost restored their lead in the 56th minute when a precise through 
ball from Terry Hawkridge dissected the Town defence but Arnold’s route to goal 
was blocked by the onrushing Gerken.

The visitors were defying the difference in leagues although Freddie Sears 
almost scored a goal out of nothing when his snap-shot on the turn fizzed just 
wide.

At the other end, a dangerous cross-shot from Sam Habergham’s was well-held by 
Gerken before Lincoln regained the lead in the 65th minute. Farman’s long 
clearance was only diverted towards his own goal by the head of Christophe 
Berra and Robinson expertly volleyed the ball in as Gerken slipped when he came 
out.

It was no more than the visitors deserved and although Ipswich huffed and 
puffed they found it difficult to break down their lower league opponents.

Dozzell went close with seven minutes left when his header was parried away by 
Farman before Ipswich levelled again through Lawrence in the 86th minute. The 
Leicester loanee had time to turn 25 yards out and his low shot found the 
bottom corner beyond the despairing dive of Farman.

There was still time for Lawrence to almost grab his hat-trick after a neat 
one-two with Sears, before Alex Woodyard was set clear in the final minute but 
his path to goal was blocked brilliantly – and desperately – by a strong 
challenge from Emmanuel.
 