 Not since the knave's trial in Alice in Wonderland has the law been so 
manipulated. Barely a day goes by without some new anti-terror measure being 
mooted or an old one, such as treason, disinterred. If this was a black farce, 
the next step would be to rebuild the Tyburn gallows, subject to a human-rights 
waiver laid down in a ministerial postcard from abroad.
In a democracy famous for protecting liberties, the crackdown is all the 
weirder. Ten foreign nationals have now been jailed pending deportation and the 
Lord Chancellor is planning legislation to force judges to give the same weight 
to national security as to individuals' rights. Though the men have not been 
named, some, if not most, are said to be the usual suspects. Held in Belmarsh 
until the Law Lords declared their internment unlawful, this group was subject 
to the Home Secretary's bitterly fought control orders. Now they may be back at 
square one.

One, Abu Qatada, is an alleged henchman of Osama bin Laden. Prosecuting him 
under a panoply of existing laws should not be beyond a system that locks up 
12-year-olds for breaching Asbos. Most of the other former Belmarsh inmates 
were suspected of fund-raising for foreign struggles. The London tube was never 
in their sights, nor could it now be. One is a double amputee with psychiatric 
problems. Others are gravely mentally ill or suicidal.

If such broken figures have been jailed again, ministers should be ashamed. 
Give or take a retired rear admiral from Dorking, Britain can have few less 
menacing inhabitants than these. But even if the potential deportees are 
genuine menaces, they should not be facing the fate planned for them.

For the first time, the government wants to send foreign nationals to 
countries which abuse prisoners. Ministers also want to protect potential 
deportees. Thus, a no-torture pact has been struck with Jordan and talks are 
taking place with Algeria.

People interested in the regimes' more workaday practices need look no further 
than the government's own testimony. As Justice points out, a link to Amnesty 
from the Foreign Office's website shows Jordan's brutal record, including 
unsafe trials and executions. On Algeria, the FO says it is 'pursuing cases of 
the disappeared'. A recent Home Office report notes 'confessions' obtained by 
strangulation, electric shocks and forcing prisoners to drink bleach and urine.

Any deportees may escape such treatment, for a while at least, but that 
concession is dearly bought. A photocall for the Jordan compact was a publicity 
coup for a regime eager to mask methods that imperil individuals and the world. 
Mr Blair should be demanding an end to torture, not cutting deals with regimes 
likely to breed angry young men intent on fomenting terror and exporting it.

In liberal countries, though, torture belongs mainly in the imagination. Let's 
pretend a terrorist is held at Paddington Green, refusing to disclose 
information that would save thousands of lives. The detonator of his dirty bomb 
ticks towards zero hour. Would it not be the moral duty of an interrogator to 
hurt him until he tells?

As Clive Stafford-Smith suggests in openDemocracy, the ticking bomb scenario 
is unrealistic. You cannot refigure society's rules on a chimera. Torture is 
always wrong, and mostly useless. It is also more fashionable than most people 
ever acknowledge.

The Prime Minister's assertion that 'the game is changing' is an echo of what 
the ex-head of the CIA's counterterrorist unit, Cofer Black, told Congress in 
2002. 'There was a before and an after 9/11,' he said. 'After 9/11, the gloves 
came off.' Some time would pass before the world saw what bare knuckles can do.

According to Newsweek, George W Bush and Donald Rumsfeld signed off a secret 
system of detention. While no one authorised outright torture, prisoners were 
softened up and Geneva Convention protections stripped from al-Qaeda and 
Taliban prisoners. The scene was set for Guantanamo, for Abu Ghraib and for the 
traffic of 'ghost' prisoners: those interrogated for the CIA by means banned in 
the US, in outposts including Jordan.

It would be preposterous to suggest that Britain is heading down such a black 
hole of justice. The Prime Minister is trying for a formula that, however 
cosmetically, enshrines Britain's fine record on preserving people from 
torture. Senior judges, far from being the wild activists of Michael Howard's 
fevered brain, are neither minded nor mandated to strike down Acts of 
Parliament. But if, as seems likely, the new deportation law is a flawed mess, 
they will rule accordingly.

The cases will then move on, to the Lords and maybe to Strasbourg, borne aloft 
on the hot air of media wrath about dangerous spongers abusing our legal aid. 
By the time anything is decided, Jordan may even be a hybrid of Legoland and a 
Swedish-style welfare state. But the list of dangers to Britain's values and 
constitution is immediate.

Ministers may pay lip service to the right to be spared torture, as enshrined 
in article three of the Human Rights Convention, but many also cast a 
lascivious glance at France, which has identical obligations but whose 
magistrates seem happy to deport on the say-so of M Sarkozy, the Interior 
Minister.

Mr Blair may lack such control, but a Prime Minister once criticised for being 
too presidential risks turning, with Mr Howard's blessing, into a Gilbert and 
Sullivan potentate. The supremacy of parliament is a joke, when the executive 
can do much as it likes, and the judges are both nervous and livid at one more 
onslaught.

Already they have been pushed around on sentencing and treated abysmally on 
constititutional reform. When the government tried to abolish the office of 
Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice, far from being consulted, was informed 
of the botched scheme by fax.

Now judges are under caution from a flailing government, even though no 
judicial decision has made Britain less safe. The courts are the solution, not 
the problem. The government should help bring terror suspects to justice and 
eject no one lacking a safe haven to go to. Extending Omar Bakri Mohammed's 
holiday in Lebanon is no bad thing, even if bumptious clerics are a distraction 
from bigger threats. But it is also time for a cool look at where fear has led.

The rule of law is under threat. Human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> risk becoming a dowry payable to 
foreign torturers, in return for taking those Britain wishes to expel. How this 
sideshow must delight the truly perilous who watch, unmonitored, from the 
shadows.

It is a truism that citizens lack trust in politicians. I never believed it. 
People trust too much. Cynical, but not by nature sceptical, they put faith in 
intelligence, despite Saddam's non-existent weapons. When government says 
someone is dangerous, they tend to agree.

Unease magnifies credulity and erases memories. So remember the human pyramids 
of Abu Ghraib. Imagine the living carcasses rotting in a Jordanian cell. 
Sending suspects to such a regime, whatever the promises, would kill some part 
of Britain that terrorists could never destroy. Like Faustus, we are bartering 
our soul.

mary.riddell@observer.co.uk <mailto:mary.riddell@observer.co.uk>
 