
The Mask Gallery

Trying to find a carnival mask that doesn't come from China is harder to find 
than you'd think, but discerning tourists like Beyoncé and Mardi Gras queens 
in-the-know head to Massoud Dalili's studio and gallery in the French Quarter 
for stylish handmade one-offs. There are animal-themed masks, masks with 
feathers and jewels, all-brass masks in the shape of butterflies, masks from 
Venice and masks crafted right there by Dalili himself, on a large table 
littered with bits of leather, wooden brushes, paint splatter and ribbons. They 
cost more than those at the tourist shops, but not that much more.
• 636 Royal Street, neworleansmask.com <http://neworleansmask.com/>

Euclid Records
 Photograph: Gavin McOwan 
Part of the reason New Orleans is so bewitching has much to do with the music 
that's been wafting indiscriminately out of half-open windows in just about 
every neighbourhood for the past hundred years: primordial drum beats, trumpets 
hitting euphoric high notes, mournful saxophone solos, all blending together 
into a harmonious hum that seems cliched but is the soul of the city. Nostalgic 
for the turntable era, Euclid Records, in the Bywater neighbourhood, is prime 
hunting ground for musicians and DJs looking for vinyl treasures from 
indigenous celebrities such as thePreservation Hall Jazz Band  
<http://www.preservationhalljazzband.com/>and Hurray for the Riff Raff 
<http://hurrayfortheriffraff.com/>. There is almost nothing Euclid doesn't 
carry or play, and you'll probably walk out with something you didn't know you 
wanted: like a disco reggae album from the 1970s or, if you are lacking in the 
record player department, a cool concert poster.
• 3401 Chartres Street, euclidnola.com <http://www.euclidnola.com/>. Open 
Mon-Thurs 10am-8pm, Fri-Sat 10am-9pm, Sun 10am-5pm

Bon Castor
 Photograph: Sophie Lvoff 
A sweet hand-painted sign outside this tiny gift store telegraphs that it's 
all about craft shopping. Amy Knoll, Bon Castor's infectiously enthusiastic 
proprietress, has lined her cheery yellow shop with singular items such as 
children's apron tops, tin bird mobiles and graphic novels, all from New 
Orleans-based artists. "I couldn't find anywhere to buy a birthday present, and 
I wanted to support the community," says Knoll, who is one of the early 
pioneers of a retail experience burgeoning over the past two years in the 
Bywater district. Everything for sale is unique or vintage and under $100, 
including rock'n'roll hairdos, cut and styled in the back by coiffeur Joe 
Starnes.
• 3207 Burgundy Street, boncastor.com <http://boncastor.com/>. Open Tues-Fri 
11am-7pm, Sat midday-8pm, Sun midday-6pm

Sterling Provisions
 Photograph: Sophie Lvoff 
A bike ride downtown through the French Quarter and across historic Esplanade 
Avenue will take you to the Marigny neighbourhood, where emerald-, coral-, 
mustard- and teal-painted Creole cottages peek out from behind royal palm 
trees. On a quiet corner sits newcomer Sterling Provisions, a home goods shop 
curated by New York City transplant Dennis Weddle, who describes his aesthetic 
as, "mid-century meets Chinese vernacular with a spot of the really decent 
stuff from the 1980s". The common thread is natural elements: wood, ceramic and 
plaster. Brass serving sets and Danish crystal ashtrays, as well as bigger 
pieces like industrial desks and glass chandeliers have lately been luring 
decorators, who are bound to be sorry this shop is no longer a well-kept secret.
• 2402 Royal Street, sterlingprov.com <http://www.sterlingprov.com>. Open 
Tues-Sat midday-6pm, Sun midday-5pm

The Revival Outpost
 Photograph: Sophie Lvoff 
The explosion of filmmaking over the past 12 years in New Orleans – nicknamed 
the Hollywood of the South – has resulted in a growing number of vintage shops 
to help service the industry. The Revival Outpost, (recently Instagrammed by 
Emma Roberts while she was in town shooting American Horror Story) has become a 
destination for costume designers since it opened two years ago. The inventory 
includes copious amounts of crocheted garments, Stevie Nicks-esque lace Gunne 
Sax prairie dresses and amazing Dynasty-era sequined gowns, plus accessories, 
shoes and a smattering of homewares (think framed cross stitch steamboat 
pictures). A portion of the store's square footage is dedicated to new clothing 
by indie designers.
• 234 Chartres Street, therevivaloutpost.com <http://therevivaloutpost.com/>. 
Open Mon-Sun 11am-7pm, Fri-Sat 11am-8pm

James H Cohen & Sons Inc
 Photograph: Sophie Lvoff 
When you think of the south, you think of time slowing down, front porches, 
gin fizzes, and … the civil war. At James H Cohen & Sons on Royal Street, the 
main shopping drag in the French Quarter (not to be confused with Bourbon 
Street, which would be the main drinking drag), an entire afternoon can be 
spent perusing rare swords, guns and gorgeous gold coins, Confederate 
currencies and antique jewellery. The chatty staff are keen to elucidate on 
everything from the civil war to how much nickel there is actually in a buffalo 
nickel.
• 437 Royal Street, shop.cohenantiques.com <http://shop.cohenantiques.com/>. 
Open Mon-Sat 9.30am-5pm

The Kitchen Witch
 Photograph: Sophie Lvoff 
Despite the depressing trend of bookstores going out of business, The Kitchen 
Witch – committed to food-related books – stays resolutely open. Dedicated 
shopkeepers Debbie and Philip thrill to steer interested customers toward 
hidden gems: first editions of iconic tomes such asThe Gastronomical Me 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Gastronomical-ME-M-F-Fisher/dp/0865473927> by MFK 
Fisher, stunning photography books including one about dinner parties by 
Salvador Dali, and a generous supply of regional cookbooks from creole, cajun 
and Louisiana kitchens, many out of print and written by slaves, others brand 
new from New Orleans chefs such as Donald Link and John Besh. Browsing through 
the food titles, under strings of fairy lights, is a nice respite from actually 
eating and drinking.
• 631 Toulouse Street, kwcookbooks.com <http://kwcookbooks.com>. Open 
10am-5.30pm, closed Tues

Perch
 Photograph: Sophie Lvoff 
Native Texan Caroline Robert's jolly home design shop, in an eclectically 
decorated doublewide shotgun house on Magazine Street, is a mix of fresh and 
antique finds. Fans flock to Perch, where the gossip is sometimes as good as 
the merchandise: visitors are likely to find themselves having a cup of tea 
with Robert's design sidekick, Jack Mayberry, at the work table in the back, 
surrounded by Christian Lacroix's Butterfly Parade wallpaper. Open for over 
seven years, Perch rotates its inventory every few weeks. Current bestsellers 
include wall-mounted papier maché animal heads, brightly coloured scatter 
cushions, powder room hand towels and cheeky cookie jars.
• 2844 Magazine Street, perch-home.com <http://www.perch-home.com>. Open 
Mon-Sat 10am-6pm

Lili New Orleans
 Photograph: Sophie Lvoff 
Pretty and petite, Laura Hourguettes has an unfailing eye for Downton 
Abbey-esque cocktail dresses, while chic daywear makes her vintage clothing 
business a deal closer. Hourguettes is drawn toward feminine, southern 
silhouettes, which means a lot of lace, silk and ruffles, but not excluding 
glam jumpsuits or the occasional Chanel frock. Flawless accessories – 
jewellery, bags and hats – round out the collection. This small uptown boutique 
exudes a sort of Parisian shopping tranquillity, with subtly perfumed air and 
breezy space between the hangers – everything about Lili's is desirable, 
including the price tags.
• 3329 Magazine Street, lilivintage.com <http://lilivintage.com>. Open Mon-Sat 
midday-5.30pm

Aidan Gill
 Photograph: Sophie Lvoff 
This is one of the few spots on the planet where a civilised man can get a 
proper hot towel shave, while listening to groovy tunes and enjoying a tumbler 
of scotch. Aidan Gill's barber shop is hipster-friendly, which means if you 
have a beard, it can be expertly looked after or cleared right off – and sells 
anything to do with a dandy man's toilette: fancy colognes, aftershave, 
gentleman's soap, badger shaving brushes. Gill, who originally hails from 
Dublin, personifies style, but also substance - which you'll quickly glean if 
you get him going (on any subject). Ladies can shop for manly fragrances that 
smell good on a woman or simply ogle the old-school patina of this classic 
interior.
• 2026 Magazine Street, aidangillformen.com <http://www.aidangillformen.com/>. 
Open Mon-Fri 10am-6pm, Sat 9am-5pm, Sun 10am-6pm, haircuts from $40, shaves $40

New Orleans-based designer Sara Ruffin Costello 
<http://sararuffincostello.com/> is a contributor to the New York Times T 
Magazine

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 