
Eastern State Penitentiary


After the Revolution, Benjamin Franklin began hosting meetings about ways to 
reform criminals, rather than just punish them. Eastern State, a hulking, 
castle-like structure that now looks quite out of place in its quiet 
neighbourhood, was the eventual result. Cells were designed to isolate 
prisoners from all human contact, under the assumption that anyone left 
completely alone with their crimes would become penitent – hence the new term 
"penitentiary". It's still creepy enough to be the site of an enormous "haunted 
house" attraction every autumn, and to have its audio tour narrated by Steve 
Buscemi.
• 2027 Fairmount Avenue, easternstate.org <http://www.easternstate.org/>. Open 
daily 10am-5pm. Adults $14, seniors $12, students and children $10

Independence Hall

 Photograph: Alamy 
Many of the city's historical spots relating to the founding of America are 
within walking distance of this three-square-block national park. The biggest 
draw is the famously cracked Liberty Bell (actually forged in England in 1751). 
A block away is Independence Hall, where the Declaration of Independence was 
signed and the Constitution was adopted. Though you'd think Independence Hall 
and the Constitution Center, right across the street, would contain their 
namesake documents, both are at the National Archives in Washington DC. The 
Constitution Center does, however, have a highly entertaining interactive 
hologram of hometown hero Ben Franklin. (Ask him about French women for a 
hilariously lecherous response.)
• Fifth and Market streets, nps.gov/inde <http://www.nps.gov/inde/index.htm>. 
Independence Hall open daily 8.30am-6pm, Liberty Bell open 9am-4.55pm. Tickets 
free but tours must be booked

 Mütter Museum

 Photograph: Alamy 
The Mütter (rhymes with "looter") Museum's collection includes the shared 
liver of original Siamese twins Chang and Eng, pieces of Einstein's brain, the 
Hyrtl skull collection, all sorts of bottled foetuses, and a nine-foot colon. 
Though all the antique surgical tools and medical oddities are meant to inspire 
an appreciation of medical history, the array of pre-1960s gynaecological 
instruments mostly inspires a fervent gratitude for the modern era.
• 19 S 22nd Street, collegeofphysicians.org/mutter-museum 
<http://www.collegeofphysicians.org/mutter-museum/>. Adults $15, military and 
seniors $13, students and six-17s $10, under-sixes free. Open daily 10am-5pm

 Benjamin Franklin Museum

 Photograph: Alamy 
After the Liberty Bell and the weird green creature that is the Philadelphia 
Phillie Phanatic, Ben Franklin is probably Philadelphia's primary mascot. 
George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, James Madison – they got to be 
president, but calling them "beloved" is a stretch. Philly loves Ben Franklin, 
as evidenced by something being named after him every 10 feet – Franklin 
Square, Ben Franklin Parkway, Ben Franklin Bridge, Franklin Field, Franklin 
Mills, the Franklin Institute ... our hardcore soccer fans even call themselves 
the Sons of Ben. It's hard not to love Franklin, who was an abolitionist before 
it was cool, ran the Onion paper in the 18th century, was central to setting up 
a new form of government, played the wine glasses, proved that lightning was 
electricity, published alist of 220 words for being drunk 
<http://mentalfloss.com/article/29753/ben-franklins-200-synonyms-drunk>, and 
essentially invented the modern American library, hospital, postal service, 
public college and reformatory prison. This guy's life is fascinating; find out 
more about him at the Benjamin Franklin Museum, which recently reopened after a 
long renovation.
• 317 Chestnut Street, nps.gov/inde 
<http://www.nps.gov/inde/planyourvisit/benjamin-franklin-museum.htm>. Open 
daily 9am-5pm. Adults $5, four-16 years $2, under-fours free

The Magic Gardens

 Photograph: Alamy 
South Street was Philly's equivalent of New York's East Village in the 1960s 
and 1970s, a wasteland revitalised by bohemians. South Street is mostly cheap 
retail and crowds of teenagers these days, but its former life is visible in 
the mosaics of Isaiah Zagar, which spangle random buildings like a particularly 
beautiful lichen. The epicentre is the Magic Gardens, a former vacant lot that 
Zagar spent decades turning into a enormous, multi-level art environment – 
every surface covered with his trademark ceramic-and-mirror tiles.
• 1020 South Street, phillymagicgardens.org 
<http://www.phillymagicgardens.org/>. Open Sun-Thurs 11am-5pm and Fri-Sat 
11am-6pm. Adults $7, students and seniors $3, six-12 years $3, under-fives free

Mummers Museum

 Photograph: Alamy 
Philly's annual Mummers Parade is the oldest folk festival in the country, if 
you can still call it that. It's related to the traditional British mummers 
plays, but distantly – if you were Darwin, it would be like finding a species 
of finch that had been stranded on an island where survival was linked to an 
odd, strutting dance, glitter, marching banjos, bedazzled umbrellas, huge 
feathered headdresses and beer. Lots of beer. Mummery has been the domain of 
blue-collar white men since its beginnings as a melding of the holiday 
traditions of the lower-class South Philly river ward immigrants from Sweden 
and the British Isles. Over the years, this coalesced into something more like 
Mardi Gras, with distinct subdivisons like Fancy Brigades, String Bands, Comics 
and dozens of serious clubs spending the better part of a year putting together 
their spangled costumes and performances. The first formal Mummers parade in 
1901 was in part an attempt to corral all the rowdies into one place but, even 
today, the procession up Broad Street from South Philly to City Hall is only 
half the point – after dark, everyone heads back down to South Philly by the 
river to channel their rowdy forebears. For the full experience, visit over New 
Year; if you just want a taste of something uniquely weird and Philadelphian, 
check out the museum in the heart of Mummer territory.
• 1100 S 2nd Street, mummersmuseum.com <http://www.mummersmuseum.com/>. Open 
Wed-Sat 9.30am-4pm, October-April. Adults $3.50, students, seniors and 
under-12s $2.50

Rittenhouse Square

 Photograph: Alamy 
Philly's nattiest park is one of the five Center City public squares laid out 
in the initial plans by city founder (and Pennsylvania nakesake) William Penn 
who, with a typical Quaker lack of romance, named them Northeast, Northwest, 
Southeast, Southwest and Center. Center Square eventually was built up into 
City Hall, while in the post-Revolution days the eastern squares were renamed 
Washington and Franklin in honor of the Founding Fathers. Northwest (later 
Logan) Square became the site of public hangings. But Southwest Square – 
renamed in 1825 for astronomer, clockmaker, inventor and first director of the 
US Mint David Rittenhouse – has been the centrepiece of the wealthiest area in 
the city since just after the Civil War. The public park itself, with its 
diagonal sidewalks, central fountain and plenty of benches, is Philly's 
number-one spot for outdoor people-watching. Regulars include bike messengers 
waiting for a call, old-money grandmas walking Pomeranians, students from the 
nearby Curtis Institute of Music getting some fresh-air practice in, and the 
occasional amateur tightrope-walker. Sit down; stay a while.
• 18th and Walnut Streets, friendsofrittenhouse.org 
<http://www.friendsofrittenhouse.org/>. Open Tues-Thurs and Sat 10am-5pm, Fri 
10am-7pm

Philadelphia Museum of Art

 Photograph: Alamy 
Look out for the wannabe Stallones running up and down the front steps of the 
Parthenon-looking art museum in a constant mass reenactment of the famous scene 
from Rocky. You could easily spend a full week wandering the PMA's 10 acres 
without seeing everything, but be sure to catch the particularly good Duchamp 
collection. For bonus points, seek out his final work,Étant Donnés 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89tant_donn%C3%A9s>, a creepy tableau behind 
an unmarked peephole.
• 2600 Benjamin Franklin Parkway, philamuseum.org <http://www.philamuseum.org/>
. Open Tue-Sun 10am-5pm. Adults $20, seniors $18, students and 13-18s $14, 
under-12s free

The Barnes Foundation

 Photograph: Alamy 
Albert C Barnes amassed one of the world's greatest collections of 
impressionist and modernist art, and was as contrary as possible about 
displaying it. His eccentric arrangements put million-dollar paintings side by 
side with crafts, fixtures and even spoons. It lived out in the suburbs, far 
from the art establishment Barnes loathed. Intentionally inconvenient hurdles 
like only being open two days a week, complicated parking, and comically 
limited tickets kept the collection essentially off-limits to all but the most 
dedicated for decades. When Barnes died in 1951, his will was clear: the 
artworks must be kept "in exactly the places that they are". But after 
financial straits triggered a heated legal battle, the collection relocated to 
a shiny new building down the block from the PMA in 2012. Barnes's arrangements 
were painstakingly replicated – in exactly the places that they were (in 
relation to one another). Whether this is a triumph or a tragedy remains a 
bitter debate.
• 2025 Benjamin Franklin Parkway, barnesfoundation.org 
<http://www.barnesfoundation.org/>. Open Sat-Mon and Wed-Thur 10am-6pm, Fri 
10am-10pm. Non-members $30, members $20

Reading Terminal Market

 Photograph: Alamy 
Philly's main east-west thoroughfare is called Market Street because of the 
many produce stalls that clustered along a mile of it until the mid-19th 
century, when city officials – noting that the frenzy of open-air markets was 
interfering with streetcar traffic, not to mention constituting a public health 
hazard – consolidated them all at an indoor spot at 12th and Market. A few 
decades later, the Reading Railroad built a colossal train station over that 
spot, relocating the farmers and merchants yet again with promises of 
state-of-the-art refrigeration. But the market ended up outlasting the 
railroad, which ran its last train in 1971; if you happen to look up and notice 
that the roof of the modern-day Reading Terminal Market is an enormous, 
blocks-long arch, it's because the market's current home was once the widest 
train shed in the world.

Today, Reading Terminal Market is a sprawling complex packed with people 
buying dirt-cheap produce – Thai curry, urban honey, roast pork sandwiches, 
quail and emu eggs – anything you can think of that's edible. The bearded and 
bonneted folk occupying the north-west section are the Pennsylvania Dutch, an 
Amish-related community based in western Lancaster County. Try their shoo-fly 
pie and sticky buns.
• 12th and Arch streets, readingterminalmarket.org 
<http://www.readingterminalmarket.org/>. Open Mon-Sat 8am-6pm and Sun 9am-5pm

Emily Guendelsberger <http://citypaper.net/emilyg/> is the arts editor of 
Philadelphia City Paper

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 