
Rickhouse

Beautiful wood interiors (mimicking the inside of a cask), stunningly tall 
liquor shelves (so high that they need a rolling ladder), live music and a good 
crowd make Rickhouse the quintessential San Francisco cocktail bar. On choice 
nights, a bluegrass band sets up in the back, and enthusiasts can gather around 
or climb up to the second floor – a modest loft space – and watch the band from 
above while leaning on the railings. Whiskey is king here, though the menu also 
offers a wide variety of contemporary classics and punch bowls.
• 246 Kearny Street, +1 415 398 2827, rickhousebar.com 
<http://www.rickhousebar.com/>. Open Sat 6pm-2am, Mon 5pm-2am, Tue-Fri 3pm-2am

Wilson & Wilson
 Photograph: Noelle Chun 
The Wilson & Wilson is not any old speakeasy – it's a speakeasy within a 
speakeasy. Hidden within the famed prohibition-style Bourbon & Branch – one of 
the first pioneers in San Francisco's craft cocktail movement – the Wilson & 
Wilson is detective-agency themed, with a film-noir atmosphere, complete with 
1920s-style wallpaper, old cash registers and cocktail menus fashioned to look 
like detective cases. In California style, the Wilson focuses on a culinary 
approach to cocktails. Fresh flavour combinations take the stage with unique, 
house-made syrups and tinctures such as tobacco and tea. For $30, you can order 
a "prix fixe" cocktail flight – starting with a light aperitif, moving to a 
"main course" cocktail, and finishing with a satisfying digestif. Highly 
attentive and knowledgeable bartenders guide you through your experience.
• 505 Jones Street, no phone, thewilsonbar.com <http://www.thewilsonbar.com/> 
(reservations via the website required). Open Mon-Sat 6pm-2am

The Slanted Door 
 Photograph: Noelle Chun 
At Slanted Door, bartenders sling perfectly tweaked classics against the 
backdrop of the gorgeous Bay view and famously tasty Vietnamese food. Led by 
bar luminary Erik Adkins, The Slanted Door's bar serves bright, rich cocktails 
in a modern, restaurant-oriented environment. Whether catching up with an old 
friend or going out on a first date, The Slanted Door is a sophisticated bar 
spot for solid cocktails, delicious food, and a breathtaking view of the Bay 
bridge twinkling over the water.
• 1 Ferry Building #3, +1 415 861 8032, slanteddoor.com 
<http://www.slanteddoor.com/>. Open Mon-Sat 11am-4.30pm and 5.30pm-10pm, Sun 
11.30am-4.30pm and 5.30pm-10pm

Shotwell's

History buffs and beer lovers alike will find a home at Shotwell's bar in the 
Mission district. The neighbourhood hangout draws an easy stream of locals with 
pool tables, pinball machines, and a low-key atmosphere. The menu is comprised 
of a wide variety of beers sourced both locally and internationally. Shotwell's 
is one of San Francisco's few remaining saloons from the late 19th century (it 
first opened in 1891) and features the original wooden back bar, which was 
shipped from Maine to California in 1906, and still has gunshot holes from an 
unknown incident … leaving patrons to imagine the skirmishes that once occurred 
there.
• 3349 20th Street, +1 415 648 4104, shotwellsbar.com 
<http://www.shotwellsbar.com/>. Open Mon-Sat 4.30pm-2am, Sun 4pm-1am

Smuggler's Cove

One of the most celebrated tiki bars in the world, Smuggler's Cove offers a 
vast selection of rums and historically grounded tiki drinks that range from 
fun to zany to seriously boozy. For groups, punch bowls provide strong and 
delicious fun: they come with several-foot straws and sometimes a fire show. 
Even on the coldest San Francisco nights, Smuggler's Cove brings patrons into a 
pirate wonderland with Disneyland-esque flair. The three-level space sports 
designs of movie-set proportions, delighting with embellishments such as long 
ship beams, rum barrels, anchors, colourful water buoys, and an indoor 
waterfall.
• 650 Gough Street, +1 415 869 1900, smugglerscovesf.com 
<http://smugglerscovesf.com/>. Open everyday, 5pm-1.15am

Bar Agricole
 Photograph: Noelle Chun 
Fresh flavours, artisan ingredients and flawlessly executed cocktails take the 
spotlight at this SoMa (South of Market) district spot run by bar legend Thad 
Vogler. Foodies will find a robust food menu of northern European and 
Californian fusion, and bar flies will feel equally at home at the long, wooden 
bar or outside on the heated garden patio (making it a perfect summer night 
stop). The stunning, industrial modern tavern is marked by big open skylights, 
warm wood tones, and cool concrete. The bar staff works hard to source rare, 
small-batch spirits and shake up elegant cocktails with clean flavours.
• 355 11th Street, +1 415 355 9400, baragricole.com 
<http://www.baragricole.com/>. Open Sun-Thur 5pm-10pm, Fri-Sat 5pm-11pm

The Ice Cream Bar 
 Photograph: Noelle Chun 
For those looking for an unconventional or family bar experience, The Ice 
Cream Bar in Cole Valley is a soda fountain that serves handcrafted ice-cream 
sodas alongside a selection of alcoholic "remedies". The sodas and alcoholic 
libations were devised by celebrity mixologist Russell Davis, integrating 
innovative ingredients – such as celery, saffron, tobacco, and anise – into 
1930s-style drinks. Friendly and knowledgeable soda jerks guide you through the 
world of phosphates, lactarts, and floats, using soda pumps actually used in 
the 1930s. Adult drinks spotlight ports, porters, bitters, and spiced wines.
• 815 Cole Street, +1 415 742 4932, theicecreambarsf.com 
<http://theicecreambarsf.com/>. Open daily 12pm-10pm

15 Romolo
 Photograph: Noelle Chun 
15 Romolo is a saloon-style cocktail watering hole in North Beach that prides 
itself on drinks made from fresh ingredients in an unpretentious environment 
(which you might find a bit of a surprise, based on the many seedy strip clubs 
that light up the street outside). Weekend nights promise large and lively 
crowds, and a steady streaming jukebox. Elevated bar food – such as pork rib 
sliders, burgers, and salads – is served alongside a drinks menu of mostly 
original, contemporary craft cocktails, as well as a modest list of wine and 
beers.
• 15 Romolo Place, +1 415 398 1359, 15romolo.com <http://www.15romolo.com/>. 
Open Mon-Fri 5pm-2am, Sat-Sun 11.30am-3.30pm and 5pm-2am

Zeitgeist
 Photograph: Noelle Chun 
Freedom and good times are the themes at Zeitgeist, an open-air beer garden 
located in a less-salubrious part of the Mission district. After passing 
through a small indoor bar area with a TV and pool table, bar-goers find a 
large open back patio, packed with locals at tight rows of picnic tables. Rowdy 
crowds make themselves happy with big pitchers of beer, bloody marys, and a 
smoker-friendly atmosphere. The food menu of burgers and fries is augmented by 
sightings of a San Francisco legend – the Tamale Lady – who serves up piping 
hot pork, beef, and bean and cheese varieties of the Mexican treat. Though you 
may question your senses after all the beer and the smoke, the enormous pink 
elephant parade mural is real.
• 199 Valencia Street, +1 415 255 7505, zeitgeistsf.com 
<http://www.zeitgeistsf.com/>. Open daily 9am-2am

Tommy's Mexican Restaurant

For local tequila lovers, this is the only place in town. With a mission to 
"serve the best tequila selection on Earth", the Inner Richmond watering hole 
features over 300 different tequilas in an unassuming environment. Enthusiasts 
can even join the Blue Agave Club, which takes drinkers through all the many 
various styles of the agave spirit. Proprietor Julio Bermejo is as passionate 
as he is informative about the tequilas behind the bar, and the nine-seat bar 
within the colourful Mexican restaurant serves what is considered the gold 
standard of margaritas. The restaurant cooks up some tasty Mexican food too.
• 5929 Geary Boulevard, +1 415 387 4747, tommystequila.com 
<http://tommysmexican.com/>. Open Wed-Mon midday-11pm

Noelle Chun is a drink blogger, videographer, and photographer at 
thejoyofdrinking.blogspot.com <http://thejoyofdrinking.blogspot.co.uk/> and 
writes about San Francisco and tech atamilliontimesyes.com 
<http://amilliontimesyes.com/>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 