
There is an argument that says, if you don’t like tourists, then you shouldn’t 
buy a house on Wonder View Drive. It is not one, however, that would convince 
the residents of the Hollywood Hills. They are sick of the pilgrims to the 
Hollywood Sign. All the norms of human decency have been abandoned, apparently 
- tourists don’t just drive up to the viewing platform, though that vexes the 
locals enough. They scramble up to the letters themselves. They urinate on 
them; they spit at the residents. They take selfies. It has caused so much 
ill-feeling that the locals havepersuaded some mapping software companies to 
take the road off the maps 
<http://la.curbed.com/archives/2012/09/hollywood_sign_neighbors_fretting_over_new_iphone_5_maps.php>
.

One resident, Heather Hamza, told the Hollywood Reporter last week 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/war-hollywood-sign-pits-wealthy-761385>: 
“I shudder to think if any of these people coming up here have weapons in their 
cars. One of these days someone will get shot.” I often shudder to think what 
would happen if people drove around with yoghurt in their cars. One of these 
days, someone would get covered in yoghurt.

The drive up to the sign, which was originally constructed in 1923 to 
advertise a local housing development 
<http://www.hollywoodsign.org/the-history-of-the-sign/> but has since become 
synonymous with the city’s celluloid heritage, reminds me of Guildford - lots 
of greenery and high hedges, the intimation of great riches but nothing to see.

On the streets of Los Angeles <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles>
 proper, you can walk for four miles and see nobody who isn’t pushing a 
lawnmower. Up here, in the Santa Monica mountains, there is a purposeful 
hiking, together with, granted, a lot of cars. The viewing platform is a fair 
way from the sign itself, and there is no way I can see of scrambling any 
closer, irrespective of the trespassing signs. But it can’t be this, surely? 
This 10ft square lay-by of people taking pictures: nobody could mind this?

Michael, 34, and Vanessa, 32, were on holiday from the east coast. “The 
calibre of individual that would live up here,” he said, “I can imagine there 
would be animosity. When you pay $30m for a house, you want your privacy.” 
“Maybe they want their privacy,” Vanessa interjected, “but then they shouldn’t 
live here.” I aired some scepticism that anybody really does get up there, and 
Michael said gamely, “If I’d come 10 years ago, with 10 of my friends, I’m sure 
one of us would have made it up there.” We all paused respectfully to consider 
the passing of time and the way fellowship cedes to coupledom. Then I backed 
away, satisfied that I had opened up at least two serious faultlines in their 
relationship.

Mandy and Dean, 49 and 50 respectively, were here from Wakefield. “It’s too 
many cars coming up and down, that’s what it is,” said Dean, authoritatively. 
“I think they’re mad,” said Mandy. “They should have a little shop or a cafe, 
they’d make a killing.”

Most people don’t mind tourists because they spend so much money. When you 
already have all the money in the world, the upsides are less apparent. It 
makes you wonder how the Queen feels about Buckingham Palace.

Sebastian, 20, was a real-life resident, though he was studying in New York 
and was just visiting his parents. “With iconic stuff, it can be washed away 
with the tourism, but there’s a beauty to it. I would go to the Chinese theatre 
just to photograph the tourists. Because I find them as interesting as they 
find it.”

Deidre, 27, Melissa, 31, and Chenoa, 30, were a mixture of local and tourist, 
meeting for Melissa’s birthday. “I went past the ‘no trespassing’ sign once,” 
Deidre said, “but I didn’t make it that far. I don’t think you could get up 
there.” She was seriously dubious that anybody had ever urinated on the sign. 
The closest resident, Jeffrey Kleiser, has insisted upon this fiercely to the 
Hollywood reporter, claiming that people are always falling off it and knocking 
on his door, asking for medical assistance.

“I would love to climb up there,” said Chenoa. “I would just love to see how 
small I was compared to one of those letters.” I suggested to her that she just 
stand next to any given thing that was 45ft high. “No, I want it to be the O.” 
“The O?” said Deidre. “Don’t you want to be in the Y?” I appear to have sown 
yet more discord.

“In the end, the Hollywood sign was here first,” Chenoa adjudicated. “It’s 
been here longer than any of them.” It probably isn’t accurate down to its 
core, this statement (there will be somebody in these hills who is incredibly 
old). But it’s true enough.
 