
For 70 years, the US and Britain have underwritten the open global trading 
system, partly because of a stubborn and correct belief in the merits of free 
trade, partly out of self-interest as beneficiaries of globalisation and partly 
because, strategically, it spreads democracy, peace and capitalism.

They have spearheaded successive rounds of tariff cuts and multilateral trade 
deals and stood by, first, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) 
and its successor, the World Trade Organisation, to keep the system honest. 
They have cut regional trade bargains, promoted the European single market and, 
above all, kept their markets open despite other countries, notably China, 
gaming the system for their own narrow advantage.

The consensus in both countries was that the wider gains transcended any 
localised pain. No longer. The Americans voting for the anti-trade, America 
first Trump have consigned all that to history and the unintended consequence of
Brexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> will mean the same 
for Britain. The system that underpinned our collective prosperity is about to 
be trashed.

It brought national and international benefits, including an avalanche of 
inward direct investment into both countries, powerful international financial 
and business service sectors, rising global living standards and the economic 
and democratic transformation of Asia. But both countries’ manufacturing 
sectors have taken disproportionately heavy hits. Drive round the ailing 
industrial towns of south Yorkshire or Ohio and compare the economic and social 
landscape with that of Düsseldorf, Munich, Shanghai or Shenzhen. Decade of 
consistent manufacturing trade deficits have exacted a cruel toll.

This year, working-class voters across America and Britain’s rotting 
industrial heartlands delivered their verdict. No more plants moving abroad. No 
more closures because of cheap imports. No more sales of great companies to 
foreigners. No more stagnating blue-collar wages. No more immigration. It may 
be that there are jobs and great prospects aplenty in the burgeoning tech and 
service sectors in the big cities driven by global trade, but they don’t care. 
They are hurting and nobody has taken decisive action to help them. The votes 
for Trump and Brexit mark the end of an era and a new dark age of closure, 
protectionism and nationalism.

Leading Tory Brexiters will insist that this is a travesty of their position; 
they want Britain to access more global trade and not be imprisoned, they 
crazily claim, by the confines of the slow-growing European Union and its 
bureaucratic inability to cut aggressive trade deals with the rest of the 
world. They live in a dreamland if they feel that the rest of the world is more 
committed to free trade than Europe, while EU membership did not hold back 
Germany from being among the world’s major exporters.

In any case, apart from the promised closure of borders to immigrants, that is 
not what their voters want, as Nigel Farage always better understood than any 
of his Tory allies he cordially despises. Working-class voters in south 
Yorkshire and the West Midlands want the same as their counterparts in 
Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin. After all,it was those three states, with 
their tiny 100,000 vote margin 
<http://www.weeklystandard.com/the-election-came-down-to-107330-votes-in-pennsylvania-wisconsin-and-michigan/article/2005323>
, which gave Trump the electoral college votes for victory. He might be a 
billionaire, but he is, or at least styles himself, a “blue-collar 
billionaire”. Blue-collar (post-)industrial workers don’t benefit from free 
trade and immigration, as he has consistently said for 18 months, in the teeth 
of opposition from the Republican mainstream who remain free traders. His 
movement, as he called it, wants to stop both.

Trade, exchange and intermingling are the lifeblood of humanity

‘Build that wall” – along the US-Mexican border – was one of the most 
insistent chants at his rallies,along with the forced deportation of 11 million 
illegal immigrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/27/donald-trump-deport-11-million-migrants-is-that-even-possible>
. But more importantly for the international trading system, Trump wants to 
withdraw from the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) between the US, 
Canada and Mexico, which he casually dismisses as the “worst trade deal in 
history”. He also wants an immediate halt in negotiations for both the 
Transatlantic and Trans-Pacific trade agreements and unilaterally he wants to 
impose swingeing45% tariffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/17/china-finance-minister-trump-trade-proposal-irrational>
, against the rules of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) from which he is 
prepared to “walk away”, on Chinese imports, which account for half of the US’s 
trade deficit. Thirty-five per cent tariffs are promised on Mexican imports. 
The remaining 20 free-trade agreements the US has signed are to be reviewed or 
abrogated. Cumulatively, the impact would be devastating, killing 
multilateralism by exposing the already enfeebled WTO as helpless, inciting 
Chinese and Mexican trade retaliation and destabilising the entire global 
system of trade and finance.

Optimists say that Trump the president will be much more cautious and realist 
than Trump the campaigner: his talk on trade should be seen as threats to 
produce more fairly balanced agreements, not a tearing up of the world system. 
Maybe. But there cannot be a complete divorce between campaign rhetoric and 
policy. He believes what he says and nobody in his close coterie is going to 
urge caution. Not Dan DiMicco, his senior trade adviser, who has promised a 
potential withdrawal, in the first six months of the Trump presidency, from 
every major US trade deal if it cannot be shown actively to benefit the US. 
“The era of trade deficits is over,” he says. “It will be: let’s talk, but 
otherwise we put tariffs on.”

Another intimate, Walid Phares, has said Trump will go “back to ground zero” 
on every trade deal, such as the one with South Korea that the president-elect 
described as “job destroying” and wants to revoke. Trump has already given a 
commitment that on day one he will declare China a currency manipulator as a 
precursor to introducing up to 45% tariffs on Chinese imports.

These positions are not posturing: they represent a deeply held view that the 
US does not need trade except on terms that put America first. The idea that 
successive American administrations have negotiated deals loaded in the US 
interest is impossible to concede. Because how else would he explain the rust 
belt? Equally, there can be no concession that blue-collar jobs are 
disappearing with or without trade because of robotisation and automation. The 
America of the 1940s and 50s has disappeared for ever and destroying the 
international trading system is not going to bring it back.

None of that cuts any ice with a demagogic populist. Trump has promises to 
keep to a “movement” that expects no less. The last time a Republican president 
and his party controlled both the House of Representatives and Senate with the 
same convictions on America first trade was 1928. There were warnings that 
introducing the Smoot-Hawley tariffs on American imports in 1930 would trigger 
a slump, but America first Republicans could not help themselves and the 
Democrats were too weak to stop them.

The Peterson Institute for International Economics <https://piie.com/> in 
Washington predicts that if Trump raises tariffs on China and Mexico, and they 
retaliate, then US growth will stop in its tracks for at least two years. The 
prospects could be even worse if Trump goes further. Already world trade growth 
over the last year has been the slowest for the last 15. Even introducing the 
mildest of Trump’s measures must presage a further deceleration and if he goes 
as far as he promises – walking away from the World Trade Organisation, 
withdrawing from multiple trade agreements and freely imposing tariffs – then 
the prospect of a 1930s-style implosion is all too real.

In this context, the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, babbling alongside 
other Brexiters about the opportunities for trade deals with the US is surreal. 
To exit the EU, the one continent pledged to open trade, in order to plunge 
into a world trade system threatened by collapse is the height of folly. If 
British voters had known Trump was going to be president in June – and known of 
his attitude to trade – Remain would have won comfortably. Parliament may find 
it has a duty to veto the application to exercise article 50 before the end of 
March; the referendum was only ever advisory and Trump’s attitude to trade 
changes everything.

One of the many tragedies of the rise of neoliberalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
 is that the promotion of international trade has been able to be portrayed by 
some on the left as part of the same portfolio of policies as austerity, 
privatisation and assaulting trade unions. Wrong. Trade is the essential 
ingredient of growth and prosperity. The rise of Egypt, Greece and Rome was 
because the Mediterranean promoted seaborne trade. The rise of maritime Europe 
after the middle ages was because of Atlantic trade. China has grown so 
explosively since 1978 because of its opening to trade.

Autarchy, protection and closure to immigration have always meant economic 
stagnation and, lacking the stimulus of other cultures and ideas, a parallel 
freezing of innovation and cultural vitality. Trade, exchange and intermingling 
are the lifeblood of humanity. Of course trade brings losers, and the rise of 
contemporary Conservatism, with its ferocious enmity to state action to support 
the incomes, skills and life chances of working-class men and women, in a 
period of great economic change, laid the foundations of huge anger.

It has been two rightwing demagogues – Trump and his British echo, Farage – 
who have been the first beneficiaries. But as this drama plays out in 
recession, nationalism and perhaps even forms of inter-state conflict, there 
will be a rediscovery of ancient verities. Trade and exchange are the 
foundations of our civilisation and, whatever Trump and his movement think, the 
more, the better.
 