
Convincing companies to buy back their own rubbish sounds like an unlikely 
business model – yet the Melbourne social enterpriseGreen Collect 
<http://www.greencollect.org/#home-3> has found a way to make it work. 


Companies in the city’s office towers pay Green Collect to take away 
hard-to-recycle waste. Green Collect then employs socially disadvantaged people 
to refashion it into something useful and then sells it back to the companies 
that threw it out. It’s a double whammy. As social enterprise expert Prof Jo 
Barraket says: “It doesn’t get much better than that.”

Social enterprises <https://www.theguardian.com/society/socialenterprises> 
such as Green Collect exist to solve social, environmental, cultural or 
economic problems. They aim to be self-sustaining and at least 50% of their 
profits are ploughed back into their mission. “And that capacity of being able 
to find latent value is really a characteristic of all social enterprises,” 
says Barraket, director of the Centre for Social Impact Swinburne.

Opening doors for women and children when domestic violence hits home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/04/opening-doors-for-women-and-children-when-domestic-violence-hits-home>
Sally Quinn started Green Collect with partner Darren Andrews as a 
not-for-profit business 11 years ago because she was looking for a way to get 
some of society’s most disadvantaged people into employment.

Green Collect now employs about 30 permanent staff, earns an annual revenue of 
$800,000 and is 85% self-funded, with the remainder being a combination of 
philanthropy and government funding.

Quinn says she hopes the business will be self-sustaining by 2019 and their 
goal is for 60% of the permanent jobs in the enterprise to be for people who 
have faced significant barriers to employment.

“We want to make sure that our social mission is always at the forefront of 
what we do,” she says, adding that it is also important that staff are paid 
“good wages”.

The idea for Green Collect emerged from Quinn’s social work in women’s crisis 
housing in St Kilda, Melbourne. She realised that employment was a key part of 
helping these women rebuild their lives.

“For a lot of these women, it was so hard to be able to get back in the 
workforce, mainly because when you don’t have a fixed address, it is hard to 
have a CV, it is hard to be contactable, hard to prepare yourself for work,” 
she says. “And if you can’t get work, you can’t get secure housing, you can’t 
access the private rental market. I saw these people had nowhere to move.”

For his part, Andrews has a background in environmental policy and planning 
and was inspired to do something when he saw how much waste was occurring in 
city businesses.

“He was doing some further study in the city at the time and he would come 
home and say, ‘You won’t believe what I saw in these skips today’,” Quinn says.

Driving change: Indigenous women grab the reins and get down to business
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/27/driving-change-indigenous-women-grab-the-reins-and-get-down-to-business>
When the couple settled on the idea of creating a recycling company, they 
spent two years investigating the potential of their idea by offering waste 
auditing services. This meant companies could get an idea of what they were 
dumping into skips and landfill each week.

“What were the things that were not being recycled? By sifting through waste, 
we discovered stationery and electronic waste and folders, toner cartridges and 
CDs – all the things that are part of operating an office.”

Among the products they sell back to businesses is a notebook range made from 
discarded binder folders, which have a PVC cover and metal rings.

“For most recyclers, they are too much work,” says Quinn. Green Collect takes 
the cardboard out of the PVC cover to make the front and back of the notebooks, 
which are filled with paper from cut-down letterhead (often thrown out when a 
company changes its address, name or logo).

“In the last 18 months, we have collected 75,000 binder folders,” she says. In 
the same time, they have processed almost 100 tonnes of hard-to-recycle waste.

Other products, sometimes also sold to schools or community groups, are 
magnets made from the keys of keyboards (often used to spell out names at 
events), repackaged stationery and pens and highlighters that were thrown out, 
but still work. Green Collect also sells its products through shopfronts in 
Yarraville and Braybrook.

Quinn says Green Collect has become a cheaper way for businesses to dispose of 
waste. One utility company reported that Green Collect takes 10% of its waste, 
but costs less than 10% of its waste budget.

Quinn says it is unusual to be a female entrepreneur in the recycling 
business, but says women are making inroads into the resource recovery and 
“green” social enterprise fields.

The similarly-named Green Connect 
<http://www.green-connect.com.au/#!who-we-are> is a social enterprise working 
with former refugees and young people to grow food and manage waste in the 
Illawarra region of New South Wales and is headed by general manager Jess Moore.

Anita Saunders is the general manager, business development for the South 
Australian FWS (Finding Workable Solutions <http://www.fws.org.au/>) and runs 
theSalvage and Save  <http://www.salvageandsave.com.au/>social enterprise 
salvage yard, which has five sites in South Australia and employs people with 
disabilities.

And in Melbourne, Loretta Curtin co-founded Good Cycle  
<http://www.goodcycles.org/about-melbourne-bike-repair/our-story/>with Luke 
Wright to offer a mobile bike maintenance service and employing people who are 
socially disadvantaged.

Cheryl Kernot, a social business fellow at the Centre for Social Impact, 
teaches would-be social entrepreneurs and says many are motivated by a desire 
to do something meaningful. “I get lawyers, I get students with master’s 
degrees and PhDs coming along for a graduate certificate – which is like the 
bottom postgraduate rung. And they say they really want to have a more 
meaningful job, particularly in social sphere,” she says.

“Some of them say they want to be a social ‘intrapreneur’ within their 
companies and we have had a couple from PwC [PricewaterhouseCoopers] and the 
Commonwealth Bank. They try to change the culture they work in and they have 
had some success with that.”

Kernot says it’s a promising sign: “I think there is a whole new future of 
business, not just social enterprise but [also] socially-responsible business, 
generally,” she says.
 