
Green-minded individuals who want their money to do good but are also looking 
for a potential return of as much as 10% a year, are being targeted by a new 
public share issue. You don’t need to be wealthy to become a shareholder – the 
minimum investment has been set at just £50.

The share offer, aimed at raising £5m to invest in renewable energy projects, 
has been launched byTriodos Renewables 
<http://www.triodos.co.uk/en/personal/ethical-investments/renewables/overview/>
, a UK company managed by Bristol-based Triodos Bank. The company owns and 
operates 11 sites around the UK – 10 wind farms and a hydroelectric scheme – 
that can generate enough renewable power for more than 34,000 homes.

Triodos Renewables was set up in 1995, partly in response to the Chernobyl 
disaster of a decade earlier, and now has more than 5,000 shareholders. It says 
the money raised through this latest fundraising initiative will be used to 
finance new schemes.

In terms of what’s in it financially for potential shareholders, the company 
says renewable energy can offer “decent, steady” returns, with the added 
benefit of knowing your money is doing something good.

The prospectus says the long-term aim is to deliver average annual returns of 
9-10% through a combination of dividends and capital growth. “Long-term” is 
defined as 15 to 20 years, so this isn’t for people hoping to make a quick buck 
and then get out.

In the shorter term, someone who bought 2,000 shares in the 2005 issue, when 
they were £1.40 each (ie, an outlay of £2,800), and who has decided to sell 
this year via the company’s buy-back scheme, is in line to receive £4,100, and 
has also pocketed a total of £440 in dividends. That’s a combined dividend and 
capital return of £1,740, equating to a decent total return of 5.8% a year for 
nine years (this assumes the shares are sold for 90% of the current share price 
and after this year’s dividend has been paid out).

Olivia Dean <http://oliviakdean.weebly.com>, who lives in Norwich, invested 
£540 in Triodos Renewables shares in August 2011 “because I was looking to make 
an ethical investment, and I wanted to put my money towards helping to build a 
sustainable future”.

Dean, 33, a self-employed project manager specialising in arts and education 
projects, says: “I’d done a couple of training days and was thinking: ‘What 
shall I do with this money?’ I thought I’d take a chance on shares, and it’s 
turned out really well.”

She adds: “It’s been nice to have my money doing some good, and it’s an 
additional bonus that they give me more than I’d get if it was in a bank 
account.”

Those thinking about signing up need to remember this is a long-term 
investment in a single share, with all the risks that entails, and your money 
is not covered by theFinancial Services Compensation Scheme 
<http://www.fscs.org.uk> (FSCS). There are no guarantees that you will get back 
the full amount invested, or that you will be able to sell the shares, though 
they are tradeable on a “matched bargain service” marketed by ethical 
investment trading platformEthex <https://www.ethex.org.uk> and operated by 
Capita Share Dealing Services.

Some may feel that a less risky bet is an ethical fund investing in lots of 
different companies or, for those who are more risk averse, a savings account 
with an ethical institution.

This is the eighth Triodos Renewables share issue, and this time the price has 
been set at £2.28 per share – in 2012 it was £1.90 – with a minimum investment 
of £50, which is much lower than the £500-plus minimum it has typically 
insisted on in recent years. The company is working withTrillion Fund 
<https://www.trillionfund.com>, a crowdfunding platform for clean energy, to 
promote the offer.

Matthew Clayton, Triodos Renewables’ executive director, says: “In launching 
this share issue we are giving investors the opportunity to participate 
directly in the energy revolution in the UK by taking direct ownership of some 
of the country’s flagship renewable power projects.”

For more information go to triodosrenewables.co.uk 
<http://triodosrenewables.co.uk>.

This isn’t the only option for people interested in (hopefully) making some 
money while supporting the planet.Abundance 
<https://www.abundancegeneration.com> is an investment and lending platform 
which allows small investors to put money into renewable energy schemes and 
receive a regular cash return. You can invest as little as £5, and your money 
is used to buy debentures, which are like IOUs issued by the individual 
projects. In return, the project commits to pay you a share of the profits from 
generating green energy.

Two new schemes are due to go live on the Abundance website this weekend. One 
aims to raise up to £3.1m to finance the installation of solar panels on up to 
749 homes in the Scottish Borders owned by Berwickshire Housing Association. 
The other is looking to secure up to £860,000 for a wind turbine near the 
village of Bere Regis, in the Purbeck district of Dorset.

The solar scheme says it is offering the chance for investors to receive an 
effective return of 7.5% before tax and after fees over 20 years, while those 
behind the wind turbine scheme suggest people could receive an effective rate 
of between 8.2% and 9.4% before tax over the life of the investment. However, 
these are very long-term – 20 to 25 years.

Abundance is regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority, though in the event 
that an energy project went bust, there is a risk that you may not get back all 
or any of your original investment. Debentures are not covered by the FSCS.
 