
Labour missed a golden opportunity during the last parliament to deliver on 
its core values through a devolution of power after its “centralist instincts” 
returned, the former frontbencherTristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt> will claim.

In a rallying call for Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> to 
rediscover its heritage of municipal socialism, the historian will say that the 
party’s equivocation on devolution within England should end.

Hunt, whose 2014 book Ten Cities That Made an Empire focused on the importance 
of Liverpool, shares the view of the likes of the former cabinet minister Lord 
Adonis that Labour ceded important territory to the Tories on devolution.

Adonis, a strong advocate of devolution who leads the new national 
infrastructure commission, and Hunt believe thatGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> stole a march on Labour by 
launching his “northern powerhouse” . The chancellor has devolved powers to 
Greater Manchester as part of a plan, inspired by the economist and Treasury 
minister Lord O’Neill, to build up city regions to create clusters of economic 
growth.

In a speech in Manchester, Hunt will say: “Despite Labour leading the way on 
devolution for much of the last parliament, when Osborne announced that first 
Manchester deal our centralist instincts returned and we allowed the Tories to 
capture the spirit of the moment.

“As a result, we missed a golden opportunity to show how we could deliver – in 
a time of tight public finances - the three fundamental promises of the Labour 
party: to reduce economic unfairness, strengthen our communities and revitalise 
our national democracy.

“The time for equivocation is over. We must go further and faster than the 
Tories on devolution, and embrace a new radical localism that puts power back 
in the hands of our communities and restores a sense of civic pride.

“Labour must draw on our proud heritage of municipal socialism to reinvent 
England’s towns and cities. And this means a new era of civic provision for our 
essential services.”

But the former shadow education secretary will be highly critical of what he 
calls the Tories’ “secretive, haphazard and controlling” approach to 
devolution. He will say the government needs to do more to deliver greater 
financial autonomy, by allowing city regions to raise local tourist taxes; to 
shape public services at a city level with the appointment of city schools 
commissioners; and for essential services, such as water, energy and broadband 
to be delivered at a civic level.
 