
Sam Allardyce would be forgiven for wondering if, at some point, he is going 
to pinch himself awake and discover the last few months have been nothing more 
than a nightmare. The last time he had overseen a competitive match had been in 
Trnava back in September as Adam Lallana’s stoppage-time winner kickstarted 
England’s World Cup qualifying campaign with a 1-0 victory over Slovakia. Yet 
here he was cast again in that familiar role of firefighter, charged this time 
with haulingCrystal Palace <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> 
away from the relegation zone, and being quizzed post-match about the antics of 
a man who spends every other week dressed head to foot in a comedy hornet 
outfit.

It was not supposed to be like this. He could concentrate on the promise 
conjured by a welcome point gained in Palace’s struggle against the drop, and 
cite disappointment that his team had been so wasteful in fluffing their chance 
to double an early lead as Heurelho Gomes saved Christian Benteke’s dreadful 
first-half penalty. Yet, as he familiarises himself with new surroundings, his 
adjustment to life after England, with whom his tenure had not extended beyond 
67 days, may take time. He has inherited a team shorn of confidence, a group 
whose ambition rather shrunk as this game progressed despite the very clear 
shortcomings of their hosts. It wasWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> who felt the more relieved to 
have secured a draw.

The nonsense with the mascot reflected Palace’s frustrations. The incident was 
born of Miguel Britos’s challenge on Wilfried Zaha as the game drifted towards 
its conclusion, the winger crumpling to the turf only to be booked by Mark 
Clattenburg for simulation. There had been clear contact on the visiting 
player, though the locals – presumably relieved the referee had not been 
persuaded to award a third spot-kick of the afternoon – delighted raucously in 
the caution. There is history between Zaha and Watford, born of penalties won 
in the 2013 play-off final and a league game here last season, yet the sight of 
Harry the Hornet launching himself into a wildly dramatic dive in front of the 
24-year-old on the touchline after the final whistle was probably a little 
unnecessary.

Allardyce dismissed it as something for Watford to address. Or maybe the 
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, or even 
his former employers at the Football Association. “Everything doesn’t have to 
be a drama,” chuckled Walter Mazzarri, the Watford manager, though Zaha had 
been incensed and had to be dragged down the tunnel. The Palace manager 
presumably had not heard the Tannoy announcer’s reference to home supporters 
being free now to enjoy “a pint of wine” over what remains of the festive 
season, recalling footage from the newspaper sting which cost him his job with 
England. Allardyce probably spends his life braced for such sniggers these days.

He might also have predicted the equaliser. Palace have not kept a clean sheet 
away from home in a year and, for all that they ensured Watford did not muster 
a shot on target until beyond the hour-mark, the nerves crept back into their 
play as this game drifted into its last quarter. Damien Delaney’s grapple with 
Sebastian Prödl at Adlène Guedioura’s corner was ill-advised, the award 
legitimate, and the centre-half’s caution rules him out of the trip to the 
Emirates Stadium on Sunday.

Troy Deeney had waited almost 800 minutes of football to convert his 100th 
goal for this club, and duly thumped the penalty down the middle and in. “I’ve 
been having a bit of a stinker recently, so it’s a huge weight off my 
shoulders,” he said. “The gaffer had every right to drop me.” It had been Valon 
Behrami’s departure, following that of Daryl Janmaat after only four minutes, 
which had seen him summoned from the bench.

If only Benteke had been so decisive with his own spot-kick. Palace had been 
the slicker side in that first period, with Zaha and Andros Townsend tormenting 
their markers and Yohan Cabaye imperious in a playmaker’s role. The Frenchman 
had rammed in the visitors’ goal, turning neatly on to Townsend’s fine pass 
with the winger having left two opponents utterly bamboozled by his twisting 
run. When Gomes clipped Benteke as he reached Prödl’s poorly placed back-pass 
nine minutes from the break, Palace had their opportunity to double the lead.

The Belgian took the resultant spot-kick himself, staggering his run up as 
ever, but his effort was weak and blocked by the diving goalkeeper. It was the 
ninth save Gomes has mustered from 30 Premier League penalties at two clubs, a 
remarkable record even if Benteke’s attempt was dismal.

“You have to get in the mind of the player that is going to kick,” said the 
goalkeeper. “I saw some of Benteke before the game, he came to the ball so 
slow, so I knew that if I waited I could get the right side.” That technique 
will have to be re-assessed, with this Palace’s third penalty miss of the 
campaign. Had they all been scored, the team would have been five points better 
off and ensconced in mid-table.

That is food for thought for Allardyce as he seeks about instigating a 
revival. In time, he may consider this a decent enough start. It just felt as 
if it could have yielded so much more.
 