
Donald Trump should have a relatively clear road ahead at home for the 
implementation of his economic programme: with Republicans holding majorities 
in both houses of Congress, he seems likely to benefit from a break in the 
political gridlock that has paralysed the body for the last six years. But the
US economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> does not exist in a 
vacuum. If Trump is to succeed in delivering the high growth and genuine 
financial stability that he has promised, he will need some help from abroad.

Trump has established infrastructure investment, tax reform, and deregulation 
as central components of his strategy to boost the US economy’s actual and 
potential growth. Confident that his plan can unfold as intended, he has set
ambitious targets <https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/economy>, including 
GDP growth approaching 4% a year.

For now, investors seem to be pretty much sold. Under the assumption that the 
incoming Trump administration will ultimately refrain from triggering a trade 
war, they moved fast toprice in optimistic prospects 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/trump-market-rally-economic-growth-by-mohamed-a--el-erian-2016-11>
 for higher real growth, higher inflation and more money entering the financial 
markets. This has enabled the US Federal Reserve to begin to normalise its 
monetary policy stance; in addition to a 25-basis-pointinterest rate hike 
<https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20161214a.htm> on 14 
December, the Fed has indicated that the pace of such rises will accelerate in 
2017.

What the US economy doesn't need from Donald Trump | Joseph Stiglitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/what-the-us-economy-doesnt-need-from-donald-trump>
As a result, markets seem convinced that the US will gradually exit its 
prolonged period of excessive reliance on unconventional monetary policy, 
replacing it with a mix of looser fiscal policy and pro-growth structural 
reforms an approach much like that pursued by Ronald Reagan. Barack Obama 
sought to purse a similar approach, but was frustrated by a highly polarised 
Congress.

The expectation that Trump will have better luck on this front has produced a 
textbook asset-price response. Stock prices have climbed, led by financials and 
industrials; interest rates on US government bonds have risen, both on a 
standalone basis and relative to those in other advanced economies; and the 
dollar has surged to levels not seen since 2003.

Here is where the rest of the world comes in. Other major economies – namely, 
in Europe and Asia – may have a much harder time than the US rebalancing their 
policy mix (which continues to be characterised by excessively loose monetary 
policy, inadequate structural reforms, and, in some cases, excessively tight 
fiscal policy). But if they do not, the Fed’s continued interest-rate hikes 
would stimulate investors to trade their German and Japanese bonds, in 
particular – which are now bringing low and even negative returns – for 
higher-yielding US varieties. The resultant wave of capital flows into the US 
would push up the value of the dollar even further.

Though the US economy is doing much better than most of the other advanced 
economies, it is not yet on sound enough footing to withstand a prolonged 
period of a substantially stronger dollar, which would undermine its 
international competitiveness – and thus its broader economic prospects. 
Augmenting the risk is the prospect that such a development could spur the 
Trump administration to follow through on protectionist rhetoric, potentially 
undermining market and business confidence and, if things went far enough, even 
triggering a response from major trade partners.

If Trumponomics is to deliver on its promise, key countries – in particular, 
Germany (the largest and most influential European economy) and China and Japan 
(the world’s second- and third-largest economies, respectively) – must promote 
their own pro-growth policy adjustments. They should implement quickly 
growth-enhancing structural reforms to support monetary stimulus. Germany, in 
particular, would also need to pursue a looser fiscal policy, while adopting a 
more conciliatory attitude toward outright debt reduction for beleaguered 
Greece.

Unfortunately for Trump, the rest of the world does not seem prepared at this 
stage to pursue such a comprehensive policy shift. That is why, beyond 
advancing Trump’s pro-growth economic agenda at home, the newly appointed 
members of his economic team should be establishing direct contact with their 
German, Chinese, and Japanese counterparts, with a view to improving 
international policy coordination.

Germany, China and Japan have good reasons to embrace such an approach. They 
are not getting enough out of monetary expansion at this point; the risk of 
collateral damage and unintended consequences is rising; and pro-growth 
structural reforms are overdue. Furthermore, helping the US to achieve healthy 
and sustainable growth would bring about an indirect boost to their own 
economies. And it would help to avoid a scenario in which a Trump 
administration, under political pressure, would threaten protectionist 
measures, increasing the risk of a trade war that would hurt nearly everyone.


Despite the uncertainty surrounding Trump’s impending presidency, one thing is 
certain, at least on paper: he is in a strong position to boost US economic 
growth. He and his team must, however, take the time to dismantle potential 
international barriers to success.

• Mohamed El-Erian is chief economic adviser at Allianz and chairman of Barack 
Obama’s Global Development Council.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>, 2016
 