
Next Monday (27 May), the Guardian will begin the second of its road trips in 
America, pitching up in a part of the country without any plans, accommodation 
or a firm route.

I will be starting in Seattle before driving to Portland and ending up in San 
Francisco. I will be armed only with my mobile phone and its rubbish battery, 
Twitter and my laptop, meaning that for five days I will be guided down the 
west coast by tips sent in by you, dear readers. You'll be telling me where to 
go, where to stay and what to eat.Be gentle, please.

Every day I will tweet about what I'm doing. There will be pictures, videos 
and ablog on the Guardian Travel website following my progress.

Twitter will be my best friend, because from the moment I start out in Seattle 
on the first day, your tweets to@JacobSteinberg 
<https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg> or @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> or @GuardianUS 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianUS> will dictate where I go. Is it worth going to 
the Space Needle? Should I go looking for the Frasier Crane trail (I'm assuming 
there is a place called Café Nervosa)? Where's the best place to get breakfast 
on the first morning? Where's the best place to get a drink?

I won't be able to spend too much time in Seattle before the long drive to 
Portland begins, and it would also be great to hear of any sights that would 
make the journey more interesting – plus any food tips would be greatly 
appreciated. I'll also need somewhere to stay, in between the two cities so get 
thinking. Please! I really don't fancy roughing it in the car.

All anyone has said to me about Portland is that it's the hipster capital of 
the world, and that I should watch Portlandia before I go. But I live in 
London. I've spent a fair amount of time in Shoreditch.I know what a hipster 
looks like. Is there anything more that I should be trying to find in the city? 
Any parks or museums? How about a market? Should I go toPowell's City of Books? 
And seeing as I will be in Hipsterville, what's the best thing to do at night?

As for San Francisco, I have already been advised to visit the breweries and 
vineyards and todrive Highway 1 along the coast for the majestic views and 
small towns. What else? Sure, there's the Golden Gate bridge, North Beach and 
Fisherman's Wharf. But are there any places off the beaten track that I 
shouldn't miss? Is there somewhere all the other tourists wouldn't know about?

At this juncture, I suppose I should point out that I am not a travel writer – 
my day job is on the sports desk. With that in mind, it would also be great to 
know whether there any sporting events to look out for in any of the three 
cities. I will watch anything.

I will be tweeting @JacobSteinberg <https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg> before 
I set out on the trip so do be sure to join in andsend your all your best tips 
to me. 
 