
There has been little improvement in air quality over the past 20 years as 
transport planners focus on preventing road deaths, according to a study.

Two university academics set out to try to understand why there has been 
little improvement in air pollution concentrations from road transport since 
the UK signed up to international air quality standards in 1995, as part of the 
Environment Act.

Dr Tim Chatterton and Prof Graham Parkhurst, from the Bristol-based University 
of the West of England, said their work concluded thatUK transport planners 
were not taking the environmental impacts of transport choices sufficiently 
into account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/09/uk-government-accused-of-pursuing-gimmicks-to-tackle-air-pollution>
.

They said that current figures estimate that more than 50,000 deaths a year 
can be attributed to air pollution in the UK yet planners focus on reducing 
road accidents.

Air pollution threat hidden as research 'presumes people are at home': study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/24/air-pollution-dangers-flawed-research-new-york-study>
“Air pollution is perhaps the grossest manifestation of a general failure of 
UK transport planning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/09/uk-government-accused-of-pursuing-gimmicks-to-tackle-air-pollution>
to take the environmental impacts of transport choices sufficiently into 
account,” said Prof Parkhurst.

“Currently air pollution is a shared priority between the Department for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Department for Transport but shared 
priority does not mean equal priority.

“Environmental managers only identify and monitor the problems. Insufficient 
relevant priority has been given within the sector responsible for most 
relevant emissions – transport policy and planning – which has instead 
prioritised safety and economic growth.”

The academics also claimed there were limited regulatory and financial support 
for alternative transport and for local authorities seeking to introduce air 
improvement measures such as low emissions zones.

They also said there was a strong social equity issue, with households in 
poorer areas more exposed to much higher levels of air pollution, while 
contributing much less to the problem, mainly through driving less.

Prof Parkhurst and Dr Chatterton also called for poor air quality to be 
promoted as a public health issue.

“Air pollution-related morbidity and mortality are at epidemic levels and, 
although less obvious, are more significant than road transport collisions as a 
cause of death and injury,” Dr Chatterton said.

“Politicians at local and national levels must treat poor air quality as a 
public health priority, placing clear emphasis on the severity of the problem 
and the limitations of technological fixes.

“Existing approaches that focus on individual, voluntary, behaviour change and 
technological innovations are not sufficient to tackle poor air quality.

The findings are due to be presented at Royal Geographical Society annual 
international conference in London on Wednesday.
 