
The UK construction industry enjoyed the fastest growth in new orders in 
almost a year in December, according to a survey, but the weaker pound has 
driven up firms’ material costs to their highest in five-and-a-half years.

The upbeat report from Markit/CIPS comes a day after a strong survey for the 
manufacturing sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/uk-manufacturing-growth-at-a-30-month-high-says-pmi-survey>
, where activity hit a two-and-a-half-year high last month. Together they paint 
a better economic picture than many had expected following the Brexit vote in 
June. A third industry survey, for the dominant services sector, is due on 
Thursday.

The construction purchasing managers’ index rose to 54.2 in December from 52.8 
in November, signalling stronger expansion. Improving order books and a general 
rebound in business conditions helped lift construction output to the highest 
level since March, the report said.

UK manufacturing growth at a 30-month high, says PMI survey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/uk-manufacturing-growth-at-a-30-month-high-says-pmi-survey>
Housebuilding was the main driver behind construction growth again and grew at 
the fastest rate since January. Work on civil engineering projects also picked 
up at a robust pace while commercial construction increased only slightly.

However, cost and price pressures have increased further as a result of the 
sharp fall in sterling since the referendum. The latest rise in input costs, 
from 71.5 in November to 72.2, was to the highest level since April 2011 and 
construction firms are passing on higher imported raw material prices to 
customers, with output prices rising at the fastest pace since March.

Tim Moore, senior economist at IHS Markit and author of the survey, said: “All 
three main areas of construction activity have started to recover from last 
summer’s soft patch, but in each case growth remains much weaker than the 
cyclical peaks seen in 2014.”

Paul Trigg, construction specialist and assistant head of risk underwriting at 
the trade credit insurer Euler Hermes, was also cautious. “Business confidence 
across construction remains high. But the industry is yet to feel the full 
brunt of Brexit and there are concerns the current work pipeline will only 
carry contractors in the short-term.

“Plummeting levels of foreign direct investment are expected to curb office 
development, which will hurt contractors as competition ramps up and squeezes 
low industry margins even further.”
 