
Britain’s labour market showed signs of slowing in November as the number of 
people in work declined and wage growth slowed for the first time since August.

The number of people in employment fell by 9,000 to 31.8 million while 
month-on-month wage growth, including bonuses, dropped from 2.9% to 2.8%.

Analysts said the figures showed that a return to near 3% wage growth in the 
months after the Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/uk-jobs-market-ons-figures-brexit-employers-wait-and-see>
 vote appeared to have been short lived.


John Philpott, director of theJobsEconomist.org, said the employment figures 
also revealed tumbling levels of self-employment, part-time working and 
employment of temporary workers, who had borne the brunt of the slowdown.

“Don’t be fooled by headline news of falling unemployment and higher wage 
growth. The jobs market is at present slowing not growing, as those in 
precarious work know only too well,” he said.
 See the full visual 
Fathom Consulting said: “We detect a slight softening in the labour market 
towards the end of last year. Much of the reduction in unemployment reflected a 
decline in the number of people seeking work, rather than an increase in 
employment.”

The number of self-employed workers who say they work more than 16 hours a 
week declined by 49,000 in the three months to November, while the number of 
part-time employees dropped by 60,000 and temporary workers by 35,000.

Only a sharp rise of 143,000 in the number of economically inactive people 
prevented the weaker jobs numbers from showing up as higher unemployment, 
Philpott said.

The Office for National Statistics’ preferred measure of the labour market 
data is based on a three-month average compared with the previous three months 
to iron out sometimes volatile month-on-month data.

This showed that in the three months ending in November wage growth picked up 
and unemployment fell.

Pay growth including bonuses picked up to 2.8% from 2.6% while unemployment 
fell by 52,000 to 1.6 million. The jobless rate was unchanged at 4.8% – still 
an 11-year low.

The number of people claiming jobless benefits also fell, by 10,100 to 
797,800, between November and December, defying City expectations of a 5,000 
increase.

Suren Thiru, head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said the 
UK jobs market was proving resilient and remained “a major bright spot for the 
UK economy”.

Related: Pound soars but FTSE falls after Theresa May's Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/pound-ftse-theresa-may-brexit-speech-sterling-dollar>

David Freeman, a senior statistician at the ONS, said: “While employment is 
little changed on the quarter, the rate remains at an historical high. The rate 
at which pay is increasing continues to pick up in cash terms, though it 
remains moderate.”

The Resolution Foundation said the modest growth in pay was likely to fall 
back over the coming months, ending several years of healthy rises in incomes 
once inflation is taken into account.

The thinktank’s latest pay projection shows that with inflation rising 
sharply, real pay growth is poised to fall to around 1.4% in December, and to 
around 1% in January, less than half the pre-crisis average of 2.2%.


The senior policy analyst Laura Gardiner said: “Pay growth is set to change 
rapidly as inflation picks up. The big question for this year is whether pay 
settlements respond to rising prices and a tight jobs market. If they don’t, a 
fresh pay squeeze later this year remains on the cards.”

Rachel Smith, principal labour market economist at the employers group the 
CBI, said the flexibility of the labour market remained a mainstay of the UK 
economy and would be key to making a success of Brexit.

But she added the government would need to step up investment to prevent a 
decline in living standards.

“Pay growth is likely to be eroded by increasing inflation during this year, 
underlining the need for a regionally focused industrial strategy that powers 
the productivity growth that will enable wages to rise more swiftly,” she said.
 