
Britain will have less than 18 months to negotiate Brexit and must end up with 
a worse deal than it currently has as an EU member, the bloc’s chief negotiator 
has said.

In remarks that seemed to surprise London, Michel Barnier said the EU would 
need time to define its stance at the start of the two-year exit process, and 
the European parliament, EU-27 and UK government several months to ratify it at 
the end.

Twenty reasons why Brexit will be even trickier than we thought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/twenty-reasons-brexit-trickier-than-we-thought>
Adding to the pressure on the government as Theresa May accepted a Labour 
demand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/may-says-she-will-reveal-brexit-plan-before-triggering-article-50>
 that the government publish its plan for Brexit before triggering article 50, 
Barnier also said it was “difficult to imagine” an interim deal bridging 
Britain’s departure from the bloc and any future trade agreement.

“Time will be very short,” the former finance commissioner stressed in his 
first press conference since taking up the post in October. “It’s clear that 
the period of actual negotiations will be shorter than two years. All in all, 
there will be less than 18 months to negotiate.”

Barnier, who has visited 18 EU countries in recent weeks to hammer out a 
common position on Brexit and aims to hold talks in all 27 remaining members by 
the end of January, said the EU would base its approach on four key principles.

It would seek first to preserve the unity and interests of its 27 remaining 
members, he said, and refuse all negotiation before notification. Brexit must 
be an inferior deal for Britain than EU membership, and curbs on free movement 
were not compatible with full access to the single market.

“Being in the EU comes with rights and benefits – third countries can never 
have the same rights and benefits,” he said in Brussels. “The single market and 
its four freedoms are indivisible. Cherry picking is not an option.”

Barnier said that if the UK triggered article 50 by the end of March, as 
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has said she 
would, formal negotiations on Britain’s departure from the EU could start “a 
few weeks later”, but agreement would need to be reached by October 2018 to 
allow time for ratification.

His substantive remarks on the EU’s position came in contrast to comments on 
Tuesday from May. Amid all the terms – hard, soft, black, white, grey – coined 
for variations of Brexit,the prime minister said on a visit to Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-calls-for-red-white-and-blue-brexit>
 that “what Britain was actually looking for is a red, white and blue Brexit”.

“That is the right deal for the United Kingdom, what is going to be the right 
relationship for the UK with theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> once we’ve left,” May said, without 
elaborating on what she meant. “That’s what we’re about, that’s what we’ll be 
working on.”

The continuing opacity of the UK’s Brexit strategy has led to mounting recent 
frustration in European capitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/brexit-rising-frustration-across-eu-at-britains-unclear-exit-strategy>
. Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister, called bluntly on Tuesday 
for a fundamentally “different attitude” from the UK.

“The things I have been hearing so far are incompatible with smooth, and 
incompatible with orderly,” Dijsselbloem, who also chairs the 19-strong group 
of eurozone countries, said at a meeting of the group in Brussels.

Responding to May’s comments, the Liberal Democrat leader, Tim Farron, called 
the slogan “jingoistic claptrap” and said it showed no further policy 
development. “The prime minister has surpassed herself with this statement,” he 
said.


Downing St sources admitted Barnier’s comments were the first time it had been 
made aware EU officials wanted to complete Brexit negotiations within 18 
months, but said the Brexit process belonged to the UK as much as to the EU.


“It is the first I had heard of it,” the sources said, adding that the Brexit 
broker’s remarks had “not been the focus of the prime minister’s day”. But 
Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, appeared unconcerned.

“I think that with a fair wind and everybody acting in a positive and a 
comprising mood … we can get a great deal for the UK and for the rest ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> within that timeframe,” he 
said. “That timeframe seems to me to be absolutely ample.”

Underlining the EU’s unusual solidarity on the issue, Barnier’s comments were 
echoed by the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, who told a conference of her 
CDU party in Berlin that the “have-cake-and-eat-it” deal apparently sought by 
London was not on offer.

“The four freedoms - free movement for people, goods, services and financial 
market products – must be safeguarded,” Merkel said. “Only then can there be 
access to the single market. We will not allow cherry-picking.”

Barnier said there may be “some point and usefulness” to an interim 
arrangement to avoid the economic turmoil feared by many British businesses if 
article 50 talks end and Britain leaves the EU with no future trade agreement 
yet concluded.

But he said that could only be considered once Britain had explained exactly 
what it wanted from its future relationship with the EU, and the bloc had 
established what it could accept.

The EU “needs to know what the new partnership with Britain would look like to 
weigh up the usefulness of a transitional deal”, Barnier said. “As we don’t 
know what the UK wants and is waiting for, it’s difficult to imagine one.”

He declined to discuss what kind of future relationship might be possible, 
though he cited the example of Norway, which accepts free migration and pays 
the EU in return for access to EU markets.

The chancellor, Philip Hammond, confirmed in Brussels on Tuesday that Britain 
could continue to pay for access to some parts of the single market.

On the debate in Britain over a hard Brexit, leaving the UK outside the single 
market, or a soft Brexit preserving more ties, Barnier said he could not say 
what the difference was.


“I can say what Brexit is,” he said. “We want a clear agreement, we want to 
reach this agreement in the limited time we have available and we want it to 
take account of our point of view, the interests of the 27 as defined by the 
European council, and [be] something that preserves the unity of the 27.”

Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> had assembled a solid 
team combining all the necessary expertise and would be ready to begin talks as 
soon as it received formal notification, Barnier said, but added that everyone 
involved in Brexit was entering uncharted waters.























 