
On Tuesday, Uli Hoeness cheered his club from the stands as they progressed to 
the next round in the Champions League against Arsenal. on Thursday, the former 
Germany international and president ofBayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> sat in silence as a judge 
sentenced him to three and a half years in jail for tax fraud calculated to 
have cost the state more than €28.5m.

Hoeness, who won the World Cup with West Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> in 1974, last year admitted to 
squirrelling large profits made on the stock market into a Swiss bank account, 
opting for what German law calls "voluntary disclosure", where evaders can 
avoid trial by detailing taxes they have skipped and paying them back with 6% 
interest.But during this week's trial in Munich, it not only emerged that the 
sums Hoeness evaded were almost 10 times higher than previously assumed, but 
also that he failed to disclose his accounts within the rules.

Prosecutor Achim von Engel described the case as a "particularly grave case of 
tax evasion", calling for five and a half years in prison. The defence sought a 
suspended sentence and now has a week to appeal against the verdict.

Even before the sentencing, the most high-profile tax evasion trial in German 
history has already had a noticeable effect: more than 26,000 German tax 
evaders have opted for voluntary disclosure since the Hoeness revelations hit 
the headlines in 2013. In Bavaria alone, the figure has quadrupled since 2012.

Reactions varied from fans' laments to those decrying the sentence for 
leniency. The country's largest-selling tabloid, Bild, welcomed the verdict: 
"Bitter for Hoeness, good for tax justice", ran the headline.On Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/danielmack/status/444101629491818496>, Daniel Mack, a 
Green politician, called the sentence "the longest sending-off in Bundesliga 
history".

Hoeness's defence lawyer, Hanns Feigen, had repeatedly drawn attention to the 
social causes to which the Bayern president had committed himself. 
Strong-willed and often disliked by other teams' fans, Hoeness also had a 
reputation for running Germany's most successful club with the genial 
atmosphere of a family business.

He arranged for his former strike partner Gerd Müller to be given a job at the 
club when the retired star was suffering from alcoholism, and organised support 
for another player, the talented midfielder Sebastian Deisler, who was blighted 
by bouts of depression. Repeatedly lauded for his charity work, Hoeness told 
Bild said in 2005: "I know it's stupid, but I pay all my taxes." The details 
that have emerged over the last 15 months paint a different picture. Between 
2001 and 2010, he made more than 50,000 stockmarket transactions. A 
self-confessed luddite when it came to using computers, Hoeness conducted most 
of his deals via a hand-held pager, often during matches or boardroom meetings. 
Among Bayern colleagues, the gadget was jokingly known as Hoeness's "Tamagochi".

Asked in an interview with Die Zeit 
<http://www.zeit.de/2013/19/uli-hoeness-interview> if he was addicted to 
gambling, Hoeness said: "I don't consider myself ill, if that's what you mean 
... Maybe I was close to it for a couple of years. But nowadays I consider 
myself cured." His son Florian, 34, had interjected to point out that "the 
family begs to differ a little on this point".

With Barcelona having recently been charged for tax fraud over the signing of 
Brazilian star Neymar, two of Europe's most successful clubs are now under 
pressure to repair their reputation. Bayern say they won't comment on the 
sentence until after the appeal, though a statement on the future of the club's 
presidency from the supervisory board – which contains high-profile executives 
from Adidas, German Telekom, Volkswagen and Audi – is expected on Friday.

On Saturday, Bayern will play Bayer Leverkusen in the German league. If 
Hoeness attends, it is likely to be the last match he will watch in person for 
some time.
 