
Public sector workers including doctors and nurses will receive a 1% pay rise 
from the government, prompting an angry response from their unions.

More than 1 million employees, including staff in the armed forces, will 
receive the award from this year. Ministers have claimed the amount was in line 
with its policy of an average 1% pay increase in 2016-17.


NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> staff, doctors and dentists, and 
members of the armed forces will receive an average of 1%. The only exception 
will be prison service staff who will get 1.36% as an “exceptional award” for a 
“highly ambitious” overhaul of the prison system.


In contrast, MPs are set to receive a 1.3% pay rise of £962 nine months after 
they received a backdated 10% pay rise from £67,060 to £74,000.


Greg Hands, chief secretary to the Treasury, said the announcement follows 
recommendations from pay review bodies. “The independent OBR [Office for Budget 
Responsibility] estimates that 200,000 public sector jobs have been protected 
thanks to our average 1% pay policy so we can continue to deliver crucial 
public services,” he said.

We must not take NHS workers for granted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jan/26/we-must-not-take-nhs-workers-for-granted>
“The independent pay review bodies have worked hard to bring forward a 
balanced and affordable set of recommendations that delivers on our commitments 
to increase pay by an average of 1% across the workforces.”

Junior doctors, who will stage a 48-hour strike from Wednesday over their 
contracts row with the government, will receive the 1% increase from April.

Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> union leaders said 1% was 
not enough. Unison’s head of health, Christina McAnea, said: “This 1% pay rise 
falls way below what health workers need and deserve after years of pay cuts, 
especially as changes to national insurance and pension contributions will 
absorb much of this miserly increase.


“The governments in Scotland and Wales are committed to paying health workers 
the living wage. NHS staff earning below this in England and Northern Ireland 
will quite rightly want to know why tackling poverty pay in the NHS in their 
countries isn’t a political priority.

“It’s no surprise that many desperately hard-up health workers are leaving the 
NHS to come back as agency staff, where they can earn more money.”

Janet Davies, general secretary of the Royal College of Nursing, said: “Nurses 
have been telling the government that they are struggling to make ends meet, 
and are asking themselves if they can afford to continue nursing. Their 
warnings have repeatedly fallen on deaf ears. The earnings of the people who 
are looking after us and keeping our health service going have fallen way 
behind everyone else. Worse, they have fallen way behind inflation.

“Restraining pay while demand increases – and there is a continuing staff 
shortage – is a false economy. More and more nurses and healthcare assistants 
are being forced to consider their future in the profession that they love. 
Nurses cannot afford for this to continue, and neither can the health service.”

Danny Mortimer, chief executive of NHS Employers, said: “Employers in the NHS 
will welcome the acceptance by the government of the clear recommendations of 
the NHS pay review bodies.


“At the same time, they recognise that the continued restraint of pay 
increases across the public sector is of concern to their staff and also 
restricts the ability to agree reform of non-medical contracts with staff 
representatives.”

The Department of Health said, as they move to the new contract in August, the 
award has already been added to new pay progression points.
 