How did Donald Trump launch his presidential campaign?  During an episode of 
The Apprentice  He rode down an escalator into the lobby of a skyscraper 
bearing his nameTrump used his to criticise Mexican immigrants, accusing Mexico 
of “bringing their worst people” to America, including criminals and “rapists”. 
The New York Times reported on the launch as 'an improbable quest for the 
Republican nomination'.  Via a series of heated tweets  While travelling over 
Washington in a private jet During Hillary Clinton's own official launch, she 
accused her Republican rivals of singing “the same old song”. Which Beatles hit 
was she referring to?  The long and winding road  Let it be  Yesterday 
Clinton's opening attack lines on her Republican rivals centred on climate 
change, equal rights for LGBT people, the economy and their threat to Obama's 
health care reforms  Revolution While the Democratic race was soon dominated by 
Clinton and Sanders, the GOP had the busiest field for a century. How many 
Republican candidates were there in total?  10  13  17 Dropping out of the 
Republican race were *deep breath* Rick Perry, Scott Walker, Bobby Jindal, 
Lindsey Graham, George Pataki, Mike Huckabee, Rand Paul, Rick Santorum, Carly 
Fiorina, Chris Christie, Jim Gilmore, Jeb Bush, Ben Carson, Marco Rubio, Ted 
Cruz and John Kasich  21 Who formally announced his own presidential bid by 
saying: "This grotesque level of inequality is immoral. It is bad economics. It 
is unsustainable. This type of rigged economy is not what America is supposed 
to be about."  Donald Trump  Ben Carson  Bernie Sanders The leftwing Vermont 
senator wasn't given much of a hope when he launched his campaign in May 2015, 
but ended up pushing Clinton hard for the nomination  Rand Paul Donald Trump 
caused outrage with his proposal to ban all Muslims from entering the United 
States, following the San Bernardino terrorist attack. Which former President 
did Trump cite in defence of his plans?  Franklin D Roosevelt Trump told Good 
Morning America: "What I'm doing is no different than FDR," referring to 
presidential proclamations made after Pearl Harbor which limited the rights of 
Japanese, German and Italian nationals living in the United States. "I mean, 
take a look at what FDR did many years ago and he's one of the most highly 
respected presidents," he added.  George W Bush  Barack Obama  Abraham Lincoln 
Name the Libertarian party candidate  Gary Jackson  Gary Johnson Johnson won 
just under 1% of the vote as Libertarian party candidate in 2012, but polls 
suggest he could do a lot better this time around. Could Johnson affect the 
election with an unprecedentedly high third-party vote?  Gary Jefferson  Gary 
Anderson Who were the Democratic and Republican winners of the Iowa caucuses?  
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump  Bernie Sanders and Ted Cruz  Hillary Clinton 
and Ted CruzClinton was given notice that her journey to the nomination wasn't 
going to be easy, as she won the Iowa caucus over Sanders by an extremely small 
margin. Cruz, Trump and Rubio were the top three of a congested Republican field
 Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump Trump's campaign continued to gather momentum 
– his second place in Iowa was swiftly followed by victory in New Hampshire. 
Who elicited criticism from Trump by saying: “A person who thinks only about 
building walls, wherever they may be, and not building bridges, is not 
Christian.”  Barack Obama  Ted Cruz  Mike Huckabee  Pope Francis Trump 
responded by calling Pope Francis's comments "disgraceful". “The pope said 
negative things about me because the Mexican government convinced him Trump is 
not a good guy,” he added. Which amendment to the US constitution came under 
fire from Trump during a rally in Fort Worth, Texas?  The first amendment Trump 
pledged if elected president to “open up our libel laws so when [newspapers] 
write purposely negative stories … we can sue them and make lots of money”. The 
first amendment states that “Congress shall make no law … abridging the freedom 
of speech, or of the press”  The second amendment  The fourth amendment  The 
fifth amendment Clinton was attacked by Bernie Sanders for making millions of 
dollars in speeches to private groups or companies after leaving office as 
secretary of state in 2013. What was Clinton's standard fee?  $75,000  $150,000 
 $225,000After leaving office as secretary of state in 2013, Clinton embarked 
on a career speaking to banks, securities firms and other financial 
institutions. Tax returns show that her minimum fee was $225,000 per speech. 
Speeches given by Hillary Clinton to major Wall Street banks including Goldman 
Sachs were leaked by WikiLeaks in October. Hillary and Bill Clinton earned 
$10.6m in 2015, according to a tax filing released by her campaign. Trump has 
not, to date, released any recent tax returns.  $400,000 “You wouldn’t want me 
to condemn a group that I know nothing about. I’d have to look. If you would 
send me a list of the groups, I will do research on them and certainly I would 
disavow if I thought there was something wrong." What group was Trump talking 
about?  American Nazi Party  Ku Klux Klan Trump's comments came after David 
Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader, urged sympathisers to back Trump's 
campaign. “I don’t know anything about David Duke. I don’t know anything about 
what you’re even talking about with white supremacy or white supremacists,” 
Trump added.  Golden Dawn  Front National Sanders fought on against Clinton 
until late June. How many delegates did he win in total? Hint: 2,382 delegates 
were needed for the nomination  1,247  1,463  1,893 Hillary Clinton won with 
2,814 – 2,205 pledged delegates and 609 superdelegates  2,128 Presumptive 
Republican nominee following the withdrawal of the other Republican candidates, 
Trump took time out from campaigning to visit Scotland the day after Brexit. 
What did he say?  “You know, they've made Britain great again"  "Basically, 
they took back their country. That's a great thing"Speaking during a visit to 
his Turnberry golf course, Trump said: “You see it all over Europe and many 
other cases where they want to take their borders back. They want to take their 
monetary [sic] back. They want to take a lot of things back. They want to have 
a country again. I think you are going to have this more and more. I really 
believe that. And it is happening in the United States.”  "Britain needs to be 
strong, and I think this shows how strong they can be"  "I'm so happy, you 
know, for Scotland, and Britain. I'm so proud" Trump's nomination as official 
Republican candidate at the GOP convention was overshadowed by a controversial 
speech by Trump's wife, Melania Trump. Whose 2008 speech was she accused of 
plagiarising?  Hillary Clinton's  Gabrielle Giffords's  Elizabeth Warren's  
Michelle Obama'sA junior aide eventually took the blame for including Obama 
lines in the speech Which of the following stars did not appear at the 
Democratic national convention?  Sigourney Weaver  Meryl Streep  Katy Perry  
Sharon StoneThe lineup also included Alicia Keys, Paul Simon, Lena Dunham and 
Sarah SIlverman Who did Donald Trump claim 'founded Isis?'  Abu Musab al-Zarqawi
 Osama bin Laden  Saddam Hussain  Barack Obama The comments came during a rally 
in Sunrise, Florida: "He is the founder of Isis. He founded Isis. And, I would 
say the co-founder would be Crooked Hillary Clinton.” Clinton came under fire 
for a speech in which she claimed 'half' of Trump's supporters are 'racist, 
sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamaphobic – you name it'. How did she 
describe them?  The hatbox of depravity  The cave of unacceptability  The 
underbelly of evil  The basket of deplorables In a statement released the 
following day, the Democratic presidential nominee repeated that she was being 
“grossly generalistic” but expressed regret for “saying ‘half’”, adding: “That 
was wrong.” The second televised presidential debate was overshadowed by a tape 
in which Trump was heard using obscene language to brag about groping women. 
“You can do anything,” he boasted to a TV host. The host in question is a 
cousin of which former president?  Bill Clinton  George W Bush Billy Bush was 
sacked by NBC’s Today show following the release of the 2005 recording  Barack 
Obama  Jimmy Carter Which website did Clinton's team dub a “propaganda arm of 
the Russian government” after the site released slew of hacked emails from 
Clinton campaign chairman John Podesta?  Russia Today  WikiLeaks “You are no 
media organization,” Clinton spokesman Brian Fallon tweeted at WikiLeaks. “You 
are a propaganda arm of the Russian government, running interference for their 
pet candidate, Trump."  4chan  Pravda A late October surprise came when James 
Comey told Congress the FBI had found new emails that 'may be pertinent' to a 
previously closed investigation into Hillary Clinton's email use. The messages 
were found on the laptop of which former congressman?  Tom DeLay  Mark Foley  
John Edwards  Anthony Weiner Weiner is the estranged husband of Clinton aide 
Huma Abedin. Abedin and Weiner separated after Weiner was caught in 2011, 2013 
and again in 2016 sending women sexually explicit text messages and pictures of 
himself undressed.  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  