
The US department of justice has accused Barclays of jeopardising the 
financial position of millions of American homeowners over a decade-old 
mortgage bond mis-selling scandal.

The DoJ is now taking the bank to court, in what was thought to be the first 
time an institution had failed to reached a settlement with the US authorities 
over the sale of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) in the run-up to 
the banking crisis. Responding to the news on Thursday night, Barclays said it 
would fight the case.

Loretta Lynch, the US attorney general, said: “Financial institutions like 
Barclays occupy a position of vital public trust. Ordinary Americans depend on 
their assurances of transparency and legitimacy, and entrust these banks with 
their valuable savings.”

Deutsche Bank reaches $7.2bn settlement with US in mortgages case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/23/deutsche-bank-reaches-72bn-settlement-with-us-in-mortgages-case>
As the DoJ issued its civil claim 
<https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/united-states-sues-barclays-bank-recover-civil-penalties-fraud-sale-residential-mortgage>
 in the New York courts, Lynch said: “As alleged in this complaint, Barclays 
jeopardised billions of dollars of wealth through practices that were plainly 
irresponsible and dishonest. With this filing, we are sending a clear message 
that the department of justice will not tolerate the defrauding of investors 
and the American people.”

No figure was released about the sum that the DoJ had been seeking from 
Barclays for settling the complaint, which was announced amid speculation that 
Deutsche Bank was close to reaching an agreement over the mis-selling scandal.

Deutsche Bank has been facing a $14bn settlement with the DoJ over similar 
allegations and when the size of the potential penalty leaked in September the 
shares in Germany’s biggest bank tumbled to new lows. Deutsche’s chief 
executive, John Cryan, has repeatedly insisted that it will not agree to pay 
such a penalty for a mis-selling saga that dates back to 2005.

Earlier this week Reuters reported that the Swiss bank Credit Suisse had been 
asked to pay between $5bn and $7bn to settle the long-running investigation.

Bailed-out Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/royal-bank-of-scotland-from-bailout-to-sell-off-rbs>
 has repeatedly warned that it too faces a penalty from the DoJ over the 
investigation that reflects an attempt by outgoing president Barack Obama to 
hold banks accountable for selling the bonds – which packaged up home loans – 
without telling investors about the risks. Analysts have calculated that RBS 
could face a bill of up to £9bn.

 Since the election of Donald Trump – who takes office next month – analysts 
have been to trying to gauge what impact this might have on outstanding 
investigations.


In an announcement that will be released to the London Stock Exchange on 
Friday, Barclays said it would fight the DoJ.“Barclays rejects the claims made 
in the complaint. Barclays considers that the claims made in the complaint are 
disconnected from the facts. We have an obligation to our shareholders, 
customers, clients, and employees to defend ourselves against unreasonable 
allegations and demands. Barclays will vigorously defend the complaint and seek 
its dismissal at the earliest opportunity.”

But Bill Baer, principal deputy associate attorney general, said: “The 
widespread fraud that investment banks like Barclays committed in the packaging 
and sale of residential mortgage-backed securities injured tens of thousands of 
investors and significantly contributed to the financial crisis of 2008.

 “Millions of homeowners were left with homes they could not afford, leaving 
entire neighbourhoods devastated. The government’s complaint alleges that 
Barclays fraudulently sold investors RMBS full of mortgages it knew were likely 
to fail, all the while telling investors that the mortgages backing the 
securities were sound.”

The complaint covered the period between 2005 and 2007 and includes 
allegations of misleading staff against two Barclays staff. The scheme involved 
36 RMBS deals in which $31bn worth of loans were packaged up in securitisations.

The DoJ more usually reaches settlements with major financial firms over its 
investigations and has done so in relation to RMBS with a number of US banks, 
including JP Morgan, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Bank of America Merrill 
Lynch and Citi. The US has recouped $48bn so far as a result of the mortgage 
bond mis-selling.

Barclays has set aside £4bn for upcoming fines and litigation but did not have 
a specific provision for RMBS.

Bloomberg reported that Barclays had hired law firm Williams & Connolly to run 
its defence against the DoJ.
 