
Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> loves New 
York, and the Big Apple is falling for Konta. On her second visit to the US 
Open, she has reached the fourth round again. This time she is in better shape 
to go deep into the fortnight – and seemingly recovered after collapsing on 
court in her second-round match against the cultured Bulgarian Tsvetana 
Pironkova, two days previous.

It took two-time Wimbledon champion Petra Kvitova to stop her 16-match 
unbeaten summer run in the fourth round at Flushing Meadows last year after she 
had rousing victories over Andrea Petkovic, Victoria Azarenka and Simona Halep. 
This year, it looks less demanding and she has hit an even higher pitch of 
excellence.

Andy Murray happy to ride the storm as he prepares for US Open third round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/andy-murray-ride-the-storm-us-open-third-round>
The British No1, who took 52 minutes in moderate heat to dismiss the talented 
Swiss teenager Belinda Bencic 6-2, 6-1, said she is still recovering from the 
sudden and worrying shutdown of her system on an outside court on Wednesday, 
but feels confident she is strong enough to carry on in the tournament.

“I’m still constantly working on recovering,” she said. “It’s a management 
process more than anything. But I feel good. I feel well enough to play. I’m 
really happy with how I was able to really focus on the match at hand and the 
work at hand, and then put all else out of my mind.

“It was a slightly new situation, the aftermath of it, and even today and now 
obviously I have one more chance to come out and play.”

Without giving anything away about the nature of her complaint or the specific 
cause of her collapse, she said her recovery was all-embracing. “In every way. 
It was quite a traumatic experience. I’m just still working on getting better. 
The best I can do for myself is move on from it, and I felt I did that.”

Serena Williams set to pass Martina Navratilova’s grand slam win tally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/serena-williams-martina-navratilova-grand-slam-win-tally>
Obviously answering questions about it was not part of what she calls her 
“process”. But she looked a good deal better than she did on the night of the 
incident when she was understandably still in a state of minor shock.

Friday’s win, however, was by a distance the best of her three here so far and 
her most convincing performance in months; it was controlled, incisive and 
imaginative. She rarely can have served better or hit her ground strokes with 
more power or certainty: eight aces without a double fault, as well as 29 clean 
winners and only six unforced errors. She lost just one point on her first 
serve.

“I felt I did a good job staying focused on the things I want to execute and 
how I wanted to play,”Konta said. “I definitely made it hard for her to get 
into the match.”

Her opponent on Sunday is the 26-year-old Latvian, Anastasija Sevastova, 
ranked 48 in the world, and who pulled off her second surprise of the first 
week when she beat the Ukrainian Kateryna Bondarenko, 6-4, 6-1. Earlier she 
beat the world No3 and French Open champion, Garbiñe Muguruza.

“I have played her once before actually, in my first Australian Open 
qualifying, so I do know her and I have been on court with her,” Konta said. 
“That was a number of years ago. She’s obviously playing very good tennis. She 
is a very good player. I have a lot of respect for her.”

Bencic, who was out for a couple of months with back problems, and had a wrist 
injury as well, has done well to get as far as the third round.

She briefly contained Konta’s power with some clever changes of angle and pace 
in the early exchanges, but dropped serve in the fourth and seventh games, 
unable to counter the heavy returns, and saving the set was beyond her. As was 
the match, Konta showcasing all her talent for the 24 minutes it lasted.

That was four minutes shorter than her first-set blitz of Pironkova before her 
worrying shake-and-shiver meltdown at the end of the second set on Wednesday. 
She seems to have fully recovered.

“I feel overwhelmingly happy,” Konta said. “She’s in great shape,” Annabel 
Croft, the former British No 1 said.

Meanwhile, her nearest peers are struggling. The eighth seed Madison Keys took 
two hours and nine minutes to overcome the nervous challenge of the Japanese 
teenager Naomi Osaka 7-5, 4-6, 7-6 (3). Keys, who also had troubles getting out 
of the first round against Alison Riske, was 2-5 down in the third.

Keys plays Caroline Wozniacki, who looks to be on a roll. On day five, she 
needed less than an hour-and-a-half to beat the Romanian Monica Niculescu 6-3, 
6-1.

On Arthur Ashe, the world No1 Novak Djokovic was gifted a second match when 
the unseeded and temperamental Russian Mikhail Youzhny retired with a leg 
injury trailing 2-4 in the first set after only 32 minutes of tennis.

In the second round, Djokovic, who is nursing a wrist injury, benefited from a 
walkover when Jiri Vesely, who beat and bagelled him in Monte Carlo this 
summer, withdrew injured.

Novak Djokovic v Mikhail Youzhny: US Open third round – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/02/novak-djokovic-mikhail-youzhny-us-open-tennis-third-round-live> 