
Australian teenager Nick Kyrgios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> has continued his strong grand 
slam run with a straight-sets win over Andreas Seppi to reach the US Open third 
round at Flushing Meadows.


Kyrgios produced a serving masterclass to sweep past the seasoned Italian 6-4 
7-6 (7-2) 6-4 and soften the blow of fellow Australian Samantha Stosur’s 
shattering defeat earlier on Thursday.


The 19-year-old Wimbledon quarter-finalist hit 22 aces and didn’t drop serve 
once to book a showdown on Saturday with Spanish 14th seed Tommy Robredo, the 
man who stopped Roger Federer last year in New York.


“If I play like I played today, just do whatever I can to recover and keep 
having fun, I can make an impact,” the 19-year-old said after dispatching the 
experienced Italian.


Kyrgios said he was pumped to have followed up his giant-killing quarter-final 
run at Wimbledon – where he took down Rafael Nadal and Richard Gasquet – with a 
last-32 showing in New York.


“It’s always a good feeling to win another match at a grand slam, especially 
new ground for me,” he said.


“[I’ve] never made it past the first round at the US Open main draw. To have 
gone to the third round, having beaten some quality opponents, feels good.”


Almost certain to replace Lleyton Hewitt as Australia’s new No.1, Kyrgios said 
it was easy to stay focused knowing next up is Robredo, the seasoned 14th seed 
who defeated his boyhood idol Roger Federer in the fourth round last year.


“He’s probably one of the most experienced players on tour,” Kyrgios said.


“He’s still playing some really good tennis. I know I can’t get too confident. 
I’m going to go out there, have fun, just play my game and see how it goes.”

But while Kyrgios is savouring another victory in his rise up the rankings, 
Stosur departed Flushing Meadows shellshocked after suffering a second-round 
defeat.


The 2011 champion blew two match points in a 3-6 6-3 7-6 (10-8) loss to 
unseeded Estonian Kaia Kanepi.


Stosur appeared in command but unravelled in the second set, falling behind 
5-0, and, despite leading 4-1 in the third-set tiebreaker and then having match 
points, was never truly able to wrestle back control in another disappointing 
early exit.


The Queenslander was knocked out in the opening round last year at Flushing 
Meadows, falling to 17-year-old world No 296 Victoria Duval.


“I’m just really disappointed right now,” she said.


“It’s one of those matches where you walk off and think ‘what just happened?’


“I got off to a good start, really lost my way in the second set but started 
to get it back.


“But in the third set, we’re both playing pretty decent at the same time and 
it becomes a real fight and to get to two match points and not win, it’s not 
easy to walk off court losing.”


Fellow Australian Casey Dellacqua earlier lived up to her newfound seeded 
status to reach the third round for the first time.


Dellacqua overcame a one-set deficit, some dubious umpiring and 40 unforced 
errors to defeat Chinese qualifier Qiang Wang 4-6 6-4 6-2 in a major 
breakthrough for the 29-year-old.


With her expected third-round opponent, Serbian eighth seed Ana Ivanovic, 
faltering, Dellacqua’s win presented the West Australian with a big opportunity 
to make the last 16 at a major for the first time outside of Australia.


The free-swinging left-hander will play unseeded Karolina Pliskova on Saturday 
after the Czech upset Ivanovic 7-5 6-4 in their second-round contest.


“I am not overly surprised she beat Ivanovic, to be honest,” Dellacqua said.


“I practiced with her the other day and she was playing great.


“In these conditions, I think having a big serve like that is massive and I am 
going to have to play really well in the next round to beat her.”


Seeded 29th after rising 152 places up the world rankings in the past 12 
months, Dellacqua had been favoured to make light work of Wang, but she lost 
the first set and struggled to make inroads on the world No 139’s serve until 
deep in the second set.


Dellacqua stood two games away from crashing out of the tournament until, out 
of nowhere, she broke Wang from 30-0 down to snatch the second set.


It took two controversial line calls against her in the fourth game of the 
deciding set to wake Dellacqua from her slumber.


After smashing her racket into the back fence in frustration, Dellacqua didn’t 
drop another game and wrapped up the match after one hour and 59 minutes.


“It probably made me switch on a bit,” Dellacqua said.


“It made me get a bit fired up, get a bit of energy going, get the feet going. 
It felt good.”
 