
On smooth, grey tarmac, I drive slowly, pass a pair of deer to my left, and 
realise that I’ve never driven like this before: unhurried, giving myself as 
much time as I want to look and think. In the hour after leaving Benito, I stop 
three or four times to take photographs – a derelict shack, a lake surrounded 
by graceful aspens, a line of rusting pick-ups in a field, the road ahead. A 
few cars and trucks pass me, but I don’t care. I’m enjoying travelling slowly 
and I’m wondering whether I can drive like this all the way.

Benito is in northern Manitoba in the Canadian prairies, close to the 
Saskatchewan border and a few miles south-west of Swan River, a small town 
serving a valley filled with farms. I had left Swan River that morning to drive 
to Brownsville, the southernmost city in Texas, on the US-Mexico border close 
to where the Rio Grande flows into the Gulf of Mexico. Swan River and 
Brownsville are connected by a single road, 2,271 miles long, called Highway 83.

I drove another 100 miles that day, all of them slowly, stopping, starting, 
taking in the scenery. But what do I mean by slowly?

When I was at school, back in England, a boy called Billy Furtherfield was 
sometimes collected at the end of the day by his father, a jovial man who wore 
a trilby hat and made a living as an actor. Mr Furtherfield kindly offered 
lifts to as many boys as could cram into his old Morris Oxford – like the 
Furtherfields, many of us lived in a town a few miles from the school and 
usually we travelled on a stop-start bus. On days when Mr Furtherfield turned 
up, five or six of us would clamber into his car and be driven the five miles 
home along a two-lane A road at precisely 36mph. Billy’s dad thought it 
dangerous to drive faster and seemed oblivious to the long line of cars behind 
him, some of which would shoot past, engines roaring, drivers glaring, while 
others stayed behind pointlessly hooting. My father, who liked to drive fast 
when he could, said that Mr Furtherfield’s slow driving was dangerous – and 
even I, aged eight, could see his point. But, though we travelled slowly, we 
got home more quickly than by bus and we had just as much fun, yelling and 
shoving each other in the era before seatbelts.

I can see now that, though Mr Furtherfield was a kind, amusing, tolerant man, 
his slow driving was an irrational obsession. I can see, too, that the slow 
driving I discover unintentionally on my way south from the pines of Canada to 
the palms of the Rio Grande valley serves a purpose: it enables, even promotes, 
contemplation – of landscape, life, history. This gentle cerebral activity 
grows and flourishes over four weeks as I drive at around 50mph on a largely 
straight two-lane road with little traffic, my progress marked by the rhythm of 
oncoming telegraph poles.

I stop a lot, walk a lot, drive backwards, forwards and sideways a lot, so 
that by the time I trickle into Brownsville I have driven, according to the 
milometer, 5,152 miles, more than twice the length of the road – almost all of 
them slowly. And, all of them, incidentally, in a rented red Toyota Prius. 
Later, when they hear about my trip, some people are disappointed that I didn’t 
drive a Harley-Davidson or a pink, convertible Cadillac from the 1960s, as if I 
might have something in common with Jeremy Clarkson. As if, indeed! For me, on 
this trip, the vehicle is unimportant. I just want it to move – and keep moving 
–slowly.
 Stopping to photograph and old wooden building near Pipestone, Manitoba. 
Photograph: David Reynolds 
Now and again as I drive, I ask myself why I am doing this. Why am I, born and 
still living in London, taking four weeks out of my life to drive from halfway 
up Canada, south through the US to the Mexican border? Because, I tell myself, 
I have a connection – through my grandfather – to the town of Swan River where, 
curiously, this road that bisects a continent starts. Because I am curious 
about what lies along it: the Great Plains, almost 1,000 miles of Texas, and 
then the Rio Grande. Because I feel an affinity with North America derived from 
music, novels, films, television. Because I grew up watching westerns and road 
movies, and want to look for the realities behind the myths. Because of Bury My 
Heart at Wounded Knee: an Indian History of the American West by Dee Brown, a 
book that roused me to anger, despair, tears.
 A derelict housenear Benito, Manitoba Photograph: David Reynolds 
It was on the plains, which these days lie on either side of Route 83, that 
between 1860 and 1890Native Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/native-americans> fought, raided, stood 
their ground, retreated, fled, hid and often tried to make peace. And it was 
there that they lost thousands of lives, their way of life, their freedom and, 
what the white men wanted most, their land. They – the Sioux, the Cheyenne, the 
Comanches, the Apaches, Sitting Bull, Crazy Horse, Red Cloud, Quanah Parker, 
Geronimo – were on my mind when I planned this trip. I want to see where they 
lived and died, and look at how their descendants live now.
 Sioux chief Sitting Bull in the 1880s. Photograph: Alamy 
In a small bar in Minot, North Dakota, a youngish man with a short beard and a 
baseball cap sits down on the stool beside mine. He nods in my direction, we 
get talking and he tells me that I should visit the place in South Dakota where 
Sitting Bull was born. He turns away, back to his beer, unaware of the effect 
of his casually delivered words. I have only ever read about Native American 
chiefs and their people and their struggles to save their lands. Now I am 
there, on the land where they lived – and I will be there all the way as I 
drive slowly south.

Three days later, I drive across a bridge over the Missouri at Bismarck, the 
capital of North Dakota. I want to follow the west bank of the river south for 
some 100 miles to a bluff overlooking the river, where Sitting Bull is buried – 
and then, in the evening, to return to Bismarck. The day is sunny – blue sky, 
big white clouds. I drive slowly, as is now my habit, windows down, on a 
two-lane road through open grassland. I am on State Highway 1806. The Missouri 
is to my left, though I can’t see it. Soon I come to a sign: “You Are Entering 
Standing Rock Indian Reservation.” It has several bullet holes in it; otherwise 
it is a conventional US road sign, with rounded white letters on a green 
background. I am in one of the largest Native American reservations in the US, 
in the land of the Hunkpapa Sioux – the grouping of which Sitting Bull was 
chief.

As I mosey south, the hills grow gradually more angular and majestic. I 
continue driving for perhaps three hours, stopping frequently as usual. Despite 
the blue sky and green grass and rolling countryside, the region seems 
desolate, perhaps because that is all there is: blue sky and green grass. There 
isn’t even much traffic.

I come to a fork in the road, and a sign: 1806, it says, is closed 10 miles 
on. Arrows point to a long diversion away from the Missouri. I stay on the 
country road; I want to reach the place where Sitting Bull is buried, and 
perhaps I can get through. Still there are no houses or cars, just hills in 
folds like a rumpled blanket, empty fields – and then a crowd of black cows, 
way off in the lee of a line of trees. From the crest of a hill, I look down at 
the Missouri, wide and blue. And I see that the road is blocked because it is 
being resurfaced. I must drive back the way I have come.
 Standing Rock reservation. Photograph: /Getty Images 
I’m not upset about this. In my other life, where I drive faster so as to get 
from A to B as quickly as possible, I would feel cross. I would curse the 
roadworks and my bad luck out loud. As it is, I’m quite happy – I can visit 
Sitting Bull another day; there is a bridge across the Missouri further south. 
Besides, I have seen the waving grass and the angular hills and much more.

On this 95-mile excursion, I have stopped to gaze at Lake Oahe, a vast 
reservoir formed by a dam further south, and there learned about bobcats – 
ferocious wild creatures twice the size of domestic cats – from a man emptying 
bins. I have visited Fort Yates, the capital of the Standing Rock reservation, 
and there contemplated the original standing rock, held to be the petrified 
form of a young woman and her baby, and sacred to the Hunkpapa Sioux. I have 
stopped to photograph horses – eight or 10 of them, tiny to my distant eye, 
chestnut brown and somehow perfect – standing against the sky high above me, 
gazing west and looking wild and ready to be ridden by Native Americans, 
bareback and fast.
 Sitting Bull’s burial place, overlooking the Missouri river. Photograph: 
David Reynolds 
I drive back towards Bismarck – slowly, of course – and turn off at a sign to 
Fort Abraham Lincoln state park. There – close to the remnants of a 
16th-century Mandan tribe village, abandoned by the Mandan following an 
outbreak of smallpox contracted from white men – I find a restored US army fort 
dating from 1872, and the ghost of Colonel George Custer. I stand on the 
veranda outside a replica of “the Custer house”, where the man himself would 
have sat with his wife and fellow officers, enjoying drinks of an evening, and 
look to my right, to a gap in the hills. In the spring of 1876, Custer led his 
7th Cavalry through there on their way to the Little Big Horn river, 250 miles 
away in eastern Montana. There, on 25 June, Custer attacked a peaceful Sioux 
encampment, slaughtering women and children. The Sioux, led by Sitting Bull, 
Crazy Horse and a younger chief named Gall, fought back and annihilated Custer 
and every one of his 265 cavalrymen.
 Custer’s house in Fort Abraham Lincoln, North Dakota. Photograph: David 
Reynolds 
Custer was just 35 years old and his two younger brothers died with him. Had 
he proceeded more slowly – a much larger force was a few hours behind him – the 
Custer brothers would probably have lived a lot longer. As I drive away, I 
ponder Custer’s folly and the bravery of the Sioux. Three days later I drive – 
slowly, of course – to a bluff above the Missouri, where I eat a lunch of 
almonds and apricots at the foot of the mound under which Sitting Bull is 
buried.

Some might associate slow driving with Buddhism, with the spiritual teachings 
of GI Gurdjieff, or with what is now called mindfulness. But perhaps it is just 
a simple matter of driving slowly.

• This article first appeared in Hole & Corner magazine 
<http://www.holeandcornermagazine.com/>. Slow Road to Brownsville by David 
Reynolds is published by Greystone Books, £10.99. To buy a copy for£8.79, 
including UK p&p, visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/276678/> or call 0330 
333 6846
 