
We decided to move from London to New York. Writers can write anywhere, I 
thought. It's a privilege. Why pass up that freedom? So last August we brought 
our dogs over on the Queen Mary 2. I heard thatAshleigh and Pudsey 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/may/14/pudsey-dog-britains-got-talent>
 – winners of Britain's Got Talent 2012 – were on the voyage before ours, and 
that Pudsey had been allowed to sleep in Ashleigh's cabin. Our dogs had to 
sleep in kennels. I found the injustice intolerable. Still, the voyage was 
grand and exciting.

Then we arrived in New York and everything started to go wrong. There was 
Hurricane Sandy, followed by a winter that felt like it was injuring your 
bones. London winters are long resigned sighs, but in New York they are long 
sharp yells. I was homesick, discombobulated and writing badly. Every 
bureaucratic problem and family difficulty felt agonising. We were alone in a 
place that's amazing when you're excelling, but unforgiving when you're out of 
your depth. By December we were talking about going home.

Instead, we started planning a road trip. I would stare for hours at Google 
maps – at Yellowstone Park and Old Faithful and the Rocky Mountains and 
Martha's Vineyard and Niagara Falls. A road trip! All of America was on our 
doorstep. It was part of the reason why I wanted to move here. Americans don't 
think twice about undertaking epic drives. We could find beaches for our dogs 
to run on. (In New York, dogs are only allowed off the lead before 9am and 
after 9pm. I was getting sick of taking Floppy and Josie to Central Park and 
running frantically alongside them while holding their leads to give them the 
illusion of freedom.)

A road trip is the only way to have a humane holiday with your dogs in 
America. Amtrak trains won't take them for some crazy reason, and the only way 
to avoid putting them in with the checked baggage on the plane is to get an 
anxiety note from your psychiatrist – which is something I'm definitely willing 
to explore.

The impending trip began to take on a massive significance for me. It was 
make-or-break – the thing to make me fall back in love with America.
 Old-time charm … mansions on Battery Street boardwalk, Charleston. 
Photograph: Joseph Sohm/Visions of America/Corbis 
And so, on 23 March, as the New York winter rages relentlessly on, we hire a 
car and head south, down the eastern seaboard, to Georgia. This is the least 
ambitious of the great road trips from New York. North will be bitterly cold, 
west will take forever, Savannah, Georgia, is only about 13 hours away. It is 
me, my wife Elaine, son Joel, and Floppy and Josie. We turn on to the New 
Jersey Turnpike, with its severe smoke-billowing factories.

I pull out all the emotional stops by putting on Bruce Springsteen: "Down the 
Shore, everything's all right…" And I suddenly feel very excited. "It's a town 
full of losers, and I'm pulling out of here to win!" he sings, as we head along 
the I-95. Infected by his energy I speed up to 68mph. My GPS sets off a warning 
bleep, so I go back down to 65.

The highway is insanely boring. But after the drama of New York, there's 
something calmingly cocoon-like about being in a car with your family. It feels 
quiet and safe.

We arrive at Annapolis, Maryland. It's full of ancient rickety inns in pretty 
cobbled districts but we can't find one willing to take the dogs, so we eat at 
a lovely steak place calledLewnes' Steakhouse <http://www.lewnessteakhouse.com/>
 and then get back on the highway, and keep driving south, through Virginia, 
and on to Fayetteville, North Carolina.

Objectively, Fayetteville is not great. It's basically a vast strip of chain 
restaurants and motels serving Fort Bragg, with its 60,000 or so troops, a mile 
away. But I love Fayetteville. I have a personal reason for loving it. This is 
where, 10 years ago, I discovered the existence of Goat Lab, the secret 
building inside which special forces soldiers tried to kill goats just by 
staring at them. I ended up writing a book about it –The Men Who Stare at Goats 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330507707>
 – and ever since I've idealised Fayetteville and towns like it as places where 
fantastic mysteries unfold everywhere, and you just have to be lucky enough to 
spot them.
 Victorian houses in Savannah, Georgia. Photograph: Wendell Metzen/Getty Images
We have dinner at a branch of Red Lobster <http://www.redlobster.com/>. Every 
other booth is occupied by soldiers and their loved ones. They all have the 
same look – immaculate, polite, quiet. I don't see much talking. Perhaps these 
are goodbye dinners and they're about to be shipped off somewhere abroad. I am 
loving every minute of this journey through the strip-mall shadowlands. Which 
is easy to say because I'm not the one being shipped off. But American road 
trips aren't just about the picturesque destinations – they're about finding 
yourself in a random Red Lobster in the middle of mournful goodbyes.

The next morning we drive to Charleston, South Carolina, which turns out to be 
beautiful, like the south of France. There's a cool sea breeze and grand 1900s 
mansions and cobbled roads. I could live here, I think, but then I order a 
sandwich at theBull Street Gourmet 
<http://bullstreetgourmetandmarket.com/bull-street/> deli and it takes the guy 
about 20 minutes to make, so I decide I couldn't live here. We stay at a sweet 
hotel –the Kings Courtyard Inn <http://www.kingscourtyardinn.com/> – where 
they're doing that southern thing, where all the guests are supposed to meet 
and chat and drink sherry before dinner. We don't attend because we're 
introverted and find it overwhelming to meet strangers on holiday. Instead we 
walk along the seawall and eat at the fantastic, clapboardHominy Grill 
<http://hominygrill.com/>. I have the shrimp and grits and collard greens – the 
greatest greens there are. I now understand the difference between Waffle House 
grits and proper grits. Next morning we drive an hour south to Savannah, 
Georgia.

We stop at the Bonaventure cemetery <http://www.bonaventurehistorical.org/> – 
Spanish moss-draped, grand and crumbling and eerie – and sit on Johnny Mercer's 
grave, like tourists do. Small intrigues are everywhere – like the signs on 
some graves that say, "Do Not Service". Maybe the families of the dead want to 
keep them tidy themselves. Or maybe the dead people did something bad.
 Journey's end … St Simon’s Island, Georgia. Photograph: Stephen Saks/Getty 
Images/Lonely Planet Images 
In town we walk the dogs on the seafront, passing anti-slavery sculptures. 
Savannah is more liberal than much of the south – historically so, and also 
because of the art school here. It's that incongruous combination – art school 
and total otherworldliness – that makes Savannah so amazing. It's at once 
aesthetically like nowhere on Earth, and also culturally like Manchester in the 
1990s – interesting clubs and galleries and underground cinemas. Charleston, 
for all its loveliness, seemed a little more spotlessly clean.

The antebellum part of Savannah is a huge chunk of the place, which is nice. 
(I've got a memory of nearby Macon being basically an antebellum street 
surrounded by acres of decidedly postbellum strip-malls.)

Savannah comprises 24 Spanish moss-draped squares. Many have ostentatious 
centrepieces – obelisks and gazebos and increasingly showy fountains – each 
seemingly built to outclass the others, like an escalating cold war of water 
features. We pass grand crumbling houses with their histories of murder and 
intrigue. Practically every Savannah mansion has had – at some point – an 
ivory-handled pistol fired in anger or jealousy by a local luminary spiralling 
out of control. John Berendt, the author ofMidnight in the Garden of Good and 
Evil 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780340992852>
, puts Savannah's oddness down to its separateness: "Eccentrics thrived like 
hothouse plants tended by an indulgent gardener. Every nuance and quirk of 
personality achieved greater brilliance in that lush enclosure than would have 
been possible anywhere else in the world."

Elaine books dinner at a place called Elizabeth on 37th 
<http://www.elizabethon37th.net/>. She says eating there is a great Savannah 
tradition. I look it up on the internet. It's won awards – too many awards. I 
realise in horror that it is fine dining. So I go with enormous reluctance. And 
I'm really wrong. It's great. The restaurant is in the front room of a slightly 
dilapidated 1900s mansion, giving the grandeur a kind of spookiness, as if 
someone will emerge from the parlour any moment to say, "You're probably 
wondering why I've gathered you all together."

Our waiter has beads on his wrist. "What are they for?" Joel asks. "Are you a 
Hare Krishna or something like that?"

"Something like that," he replies. He starts to say something else. Then he 
stops. He glances around, and furtively pulls a photograph from his pocket. "He 
gave them to me," he whispers. It's a picture of the Dalai Lama. Then he shows 
us something else – his invitation to last year's Nobel peace prize ceremony, 
where he was a nominee for doing some big clean-water project with the Dalai 
Lama.

He smiles. "Only in America," he says, "would your waiter be a Nobel Peace 
Prize nominee."

And finally on south to the Sea Island <http://www.seaisland.com/> resort . We 
had thought that, after all the driving, we would want to stay somewhere fancy 
and relaxing for a few days. This is a bit of a mistake. The grand lobby is 
full of massively self-possessed preppy Ivy-Leaguers wearing chinos and draping 
their tennis racquets over their shoulders, laughing and being basically 
excellent. I feel like I have to dart from the shadows to the escalator.

So we end up spending our days at nearby St Simons' Island 
<http://www.explorestsimonsisland.com/>, a sweet resort with huge beaches that 
the dogs get to run around on. It's not that well-known. Even people in 
Savannah – only 80 miles away – told us they had never been. But it's a great 
little island – clapboard, friendly, unpretentious and with lots of brightly 
coloured bucket-and-spade shops. They're complaining about a cold snap, but 
they have NO IDEA what a cold snap feels like, having not spent the past four 
months in New York. It's perfectly warm and lovely. I manage to wear shorts, 
albeit only for a few hours.

The dogs gallop along the beach, amazed that they can. We eat at a roadside 
soul food place – theSouthern Soul Barbeque <http://www.southernsoulbbq.com/>, 
which is endearingly weird and shack-like, with sand-covered families crowding 
into long benches as the sun goes down. It's a lovely thing to do on our last 
night before the drive back to New York.

When we arrive back in the city, it is spring. I go for smoked salmon at 
Barney Greengrass <http://www.barneygreengrass.com/welcome.php>, "The Sturgeon 
King" in the Upper West Side, and I suddenly realise that I love it here.

• British Airways (ba.com 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/home/public/en_gb>) flies from Heathrow 
to New York and back from Atlanta from £572. Seven days' car hire (see
ba.com/avis <http://www.britishairways.com/travel/car-rental/public/en_gb>) 
costs from £429
 