
The federal government will permit a US startup to send a robotic spacecraft 
to the moon next year, paving the way for the company to be the first 
non-government organization to land on the moon.

Moon Express announced on Wednesday morning that it had been granted approval 
for its planned 2017 lunar mission. Previously, commercial companies have 
traveled only within Earth’s orbit.

Lunar X teams in $20m race to put robot rover on the moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/oct/02/lunar-x-race-moon-rover> 
“With this landmark ruling, Moon Express has become the first private company 
approved to literally go out of this world as a pioneer of commercial space 
missions beyond Earth orbit,” the commercial space company said in a statement 
on its website.

The US, the Soviet Union and China are the only entities to have successfully 
landed on the moon. The outer space treaty, which regulates government 
exploration of the celestial world, was adopted by the United Nations and went 
into effect in 1967. The treaty requires “non-governmental entities” to receive 
“authorization and continuing supervision by the appropriate State Party to the 
Treaty”.

Moon Express submitted its request in April to the Federal Aviation 
Administration, which made a favorable determination on 20 July, according to an
FAA fact sheet <http://www.faa.gov/news/fact_sheets/news_story.cfm?newsId=20595>
. The Florida-based company was founded in 2010 to develop the moon’s resources.

The company is one of 16 teams aiming to be the first commercial entity to 
land on the moon and to net the $20m that comes with the feat, courtesy of 
Google. In 2007, Google launched its “lunar X Prize” promising $20m to the 
first company to land a privately funded rover on the moon. Three of the 16 
teams still in the running are based in the US, although Moon Express is the 
only one so far to receive approval.

In a statement, the FAA said it would “continue to work with the commercial 
space industry to provide support for non-traditional missions on a 
case-by-case basis”.

“Space travel is our only path forward to ensure our survival and create a 
limitless future for our children,” Naveen Jain, the company’s co-founder and 
chairman, said in a statement.
 