
John Isner has won the battle of big serves against Australia’s Sam Groth to 
give the United States a 1-0 lead on day one of theDavis Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/daviscup> clash at Kooyong. The American No1 
triumphed 7-6 (7-2) 6-2 6-2 in the opening singles of the World Group first 
round tie on a temporary grass court.

Lleyton Hewitt out of retirement to replace Nick Kyrgios in Davis Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/03/lleyton-hewitt-out-of-retirement-to-replace-nick-kyrgios-in-davis-cup>
Isner, the world No11, said he was tested early by Groth, who is ranked 77. “I 
was down 0-40 at 2-2 in the first set and those three points are essentially 
set points,” Isner said. “To climb out of that and then play a great 
tie-breaker, I had a lot of momentum from that point forward and I think it 
showed.”

Groth, who was called into the singles to replace an ill Nick Kyrgios, started 
well. The Australian’s powerful serve matched that of Isner and he caught the 
American on the hop a few times with his serve-volley style.

But after Isner convincingly won the opening set tie-break the wheels fell of 
Groth’s challenge and he paid the price for a high error rate. Isner wrapped up 
the first set in 49 minutes and then cruised through the second two untroubled 
in the hot conditions in front of almost 7,000 fans.

While the opening singles was played in searing conditions on the temporary 
grass court at Kooyong, Isner said his win could cause more mental than 
physical damage to the Australian. “Physically I think Sam will be fine,” Isner 
said. “At this point for me and him, it’s not a physical matter, it’s probably 
a bit more mental. Any time you win a match in a situation like this you’re on 
cloud nine and you feel like you’ve got a lot of confidence but on the 
flip-side maybe not so much.”

Australian captain Lleyton Hewitt replaced Kyrgios in the four-man team and 
could join with Peers in the doubles or play singles on Sunday. Groth is 
currently down to play doubles with debutant John Peers on Saturday against 
powerhouse paring Mike and Bob Bryan. But teams are permitted to change players 
up to an hour before play.

The world No77 said while he didn’t serve as well as he’d hoped against Isner 
he wanted the opportunity to face the Bryans. “My body feels good and I feel 
like I’ve played good doubles in Davis Cup in the past and John and I have been 
playing well in practice,” said Groth. “But it will be up to Lleyton. I will be 
doing everything I can to put my hand up to play.”

Australian No1 Bernard Tomic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> 
will attempt to level the tie for the home side with a win over Jack Sock.
 