
He stood tall in the face of brutal Sydney derby vitriol, but Vedran 
Janjetovic wasn’t allowed to talk about it.

The Western Sydney goalkeeper was under strict instruction from his new club 
to avoid media on Saturday night’s first return to Allianz Stadium, the venue 
at which he played five A-League seasons forSydney FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc> before last month’s an 
acrimonious exit.

Controversy as Sydney FC and Wanderers share spoils in derby clash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/controversy-as-sydney-fc-and-wanderers-share-the-spoils-in-tight-clash>
As the first player to cross the divide since the Wanderers’ inception, 
Janjetovic would have expected an icy reception, and he certainly got it, as 
Sky Blues fans relentlessly taunted their former custodian and launched a wave 
of rubber snakes into his net.

During the warm-up he took it in his stride, beating his chest and smiling as 
a chorus of boos erupted around a packed-out Allianz Stadium. The 29-year-old’s 
mental fortitude continued throughout the stalemate, making several saves, 
including one acrobatic leap to deny Alex Wilkinson a headed goal.

He refused to speak to media post match, which a Wanderers representative 
confirmed was in line with a club-imposed media ban. Janjetovic has not had the 
chance to speak publicly since signing an 18-month deal with Wanderers nearly a 
month ago.

He did unleash a scathing, since-deleted Instagram attack on Sky Blues 
officials after coach Graham Arnold said the keeper had forced the club’s hand 
in granting him a release.

After a friendly chat with a former Sydney team-mate in the tunnel, Janjetovic 
saw waiting journalists and put on his headphones before rushing past.

Wanderers coach Tony Popovic praised Janjetovic’s performance and said he 
hadn’t felt the need to tell his recruit to keep his swagger in check. “He was 
very assured in goal, very calm,” Popovic said. “You can see he’s a very good 
keeper.”
 