
Donald Kissinger started to fear it was the end of Venice Beach's era as a 
haven for artists and free speech when a rival stallholder whacked him on the 
head with a skateboard.

For more than a decade, Kissinger had sold badges with political and cultural 
messages alongside the poets, singers, musicians, painters and street 
performers who made this Los Angeles promenade a sun-drenched, bohemian mecca.

Then about two years ago, pedlars of T-shirts, sunglasses, jewellery and other 
merchandise muscled in on the two-mile boardwalk, a lucrative market that 
attracts many millions of visitors each year, southern California's biggest 
draw after Disneyland.

According to Kissinger, a barefoot, bookish 55-year-old, the new vendors hired 
homeless people and drug addicts to reserve prized spots traditionally occupied 
by artists and performers. "They were very successful at intimidating us. One 
morning, a guy wanting to sell tie-dye T-shirts cracked my skull with a 
skateboard."

Kissinger stayed but many artists fled, saying the strip had become too wild 
and commercial to continue as a beacon of counter-culture and first amendment 
freedoms.

This week, however, the artists were back and most of the vendors had 
vanished, restoring Venice Beach to a semblance of its previous incarnation. 
"The feeling is so much better now," said Kissinger. "Those of us who come here 
to communicate can do so."

For this the bohemians are thanking – in many cases through gritted teeth – an 
unlikely ally 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2011/dec/13/local/la-me-1214-venice-boardwalk-20111214>
: the Los Angeles police department (LAPD). The police started sweeping hawkers 
and vagrants away in February, leaving the promenade's 205 designated spaces 
free for artists, performers and craftspeople.

"It had become chaotic. Homeless people were being paid to sit in and watch 
spots," said Jon Peters, commander of the LAPD's Pacific division. Since the 
crackdown, which includes a midnight-to-dawn curfew, property crime had fallen 
by 6% and violent crime was down by 33%, he said. "We're seeing a lot less of 
the fights, arguments, extortion and violence."

Shop owners who had been undercut by the street sellers have reported a 
recovery in sales and artists and performers have enjoyed more space and 
attentive audiences.

"Yeah, you can say it's better," said Nathan Pino, 55, a pony-tailed, 
classically trained pianist who has played the promenade for 12 years 
<http://venicebeachartists.com/street-musicians/nathan-pino-pianist/>.

"It was getting away from the artistic spirit: people buying Chinese trinkets 
wholesale for 10 cents downtown and selling it here for five bucks, pretending 
they'd made it themselves. The cops got rid of all that and that's a good 
thing."

Pino shook his head. "But you know, that doesn't put the police on my side. 
I'm always getting hassled, getting tickets, summonses. The city wants to get 
rid of Venice and build expensive stores and condominiums here. And they'll do 
it. Because money always wins."

It was a belief shared by others such as Matt Dowd, a New Zealand-born 
guitarist who hasaccused authorities of harassing legitimate performers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rHp2P_MJGE4>. "The crackdown is good news for 
those of us who are still here and bad news for those wiped off. It's a matter 
of time before I get another ticket for leaving my guitar case in the wrong 
place or something equally ridiculous."

Greta Cobar, an activist and writer for the local paper, Beachhead 
<http://www.freevenice.org/>, shared the ambivalence, welcoming the clean-up as 
a boon for shops and artists but remaining suspicious of city authorities' 
long-term intentions. "LA doesn't want this area's quirkiness and weirdness."

The homeless people, she added, had been pushed to other parts of the city.

Peters, the police commander, said his force had good relations with the 
artistic community and had balanced the area's free spirit with law and order. 
"We're not trying to take away from the uniqueness of Venice Beach. We support 
the artists and performers and the first amendment." Deciding what constituted 
art, and thus who was entitled to a spot on the boardwalk, was complicated, 
said Peters. "At the academy they teach you about burglaries and robberies. 
We've had to do extra training."

Some recent arrivals stretched artistic concepts. Charles Moorehead, 28, and 
Dustin Bryant, 19, stood on the corner of Windward avenue holding a sign that 
read: "Kick me in the balls for $10." They said the invitation constituted 
performance art and served a social purpose by relieving passers-by of pent-up 
aggression.

"This is free speech. And it helps people get stress out of their system," 
said Moorehead. "I wouldn't normally do this – I'm an oil painter – but 
galleries stopped sponsoring me so I got to do what I can to survive." Asked 
about the pain, he shrugged. "Get used to it. A 350lb [160kg] guy once lifted 
me off the ground."

Kissinger said the duo were entitled to boardwalk space. "They're 
communicating something. Is it art? Well, who decides? Philosophers have 
trouble deciding these issues."
 