
Venus Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/venus-williams> allowed 
herself to be compared to Tiger Woods, predicted that her conqueror Justine 
Henin could become world No1, and headed home to the United States looking 
relaxed and happy.

It was not the reaction people had been expecting after a stunning 6-1, 6-4 
defeat to the 18-year-old Henin in the third round of the German Open.

It was, though, a result which may give the Wimbledon and US Open champion a 
better chance of getting nearer to the golfer's four consecutive grand slams, 
because it gives her 2 weeks' rest before the French Open, something she may 
need if she is to survive a fortnight's grind on the killing red clay with a 
persistently dodgy knee.

"Four weeks in Europe is too much before trying to capture a grand slam. I 
don't want to be tired when I get to Paris," she admitted. That must have been 
in her calculations all along, but she knew she risked questions about her 
motivation by saying so, suggesting that some of her remarks were a smoke 
screen.

"If she [Henin] can play like that every time, she can become No1," Williams 
volunteered. "I don't think my movement was the best but she played well more 
than anything else. She hit some great shots. I knew she was a good player but 
I don't think she's played that well in a match before."

It was indeed a career-best win by the Belgian but she was given assistance. 
Halfway through the first set Williams delivered a telltale smash from 
mid-court - something she would normally have bounced with a hiss and a grunt 
into the posh seats - which allowed her opponent a chance of a winning 
counter-hit.

Three times Williams lost her serve in the opening set, which she attributed 
to problems with her toss. It may also have been difficulties with the fulcrum 
for the action - that left leg with its taped knee. But, most of all, her 
ground-stroke preparation was sluggish by her own high standards.

It all made Henin play much better. She has arguably the best one-handed 
backhand top-spin in the women's game and pretty soon she was launching rockets 
on both sides. Although there were mistakes, she remained constantly assertive 
and clear-headed as well, sometimes denying Williams chances to find angles and 
gaps for winners by playing down the middle.

After such a tearaway start, Henin knew she could win. "In the past I have 
been a little bit overawed against the top players and I couldn't play my best 
tennis, but today I could see I could do it. I really wanted to win and 
realised that I could."

Williams served a double fault in the last game and spent the last two points 
rallying defensively, but despite these uncharacteristic blips had no doubt 
that she would be playing well again in Paris.

"I have had some good experience on clay [she won Hamburg last week] and I 
have had enough matches," she said. And emulating the Tiger? "To get all four I 
had to have won the Australian Open," she acknowledged immediately, but thought 
for a moment and could not resist allowing it a little credibility. "I guess I 
have to start with the French Open and go from there," she said with a smile.

There were no such setbacks for Jennifer Capriati, who came back from 3-5 in 
the second set and saved a set point at 5-6 in the tie-break to win 6-3, 7-6 
against Sandrine Testud, or for Martina Hingis, who beat another French player, 
Nathalie Dechy, 6-3, 6-1. That earned the top seed a meeting with Arantxa 
Sanchez-Vicario, the former world No1 who beat her at Amelia Island last month 
in the Swiss player's first tournament since her separation from her mother as 
coach.

This is her third event and she needs to win it to convince herself she can 
stand on her own two feet. "You doubt yourself when you go out there," she 
admitted. "But the more matches you play well the better it gets."

Does she tell her mother it is strange without her when she rings her each 
evening? "We don't discuss feelings. We just talk about what we have done that 
day. And I still ask questions about my game. I am happy she can still help 
me," she said. But the 20-year-old will be happier when she has finally won 
without mum.

The woman she was named after, Martina Navratilova, was beaten in the second 
round of the doubles but confirmed that she will play with Sanchez-Vicario at 
Wimbledon.
 