
Three-time doubles gold medalists Serena and Venus Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/venus-williams> lost an Olympic match as 
partners for the first time, stunned in the opening round of the Rio de Janeiro 
Games by the Czech Republic’s Lucie Safarova and Barbora Strycova 6-3, 6-4.

The Williams sisters entered Sunday’s match with a 15-0 career record in the 
Olympics, winning the gold medal in women’s doubles every time they entered the 
event: in 2000, 2008 and 2012.

“We played terrible,” Serena said, “and it showed in the results.”

The American duo was seeded No1 in Rio and coming off a 14th Grand Slam 
championship together at Wimbledon a month ago.

Neither Safarova nor Strycova, meanwhile, ever had won an Olympic doubles 
match, going a combined 0-3 with other partners. They are unseeded in Rio.

And get this: They weren’t even supposed to be playing together at the 
Olympics. Strycova was a late replacement for Karolina Pliskova, who withdrew 
from the tournament.

Indeed, Strycova and Safarova only had played one match as a team before 
Sunday night and they lost that, in a Fed Cup match last year.

Still, Strycova said: “We’re good friends, and we know each other’s games.”

This was Serena’s second match of the day: She won her first-rounder in 
singles earlier Sunday. Venus, meanwhile, now has two first-round exits at the 
Rio Olympics, because she was beaten in singles on Saturday night.

After that defeat, Venus did not meet with reporters, but US women’s Olympic 
tennis coach Mary Joe Fernandez said that the seven-time major singles champion 
had been sick since before she arrived in Brazil. Fernandez also said Venus was 
dealing with cramping, dehydration and an upset stomach after Saturday’s loss.

In the doubles, played under the lights, when occasional chants of “USA!” 
would rise from some spectators, other members of the crowd would respond with 
boos.
Safarova and Strycova did their best to keep hitting shots toward Venus when 
she was at the baseline, while Serena was left to stand near the net and watch 
those exchanges.

“I wasn’t playing the way I needed to play,” Serena said. “I wasn’t crossing 
the way I need to cross.”

The Williams sisters appeared to be getting back into the match in the second 
set, which was even at four-all.

But Venus got broken there, allowing Strycova to serve out the surprising 
victory.
 