
Victoria’s minister for children, Jenny Mikakos, said there were “obvious 
risks” that children in detention would assault and rape each other if they 
were placed in shared cells.

The minister made the comment on Twitter during a back-and-forth with the 
director of legal advocacy at the Human Rights Law Centre, Ruth Barson, about
juvenile prisoners who are currently being detained in Barwon prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/27/youths-detained-in-maximum-security-adult-jail-held-in-solitary-confinement>
, a high-risk, maximum security prison for adults.

Youths detained in maximum security adult jail 'held in solitary confinement'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/27/youths-detained-in-maximum-security-adult-jail-held-in-solitary-confinement>
The children were moved to the adult prison after ongoing rioting at the 
Parkville and Malmsbury youth detention centres, which caused damage to the 
facilities. Some of the children moved to the adult prison were not involved in 
the rioting.

Last week, the court of appeal upheld a ruling by the supreme court that 
detaining the children in Barwon was unlawful, because the government had 
failed to take certain factors into consideration before declaring an area of 
the prison a youth justice facility. The court ordered the children be removed 
from Barwon.

But 24 hours later, Mikakos said the government had again re-gazetted the 
Grevillea unit of Barwon as a youth justice facility, this time having adressed 
the outstanding issues. She maintained the decision was in the best interests 
of the children.

On Twitter, Barson said: “Let’s hope 2017 sees a change of heart by this Gov, 
in favor of upholding children’s human rights”. She linked toa comment piece 
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/the-real-crisis-facing-victorias-youth-justice-system-20161229-gtjqb2.html>
 she wrote for Fairfax Media about what she described as a crisis in youth 
detention.

Mikakos responded with a series of tweets, saying Barson had failed to 
acknowledge existing child detention facilities were “far worse” than the adult 
prison, and that children would be forced to share cells if they were returned 
to Parkville of Malmsbury, some of which did not have a toilet. Barwon was “a 
lawful facility comparable to others,” she wrote.

Barson replied that the children had said they would “prefer to share cells 
and toilets, than be illegally confined in maximum security adult jail”.

Victoria reclassifies part of Barwon jail as juvenile unit after court ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/part-of-barwon-prison-reclassified-as-juvenile-detention-unit-after-court-ruling>
It prompted Mikakos to reply: “and when they assaulted and raped each other, 
what then Ruth? You don’t care about the obvious risks”.

Barson said while she encouraged open and frank dialogue from ministers, she 
was concerned by the forum in which Mikakos expressed her views. “A minister 
with caring responsibilities for children is making comments that children 
might see about themselves and I am concerned about the impact that might have 
on them,” she said.

“The other point is that these kids are in jail because we’re trying to teach 
them that there’s no excuse for breaking the law, and we want them to be 
remorseful. But some of them have been held in what the courts have determined 
is an unlawful facility, and yet the government is anything but contrite.”


Guardian Australia requested an interview with Mikakos but was told she was 
unavailable. Instead, a department of health and human services spokeswoman 
sent a statement.

“There is reduced opportunity to supervise and separate vulnerable or violent 
young people when double-bunking,” the statement said. “This has the potential 
to lead to serious incidents including assault and sexual assault. 
Double-bunking also presents risks to the safety of staff at these facilities.”

At both Malmsbury and Parkville there are a number of double rooms used when 
it may be appropriate for cultural and other reasons for young detainees to 
share.

The interim report from the royal commission into Aboriginal deaths in custody 
found cell sharing may help to reduce the number of deaths in custody, and that 
Aboriginal detainees should not be confined alone in cells.

During evidence given to the supreme court on 21 December,the director of 
secure services for the department of health and human services, Ian Lanyon, 
was asked about risks that emerged when youth in detention were forced to sleep 
on mattresses on the floor of rooms.


“What we will try to do in these circumstances is do a risk assessment on both 
young people as to their suitability to be accommodated together, but whenever 
the door closes at night, there’s a significant risk to both of those young 
people,” he said.

“This would exacerbate, you know, opportunity for sexual or physical assault 
to occur within those rooms.”

However, Lanyon was speaking specifically about risks that occurred when youth 
detention facilities were at capacity and extra mattresses were subsequently 
placed on floors, rather than about risks to children in purpose-built share 
cells.


While Mikakos justified her position by linking on Twitter to an Ombudsman 
report on deaths and harm in custody that described an increased risk of sexual 
assault when prisoners shared cells, this report referred only to adult 
prisoners, and was in relation to overcrowding, not sharing shells generally.

Greens MP Nina Springle accused Mikakos of demonising children. “She’s now 
labelling them as rapists, it’s crazy,” Springle said.

“I do think what’s gotten lost in this whole debate is how this is impacting 
on these kids. These really are children, they’re not adults and they can’t 
make decisions in the same way adults do. There seems to be some scepticism 
about that, but it’s true, and it’s also true that some of these children have 
come from extremely difficult backgrounds. This is no way to rehabilitate them.”





 