
'Don't let me buy any orange things, OK? No more kitsch orange pieces," says 
Barbara Hulanicki, as we head off on our vintage shopping expedition. Miami's 
South Beach is well known for sun, sea, sand and partying. Less well-known is 
its appeal for vintage fans – flea markets, fascinating shops and huge trucks 
full of designer dresses from house clearances. Keen to uncover this side of 
Miami, I'd put in a call to Hulanicki, fashion designer, founder of iconic 
clothes store Biba and long-time Miami resident.

My grandmother was a Biba shop girl, so tales of tight Hulanicki miniskirts, 
stylish 1960s plastic Biba raincoats for under £20 and celebrities flocking to 
the Kensington High Street shop filled my childhood. I grew up in awe of this 
shop, sad that I missed the era it defined and annoyed that my grandmother has 
no items left – she didn't keep one thing. The last time I interviewed Barbara 
she offered to take me shopping in Miami. So, here I am eating breakfast with 
her at the Front Porch Cafe on Ocean Drive (frontporchoceandrive.com 
<http://frontporchoceandrive.com>), fuelling up in preparation. The plan is to 
do vintage shops on Saturday and the vintage/antique market on Sunday.

Barbara moved to Miami in the early 1990s to help Rolling Stone Ronnie Wood 
decorate his club, Woody's on the Beach, and she's made the city her base ever 
since. She travels around the world designing hotel interiors and clothing for 
labels from Topshop toCoccinelle <http://www.coccinelle.com>. Orange, I'm 
discovering, is her achilles heel. Her office is littered with orange glass 
ornaments, ashtrays and lights. Even now, as she is telling me that she really 
must not buy any more orange, her eye is wandering through the window of a 
secondhand shop, where she can spy some tangerine bric-a-brac.
 Barbara Hulanicki with a vintage find 
But orange aside, when it comes to shopping, Barbara is an expert. "I am just 
a big hunter. I think they call them hoarders now. I'll show you some pictures 
of what our place in London used to look like. Remember Steptoe and Son? It was 
like that. I used to collect antique lights. I'd have loads of them, art 
deco-style. Before going to bed my [late] husband Fitz would turn them all off, 
and as he got into bed he would realise he had forgotten one.

"After each big shopping trip I get that feeling again, the thrill of it, and 
I have to try to curb my hunting. This weekend will start my shopping habit 
again – I just know it."

Our first stop is Las Tias (2834 N Miami Avenue, lastias.com 
<http://www.lastias.com>), an upscale secondhand shop with a fur-covered chaise 
longue and a 1980s cocktail dress in the window. We jump out of Barbara's Mini 
Cooper and get started. I run straight to the clothes and purses, and leave her 
eyeing up the furniture – yellow pieces from a living room set.

"This person was very matchy, matchy," she says, stroking the pieces and 
imagining their former owner.

Then it's on to the women's clothes: old party dresses, 1960s print shifts (my 
favourite) and vintage shoes.

Having whetted our appetites we drive to C Madeleine's (13702 Biscayne 
Boulevard,cmadeleines.com <http://www.cmadeleines.com/>), which is famous with 
editors, stylists and serious fashion fanatics.

"OK, hold your breath," says Barbara, as she swings open the door. She sees my 
eyes light up and says, "I knew you were going to love this store. You are 
going to have such fun. I might have to say goodbye to you, see you in two 
hours' time."

I start in couture, then move on to the 1970s section (think vintage Bill 
Blass dresses for around $300), by way of hat boxes and leather jackets (around 
$600), and finish up wondering if I can charge a vintage Pucci dress to my 
credit card. Sadly the prices are out of my reach, but Barbara still 
practically has to drag me out of the shop.

On the way back we make a quick stop at Divine Trash (7244 Biscayne Boulevard, 
getdivineonline.com <http://Getdivineonline.com>). The owner, Donna, is 
fabulous. As we walk in, she is sorting through a collection of designer 
clothes that a celebrity has donated because she "can't wear anything twice". 
Barbara and Donna, both stalwarts of the vintage scene, swap stories of how 
much stuff they've bought since they last saw each other.

I head straight to the celebrity pile, and start digging. But then my eyes are 
drawn to the vintage dresses.

"I see you have a thing for antique white lace dresses … very interesting and 
summery, but what would you wear underneath it?" ponders Barbara as I'm trying 
on another lace top in the changing room. It could be worn as a dress, and is a 
bargain at $40.

Sadly, nothing fits, so we drive to a stylish new eatery called Gigi (3470 N 
Miami Avenue,giginow.com <http://giginow.com>). It's in the design district, 
open till 5am at weekends and serves Asian fusion food and great desserts. The 
Design district has been transformed in the past few years. It's now a hub for 
a young cool crowd, with art galleries on every block and new places to eat.
 Vintage shoes at C Madeleine's, Miami 
Next day, I'm up early to find Barbara in my hotel lobby raring to go. The 
Sunday Lincoln Road Antique & Collectible Market (lincolnroadmiamibeach.info 
<http://www.lincolnroadmiamibeach.info/lincoln-road-antique-flea-market-sunday-schedule/>
) is a short walk from the hotel but first we head to the nearby cafe at Books 
& Books for breakfast (927 Lincoln Road,booksandbooks.com 
<http://booksandbooks.com>) to feast on eggs Benedict, coffee and fruit. Under 
the hot sun, we start on the stalls.

"I love wondering what I might find, don't you? Nowadays I don't have any 
space left to store things but if it's haunting me, I have to go back and see 
if it's still there," Barbara tells me. Tanned muscular men and bikini-clad 
ladies on Rollerblades pass us, heading for the beach. But that's the last 
thing on our minds.

We find vintage Missoni and Chanel clothes, plastic furniture and an antique 
globe. Three hours later, we still haven't bought anything, but we've had a 
blast. We talk all things Biba ("I still get people coming up to me and 
describing exact Biba items – it's very sweet and I remember designing all of 
them," says Barbara), why vintage clothes are awesome ("that quality, it lasts 
for ages") and try to imagine the previous owners of some of this stuff, 
especially the nodding doll, and the lime green dress with one shoulder pad.

The lack of purchases hasn't dampened our spirits. In fact, we've set a date 
for early next year to do it all again and I've started the research. Top of my 
list is Fly Boutique (650 Lincoln Road,flyboutiquevintage.com 
<http://flyboutiquevintage.com/>), an Aladdin's cave of vintage wares from 
battered Levi's to Chanel pieces and vintage Versace waistcoats. I can't wait.

• The Catalina Hotel & Beach Club in Miami's South Beach (+1 305 674 1160, 
catalinahotel.com <http://catalinahotel.com>) has doubles from around $200 a 
night. Virgin Atlantic (0844 209 7310,virgin-atlantic.com 
<http://virgin-atlantic.com>) flies to Miami from Heathrow from around £390 
return. For more information seemiamibeachfl.gov <http://miamibeachfl.gov> 
 