
Russia’s president Vladimir Putin has ordered the government to crack down on 
so-called surrogate alcohol, as the death toll fromconsumption of a fake batch 
of bath tincture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/russia-irkutsk-surrogate-alcohol-siberia>
 exceeded 60.

Putin on Wednesday demanded new regulations be put in place to tighten 
controls over the production and sale of liquids including perfume, cleaning 
fluids, medicines and cosmetics that contain more than 25% alcohol. He also 
told the government to look at increasing the legal consequences for violations 
in the production and sale of these items.

The death toll in the Siberian city of Irkutsk over recent days has now 
reached 62. Investigators on Monday said they had discovered an underground 
laboratory in the city making fakeboyaryshnik, a tincture supposedly meant to 
be added to baths for relaxation. The fluid, which normally contains 93% 
ethanol, as well as hawthorn extract and lemon oil, is widely drunk inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> as a cheap substitute for alcohol.

Siberian city declares emergency as dozens die from drinking alcoholic bath 
tincture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/russia-irkutsk-surrogate-alcohol-siberia>
However, police found that the batch in Irkutsk contained methanol, a 
poisonous substance found in antifreeze, instead of ethanol. Local authorities 
declared a state of emergency in Irkutsk on Monday, and across the wider region 
on Tuesday. Police seized thousands of bottles of the liquid from shops and 
kiosks across the region, and authorities ordered a temporary ban on the sale 
of all fluids containing alcohol.

Twelve people have been arrested for distributing the fake batch, and courts 
in Irkutsk remanded them in custody on Wednesday.

According to Irkutsk region’s ministry of health, 107 people have been 
poisoned by the batch of fakeboyaryshnik, with 62 dead so far. Around half of 
them died in hospital, while others were already dead on arrival. There are 
still 36 people in hospital. Four people have been released having made what 
local doctors called a “miracle recovery”.

There are two main problems in Russia’s surrogate alcohol market: first is the 
widespread consumption of items marked as perfumes or bath tinctures. They are 
exempt from sales restrictions and taxes that normal alcoholic drinks would 
carry but are often sold at drinks kiosks where it is obvious people would 
purchase them for consumption. In one Russian region, automated street machines 
sellingBoyaryshnik were installed earlier this year. 


The second problem is fake alcohol: there have been numerous cases of 
underground factories making cheap vodka or whisky and attaching fake labels to 
the bottles.

In Irkutsk, both problems combined to lethal effect, as dozens died from 
ingesting a tainted version of something that was in any case not designed as a 
drink.

The Irkutsk tragedy is an extreme example, but deaths from drinking 
low-quality alcohol are common. Russia’s consumer watchdog said that during the 
first nine months of 2016, 9,300 Russians died from alcohol poisoning. Of 
these, 1,200 had died from methanol poisoning, the watchdog said.
 