
Volkswagen said it wants to be the world leader in electric cars by 2025 as it 
unveiled a major shift to clean-energy vehicles in the wake of thedieselgate 
emissions cheating scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/25/volkswagen-scandal-qa-what-you-need-to-know-about-diesel>
.

The US market, where the pollution crisis first erupted, will play a key role 
in the revamp, according to VW brand chief Herbert Diess. He announced a 
“comeback story” for the region, with plans for electric cars to be built in 
North America from 2021.

During a presentation at the group’s headquarters in northern Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, Diess said: “By 2025 we plan to 
sell one million electric cars per year, and by then we also want to be the 
global market leader in electromobility.

“Going forward, our electric cars will be the hallmark of Volkswagen.”

Last year, Volkswagen sold 4.4m own-brand passenger cars worldwide. Diess said 
the company’s switch to electric will be made possible through new investments 
and economies of scale. He described the move as a crucial part of the troubled 
brand’s efforts to reinvent itself.

Last Friday, VW announced the biggest revamp in its history, saying it would 
cut 30,000 jobs to save €3.7bn a year by 2020. It also plans to ramp up 
investment in future technologies such as electric cars, self-driving cars and 
digitalisation.

“Our industry will undergo more fundamental change over the next 10 years than 
ever before,” Diess said. He predicted that the breakthrough of electric cars 
was just four or five years away and would be driven by environmental concerns.

Volkswagen to axe 30,000 jobs worldwide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/volkswagen-axe-30000-jobs-worldwide-diesel-emissions-scandal>
“For most customers the electric car will soon be the better alternative,” he 
added.

The shakeup at Volkswagen’s core brand comes as it tries to recover from the 
biggest crisis in its history after it admitted last year to installing 
emissions-cheating software in 11m diesel vehicles.


The software could detect when a vehicle was undergoing regulatory tests. It 
then lowered emissions accordingly to make the cars seem less polluting than 
they were.

Most of the cars bore the Volkswagen logo but vehicles by other VW group 
companies such as Audi, Seat and Skoda were also affected. The scandal hurt 
sales and damaged VW’s reputation, resulting in the group’s first loss in more 
than two decades last year.

But even before the scandal, VW had been struggling with profitability, 
weighed down by high costs and low productivity. “The image of our brand has 
suffered from the diesel crisis, many people no longer trust us as they used 
to,” Diess said. “Our main task is to win back this trust.”

American customers were particularly turned off by the cheating scandal. This 
dealt another blow to a brand that has never been very popular in the US. VW is 
determined to change this, however. Diess said: “In North America we want to 
write a comeback story.”

The company will start by focusing on core segments such as large SUVs and 
limousines. Next, under the motto “Electrify America”, it will begin local 
production of its electric cars in the region in 2021.

“Nowhere else can you make more money by selling cars than in the United 
States,” Diess added.

Analyst Frank Schwope of Nord/LB bank said he was sceptical about VW’s 
ambitious US plans. He said the VW group had already taken a big hit there due 
to the diesel scandal. He pointed to its $14.7bn settlement with US authorities 
last month. This included compensation for nearly 500,000 owners of the 
affected vehicles, with more legal costs expected to follow.

Schwope added: “Even if for many Volkswagen executives the US is and has long 
been seen as a challenge, the country appears to be a bottomless pit for 
Volkswagen.”
 