
Verdi-Wagner. we'll hear a great number of easy comparisons during this year, 
in which both composers reach the venerable age of 200. In the past, they were 
typically thought to embody a series of weighty, over-determined opposites. One 
hundred years ago, at least in elevated intellectual circles, the Verdi-Wagner 
axis would all have been in the latter's favour: Italian-German; 
popular-serious; simple- complex; conservative-radical. Wagner was then at the 
peak of his influence and prestige, while Verdi survived chiefly by means of a 
handful of stubbornly popular repertory pieces.

The intervening century then saw a gradual re-balancing, a process that began, 
of all places, in post-World War I Germany, in which a combination of Wagner 
saturation, Wagner-influence anxiety and a general sense of 'opera crisis' led 
to a rehabilitation of Verdi's reputation, a process that started with 
late-middle works such as La forza del destino, Simon Boccanegra and Don 
Carlos, but eventually embraced almost all his operas. Today, one might (with 
only some exaggeration) say that these two mainstays of 19th-century opera 
exist in easy cohabitation. Although traces of the old oppositions linger, 
Verdi can now be judged as just as serious and just as complex and just as 
radical as his famous antagonist; he remains stubbornly Italian, of course, 
just as Wagner remains ferociously German; but the relative prestige of such 
national allegiance has also shifted. The operatic museum in which they reside 
has many rooms, even on thepiano nobile that both by right will occupy.

As time passes and historical distance interposes, it may even be that Verdi 
and Wagner begin increasingly to seem an inseparable part of the same broad 
period in European history: we have become as aware of their similarities as of 
their differences. Both, for example, were enmeshed in and profoundly affected 
by the 1848 revolutions. The optimism and energy leading up to that moment is 
painted onto their operatic language (think of Ernani, 1844; think of 
Tannhäuser, 1845); and then, in the disillusioned aftermath of 1848, both 
turned inward, became more contemplative, less prone to sudden, uncomplicated 
enthusiasms. Or consider their remarkably similar reactions to the phenomenon 
of Parisian grand opera: their early envy of Meyerbeer, and the lasting 
impressions that his musical drama had on their attempts at high grandeur. Or, 
most significant of all, consider how both of them insisted in later life on an 
extreme level of audience attention, on furthering the idea that what was 
happening on stage should be all-encompassing and all-absorbing.
 Glyndebourne's 2009's production of Falstaff. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
One specific parallel, however, stands out: both specialised in tragic opera 
yet, late in life, both wrote a single comedy. For Verdi, that 'late' was 
extraordinarily late. His Falstaff (1893) was premiered when he was nearly 80, 
at a point when few believed he had another opera in him. Wagner's Die 
Meistersinger von Nürnberg (1868) – the composer was 55 – was, along with 
Tristan und Isolde, something he considered a lighter and easier piece: 
something, in other words, to occupy his time while work on The Ring was on 
pause. The fact that both composers were intent for most of their careers on 
tragedy should not surprise us. By the middle of the 19th century, comic opera 
had mostly become a backwater, a place in which the old Rossinian clichés 
still reigned supreme: emphatically not the stuff of serious art and its 
explorations of originality. In part because of this, however, the anomalous 
turn to comedy imposed different operatic constraints – and in so doing steered 
both Verdi's and Wagner's musical imaginations in odd but stimulating 
directions.

This change of tack should come as no surprise: comedy, especially comedy in 
opera, comes with rules that powerfully transcend individual style. It's worth 
pausing to consider how similar the plot structures of great comic operas turn 
out to be. As Figaro puts it, in Act II of Mozart's Le nozze di Figaro, 'per 
finirla lietamente, / E all'usanza teatrale / Un'azion matrimonale / Le faremo 
ora seguir' (to end it happily / and in the usual theatrical manner / we 
continue now / with a wedding ceremony). According to hallowed theatrical 
tradition, comedies always end in marriage and the happily-ever-after. Because 
of this, they almost always feature young lovers, well matched in spirit and 
affection, and a plot that does its best to keep these lovers apart until the 
last act. The plot's agent-in-chief is in many cases the ancient Fool: the 
older man who, against all good taste, wants the girl for himself. He may be a 
tipsy vulgarian (Ochs in Der Rosenkavalier or Don Pasquale) or an aristocratic 
predator with disturbing attractions (the Count in Figaro or Don Giovanni). In 
Verdi's and Wagner's solitary comedies, though, the situation is more complex. 
In Falstaff, each position doubles and trebles. Old Dr Caius's designs on 
Nannetta Ford – she, being young, is clearly destined for the ardent, 
sonnet-weaving tenor Fenton – are mirrored in Falstaff's pursuit of her mother, 
Alice. Falstaff, the amiable fat man of great appetite, is of course the 
primary Fool. In Die Meistersinger, the Fool by contrast seems to suffer from 
too little ardour: Beckmesser is presented as a sterile, fusty bachelor. But in 
these designs there is usually a fourth figure, variable in shape – the 
facilitator, someone who is, in one way or another, excluded from the circle of 
desire, but who makes the marriage plot right in the end. This place in the 
structure is androgynous, and often occupied by more than one character. In 
Figaro, it's a helpful collective that even includes the young bride Susanna; 
but at its centre stands the melancholy figure of the Countess, ignored by a 
husband she still loves. In Der Rosenkavalier, the Marschallin cedes Octavian 
to Sophie, thereby not only fixing what has gone wrong but banishing love for 
herself. In Falstaff, the Merry Wives conspire together to thwart the men, but 
Mistress Quickly – the unmarried contralto – is the linchpin.
 Gerald Finley as Hans Sachs in Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg at Glyndebourne 
2011. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
In Die Meistersinger, the angel in the plot is Hans Sachs, who gives up his 
own gentle claim on Eva, the soprano ingénue, in order to unite her with the 
tenor of her destiny, young Walther. This being an opera by the mature Wagner, 
that uniting involves something other than people hiding in closets, or wicker 
baskets, or disguises and mistaken identity, or misleading billets doux. Far 
from it: at stake is nothing less than Art itself. Wagner overlays the basic 
comic structure of Die Meistersinger with a Song Contest. Eva's father, the 
goldsmith Veit Pogner, has declared that she may only marry a man who wins 
first prize in a vocal competition judged by the guild of Master Singers. The 
knight Walther, arriving untutored in medieval '... for us Germans there could 
loom no fairer love- match than a wedding of Italia's genius with that of 
Deutschland'.

Nuremberg, has inspiration to burn but no discipline. Beckmesser has all the 
discipline but no inspiration. It falls to Hans Sachs – who, although at times 
world-weary, has abundant quantities of both – to train Walther. He does so in 
Act III, Scene 2, in a series

of lengthy onstage composition lessons that serve as a thinly disguised 
allegory for Wagner's self-image, as aesthetic genius and great master all in 
one. In Act III, Scene 4, Walther has gone off, his song still lacking an 
ending. Eva arrives; Walther returns and, seeing her, invents a suitable finale 
on the spot. Sachs in very short order publicly renounces Eva, unites her with 
Walther and promotes his apprentice David to journeyman (thus facilitating 
David's own marriage). His role as weaver of destinies culminates in this 
scene, and the sense of threads being gathered has an exact musical parallel in 
the intricate ensemble for five voices that follows. The quintet (David's 
fiancee Magdalene is the fifth voice) begins with Eva alone; others come in 
below her, in counterpoint and each with his own words, spinning out into one 
of the most beautiful musical pieces Wagner ever wrote, an inspiration whose 
melodic arcs rival Bellini's.

To write a quintet was, for Wagner, to use a formal device from the operatic 
past – from number opera – that he had abandoned decades before, in the late 
1840s. His flamboyant renunciation had occurred both in theory – as his 
scornful writings from that period attest – and in practice, as evinced, say, 
by Das Rheingold in the mid 1850s, where (Rheinmaidens aside) there is barely a 
hint of characters singing together. And this in turn brings us to another 
aspect of operatic comedy: its tendency towards musical conservatism. Again, 
Wagner and Verdi might be drawn together here, as Falstaff, like Die 
Meistersinger, constantly looks back nostalgically into the musical past. The 
locus classicus in Verdi's case is the opera's finale, in which the follies of 
the world are celebrated in a formal fugue, complete with staggered entries, 
imitation points and even a dominant pedal to herald the end; but elsewhere in 
the opera we are constantly reminded of antique manners, of sonnets, of songs 
with lute accompaniment and – most daring of all – a mock sonata form that 
launches the hectic progress of the drama.

So in some ways at least, encouraged by the ancient restraints that comedy can 
impose, Verdi and Wagner become most musically proximate in their solitary 
mature comedies. The comic muse permitted Wagner to relax his declamatory 
principles, and allowed his love of Italianate melody (which had lain mostly 
dormant since Lohengrin) to resurface. Soon after Die Meistersinger, in 1871, 
he even wrote to 'an Italian friend' (none other than Arrigo Boito, future 
librettist of Falstaff) saying – with what sincerity we can only speculate – 
that '... for us Germans there could loom no fairer love- match than a wedding 
of Italia's genius with that of Deutschland'. The chief usher at this ceremony 
might, Wagner mused, be his 'poor Lohengrin', just premiered in Italy. But in 
the last decade of the 19th century it was Die Meistersinger that became the 
Italians' favourite. Puccini may have agonised over Tristan (after hearing a 
performance, he despaired that – by comparison – Italians were 'mandolinists, 
amateurs'), but it is the cheerful, slightly ponderous energy of Die 
Meistersinger that rings out from Manon Lescaut, even from parts of La bohème 
and Tosca.

And Verdi? In the first scene of Act III of Falstaff, with the protagonist at 
the lowest of low ebbs, the drenched knight's fractured, almost atonal 
ruminations are punctuated by a ghostly orchestral echo of Klingsor's magic, 
shape-shifting chromaticism. But truer to the overall spirit of the opera is 
the grand finale of Act II, with its furious, chaotic, action-driven ensemble. 
The scene ends with Falstaff unceremoniously tipped into the Thames; but one 
senses that almost anything could have happened. In another, similarly chaotic 
ensemble, in Act II of Die Meistersinger, a Night Watchman emerges from the 
maelstrom, a solitary horn calls out, and the town is wished a solemn good 
night: 'Lobet Gott, den Herrn!' Verdi saved his solitary horn calls for the 
last scene of Falstaff, but the echoes, ghostly echoes, are nevertheless there.
 Laurent Naouri (Sir John Falstaff), centre, in Glyndebourne's 2013 revival of 
Falstaff. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
Night, in comic opera, is the place of mistaken identities, where people have 
exchanged cloaks and hats, where the wrong lovers sometimes embrace in the 
dark. In opera of all periods, night scenes are an occasion for the composer to 
toy with orchestration and timbre, to create a numinous alternative world. In 
the final scene of Falstaff, those calls from unseen horns suggest spaces and 
events beyond the visible. Even though the fairies and elves that fill the 
stage are just ordinary mortals in disguise, the sense that enchantment is at 
work in human events can't wholly be banished. When Hans Sachs in Act III looks 
back on the comic chaos of the previous night, he too thinks of fairies and 
magic: 'Ein Kobold half wohl da: / ein Glühwurm fand sein Weibchen nicht; / 
der hat den Schaden angericht't. / Der Flieder war's: Johannisnacht' (A 
mischievous sprite was at work: / a firefly couldn't find his mate; / that 
caused all the trouble. / Or it was the elder tree: Midsummer's Night!). Under 
the aegis of comic opera, Verdi and Wagner seem to have wandered together into 
a moonlit garden – the same garden where, disguised as the Countess, Mozart's 
Susanna once sang so alluringly.

Carolyn Abbate is Professor of Music at Harvard University and the author of 
Unsung Voices (1991) and In Search of Opera (2001). Roger Parker is Professor 
of Music at King's College London, and the author of Leonora's Last Act (1997) 
and Remaking the Song (2006) .Their jointly written History ofOpera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> was published by Allen Lane last year.

This article is taken from the Glyndebourne 2013 Festival programme and is 
reproduced with kind permission.
 