
The largest ever survey of footpaths in England and Wales has found that 
almost half are in need of improvement 
<http://www.ramblers.org.uk/news/news/2016/november/big-pathwatch-report-launch.aspx>
, with a tenth of the 140,000-mile network in serious disrepair. For anyone, 
like me, who considers a decent yomp a staple of any good weekend, those 
results won’t seem in the least bit surprising.

Of the 59,000 problems reported by the 3,250 citizen surveyors who took part 
in the Ramblers’ Big Pathwatch, a third were for missing signposts that can 
quickly turn a pleasant country stroll into an epic trudge as the detours mount 
up. But most were for obstructions, like barbed wire and collapsed bridges, or 
footpaths made impassable by flooding and overgrowth that would likely force 
you to abandon your walk altogether.

My most recent walk in the otherwise glorious Shropshire Hills suffered from 
many of the same symptoms. Field upon field of free-roaming and frisky young 
bulls initially tested the nerves of me and my companion as we followed the 
Shropshire Way. As a nationally recognised long-distance trail through numerous 
National Trust, SSSI and Forestry Commission beauty spots, the route was 
handsomely signed and maintained throughout.

But as soon as we left it to continue our journey along more minor footpaths, 
we quickly found ourselves in unsigned territory, negotiating dangerously 
dilapidated stiles and wading through chest-high crops and brambles along 
barely there trails. In the end, we were forced out of the fields and traipsed 
the last few miles along dangerous B-roads instead.

This pattern of feast and famine for walkers is something the Ramblers’ survey 
picks up on across England and Wales. Areas of land with high levels of active 
custodianship, such as national parks and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, 
predictably had the footpaths with the least problems. And the 
government-funded National Trails scored particularly highly. But it’s the 
thousands of miles of small but essential footpaths administered by local 
authorities, which link the whole rights of way network together, that are the 
poor relations and suffering the most.

And the explanation isn’t too hard to find. For many austerity-hit councils, 
rights of way budgets were the first to go, with a fifth of staff employed to 
maintain footpaths cut in the last six years. So it’s not surprising that a 
rural county as big as Cornwall (like Shropshire) finds itself with a thriving 
South West Coast Path national trail worth £436m a year in tourism, that’s 
connected to an ailing local path network with the highest reported instances 
of blockages.

And this disparity is, ironically, only likely to get worse because of the 
boom in popularity of challenge walking and an increasing demand for prestige 
routes, like the Three Peaks.

I think it’s fantastic that after years of being gently derided for my love of 
Gore-Tex and OS maps, thousands of people are now discovering the joys of 
hillwalking for themselves (often while also raising money for charity). But 
getting up Snowdon at any time of the year can now be a bit of a bunfight, and 
it’s getting similarly busy on many of our 15 National Trails.

Indeed, the Wales Coast Path, which opened in 2012 as the first complete 
round-country walk in the world, has proved so popular that the government has
committed to completing the England Coast Path by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/19/englands-first-stretch-south-eastern-national-coastal-path-opens>
, reversing earlier threats to abandon the costly scheme.

England's first stretch of south-eastern national coastal path opens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/19/englands-first-stretch-south-eastern-national-coastal-path-opens>
While it’s exciting to see such landmark new footpaths and the landscapes they 
pass through opened up to walkers, with the welcome boost in tourism that 
they’ll no doubt bring, I just hope they don’t come at the expense of the local 
network that provides such a vital amenity for everyday walking.

With the UK’s burgeoning obesity and mental health problems, we need there to 
be as few obstacles as possible to people enjoying the benefits of a good walk 
in the outdoors.
 