
In the summer of 1995, 26-year-old Cheryl Strayed, carrying a backpack nearly 
half her weight, embarked on a solo 1,100-mile trek along the Pacific Crest 
Trail. The PCT stretches across nine mountain ranges, from the 
California-Mexico border to Canada; Strayed said she was hoping for a 
transformative experience that would “make me into the woman I knew I could 
become and turn me back into the girl I’d once been.”

Seventeen years later, Strayed published her memoir Wild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/06/wild-cheryl-strayed-review>, 
which details her experience of hiking alone for two months, and the poignant 
life events — the death of her mother and subsequent divorce from her husband 
of six years — that propelled her journey. The book spent months on and off the 
New York Times bestseller list and has now been been turned into a movie, 
produced by and starring Reese Witherspoon – who has been nominated for a best 
actress Oscar. So far, the film has earned $34m worldwide and has ignited what 
has been termedthe “Wild Effect,” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2876281/The-Wild-Effect-Hundreds-women-follow-Cheryl-Strayed-s-footsteps-2-600-mile-Pacific-Crest-Trail-famous-best-selling-novel.html>
 inspiring people to hit the PCT. It has also turned Strayed into a feminist 
icon.

Critics have accused Hollywood of continuing sexism for snubbing the film from 
a nomination in the Best Picture category at The Oscars this year, butWild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/wild> perhaps already wins as the most 
feminist film of 2014. Between the frankness of Strayed’s sexual encounters and 
the brutal blood and blisters incurred during her epic hike, the fact that the 
story hangs on a single female performance focused on a feat of physical and 
mental strength is remarkable in itself.
 Cheryl Strayed and Reese Witherspoon. Photograph: Jeff Vespa/WireImage 
“It wasn’t popular in my generation to be a feminist,” says Strayed, now 46, 
from her home in Portland, Oregon. “There’s a whole lot of women in my 
generation who said, ‘Well, I’m not a feminist, but ...’ And I always think, if 
you enjoy wearing pants, you’re a feminist – because that is a right fought for 
by feminists, by women who came before you.”

As an adolescent, Strayed’s existence was far from what you would expect of a 
fledgling women’s rights champion: she was captain of the cheerleading team and 
homecoming queen. “The life I led as a teenager was at great odds with my 
actual identity – who I knew I was and my beliefs,” she says. “It was just that 
I needed to be loved and so that was pretty much the only way for a small town 
girl from northern Minnesota to gain acceptance and love – to be the cute blond 
person I pretended to be.”

What was she interested in at the time? “I was an avid reader. I was much 
smarter than anyone assumed, and much more ambitious.” One tangible marker for 
her political beliefs was a subscription toMs magazine 
<http://www.msmagazine.com/about.asp>. The other was, as she says, “just the 
life I had. I saw my mom being beaten by my father many countless times, and I 
also saw what it took for her to gather her strength and leave him, and how 
hard it was for her, as a single mother of three kids, without any support at 
all from the culture or my father or her family. She really was a heroic 
person, and I recognised that as a little girl.”

In an early chapter of Wild, Strayed writes about the challenges of shedding 
socially constructed notions of femininity while travelling along the PCT: “I’d 
been a girl for ever, after all, familiar with and reliant upon the powers my 
very girliness granted me. Suppressing those powers gave me a gloomy twinge in 
the gut.” Strayed says she worked hard to get that passage of the book right. 
“It’s a really interesting part of being a woman, especially a young woman, and 
especially somebody who has been conventionally attractive. I think most young 
women go through this experience.”

“I’m just fascinated by the fact that the main power we grant young women in 
our culture is the power of their beauty and sexual appeal to men. And we also 
punish them for cashing in on it and admitting to it.”

Before the PCT, Strayed often fell back on that traditional female “power”. 
Out on the trail, she felt stripped of it: “I didn’t have any of the artifice 
that goes with looking as my ‘sexy self’ in the world.“I was instead shorn 
clean, really, just in my stinky hiker clothes. It was good for me. It had to 
do with learning how to rely on myself; other ways to feeling comfortable or 
accepted or valid in the world of men.”

Another scene from the book details her confiding to a therapist how she has 
sex like a man – “detached”. You could argue that this is not a gender-specific 
state of mind.

“I couldn’t agree more,” she says. “I think, absolutely, the way female 
sexuality has been expressed and essentially allowed to exist in a public way 
is all about love and emotion and attachment. So when I say to that therapist, 
‘I’m more like a man sexually,’ I’m really speaking more to the cultural norms 
and expectations about male and female sexuality. I wasn’t saying there aren’t 
any women like me. I was saying maybe we need to have a wider view of what it 
means to be a women when it comes to sex.”

For Strayed, the most important line in Wild came during a conversation with 
her mother, Bobbi Lambrecht, shortly after learning she was dying of cancer: 
“She said to me, ‘I’ve never been in the driver seat of my own life, I’ve 
always been somebody’s daughter or mother or wife.’ And it was her deepest 
regret.”

At the time of the diagnosis, her mother was on the cusp of taking control – 
she had enrolled in the same college Strayed attended, majoring in women’s 
studies and history. Lambrecht died aged 45, before she could finish her 
degree. “When my mother went to college, she could see her life in a broader 
context. She got married [at 19] because she was pregnant, because abortion was 
not legal. Her life had been defined by that single motherhood.” Strayed knew 
her life would be different. “My work as her daughter was to always be a person 
in the driver seat. It’s the story of feminism – it’s always women hoping to 
make it better for the next generation of women.”

WILD is out now in cinemas across the UK
 