
Ronald Koeman has made his reputation as a canny, pragmatic manager in the 
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> but his 
Everton side were made to look naive by Watford as they maximised their 
opportunities to take all three points.

Bournemouth crash back to earth as George Boyd goal gives Burnley win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/burnley-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
After being outplayed on the pitch, the Dutchman failed to cover himself in 
glory after the match either. Rightly furious at his team letting a 1-0 lead 
become a 3-1 deficit before Romelu Lukaku’s second restored a sheen of 
credibility, he described his team as “reactive, not proactive”. But he also 
saw fit to criticise, more than once, his opponents’ style of play.

Walter Mazzarri smiled when he heard that the Dutchman had described his team 
as “direct and aggressive”. Yes, his side had scored twice from set pieces, and 
yes the move that led to their opening goal had begun with a long ball from the 
back. But Mazzarri knew what had happened on the pitch, andWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> had been better in every 
department.

“Each person has his opinion, luckily we all have eyes to see,” the Italian 
said through his interpreter. “I think you have all seen who played better 
today, who played good football. Every person has an opinion, but I don’t agree 
with him.”

Watford’s star performer was Stefano Okaka. The striker arrived from 
Anderlecht in the summer for an undisclosed fee but his season has been 
disrupted by injury. This was only his second start of the season, his first 
came last week, but he looked anything but rusty as he pirouetted to score 
Watford’s equaliser in the 36th minute.

After Sebastian Prödl gave Watford the lead with a towering header in the 59th 
minute, Okaka produced one of his own four minutes later. He lost his marker to 
meet José Holebas’s corner at the near post and flick the ball past Maarten 
Stekelenburg. The Italian was withdrawn late on to a standing ovation.

“I’ve known him since he was very young and playing for Roma, he’s a great 
talent,” said Mazzari, who gave the striker a bear hug after his opening goal. 
“We had the opportunity to sign him in the summer and we took it. He is perfect 
for the Premier League because he doesn’t only help himself but helps his 
team-mates to play well and score.”

Where Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> would have been 
without their own two-goal striker is anyone’s guess. Lukaku opened the scoring 
when he coolly finished off Gareth Barry’s wonderful long ball, ironically 
Everton’s best pass of the game. The Belgian closed it out with a surefire 
header from the substitute Aaron Lennon’s cross. In between times, however, he 
was largely marooned, waiting hopefully for crosses that rarely came.

Fraizer Campbell’s late leveller rescues Crystal Palace after Hull heroics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/hull-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
After criticising Ross Barkley’s lack of productivity during the week, Koeman 
once again left the England international on the bench. His replacement, James 
McCarthy, looked entirely at sea in a nominal No10 role. Gerard Deulofeu tried 
hard on the right-hand side, while Kevin Mirallas was anonymous on the left. 
And these are the players who apparently make Everton more of a footballing 
side than their opponents.

“The Premier League is not always about football qualities, it’s about 
physicality, about second balls and in that respect the team is too weak,” 
Koeman said. “We have too much to do when teams like this play direct and 
aggressive.

“We have different players, different qualities but in that aspect we have to 
improve and do better. You can’t change that in two weeks. You need January, 
you need the summer to change what you need as a team. We need a 
better balance.”

Everton had a late penalty appeal when Miguel Britos manhandled the substitute 
Enner Valencia to prevent him jumping for a cross but Watford now sit in the 
top half of the table, with Mazzarri about to get his first experience of the 
Premier League Christmas period. “In Italy we don’t have games so close at 
Christmas but I’m not worried about it,” Mazzarri said. “All I’m worried about 
is that my squad is not fully fit. If we had the complete squad I’d be very 
happy.”
 