
Last Christmas was a particularly sweet one for Watford’s supporters, who went 
into the festive period on the back of a four-game winning run that culminated 
in their finest result of the season,a 3-0 victory against Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/20/watford-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
. As they pulled their crackers and donned their paper party hats the team was 
seventh in the Premier League and boasted perhaps the division’s most fearsome 
strike pairing: between them Odion Ighalo and Troy Deeney had scored 17 goals 
in as many games under the guidance of their dapper Spanish manager, Quique 
Sánchez Flores.

Meanwhile the players and coaches gathered as instructed at their hotel before 
the Boxing Day fixture against Chelsea. As they sat down to dinner only one man 
was missing: Flores had not turned up, having decided to spend the time with 
his children instead. It was not much of an example, and did not go unnoticed. 
Over the next few months this attitude was transmitted to some of the other 
senior players, who occasionally skipped training sessions without sanction. 
Others saw this, and the manager’s preference for picking the same team 
irrespective of performance either on the pitch or in training, and questioned 
their own need for punctuality and strenuous application. Though the team 
reached an FA Cup semi-final,losing 2-1 to Crystal Palace  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/24/crystal-palace-watford-fa-cup-match-report>
at Wembley, the 21 remaining league games would bring only four wins, as team 
morale and discipline gradually deteriorated. Flores departed at the season’s 
conclusion.

Watford and Stefano Okaka rally to hold off Everton and Romelu Lukaku
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/watford-everton-premier-league-match-report>
Individually and collectively they go into this Christmas in very different 
form, having lost four of their past five matches, while Ighalo and Deeney have 
had only four goals to celebrate this season. The Nigerian’s decline has been 
particularly stark: in 2015 he was the most prolific goalscorer in any of 
England’s professional leagues, ending the calendar year with 30 goals to his 
name. “As a professional, and someone who works hard, I always hope that my 
next year is going to be better than my last year,” Ighalo said in late 
December of last year. “I’m praying that 2016 is going to be even better than 
2015.” With one game to play he has scored four league goals this calendar 
year, and only two since the end of January. A year ago he was wanted by 
Manchester United; now he only gets in theWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> team when others are injured.

But in many ways the team’s outlook is brighter than it was a year ago. The 
side, currently 12th, have again spent most of the first half of the season in 
the top half of the table, while the burden of goalscoring has been better 
shared – for all their strikers’ travails they managed precisely as many goals 
at this stage and already 11 players have scored for the Hornets in the league, 
compared with eight across the entirety of last season. And as others have 
faded new stars have shone, none brighter than Nordin Amrabat, the Moroccan 
winger signed by Flores last January but hardly used by the Spaniard. On the 
downside, a team that conceded 16 goals in the first 17 games of last season 
have let in 29, proving particularly susceptible from crosses and set pieces.

“I always try to assess the team’s performances in a balanced way, like an 
outsider, not with bias,” says Walter Mazzarri of the season thus far. “I am 
someone who always wants to get more from his team. Overall, I think we are 
achieving our targets for this year – but we could have done even more.”

Mazzarri has been particularly irked by some of the games in his side’s recent 
run, feeling they have underachieved. “Some of the matches have made me very 
angry, I was really unhappy with them,” he says. “For example we should have 
taken at least a point from West Brom, a point from Stoke, and above all 
something from Sunderland. If you watched that game we played as if we were the 
home team, always on the front foot, creating many chances, especially in the 
first half, but we didn’t score. Then the first chance they got, they did. 
Based on our performances I think we have deserved four or five points more 
than we’ve got, and that annoys me.

“Even against Manchester City, who have a wonderful team and often thrash 
opponents at home, we played well and could have equalised near the end when we 
created one great chance [for Ighalo], but we missed it. The game turned on 
that moment. What’s important is that this team, this group of players, has 
performed well. We deserved to win those points. Perhaps we need to improve the 
squad a bit in some areas, and we need to score more of the chances we create.”

Mazzarri has also had to cope with a succession of injuries, particularly in 
attack, where the summer signings Stefano Okaka and Isaac Success have so far 
managed three starts between them. Another August recruit, Roberto Pereyra, 
sustained a knee injury during therecent defeat by City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/manchester-city-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 that seems likely to end his season. The club seems certain to enter the 
transfer market once again in January in an attempt to replace him, which is 
not something they have been averse to of late.

The Boxing Day fixture against Crystal Palace gives Mazzarri an opportunity to 
reverse his side’s recent run of apparent misfortune against opponents whose 
form is worse than Watford’s, even if they no longer employ the manager who is 
responsible for it. Whatever happens, though, Watford will be conscious of the 
fact that a merry Christmas does not necessarily preface a happy new year.
 