
The Potteries Museum and Art Gallery 
<http://www.stoke.gov.uk/ccm/navigation/leisure/museums/> in Stoke-on-Trent is, 
according to author AN Wilson, "the greatest museum in the world". Its ceramics 
collection is rivalled only by the V&A, its Arnold Bennett archive is bettered 
only by the British Library and itsStaffordshire Hoard  
<http://www.staffordshirehoard.org.uk/>of Anglo-Saxon treasures is second only 
to the British Museum.

But while it is free to visit the V&A, the British Library and Museum, an 
entrance fee is set to be charged in Stoke. Across the country, eye-watering 
cuts to local authority budgets mean that councils are either closing museums 
or ratcheting up charges. Last week, artistAnish Kapoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/mar/03/anish-kapoor-arts-cuts-exhibition>
 accused the Tories of having a "castration complex" about the arts. Yet, in 
the midst of this, the teeming London museums continue to enjoy a state subsidy 
to retain free admission.

It was an achievement of the Labour government to deliver free entry to 
national collections. To wander into the National Portrait Gallery or the 
Imperial War Museum at Duxford was a delight. The last 15 years signalled a 
cultural renaissance in Britain as museums and galleries were restored and 
expanded with lottery funding and government investment. Visitor numbers went 
up and London's standing as a creative hub outshone New York and Paris.

But the real work was done behind the scenes, for when it came to broadening 
audiences for art and culture, free entry didn't achieve that much. According 
to a study by Mori: "While the number of people coming through the door might 
have dramatically increased, the profile of a typical 'population' of museum or 
gallery visitors has remained relatively stable and firmly biased in favour of 
the 'traditional' visitor groups." Instead, working with schools, a proper 
outreach strategy and well-funded inclusion programmes did more to bring 
hard-to-reach audiences through their forbidding porticoes. Whether it was the 
National Gallery's use of Raphael'sMadonna of the Pinks to engage single 
mothers or the Whitworth Gallery's proactive work in Moss Side, hard graft by 
curators in their communities shifted a gallery's audience and reputation. And 
that is exactly what is under threat. The savage assault on the English 
Heritage budget, for example, has forced it to close its access department 
which had successfully opened up history and heritage for thousands of 
inner-city children.

Now comes the assault on the region's arts. In addition to council-funded 
museums feeling the pinch, the government has cut Renaissance in the Regions 
funding, slashed the Arts Council budget and wound down all central support for 
"non-national museums". So, thePeople's History Museum <http://www.phm.org.uk/> 
in Manchester and theTyne and Wear Museums <http://www.twmuseums.org.uk/> will 
have to become dependent upon local authority support, which means entrance 
fees.

But not in London. This metropolitan, club-class government has made sure that 
our global cultural icons are immune from the pressures hitting their regional 
colleagues and, even more perversely, in the case of Tate Modern, continue to 
enjoy secure funds for major capital projects.

So, while American tourists and continental mini-breakers have no problem 
paying €6.50 to wonder at the majesty of Lorenzetti in the Uffizi and €8 to 
feast on Velázquez at the Prado, in London it is all gratis. At New York's 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, there is a de facto $20 entrance fee for adults, so 
why not a fiver for London's great galleries? Would it really undermine our 
cultural competitiveness?

Most museums would support it as well. Acquisition budgets in London and 
Edinburgh have been falling over the last few years. Time and again, our 
national galleries are being outbid by foreign rivals as they seek to keep 
their collections relevant. Curatorial budgets are collapsing and recent cuts 
to grant-in-aid funding shows the dangers of over-reliance upon the state.

A truly equitable cultural policy might begin to think about reintroducing 
charges for our national museums. Naturally, one needs safeguards with schools 
and students retaining free entry and a free day a week reserved for residents. 
Some of the extra income gained could also be allocated to proper inclusion 
strategies and grant-in-aid funds relocated to support our provincial 
collections.

It was in the great regional cities of England that the 1845 Museums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/museums> Act made its mark, as 
corporations worked to bring culture to people blighted by the Industrial 
Revolution. In these hard times, if anywhere should be free, it should be the 
Potteries Museum and Art Gallery, not Tate Modern and its tour parties.
 