
Born a miner’s daughter, Alice Bacon’s experiences as a teacher at an interwar 
secondary modern put her on a mission to transform education in Britain. 
Yorkshire’s first woman MP – elected in 1945 – was passionate about how 
education could radically improve lives in working-class communities such as 
hers in West Yorkshire. As an MP and as a minister, she got to fulfil her dream.

As Alice saw it, she was one of a lucky few to go to a grammar school but she 
could see the world of opportunity denied to her friends, a view confirmed by 
her time as a teacher. It became Alice’s political, social and personal crusade 
to improve the education of working-class boys and girls. Early political 
influence came from her father who took his teenage daughter to work, a memory 
seared in her mind, describing later how she “went down the mine into its inner 
workings and almost terrifying darkness”.

In 1925, aged 16, Alice joined the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party – it was she said, “as 
natural as breathing”. Her first speech was at the Normanton Railwaymen’s Club 
and her first advice surgeries were held almost 20 years before she became an 
MP in Leeds, helping miners fill in compensation forms for industrial injuries. 
Alice’s politics came from experience, not from grand theories.

Once in Westminster, she spoke more than any of her colleagues about 
comprehensive education and forced the issue to the top of the political 
agenda. By the 1960s, as a member of the Labour’s national executive committee, 
she had transformed the party’s at best ambiguous position towards 
comprehensive education to one of outright support. As part of Harold Wilson’s 
government and with Tony Crosland as education secretary, Alice began to see 
her dream fulfilled.

Wilson made Alice a minister, first at the Home Office, then at Education, 
where she became responsible for bringing comprehensive schools to children 
across the country. By the time she left office in 1970, one in three children 
was taught in comprehensives. It was a tide evenMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/apr/15/margaret-thatcher-education-legacy-gove>
 could not reverse. The battle had been won – at least that’s what we thought 
until more than four decades later, another grammar school girl, Theresa May,
seems determined to revisit the argument. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>

Alice said her commitment to comprehensive education “did not come from 
political dogma but from the reality of teaching in a secondary-modern school”. 
She would be deeply disappointed to think we could go back to dividing children 
at the age of 11, slamming doors in the face of those who most need them held 
open.

Alice’s politics were practical and formed by a connection with the people she 
served. Labour peer Bernard Donoughue said: “Alice understood the concerns of 
working-class communities … and was more able to carry them with her by 
argument rather than by lecturing them sanctimoniously on their alleged bigotry 
and prejudices.” He was right.

Addressing the Labour conference in Blackpool in 1965, and understanding the 
mood of the country and party very well, Alice said: “I say that this country 
of ours ought to be able to absorb one million immigrants, but I would ask the 
conference to recognise that these immigrants are concentrated in those very 
areas where the supply of houses, schools and teachers is already inadequate.

“Of course we know that the immigrants did not create the shortage… but until 
the Labour government can make good these shortages, to put more on the already 
over-burdened services could lead to a very serious situation.”

In the 1950s, when some on the left railed against consumerism and “a hell of 
TV sets and home ownership”, Alice said: “One of the good things in the postwar 
years has been the fact that ordinary working women have been able to take 
advantage of appliances which were once considered luxuries. Only those who 
live among working people know the difference which it makes on washing days 
when the woman of the house can use a washing machine instead of having to do a 
weekly wash in the old-fashioned way.” Alice was concerned more than anything 
to improve the lot of working people – in education, at work and at home.

In Labour party politics, Alice was on the right, a Gaitskellite who believed 
in tough party discipline, nicknamed by her Leeds neighbour,Denis Healey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/03/lord-healey>, as “the terror 
of the Trotskyites”. But as the party drifted to the left in the 1980s, Alice 
condemned the “terrible way”the SDP was set up  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/jun/03/guardian190-sdp-ad-1981>
and the “despicable” behaviour of the Gang of Four. Alice was loyal to Labour 
before she was loyal to any faction in it. SDP co-founder Shirley Williams told 
me that Alice never considered joining the SDP – she was too rooted in the 
Labour party. Williams said: “Europe was a key policy for us, but was not an 
issue Alice greatly cared about.”

My biography of Alice came about because when I was elected as the MP for 
Leeds West in 2010, I was only the second female MP elected by the city, 65 
years behind Alice. We still have a way to go at Westminster, where there are 
more men serving in parliament today than the total of women ever elected to 
the House of Commons.

Although Alice asked people to judge her as “a socialist, not a feminist”, she 
helped future generations of Labour women, including me, by making being a 
woman in parliament a little bit less unusual and she fought her own battles. 
Herbert Morrison told the new female MPs in 1945 to stick to “women’s issues”, 
while Gerald Kaufman noted that neither Alice Bacon nor Barbara Castle would 
have been selected if local party members had believed there was the faintest 
chance they would become MPs; both overturned big Tory majorities.

Alice was a pioneer in the world of education and politics whose success was 
founded on her determination to stay true to her working-class roots and the 
people she came into politics to serve. We should be thankful that she 
staunchly refused to accept a second-class world – neither for school pupils, 
nor for women in Westminster.

Rachel Reeves is Labour MP for Leeds West and the author of Alice in 
Westminster: The Political Life of Alice Bacon, published by IB Tauris on 
Thursday.
 