
It's a weird little city, Austin; a ramshackle clutter of voodoo emporiums, 
thrift stores, psychedelia and dive bars, nestled up against state buildings, 
hi-tech industries, mountains and lakes. There are wide streets and high-rises, 
the headquarters of Whole Foods Market, and more bloggers than anywhere else in 
the US. It is also, according to the city's official slogan, "The Live Music 
Capital of the World", and twice a year, Austin hauls out its finery and its 
southern charm to play host to two of the biggest annual music festivals in the 
world. South by Southwest - an industry showcase gone wild - sprawls across the 
city in various venues over the course of a week in March. Austin City Limits 
(ACL), for which we have come, follows the regular rock festival format of 
several stages erected in a big old field for a weekend.

Though we are here for the delights of ACL, the scruffy allure of the city 
keeps us in town more than we'd anticipated. A bohemian oasis in a redneck 
state, Austin has always been fairly cosmopolitan for its size (its population 
has recently swelled to a modest 1.5 million), inhabited by University of Texas 
students, aspiring musicians and a fair few eccentrics.

The capital of Texas has long been associated with hard-drinking and partying, 
a reputation dating back to the 19th century when General Custer's troops 
frequented the city's numerous nightspots after the civil war. Since then, the 
area around 6th Street and 4th Street have remained the hubs of the city's 
nightlife where you'll find music venues such as Stubbs BBQ, Emo's and the 
Parish Room.

Austin's eclectic music scene is as old as the city itself, on account of its 
Mexican, German and colonial origins. By the 30s the city streets were swarming 
with jazz clubs such as the Cotton Club, which were gradually replaced by blues 
bars in the 60s and then, in the 70s, country music came to Austin and it all 
got mixed up. Today, this is where country and bluegrass meld awesomely with 
stoner and psychedelic rock. Local musical heroes have included the be-plaited 
Willie Nelson (still going strong at 74), Roky Erickson, Daniel Johnston, the 
Gourds, Butthole Surfers, And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead and the 
Black Angels. To name but seven.

We arrive late on a muggy September evening, wired from jetlag, and sit out on 
the porch, chit-chatting and drinking beers all night long. Via the online 
noticeboard,craigslist.org <http://www.craigslist.org>, we have rented a little 
wooden house 10 minutes' walk from the centre of town. Renting a stranger's 
home for the weekend is always a bit of a gamble, but this place is clean and 
cosy and pretty, with a Day of the Dead toy skeleton sitting cross-legged on 
the garden bench.

Austin is a fine city for breakfasting: huevos rancheros, pancakes, 
quesadillas and watermelon juice are menu staples, and our night of travelling 
and boozing has left us ravenous. We hop on a Dillo (as in armadillo, varnished 
wooden buses that patrol Austin's streets with a jovial air, and cost precisely 
nothing to ride) and head downtown, over the Colorado river, to South Congress 
and the promise of one of the best diners in town. Congress is a broad avenue 
that bisects the city, with the magnificent dome of the state capitol building 
perched at the top. It used to be the main route into town, but during the 
1960s gleaming new highways beckoned the traffic away from the once prosperous 
South Congress neighbourhood, rents went down and artists and independent 
retailers moved in. Today its bohemian tendencies, record shops and vintage 
stores have earned it the nickname "SoCo".

The Magnolia Cafe (1920 South Congress Avenue, cafemagnolia.com 
<http://www.cafemagnolia.com>), sits plum in the middle of SoCo. It's that 
American diner of your dreams: low-lying, neon-lit, promising root beer floats 
and apple pie. It's busy this morning, with a queue that snakes out into the 
parking lot where, when we arrive, the lead singer of one of the ACL bands is 
scrabbling about in the dust in a frantic attempt to retrieve the pills that 
have tumbled from his pocket. There are omelettes, sandwiches on rye, fries and 
mighty fine burgers. As we wander out into the morning, dazed by the sunshine 
and heavy with breakfast, we spot the legendary Elmo's across the street, a 
brilliantly grotty subterranean dive bar that serves strong liquor, pool and 
live music seven nights a week.

The heat makes you slothful, the air warm on your lips and the pavement hot 
under foot, and so we pass a few lazy hours loafing around the neighbourhood, 
rifling through racks of candy-coloured prom dresses, boxes of silk 
neckerchiefs and shelves covered in kitsch paraphernalia in New Bohemia Retro 
(1606 S Congress Ave) and its swisher neighbour Feathers Boutique (1700 S 
Congress Ave), well-stocked with chunky 60s costume jewellery, mostly featuring 
owls. Later, we head up to the tremendous Waterloo Records (600A North Lamar,
waterloorecords.com <http://www.waterloorecords.com>) and shoot the breeze with 
some cops over beers next door.

ACL puts on special buses for the festival, ferrying the revellers from 
downtown to its venue at Zilker Park on the outskirts, and the next day we hop 
aboard. It's a good-natured festival, the attendees meandering leisurely from 
stage to stage, and we join them until we grow so hot and dusty that we feel 
compelled to plunge into Barton Springs - the natural cold springs just across 
the way from the festival site, that are quiet and deep and greeny-blue. As we 
float on our backs we can hear the distant sound of amplified guitars drifting 
over the treetops.

The day has grown humid, and by nightfall the ceiling fan in our little wooden 
house can do little to stir the drowsy heat. Some local friends collect us in 
their pick-up truck, and soon we're heading to the best barbecue joint in town 
- Ruby's (512 West 29th Street) up in north Austin.

It's "the only BBQ restaurant serving all natural Texas brisket" apparently, 
with a head-spinning array of side-orders such as Andrew Bell's collard greens, 
creamy coleslaw with poppy seeds and southwest mashed potatoes. Outside the 
night air is still warm and gluey, and so it's a relief to clamber into the 
back of the truck and feel the wind in our hair as we zoom up the freeway. 
We're laughing and hollering and waving at passers-by when the first swollen 
raindrops plunk down upon us. A few more, a few more, they gather pace and soon 
it's torrential.

It's fun at first - nothing like a subtropical rainstorm in the back of a 
pick-up truck to make you feel free as a bird - but we're soon soaked through 
to our knickers and, upon arrival, have to take it in turns to wring our 
clothes out in the bathroom sink.

By morning the sky has cleared and we spend a blissfully sunny day back at the 
festival. Back in town that night, local psychedelic rock band the Black Angels 
who, we learn, like to bond with their new acquaintances over shots of 
Jagermeister, show us some of their favourite haunts. We swig from bottles of 
Lone Star beer at the Peacock (515 Pedernales Street) - a vast, dimly lit 
cavern where the DJs are playing heavy rock - before charging down the street 
to revel in the rough-hewn seediness of the Jackalope (404 East 6th Street).

The next day we are somewhat bedraggled. We haul ourselves to Guadalupe Street 
near the university, and sit in silence at Kerbey Lane Cafe (12602 Research 
Blvd,kerbeylanecafe.com <http://www.kerbeylanecafe.com>), hoping that eggs and 
coffee might revive us. A little refreshed, we lope around some more vintage 
clothing stores such as Crème Vintage and Blue Velvet, and admire the Daniel 
Johnston graffiti, before seeking refuge from the blistering heat and our 
hangovers in a cab ride across town. Big mistake.

Upon discovering the fact that we are British, the taxi driver launches into a 
manic defence of David Icke's theories of alien lizards walking among us, for 
he has, he says, seen them too. Our heads pound, the driver rolls forth on his 
lizardy monologue, and the streets of Austin rush by, a blur of finger puppet 
shops, crawfish restaurants and cheap bars. Oh, we think, what a weird little 
city.

Way to go

Getting there

Continental Airlines (0845 60 767 60, continental.com/uk 
<http://www.continental.com/uk>) flies Gatwick-Austin from £373 rtn inc tax.

Where to stay

The Austin Motel is a 70 year-old independent motel with double rooms from 
$100 (austinmotel.com <http://www.austinmotel.com>).

Music festivals

SXSW Music Festival (http://2008.sxsw.com/music <http://2008.sxsw.com/music>) 
March 12-16 2008.

Austin City Limits Festival (aclfestival.com <http://www.aclfestival.com>) 
September 26-28 2008.

Further information

traveltex.com <http://www.traveltex.com>, 020-7978 5233.
 