
Recently the writer and literary critic Ruth Franklin, author of the 
forthcoming biography of the writer Shirley Jackson, wanted to take her 
nine-year-old daughter out of the city for a while. She chose the unassuming 
Catskills town of Hobart,New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>
, as her destination.

With six bookstores, an art gallery, a coffee spot that serves breakfast and 
lunch, and the recent purchase of a building that’s to be renovated into a 
proper English pub by the new owners, the town has undergone an unlikely 
transformation into something akin to an English village.

“At first we were a little disappointed that it was smaller than we expected,” 
Franklin told the Guardian by email. “But as soon as we started looking in the 
bookstores, we got pretty excited. My daughter picked up copies of the Green, 
Yellow and Rose Fairy Books, which she had never encountered before.”

Her daughter browsed the children’s sections; Franklin found a first edition 
of Shirley Jackson’s We Have Always Lived in the Castle from Adams’ 
Antiquarian. “We spent around $100 and came home with about two dozen books,” 
Franklin added, a respectable haul.

 Surrounded by red barns, silos and pasturing animals, and nestled between 
verdant hills and the west branch of the Delaware River, the main street of 
Hobart runs parallel to the former railway line turned into the meandering 
Catskills Scenic Trail. According to Hobart’s one-man booster squad (and real 
estate investor and bookstore owner), Don Dales, the only business open in 
Hobart in 1999 was a diner run by an eccentric woman who would duck down behind 
the counter and turn off the lights if she saw a stranger approaching her 
establishment. “Hobart was essentially a ghost town,” he says.

Over the years, Dales began buying up the inexpensive retail storefronts in 
town, explaining: “I’ve got a bee in my bonnet to do something with Hobart,” 
and began giving retail space away. But even a year of free rent didn’t lure 
businesses and many of his renters didn’t pay their electricity bills.

Enter Diana and Bill Adams, a lawyer and a physician, respectively, married 
New York City residents who drove through Hobart on a weekend trip in 2000, and 
then again visited the area in 2001 for a wedding. Despite having demanding 
full-time jobs, they saw a retail space (not owned by Dales) on Hobart’s Main 
Street and rented it on the spot. Then they made an offer on a house up the 
road and closed on it the week before 9/11.

“It was spontaneous,” says Diana Adams of their entry into Hobart and 
professional book-selling. The Adamses Antiquarian bookshop opened in 2002. “We 
didn’t know what we were doing. Now retired from their previous careers, and 
New York City, Bill Adams adds: “Our aim was to buy books and afford to travel 
and buy new books.”

 A few years later Dales decided to get into the book-selling business 
himself. “The way the Adams tell the story, I was sitting down there having tea 
one day and said: ‘Well, no one is renting these stores for free, so dammit, 
I’ll do it myself.’” The Adamses confirm his story. Dales opened two bookstores 
and when two other bookstores were added to the mix in 2005 Hobart Book Village 
was born. Since then the bookstores have come and gone, been bought and sold, 
and merged and melded.

Dennis Lauchman, owner of Butternut Valley Books, who sells much his selection 
online and at books and ephemera shows, was convinced to open his Hobart 
location last year by the Adams. “Selling online is more efficient, but this is 
much more fun. And the Adamses do so much promotion for the town, it makes it 
worth it,” he says.

 Now celebrating their 10th anniversary a book village, there are six 
bookstores, a book village dog and two book village cats, and business has 
grown every year since the village’s founding.

At the Adamses Antiquarian Book Shop, there are three browsable floors of fine 
books at a variety of price points. The Adamses regularly make buying trips to 
England, and their special focus is on rare Greek and Latin books. “To say 
we’re becoming known for them is an overstatement, but they represent a high 
percentage of our sales,” says Diana Adams.

At Blenheim Hill Books, co-owned by retired Rutgers professors, Barbara J 
Balliet and poet Cheryl Clarke, the selection is more general, with some 
collectibles on subjects ranging from gardens to photography. “We bought the 
stock and weeded it down,” says Clarke. “We also have a barn that’s full of 
books.” Clarke and Balliet are also the organizers of Hobart’s annual Festival 
of Women Writers, with Clarke’s sister, the writer Breena Clarke. In its third 
year, the festival takes place the weekend after Labor Day and in 2014 drew 
more than 100 writers to the village.

Liberty Rocks Books opened in 2014 and has a newly renovated 5,000 sq ft 
space, a broad selection of used and antiquarian books, an art gallery, a small 
display of contemporary fine press publications from Brooklyn’s Ugly Duckling 
Presse, and a wing called the Hobart Booksellers Emporium, with shelves 
available to be rented out by other dealers. One of the first occupants of the 
wing is a micro-bookstore of six shelves of books by and about James Joyce.

There are more specialized stores, too. Around the World with Books and Cooks 
is a bookstore cooperative run by three other sellers and carries foreign 
language books for adult and children and vintage cookbooks in English. 
Butternut Valley Books is a small but jam-packed store full of old books, maps 
and paper ephemera. Lauchman lives 40 miles away, and spent many years selling 
books outdoors in Haarlem, Amsterdam. Mysteries & More is owned by Don Dales 
himself and is stocked with vintage mysteries, suspense, thrillers and science 
fiction. It’s also home to Big Red, the detective cat. Like the other 
bookstores Dales has owned in Hobart, he notes that Mysteries & More is for 
sale.

One of the things that both delights and worries the booksellers of Hobart is 
the frequent comparison to the much larger andwell-established book village of 
Hay-on-Wye in Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/books/guardian-hay-festival> 
on the English border. They don’t want to disappoint visitors. Even though they 
took loose inspiration from the village when they started opening bookstores, 
and like Hay, they added a festival and lecture series to its offerings, the 
scale is much different and always will be (Hay-on-Wye has a population of 
1,900, and over 20 bookstores in town as well as other businesses). Its 
festival draws thousands. Hobart is a village of 441 and still is seeking a 
variety of businesses to help fill out the Main Street, like the planned 
English pub, to truly become a weekend destination.

Despite being three and a half hours from Brooklyn (and a healthy drive beyond 
the reach of ongoing hipsterfication of Kingston and other similar Catskills 
towns like Phoenicia and Woodstock), Diana Adams says a significant percentage 
of their visitors are from Brooklyn, many of whom do make the tie to the Welsh 
book village.

Adams concurs: “You just can’t imagine how much like England it is. It’s 
beautiful and it’s changed our lives.”
 