
West Bromwich Albion <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> have made 
a £10m offer for the Hull City midfielder Jake Livermore.

It is understood that the Baggies are chasing the 27-year-old after missing 
out on Morgan Schneiderlin to Everton.

Tony Pulis <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tony-pulis>, the West Brom 
head coach, is keen to add quality to his squad as they try to maintain a 
surprise challenge for Europa League qualification.

Livermore was a late substitute in Hull’s 3-1 win against Bournemouth, Marco 
Silva’s first Premier League game since taking charge of the east Yorkshire 
club.

Hull’s Jake Livermore set to avoid suspension over positive cocaine test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/09/jake-livermore-sanction-cocaine-hull-city-fa>
One of the new manager’s first tasks will be to help try to keep former 
Tottenham Hotspur player Livermore or cash in with Hull battling relegation.

Livermore, who joined from Spurs in 2014, has made 25 appearances for Hull 
this season and 104 in total.

Hull are third from bottom in the Premier League and only in the relegation 
zone on goal difference following the win against Bournemouth on Saturday, 
which was their first in the league since November.

West Brom have money to spend this month although are the club are keen to 
avoid a late transfer scramble ahead of the deadline on 31 January. They made 
an offer of around £18m for Schneiderlin but he joined Everton from Manchester 
United in a deal worth £24m.

There was also interest in Jeff Schlupp, having had two bids rejected in the 
summer, but the Ghana international moved to Crystal Palace from Leicester City 
for around £12m last week. West Brom had doubts over paying the fee having 
already had a £12m offer turned down last year.

They will only make a move for a striker if Saido Berahino leaves this month 
with Stoke City, who have previously offered £20m in talks with the Baggies for 
the striker, who is out of contract at the end of the season.

Pulis has guided West Brom to eighth in the Premier League although they were 
beaten 4-0 at Tottenham on Saturday.
 