
Aloe vera, cucumber, teabags and the simple cold shower – most people 
afflicted with sunburn have a remedy passed down from their parents and their 
parents’ parents to relieve the pain at home.

With a heatwave sweeping eastern Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2017/jan/11/temperatures-to-soar-above-40c-as-heatwave-sweeps-eastern-australia>
, obviously the best, most effective, and least cancer-inducing strategy is not 
to get sunburnt in the first place. But with the Cancer Council estimating that 
1.9 million Australians are sunburnt every year, it’s not ridiculous to have 
the treatments on hand.

University of Sydney associate professor Saxon Smith, a dermatologist who also 
works at the Royal North Shore hospital, says most people’s home remedies do 
work – but by coincidence rather than any inherent superior curing properties 
in aloe vera or teabags.

Temperatures to soar above 40C as heatwave sweeps eastern Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2017/jan/11/temperatures-to-soar-above-40c-as-heatwave-sweeps-eastern-australia>
“I hear lots of stories of what people try to do at home to alleviate 
sunburn,” he said. “Some of the things they use can be done in an easier way.”

The first step is to get the heat out – the longer the heat remains in a burn 
the more damage and sorer it is going to be. A cold shower or pouring cold 
water directly on the sunburn is the easiest way to relieve the burn of heat.

The next step is to cool the skin. “It’s not so much the tomatoes or teabags 
[that people use that are effective], it’s that there’s liquid in them and it’s 
the liquid cooling the skin,” Smith said.

“Depending on the severity you can use any type of moisturiser that doesn’t 
have fragarances in them – fragrance can irritate the skin. There’s always good 
old-fashioned sorbolene.”

The fact that the moisturiser evaporates within minutes does not mean it isn’t 
doing the job, according to Smith: skin is desperate to cool down and is 
absorbing any moisture. If the burn is quite severe it will need something 
thicker than liquid moisturiser.

“It used to be Vaseline was quite useful for hot-water burns, as a barrier 
after cooling it down,” he said. “You could use it for sunburn but the 
difficulty is people don’t want to put Vaseline on their skin.”

Smith said tea tree oil, used in hospitals to treat severe burns, was good for 
the skin but it didn’t matter if tea tree or another type of oil was applied. 
“It’s an oil form, it’s moisturising,” he said. “Some people use olive oil – 
again it’s a moisturising effect on the skin.

People need to learn sunscreen is last line of defence, Cancer Council stresses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/people-need-to-learn-sunscreen-is-last-line-of-defence-cancer-council-stresses>
“There are healing properties associated with aloe vera and tea tree, 
particuarly tea tree has an antiobiotic effect, so it’s good for people with 
more serious burns but people can be allergic.”

He added: “In the early days [of sunburn] go simple as possible, and use lots 
of it,” he said. His best advice for treating sunburn? Don’t get burnt in the 
first place.

The Cancer Council Australia has warned that sunscreen should be people’s last 
defence against sun damage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/people-need-to-learn-sunscreen-is-last-line-of-defence-cancer-council-stresses>
after a slew of complaints from people about getting burnt while wearing it.

But the predominant problem was the way people applied sunscreen, said the 
council’s chief executive, Prof Sanchia Aranda.

“People see it as a suit of armour,” she said. “But when you see someone 
wearing a bikini and out in sun for six hours one would expect to get burned, 
even with sunscreen on. It’s against every recommendation we would make.

“Sunscreen should be a last line of defence and used with a rashie, 
sunglasses, a hat and people should also stay in the shade as much as possible. 
Sunscreen should be used on top of these measures and applied sensibly, every 
two hours.”

• Guardian Australia cannot provide medical advice and the suggestions given 
here are no substitute for it
 