
Pubs and literature are glorious bedfellows; reading a novel in a warm, cosy 
pub is one of life’s great joys. I even wrote a book merging the two:Spoon’s 
Carpets: An Appreciation <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/spoon-s-carpets.html>
, a daft celebration of weird pub carpets and pub culture. The chief 
inspiration for it came from an afternoon spent reading The Way Inn by Will 
Wiles while sitting in a pub. The novel’s unique perspective on hotel 
architecture made me glance down at the ground beneath my feet: once I’d seen 
into the fiery heart of eccentric pub carpet design, I couldn’t unsee it. This 
is the way novels are – they make you see things differently.

The secret life of Wetherspoon’s freaky carpets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/jan/10/wetherspoons-carpet-tumblr-blog>
Pubs are booky places: there are many pubs named after novelists, such as the 
Mary Shelley in Bournemouth; others had novels named after them, such as the 
Jamaica Inn on Bodmin Moor; some even named after literary characters, like the 
Betsey Trotwood in Farringdon. Reading in pubs is different to reading at home 
or on public transport. The pub is warm. There is beer.Pubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pubs> are spaces that allow your mind 
to drift, particularly on a mellow afternoon where a gentle thrum of 
conversation can serve as a soothing mantra to settle you in to your book (of 
course, I wouldn’t recommend reading on a Friday night out – although, I did 
once see someone reading Tolstoy in a Shoreditch club, so make of that what you 
will).

To celebrate glorious union of the pub and the novel, I established a literary 
prize: the Spoons Carpet Novel Award 2016, for best novel to read in a pub. The 
prize is £100 in £1 coins to the author to put in a fruit machine, and the 
nominator with the most convincing arguments wins a £100 Wetherspoon gift card, 
plus some free books from me.

There are five criteria for my prize, and nominated books should meet at least 
three of them:

 * The book must contain at least one character drinking something alcoholic 
at some point in the story or there must be a scene in a bar or pub. 
 * The cover must look amazing when in the presence of a carpet, but not 
undermine the beauty of said carpet. 
 * The novel must make you consider the surroundings you are in as you read it.
 * One main character in the book must remind you of someone you met in a pub 
once. We’ve all met Begbie from Trainspotting, haven’t we? 
 * The novel must make you sad to finish it and to leave the world in which it 
is set. When entering, do (briefly) explain how boring your life is compared 
with the book. 
One of the rules is that the writer must be alive and living in the UK or 
Ireland so they can receive their prize. This excludes many great novels. 
Nights at The Circus by Angela Carter, for example – Fevvers is an autodidact 
like many a pub dweller – or Invisible Cities by Italo Calvino, the ultimate 
collection of made-up travel tales. Even Marquez’s 100 Years of Solitude, 
reflecting the pub’s capacity for bending reality the longer you stay in it.


My personal picks for the prize include:

 * Eat My Heart Out by Zoe Pilger
Very amusing, which helps pub reading. The black cover with red lips could 
easily complement a dark heraldic classic carpet pattern, and I managed two 
chapters a pint (an excellent ratio). 
 * Meatspace by Nikesh Shukla
Features some hilarious “author reading” scenes in a bar. Makes you want to 
put down your iPhone, stop staring at Twitter and read a book instead. Cover 
has a collage of meat on it, which you also often see on pub carpets. 
 * Ten Storey Love Song by Richard Milward
Milward’s novel is full of booze, and Teesside booze at that. The cover is a 
rancid orange, with colourful sweets on the front – perfect camouflage for a 
gaudy pub carpet. The dialogue is fast-paced, which is great when you’ve had a 
couple. 
What is your ultimate pub read? You can enter Kit’s competition here 
<http://wetherspoonscarpets.tumblr.com/spoons-carpets-novel-award>, or for fun, 
leave your nominations (alive or not) in the comments below.
 