
You might think your personal data is safe, secured under computerised lock 
and key, and fenced by the Data Protection Act with its sanctions against 
release of private data. Especially, surely, that which the government holds.

The reality is that everything has its price. Last month, the Information 
Commissioner's Office (ICO), the state-funded watchdog for personal data, 
published a report, What Price Privacy?. The title's question was answered with 
a price list of public-sector data: £17.50 for the address of someone who is on 
the electoral register but has opted out of the freely available edited 
version; £150 to £200 for a vehicle record held by the Driver and Vehicle 
Licensing Agency; £500 for access to a criminal record. The private sector also 
leaks: £75 buys the address associated with a mobile phone number, and £750 
will get the account details.

These were the prices charged by private investigators caught by the ICO and 
police. Their clients included insurers, creditors and criminals trying to 
influence jurors, witnesses or legal personnel. Newspapers were a big source of 
business: the ICO says it knows the names of 305 journalists who have used such 
investigators.

The investigators obtained the data from corrupt insiders or via "blaggers" 
who impersonated officials and others to obtain personal information, often 
gathering an apparently unimportant fact, such as a mother's maiden name, in 
one phone call in order to get a much more important one in the next.

In the report, the ICO called for prison sentences of up to two years for the 
illegal buying and selling of personal information. The maximum fine is £5,000, 
and courts often impose much less. "The fine is no deterrent to them," says 
Jonathan Bamford, assistant information commissioner. One investigator used by 
local authorities as well as finance firms to find debtors was invoicing 
£120,000 a month. "People make so much money, they can get a fine and drive 
away from court in their Porsche," says Bamford. The Department for 
Constitutional Affairs says it is reviewing the sentencing tariff.

Patient records

In the absence of tougher laws, the ICO sees the potential for much worse. 
"The government's plans for increasingly joined-up and e-enabled public-sector 
working make the change even more urgent," the report says. Medical 
professionals are already concerned about the risks of electronic patient 
records, which they think will be unpopular with patients who are uneasy about 
other sectors of government getting at them (see 'Doctors voice concern over 
patient records', below).

Indeed, the government has been playing fast and loose with some people's 
data, according to a European court of justice ruling at the end of last month. 
The court said the 2004 deal between the EU and the US, under which airlines 
had to provide data about passengers travelling to the US, was unlawful because 
it breaches privacy rules. As a Guardian investigation last month (
http://tinyurl.com/gxx5l <http://tinyurl.com/gxx5l>) showed, the data sent as a 
result of that law means a discarded airline ticket stub can be enough to carry 
out identity theft.

But sometimes the problem lies inside government departments. In January, it 
emerged that the identity details of 8,800 Network Rail staff - who are civil 
servants - were stolen in 2003-04 and used to make fraudulent online claims for 
tax credits, costing the government millions of pounds. Alarmed at the rising 
levels of fraud through the online service, the government shut it last 
December.

Such examples are not encouraging about the government's ability to protect or 
police the valuable data about us. Yet more is to come in the government's 
largest project, which will join all the data about us and put it in a single 
place - creating a unique description of each of us for every government 
department. Enrolment on the National Identity Register, to be established by 
the Home Office under the recently passed Identity Cards Act, will, from 2008, 
be compulsory when renewing a passport - and compulsory for everyone some time 
after the next election (due by 2010), if the next government backs it.

The register can include a wide range of personal data, an audit trail of 
where and when the entry has been accessed, and reference numbers for other 
systems, including national insurance, driving licence and passport numbers, 
allowing for substantial joining-up.

The act imposes prison sentences of up to two years for those who illegally 
disclose information from the register. The ICO - which has reservations about 
other aspects of the scheme - takes this as its model for all illegal use of 
personal data.

But Phil Booth, national coordinator for the campaign group No2ID 
(www.no2id.net), says a two-year sentence will not deter criminals wanting to 
reach and influence jurors. "The problem is having all that data in one place, 
so it becomes trivially easy to compromise the system," he says. He compares 
personal identity to the Titanic: "They are talking about linking all the 
watertight compartments, so if one is holed, you go to the bottom of the sea."

The Home Office says it is taking security "very seriously" in designing the 
scheme, such as learning from the experiences of financial card systems. "We 
recognise that a scheme covering the whole of the UK adult population will be 
attractive to criminals," said a spokesperson.

Margaret Moran, the Labour MP who chairs Eurim, a liaison group between 
parliament and the IT industry, argues that with the ICO's tougher penalties, 
rigorous training of staff, and internal security measures such as the audit 
trail, the ability to join up people's data will allow the government to 
provide a better service. She says that when she led Lewisham council, citizens 
benefited from data sharing between the local authority and the then Department 
of Social Security to improve housing benefits. "There are concerns around 
privacy, but people are more concerned about efficient services," she says.

Access card

Moran believes the current identity plans are too tied to security. "I think 
we will have missed a very big opportunity, one that will never come again, if 
we don't join up and ensure that the ID card is not just around identity." She 
insists that the card must also be an access card to government-provided 
services, so that, for example, victims of domestic violence would not have to 
provide similar information to half a dozen agencies, as happens at present.

But Booth says the government could join up its response to incidents such as 
domestic violence through a time-limited identity code for that event, allowing 
agencies to cooperate temporarily rather than marking the victim's record 
permanently, which could make that record a target for the likes of abusive 
partners.

It's a simple method, far more efficient than the bludgeoning concatenation of 
data planned under the register. But despite the excoriation by the Home 
Secretary, John Reid, of the Home Office's inability to deal with the 
relatively small task of when and whether to deport imprisoned foreign 
nationals, and how to identify them, the government remains resolute.

Yet, while it drifts in the voter polls, the government might have some reason 
to consider another poll: a YouGov survey of 2,000 people in April found that 
just 23% of respondents trust the government to deal with their data online, 
compared with 70% who trust their bank. If a bank fails to protect its 
customers' data, or links it in ways that customers don't want, it risks losing 
their business. Often, there is no alternative to the government. Apart, of 
course, from changing it.

· Doctors voice concern over patient records

Medical professionals are concerned about risks to data security caused by the 
creation of the NHS's Connecting for Health's Care Records Service. That will 
establish electronic patient records for everyone in England, accessible at any
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> site, and replace on-site 
computerised or paper patient records.

Users log on using a "chip and pin" smart card and number. Access will be 
limited to those with a reason, and there will be an audit trail. Patients will 
be able to put sensitive information in an electronic "sealed envelope".

Last week Lord Warner, the health minister responsible, said the overall 
programme is more than two years late - due partly to software problems, but 
also to disagreements over access to records. Of 787 doctors contacted recently 
by researcher Medix for the BBC, 44% disagreed that the proposals to maintain 
confidentiality of records were satisfactory, while 21% agreed. Among GPs, 57% 
disagreed and 13% agreed.

Dr Richard Vautrey, a Leeds GP and member of the British Medical Association's 
GP committee, says the technical security seems state of the art. However, "the 
proposal is that there will be an assumption of consent that records can be 
shared", he says. Patients will have to opt out of sharing. And it is not clear 
who might see records, Vautrey says. "The patient may be happy for a consultant 
to have access, but not a social worker."

But once data is on the national system, patients may be unable to stop access 
by other parts of government, he adds. That could damage the trust between 
patients and doctors. Patients might refuse to divulge data, or demand a second 
"private" record is created - just what the system was meant to prevent.

· If you'd like to comment on any aspect of Technology Guardian, send your 
emails totech@theguardian.com <mailto:tech@theguardian.com>
 