
I’m a Brit living in Berlin, but on 5 January I became German, picking up my 
citizenship certificate at Schöneberg town hall. Neatly, this is the same 
building where John F Kennedy declared in 1963: “Ich bin ein Berliner.” Now, 
I’m also a German Berliner!

When I did the necessary German citizenship test in October, another British 
guy and I left the exam together. “Are you another Brexit victim?” he asked.

Am I? I certainly thought I was, in the early hours of 24 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
. I postal-voted remain, and felt cut off from a country I no longer 
understood. I felt insecure about my future as a non-EU citizen in Germany. So, 
victim? Actually, not really. I’ve realised that by becoming German, Brexit has 
a silver lining. This is how it happened.

25 July 2016 


I arrive early at the citizenship section of the town hall and wait for Frau 
Mittag (“Mrs Midday”), responsible for surnames starting with “W”. I’ve lived in
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, with a few breaks, since 
1992. My wife and kids are German. Yet I have always been rather worried about 
how becoming German would change me, so never thought seriously about doing it, 
until 24 June. I was comfortable on the outside of German society, looking in.

Frau Mittag is friendly, mid-50s. We chat, she notices I speak German and says 
she won’t insist on an official language test. A good start. She gives me the 
application forms, the long list of necessary documents, and tells me 
citizenship costs €255. Not cheap.

I ask if many British people are applying post-Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/17/dual-nationality-passports-eu-migrants-fear-brexit-european-union-referendum>
? “Yes, there’s been quite a wave,” she says. And she warns: “Without it (after 
Brexit), you’ll have to apply for a residency permit, which may not be easy.” A 
useful incentive! “And you can keep your British passport.”

“That’s important to me,” I say, as if she is already an old friend.

23 August

Back at the town hall and I am an hour too early for my appointment. Time for 
a coffee in the wood-panelled basement canteen and a moment to reflect: how 
German am I? More than I realise. I use my crumpled German driving licence – 
with a picture from 1992 – as my ID. I’m comfortable with the national rituals 
– celebrating Christmas on 24 December, holidaying on Baltic sea islands and 
ski slopes in Bavaria. During the World Cup, I try to cheer for England but 
cheering for Germany comes more naturally (and not just because they win more). 
Thinking of a map of the country, I realise I’ve visited all 16 federal states. 
I feel at home here.

I hand over my dozen documents to Frau Mittag – payslips, my wife’s payslips, 
birth certificate, kids’ birth certificates, mortgage arrangements. Now the 
unofficial language test. She gives me a blank piece of paper. “Just write a 
few sentences about your summer vacation.” I do so. It feels like the first day 
back at school. She reviews it briefly and seems satisfied.

28 August
 Williamson with his citizenship certificate and a Berlin bear outside 
Schoneberg town hall, Berlin. Photograph: Courtesy Hugh Williamson 
I sit down at home with an extra document Frau Mittag gave me – my commitment 
to the German constitution. Serious stuff; the first sentence says the 
country’s “free, democratic basic order is the basis for the peaceful 
co-existence of people in Germany”. It lists human rights, sovereignty of the 
people and equality between men and women as core values. I agree with them but 
it feels like a big step to commit in a formal way. I realise that I avoided 
citizenship partly to avoid grappling with such pledges. I think it’s a British 
thing. I sign anyway.

23 September




News comes that Germany’s Greens are standing up for us Brits! They propose a 
law to speed up citizenship applications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/23/germany-green-party-fast-track-british-citizenship-applications>
 for the 107,000 Brits in Germany. I’m realising Brexit has pushed me to make a 
decision I would have felt comfortable with years ago. Signing up to the 
constitution feels OK, especially in these difficult times. This summer has 
seen minor terrorist attacks in Germany (another major attack happened at a 
Christmas market not far from my home on 19 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/berlin-truck-crashes-into-christmas-market>
). It’s a time when politicians are urging us to beat the terrorists by holding 
on to democratic values. With citizenship I can also vote in national 
elections, which feels very grown up.

Do I feel less British by also being German? Yes, if it’s the new “Brexit 
means Brexit” Britain; no if it’s the Britain deep in my soul – my family, my 
upbringing, my culture.

3 October




My citizenship test is looming. Samples of the multiple choice questions are 
passed around the breakfast table. Even my 13-year-old daughter, usually too 
cool for such things, says the questions are “really simple”. German 
bureaucracy helps: all the right answers to the possible 300 questions are on 
an official website.

5 October

Test day. Butterflies in my stomach. Throwback to school: small tables in 
rows, turn over your papers, you may begin. First of 33 questions: when did 
Hitler come to power? 1933? 1936? Mild moment of panic. Old habits kick in. 
Leave it, return to it later. I plough on. The rest are easier (what criminal 
punishments are allowed in Germany? Yes to fines and prison, no to torture. Who 
has the responsibility to bring up kids in Germany? Right answer: parents!) I 
decide for Hitler it’s 1933, get up and leave.

9 November

My test results arrive: 100% correct! My best exam score ever.

5 December 

Post from Frau Mittag. She wants details of my wife’s parents, and her 
grandparents, to prove she is really German. One question asks: did her grandad 
fight in Hitler’s Wehrmacht army? He did, but would she be less German if he 
didn’t? Another town hall trip to drop off the paperwork.

5 January 2017

Citizenship day! I’ve heard I shouldn’t expect a ceremony, no mayoral 
handshakes. But it still feels special, especially with my wife accompanying 
me. Frau Mittag asks me to read a pledge of allegiance to Germany (sitting 
down, no hand on heart – what a disappointment). She hands over the certificate 
and declares me now a “citizen of Germany”.

My wife and I celebrate in a nearby cafe. In this moment, Brexit feels a long 
time ago. And Germany feels a bit more like home.

Anyone for a Beck’s?
 