
In a dining establishment in Lyon, you can eat pig fat fried in pig fat, a 
pig's brain dressed in a porky vinaigrette, a salad made with creamy pig lard, 
a chicken cooked inside a sealed pig's bladder, a pig's digestive tract filled 
up with pig's blood and cooked like a custard, nuggets of a pig's belly mixed 
with cold vinegary lentils, a piggy intestine blown up like a balloon and 
stuffed thickly with a handful of piggy intestines, and a sausage roasted in a 
brioche (an elevated version of a "pig in a blanket"). For these and other 
reasons, Lyon, for 76 years, has been recognised as the gastronomic capital of 
France and the world. The world is a big place. Two and a half years ago, I 
persuaded my wife Jessica Green and our three-year-old twins that we should 
move to Lyon to see what was so good about the good food there.

Should I have proposed a two-week holiday? We had been happy in New York, in 
an apartment by a park. We had neighbours. We had friends. But, for reasons I 
didn't understand, I felt I needed to learn how to cook the food of France and 
knew that I was going to have to get over to the country: to Paris, I'd always 
assumed. But where in Paris, and doing what? I interrogated chefs, including 
Daniel Boulud, whom I tracked down on a family vacation, and the great Michel 
Richard, whom I met on a train from Washington DC.

They all said: Go to Lyon.

Lyon? Who goes to Lyon?

We arrived at the end of 2008.

We found a flat. It had no oven. The windows didn't shut. It was cold. Bits of 
semi-frozen Rhone Valley river scum floated into our lungs and infected them 
with microscopic bronchial suicide bombers. We went to A&E. We got lice. We got 
lice again. One of our children walked on a taxi seat in his tiny 
three-year-old shoes; the driver hit him with his fist. I swore at the driver. 
He thanked me. I swore at myself. Why did I think I spoke French? The plan had 
been to stay six months. What about six days? Six days passed. Six months 
passed. Did we forget to leave? We are in our third year. We have no exit 
strategy. Is Lyon the world's gastronomic capital – is that why we're still 
here? This is what we've discovered.

BEST LYONNAIS MEAL

Lunch. Small price, big bang: simple, never fancy, like the food you wish your 
mother had cooked, and so cheap that, even with wine, even with a lot of wine, 
even with a ridiculous amount of wine, you'll stare at l'addition looking for 
the mistake. Best version? Anywhere. Everywhere. There will be one expensive 
item: the espresso, unfortunate because it tastes of mud.

WORST LYONNAIS MEAL 

Breakfast. Tip: if staying the night, pack a cup of coffee.

BEST-VALUE KILLER MEAL 

Saisons, the inexplicably elegant establishment on the ground floor of a 
19th-century silk-maker's preposterous folly – towers, turrets, there must have 
been a moat – otherwise known asL'Institut Paul Bocuse 
<http://www.institutpaulbocuse.com/us/>, in Ecully, four miles away: yes, a 
cooking school. (In Lyon, every food institution is named Paul Bocuse.) The 
kitchen is run by Alain le Cossec. Nota bene: Alain le Cossec, MOF (1991), 
chef, icy Zen master of culinary perfection, is not a student. You don't go to 
a restaurant, especially in Lyon, to support amateurs making a mess of your 
dinner. The secret: no student is allowed close to the food. (How do I know? I 
became a student.)

BEST SATURDAY NIGHT BOUCHON 

Café des Fédérations <http://www.lesfedeslyon.com/>. Drunken, alarmingly 
uninhibited, sometimes just plain alarming, a bouchon is a Lyonnais 
peculiarity. What is it? Go, here, for dinner. You'll understand.

BEST SUNDAY NIGHT BOUCHON 

Bouchon des Filles. Run by two sisters and former waitresses of Café des 
Fédérations <http://www.lesfedeslyon.com/>. They describe their place as a 
bouchon run by women for people who think that a normal bouchon is too heavy. 
Me? I describe it as good.

BEST BOUCHON ANYTIME

Daniel et Denise <http://www.daniel-et-denise.fr/>, except it's not a bouchon, 
it's a restaurant that just happens to serve classic Lyonnais dishes done so 
expertly that you don't recognise them as classic Lyonnais dishes. The chef, 
who is neither a Daniel nor a Denise but a Joseph, is another MOF. (An MOF is a 
Meilleur Ouvrier de France; it's French for "I'm kick-ass, you're not" 
although, to preserve the force of the abbreviation, the best English 
translation might be 'MOther Fucker'). Chef Joseph Viola became an MOF in 2004, 
just before buying Daniel et Denise from Daniel and Denise and quitting his job 
as chef of the once famous Lyon de Lyon, where you could eat classic Lyonnais 
dishes done so expertly that only a Michelin inspector could spot them. Lyon de 
Lyon hasn't seen a Michelin inspector for some time.

BEST SMALL RESTAURANT YOU HAVEN'T HEARD OF AND WHERE YOU WON'T GET A 
RESERVATION

Au 14 Fevrier <http://www.au14fevrier.com/vieux-lyon/>, in Vieux Lyon. You 
don't know it. You should.

BEST BREAD 

Bob's (even Bob doesn't remember why people call him Bob when his name is 
Yves). On the Quai Saint-Vincent. Old-fashioned, pre-revolutionary bread. Go 
there. Eat. You will understand why the French once put away three kilos of the 
stuff a day. The boulangerie was my first apprenticeship, dragging my sorry ass 
out of my warm matrimonial bed at four in the cold morning, bundling up, the 
city in deep sleep, then unbundling in front of the hot ovens, trying to figure 
out the sweet secret of Bob's bread. He said: the flour. I wondered: the water? 
I concluded: touch (that yeasty buoyancy) and timing (to get crunch and 
softness). If I spent three more years with Bob, I'd nail it.

BEST OLD-FASHIONED QUENELLE 

At Café Comptoir Abel <http://cafecomptoirabel.fr/1.aspx>. Neither a café nor 
a comptoir but a bouchon with an excess of atmosphere so precious that even 
Daniel Boulud has admitted to a scheme to steal it. Abel's chef, Alain 
Vigneron, is the only person still standing behind a stove who knows how to 
make a quenelle as it was done 76 years ago. A quenelle is less a recipe than a 
clever invention that, in Vigneron's preparation, renders a bony, virtually 
inedible Rhone lake fish into a creamy soufflé-like poem irritatingly evocative 
of sex. In fact, it's not Vigneron's preparation; he stole it from the grave of 
Eugenie Brazier, akaMère Brazier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/15/bill-buford-favourite-cookbook>
, France's first woman to get three Michelin stars. Today you still see (on the 
wall of restaurants where she never worked, at the tabac, on a bus), not just 
her picture, butthe picture, the now-iconic image that was taken in 1935 by 
Theo Blanc and Antoine Demilly, the Lyonnais celebrity photo team, that depicts 
a tough, rotund, no-nonsense woman in a too-tight chef's garb, stirring a 
steamy, unexplained pot with demonic intensity. I learned these things working 
at Abel, trying to master the quenelle. I failed. I can't do the pointy 
egg-shape operation with two spoons, although rarely a day passes when I don't 
try: with my children's ice cream, the morning yoghurt, once with my toothpaste.

BEST POSTMODERN QUENELLE 

A confection, lighter than the sea, marginally heavier than air, and with the 
mouth-feel of a cloud that was presented to the world at 11.45am on 5 April, 
2010. At La Mère Brazier: the restaurant, not the person, who had died in 1977, 
by which time the place had been run for more than a decade by her son, the 
parent and progeny having developed such a loathing that she abandoned both 
kitchen and child, opened another establishment in the countryside, and became 
the world's first six-star chef. When the son died, his daughter, Jacotte, took 
over, and, in time, sold up to Mathieu Viannay has been reinventing 
Mère Brazier's recipes ever since, although it took 18 months to come up with a 
postmodern quenelle. Viannay became an MOF in 2004. Like the other MOFs, he 
wears a collar that's a version of the French flag and which makes you feel 
that you should stand at attention whenever he enters the room, which is what 
his cooks do, then stare longingly at his MOF neckwear, muttering that one day, 
they, too, will grow up to be an MOF. (Source? Me. I worked there six months.)

BEST PLACE AT DAWN ON SUNDAY 

The Roman amphitheatre. You have no idea.

BEST PLACE AT MIDNIGHT 

The amphitheatre of the Trois Gaules, the world's first pub. Early Christians 
were skinned alive. The first, Blandine, was a teenager and a saint. People 
still report wailing at night.

BEST RESTO I HAVEN'T EATEN AT 

Régis et Jacques Marcon <http://www.regismarcon.fr/prepage.php>, in 
Saint-Bonnet-le-Froid, a village of 252 people, in high, white-pine woody 
mountains, an hour-plus drive southwest of Lyon. Régis is the dad; Jacques the 
son, both born in the village, although the father has additional distinctions 
of having been born in the home where he was conceived (then also a bistro, run 
by his mother) and of being given the most local of local names, Régis, after 
Saint Régis, who died in Lalouvesc, two hours away by foot, in 1640. On a hot 
summer, 335 years later, Régis, then 19, visited Lalouvesc (with 503 people, 
the big town), stayed long enough to meet a 16-year-old named Michèle, returned 
home betrothed, and hasn't left Saint-Bonnet-le-Froid since, except to collect 
the occasional trophy, including, in 1995, a gold replica of the oblong Paul 
Bocuse, awarded to the winner of the Bocuse d'Or, the biennial cook-off 
honouring the country making the best French food. [for Rachel Cooke's report 
from the 2011 event turn to page 38.] This much I knew last June, when I booked 
a table for a Wednesday, not knowing that I'd got my reservation so easily 
because there are no mushrooms in June. I didn't know much more when I had to 
cancel, or when I phoned back two months later, and learned that there were no 
tables for three months. What I didn't understand was the French system of 
controlled branding (affectionately known as the Appellation Controllée), which 
ensures that one town, and no other, has the one thing you want. Your good 
lentils come from Puy. Your prunes? Agen. Your pepper from Espelette, your 
beans from Tarbes, your chickens from Bresse, and your wild mushrooms (who 
knew?) from Saint-Bonnet-le-Froid. On a single Saturday last November, the 
village saw 20,000 visitors, all afflicted with an appetite for mushrooms. 
I know because I phoned the restaurant on that day of all days, still hoping 
for a cancellation. It had none. Then it closed for four months. Who picks 
mushrooms in the snow?

BEST BOUTIQUE HOTEL IN LYON 

None.

WHY LYON? 

Because of what's not in Lyon but nearby. The food-makers, like Régis Marcon 
and his son, or Alain Chapel, 15 miles east, now run by his son (and where 
Heston Blumenthal fattened his first ducks), or Le Pyramide, 15 miles south, 
where Paul Bocuse learned how to cook with a pig's bladder, or Marc Veyrat (and 
his disciple Emmanuel Renant), both in the Alpine foothills, both cuisiniers of 
the dirt clod (who needs foie gras when you have wild pasture weeds peed on by 
a Beaufort cow?). And because of what is grown in the dirt itself. Amid the 
dormant volcanoes north of Lyon: that's Beaujolais. Ten minutes further in a 
car: Macon, where the white grapes start. Another hour: Burgundy. And in the 
other direction, tilting from the impossibly steep hills overlooking the Rhone: 
that's Côte Rôtie. And the rows of white clusters, mixed in amid the syrah: 
that's the stressed, struggling, perfumed viognier grapes of Condrieu. 
Sommeliers hold to the implicit belief that a wine complements food; that, in 
effect, the food comes first. ("You're having the sole, sir?") But sommeliers 
are very stupid.

BEST MARKET 

Quai Saint-Antoine on a Sunday morning. The famous Les Halles de Paul Bocuse 
is a shopping mall of high-end products, incomprehensible to a non-Lyonnais 
unless you are an anthropologist studying the Lyonnais psyche as manifest in 
its irrational habits of food consumption. But for dinner? The Quai.

BEST PLACE TO DRINK IN VIEUX LYON

Le Georges Five, run by the impresario Georges dos Santos (his store, Antic 
Wines, supplies the good restaurants, where you'll also eat Bob's bread). 
Georges is at the bar.

WHERE TO SHAKE THE HAND OF GOD, AKA PAUL BOCUSE

At 8am, over coffee with Mère Richard, the cheese lady, at Les Halles de Paul 
Bocuse. <http://halledelyon.free.fr/> (Like your lentils from Puy, there is one 
place for cheese.) At 8.30am, over a coffee with Colette Sibilia, the 
charcuterie lady. (Like your lentils from Puy, etc.) At 10am, over a coffee at 
Bernachon, the chocolatier. (Lentils, Puy, etc.) For Monsieur Paul, as God is 
known locally, the mornings are busy (I learned from Blandine Thenet, on my 
first and last meeting with a Lyonnais publicist), because the afternoons are 
even busier and when Monsieur Paul heads out to the estate of his mistress, 
shoots wild animals, has sex, a nap, returns home, bearing rabbits and 
pheasants, and then, according to Blandine, pops upstairs to have sex with his 
not-to-be-neglected wife, showers, slips into his chef whites for the evening 
service of Lyon's only three-star restaurant, his, located downstairs from his 
home and where you can eat dishes conceived in 1934, 1946, 1958 and 1974, 
recreated by four MOFs in the kitchen. For a year, I avoided the place, 
believing it to be a museum. (I was wrong.) Then, I avoided it because I 
couldn't afford it. (I was right.) Then we ate there: twice. It's kitsch, yes, 
but unique (what else do you want from a meal?), and flawless: a perfect 
version of itself. Bocuse is 85.

WHY YOU DON'T KNOW LYON 

Because the Lyonnais don't want you to know, and wouldn't know how to tell 
you, anyway. The dysfunction is expressed in a mini-Eiffel Tower located atop 
the city's mountain. The city's elders concluded, 120 years ago, that Paris had 
so many tourists because Paris had an Eiffel Tower. Ergo, what Lyon needed… 
Today, Lyon still has no tourists. But it now has a tower. Lyon is unusual and 
seems to be exceptionally incompetent at publicising itself. In fact, it 
doesn't want visitors. It fears discovery. The Lyonnais: they like their food, 
they eat it, they talk about it all day long. They don't care what you think 
about it. They don't care if you like it, if you eat it, if you never even try 
it. They don't care about you at all.

BUT WHY FRANCE? 

Before I arrived, I asked this question. Why France now, when everything 
groovy is happening somewhere elsewhere? Why France, when even the most 
chauvinistic members of the most uncompromising Gallic tribe must concede that 
their claim of making the best food in the world is, for the first time in four 
centuries, no longer exclusively theirs? Seventeen years ago, Joel Robuchon, 
then regarded as the best chef in France, declared that Ferran Adrià, the chef 
of El Bulli in Spain, was even better because Ferran Adrià was "the best cook 
on the planet", and that statement – Spain hot, France cold – has been repeated 
ever since: not that French food isn't what it used to be, but that it is what 
it used to be. After I arrived, I stopped asking the question. Why France? Why 
not?

WHY STILL HERE? 

By chance, we landed on one of those uniquely animated patches of earth that 
people just don't leave: our quartier, rough, cheap, drunken (by the eternal 
Rue de Bouteille), violent (three Saturday night deaths in a row), but ancient 
and alive. Many of the restaurants I've mentioned are here, in our quartier, 
not least because they get their bread and inspiration from Bob: no one works 
longer or so uncompromisingly. Bob is in the boulangerie all night on Fridays 
and Saturdays. I see Bob three times every day, except Wednesdays, the day Bob 
closes. Wednesdays are a little bit lonely.

On an afternoon in July, I realised that a bakery was, in effect, keeping us 
in France. It now seems absurd, although it didn't at the time. So I took Bob 
out to dinner, to celebrate my realisation, and we drank Rhone wines until the 
early hours of the morning, whereupon I returned home and Bob returned to the 
bar of Potager (yet another resto worth visiting).

Just before Christmas, my wife and I attended a répas held by Roberto, the 
owner of another nearby restaurant, on his last night: he had accepted an 
unexpected offer for his premises. It was a sad-sweet-happy-high-low occasion, 
just about everyone in the quartier crammed into Roberto's dining room, except 
Bob, who couldn't get a babysitter. So we didn't see him that night. Then he 
died. At five that morning. Just like that. It was sudden. It was unexpected. 
He was 46.

Bill Buford is the author of Heat. He is completing a book about being a 
French cook, provisionally titled Dirt & Dinner: Hauling my Sorry-ass Family to 
France for Three Years (and Counting)
 