
A couple of months back Nick Kyrgios was the subject of a lengthy profile 
piece in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/28/magazine/tennis-us-open-electric-infuriating-nick-kyrgios.html?_r=0>
. This was considered highly unusual for a player rankedonly No16 in the world, 
but especially so that a 21-year-old Australian of any kind should be 
considered worthy of such heightened discourse in an august publication.

Nick Kyrgios in new row: not returning shots and serving without effort
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/nick-kyrgios-row-serving-without-effort-not-returning-shanghai-masters>
In most ways it sat firmly within its genre and rarely surprised, but one 
sub-plot stuck out. Tasked with unravelling the enigma that isNick Kyrgios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios>, his profiler Michael 
Steinberger focused his sights on the tennis star’s obsession with Pokémon Go, 
which for the time the writer spent with Kyrgios, he played incessantly with 
his entourage – a pair of junior tennis prospects, 13-year-old Tauheed Browning 
and 14-year-old Langston Williams.

There was this:

They had bonded with Kyrgios over a shared infatuation with Pokémon Go, the 
blockbuster mobile game, and the three were apparently now inseparable. They 
had gone to the movies and the mall together.

And also this, with regards to Kyrgios’ girlfriend and fellow professional 
tennis star, Ajla Tomljanović:

[Tomljanović] didn’t appear to mind sharing her boyfriend’s attention with 
Browning, Williams and Pokémon – although later in the day, at a photo shoot in 
West Palm Beach, she expressed some mild exasperation when Kyrgios, summoned to 
the wardrobe room, implored her to take over his game. ‘I’m not playing Pokémon 
with your seven-year-old friend,’ she said. Kyrgios quickly corrected her, 
albeit incorrectly: ‘He’s 10, not seven.’

There are a number of conclusions you could draw from this, including not 
taking it entirely seriously, but the impression it left on me is that faced 
with the myriad pressures of a quite brutal and unforgiving professional sport, 
Nick Kyrgios is not only resisting adulthood, he’s withdrawing himself further 
back into the comforts of childhood – the tantrums, the mood-swings, the trips 
to the cinema with 13-year-olds, and the Pokémon Go.

It says a bit about him and the strange world of tennis, but it also says a 
hell of a lot about us, and the way we’ve treated him. It’s no wonder he should 
surround himself with children and their uncynical, open-minded outlook on life.


Later in the profile, Steinberger sees Kyrgios in full flight on the practice 
courts, a session in which he “just wants to play points” and gives up after 
half an hour of running commentary for the amusement of those watching, 
including his two young friends, who are eventually brought onto the court too. 
Always the class clown.

On Wednesday Kyrgios “tanked” a service point at the Shanghai Masters, which 
is clearly problematic, but as the match unravelled for him it also highlighted 
why we might resist caning the guy and perhaps just ask if he’s feeling OK. 
Less than a week agoKyrgios won his third ATP singles title at the Japan Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/kyrgios-japan-open-final-after-monfils-win>
 and appeared a world beater.Lleyton Hewitt said he should be setting his 
sights on the Australian Open trophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/nick-kyrgios-can-challenge-for-australian-open-says-lleyton-hewitt>
. Days later Kyrgios looks like he wants centre court to open up and swallow 
him. Those are pretty wild ups and downs for one young person in the space of a 
week.

What’s becoming clear is that Kyrgios is no more capable of handling the 
amplified emotional challenges of a life lived in the intense spotlight of pro 
tennis than any other person his age, and there’s now a strong body of evidence 
to conclude that his coping mechanisms are really not up to spec. Yet he is 
also, I think, a realist and quite self-knowing. He said this after the match: 
“You want to buy a ticket? Come watch me. You know I’m unpredictable. It’s your 
choice. I don’t owe you anything. Doesn’t affect how I sleep at night.”

You’d question the last sentence, because between checking his social media 
feeds and playing computer games, he rarely gets much sleep at the best of 
times, but who other than tournament organisers and integrity scrutineers can 
say Kyrgios actually owes them anything? His sponsors, perhaps? Maybe his 
family? He’s certainly not representing his country when he’s out there at a 
tournament like this. Even when he’s falling apart he’s more interesting than 
most players when they’re playing well.

Kyrgios says he can’t grasp the frustration of fans. “I can’t really 
understand it at all,” he said today. “They don’t know what I’m going through, 
so no, I don’t understand it.”They don’t know what I’m going through. That’s 
the excuse of a child, and a bit of a cliché, but it’s also true. It would be 
disingenuous of us to claim any understanding at all of what it’s like to be 
him – all of that explosive talent and raw, childish emotion, but a total 
absence of the protective layer he needs to shield him from disastrous moments 
like this.

If you ever find yourself at a tournament Kyrgios is playing at, don’t just 
watch him on centre court – though that is definitely where his talent belongs 
– because there he is hemmed in at the sidelines by the suspicious, cynical and 
voyeuristic gaze of the mostly middle-aged audience who can afford seats close 
to the action.

Instead watch him on the practice courts, where you can see up close the full 
manifestation of his otherworldly talent, but also the internal forces that 
work constantly at cancelling it out; the darting eyes, the motor-mouth, the 
kiddish fragility and the inattentiveness.

Surrounding those practice courts, craning their necks, climbing fences and 
yelling out his name, you will also see an entirely different crowd, the one 
with whom Kyrgios most easily identifies and the one which sees the best and 
worst of itself reflected back almost every time he plays: children.

 