
Most professionals are not getting a good return on their investment of time 
and money when attending networking events.

This is because people have entirely different objectives when it comes to 
networking. Most events are mixing bowls for professionals who are there for 
different reasons, whether it be signing up a new client, meeting prospective 
employers, creating awareness for their business, or connecting with someone in 
the hopes of developing a mutually beneficial relationship.


Regardless of your networking objectives, your level of success will be tied 
directly to your ability to interact with other professionals who have similar 
goals.


We have very little control when we attend networking events organised by 
others. We usually don’t know who will be there and when we do, we can’t be 
certain we’ll connect with the people who would be most useful for us to meet. 
This leads to results that are unpredictable at best.


Hate networking? Perhaps you're doing it wrong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/09/hate-networking-you-could-be-doing-it-wrong>
Focusing on activities where you have more control over the various inputs 
(who, what, where, etc.) will almost always yield a better – and more 
predictable – return on investment. Hosting your own events is a great way to 
deepen your existing relationships, while also providing an opportunity to make 
and develop new connections.

Here are a few alternatives to consider in place of the next networking event 
you were planning to attend:


Un-networking lunches

I have hosted a few hundred “un-networking lunches”, where I provide a forum 
for six to 12 like-minded members of my network to meet and exchange value.


The key to hosting a successful lunch lies in the selection of the restaurant 
and the attendees. You’ll want to select a restaurant that can accommodate 
paying separately and has a private dining room. (OpenTable allows you to 
search for private rooms in your region.) When inviting guests, focus on 
professionals who have similar roles and are in complementary industries.


During the lunch, make sure everyone has an opportunity to introduce their 
business, current areas of focus and anything they could use help with.


At a minimum, each of your guests will leave with new connections and a desire 
to help you for making this happen.


Mastermind dinners

My friend, Jayson Gaignard, started hosting dinners in 2013 to connect 
successful entrepreneurs in his network.


He, too, puts a lot of emphasis on selecting the right attendees for each 
event and offers great advice in his book, Mastermind Dinners.

Baring it all to your business contacts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jan/07/naked-networking-business-contacts>
He ensures there is at least one over-arching commonality among all guests and 
avoids inviting people at opposite ends of experience (i.e. don’t invite 
someone who recently started their first venture to join a group of CEOs 
running $100m companies). He also identifies something at least two of his 
guests have in common that’s not particularly common and will arrange seating 
to increase the likelihood of it coming up over the course of the dinner.

Jayson was so effective at creating value for people in his network, that this 
became his life’s work. He now runs the invite-onlyMasterMindTalks 
<http://www.mastermindtalks.com/>, a conference for entrepreneurs.

Wine tasting events

If you have a business with existing client relationships, hosting client 
appreciation events is one of the best ways to meet ideal prospective clients. 
A few years ago, I started hosting wine tasting events on a quarterly basis. I 
wanted to do something for my existing clients that I knew they would enjoy.

I asked my clients (and strategic partners) to bring someone they thought 
would be good for me to meet. I assured them there would be no sales pitch; you 
don’t have to sell because your clients will do the selling for you.


It became commonplace for at least 50% of the non-clients to reach out to me 
after the event to learn more about my firm and how I could help them.

Even if you don’t end up with a single new client, your existing clients will 
have had a nice night out, met some cool new people, and shared the experience 
with the person they invited – all thanks to you.

Deepen existing relationships

Instead of going to networking events with the intention of meeting new 
people, consider checking in with some of your existing connections. Have you 
properly followed up with the promising contacts you have made over the past 
year (or five years)? Have you maintained your relationships with strategic 
partners and centres of influence?

I regularly email members of my network to ask them about the number one 
challenge they’re facing, or what they’re focused on achieving right now. Their 
responses will put you in a position to be a great resource for them, and when 
you can help, you will often be creating an opportunity for someone else in 
your network.

Whatever you do, avoid asking, “How can I help?” This vague question puts 
pressure on the recipient to figure out what you can do to help them, which 
usually leads to them not responding to your email.

Networking ... anytime, anywhere

Effective networking can happen at any time of the day, and in some cases, you 
don’t even have to leave your house. My definition of networking is “any 
activity that increases the value of your network and/or the value you 
contribute to it”. Proper networking is about building new relationships and 
deepening your existing ones. You don’t have to follow traditional advice, or 
even go to events, to successfully build and maintain a valuable network.

Derek Coburn is CEO and co-founder of Cadre and author of Networking is not 
working

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 