
One could be idiosyncratic. Two might be a coincidence. Four and with more to 
come begins to suggest a pattern. Were Tristram Hunt the only example of an 
ambitious and talented politician in his 40s contemplating his life and 
deciding there were better things to do with it than continuing as a Labour MP,
his decision to abandon parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
 would be interesting but not wildly significant. When the offer to become 
director of the Victoria and Albert Museum was confirmed, I bet it took him 
less than a nanosecond to decide that this would be a whole lot more rewarding 
– and not just in the financial sense – than remaining as Labour MP for 
Stoke-on-Trent Central. He is and has always been entirely out of sympathy with 
Jeremy Corbyn and what the current management of Labour is doing to the party.

His witty sallies mocking Corbynism were the mask on a deep despair, widely 
shared by Labour MPs, about their prospects. Before he announced his decision, 
he had told friends that he would wake up in “a cold sweat”, haunted by the 
spectre that he would one day find himself a decade older and still sitting on 
the opposition benches. He was a passionate and eloquent advocate for the 
Potteries and their people, but he came into politics with aspirations to do 
more. His majority was too slim to be confident that he could survive the 
disaster that will engulfLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
if the party’s current opinion poll ratings are translated into a crushing 
defeat at a general election.

The hard left has been very active in his constituency and had him on its 
hitlist. On top of which, the boundary commissioners have proposed that his 
seat should be abolished. His choice was to wait to be handed a redundancy 
notice or take what he describes as “a dream job” running the V&A. It was not 
really a choice at all.

What gives this departure a wider resonance is that his is not an isolated 
case. It followsJamie Reed’s decision to quit his Copeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
 seat to become head of development and community relations at the nuclear 
reprocessing plant in the constituency. Other MPs are also telling us that they 
think there is no foreseeable future for Labour as a party of national 
government, or even as an effective and relevant national opposition, by 
clambering into lifeboats provided by civic politics. Andy Burnham will stand 
down from parliament if, as is likely, he succeeds asLabour’s candidate for 
mayor of Greater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/16/andy-burnham-labour-wrong-to-put-single-market-ahead-of-immigration>
. Steve Rotheram will resign his Liverpool seat if he fulfils hisgoal of 
becoming mayor of the city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/10/corbyn-ally-steve-rotheram-named-as-candidate-for-liverpool-city-region-mayor>
.

Tristram Hunt had often said that he thought Labour was on a suicidal course 
and had been targeted by Corbynistas for a revenge deselection. Jamie Reed 
could never be confused with an enthusiast for the current Labour leadership. 
But it is wrong simply to categorise the exodus as the abandonment of Jeremy 
Corbyn by people who have never liked him or his brand of politics and have 
always been convinced that it means calamity for Labour. Mr Rotheram is the 
Labour leader’s parliamentary aide. He can hardly be branded a serial 
disloyalist. Mr Burnham, though no Corbynista, was one of the very few members 
of the shadow cabinet who did not resign last summer and he opposed the failed 
attempt to oust the leader. Mr Hunt was consumed by feelings of dread and 
frustration much more profound and complex than a simple animus towards the 
party’s leader. Hisresignation letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
 expressed a general lament that the left, including the centrist left that he 
represents, have failed to respond to the challenges thrown up by “social, 
cultural and economic forces which have rocked mainstream social democratic and 
socialist parties” across the democratic world.

Will others follow his example? “I think it is inevitable there will be more,” 
says one very well-placed observer in the parliamentary Labour party. Most 
Labour MPs will stick it out and pray something will turn up to save the party 
and their skins. Some will do so from the conviction this is the right thing to 
do and some will not quit parliament because they don’t have good alternatives. 
Not every Labour parliamentarian has a curriculum vitae that would make them a 
candidate for a city mayoralty or the leadership of one of the world’s great 
cultural institutions. But I have heard many rumours about Labour MPs who are 
thinking about deselecting themselves from parliament and I know quite a few 
who are in a state of personal crisis about their futures. Every time a Labour 
MP announces that they are off to do something else, it sharpens the questions 
others ask themselves during dark nights of the soul. Yes, this is often the 
product of alienation from the current leadership and career disappointment. 
That doesn’t stop it also being a very human story: people asking themselves 
whether they want to spend an indeterminate and possibly endless number of 
years in miserable frustration, out of government and powerless to do anything 
for the people and causes they care about.

The decline in the prestige of parliamentarians, and public respect for them, 
comes into it as well. Shortly before Christmas, one Labour MP, a man of 
ability who once fizzed with relish for politics, confided that he was looking 
for a fresh career, saying: “I have to ask myself – and I know a lot of 
colleagues who are doing the same – whether this is how I want to spend the 
rest of my life.”

The responses to Mr Hunt’s departure have been instructive. Corbyn loyalists 
have reacted exactly as you would expect them to react by saying the party will 
be better off without him. Good riddance to a “Tory-lite”, a “Blairite” and a 
“careerist”. That has been the wholly unsurprising reaction from that entirely 
predictable quarter. The response from people in the Labour mainstream has been 
more diverse. There is genuine disappointment among some MPs, especially those 
who admired his efforts to try to engage intelligently with the questions 
raised for social democrats by the new forces sweeping politics. Regret is 
mingled in some cases with envy that he has found a golden parachute to escape 
the burning plane. Then there are fellow Labour centrists who are angry with 
him for deserting the field of battle. They are the people who are really cross 
with Mr Hunt.

Some fear that this high-profile departure will demoralise Labour moderates 
and just at the moment when there were some reasons for them to be encouraged 
to believe that the tide might be turning. Momentum, the activist organisation 
set up to cheerlead for Mr Corbyn, has become riven by poisonous schisms 
between different factions of leftists. Len McCluskey, the general secretary of 
Unite and Mr Corbyn’s most pivotal supporter in the union movement, is facing a 
serious challenge for his position from Gerard Coyne. As for the attempt to 
stage a new year “relaunch” of Mr Corbyn, even his best friends can distinguish 
between that and a resounding success.

It is perhaps most significant that his inner circle appear to have abandoned 
their plans, at least for the moment, to try to strengthen their power within 
the party. Last autumn, they said there was going to be a special session of 
the party’s national executive committee, a “democracy day”. The idea was that 
this would pave the way for changes to the party’s rules that would strengthen 
the power of the Corbynistas within Labour. This plan has been quietly dropped. 
The special NEC meeting has never been convened, presumably because they aren’t 
sure they can command the votes to get the changes they want.

Developments at a constituency level have also been more encouraging for the 
moderates. As I reported to you before Christmas, non-Corbynites have been 
prevailing at annual general meetings of local parties by securing key posts in 
constituencies. This matters, not least because this is the first line of 
defence against attempts to deselect MPs. Since I last reported to you, I’ve 
collected more examples of how these local struggles are playing out. A 
striking one comes from the London constituency of Vauxhall. Paul Mason, one of 
Jeremy Corbyn’s most prominent media advocates, stood for a position on the 
local party’s general committee. He was defeated. By a delicious irony, he was 
beaten by someone who used to be a member of the SDP, the now defunct party 
that split from Labour when it lurched to the left in the 1980s.

So the harshest reaction to Mr Hunt has come not from Corbynistas, but from 
his fellow Labour centrists who think he has let them down. Some admonish him 
by citing Hugh Gaitskell’s historic instruction to Labour moderates that they 
should “fight and fight again to save the party we love” – not abandon the 
struggle in the heat of the battle for a lovely job at a museum.

To friends who have rounded on him, he has responded that he entirely 
understands their anger. He also told them that, having devoted a lot of time 
to thinking about how to renew social democracy for the 21st century, he had 
grown increasingly fearful that he hadn’t got the answers to Labour’s 
predicament. Of all the reasons for his departure, that is the most telling 
and, for anyone who wants the party to have a future, the most disturbing.
 