
Donald Trump’s election as president of the United States does not just 
represent a mounting populist backlash against globalisation. It may also 
portend the end ofPax Americana – the international order of free exchange and 
shared security that the US and its allies built after the second world war.

That US-led global order has enabled 70 years of prosperity. It rests on 
market-oriented regimes of trade liberalisation, increased capital mobility, 
and appropriate social welfare policies; backed by American security guarantees 
in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia, through Nato and various other alliances.

Trump, however, may pursue populist, anti-globalisation, and protectionist 
policies that hinder trade and restrict the movement of labour and capital. And 
he has cast doubt on existing US security guarantees by suggesting he will 
force America’s allies to pay for more of their own defence. If Trump is 
serious about putting “America first”, his administration will shift US 
geopolitical strategy toward isolationism and unilateralism, pursuing only the 
national interests of the homeland.


When the US pursued similar policies in the 1920s and 1930s, it helped sow the 
seeds of the second world war. Protectionism – starting with theSmoot-Hawley 
tariff <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smoot%E2%80%93Hawley_Tariff_Act>, which 
affected thousands of imported goods – triggered retaliatory trade and currency 
wars that worsened the Great Depression. More important, American isolationism 
– based on a false belief that the US was safely protected by two oceans – 
allowed Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan to wage aggressive war and threaten the 
entire world. With the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, the US was 
finally forced to take its head out of the sand.

Today, too, a US turn to isolationism and the pursuit of strictly US national 
interests may eventually lead to a global conflict. Even without the prospect 
of American disengagement from Europe, the European Union and the eurozone 
already appear to be disintegrating, particularly in the wake of the UK’s June 
Brexit vote and Italy’s failed referendum on constitutional reforms in 
December. Moreover, in 2017, extreme anti-Europe left or rightwing populist 
parties could come to power in France and Italy, and possibly in other parts of 
Europe.

Without active US engagement in Europe, an aggressively revanchist Russia will 
step in. Russia is already challenging the US and the EU in Ukraine, Syria, the 
Baltics, and the Balkans, and it may capitalise on the EU’s looming collapse by 
reasserting its influence in the former Soviet bloc countries, and supporting 
pro-Russia movements within Europe. If Europe gradually loses its US security 
umbrella, no one stands to benefit more than the Russian president, Vladimir 
Putin.

Trump’s proposals also threaten to exacerbate the situation in the Middle 
East. He has said he will make America energy independent, which entails 
abandoning US interests in the region and becoming more reliant on domestically 
produced greenhouse-gas-emitting fossil fuels. And he has maintained his 
position that Islam itself, rather than just radical militant Islam, is 
dangerous. This view, shared by Trump’s incoming national security adviser, Gen 
Michael Flynn, plays directly into Islamist militants’ own narrative of a clash 
of civilisations.

What the US economy doesn't need from Donald Trump | Joseph Stiglitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/what-the-us-economy-doesnt-need-from-donald-trump>
Meanwhile, an “America first” approach under Trump will likely worsen the 
longstanding Sunni-Shia proxy wars between Saudi Arabia and Iran. And if the US 
no longer guarantees its Sunni allies’ security, all regional powers – 
including Iran, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Egypt – might decide that they can 
defend themselves only by acquiring nuclear weapons, and even more deadly 
conflict will ensue.

In Asia, US economic and military primacy has provided decades of stability; 
but a rising China is now challenging the status quo. US President Barack 
Obama’s strategic “pivot” to Asia depended primarily on enacting the 12-country 
trans-Pacific partnership, which Trump has promised to scrap on his first day 
in office. Meanwhile, China is quickly strengthening its own economic ties in 
Asia, the Pacific, and Latin America through its “one belt, one road” policy, 
the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, the New Development Bank (formerly 
known as the Brics bank), and its own regional free-trade proposal to rival the 
TPP.

If the US gives up on its Asian allies such as the Philippines, South Korea, 
and Taiwan, those countries may have no choice but to prostrate themselves 
before China; and other US allies, such as Japan and India, may be forced to 
militarise and challenge China openly. Thus, an American withdrawal from the 
region could very well eventually precipitate a military conflict there.

As in the 1930s, when protectionist and isolationist US policies hampered 
global economic growth and trade, and created the conditions for rising 
revisionist powers to start a world war, similar policy impulsescould set the 
stage 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/trump-trade-war-with-china-by-stephen-s--roach-2016-12>
 for new powers to challenge and undermine the American-led international 
order. An isolationist Trump administration may see the wide oceans to its east 
and west, and think that increasingly ambitious powers such as Russia, China, 
and Iran pose no direct threat to the homeland.


But the US is still a global economic and financial power in a deeply 
interconnected world. If left unchecked, these countries will eventually be 
able to threaten core US economic and security interests – at home and abroad – 
especially if they expand their nuclear and cyberwarfare capacities. The 
historical record is clear: protectionism, isolationism, and “America first” 
policies are a recipe for economic and military disaster.

• Nouriel Roubini is a professor at NYU’s Stern School of Business. He was 
senior economist for international affairs in the Clinton White House and has 
worked for the IMF, the Federal Reserve, and the World Bank.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>
 