
Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> organisers said on 
Wednesday night that the prospect of playing on the middle Sunday was “not 
being discussed” yet despite a second day of rain which has left the tournament 
44 matches behind schedule, in singles alone. Only 18 matches were completed on 
Wednesday but tournament organisers are still confident they have enough time 
to catch up without having to play on what is traditionally a rest day at the 
championships.

Wimbledon is the only one of the four grand slams to not play on the middle 
Sunday, although it has happened three times in the past, in 1991, 1997 and 
2004, usually to an extra-special atmosphere with all tickets available on the 
gate that day. Though some rain is forecast at times over the next few days, 
organisers believe the tournament should be back on track by the weekend.

In theory, players should have a day off between matches but they are well 
used to playing on consecutive days, as happened at this year’s French Open, 
where the eventual men’s champion, Novak Djokovic, had to play four days in a 
row. Unlike Paris, Wimbledon does have one roof, over Centre Court, but that 
only allows three or four matches to be completed each day.

Many players, though, are likely to be faced with a particularly gruelling 
schedule with several not having even begun their first-round matches. Britain’s
Heather Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson> and Annika 
Beck, who were into a deciding set, will be among those players affected. 
Watson began well as she took the first set but was trailing 3-6, 6-0, 1-0 when 
the rain returned later in the match.

The saving grace for Watson, who was two points from beating Serena Williams 
in the third round last year, could be that Beck had her right ankle taped 
after a nasty fall, although the extra recovery time may yet aid the German’s 
cause before both players return to court.

The men’s doubles, however, has already been affected, with all first-round 
matches to be played over the best of three sets instead of best of five, a 
decision which has been met with some criticism.

It was not greeted well by everyone, with the American Scott Lipsky tweeting: 
“Panic move by @Wimbledon ... Doubles now best of 3 in 1st round after 1 day of 
rain. Panic!! Bad move guys.”
 