
The Woodland Trust <https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/> has suffered its worst 
year on record for flytipping, with almost 200 incidents of rubbish dumped in 
its woods and land.

The charity has spent £42,596 on clearing up 196 incidents of flytipped waste 
this year, bringing the overall bill for dealing with litter in its woodlands 
to around £354,000 in 2016. Costs areup substantially on last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/20/flytipping-in-england-rises-for-second-year-running>
, when the trust spent £31,360 on tackling flytipping, as part of an overall 
waste clearance bill of £192,000.

Since 2010, the charity’s total rubbish clear-up bill, including routine 
litter picking and dealing with flytipping, has reached more than £1.2m – money 
which it says would be better spent on creating new woodlands or protecting 
ancient woods.

Some of the more bizarre items found flytipped include a snooker table, 
exercise bike, paddling pool, scooters, kitchen worktop and a burnt-out wheelie 
bin.

In one urban woodland, Windmill Hill, near Runcorn, 280 bags of rubbish have 
been collected since January, along with bulky items such as mattresses, a 
fridge and garden fence panels, at a cost of nearly £6,000.

A young woodland, orchard and wildflower meadow planted by members of the 
local community at Theydon Bois, Essex, a site that is thought to have once 
been part of Epping Forest, has been blighted by a huge pile of flytipped 
rubbish.

Only one flytipper was taken to court this year by the Woodland Trust, in what 
is the only known instance of a flytipper being tracked down in the 44-year 
history of the charity. The culprit was ordered to pay £200 compensation for 
dumping a coffee table, mattress, bed frame and children’s playhouse at Little 
Wold Plantation, Yorkshire.

The trust said it finds it hard to tackle the problem because of the cost of 
CCTV and the scale of the land it owns, with more than 1,000 woods covering 
22,500 hectares (55,600 acres) across the UK.

Norman Starks, Woodland Trust UK operations director, said: “It’s worrying to 
see, in a world where our woods face constant threats from disease, pests and 
development, that we also have to deal with the actions of mindless 
individuals. Each year we are spending thousands of pounds clearing up other 
people’s waste, which could otherwise go towards creating new woods or 
protecting ancient woodland.

“At the end of the day flytipping is an illegal activity, and people need to 
understand and remember that it has numerous implications for our woods and 
wildlife. We all need to care for our natural environment or risk ruining it 
forever.”
 