
Yahoo’s admission that the personal data of half a billion users has been 
stolen by “state-sponsored” hackers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/22/yahoo-hack-data-state-sponsored>
 leaves pressing questions unanswered, according to security researchers.

Details, including names, email addresses, phone numbers and security 
questions were taken from the company’s network in late 2014. Passwords were 
also taken, but in a “hashed” form, which prevents them from being immediately 
re-used, and the company believes that financial information held with it 
remains safe.

Yahoo hack: what to do to protect your account
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/23/yahoo-hack-what-to-do-to-protect-your-account>
The company confirmed the breach in a statement on Thursday night, but its 
statement, and a follow-up notification sent out to customers on Friday 
morning, raised as many questions as it answered.

Chief among them was why disclosure took so long, both from the date of the 
hack, almost two years ago, and from the first appearance of the dumped data on 
the dark webalmost two months ago 
<https://motherboard.vice.com/read/yahoo-supposed-data-breach-200-million-credentials-dark-web>
 where it was being sold by a user named “Peace of Mind”, who had also sold 
dumps of data from MySpace and LinkedIn. Jeremiah Grossman, head of security 
strategy at infosec firm SentinelOne, said: “While we know the information was 
stolen in late 2014, we don’t have any indication as to when Yahoo first 
learned about this breach. This is an important detail in the story.”

Grossman, who ran information security for Yahoo’s engineering department 
until 2001, added that the company’s claims that the attacker was 
“state-sponsored” also need additional scrutiny. “State-sponsored adversaries 
don’t typically publicly share stolen data or sell it, like profiteer hacker 
‘Peace of Mind’. Peace of Mind was all about selling stolen Yahoo account data, 
so it’s unlikely he was state-sponsored. And if so, this means it’s possible 
we’re looking at two differentYahoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/yahoo> breaches with two different 
hacking groups in their system.”

Chris Hodson, EMEA chief information security officer at enterprise security 
firm Zscaler, agrees. “With no technical details included in Yahoo’s report 
about how the data was exfiltrated, just that it was, it’s impossible to assess 
credibility of the ‘state sponsored’ claim.

“It might well be that Yahoo has had support from government departments and 
that attribution has been possible but equally, ‘state-sponsored’ is often 
prefixed to ‘actor’ in an effort to suggest sophisticated and surreptitious 
means of data exfiltration. We simply do not know.”

Equally unclear is the extent to which passwords were protected. Yahoo has 
confirmed the passwords were hashed, a one-way transformation which allows the 
site to check that an entered password is correct without needing to store the 
actual password.

The company added that “the vast majority” were hashed with bcrypt, a 
particularly secure method which incorporates a “salt” ensuring that two 
identical passwords still have different entries in the database. That’s 
important for protecting the hundreds of thousands of users who will all have 
picked “password” as a password, since it ensures that they don’t all stand out 
– but it’s unclear whether the minority of users whose passwords weren’t hashed 
in this way have similar protections.

The breach also highlights a strong problem with “security questions”, the 
common practice of letting users reset passwords by answering questions about 
their first house or mother’s maiden name. Yahoo did not encrypt all the 
security questions it stored, and so some are readable in plaintext. While it 
may be irritating to have to change a stolen password, it is somewhat worse to 
have to change a stolen mother’s maiden name.

One other question raised by the breach is also unanswered: what happens to 
the company’s multi-billion dollar merger with Verizon now? Kevin Cunningham, 
president and founder at identity company SailPoint, argues that the breach 
should already be priced in – but only if Verizon’s due diligence was thorough 
enough. “Mergers are complicated endeavors, and the scrutiny under which both 
companies will reside during the course of the transaction only increases the 
stress to keep what should be sensitive information protected. Verizon 
certainly took on a calculated level of risk in acquiring Yahoo!, particularly 
because of its massive user base.

“The question of whether this breach will affect the sale price depends on how 
extensively it performed due diligence on Yahoo’s security controls. It’s a 
perfect illustration of the fact that this due diligence should include not 
just network security controls, but also identity governance controls, because 
as we’ve seen with LinkedIn, Dropbox and countless others, breaches very often 
result from compromised employee credentials.”

For users with Yahoo accounts, though, many of these questions are moot. The 
advice remains the same either way: they need to change their Yahoo password 
and security questions as soon as possible, and also change the password 
anywhere else they may have re-used that information. Ideally, they should stop 
re-using passwords altogether.

Since Yahoo is a major webmail provider, there’s one extra problem: any 
further service which has password reset emails sent to a Yahoo Mail account 
should also be considered compromised, and passwords accordingly changed.
 