
Visitors to Yosemite national park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/may/25/carleton-watkins-photographs-yosemite-valley-california-ansel-adams>
 in California have more room to roam after officials on Wednesday announced a 
400-acre expansion of the park – its largest in nearly 70 years.

The addition features wetlands and a grassy meadow surrounded by tall pine 
trees on rolling hills that are home to endangered wildlife.

Ackerson Meadow is located along Yosemite’s western boundary. The area was 
purchased from private owners by the Trust for Public Land, a not-for-profit 
conservation group, for $2.3m and donated to the park.

Obama at Yosemite attacks 'lip service' to natural beauty amid climate inaction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/18/yosemite-obama-national-parks-climate-change>
Officials told the Associated Press that Yosemite would preserve the land – 
historically used for logging and cattle grazing – as habitat for wildlife such 
as the great gray owl, the largest owl in North America and listed as 
endangered byCalifornia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> 
wildlife officials.

Robin and Nancy Wainwright, who had owned the land since 2006, sold it to the 
trust. Robin Wainwright said they lost a “few hundred thousand dollars” passing 
up a lucrative offer from a developer to build a resort.

He said he often saw bears strolling through the meadow and owls soaring over 
fields of vibrant wildflowers blooming in the springtime. He did not want that 
experience available only to those who could afford a resort.

“To have that accessible by everyone, to me, is just a great thing,” 
Wainwright said. “It was worth losing a little bit of money for that.”

The park’s boundary has seen some minor changes over the years, but this 
expansion is the largest since 1949 to the park of nearly 750,000 acres total, 
park spokesman Scott Gediman said.

More than 4.5 million people are expected to visit Yosemite this year, which 
Gediman said would set a record for the park, which celebrated its 125th 
anniversary in 2015.

Visitors pass Ackerson Meadow on their way to Hetch Hetchy reservoir, which 
provides drinking water to San Francisco.

The land was bought with $1.53m from the Trust for Public Land and $520,000 
from the Yosemite Conservancy, which supports a variety of projects in the 
park. Anonymous donors contributed the rest, Gediman said.

“We are delighted and proud to make this gift to Yosemite and the people of 
America,” said Will Rogers, president of the Trust for Public Land.

The land completes the park’s original plans from 1890, which included 
Ackerson Meadow, said the Yosemite Conservancy’s president, Frank Dean.

“It’s a stunning open meadow surrounded by forest habitat, which supports a 
wide variety of flora and fauna,” said the park superintendent, Don Neubacher.
 