
Your medical data is for sale – all of it. Adam Tanner, a fellow at Harvard’s 
institute for quantitative social science and author of a new book on the topic,
Our Bodies, Our Data 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/539847/our-bodies-our-data-by-adam-tanner/9780807033340/>
, said that patients generally don’t know that their most personal information 
– what diseases they test positive for, what surgeries they have had – is the 
stuff of multibillion-dollar business.

But although the data is nominally stripped of personally identifying 
information, data miners and brokers are working tirelessly to aggregate 
detailed dossiers on individual patients; the patients are merely called 
“24601” instead of “Jean Valjean”.

At the doctor’s office, Tanner told the Guardian, “you close the door and you 
think, I’m telling my doctor my most intimate medical secrets, and only my 
doctor knows about it. But it’s sold commercially.” Patients are reduced to 
gender, age, particular ailments and neighborhood. Then, Tanner said, data 
miners cross-reference that information with data from pharmacies about who 
they sell prescriptions to, culled by big drugstore chains like Rite Aid and 
CVS.

How much medical information would you share in the name of big data?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/oct/23/healthcare-big-data-how-much-medical-information-would-you-share>
In a new report 
<https://tcf.org/content/report/strengthening-protection-patient-medical-data/> 
from the Century Foundation released on Tuesday, Tanner quotes Per Lofberg of 
CVS: “The patient is not really a component of this because their name and 
connection to the prescription have been stripped off.”

But other forms of data, such as information from fitness devices and search 
engines, are completely unregulated and have identities and addresses attached. 
A third kind of data called “predictive analytics” cross-references the other 
two and makes predictions about behavior with what Tanner calls “a surprising 
degree of accuracy”.

None of this technically violates the health insurance portability and 
accountability act, or Hipaa, Tanner writes. But the techniques do render the 
protections of Hipaa largely toothless. “Data scientists can now circumvent 
Hipaa’s privacy protections by making very sophisticated guesses, marrying 
anonymized patient dossiers with named consumer profiles available elsewhere – 
with a surprising degree of accuracy,” says the study.

“The problem over time is that as you have more and more information, there’s 
more and more about people who might be,” Tanner said. He has lived in two 
different cities recently, he said; now he will teach for a year in the small 
city of Fairbanks, Alaska – population roughly 32,000. On an index that 
cross-references people who have lived at addresses in all three cities over a 
five-year period – an easy-to-find set of data – the researcher said he could 
easily be the only entry.

Tanner said that non-medical data, which people might consider less private, 
is in fact easier for the owner to control. “You could try to choose your 
doctor based on what systems they use and whether [those systems] sell your 
data commercially, but often you have insurance through your employer and you 
don’t have a choice.”

Many companies trade in medical data – IMS Health is the one Tanner names most 
prominently in the Century Foundation report, but IBM Watson and General 
Electric also have businesses in patient info.

The legal right of businesses to harvest and sell the information of 
individual patients without their permissionhas been upheld by the US supreme 
court <https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/pdf/10-779P.ZO>, thanks to a case in 
which conservative justices ruled in favor of IMS Health and against the 
attorney general of Vermont. In 2011, the high court struck down a Vermont law 
restricting the sale, disclosure, and use of records that revealed the 
prescribing practices of individual doctors, ruling that corporations’ right to 
free speech trumped individuals’ right to privacy.

“We need to discuss this,” Tanner said. “[Data miners and brokers] often don’t 
want to talk about it because it’s a multibillion-dollar trade and they say 
there’s a great chance to advance medical science. They don’t talk about the 
real reason, which is marketing and sales.”

The question of whether or not to use individual medical data in the interest 
of private corporations should be up to those individuals, Tanner concluded. 
“If there’s a chance to advance medical science, let them make the case to we 
the patients. If you want to donate your data to science, that’s great, but you 
should have the choice. Right now, we don’t have the choice.”
 