
Documents seen by the Guardian reveal for the first time the full details of 
the allegations of rape and sexual assault that have led to extradition 
hearings against the WikiLeaks founder,Julian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange>.

The case against Assange, which has been the subject of intense speculation 
and dispute in mainstream media and on the internet, is laid out in police 
material held in Stockholm to which the Guardian received unauthorised access.

Assange, who was released on bail on Thursday, denies the Swedish allegations 
and has not formally been charged with any offence. The two Swedish women 
behind the charges have been accused by his supporters of making malicious 
complaints or being "honeytraps" in a wider conspiracy to discredit him.

Assange's UK lawyer, Mark Stephens, attributed the allegations to "dark 
forces", saying: "The honeytrap has been sprung ... After what we've seen so 
far you can reasonably conclude this is part of a greater plan." The journalist 
John Pilger dismissed the case as a "political stunt" and in an interview with 
ABC news, Assange said Swedish prosecutors were withholding evidence which 
suggested he had been "set up."

However, unredacted statements held by prosecutors in Stockholm, along with 
interviews with some of the central characters, shed fresh light on the hotly 
disputed sequence of events that has become the centre of a global storm.

Stephens has repeatedly complained that Assange has not been allowed to see 
the full allegations against him, but it is understood his Swedish defence team 
have copies of all the documents seen by the Guardian. He maintains that other 
potentially exculpatory evidence has not been made available to his team and 
may not have been seen by the Guardian.

The allegations centre on a 10-day period after Assange flew into Stockholm on 
Wednesday 11 August. One of the women, named in court as Miss A, told police 
that she had arranged Assange's trip toSweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden>, and let him stay in her flat 
because she was due to be away. She returned early, on Friday 13 August, after 
which the pair went for a meal and then returned to her flat.

Her account to police, which Assange disputes, stated that he began stroking 
her leg as they drank tea, before he pulled off her clothes and snapped a 
necklace that she was wearing. According to her statement she "tried to put on 
some articles of clothing as it was going too quickly and uncomfortably but 
Assange ripped them off again". Miss A told police that she didn't want to go 
any further "but that it was too late to stop Assange as she had gone along 
with it so far", and so she allowed him to undress her.

According to the statement, Miss A then realised he was trying to have 
unprotected sex with her. She told police that she had tried a number of times 
to reach for a condom but Assange had stopped her by holding her arms and 
pinning her legs. The statement records Miss A describing how Assange then 
released her arms and agreed to use a condom, but she told the police that at 
some stage Assange had "done something" with the condom that resulted in it 
becoming ripped, and ejaculated without withdrawing.

When he was later interviewed by police in Stockholm, Assange agreed that he 
had had sex with Miss A but said he did not tear the condom, and that he was 
not aware that it had been torn. He told police that he had continued to sleep 
in Miss A's bed for the following week and she had never mentioned a torn 
condom.

On the following morning, Saturday 14 August, Assange spoke at a seminar 
organised by Miss A. A second woman, Miss W, had contacted Miss A to ask if she 
could attend. Both women joined Assange, the co-ordinator of the Swedish 
WikiLeaks group, whom we will call "Harold", and a few others for lunch.

Assange left the lunch with Miss W. She told the police she and Assange had 
visited the place where she worked and had then gone to a cinema where they had 
moved to the back row. He had kissed her and put his hands inside her clothing, 
she said.

That evening, Miss A held a party at her flat. One of her friends, "Monica", 
later told police that during the party Miss A had told her about the ripped 
condom and unprotected sex. Another friend told police that during the evening 
Miss A told her she had had "the worst sex ever" with Assange: "Not only had it 
been the world's worst screw, it had also been violent."

Assange's supporters point out that, despite her complaints against him, Miss 
A held a party for him on that evening and continued to allow him to stay in 
her flat.

On Sunday 15 August, Monica told police, Miss A told her that she thought 
Assange had torn the condom on purpose. According to Monica, Miss A said 
Assange was still staying in her flat but they were not having sex because he 
had "exceeded the limits of what she felt she could accept" and she did not 
feel safe.

The following day, Miss W phoned Assange and arranged to meet him late in the 
evening, according to her statement. The pair went back to her flat in 
Enkoping, near Stockholm. Miss W told police that though they started to have 
sex, Assange had not wanted to wear a condom, and she had moved away because 
she had not wanted unprotected sex. Assange had then lost interest, she said, 
and fallen asleep. However, during the night, they had both woken up and had 
sex at least once when "he agreed unwillingly to use a condom".

Early the next morning, Miss W told police, she had gone to buy breakfast 
before getting back into bed and falling asleep beside Assange. She had awoken 
to find him having sex with her, she said, but when she asked whether he was 
wearing a condom he said no. "According to her statement, she said: 'You better 
not have HIV' and he answered: 'Of course not,' " but "she couldn't be bothered 
to tell him one more time because she had been going on about the condom all 
night. She had never had unprotected sex before."

The police record of the interview with Assange in Stockhom deals only with 
the complaint made by Miss A. However, Assange and his lawyers have repeatedly 
stressed that he denies any kind of wrongdoing in relation to Miss W.

In submissions to the Swedish courts, they have argued that Miss W took the 
initiative in contacting Assange, that on her own account she willingly engaged 
in sexual activity in a cinema and voluntarily took him to her flat where, she 
agrees, they had consensual sex. They say that she never indicated to Assange 
that she did not want to have sex with him. They also say that in a text 
message to a friend, she never suggested she had been raped and claimed only to 
have been "half asleep".

Police spoke to Miss W's ex-boyfriend, who told them that in two and a half 
years they had never had sex without a condom because it was "unthinkable" for 
her. Miss W told police she went to a chemist to buy a morning-after pill and 
also went to hospital to be tested for STDs. Police statements record her 
contacting Assange to ask him to get a test and his refusing on the grounds 
that he did not have the time.

On Wednesday 18 August, according to police records, Miss A told Harold and a 
friend that Assange would not leave her flat and was sleeping in her bed, 
although she was not having sex with him and he spent most of the night sitting 
with his computer. Harold told police he had asked Assange why he was refusing 
to leave the flat and that Assange had said he was very surprised, because Miss 
A had not asked him to leave. Miss A says she spent Wednesday night on a 
mattress and then moved to a friend's flat so she did not have to be near him. 
She told police that Assange had continued to make sexual advances to her every 
day after they slept together and on Wednesday 18 August had approached her, 
naked from the waist down, and rubbed himself against her.

The following day, Harold told police, Miss A called him and for the first 
time gave him a full account of her complaints about Assange. Harold told 
police he regarded her as "very, very credible" and he confronted Assange, who 
said he was completely shocked by the claims and denied all of them. By Friday 
20 August, Miss W had texted Miss A looking for help in finding Assange. The 
two women met and compared stories.

Harold has independently told the Guardian Miss A made a series of calls to 
him asking him to persuade Assange to take an STD test to reassure Miss W, and 
that Assange refused. Miss A then warned if Assange did not take a test, Miss W 
would go to the police. Assange had rejected this as blackmail, Harold told 
police.

Assange told police that Miss A spoke to him directly and complained to him 
that he had torn their condom, something that he regarded as false.

Late that Friday afternoon, Harold told police, Assange agreed to take a test, 
but the clinics had closed for the weekend. Miss A phoned Harold to say that 
she and Miss W had been to the police, who had told them that they couldn't 
simply tell Assange to take a test, that their statements must be passed to the 
prosecutor. That night, the story leaked to the Swedish newspaper Expressen.

By Saturday morning, 21 August, journalists were asking Assange for a 
reaction. At 9.15am, he tweeted: "We were warned to expect 'dirty tricks'. Now 
we have the first one." The following day, he tweeted: "Reminder: US 
intelligence planned to destroy WikiLeaks as far back as 2008."

The Swedish tabloid Aftonbladet asked if he had had sex with his two accusers. 
He said: "Their identities have been made anonymous so even I have no idea who 
they are. We have been warned that the Pentagon, for example, is thinking of 
deploying dirty tricks to ruin us."

Assange's Swedish lawyers have since suggested that Miss W's text messages – 
which the Guardian has not seen – show that she was thinking of contacting 
Expressen and that one of her friends told her she should get money for her 
story. However, police statements by the friend offer a more innocent 
explanation: they say these text messages were exchanged several daysafter the 
women had made their complaint. They followed an inquiry from a foreign 
newspaper and were meant jokingly, the friend stated to police.

The Guardian understands that the recent Swedish decision to apply for an 
international arrest warrant followed a decision by Assange to leave Sweden in 
late September and not return for a scheduled meeting when he was due to be 
interviewed by the prosecutor. Assange's supporters have denied this, but 
Assange himself told friends in London that he was supposed to return to 
Stockholm for a police interview during the week beginning 11 October, and that 
he had decided to stay away. Prosecution documents seen by the Guardian record 
that he was due to be interviewed on 14 October.

The co-ordinator of the WikiLeaks group in Stockholm, who is a close colleague 
of Assange and who also knows both women, told the Guardian: "This is a normal 
police investigation. Let the police find out what actually happened. Of 
course, the enemies of WikiLeaks may try to use this, but it begins with the 
two women and Julian. It is not the CIA sending a woman in a short skirt."

Assange's lawyers were asked to respond on his behalf to the allegations in 
the documents seen by the Guardian on Wednesday evening. Tonight they said they 
were still unable obtain a response from Assange.

Assange's solicitor, Mark Stephens, said: "The allegations of the complainants 
are not credible and were dismissed by the senior Stockholm prosecutor as not 
worthy of further investigation." He said Miss A had sent two Twitter messages 
that appeared to undermine her account in the police statement.

Assange's defence team had so far been provided by prosecutors with only 
incomplete evidence, he said. "There are many more text and SMS messages from 
and to the complainants which have been shown by the assistant prosecutor to 
the Swedish defence lawyer, Bjorn Hurtig, which suggest motivations of malice 
and money in going to the police and to Espressen and raise the issue of 
political motivation behind the presentation of these complaints. He [Hurtig] 
has been precluded from making notes or copying them.

"We understand that both complainants admit to having initiated consensual 
sexual relations with Mr Assange. They do not complain of any physical injury. 
The first complainant did not make a complaint for six days (in which she 
hosted the respondent in her flat [actually her bed] and spoke in the warmest 
terms about him to her friends) until she discovered he had spent the night 
with the other complainant.

"The second complainant, too, failed to complain for several days until she 
found out about the first complainant: she claimed that after several acts of 
consensual sexual intercourse, she fell half asleep and thinks that he 
ejaculated without using a condom – a possibility about which she says they 
joked afterwards.

"Both complainants say they did not report him to the police for prosecution 
but only to require him to have an STD test. However, his Swedish lawyer has 
been shown evidence of their text messages which indicate that they were 
concerned to obtain money by going to a tabloid newspaper and were motivated by 
other matters including a desire for revenge."
 