
From the moment a grinning Sepp Blatter opened the envelope in Zurich on 2 
December to reveal that Qatar would host the 2022World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>, the pressure has 
been on the hitherto little-known nation to stage an impressive 2011 Asian Cup 
and go some way to proving the doubters wrong.

This doesn't mean the tournament – which runs from tomorrow, when the hosts 
kick off against Uzbekistan, to 29 January – will be a dress rehearsal for 
2022. Most of the work – including the new stadiums, the hotels and the 
infrastructure – will be done over the next 11 years, and anyone who witnessed 
the changes in the city over the previous 11 will have no doubt that they will 
be done and done very well indeed. The next three weeks are about changing what 
locals feel are misconceptions about the country.

These have spread far and wide. The Australian national team are in action 
over the next three weeks and hoping for better results than their 2022 bid 
team which secured one vote. That still rankles down under as the comments from 
Les Murray, a respected Australian broadcaster andFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> ethics committee member, showed at 
the time of the vote.

"That Qatar should hold the World Cup is a notion that borders on the 
ludicrous," Murray said. "Who's going to go to Qatar? No fans are going to go … 
There's no pedestrian culture inQatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qatar>, there are no pavements. If you 
walk the streets you are suspected of something."

In fact, the only thing anyone walking would be suspected of is not owning a 
car in a nation where everyone drives (those that can afford to at least; 
others will have to make do with buses or wait for Deutsche Bahn to build the 
metro system). Nonetheless, we will have to wait until 2022 to see if people 
travel to Qatar as the Asian Cup is not going to be a litmus test. Few from 
outside west Asia will go. Even in the region itself, fans from major cities 
such as Riyadh, Kuwait City, Dubai, Abu Dhabi and Manama don't have far to 
travel and may not stay.

The big boys from elsewhere – Korea, Japan and Australia – will be cheered on 
mainly by expats but that is always the case when the competition is held in 
west Asia. Australia's supporting group, the Green and Gold Army, said that 
"very, very few" were expected to make the trip from down under while Red 
Devils who will travel from South Korea will be measured in the 10s rather than 
the hundreds. With around 20% of the local population Indian, the second-best 
supported team should be the south Asian rank outsiders. Questions about the 
ability of Qatar to handle a massive influx of international football fans 
won't be answered this month.

What the country is ready to do is to ensure that for fans who do come from 
far afield, it all runs as smoothly as possible. For the duration of the 
tournament, visitors will be able to collect their visas upon arrival at the 
airport. They will likely join the locals on the city's promenade, known as the 
Corniche, home to hotels, skyscrapers and the giant countdown clock that has 
almost reached zero. The distinctively designed Sheraton Hotel has been around 
for longer than most but doesn't plan anything special for the competition 
except "screens in the bars". Watering holes do exist in this part of the 
desert but unlike the 2022 World Cup fan zones, which will have beer freely 
available and tolerate scantily clad Brazilians if necessary, the Asian Cup 
areas will not serve alcohol.

Locals, though, are bemused by the focus on alcohol from overseas. "The World 
Cup is not just about beer," one journalist said. "Qatar is a country with high 
international standards. Qataris may not drink but respect the rights of others 
to do so. Fly with Qatar Airways and see if they serve alcohol or not."

A member of the local organising committee promised lots of fun ahead. "Staff 
and volunteers are working hard to ensure that fans will have a great time," he 
said. "There will be concerts every day, Asian food festivals, dancing and lots 
of performances for people to enjoy. We will help fans organise excursions into 
the desert and explore the country. And the weather is beautiful."

One charge that can't be put down to bitterness about Fifa decisions but can 
be laid to rest to some extent over the next few weeks is that Qatar lacks a 
football pedigree. Having never qualified for the World Cup and having 
progressed past the Asian Cup group stage only once, even the most loyal fans 
would struggle to argue that point. A good showing may go some way to silencing 
the snipers but with Qatar's habit of naturalising talented South Americans and 
shoving them into the national team, maybe not.

When the countdown clock is reset to 2022 after 29 January, it is going to 
feel like a long time before the country can show the world what it really can 
do but if Qatar can avoid making any mistakes that will be seized upon by the 
international media that will be a good start.

2011 Asian Cup format

Group A Qatar, Kuwait, China, Uzbekistan

Group B Saudi Arabia, Japan, Jordan, Syria

Group C South Korea, India, Australia, Bahrain

Group D Iraq, North Korea, United Arab Emirates, Iran

Top two from each group qualify for quarter-finals to be played on 21 and 22 
January. Semi-finals 25 January. Final 29 January.
 