
Twenty million people will lose out from the introduction of a new flat-rate 
state pension with the burden falling most heavily on low-paid private sector 
workers, according to analysis by leading pension experts.

Women’s state pension age rise: an unfair burden or a necessary reform?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/09/state-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign>
The startling figure, part of research by pension consultants Hymans 
Robertson, comes just before the new deal for pensioners is to be introduced in 
April. It appears to undermine government claims that the reforms will create a 
fairer, as well as a simpler, system.

The company also warns that the policy could have wider and graver 
repercussions for government than its attempts to slash credits for working 
people, which forced chancellor George Osborne to perform a spectacular U-turn 
in his budget last November.

Chris Noon, a partner at Hymans Robertson, told the Observer that research had 
revealed that while there would be winners among middle-to-higher earners from 
this April, the costs of these rises would fall on lower earners in the form of 
lower pensions in years to come for about 20 million people. “Within the 
private sector, it’s the low paid – those earning less than around £15,000 – 
that will be hit hardest. Gordon Brown made changes to the way the low paid 
accrue state pension, which resulted in employees with earnings below around 
£15,000 accruing relatively large amounts.

“Under the new rules, this population will be significantly affected. For 
example, for someone earning around £15,000 with a working life of 20 years, 
they will be looking at a drop of around £1,200 per annum. If that same person 
worked for 50 years they will be looking at £2,500 less per annum in state 
pension than they would have been entitled to under the old system.” Noon said 
more people would be affected than by cuts to tax credits. “With tax credits 
we’re seeing around three million people lose out, with a £4bn saving for the 
Treasury. With state pension changes, we’re seeing 20 million people lose, with 
an £8bn saving for the government.

“This is a much bigger issue affecting larger swaths of the population – and 
again, it impacts the lower paid. The only difference is tax credits affect 
individual’s incomes here and now, whereas state pension changes will hit them 
in the future.”

Pensions: the 10-point action plan to take advantage of the new rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/05/pension-planning-retirement-annuity-new-rules>
When the government first announced plans for a flat-rate pension to replace 
the current basic pension of £119.30, and the additional state pension, which 
is partly earnings related, ministers said the new system would be fairer and 
simpler. Recently they have faced criticism for not providing information to 
people on how they will be affected before the new system is launched, citing 
data protection issues for failing to send out letters.

Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> minister Ros Altmann did 
not deny there would be losers, but said the existing system was not 
sustainable. She told theObserver that in the short term there would be more 
winners than losers. “In the years between now and 2030 the majority of women 
will get higher state pensions than under the existing system, and 70% to 75% 
of both genders will be better off. But to make the state pension sustainable 
many will get less than they would have done under the old system [in the 
longer term]. The important thing is that the old system is not sustainable or 
affordable in the longer term and could not have lasted that long without 
change.” She said that from 2030, plans for auto-enrolments into private 
pensions would help people make up any difference.

The full flat-rate pension will be introduced at £155.65 a week for those who 
have reached pension age, though many will receive far less. This is because 
some will not have paid enough in national insurance contributions, and others 
contracted out of the state earnings related pensions schemes for periods 
during their working life.

Frank Field, chairman of the all-party work and pensions select committee, 
said that while the broad thrust of the reforms was to be welcomed, his 
committee would hold inquiries into claims of unfairness. “The new state 
pension is an important reform, which offers the prospect of a minimum income 
for more of the retired without resorting to means-tested assistance. But the 
only way DWP achieved this in an age of austerity was to convince the 
chancellor it could be introduced at nil cost. Any reform on such terms ensures 
that gains for the winners will be paid for by the losers.

“The select committee will soon be considering a draft report on raising the 
retirement age to 65 for women, and then for both men and women to 66, and the 
impact of reducing the timescale over which this necessary reform is being 
introduced. This report will also begin the first of a possible series of 
reports on the impact of the introduction of the new state pension.”

Currently there are two parts of the UK state pension: the basic state 
pension, which is flat-rate, and the additional state pension, which is partly 
earnings-related. The government legislated to introduce a new single-tier 
state pension for future pensioners. One of the principles of the reform was 
that the new state pension would be set above the basic level of means-tested 
support.
 