 Twenty-four British sailors died and about the same number were injured when 
the destroyer HMS Coventry and the Cunard container ship Atlantic Conveyor were 
destroyed by Argentinian air attacks off the Falklands, the Ministry of Defence 
disclosed yesterday.
The container ship - on which four men died - was North-east of the islands, 
being escorted in to the San Carlos bridgehead to unload military stores when 
she was hit by two sea-skimming Exocet missiles of the kind that sank 
Coventry's sister ship HMS Sheffield. There was almost no warning.

The Super-Etendard naval bombers that launched the Exocets were too low over 
the sea to show on radar, but their pilots were heard talking to one another. 
Atlantic Conveyor caught fire and was abandoned. Valuable stores and probably 
some Chinook heavy-lift helicopters were lost with her - but not the vitally 
important Harrier fixed-wing aircraft that had already jumped across to the 
British carriers.

The 3,500-ton Type 13 destroyer Coventry was stationed in an air-defence 
picket off the northern entrance of Falkland Sound, apparently accompanied by 
the Type 22 frigate HMS Broadsword.

During the morning she had shot down two Argentinian attackers, probably 
Skyhawks, with her SeaDart missiles. But late in the afternoon four Skyhawks 
came off the land and hit her with several bombs. She did not burn like her 
sister ship but was severely crippled.

Soon after her 280-man crew had abandoned her, with 20 dead in the attack and 
another 20 or so injured, she capsized. Broadsword has been slightly damaged 
but she has no casualties.

Coventry is the fourth Royal Navy ship to be lost since the Falklands campaign 
began and Atlantic Conveyor the first civilian auxiliary. To lose them both on 
the same day is clearly a heavy blow to the task force commander, Rear Admiral 
Sandy Woodward, but the result of the Exocet attack could have been far worse.

The Argentinian pilots almost certainly believed they had launched their 
missiles at one of the two British aircraft carriers, Hermes and Invincible. 
What would have been for them a triumphant celebration of Argentina's national 
independence day - after which their own carrier is called the 25th of May - 
turned out to be a relatively minor success.

By now most of the heavy stores and equipment needed by the 5,000 Royal 
Marines and paratroopers established around San Carlos have been landed - five 
big supply ships left the anchorage on Tuesday night - and some of the warships 
that have escorted them in and out during the night and protected them at such 
heavy cost during the day will soon be able to move back offshore.

They have done their job so well that only two naval auxiliaries actually in 
the anchorage, the ice tank landing ships Sir Lancelot and Sir Galahad, have 
been slightly damaged. The number of Argentinian aircraft brought down over the 
Falklands since Sunday is reckoned to be 26 and the Defence Secretary Mr John 
Nott told the House of Commons yesterday the total for fixed wing aircraft 
since hostilities began was 50.

The British Chiefs of Staff take considerable comfort from this massive 
depletion of Argentinian air resources and the fact that only five of their 
Harriers had been lost up to yesterday in spite of continued raids on the 
airfields at Port Stanley and Goose Green.

They are also hoping that they have their arithmetic correct in calculating 
that the Argentinian navy has only one air-launched Exocet missile left and 
that efforts to find more in Africa and South America or adapt the 
ship-launched version will be unsuccessful. A helicopter landing pad which 
might later take Harriers is now being prepared at San Carlos and plans have 
evidently been made for the first big deployment of land forces outside the 
initial bridgehead.

Indeed, reports were circulating widely in Whitehall last night that land 
forces had begun to move out of the San Carlos area and were advancing deep 
into East-Falkland. One report said that the Goose Green position had been 
taken, but Ministry of Defence sources insisted they had no information about 
such activity.

An advance into the heart of East Falkland would conform with the government 
view that a speedy military conclusion is desirable.

The Defence Secretary told the Commons yesterday: "Our ground forces are now 
poised to begin their thrust upon Port Stanley." Behind them, he added, were 
another 3,000 men of Five Brigade aboard the liner QE2, while for the 
Argentinian garrison, reinforcement and resupply was virtually denied.

The ambitious tone of Mr Nott's remarks about attacking Port Stanley may be a 
hint that the Argentinian detachment at Port Darwin and the Goose Green 
airstrip 20 miles south of the British bridgehead is of insignificant strength.

By now the British will know because they have been patrolling and observing 
for some days. On Tuesday they made contact with what sounds like an 
Argentinian patrol and they must be ready to make their own move, one way or 
another, at any time.

Mr Nott was speaking in part of his chiefs of staff when he told MPs that by 
any historical standard this will be seen to have been one of the most 
remarkable logistic and military achievements of recent times.
 