
Turning a space into a home is a process akin to alchemy. It’s a combination 
of objects (old, new, inherited, broken, and sometimes of mysterious origin) 
and an investment of emotional energy. Space does not become a home overnight. 
It’s worked and kneaded, left to rise. It is gradual, and then it is a sudden 
realisation that becomes magically real: this house is now mine.

Hana Lee and Tom Davison, the duo behind independent studio Humble Grove 
<https://humblegrove.itch.io/>, explore this cathexis of placemaking in their 
forthcoming game, 29, set in an isometric facsimile of the flat they lived in 
as students. Via soft, desaturated pastels, they’ve captured the whole feel of 
the place, from a clock ticking on the wall, to a cat purring, radiators 
popping and pipes groaning in the walls. But there are also magical elements 
mixed in with the kitchen sink realism. A small fern creeps up from the floor 
where you walk, and it dies just as quickly. Stars wink in and out of existence 
just behind you. It’s a familiar place – but uncertain. There are suitcases 
packed in the bedroom, but nowhere to go.

“I really like things that have a living feel to them,” says Lee. “I don’t 
really like seeing clean rooms in games. It’s always so nice to see, like, 
paper scattered everywhere. Pens on desks. Not neat at all.” It’s fairly clear, 
then, which desk in 29 belongs to Lee.
 ‘I don’t really like seeing clean rooms in games. It’s always so nice to see, 
like, paper scattered everywhere. Pens on desks. Not neat at all.’ Photograph: 
Humble Grove 
The game is billed as a semi-autobiographical magical realist point-and-click 
adventure. Players start out controlling Tom’s character, Bo, but later inhabit 
different friends and residents as the narrative evolves – these characters are 
loosely based on the developers themselves and real-life friends, and the 
narrative takes in incidences and conversations from their student days; but 
like memory, everything has a sheen of fiction to it. Lee and Davison also view 
29 as a kind of self-inventory. “It’s a way to examine yourself,” Davison says. 
“It’s like a ‘get to know you’ session, really. And you get to examine each 
other.”

“Like when you’re doing the animations,” Davison says to Lee. “Trying to learn 
my mannerisms.”


“Yeah, I’m like, ‘Walk, so I can see you’!” says Lee.


Much like finding what particular movement turns their walk into precisely 
their walk, Lee and Davison’s work on 29 showcases the magical in the everyday 
domestic drudgery. No one balks at the love potions in the shower, or the deer 
skull in the toaster. At one point, your character encounters a monster in the 
spare room and you’re more put out by the fact that the creature misnames you, 
rather than the fact that there is a monster in the spare room. The exchange is 
perhaps a nod to experiences Davison and Lee have each had; they identify as 
gender neutral and so misgendering and misidentifying are things they face in 
real-life.


“We’ve had people asking about the pronouns, like, why are they using ‘they’? 
I think that’s fine if people are interested in that, but … there’s a lot more 
to explore,” Davison says. “It’s just a natural occurrence.”

Lee and Davison are recently graduated, and now often separated by thousands 
of miles (Lee in Tokyo, Davison in London). They’re still trying to pin down a 
place together and 29 is part of a series of adventures under the header No 
Longer Home that ties this quest together. A prologue, Friary Road, is already 
available on the studio’s website.
 A screen shot of 29. Photograph: Humble Grove 
In this analysis of place and emotion, they take inspiration from Cardboard 
Computer’s acclaimed Kentucky Route Zero, and Fullbright’s Gone Home – 
thoughtful examinations of how space is inhabited and imbued with meaning. 
Humble Grove are already a standout studio in the category of short, 
experiential games which have received a lot of attention this year; games like 
Variable State’s Virginia, or Campo Santo’s Firewatch. 29 isn’t an adventure in 
the traditional sense – you’re not solving puzzles by building an inventory of 
selected objects; it’s about investigating the space, clicking on objects, 
learning the stories behind them, and building a picture. For many players, who 
went to university themselves, or who may have shared a flat with others, the 
game may well invoke familiar feelings – these places are home, but also 
transient; they’re yours but not yours.

Lee and Davison acknowledge their place in this new era of experimental game 
design, but despite the thriving community of artists and gamemakers around 
them, they’re still trying to find a place for themselves – they’re looking to 
express themselves through smaller spaces. “It’s a very claustrophobic game,” 
concedes Lee. Although you can go outside of the small cramped flat, your 
explorations are confined to the unkempt yard – you have the illusion of 
escape, but not the option. Both creators liken the experience of their game to 
a moment from the previous summer, when they first showed the project at indie 
festival,Feral Vector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/21/sex-art-camping-alternative-video-game-festival>
, which takes place in an old church, just outside Hebden Bridge.

“Us and a couple of other people were exploring the seating area,” says 
Davison. “A bit higher up there were these trap doors. There were two loose 
planks, and we thought, ‘Oh no, we should tell someone.’ And we lifted them, 
and we saw a ladder ...”

“There were stairs going down,” continues Lee. “And it was ... I don’t know 
how a person could get down there. We just started making up stories about what 
could be at the bottom.”

The experience stuck with them – exploring the hidden parts of a bigger place, 
bustling with people, trying to find a moment for themselves. It’s the sort of 
thinking that guides their work. When asked about the appeal of 29, about what 
has made people want to play it at indie events around the world, Lee thinks a 
while before you replying: “You can make a small space about you.”


29 is released on PC/Mac later in 2017
 