
Kempton’s King George VI Chase has a new sponsor in 32Red, an online 
bookmaker, replacing William Hill, which has had its seven-year tenure ended by 
therow over authorised betting partners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/08/bookies-racing-authorised-betting-partner-funding-talks>
. Racing’s new policy is that bookmakers may sign new sponsorship deals with 
participating racecourses only if they contribute to the sport from their 
online profits; 32Red qualifies but Hill’s does not.

The deal was announced at a press conference here on the morning of 32Red’s 
flagship Flat-racing sponsorship of Haydock’s Sprint Cup, a Group One contest 
worth £162,000 to the winner. Prize money for the King George on Boxing Day is 
to be maintained at £200,000 and the initial deal is for three years.

Ed Ware, the chief executive of 32Red, said the timing and location of the 
announcement had personal significance for him, being 11 years almost to the 
day since his firm was floated on the stock exchange. On that day, Ware was at 
Haydock to watch Rawdon win in his colours under Hayley Turner, which he 
recalled as her first success after riding out her claim.

32Red now has a large portfolio of race sponsorships, much of it at the 
grassroots level, and backs more races than any other bookmaker. “We see the 
value of investing in racing,” Ware said. “It’s a good way of attracting 
customers, an excellent way of extending our brand in public, in front of the 
right people. We’re always in the market [for new sponsorships].”

Phil White, who manages Jockey Club-owned tracks in the south-east, thanked 
William Hill for its long-term support at Kempton and said he hoped to do 
business again with the company in the future. He said in a statement: “The 
32RedKing George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> has been won by some 
of the best steeplechasers we will ever see, with Desert Orchid winning the 
race on four occasions and Kauto Star going one better to post a record that 
may never be matched.

“Last year’s finish between Cue Card and Vautour was one of the most exciting 
I’ve witnessed and the scenes when Sprinter Sacre came back into the winners’ 
enclosure the next day after winning the Desert Orchid Chase was an emotional 
moment for even our hardiest racegoers.

“I look forward to seeing what unfolds at this special race meeting this year 
now, with 32Red’s most valued backing, as well as on 32Red Lanzarote Hurdle 
Day, 32Red Tolworth Hurdle Day and across the rest of their sponsorship 
portfolio with Jockey Club Racecourses.”
 