
Tens of thousands of members of one of Iraq's oldest minorities have been 
stranded on a mountain in the country's north-west, facing slaughter at the 
hands of jihadists surrounding them below if they flee, or death by dehydration 
if they stay.

UN groups say at least 40,000 members of the Yazidi sect 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yazidi>, many of them women and children, have 
taken refuge in nine locations on Mount Sinjar, a craggy, mile-high ridge 
identified in local legend as the final resting place of Noah's ark.

At least 130,000 more people, many from the Yazidi stronghold of Sinjar, have 
fled to Dohuk, in the Kurdish north, or to Irbil, where regional authorities 
have been struggling since June to deal with one of the biggest and most rapid 
refugee movements in decades.

Sinjar itself has been all but emptied of its 300,000 residents since 
jihadists stormed the city late on Saturday, but an estimated 25,000 people 
remain. "We are being told to convert or to lose our heads," said Khuldoon 
Atyas, who has stayed behind to guard his family's crops. "There is no one 
coming to help."

Another man, who is hiding in the mountains and identified himself as Nafi'ee, 
said: "Food is low, ammunition is low, and so is water. We have one piece of 
bread to share between 10 people. We have to walk 2km to get water. There were 
some air strikes yesterday [against the jihadists], but they have made no 
difference."
 Iraq isis WEB 
At least 500 Yazidis, including 40 children, have been killed in the past 
week, local officials say. Many more have received direct threats, either from 
the advancing militants or members of nearby Sunni communities allied with 
them. "They were our neighbours and now they are our killers," said Atyas.

"It's not like this is a one-off incident," said the Unicef spokeswoman 
Juliette Touma. "We are almost back to square zero in terms of the preparedness 
and the supplies. Enormous numbers of people have been crossing the border 
since June.

"The stresses are enormous; dehydration, fatigue, people sometimes having to 
walk for days. The impact on kids is very physical, let alone the psychological 
impact."

The Kurdish minority Yazidis have long been regarded as devil worshippers by 
Sunni jihadists who have targeted them since the US invasion. As the 
extremists' latest and most potent incarnation, theIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> (Isis), has steadily conquered Iraq's 
north, the small, self-contained community has been especially vulnerable.

Isis forces advanced 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/07/03/world/middleeast/syria-iraq-isis-rogue-state-along-two-rivers.html?_r=0>
 across north-western Iraq almost unchecked since a small band of hardliners 
stormed Iraq's second city, Mosul, on 10 June, sending the Iraqi army fleeing 
and shattering the central government's control.

Flush with weapons looted from Iraqi arsenals, Isis sacked Tikrit and advanced 
on Kirkuk. With new recruits lured or pressganged along the way, it has 
captured five oilfields and three cities, an 800-mile stretch of border with 
Syria. It has menaced Baghdad and is now within striking distance of Iraq's two 
largest dams.
 An Iraqi Yazidi family that fled the violence in Sinjar take refuge in Dohuk. 
Photograph: Safin Hamed/AFP/Getty Images 
"The situation is slowly tipping in their favour," said Dr Hisham al-Hashimi, 
Iraq's leading expert on Isis. "They won't take the dam near Mosul, but Haditha 
[at the centre of Iraq's water and energy supply grid] will be very hard to 
defend.

"They are very close to Baghdad airport. If they breached the perimeter, even 
with a symbolic attack, it would be enormous propaganda value for them."

Iraq's beleaguered military has been unable to muster a meaningful push back 
against the jihadists and is under intense pressure to support the Yazidis with 
air strikes and food drops. A series of spectacular defeats has seriously 
eroded its credibility. Baghdad claimed on Wednesday that its military had 
carried out an air strike on a Mosul prison which killed scores of jihadists 
and freed an unknown number of prisoners. The area was impossible to access and 
the numbers of fatalities could not be verified. However, witnesses reported 
damage to the prison and relatives rushed to the gates in the hope of rescuing 
detained family members.

Kurdish Peshmurga troops, long regarded as a more formidable fighting force, 
had been defending Sinjar, but they too were forced to withdraw as Isis 
advanced. Kurdish officials say their forces were seriously outgunned by the 
jihadists, who were using heavy weapons looted from Iraqi bases.

The same weapons are being used to consolidate Isis's hold on much of western 
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. The group has significantly 
boosted its numbers by tapping into Iraq's estranged Sunni population, which 
has been marginalised by the Shia majority government since the US overthrow of 
Saddam Hussein more than 11 years ago.

"I would say there are now between 30,000 and 50,000 of them," Hashimi said. 
"Of those, I would say 30% are ideologues. The others have joined out of fear 
or coercion."
 Yazidi members demonstrate outside UN offices in Erbil against the Isis 
violence. Photograph: Safin Hamed/AFP/Getty Images 
The once dominant US military and powerful embassy now play next to no role in 
Iraq, with Iraqi militias reporting to Iranian generals increasingly taking the 
lead in the fight against the jihadists.

"Iraq is spiralling out of control," said Ali Khedery, the former 
longest-serving US official in Baghdad. "The centrifugal forces are spinning so 
quickly. They are on one timeline and Washington is on another. I am beyond 
concerned."

Khedery, who reported to five US ambassadors and three US central command 
generals and is now chairman of the Dubai-based consultancy Dragoman Partners, 
said: "Everybody is retreating to their corners. And there is no credible 
international actor that I can see that is trying to bring it together again.

"It definitely is an existential threat to the Iraqi government and I think it 
represents yet another manifestation of the disintegration of Iraq as we know 
it.

"Iranian overreach, the genocide in Syria, [Nouri] al-Maliki's consolidation 
of power in a very sectarian way, have all led to the disillusionment, the
disenfranchisement of the Sunni Arabs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/04/-sp-middle-east-politics-2014-egypt-syria-palestine-iraq-gaza>
, who have fatally, but perhaps understandably, chosen to consummate a deal 
with the devil. Now we are locked in a race to the bottom."

Additional reporting by Saud al-Murrani
 