
When you wake up in the morning the world is as you find it. What's happened 
in the night is history or dream. That's the only way I can account for the 
weird feeling that I sort of missed 9/11. My girlfriend, Zoe, and I were living 
in San Francisco, and by the time we woke up the planes had hit and the Towers 
were down. We'd gone to bed late the night before and were still asleep when a 
friend called and told us what had happened. It was just past eight and what he 
said made so little sense it wasn't even surprising, just the blurred aftermath 
of something I might have been dreaming. Zoe turned on the TV straight away. 
There was still a lot happening, and the original footage was endlessly 
replayed, but the Towers were down and we were in a changed world.

I never got over this lag, never experienced the shock of things happening as 
they happened. I was out of step with the world, but for Zoe, who was suffering 
from anxiety, sadness and panic attacks, this catastrophic turn of events meant 
that the world had caught up with her frightened sense of the way things were. 
A side-effect of this, inevitably, was that we were out of step with each 
other. A couple of weeks previously, out in the desert, she had thought she was 
going to die, and now people were dying and we had woken up in a world where 
that is what had happened to people who had woken up in one world and then, a 
few hours later, found themselves in another, one that was falling apart 
beneath and around them. There was something wrong with me, too, she claimed on 
the following day, the day after 9/11, but I didn't know what it was and when I 
asked her to "elucidate" – strange how certain words pop out like that – she 
just shook her head.

We had sublet a big loft space on Hampshire and Mariposa, with a clangy 
echoing acoustic, above the Slow Club restaurant. Our landlord's brother was 
meant to be delivering a sofa at two o'clock on the day of the attacks. By 
three he had not turned up so I tried calling. The number was busy. It took 
ages to get through.

 "Hi Tony!" I said enthusiastically when he finally picked up.

 "Hi." It was only a single syllable, but from the way he said it I guessed 
that things were not looking good on the sofa front.

 "So how are you?" I said, guessing that an indirect approach was best.

 "I'm OK," he said. "Talking to family members."

 "Are they in New York?"

 "They're in Vermont and Florida."

 "Ah, good," I said instinctively. He took this as an expression of relief 
about the well-being of his family, which it was, of course, but it was also an 
expression of relief with regard to our chances of getting the sofa, the real 
subject of the call, to which I now turned. "So we were wondering when we might 
expect the sofa."

 "Sofa?"

 "You were supposed to bring it round at two today." I could have said you 
were going to bring it round but I said supposed to establish that while it may 
have been a little tactless to bug him about a sofa he was the one who was in 
dereliction of his obligations.

 "There's been a lot going on."

 "Of course. Planes flying into buildings, family members to talk to and so 
forth. But the need for sofas to sit on does not go away," I said, lightening 
the tone at a time when the tone should perhaps not have been lightened.

 "I'm not sure I'll be able to make it today." There was nothing else for me 
to say except that maybe we could speak tomorrow. Yesterday's certainties – the 
promise to come at two o'clock with a sofa – were gone. Today there were only
maybes and not sures even though these contained their own certainties: that he 
would not make it today and would not call tomorrow and we would be left 
perched uncomfortably on the same chairs that we'd been sitting in for the 
previous fortnight.

 There was nothing to do except go back to watching TV.

"You know," I said to Zoe after a while. "I bet we're the only people at home 
watching telly who are not cuddled up on a sofa."

 Later in the afternoon we went out for a walk in the clear blue sky of a 
changed world in which nothing looked any different to how it had yesterday, 
apart from on TV and the way that so many people were bunched around watching, 
wherever a TV was on. Aside from that brief outing we stayed home all day. It 
was the most time I'd spent watching TV in a day since Christmases when I was a 
kid.

 Friends were supposed to be coming round for dinner the next evening. In view 
of what had happened the previous day we considered cancelling but decided to 
go ahead anyway, in spite of the lack of a sofa. There were eight of us. We ate 
and drank and talked as we would have on any other night, except that the only 
topic of conversation was what had happened on the other side of the continent 
and whether anything like it could happen here, on this side. We'd last seen 
each other a few weeks earlier at Burning Man where we'd camped together. Since 
then we'd all been in a kind of daze and a glow, suffering from a huge 
come-down in which elements of exhilaration and depression were hard to 
distinguish from each other. We weren't the only ones feeling this way. A lot 
of people from the Bay Area had gone to Burning Man and in the days afterwards 
there were plenty of people wandering around in a glow and daze, simultaneously 
lifted-up and burned out. Most people had their cars washed as soon as they got 
back, to get rid of the fine alkaline sand – it rots the engines apparently – 
but others left their vehicles covered in it. They were scattered all over the 
city, these dust-baked cars, remnants of a civilisation so fantastic that it 
was hard to believe it really existed, that it wasn't just a dream. 
Occasionally, we'd see some of the big, post-apocalyptic trucks that had been 
part of a theme camp or a mobile art work, looking like they'd been in the 
supply convoy for Desert Storm.

 I loved coming across these relics, but for Zoe the sight of them and the 
distinctive smell of the dust – a sharp, odourless smell, if that makes sense – 
would bring about a tightness in her chest and she would find it difficult to 
breathe. She had headaches that never quite went away and felt sad all the 
time. She was not the person that she had been just a few weeks ago.

 "Nor are you," she'd said earlier that evening, while we were preparing 
dinner for our friends.

 "You're only saying that because you've changed," I said.

"I'm not sure I can be with someone who only cares about sofas," she said. 
There it was again: the uncertainty –not sure – that conveyed its own kind of 
certainty.

"I wouldn't care about sofas if I had one," I said. It was one of those 
conversations that occur in the late stages of a relationship, while you are 
both chopping or washing vegetables, not even looking at each other, let alone 
yelling or threatening each other with knives and peelers. After a while – 
after the subsidiary conversation in which I asked her to "elucidate" when she 
claimed there was something wrong with me – we resumed cutting and peeling in 
silence and I thought back to the night a couple of weeks earlier, at Burning 
Man, when Zoe thought she was going to die.

We'd had a busy day cycling around in the desert heat and only got back to our 
camp as the sun was going down. We lolled around on the big dusty sofas that 
friends had hauled up from Berkeley and ate some pre-cooked curry. The light 
faded. We changed into our evening outfits, already feeling the quick chill of 
the night. A former marine in Oakland had prepared some capsules especially for 
us and we swallowed a couple of these before heading out again.

The lights in the city were on, flashing red, darting blue, blazing purple and 
deep greens. We were on our bikes and it was wonderful to have so many 
competing claims on our dazzled attention. Then Zoe started to feel nauseous 
and did not feel any better after she had thrown up. If anything she felt 
worse. She didn't want to cycle because she was no longer confident of her 
balance. She was hot and then she was freezing cold and she kept asking me not 
leave her.

 "I feel like I'm going to fall down," she said.

 "So let's sit," I said. "You'll feel better then." I hoped that telling her 
she would feel better would help to make her feel better. We found a 
cosy-looking camp with sofas, fairy lights, ambient music and just a few calm 
people but that didn't help. She was still cold and boiling hot.

 "My thermostat is broken," she said. "And I feel like I'm falling, even when 
I'm sitting down. If I shut my eyes I might forget to open them."

 I suggested that we get on our bikes again even though I wasn't convinced 
this was a good idea – whatever we did it seemed we would be better off doing 
something else. In the end, we abandoned our bikes and just walked. Shoals of 
luminescent fish went by. And birds with neon wings that were actually people 
on bikes, although you couldn't tell that until after they had flown past. In 
the middle of everything was the Man, taller than anything else in the city. In 
two nights the Man would burn, sway and collapse, would no longer be there, and 
it would be difficult to get our bearings, but for now the Man was the centre 
of our world. We were walking away from the centre, out into the desert.

Eventually we came to a large black structure, flat like the monolith from 
2001, but with a square hole cut in the middle, through which we could see the 
Balinese-style Temple of Tears. We had visited the Temple earlier in the week 
and had both been moved by the messages written on little pieces of wood by 
people who had lost friends or loved ones – "family members", as Tony would 
say. We weren't going there, we were just looking at the Temple through the 
hole in the middle of the monolith which, we could see now, was covered in 
white writing. I started to read the words and tried to guide Zoe away before 
she read them as well but she walked towards this big slate of writing as 
though it were a prescription that might cure her of whatever it was she was 
suffering from. The lines at the top described sweating and feeling cold and as 
I read down it became clear that this was not a prescription that would save 
her but a description of her symptoms and where they could lead. The 
penultimate line was YOU STARE INTO THE VOID; the last was DEATH IS IMMINENT.

I steered Zoe away, pretending I had not seen what I had seen, hoping that she 
hadn't either. She kept saying she was going to fall over, that she was 
falling. I thought it best to keep walking but she said she had to sit down and 
so we sat down in the night, with the twinkle of lights hazy in the distance. 
There were only a few stars and then it became difficult to see anything. A 
dust storm blew through the darkness. We put on our goggles and wrapped sarongs 
around our heads and just huddled there, waiting for it to pass.

The storm did not last long, thankfully, and then we could make out the city 
lights again, and the Temple of Tears. I hoped that when the air cleared Zoe 
would feel better, but now she said that if she shut her eyes the thing she 
felt she was falling into was death, a sleep from which she would never wake. 
Her eyes were huge and frightened. The storm was over but she thought it was 
still to come.

"I can't tell the difference between before and after." Tears trickled down 
her cheek as she said this, clearing little tracks through the dust. I wiped 
her face and said we should begin walking again. I helped her up and held her 
hand and we took a few slow steps. The night was sharp and starry again, vast. 
The light-streaked world was all before us.
 