
As an illustration of how the notion of a “bonus” – in the sense of a reward 
for exceptional achievement – has been debased by modern boardroom pay 
practices, look no further thanMorrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons>, whose shareholders gather in 
Bradford on Thursday.

At least a few investors, contemplating a share price that has almost halved 
over three years, will want an answer to a simple question: if Dalton Philips’ 
shift as chief executive was so disappointing that he had to be replaced, why 
was he awarded a£1m bonus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/27/sacked-morrisons-boss-dalton-philips-2m-salary-1m-payoff>
 for his last year in the job?

Nobody should quibble with the salary-and pension-related elements of Philips’ 
pay-off. Directors’ contracts are clear in those areas: the employer must pay 
up. The sole contentious part is the bonus.

One assumes Johanna Waterous, head of Morrisons’ pay committee, will fall back 
on the explanation she gave in the annual report: the business achieved “a 
substantial portion” of its objectives for the year. On the key measures of 
underlying profits, cash flow, quality of online service and cost savings, 
Morrisons hit the targets. Thus Philips qualified for 60% of his maximum bonus.

Managers’ rich rewards for poor performance | Letter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/03/managers-rich-rewards-for-poor-performance>
But this is perverse. Philips lost his job – new chairman Andrew Higginson 
recruited David Potts, an old Tesco comrade – because Morrisons’ like-for-like 
sales figures were so dismal. That can happen despite profits and cash flow 
being deemed officially adequate. But it demonstrates, surely, that the 
incentive system was flawed in the first place. What’s the point of offering 
£1m to hit four targets if failure to achieve a fifth is so serious that a more 
dynamic boss has to be summoned?

One can’t blame Philips for accepting his bonus. It wasn’t his fault that the 
pay committee designed such a poor incentive scheme; he played by the rules. 
But Waterous owes Morrisons’ shareholders a better explanation than her watery 
offering in the annual report.

Still early days for AO World 

Optimism is the default setting for John Roberts, founder of AO World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ao-world>, so shareholders had to plough 
through more than a few boasts about “unbeatable prices” and “amazing service” 
to be reminded of what they already knew: that the fridges-to-TVs online 
retailer missed its financial targets for the year.

February’s profits warning, blamed curiously on a falling-off in publicity 
after last year’s flotation, remains fresh in the memory. So, too, does 
chairman Richard Rose’s £10m sale of the bulk of his shareholding soon after 
the warning. In short, sceptics wonder whether AO’s hype about “changing the 
way Europe buys its electricals” is running several laps ahead of reality.

Tuesday’s figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/02/ao-world-shares-fall-after-loss>
 met February’s lowered expectations but Roberts’ admission that the UK trading 
environment remains “challenging” will do nothing to calm nerves. There is a 
suspicion that the problem isn’t so much the retail climate, where disposable 
incomes are improving in the UK, but stiffer online competition from the likes 
of Dixons Carphone.

AO could still boast a 22% rise in UK revenues to £471m and a 47% improvement 
in UK top-line profits to £11.2m for the financial year. That’s not to be 
sniffed at. But, if you want to believe that AO is a revolutionary company, you 
have to think pan-European success will come quickly and confidently. In fact, 
it’s far too early to tell: revenues in Germany, the first new market, were 
only £5.8m in the first six months of trading there.

German start-up losses and set-up costs, plus £2.5m of incentive rewards for 
executives, meant AO recorded a pre-tax loss of £2.9m for the year. The share 
price has descended from 285p at float to 170p, making the equity worth £715m, 
but that still looks a rich valuation. Flogging fridges and freezers will 
always be a low-margin activity and it will be at least two years before the 
success of the German adventure, and any others, can be assessed properly. Too 
many questions, too few answers.

Fifa sponsors bear some blame

Sepp Blatter’s resignation as the president of Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/02/sepp-blatter-fifa-president-resigns>
 deprives the sponsors of their last opportunity to salvage a scrap of 
respectability by demanding that he goes. The mealy-mouthed, and inadequate, 
protestations of “concern” in recent days from the likes of Visa, Coca-Cola, 
Adidas, McDonald’s and Anheuser-Busch have been a depressing sub-plot to the 
allegations of bribery and corruption at Fifa.

These corporate titans have been able for years to demand that world 
football’s governing body undergoes root-and-branch reform under a new 
president. Even after the crisis erupted, they flunked it. They chose timid 
words over taking a stand. If a consumer backlash follows, the sponsors will 
get what they deserve.
 