
Every year, leading Silicon Valley investment company Kleiner Perkins releases 
a “Bible of trends” <http://www.kpcb.com/internet-trends>, eagerly anticipated 
by everyone in technology and increasingly everyone in media to give them a 
sense of what’s happening in the wider world. Perhaps only in Silicon Valley 
could a slide deck take on the significance of an almost religious experience.

Mary Meeker, said deck’s author, and the firm’s partner and long-time media 
and technology analyst, has seen more bubbles come and go than a West Ham fan 
at a cup final. Yet her message remains normally unwaveringly positive. 
However, this year as she rattled through the 213 slides, they came with a 
rather sobering message for the anxious audience: the end of growth.

The brakes are being applied to everything; from the rate of sale of mobile 
phones (up only 21% year on year compared with 31% the previous year) to the 
overall use of the internet, where the total universe of users only grew 9% 
year on year last year. For the media sector Meeker’s slides held a particular 
foreboding around the rate of growth for and distribution of advertising 
revenue. The mixed news here was that internet advertising has grown 20%, year 
on year, but the majority of that growth is represented by mobile ads (up 66%, 
versus desktop which is up only 5%).Adblocking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ad-blocking> software is skyrocketing 
everywhere, which Meeker drily noted means that publishers and advertisers 
ought to make better ads that people want to see. She might have also noted 
that mobile advertising’s data charges are at least as responsible for 
adblockers’ rise as any aesthetic shortcomings.

Even this increase in advertising is disturbingly unevenly distributed, with 
76% of US online ad growth accounted for by just two companies – Facebook and 
Google. There was even a bucket of cold water for the idea that the future for 
media owners is all about video advertising, which Meeker pointed out often 
“doesn’t work very well”. Her one bright spot was the incredibly effective 
performance of“Chewbacca Mom” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y3yRv5Jg5TI> and 
her viral effect on Kohl’s app download, which shot to the top of Apple’s app 
store charts as a result of Candace Payne’s mentions. In many ways this is the 
media’s worst nightmare – where the only effective advertising is being 
delivered by amateurs enthusing over purchases on Facebook Live.

There is a ceiling on growth of people, of the devices they buy, the places 
they spend their time and the money they spend. And there is a ceiling on the 
number of companies enjoying what’s left of the growth. The majority of the top 
20 internet companies are American, and seven are Chinese. Europe is crushed by 
the unfettered growth of bigger markets and more forgiving regulatory 
environments. If this is a connected world where the economy will be 
increasingly dictated by data, then now seems a particularly inopportune moment 
for Europe to be fracturing as a single market.

A fascinating aspect of the Kleiner Perkins ritual is how the extremely 
detailed and comprehensive slide deck leaves unsaid the important 
extrapolations that can be made from it. There is no room here for a mention of 
Peter Thiel, the billionaire investor who secretly funded Hulk Hogan’s 
devastating lawsuit against gossip and news site Gawker, and the subsequent 
debate about the controls on and role of free speech in a powerful commercial 
sphere. Population and employment trends are nodded to without a discussion of 
how every job we currently hold is going to be done better by a robot. There is 
a celebration of listening devices, and “audio search”, and an unrelated chart 
about how people feel about privacy and data without an explicit link being 
made between the two.

Issues which spring from the highly concentrated world Meeker describes, 
issues of money power and culture, cannot be charted in the line graphs and pie 
charts which tell us where the money and eyeballs are going. In fairness it 
isn’t an investment firm’s job to do this, but the cultural and political 
inferences that ought to be made from these “big picture” presentations are 
profound.

When Meeker started producing the trends and predictions as long ago as 1995, 
barely anyone took any notice; then they became the quirky insider preserve of 
a handful of nerds and journalists who wrote about them, now they are an annual 
event which begins to rival the labour statistics for relevance and potential 
to cause alarm.

There has been a lot of recent discussion about the friction caused by the 
spectre of Silicon Valley’s engineering culture rubbing up against the culture 
of media, or politics, or other less quantitative fields - whether it was Mark 
Zuckerberg patiently listening to rightwing bloggers explain why they didn’t 
like his humans, or his algorithm, or Thiel vs Gawker. If Meeker’s slides are 
right, and they have a fairly impressive track record over the past 20 years, 
the end of growth and the subsequent squeeze on plurality will mean that 
friction will disappear into a longer ferment of merger and submission. 
Already, we cannot wait for next year.
 