
In 1947, when I was just three years old a doctor removed my clitoris. Female 
genital mutilation <https://www.theguardian.com/end-fgm> is mostly associated 
with African cultures, and non-Christian religions, but my FGM happened in 
white, midwest America. It took place in a church clinic that used a scalpel on 
girls who masturbated.

I remember the excruciating pain and feeling betrayed. I was told not to talk 
about it, but keeping the secret meant I was alone with my questions as I grew 
into puberty: what was missing? What would it be like to be “whole”?

At 15 I consulted a doctor regarding a tugging sensation from my scar tissue. 
Unknowingly, I went to the same clinic where the clitoridectomy was performed 
and the doctor shamed me with a booklet entitled The Sin of Self-Pleasuring.

My first child and I could have died – an almost universal impact of FGM is 
difficulty giving birth. I, like so many women around the world, did not know 
genital scar tissue does not stretch. I wanted to be fully awake to experience 
giving birth, but my obstetrician performed an extensive episiotomy under 
anaesthetic that took months to heal. He was compassionate and shocked to hear 
the origin of my scar.

Unfortunately, he was no longer available for my next two pregnancies and my 
new obstetrician saw me as a scientific experiment. Another surgeon offered to 
remove one of my nipples to create a faux clitoris. I found these proposals 
repulsive, and declined them both. Discomfort continued for 50 years until the 
scar separated during menopause.

Forgiving does not mean forgetting

I no longer have that daily physical reminder and I have forgiven all those 
involved. However, forgiving does not mean forgetting. Today I work with women 
who have experienced FGM. Along with my friend, Filsan Ali, I created a 
brochure for pregnant infibulated Somalian women. It is designed for women to 
share with their clinicians to initiate a conversation about opening the scar 
to prevent unnecessary caesarean sections.

The impetus for my writing is concern regarding increased hatred and 
disrespect toward women, other cultures and religions – as if Christians in the 
United States had a flawless history.

FGM is not my shame, it is my story. I witnessed Christian religions declaring 
masturbation a sin, “some Christian leaders and doctors” recommending 
circumcision to prevent it, physicians carrying out the practice and our 
American culture first accepting this form of sexual abuse and then denying it 
ever occurred.

My resilience stems from love, respect and caring from my husband, my family 
and many people throughout the world who stood in solidarity with me as I 
progressed on my healing journey.
 Flying Free From Abuse. Illustration: Renee Bergstrom 
Honouring pain through art

About 30 years earlier, I painted an image of a woman flying free of all forms 
of oppression and abuse. Little did I know then that the artist in me was 
knocking.

In the early 1980s at a Swiss art gallery I saw a statue of a man who looked 
just like my brother Phil who died while I was in college. The overwhelming 
grief created a portal for me to mourn another great loss in my life. I felt 
this statue was a distinct sign, a blessing, if you will, of the work I had 
begun to undertake toward elimination of FGM.

My desire for our country is that we be known for our compassion and fair 
treatment of all those who have suffered and continue to suffer. My dream for 
the world is that practising cultures end FGM so women everywhere can 
experience wholeness, as I believe our Creator intended. My hope is we can fly 
free from oppression and abuse. At 72, I, Renee the Artist, add my voice to 
those who have risen above social and cultural pressure to remain silent.

 * Video excerpts from the feature documentary by John Chua The Cut: Exposing 
FGM Worldwide <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sb_YPFrWty0&feature=youtu.be>
#StopGlobalFGM
 