
When he first sees her naked, he thinks she has "the most beautiful body I 
have ever seen". Her long, distinguished face is not so beautiful, and the 
contrast astonishes him. She is 41 and has been married for 18 years. He is 
seven years younger, and unmarried.

Elizabeth Bowen <https://www.theguardian.com/books/elizabeth-bowen> and 
Charles Ritchie, a Canadian diplomat of great charm and intelligence from a 
privileged Nova Scotia background, met in 1941, and their love affair was 
conducted in the emotionally heightened atmosphere of London at war. Ritchie - 
tall, thin, beaky and bespectacled - loved women. At first, for him, this was 
just a particularly intriguing and flattering affair, and one that he might put 
an end to. For Bowen, it was a matter of life and death, from the beginning. 
Their love fuelled her creative energy and what he called her "life-illusion". 
But gradually she became equally essential to him, "the centre of my life". 
Their world of love, and her idea of him and of his qualities, were the very 
opposite of his conventional social and diplomatic life - a life he 
nevertheless wanted and needed.

His private diaries have survived, and her letters to him, but not his to her. 
She wrote no diaries, though the letters constitute a sort of running journal. 
Reading the letters and diaries together, it is sometimes painfully clear that 
what he is feeling and what she is feeling (or tells him she is feeling) do not 
always tally.

Ritchie's diary documents the beginning of their love story, which lasted 
until her death 32 years later. The first letter from Bowen that he kept is the 
one she wrote when he was leaving London for Ottawa in 1945. It was their first 
separation. He took with him, she wrote, "my real life, my only life, 
everything that is meant by my heart. I am in your keeping. And you are in 
mine." In all the years that followed, they were never parted emotionally, even 
though they were usually hundreds of miles apart and never under the same roof 
for more than a week at a time. She saw Bowen's Court, her family house in 
County Cork, as their joint home, and the intensity of the few days he could 
spend there once or twice a year is replayed in her letters and chronicled in 
his diaries.

Elizabeth Bowen grew up in the Troubles that followed the Easter rebellion of 
1916. When in 1922 the Irish Free State was proclaimed, with the six counties 
of what became Northern Ireland remaining under British rule, there was civil 
war in the south. The constitution of 1937 established Eire as a sovereign 
state. The Anglo-Irish who stayed on, like the Bowens, always in some sense 
"settlers" after hundreds of years, maintained their beautiful, often 
uncomfortable houses, Bowen wrote, "under the strong rule of the family myth".

Bowen's father had a breakdown when she was a child, and she and her mother 
moved to England, to Hythe on the Kent coast. When Bowen was 13, her mother 
died and she was brought up by "a committee of aunts", between whose homes in 
England and Ireland she shuttled. Her troubled childhood left her with a 
stammer, and a policy of "not noticing". A characteristic Bowen phrase is: 
"life with the lid on". In spite of her sociable nature, she thought of herself 
as solitary and "unrelatable", always adjusting to other people's expectations 
- except with Ritchie, she tells him, with whom she was her true self. Her 
husband, Alan Cameron, was six years older than she. At first, he was the 
dominant partner. Bowen was not university-educated and, when young, was a 
little gauche, with big hands and feet, a strong physique and features that 
were more striking than pretty. Cameron taught her how to dress, in smart 
tailored clothes that suited her type. Her looks came into their own in her 
maturity, around the time she met Ritchie.

In 1925 Cameron got a new job as secretary for education for Oxford. There, 
Bowen blossomed. Her second book of stories came out the year after they 
arrived, her first novel, The Hotel, the year after that, then two years later 
The Last September . . . and so on, in a fertile stream. Praised by the 
critics, popular with a general readership, she was a magnet to the clever, 
sociable young academics she met in Oxford such as David Cecil and Isaiah 
Berlin, who became lifelong friends.

When in 1935 Cameron's work took them to London, the Oxford friends were 
supplemented by London friends. Bowen became the centre of a coterie, and the 
Camerons' house in Clarence Terrace, Regent's Park, a rendezvous for the gifted 
and talented.

In her letters and his diaries we hear the lovers' voices. Circumstances and 
geography were against them, but both were sociable, and attractive to both 
sexes; and yet both, because of their hinterlands in colonial Canada and 
Ireland, came at society from an angle, which made them particularly observant. 
Both had a strong sense of family, aesthetic sensibility, a determination to 
live and work at the most intense level, a belief in "another world than this" 
- and a heavy and totally unworried dependence on cigarettes and alcohol. 
Ritchie writes that all his affairs had been "floated on alcohol".

He was soon unfaithful to Bowen, as he would later be chronically unfaithful 
to his wife. His diary-fantasy, not infrequently realised, was to be in bed 
with a woman, "and to fuck and smoke a cigarette and talk a little and stretch 
out my arm for a bottle of champagne beside us and drink a little and fuck a 
little and have a hot bath afterwards in a luxurious hotel bathroom". For this 
purpose he preferred dreamy, "girlie" women, completely unlike Bowen. Although 
he ceased desiring her physically quite early on, just being with her awakened 
desire (for other women), because of her "terrifying capacity for bringing one 
to life".

Bowen believed in social conventions, good manners and the Anglican church. 
Divorce was never on the cards. The Camerons' marriage was close - but 
companionable, not sexual. There were no children. Bowen had had affairs before 
Ritchie: with the Irish writer Sean O'Faolain, with the journalist Goronwy 
Rees, and with a young Oxford academic, Humphry House. She had seen House's 
marriage as no bar to continuing their liaison. She felt the same when Ritchie, 
in 1948, married his cousin Sylvia. With artful subtlety, she reflected Sylvia 
to Ritchie as an irrelevance - which she certainly was not. But since Bowen was 
"the love of his life", as Ritchie writes, and "any other love will have to be 
of a different kind", the kind of love he had with Sylvia was less demanding, 
more domestic and reliable.

While Ritchie and Bowen were both married, essentially nothing changed. But 
when Cameron died, in 1952, a cruel imbalance became apparent. As she wrote: 
"I'm simply a widow and you are an ambassador." Bowen presented herself, not 
inaccurately, as in demand, her life filled by her writing, travel, enjoying 
success as writer in residence at American universities. She wrote from Rome: 
"I am leading a very gay, amusing, glamorous sumptuous life." As she said: "The 
moment one is sad one is ordinary." But sometimes the surface of life cracked. 
Her resentment of Sylvia and "the aching hopeless wish that we were married" 
broke through. The late 1950s were the lowest point. She had a sort of nervous 
breakdown, abandoning Bowen's Court with wages and bills unpaid, and then sold 
it, perching with friends and in hotels before renting a flat in Oxford, near 
the Berlins. Ritchie dreaded the pressure which "she is beginning remorselessly 
to apply to me". For him, the meetings and partings and subterfuges that made 
Elizabeth unhappy were part of the pattern. "A life apart" suited him. Yet the 
suspicion that she might marry her close friend Eddy Sackville-West, just for 
security, filled him with panic.

For Bowen, whose fiction hinges on arrivals and departures, this fractured 
life provided the intensity she needed. She told a former lover that she was "a 
writer before she was a woman". Throughout the long years, recreating on the 
page the beauty of Bowen's Court and their magic times there, and the rapture 
of snatched meetings in favourite bars all over the world, finding the words 
and phrases about him and their unbreakable love in order to bind Charles to 
her, she is most brilliantly Elizabeth Bowen.

The letters to Ritchie are Bowen's "writing" in the same way as her books and 
stories are. Readers of her fiction will find echoes and resonances. She told 
him with great freedom about how she writes, when she writes, what it feels 
like to be writing. When, late in life, she started on The Little Girls, she 
shared the process of creation with him as never before - even though The Heat 
of the Day, about love and betrayal in London during the war, is dedicated "To 
Charles Ritchie".

If these were only love-letters, they would not be so valuable or 
extraordinary. Bowen is a natural and practised story-teller with a genius for 
evoking atmosphere. She can be wonderfully funny as well as deadly serious as 
she regales Ritchie with the minutiae of her life, whether in Ireland, England, 
Europe or America. She spills out, without inhibition, her opinions and 
prejudices. "Maimed," as she says, by their separation, "anything I don't tell 
you about seems to go down the drain and be quite unreal." She sent him 
uncensored accounts of the doings and sayings of authors, aristocrats, 
adventurers, professors and politicians, whose fame lives on - here they are 
not just illustrious names, but friends and acquaintances with annoying or 
lovable habits. Over the 30 years of this correspondence, their world changes. 
Long-distance telephone calls and transatlantic flights become normal. To read 
the letters is to experience history in real time, and in detail - her delight, 
for example, in a new kind of pen-pencil ("it's called a 'Biro'") and her 
amazement when grey London is suddenly full of flowers and fun, new restaurants 
and good-looking young people: it is the 1960s. Her constancy is heartbreaking, 
her strength of will formidable. It was by the power of her will that their 
love survived all difficulties, as Ritchie acknowledged - just as he 
acknowledged that it was by the power of Sylvia's will that their marriage was 
a happy one. As for him - Bowen tells him early on that he has a strong 
character and "a will of india-rubber". He was self-absorbed but self-critical 
and, underneath the professional competence, tormented by his own 
indecisiveness and weakness.

When she died from lung cancer in 1973 Ritchie's grief was overwhelming. He 
wrote in his diary: "I need to know again that I was her life. I would give 
anything I have to give to talk to her again, just for an hour. If she ever 
thought that she loved me more than I did her, she is revenged."

I met Charles Ritchie for the first time in the mid-70s when I was researching 
my biography of Elizabeth Bowen. I visited him in the London flat that he and 
Sylvia were renting on a trip from Ottawa. He found it difficult on that first 
occasion to talk to me about her, feeling, as he said, that she might just come 
into the room at any minute. In the event it was Sylvia who kept coming into 
the room. Her side of the story remains untold.

Ritchie never gave me Bowen's letters to read for my book. He had his 
secretary type out interesting but impersonal extracts - about London on VE 
day, for example, and about Iris Murdoch staying at Bowen's Court. In the two 
decades between Bowen's death and his own, he fretted constantly about what he 
should do with her letters, and proposed destroying them, as he had destroyed 
his to her when they were returned to him. He said he could not bear anyone 
else ever to read them. Some of his friends, myself included, urged him to 
bequeath them, with an embargo, to a university library. This did not appeal to 
him. In the end he culled them, removing the most intimate material either by 
cutting, tearing, taking out whole pages or, sometimes for consecutive weeks or 
months, whole batches of letters. There is nothing, for example, about the 
death of Bowen's husband, nor about her feelings following the loss of Bowen's 
Court, nor about the worst of her resentment of his married state.

Ritchie himself was a fluent and graphic writer, as his diaries testify, and 
he published three volumes of them after Bowen died, subtitling them 
Undiplomatic Diaries. They were mainly about his family and his professional 
life, and diplomatically edited. No one reading even his lovely account in The 
Siren Years of going with Bowen to see the roses in Regent's Park would ever 
guess that this was a specially magical afternoon in the first months of a long 
love affair.

He often felt, when they were together, that he and she were both characters 
in a Bowen novel. In Kew Gardens, for example, "it was a day like a page from 
one of her books, the involved relationship between the two lovers who are 
wandering among the flower-beds". "Love isn't really an illusion, it's a 
reality," Bowen told him. But their letters and diaries, read together, at this 
distance in time, do have a fantastical, almost fictional quality - like a 
collaboration between the two of them, which I believe would not have 
displeased either.

• Love's Civil War: Elizabeth Bowen and Charles Ritchie, Letters and Diaries 
1941-1973, edited by Victoria Glendinning with Judith Robertson, is published 
this week by Simon & Schuster (£14.99). To order a copy for £13.99 with free UK 
p&p call Guardian book service on 0330 333 6846.
 