
Visitors to Jane Fonda's loft in downtown Atlanta are presented, on arrival, 
with two versions of the actress. On the left-hand wall, nine huge prints of 
her face from the time when her hair occupied a different time zone to her 
body; on the right, across a loft space the size of a bowling alley, a library 
of theoretical texts devoted to sociology, theology and what she calls the 
"paradigm of hierarchical patriarchy". (To the side is a vestibule which, she 
will explain, she designed herself to reflect the female reproductive system.) 
In the middle is a wall of glass overlooking the Atlanta skyline. When Fonda 
walks in, it is with a tense, beady look that seems to dare one to take sides; 
you superficial dupe, have you come here expecting a movie star?

What to make of Jane Fonda <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jane-fonda>? A 
woman who, for the last four decades of the 20th century, was as surely indexed 
with the times as hemlines and house prices, who provided an iconic image for 
every decade and who, whatever she did, she meant, and screw the consequences; 
for many women, the memory of her all-in-one leotard and belt combo will never 
be erased. Today she is in a green towelling gym top, hair thatched mercilessly 
under a tight baseball cap, which fans of Barbarella will see as the unwelcome 
stylistic intrusion of all those crusty old activists. At 67 she is luminous 
without makeup. She sips herbal tea. "When I start down a path that I know is 
the right path, I go with all of me," she says in that Fonda drawl that sounds, 
these days, more ironic than it is. "I have a lot of energy. I give off sparks. 
If it's anti-war, it's going to be very visible and if it's an exercise video 
it's going to be ... "

"$17m."

"Exactly, the biggest seller of all time. I just do it big. I don't think 
about doing it big; it just becomes ... visible." After six decades of 
unhappiness, eating disorders, bad marriages and low confidence, her true 
identity has finally become apparent to her. She is, she says, now "whole", 
"authentic" and "good in my skin". She has become a Christian. It is a 
beautiful apartment, I say. "It is a good venue for fundraising," says Fonda 
stiffly. "You can fit 80 people in it."

Her memoir, My Life So Far, has been seized on in pre-publicity for its 
chapter about her marriage to Roger Vadim, the French film director, who, she 
reveals, coerced her into having threesomes with prostitutes when they lived in 
Paris in the 1960s. It was not her intention to be salacious. The book is 
honest and humorous, but the memories are couched in a language you don't hear 
much these days. The reason she went along with Vadim's demands, she says, is 
that "when I met him, I was on a search for womanhood. I was terrified of being 
a woman because it meant being a victim and being destroyed like my mother was."

Fonda's discursive style was forged in the late 60s and early 70s, during 
those huge waves of activism when "paradigms of hierarchical patriarchy" were 
all the rage. Although she wryly observes in the book that she might have toned 
it down a bit - that she made herself unlikeable by banging her drum so loudly 
- there is nevertheless something affecting about her refusal to soften, to 
flirt with neo-feminism's more digestible language. When I suggest that the 
word patriarchy is an anachronism - that, while no one would deny inequality 
exists, lots of women would bridle at the suggestion they are victims of a 
patriarchal system - she fires back: "Part of what my book delineates is how 
misogyny is internalised: the need to be perfect, to please, to be malleable. 
And that this is true for otherwise strong, successful women like me. No, Emma, 
patriarchy is very much alive and well, and we have to do something about that."

Fonda's career outside of Hollywood can be measured in the acronyms of the 
movements she is and was involved in: from the Entertainment Industry for Peace 
and Justice (EIPJ), to Mobe (Mobilisation to End War), to Glad, the deaf 
charity she supported in 1979 when she accepted her Oscar for Coming Home in 
sign language - to those hastily convened and disbanded organisations hostile 
to her, such as the American Coalition Against Hanoi Jane. In 1995, she formed 
the Georgia Campaign for Adolescent Pregnancy Prevention, to which she devotes 
most of her time these days. Above all else, she says, she is an activist; the 
acting was something she got into by default, and until she started making 
films with a political or feminist agenda, such as They Shoot Horses, Don't 
They? and Klute, she "would've given it up in a minute. Because I didn't like 
how it set me apart from other people."

The feeling of isolation grew out of a childhood with cold and unresponsive 
parents. Fonda's mother committed suicide in a mental institution by slitting 
her throat with a razor. Fonda was told she died of a heart attack and only 
learned the truth from a celebrity magazine she got hold of at boarding school. 
Her father, Henry, was remote by virtue of being a legend and was, besides, 
what she calls a typical man of his generation - incapable of sharing his 
emotions. "Bringing feelings to my dad was like bringing a dead animal and 
laying it at his feet; like my cat would do to me with mice and gophers. It 
would elicit a look like, what do you want me to do about it? He just didn't do 
it."

This made the scenes they played together in On Golden Pond poignant and 
peculiar. It was the biggest-grossing film of 1981, in which Fonda and Fonda 
played out a weird proxy of their own relationship on screen, with Katharine 
Hepburn as the mother. Didn't her dad find it bizarre that there they were 
speaking lines about the failure of a father/daughter relationship when they 
couldn't do it in real life? "I don't know!" says Fonda, throwing up her arms. 
"Because he would never talk to me about it. I could never get him to tell me! 
I mean, he was a smart and sensitive man, so he must have known. But I think if 
he had really allowed himself to talk about it he would have become emotional 
and cried and he couldn't stand emotions. This is what patriarchy has done to 
our men. They think the only thing their sons and daughters want are their 
balls; but what we really want are their hearts."

Although a good cold-war liberal, Henry Fonda disapproved of his daughter's 
activism; it was too brash, too disrespectful, although it was seeing him play 
noble, anti-establishment roles such as Tom Joad in The Grapes of Wrath and the 
young Abe Lincoln which, his daughter says, sowed the seeds of her activism. 
"He didn't talk much; he never spoke about values or anything. But he played 
these characters that I knew were what he wanted to be like. And those values 
entered my DNA. But we had a lot of conflict about [my own activism], because I 
was going beyond his comfort zone and inviting him to come with me. And he 
couldn't do it."

She was so far outside the comfort zone after her trip to Hanoi during the 
Vietnam war that effigies of Fonda were hung from trees and a 20,000-page 
dossier compiled on her by the US intelligence agencies. Her house was 
ransacked and on one occasion, she says, "I looked up out of the window and saw 
this guy with a gun in his hand; he turned and ran back up the hill. We were 
followed. There was a feeling of danger, yeah."

During the hate campaign, did she ever think of throwing it in? "No! No! God! 
They would've won! No! You can't do that. No, no, no, no, I wasn't going to 
allow that to happen."

Fonda was married at the time to fellow activist Tom Hayden, with whom she had 
a son (she also has a daughter, by Vadim), and who, when asked in an interview 
in 1973 what brought them together, said, "The degree to which Jane had changed 
and the mutual strategic outlook was exactly right." The po-facedness of the 
movement is something Fonda can't quite shake, although she has occasional 
flashes of irritation with it. When Hayden sneered that the empire she built on 
the exercise business - which she views in the light of bringing empowerment to 
women in their own living rooms - she waspishly pointed out that the $17m it 
had raised for his political activities was not exactly trivial.

"There's nothing like committing yourself heart, soul, body and mind, to 
something beyond yourself, that you're willing to die for, alongside the man 
you love and with a host of friends. There was something very beautiful about 
that. And when it ended, we had our son, but we never quite had the same 
connection after that."

I ask if she has any affection for the term Hanoi Jane. She looks horrified. 
"No, I hate it. I hate it. It's become way bigger than me. I'm just like this 
little pawn in this huge myth that's been created by people who need the myth 
to flog their rightwing narrow world-view. And they will do everything they can 
to keep it alive. When my book comes out, they'll probably use it to flog the 
myth again. But I feel sorry for them. I really do."

She continues to campaign against George Bush and the Iraq war, and to urge 
other celebrities not to be cowed by the lie that speaking out against the 
government a) is unpatriotic and b) will ruin their careers. "It didn't ruin 
mine," she says. She has just made her first film in years, a light comedy with 
Jennifer Lopez called Monster-in-Law. It is the sort of fluff she would, in the 
depths of the 70s, have looked down on for being trivial. "But I had a good 
time on it," she says. She still sees her third ex-husband, Ted Turner, who 
lives in Atlanta and whom she characterises as a lovable nutter, as someone who 
"should be like Rupert Murdoch. But he's one of the good guys". "He knows he's 
screwed up," she says fondly - they split in large part because while good at 
talking about himself, he's not so great at listening to others - "and he wants 
to do better, he really does, bless his heart, but it's just very hard."

She allows herself a wry smile. I tell her I winced at the bit in the book 
where she calls herself an inadequate mother. "Well," she says, "my daughter 
wouldn't have allowed me not to say it. You just have to own your mistakes and 
fess up. I've been close to too many people who think the world is full of 
assholes except for them. You know what I mean?"

After all of this, one has forgotten about the other Jane Fonda, the one on 
the wall in huge glamorous prints. I point at them and ask if her friends make 
fun of her for devoting a whole wall to her own image. She looks blank. 
"They're by Andy Warhol," she says. "He was a friend of mine." Of course.

I get up to leave. "I'll show you out a different way," she says. We walk 
through an atrium painted in pale pink, with huge silver doors leading out of 
her flat. "I designed it myself," she says. "It represents the womb. The doors 
are the labia, and this" - she points to the corridor - "is the birth canal."

I stare at her. Are you serious?

"Yes," she says. "I'm serious."
 