
‘I was hundreds of miles from my family with no income’


The majority of my experiences have been positive. However, one stands out. 
When I started, I didn’t tell this employer about my conditions. As usual, my 
anxiety began to make me sick. I took more and more sick days as I tried to 
struggle through, and it was eventually noticed. I ended up telling them about 
my mental health conditions. They nodded along politely, but basically gave me 
an ultimatum. They would not do anything to help, I would have to effectively 
“man up” or be fired. I tried, but the anxiety and depression were far too 
strong. I ended up back in the meeting room with my manager, and was told that 
I had not passed the probation period. I was left living in London, hundreds of 
miles from my nearest family, with no income.

Ryan Ashton, 30, software developer 


‘Telling my manager went better than I thought it would’

I suffer from depression and anxiety, so it took me a while to get out there 
and start my career. When I did it was extremely hard. Many sick days were 
taken to avoid having to face people and the fear of needing to perform well. A 
little after a year into my job I decided to take the dreaded leap. I told my 
manager about my mental health, and it went better than I thought it would! 
Luckily where I work hours are flexible and working from home is permitted. I 
now work from home every Friday, which has made a massive difference.

Amy Shelley, 20, business and administration apprentice 

The culture of silence around mental health in the workplace must end
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/04/mental-health-uk-business-employees-management-wellbeing-marks-spencer-mind>
‘I had to leave the profession I loved’

I write having had to leave the profession I loved because I became mentally 
ill. I had been a head teacher for more than 12 years but began to suffer 
serious anxiety and panic after a negative inspection report. I felt bullied by 
both the governing body and the local authority, and when I finally cracked and 
had to take time off I had no support from them. When I tried to return they 
refused to make any allowances. Eventually I found that I couldn’t work because 
I was too ill. Despite a successful career, popularity with parents and 
children, and demonstrably improving school results over many years, they never 
once tried to work with me to help me return to being the effective leader I 
once was.

Anonymous, head teacher 


‘It’s hard to explain what it can be like to deal with on a daily basis’

I joined the Civil Service in 2013 and have had three or four major depressive 
episodes since then. Each line manager I have had, barring one, has been 
incredibly supportive. One in particular stands out as being exemplary in 
assisting me back to work, having gone through similar events themselves. It is 
difficult to explain to someone who has never experienced poor mental health 
what it can be like to deal with on a daily basis. Everyone has bad days, but 
to explain how it can feel almost impossible to get out of bed to someone who 
just doesn’t get it can leave you exposed and invalidated.

Anonymous, civil servant 

‘As a teacher, the targets and relentless pressure take their toll’

I had a complete breakdown this time last year. I was suicidal, very low and 
my confidence was sapped away. I am now back at work and living life again. 
Things are different and my school has a good understanding of mental health 
and is trying to address the issues. Unfortunately the profession that I am in 
means that the targets and relentless pressure take their toll. We have had an 
external company help the school which is really encouraging.

Anonymous, teacher 

‘The stigma remains’

I am currently suffering the after effects of a bereavement which brought 
about major issues, some of which I have shared with my line manager. Each 
instance is met with the briefest acknowledgement (at best) before it’s on with 
the agenda. Every day I struggle to keep going. I’m paying for my own 
counselling, none being available elsewhere, despite attending three separate 
NHS referrals. An issue in itself but this pales into insignificance when 
compared with the “lip service” paid to the issue within my own organisation. 
The stigma remains. And the (almost) silent suffering continues.

Anonymous, quality assurance 

'Mental health is not only about darkness and depression'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/oct/10/mental-health-not-only-about-darkness-depression>
‘I’m a doctor and I worry for my future and that of my colleagues’

My job (and it is probably the same for every NHS worker in the country) is 
becoming more stressful with increases in workload and bureaucracy, increases 
in inspections and assessment and decreases in quality time spent with patients 
and colleagues. I feel my mental health is fine at the moment but I worry for 
my future and that of my colleagues. Workers in the NHS and elsewhere are being 
presented with support in the form of mindfulness courses and resources and 
talk of resilience. This is all well and good, but if the work is changing in a 
way that is negatively impacting on staff’s mental health, this is no better 
than paying lip service to the mental health of a workforce.

Anonymous, GP 

‘Living wages, permanent contracts and flexible working are vital’


I have a ten year employment history with health and wellbeing charities. In 
my experience employers and employees are incredibly receptive [to mental 
health awareness training], but it is meaningless if the basic conditions 
conducive to positive wellbeing in the workplace are not met. It is one thing 
being aware of the signs and symptoms of stress and anxiety, but entirely 
useless if an employer is not in a position to offer living wages, permanent 
contracts or flexible working hours. This is a particular problem within the 
charity sector, where a move towards short-term, results-led project funding 
has seen HR departments vanish, training resources depleted, part-time, 
short-term contracts and pressure for project staff to get measurable results 
in absurdly short time frames.

Sam Whyte, 30, social media manager 
 