
James Harden was called for one of the eight technicals in a game that turned 
tense when Dallas center Andrew Bogut received a flagrant foul on a hard screen 
that staggered Houston’s star guard.

Despite 34 points and an easy 123-107 victory that completed a four-game 
season sweep of the last-place Mavericks on Tuesday night, Harden wasn’t happy.

Is the DeMarcus Cousins era over with the Sacramento Kings?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/demarcus-cousins-news-sacramento-kings-nba>
“That other team was trippin’ tonight, just disrespectful, unprofessional, 
players and coaches,” Harden said. “I don’t know what was their problem, but I 
think that got us going. They wanted to throw a little cheap shot and just woke 
us up a little bit and it was over from there.”

Bogut was equally frustrated in his return after missing 11 games with a right 
knee injury. The call came in the second quarter, near the end of a 16-0 
Houston run that broke a 37-37 tie. Harden doubled over after running 
head-first into the 7ft, 260lbs Bogut’s shoulder.

“If you watch the replay, yeah, he made no effort to run around my screen,” 
said Bogut, who had a couple of sharp verbal exchanges with Harden. “Yeah, it 
was a hard screen and I set hard screens. But to get a flagrant for it is kind 
of head-scratching.

“You admire the effort the league’s putting in in Secaucus [New Jersey] with 
that beautiful facility where they watch replays and watch TV and have leather 
chairs and all that kind of stuff. But you scratch your head at a lot of these 
things and it becomes very, very frustrating.”

Trevor Ariza was ejected after his second technical during the break after the 
third quarter, when five technicals were called. After the game, he was waiting 
outside the Dallas locker room for Mavericks center Salah Mejri. Security had 
to make sure the pair didn’t interact after an exchange during the game that 
led to Ariza’s first technical. Houston was called for five and Dallas three.
According to ESPN 
<http://www.espn.com/nba/story/_/id/18362143/rockets-trevor-ariza-waits-locker-room-confront-mavs-salah-mejri-testy-game>
, the tension between the two escalated when Mejri insulted Ariza’s wife and 
children during the game. Mejri denied that accusation: “He was swearing and 
bullshit,” Mejri said. “Ask him. He’s out there. Ask him.”

“It wasn’t even basketball,” Dallas guard Wesley Matthews said. “Tempers, two 
in-state teams, we play each other four times, we’ve had battles in the past, 
so it is what it is. But we’ve got to be better than that. That was an 
opportunity for us to channel it into basketball and we didn’t do that.”

Harden had 24 points at halftime and finished with 11 assists without playing 
in the fourth quarter. The Rockets improved to 13-2 in December.

With two games left in the month, Houston can tie the franchise record of 15 
wins from November 1996.

Harrison Barnes scored 21 for the last-place Mavericks, who lost their second 
straight following their first two-game winning streak of the season.

There were also two flagrant fouls, both against Dallas.

Most of the technicals came during dead-ball situations, with players and 
Dallas coach Rick Carlisle complaining to officials. Carlisle mockingly clapped 
at the refs, saying “good call,” after he was whistled for one.

“They tried to defend by being real physical and thinking that’s the way to do 
it,” Houston coach Mike D’Antoni said. “I don’t really want to get into it just 
because it doesn’t serve any purpose. We needed the win. We came out and we 
took care of business.”
 