
Three women are sitting close together, heads bent, gossiping. "I know what 
deja vu is," one woman says. The others laugh. "What is it, then?" another 
asks. "It's when you dream something, and then it comes true," the first woman 
whispers. "I dreamed that my parents would split up." She hesitates. "And now 
they really are."

So runs a scene from Monkey Bars, a powerful new play in which adult actors 
give voice to words spoken by children. Conceived and produced by theatre duo 
Chris Goode and Karl James, it's based on conversations James had with 72 
children, aged between seven and 10, about their hopes, fears and dreams. These 
conversations – some hilarious, some poignant, some downright disturbing – have 
been painstakingly transcribed to form the basis of a show that makes us think 
again about what children say and how we, as adults, should be listening to 
them.

If this sounds suspiciously like a rehashing of Michael Barrymore's Kids Say 
the Funniest Things, think again. When I watch the actors in rehearsal at the 
Unicorn Theatre in south-east London – the theatre has co-produced the show, 
which will premiere at the TraverseTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in Edinburgh – it's clear that the 
show is not just a chance for audiences to laugh at the cute things children 
come out with. Hearing the adult actors talk like children is unsettling; we 
realise that, beneath the perpetual running chatter most parents quickly learn 
to tune out to preserve their sanity, children are often expressing thoughts 
and fears that deserve as much attention as our own.

The show is made up of several dozen short scenes, each drawn verbatim from 
the children's conversations. Watching the scene in which the three women sit 
together chatting, we might at first imagine that they are colleagues enjoying 
a post-work drink. It's only when we hear about the parental break-up that we 
realise the conversation is actually between children. In another scene, two 
men talk about the time that one of them got lost in a maze and was eventually 
rescued by his mother. The man's bewilderment feels so real, so adult, that we 
begin to understand how terrifying such an experience must be for a young child.

During a break in rehearsals, Goode says he thinks this "flip" – the fact that 
we start out thinking we're watching adults talking about adult things, and 
then realise they are actually talking like children – is one of the most 
interesting aspects of the show. "I've realised," he says, "that after a while, 
I stop hearing adults ventriloquising children, and I start hearing the child's 
voice inside the adult. We all carry a childish voice that's about the things 
that these children are speaking about – feeling lost sometimes, or confused, 
or disoriented, or just not really understanding how the adult world functions. 
I've realised that really, inside, I still feel exactly the same as I did when 
I was nine."

Goode, 39, is an acclaimed writer, performer and director, and the former 
artistic director of the Camden People's Theatre in north London. The idea of 
sculpting a show out of children's conversations, to be performed by adults, 
came to him quite suddenly last year. "It's one of those very rare projects 
that come like a lightning bolt," he says. "I've always been interested in 
putting different kinds of voices on stage – I've made shows that use text 
written by autistic people, and using web discussion boards. Then I was asked 
to speak at a conference on the subject of speechlessness. I started thinking 
about children and about the legal prescriptions around what they can and can't 
say and do. From that, I thought about torture, and the fact that it often 
works through removing a person's voice or access to language." He gives a shy 
smile. "It sounds like a slightly extreme thing to say in the cold light of 
day, but I started to think, well, don't we routinely torture children? We hold 
them in a place where their voices are taken away."

Goode doesn't have children, and was an only child – so I suspect he may have 
been surprised by the way his friends with kids reacted to his idea. "They 
would go, 'But I never hear anything but my children's voices! All I hear all 
day is the kids going yadda yadda yadda!' I got really interested in that 
noise: I wondered if we block out important things that children are trying to 
tell us, simply because it happens in the middle of a load of noise."

He brought James, 48 – who, as well as making theatre, is a director of the 
Dialogue Project, a consultancy that works to help people have better, 
healthier conversations – on board to conduct the interviews. As the father of 
Billy, 13, and Stanley, 11, James agreed with Goode's idea that adults rarely 
listen to children properly. "Of course parents should be listening to kids 
better," he says. "And I include myself in that – I'm much better at listening 
to other people's children than my own."

James visited several primary schools across south London, interviewing 
children of different ages, before settling on seven- to 10-year-olds as the 
optimum age-group. "We wanted to get them before – and, my God, this happens at 
an unbelievably young age – they start being self-conscious about being 
interviewed," he says.

He asked each child a series of questions – When have you felt scared? Have 
you had any good dreams? Have you ever got lost? – and then sat back to listen, 
avoiding either the praise or judgment that the child might expect from 
teachers or parents. The result, James says, was startling – and sometimes 
harrowing. "Two or three had very articulate, practical descriptions of 
violence at home," he says.

The title Monkey Bars is drawn from a poignant story told by one girl. She 
describes breaking her arm after falling from the monkey bars in the school 
playground. The school nurse insists that her injury is no big deal, and the 
breakage is only discovered when her parents take her to hospital the following 
day. The transcription of the girl's conversation is full of hesitation and 
ellipsis. With our knowledge of what has happened, they acquire a significance 
that is heartbreaking. "I felt really, like, when it was over," the little girl 
says, "I felt really like, um … er … Kind of annoyed. Because, um … they didn't 
really understand."

For Goode, the girl's story is an excellent example of what the show is trying 
to do. "Something similar actually happened to me as a kid," he says. "I broke 
my finger playing cricket and I was in a lot of pain, but everyone just told me 
to man up. In the show, we're saying, 'What is it like to be a human being who 
says things that just don't register with people?' How does it feel to tell 
someone that you're in a lot of pain and just be told, 'No you're not. Be a 
brave soldier'?"

• Monkey Bars is at the Traverse Theatre, Edinburgh, 14-26 August; and at 
the Unicorn Theatre, London SE1, 25‑30 September
 