
An ad for the delivery service Diet Chef has been banned for presenting a 
“socially irresponsible” approach to women’s body image.

The television ad featured a character, Cheryl, talking to her former self two 
months after starting Diet Chef, saying: “I know how you feel, you can look 
that good again you know,” “You look, amazing. I never dreamed I could be that 
slim again,” and “I bought a bikini last week, for the first time since this 
picture.”

The former Cheryl was shown wearing a baggy shirt and had messy hair and 
appeared distressed, while the current Cheryl had a more polished appearance 
and a happier demeanour.

Anti-begging posters banned over 'negative stereotypes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/28/anti-begging-posters-banned-nottingham-city-council>
The Advertising Standards Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
received complaints from 26 viewers claiming the ad was offensive and 
irresponsible for exploiting women’s insecurities about their bodies by 
implying that they needed to be slim to be attractive and happy, and implying 
that overweight women did not take care of themselves or their appearance.

Diet Chef said the ad showed the frustration of the former Cheryl, who did not 
feel able to make a change in her lifestyle or to maintain a controlled diet 
and so was surprised that she had done so, and the sense of achievement of the 
current Cheryl.

They provided a document showing that when playing the former Cheryl, the 
actor had a BMI of 27.4, which was in the overweight category.

The company said the change of appearance reflected the change in her 
lifestyle and her “taking control”, and the overall approach of the ad was 
typical of the “before and after” genre of ads commonly used to advertise 
weight loss products.

The ASA said the former version of Cheryl appeared less polished than the 
current version but did not give the impression that she had neglected her 
personal appearance, and considered that viewers would be unlikely to find this 
part of the ad offensive.

But it said the character’s unhappy demeanour while talking about wearing a 
bikini appeared disproportionate to concerns about her weight, especially as 
she did not appear to be particularly overweight.

The ASA said: “We considered that viewers would understand that her concerns 
about her weight had had a significant effect on her general wellbeing. We 
considered that, overall, the ad focused disproportionately on the former 
Cheryl’s negative feelings about her appearance and implied that weight loss 
was the only solution to her problems.

“It therefore implied that those with insecurities about their bodies, and 
particularly their weight, could only achieve happiness and self-confidence 
through weight loss. We therefore concluded that the ad presented a socially 
irresponsible approach to body image and breached the code.”

It ruled that the ad must not appear again in its current form and told Diet 
Chef “to ensure that their products were advertised in a socially responsible 
way”.
 