
My love affair with the Guardian began in the 1950s. I was about 12 when I 
began work as a newspaper delivery boy, and I enjoyed walking the narrow 
Preston streets reading the newspapers as I delivered them to the rows of tiny 
two-up, two-down terrace houses.

The majority took tabloids – the Express, Herald, Pictorial, Mail – and I 
delivered the Daily Mirror to my own house, where my mother, a cotton weaver 
and avid reader, would take in the editorial as well as the news. She always 
had a comment about what she read – usually about politicians – so while I got 
used to the idea of reading a daily paper, I also developed a healthy criticism 
and cynicism about what was in them.

Each morning before school I would head out on my round. I can still remember 
the newsagent Joe Unsworth’s scrawl on the edge of each paper: New Hall Lane, 
Caroline St, Wilbraham Street, Outram Street, and the house at the furthest 
point of my round: on Brockholes View.

I didn’t know it at the time, but this house would change my life and largely 
make me what I am today. All those years ago as I delivered the papers I never 
saw the house itself – it had a wall around it, and I posted the newspaper and, 
each Thursday, the Radio Times through a letter box in a small door. The only 
time I saw the owner was each Christmas, when the door would open and he would 
press a small Christmas tip into my hand.

His was the only Manchester Guardian I delivered on my round. And, as a young 
teenager, I quickly learned that this was the only paper worth reading. As I 
walked, I would start with the sport reports. Then, as I became a little older, 
I moved on to political and news reports which seemed, so far as my young mind 
could judge, to be far more factual and unbiased than those I read in the other 
papers in my bag. By the time it reached Brockholes View, and was reluctantly 
delivered, the paper was usually very crumpled and often wet.

 The Guardian has been my lifelong companion ever since, influencing my 
thinking for good or ill. Over the years it has at times frustrated, angered 
and disappointed me. But it has also brightened my day, given me cause for 
optimism, and broadened my understanding and view rather than reinforced my 
prejudices. It never ceases to challenge my preconceptions and widen my 
horizons.

As a boy, I loved the paper’s rich, challenging vocabulary and ideas – words 
that I had never read and in all honesty didn’t know how to say, or which spoke 
of ideas that I little understood but about which I wanted to find out. I would 
often check my mother’s battered dictionary for words that I didn’t understand. 
I leafed through my secondhand set of Arthur Mee’s Encyclopaedias to find out 
about places, events and names that were mentioned in the paper.

Once I began to buy my own paper, there was only one for me. I left my 
secondary modern school, having been in the first group there to take O-levels, 
and took a job as a trainee draughtsman, where my paper would sit on the edge 
of my drawing board until lunchtime, when I would read it as I ate my 
sandwiches. I enrolled on A-Level history, geography and economics courses with 
a view to becoming a teacher, and would sit on the bus from Preston to 
Blackpool technical college engrossed in it. When my teacher, Dr Proudfoot – 
who wore sandals summer and winter – asked who read a daily paper, I was able 
to rather grandly confess: “I am a Guardian reader.” So was he.

In a way, it was the Guardian that was responsible for me meeting my wife, a 
fellow student at teacher training college, who maintains that she first 
noticed me because I was always the person waiting in an empty lecture theatre 
engrossed in his Guardian. The paper has started our day ever since – although 
sadly she is a Telegraph fan.

As I stand at the beginning of my eighth decade I am grateful that the 
Guardian still takes me out of my comfort zone and daily forces me to examine 
what I believe in, and why – just as it did all those years ago. There have 
been times when my love for it has been stretched. But the link has never been 
broken. In the end I know that there will be views and opinions expressed with 
which I will profoundly disagree, but it is only by facing up to these views 
that I can find what my own is.

A week does not go by without my muttering irritably into my breakfast cereal: 
“Where do the Guardian find this stuff!” But daily I am quietly overwhelmed by 
the wonderful writing of Gary Younge, Timothy Garton Ash, George Monbiot, Simon 
Jenkins and many, many more. All of them keep my brain active, ensuring that 
whatever tendencies I have towards becoming a grumpy old man are constantly 
challenged. Put simply, the Guardian keeps me young.

I have, over the years, wondered what might have happened if I had not made 
that single Manchester Guardian delivery to Brockholes View. I might never have 
developed my beliefs and attitudes – for good or ill.

I became a member because I have absolutely no doubt that the Guardian plays a 
crucial, pivotal and unique role in the day-to-day life of this country. The 
declaration “Comment is free, but facts are sacred” is as relevant today as 
when CP Scott first made it the paper’s maxim.

When I read something which I find difficult to reconcile or with which I 
disagree, I am reminded of Rowan Williams’s comment that when, as Archbishop of 
Canterbury, he had occasion to discuss his beliefs with leaders of other 
faiths, he didn’t seek agreement, but understanding. In this increasingly 
polarised world that is a very valid and precious quality. The Guardian in no 
small measure gives us that opportunity to understand.

I didn’t become a member because of my lifelong love of the paper and what it 
means to me – although that in itself is good enough reason – but because we 
live in very worrying times. I want my children and grandchildren to enjoy the 
sort of factual reporting and personal and political freedoms and opportunities 
that I have fleetingly enjoyed. I believe that the continuing presence of the 
Guardian is an important bulwark in ensuring that they do.
 