
John McEntee is a charmer who has exploited his Irish gift for comedic 
story-telling to such effect that he has been able to lead a charmed 
journalistic life.

He has long been renowned as the guy you would most like to spend time with in 
a pub ... or elsewhere for that matter. He tells his anecdotes so well and, in 
a true measure of a wonderful raconteur, it is always fun to hear him retell 
them. Often.

And it is just as enjoyable to read them in his entertaining memoir, I’m not 
one to gossip, but ...* At the heart of the best anecdotes is McEntee’s 
unerring ability to get himself into slapstick-style scrapes.

There was his hilarious attempt to get close to Pope John Paul II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/popejohnpaul2> when he celebrated a special 
mass in the Irish village of Knock in 1979. Only the most severely ill people, 
many in wheelchairs, were granted access.

So McEntee, in what he later conceded was a tasteless tactic, acquired a 
wheelchair and had himself pushed to the front. His mistake was in downing four 
pints of Guinness beforehand. Result? He had to spend the mass squirming in his 
wheelchair, unable to get up and seek relief.

Ten years later, at a Labour party conference in Brighton, he was the 
unwitting impresario of a melee involving Eve Pollard, Keith Waterhouse, the 
bagpipingAlastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, Anthony Bevins and 
Bruce Anderson, in which most ended up rolling across the floor of the Grand 
Hotel.

He never shies from confrontation. At a 1996 party thrown by Sean Connery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/seanconnery>, after prompting from Albert 
Finney, he asked the actor why he had broken with normal convention by 
installing a pay bar.

Connery, “flanked by two po-faced hunks of raw beef in tuxedos ... blinked and 
his lips formed an unmistakeable sneer.” After a nod to his security men 
McEntee “felt firm hands under each of my oxters ... I was propelled backwards 
towards the door.”

Similar adventures are recounted about his years as a gossip columnist for the 
London Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard>, the Times 
(briefly), Daily Express and Daily Mail, where he continues to ply his trade.

There are several laugh-out-loud anecdotes, such as those involving Britt 
Ekland, Kingsley Amis and Lord Longford. But there is much sharp criticism too. 
Pollard and her husband, Nick Lloyd, won’t find much to smile about for example.

Paul Dacre <https://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre> may also grimace at 
the recollection of the time he asked McEntee whether he was wearing a poppy 
before remembrance day. No, said his new member of staff. This, writes McEntee, 
“triggered an eruption”:

“You fucking Irish. You left the lights on in Dublin so the Germans could bomb 
Belfast. Your refuelled U-boats off the coast of Galway and you signed a book 
of condolence for Hitler at the end of the war. You treacherous, treacherous 
Irish.”

I don’t think that had anything to do with Dacre’s decision to cancel the 
Mail’s agreed serialisation of McEntee’s book. He is said to have been upset 
instead about the papal wheelchair saga, arguing that it gave journalism a bad 
name. I kid you not.

Anyway, for the record, McEntee was born seven years after the conclusion of 
the second world war and he makes clear he has no time for republicanism.

The long opening chapter about his upbringing in County Cavan is both amusing 
and moving. It reveals his early penchant for getting into trouble and living 
on his wits, and his wit. He was born to gossip.

And he may well have inherited more from his mother, Judy, than he realised. 
When the euro replaced the Irish pound she remarked: “Now why couldn’t they 
have waited until all the old people were dead first?”

I cannot finish without a reference to the unduly savage review by Lewis Jones 
in the Spectator 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2016/09/john-mcentees-gossip-puts-even-the-street-of-shame-to-shame/>
. I can accept that he didn’t find much to laugh about. However, he has taken 
the book, and the nature of popular paper gossip, far too seriously.


Despite writing a column called Wicked Whispers, there is no wickedness in 
McEntee. Far better to read Richard Ingrams’s generous appraisal,published by 
Mail Online 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/books/article-3769597/Raise-glass-rogue-charmed-Tommy-s-widow-journalist-won-Mrs-Cooper-s-heart-husband-s-death.html>
.

As he points out, McEntee refused to write about the hours he spent with Tommy 
Cooper’s widow after the comedian’s death.

Not until she had passed away did he reveal, in The Oldie, how he fielded 
calls of commiseration to “Dove” Cooper from fellow comics such as Eric 
Morecambe, Michael Parkinson, Barry Cryer and Ronnie Barker, assuming a 
butler-like tone to tell them: “Mrs Cooper is indisposed”.

At the time, he lied to his news editor that the widow had refused to talk to 
him. Odd how Jones overlooked that.

*I’m not one to gossip, but ... Wicked whispers, William Hickey and forty 
years of blarney,by John McEntee (Biteback, £18.99)
 