
The day before the US premiere of Super Size Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/super-size-me>, Morgan Spurlock's chronicle 
of a month spent eating nothing but McDonald's, the fast-food chain announced a 
new product. Surreally, the GoActive Happy Meal comprises a salad, a bottle of 
water - and a free pedometer. "The timing was just an amazing coincidence," 
says Spurlock, arching his eyebrows as he echoes the McDonald's official line 
on the matter.

Soon after, they began phasing out Super Size meals, too. "Again - just a 
coincidence." And weeks beforehand, Jim Cantalupo, the company's burger-loving 
American chief executive, died of a heart attack. "Another amazing 
coincidence!" exclaims Spurlock - which in that instance, assuming no divine 
intervention in collaboration with his documentary's publicists, it presumably 
was. "Obviously," he adds, poker-faced, "a very sad coincidence."

Nothing about the 34-year-old's $65,000 film project seemed destined to make 
the Golden Arches wobble. Spurlock was mainly known, if at all, for a gonzo 
reality show called I Bet You Will ("We once persuaded a Wall Street trader to 
sell us the clothes off his back," he recalls. "We left him in his underwear 
and his shoes at eight in the morning.") And in any case, McDonald's executives 
must have reasoned, who really wants to watch someone shovel away 90 
consecutive meals of clammy burgers, buckets of fries, plasticky cheese and 
gallons of Coke, just in case it sends them into some sort of grotesque 
physical and mental meltdown?

Well, yes, exactly: everyone does! "That's the great thing," says Spurlock, 
now apparently recovered from his ordeal and lounging next to a huge plate of 
pastries - barely touched, incidentally - at London's Dorchester hotel. "You 
already have an investment in the movie just because you want to know what 
happens to this guy. It's a great way to take the edge off a very preachy 
subject." At the US box office the film has taken over $10m.

Spurlock's journey to dietary hell is the core of the film - the rules are 
that he must eat everything on the menu at least once during the month, and 
must always answer "yes" to the question: "Would you like to Super Size that?" 
But following the Mary Poppins principle about a spoonful of sugar - though in 
fact there are 48 such teaspoonfuls, Spurlock claims, in McDonald's 
largest-sized Coke - Super Size Me also manages to weave in a powerful argument 
about the politics of food.

The result, which won Spurlock the best director award at the Sundance film 
festival this year, has also provoked an increasingly loud and co-ordinated 
response from McDonald's, and from several individuals who have taken it upon 
themselves to conduct rival binges to try to discredit him. In Australia, 
cinema-goers get to watch a McDonald's ad arguing that the film they are about 
to see is full of misleading distortions. (The firm refused to co-operate with 
the movie itself. "Our research," says Nick Hindle, a spokesman for McDonald's 
UK, "showed that he'd done a few programmes on MTV betting people to eat butter 
wrapped in hairballs. It didn't seem like the kind of thing we should respond 
to.")

Spurlock's month starts off pleasantly enough - for one day. On the second 
day, he vomits graphically out of a car window, the camera following every 
splatter. "We put that in for the kids," he explains. By the fourth day, he is 
complaining of "weird pulsing feelings" in his stomach, and then his penis. 
"About seven days in, I started to notice this pressure on my chest, and by day 
nine I was getting incredibly depressed," he remembers. He had become addicted, 
he maintains. "I would eat the food and feel fantastic for about an hour. Then 
I'd feel depressed again." About halfway through, he starts complaining of 
headaches. This is also the point at which we see Spurlock's girlfriend - a 
vegan chef - tell the camera that he's "having a hard time getting it up".

Soon after, the doctors monitoring his condition stop treating it as a joke 
and warn him that his liver is "turning to pâté"; by the end of the month, 
Spurlock has gained a tenth of his original body weight and his cholesterol has 
increased by 65 points. "Though we've yet to see Morgan Spurlock's medical 
records," says Hindle at McDonald's. "All we can do is take it at face value."

Subtlety isn't Spurlock's forte, but Super Size Me is more than a simple 
tirade against McDonald's. The original inspiration was the legal action filed 
on behalf of two New York teenagers whose parents claimed the chain was 
responsible for their obesity - "I thought they were crazy," Spurlock recalls. 
"Are we so litigious in America that we're going to sue a company for selling 
us the food we buy?" But the company's response irked him just as much. "A 
spokesman for McDonald's comes on TV and says listen, you can't link our food 
to these girls being obese. Our food is healthy, it's nutritious. So I said, 
well, if it's that good for me, shouldn't I be able to eat it for 30 days 
straight with no side-effects? To live the all-American diet of over-eating and 
under-exercising, and be fine?"

This, of course, is where the film's logic falters: a three-McDonald's-a-day 
diet is so extreme that it seems, at face value, unlikely to reveal much about 
more realistic levels of overindulgence. Spurlock pleads artistic licence: 
plenty of people eat at McDonald's five or six times a week, "and if you're 
doing that, let's be realistic. You're not going home and eating humus 
sandwiches and then going to the gym." It's to his credit, though, that one of 
the film's best interviewees seems to undermine his point that a fast-food diet 
is necessarily nutritionally catastrophic: Don Gorske, a Wisconsin man, walked 
into a McDonald's in 1972, ordered nine Big Macs over the course of that first 
day, and has eaten almost nothing else since, clocking up almost 20,000 
burgers. He's not fat.

By the end of the film, Spurlock's perspective on who should take the blame 
for fast-food-induced obesity turns out to be surprisingly nuanced. It's only 
really the McDonald's marketing - not its menus, nor the sheer fact of its 
existence - that seems to provoke him. "If you saw someone pouring $1.4bn into 
encouraging people to eat apples," he says, a reference to the amount 
McDonald's spends in a single year on radio, television and print advertising, 
"you'd see apple sales go through the roof. Suddenly, you'd have Justin 
Timberlake on TV going: 'Man, I love apples! You should eat some apples too! 
Look at me - I'm running, and I'm eating apples ...'"

He hasn't been back inside a McDonald's since the end of his experiment - 
"luckily, they have this wonderful smell of deep-fried cleaning solvent that 
you only get in their stores." He has eaten the food, though, "and it just 
doesn't taste like food to me any more. The french fries taste like smoked 
plastic. If I take a bite of a Big Mac, it'll taste great in that instant, and 
then I'll chew it up and swallow it and I'll get this aftertaste in my mouth, 
this ... McFilm, that I can't really describe."

He has a few days to kill in London, and thought about going to see the London 
Eye. But then again, "someone told me I gotta go get a Wimpy's". He seems 
genuinely torn.

· Super Size Me is released on September 10.
 