
I quite like the idea of beaches. The idea. In the abstract, that sun and sea 
and rest all seem rather appealing. As I type this article, with the rain 
beating down outside and deadlines clamouring all around me, a seaside holiday 
seems like a fine plan. But I know that when I get there, I'll ruin it.

At first it will be great. I'll swim. I'll eat sandwiches. I'll swim again. 
I'll apply more suntan cream. And then? Ten minutes will have passed and there 
will be an entire day – an entire week – of enforced idleness before me. I will 
start worrying. I'll start to see time slipping away like sand through a glass. 
No, worse, like the sand that lies all around me. All of it wasted. Not even 
moving. Not even making as much of an impression on the world as its fellow 
sand that measures out the hours in egg timers and is at least useful as a 
metaphor for lost opportunity.
 Geoff Dyer, Out of Sheer Rage In the Shadow of D. H. Lawrence by Dyer, Geoff 
( Author ) ON Feb-02-2012, Paperback 
And that's only the start. Soon will come the thoughts about all the more 
constructive things I could be doing instead of lolling about like so much dead 
meat on that sandy waste. Still more painful will be the thoughts of the more 
constructive things other people are doing. I'll start to consider achievement. 
I'll recall the fact that Kurt Cobain was 10 years younger than me when he 
died. I'll remember Rimbaud had given up poetry by the time he turned 21. I'll 
be keenly aware that all I'm doing to counter the balance is lying around doing 
nothing. I'll know that Vanilla Ice had his entire career in the time I've 
spent frying up beside the sea. So I'll know that Vanilla Ice is better than me.

Such thoughts are not entirely healthy, I know. The answer, of course, is to 
immerse myself in a good book: something distracting and improving all rolled 
into one. Better still, a book by an author who feels that he is doing as 
little as I am and is just as worried about it. Better still, a book by someone 
who can make me laugh about such agitations, and by a strange alchemy make them 
seem constructive and useful. Best of all, I'll re-read Out Of Sheer Rage by
Geoff Dyer <https://www.theguardian.com/books/geoff-dyer>.

You don't need to look any further than the opening to see why this book is 
such a good fit with my coastal angst:

"Looking back it seems, on the one hand, hard to believe that I could have 
wasted so much time, could have exhausted myself so utterly, wondering when I 
was going to begin my study of DH Lawrence; on the other, it seems equally hard 
to believe that I ever started it, for the prospect of embarking on this study 
of Lawrence accelerated and intensified the psychological disarray it was meant 
to delay and alleviate."

But of course, having read that effortlessly elongated first sentence, you'll 
want to read on. Actually, now I've written that, I realise that you probably 
don't even have to read the first sentence. The title itself was enough for me. 
Has a book ever had a better name than Out Of Sheer Rage?

The line comes from DH Lawrence <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dhlawrence>
. On 5 September 1914 he wrote: "Out of sheer rage I've begun my book on Thomas 
Hardy. It will be about anything but Thomas Hardy I am afraid – queer stuff – 
but not bad."

Dyer's book is similarly queer, and similarly avoids the topic of Lawrence. 
Except, somehow, he also manages to make a gorgeously eloquent defence of the 
author's genius. Mercifully, he avoids the overstuffed sofa novels like Sons 
And Lovers, preferring to focus on letters like the one that provides the quote 
about rage. There's a tremendous sense of discovery as Dyer uses these to 
reveal a Lawrence of passion, compassion and – this may surprise those who 
dislike the novels – self-deprecating wit. A man who could laugh at the "dark 
and sinister effect" of the newspaper photographs of his bearded older self; 
describe his younger self as "a bright young prig in a high collar like a 
curate".

Dyer himself is also very funny. I roared with laughter, for instance, the 
first time I read his account of watching a documentary meant to boost the 
tourist credentials of Lawrence's birthplace Eastwood, but which really only 
emphasises how much the bearded author "hated" it and everything in it. And how 
about the cruel perfection of this description of literary academics: "A group 
of wankers huddled in a circle, backs turned to the world so that no one could 
see them pulling each other off."

And if that doesn't exactly fit the holiday mood, the book is full of sunny 
descriptions of Paris, Rome, Mexico, New Mexico and, yes, beaches. It's true 
that Dyer is generally on the move rather than lying on the sand. He is 
frequently engaged in literary pilgrimage. But don't worry. He also expertly 
demonstrates the folly of such excursions. Here he is on the moment of arrival 
at one of Lawrence's houses: "you look and try to summon up feelings which 
don't exist. You try saying to yourself, 'DH Lawrence lived here'. You say, 'I 
am standing in the place he stood, seeing the things he saw … ' but nothing 
changes, everything remains exactly the same: a road, a house with sky above it 
and the sea glinting in the distance."

Ideal! That's bound to make me feel better about doing nothing and going 
nowhere. Especially since reading this book is the very opposite of a waste of 
time. It is an education and a delight.
 