 <http://www.flickr.com/photos/athenedonald/8531333315/> 
Today is International Women's Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/international-womens-day>, 101 years old 
this year. This celebrates women in all walks of life and should remind us both 
of the many women from around the world who can inspire future generations and 
also those suffering or disadvantaged for whatever reason. Let me use this day 
not to remind readers of all the negative aspects surrounding "women in 
science", of which there are many – just as in business or law or any of the 
other professions. No, let me for once celebrate the progress that is slowly 
being made in the changing culture of the academic lab, which should ultimately 
allow many more men and women to succeed, to feel they belong and so to 
contribute to both research outcomes and (directly or indirectly) to the 
country's economic strength.

For too many women, for too long, life as a serious scientist has seemed 
unobtainable or, perhaps worse, so unpleasant that they have no desire to 
battle on; they give up the good fight in increasing numbers as they move along 
the ladder. It isn't usually a case of overt discrimination; it isn't even 
something as simple to fix as provision of good childcare, although that can 
help. Rather the problems often lie in the small things that discourage and 
ultimately drive out too many potential stars. All surveys show that across the 
disciplines the numbers fall steadily, sometimes dramatically, as you progress 
up the career ladder, regardless of the starting proportion of undergraduates 
setting out (which varies from less than 30% women in physics to over 60% in 
biology). At professorial level the numbers are pitiful even in biology, where 
there are fewer than 20% women.

It is very easy to get angry about this and rightly so. So what do I think is 
worth celebrating? What I think has changed is that we are beginning to move on 
from a situation where women are seen as the problem to one where the culture 
is seen as the major issue. It isn't that long ago that a very supportive 
colleague of mine suggested that maybe I should take voice-coaching to teach me 
how to lower my voice so I was more effective in meetings. I took it in the 
friendly spirit intended but I was outraged by the suggestion. If talking 
rubbish in a low, gravelly voice is seen as better than talking (I hope) sense 
in a higher tone, then it isn't surprising that so many committees make bad 
decisions. That sort of 'advice' aligns with the deficit model: that it is the 
women who need fixing and then they can fit right in with the norm, i.e. the 
men. But I do think this sort of approach is beginning to fade and with it some 
of the many microinequities that have added up to the major inequalities we are 
too used to seeing.

Additionally we are beginning to collect the explicit evidence of how the 
inherent culture we are brought up in affects everyone's behaviour, men and 
women. Scientists like evidence, as I was reminded in a recent meeting on 
gender issues. Here, the head of one of my university's science departments was 
trying to claim that they had been trying hard for years to appoint and promote 
more women and the numbers were still dismal. What evidence was there, he 
asked, that women were being systematically disadvantaged when everyone was 
trying so hard? I pointed him to arecent publication 
<http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2012/09/14/1211286109.full.pdf+html?sid=2b55a58d-6da7-4346-a9c6-ce473e1ee445>
 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) which showed 
how, when presented with literally identical CVs but labelled with male or 
female names, the 'women' fared worse than the 'men' when the question was 
posed 'would you hire this person and at what salary?' (Fellow blogger Jenny 
Rohn wrote about this paperearlier 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/occams-corner/2012/sep/25/2>.) Men and women 
faculty alike exhibited unconscious bias against female CVs. Presented with 
this evidence, the head of department instantly realised the problem was 
different and more subtle than he had appreciated.

That PNAS paper has been a wake-up call for many. We are all prone to 
unconscious bias, a point made inone 
<http://libsta28.lib.cam.ac.uk:2162/nature/journal/v495/n7439/full/495033a.html>
 of this week's series of articles in Nature on women in science; this isn't 
about women slagging off men (or vice versa), we are all potentially liable to 
exhibit this sort of behaviour. Recognizing this is the first step to 
overcoming the failing; it moves from being 'unconscious' to 'conscious' and 
then something can be done. As this recognition becomes pervasive I am 
encouraged to believe we will see adjustments to how recruitment and promotion 
is done.

The next stage will be a wider appreciation that, just because an individual 
may approach a problem in a way that is seen as unusual, it doesn't mean it is 
wrong; in other words, women don't 'lack' anything fundamental to being a good 
scientist. For the less than over-confident male this may be just as helpful as 
for the stereotypical woman who doesn't like to put herself forward. For 
researchers of either sex who prefer team-working to attempting to become a 
solo leading light, this too may be beneficial. Rewarding bullish, even 
aggressive characters because they can make a lot of noise and sound as if they 
know what they are talking about is not really good for science, but too often 
it can happen.

Recently reading a whole bunch of reference letters for quite senior 
scientists, most of whom were male as were most of the writers (inevitably), I 
was struck by phrases that I don't think I'd have seen a decade ago, about how 
various individuals were perceived as modest, quiet, undemonstrative or private 
(words written in terms of admiration) just as often as they were described as 
controversial or behaving like a megalomaniac (when it was clear these were not 
intended as complimentary terms!). This is healthy too if it means the 
domineering and self-serving character is no longer equated with someone who 
deserves to get on.

So, our society may still struggle with issues around the gendering of what is 
instilled in our children from the earliest years – be it dissecting worms or
taking risks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/occams-corner/2012/dec/13/exams-secondary-schools>
 – but maybe there is a better appreciation about how to ensure that talented 
men and women can both succeed in scientific careers. We don't need a'macho' 
culture 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/jun/17/women-science-athene-donald>
 (that word encompasses actions by both men and women in my book), we don't 
need overbearing behaviour to trump skill, and we do need to recognize that 
there are many different ways of approaching scientific challenges. For the 
good of our nation and the wise-spending of you, the tax-payer's money, let us 
ensure that the 'best' can succeed at science, whatever the best may look like 
and particularly when it isn't simply a clone of what preceding generations 
have looked like. Today, on International Women's Day, let us celebrate the 
progress that I believe is being made and hope that in years to come no one 
considers the topic of 'women in science' interesting enough to be worthy of 
comment on such a day as this.

• Athene Donald is a Professor of Experimental Physics at the University of 
Cambridge and tweets as@athenedonald <http://twitter.com/athenedonald>
 