
An hour or so before midnight, it was already clear that a wake was setting in 
at the Beverley Hilton Hotel, where the youngsters for McCarthy roamed in great 
numbers in and around the grand ballroom.

The percentage gap between McCarthy's lead over Kennedy was shrinking every 
quarter hour or so, as the returns form Los Angeles County began to overtake 
McCarthy's anticipated strength in Northern California. It was a young and 
doughty crowd, gamely but hopelessly trying to keep its spirit up.

In this country, at any rate, only the very pure in heart love a loser. And it 
seemed a good idea to move on to the victory boy at the Ambassador. Wilshire 
Boulevard is one of the longest of the long straight avenues that bisect the 
huge east-west spread of this city, and at such a time it seemed as long as a 
Roman road. The hotel's driveway was a miniature freeway in a traffic jam, and 
the human traffic inside the foyer was almost worse.

Fighting word

But at last, through the strutting cops and guards and the elated crowd and 
the din of whistles and cheers, it was possible to reach the north ballroom, a 
bone-white glare of light seen at the far end of the lobby.

Security is a fighting word at the Kennedy headquarters anywhere, and not 
without reason. You had to have a special Kennedy press card to acquire the 
privilege of being suffocated in the ballroom, and no other credentials for a 
reporter would do. I had only a general press card, a McCarthy badge, a 
driver's licence, and such other absurdities. So I turned back and thought of 
fighting the way back home.

But just alongside the guarded entrance to the north ballroom was another 
door, around which a pack of ecstatic faces, black and white, was jostling for 
some kind of privilege view. There was a guard there, too, and a Kennedy man 
who recognised me, caught in the general wash, squeezed me through into an 
almost empty room. It was like being beached by a tidal wave.

The place was no longer than about 40 feet. It was a small private dining 
room, fitted out as a press room. There was a long trestle table against one 
wall loaded with typewriters and telephones and standing by were a few 
middle-aged lady operators taking a breather.

In one corner was a booming television set switching between the rumblings of 
defeat at the McCarthy hotel and the clamour of victory in the adjacent 
ballroom. A fat girl wearing a Kennedy straw hat sucked a coke through a straw. 
There were15 or 20 of us at most, exchanging campaign reminiscences and making 
the usual hindsight cracks at the Kennedys.

Kennedy's press secretary had promised that once the Senator had saluted his 
army he would go down from the ballroom stage and come to see us through the 
kitchen that separated our retreat from the ballroom.

It was just after midnight. A surge of cheers and a great swivelling of lights 
heralded him, and soon he was upon the rostrum with his eager, button-eyed wife 
and Jessie Unruh, his massive campaign manager. It took minutes to get the 
feedback boom out of the mikes but at last there was a kind of subdued uproar 
and he said he first wanted to express "my high regard to Don Drysdale for his 
six great shut-outs." (Drysdale is a base pitcher whose Tuesday night feat of 
holding his sixth successive opposing teams to no runs has made him legend.)

It was the right, the wry Kennedy note. He thanked a list of helpers by name. 
He thanked "all those loyal Mexican Americans" and "all my friends in the black 
community." Then he stiffened his gestures and style and said it only went to 
show that "all those promises and all those party caucuses have indicated that 
the people of the United States want a change."

Cheers and tears

He congratulated McCarthy on fighting his principles . He hoped that now there 
might be "a debate between the Vice-President and perhaps myself." He flashed 
his teeth again in his chuckling, rabbity smile and ended, "My thanks to all of 
you - and now it's on to Chicago and let's win there."

A delirium of cheers and lights and tears and a rising throb of "We want 
Bobby! We want Bobby! We want Bobby!"

He tumbled down from the rostrum with his aides and bodyguards about him. He 
would be with us in 20 seconds, half a minute at most. We watched the swinging 
doors of the kitchen. Over the gabble of the television there was suddenly from 
the direction of the kitchen a crackle of sharp sounds. Like a balloon popping.

An exploded flash bulb maybe, more like a man banging a tray several times 
against a wall. A half-dozen or so of us trotted to the kitchen door and at the 
moment time and life collapsed. Kennedy and his aides had been coming on 
through the pantry. It was now seen to be not a kitchen but a regular serving 
pantry with great long tables and racks of plates against the wall.

Shouts and screams

He was smiling and shaking hands with a waiter, then a chef in a high white 
hat. Lots of Negroes, naturally, and they were glowing with pride, for he was 
their man. Then those sounds from somewhere, from a press of people on or near 
a steam table. And before you could synchronise you sight and thought, Kennedy 
was a prone bundle on the greasy floor, and two or three others had gone down 
with him. There was an explosion of shouts and screams and the high moaning 
cries of mini-skirted girls.

The doors of the pantry swung back and forth and we would peek in on the 
obscene disorder and reel back again to sit down, then to glare in a stupefied 
way at the nearest friend, to steady one boozy woman with black-rimmed eyes who 
was pounding a table and screaming, "Goddamned stinking country!" The fat girl 
was babbling faintly like a baby, like someone in a motor accident.

Out in the chaos of the ballroom, Kennedy's brother-in-law was begging for 
doctors. And back in the pantry they were howling for doctors: It was hard to 
see who had been badly hit. One face was streaming with blood. It was that of 
Paul Schrade, a high union official, and it came out that he got off lightly.

The arrest

A woman had a purple bruise on her forehead. Another man was down. Kennedy was 
looking up like a stunned choirboy from an open shirt and a limp huddle of 
limbs. Somehow, in the dependable fashion of the faith, a priest had appeared.

We were shoved back and the cameraman were darting and screaming and flashing 
their bulbs. We fell back again from the howling pantry into the haven of the 
pressroom.

Suddenly, the doors opened again and six or eight and police had a curly black 
head and blue-jeaned body in their grip. He was a swarthy, thick-featured 
unshaven little man with a tiny rump and a head fallen over, as if he had been 
clubbed or had fainted perhaps.

He was lifted out into the big lobby and was soon off in some mysterious place 
"in custody." On the television Huntley and Brinkley were going on in their 
urbane way about the "trends" in Los Angeles and the fading McCarthy lead in 
Northern California.

A large woman went over and beat the screen, as if to batter these home-screen 
experts out of their self-possession. We had to take her and say, "Steady" and 
"Don't do that." And suddenly the screen went berserk, like a home movie 
projector on the blink. And the blurred, whirling scene we had watched in the 
flesh came wobbling in as a movie.

First sinister note

Then all the "facts" were fired or intoned from the screen. Roosevelt Grier, a 
300lb coloured football player and a Kennedy man, had grabbed the man with the 
gun and overwhelmed him. A Kennedy bodyguard had taken the gun, a .22 calibre. 
The maniac had fired straight at Kennedy and sprayed the other bullets around 
the narrow pantry.

Kennedy was now at the receiving hospital and soon transferred to the Good 
Samaritan. Three neurologists were on their way. He had been hit in the hip, 
perhaps, but surely in the shoulder and "the mastoid area." There was the first 
sinister note about a bullet in the brain.

In the timelessness of nausea and dumb disbelief we stood and sat and stood 
again and sighed at each other and went into the pantry again and looked at the 
rack of plates and the smears of blood on the floor and the furious guards and 
the jumping-jack photographers.

It was too much to take in. The only thing to do was to touch the shoulder of 
the Kennedy man who had let you in and get out on to the street and drive home 
to the top of the silent Santa Monica Hills, where pandemonium is rebroadcast 
in tranquillity and where a little unshaven guy amuck in a pantry is slowly 
brought into focus as a bleak and shoddy villain of history.
 