
'If I knew I was going to live this long, I would have taken better care of 
myself'
 Steve Earle, reformed country-and-western hellraiser 

When Alex Higgins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-higgins> decided 
last week to cancel his improbable return to snooker because of an appointment 
with his dentist, he no doubt raised sniggers among the many people he has let 
down over the years and disappointed a fair number of ghouls.

It was always a mad plan. The minute he lodged his £30 deposit to play in the 
Benson and Hedges championship at the TowersSnooker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/snooker> Club in Mansfield this week, cynics 
must have outnumbered believers by a hundred to one. The one, most likely, was 
Alex. And anyone else who imagined for a minute they would be witnessing even 
the faintest resemblance of the old Hurricane was flirting foolishly with 
nostalgia. He could fairly be said to have escaped embarrassment by the skin of 
his teeth.

But this is no joke. The man's immediate need is not sham applause and a brief 
flit across the headlines again but urgent attention to the residual effects of 
his fight with cancer of the palate and the throat. Because he has come through 
so many crises, some people imagine he will continue to do so. In excerpts from 
his unauthorised biography on Higgins - published in the Observer Sports 
Monthly two weeks ago - Bill Borrows describes in painful detail the decline of 
snooker's most self-destructive child.

Apart from the chronicling of his drink-shattered life and his fight with 
cancer and penury, the most telling observation is that of a former manager, 
who says: 'He'll live to 70, that bastard. On and off the table, he is a total 
survivor.' That is a glib view, although you would not wish Higgins an early 
demise. Still, it is apparent that all the damage of his wild past has been 
visited on him at 53 - and he looks at least 10 years older than that. Like 
that other Belfast Cowboy, George Best, Higgins has enjoyed to the full the 
fruits of his gifts. Like Best, he has ignored every red light.

The first time I saw Higgins, 30 years ago, he had a complete set of gleaming 
gnashers and moved like a leprechaun with a firecracker in his trousers. His 
drug that night in a small working men's club was lager, lots of it, and the 
pint did not exist that could slow his whirring progress at the table as he 
potted the ball at will. His cue carved upwards like a scimitar after each shot 
(nobody in snooker could play like that), his eyes were on fire and he smiled 
in that sad, urgent way of a man who couldn't wait for the next thrill. You 
sensed his inclination was not to take better care of himself. And you wondered 
how long he would last. He was a country-and-western soundtrack waiting to 
happen.

Every image of the Hurricane now is storm damage. His empty eyes gaze out on 
who knows what. His bony arms and legs, his thin hair flickering like his 
talent, the almost audible heartbeat of sympathy welling beyond the table in 
the half-dark of echoing halls... these things, and his rush towards 
self-crucifixion through booze and ill-temper, are what's left of Alex Higgins.

He last blew our way in a competitive match in the August of 1997, going out 
in the world championship qualifiers at Plymouth Pavilions, and we did not 
imagine we'd see him or his like again. If he'd managed to drag his ravaged 
body to the table in Mansfield on Wednesday at 10am (not his favourite time of 
day) to play Lee Stick, a 22-year-old ranked 153rd in the world, it would not 
have constituted blasphemy to describe the scene as a resurrection.

Friends said he wanted one last fling, a hopeless try at the title he won in 
1978 and 1981. Really? I don't think even Higgins is addled enough to think he 
could win another tournament. 'He still loves the game,' said one friend, Colin 
Maguire. 'He misses his fans and the crowd.' That's more like it. He pines for 
the acclaim. When he's lost everything else, he's still got his memories and, 
selectively, they must all be glorious ones. What he doesn't need is false 
hope. Maguire, who sounds like a patient and loyal friend, said Higgins's 
health had improved in recent months, that he had been playing exhibitions 
against Jimmy White and 'he can still knock in 70 or 80 breaks'. If so, this is 
dramatically at odds with other sightings of Higgins struggling to beat clones 
of the Young Hurricane for small change in clubs around Belfast.

Whatever the state of his snooker, Higgins had laid down another £200 fee for 
the world championship in Sheffield next February, where, a decade apart and a 
long time ago, he twice lifted not only the cup but the hearts of the nation, 
crying with his girl on his arm and his child in his arms. Can you see it now? 
But Higgins has to win 12 qualifying tournaments to get back to the Crucible, 
where he last played in 1994. It's not going to happen.

Stephen Hendry a lot of class when told Higgins was making a comeback. It 
would have been easy to dismiss it as a stunt or a farce, given Alex's history. 
But he didn't. 'Some players should remember this game wouldn't be where it is 
but for Alex Higgins,' said Hendry, who admired him for 'having a go'. He knew 
why Higgins was doing it, and it wasn't just for the paltry money. Only another 
champion, perhaps, could know the extreme sense of loss Higgins must be 
feeling, but he has to let go some time. And his time came and went years ago.

Higgins, like Steve Earle, is not alone in struggling to identify The Hill - 
the one over which we all go, sooner or later. One can only wonder, for 
instance, how close to the big tumble is Paul Gascoigne. If you can't cut it 
with the Yanks, if the New Zealanders don't want you, if you don't make it to 
Exeter City for an interview... none of this encourages the view that a fading 
football star is on the verge of a rousing comeback, or even a quiet farewell. 
As with Higgins, Gazza has only his talent and residual charisma as shields 
against alcohol and mayhem. When the media confronted him outside his house 
after his wife had left him, he responded by offering to take them on at 
football. It was all he had.

While David Seaman has betrayed none of the off-field indiscretions that have 
afflicted Higgins and Gascoigne, his dramatic loss of form suggests he will 
soon be confronted by the toughest choice of his career: when to go. If he is 
as astute as he seems, Seaman will not let 'Yorkshire pride' get in the way of 
making the right decision. For Higgins, meanwhile, the imminent suffering is 
more physical. For all his sins, it's hard not to feel deeply sorry for him. 
The Higgins I will always see is the one from 30 years ago. The trouble is, 
that's the one he sees, too.
 