
It’s been a few weeks since you told me you wanted a professional relationship 
with me – no doubt you think this is appropriate as we work at the same 
institution. But you seem to have forgotten that we have three children 
together and a professional relationship does not really cover their needs.

You probably think my avoiding you at work is unprofessional. But whose is the 
greater ethical crime? Does it really affect our kids if I do not engage with 
you at meetings or at service activities? Probably not. But it does affect them 
when you do not engage on co-parenting issues such as their birthdays, whether 
I decide to move on or not, and finance.

But what about us? We managed two years of separation well. The kids felt 
secure when we got on well and we enjoyed it on the whole. We were the Gwyneth 
Paltrow and Chris Martin of our community. I was proud of that and so were the 
kids. There were bumps along the way, largely to do with incoming gossip and a 
lack of communication but, really, we did well.

Now we cannot stand the sight of each other. A relatively mild complaint from 
me was the cause of you ending our “friendship”. You said to me, in the way in 
which you talk to your 14-year-old students (you need to do something about 
that patronising manner of yours) that it was the straw that broke the camel’s 
back. In which case, I can only suggest that your camel is a pretty spineless 
creature or that you simply grasped an opportunity to cut me out of your life.

I have tried to communicate with you: first, to get back on an even keel and 
restore the friendship; second, to co-parent effectively. But my emails are 
dismissed (“stop sending me emails like this”) or ignored – even when they 
involve our children’s wellbeing. I have suggested mediation (“You go to 
counselling if you want. I won’t”). I wonder about your maturity, given the 
evidence that you are unable to put aside our differences and display a united 
front for our kids. Is your pride more important than they are?

So I am leaving, it seems.

It means leaving our youngest with you. Do not be flattered into thinking he 
particularly wants to live with you. We all know he would rather live with me. 
He just doesn’t want to leave his school and his friends. Our middle child says 
I shouldn’t go because you will not be able to care properly for his brother in 
terms of feeding him a healthy diet and watching his back at school. After all, 
that was always my job. I send you emails about that and you don’t reply. You 
don’t appear to be acting on any of it from what I am told by our son’s 
teachers. Can I trust you to do these things if I leave?

So take a long, hard look at yourself as a father and as an ex-husband.

You may be feeling very happy with yourself, having found a pretty young woman 
and no doubt she is satisfying your needs – I hope you will be happy with her. 
Please consider her motives and don’t make a fool of yourself.

And don’t risk our kids’ inheritance – I don’t suppose you have written a will 
yet. We were together for 20 years. While I was certainly not a perfect wife, I 
played an important role in your life and career and to be reduced to being 
referred to as a “professional relationship” is heartless of you. I was your 
lover and best friend, career counsellor and financial manager. And, most 
importantly, I am still the mother of your three children.

As for me, I know I will be happier if I don’t see you every day. I am already 
happier now that I don’t have to worry about your moods and long silences, your 
lack of empathy, your opinions on my underwear, my hair, my clothes, my shoes. 
Finally I can get back to being myself, if I can ever find that person again.

Your loving ex-wife
 