
Anniversaries should be happy times – times to celebrate the years that have 
gone before and those that will hopefully come after. And all of them have 
been. Yet ours have always been tinged with regret that I have not been fully 
with you all these years. An older man asked recently “How’s married life – 
it’s amazing they still love us, isn’t it?” His pithy statement said so much 
about marriage, about how much us men get wrong (such as how to clean the 
kitchen counter). But the truth is, I am scared that you would hate me if I 
were to confess how terrible a husband I have been.

We knew about my depression before we were engaged. You gave me the courage to 
seek professional help, and you decided to stick by me, knowing that it was 
going to be a long haul.

I also mentioned my cross-dressing. But I never opened up fully enough for us 
to address it properly. I was always embarrassed by it, but I know this is no 
excuse. It is true that I have never felt safe enough to admit this, but 
ultimately I am in control of what I say.

Early on in married life you found women’s clothing that I had bought. I did 
not admit to you the depth of my addiction: that I would drive miles to buy a 
secondhand dress advertised online or that I would specifically go to shops 
further out of town so I could browse women’s clothes without being seen by 
anyone, or slept in dresses when you were on a night shift, or the time spent 
online trawling through clothes, wigs, makeup tutorials.

I was not honest about my use of porn, either; you gave me opportunities to 
confess and I chose to lie. I lied about how much women’s clothing I had bought 
in the same way an adulterer might claim he had seen his lover fewer times than 
he really had.

And like the adulterer, I have sought other women, flirted online, and flirted 
with the idea of meeting them. I have met with none, but this does not matter. 
It has terrified me that I have gone far enough to respond to personals; even 
considering doing this tells me I am often unwilling to put our marriage first.

I am disgusted that I have done all this, especially as I have no doubt of 
your love for me: as you wept by my side when we met with psychologists to 
discuss my overdose; when you collected me after I was picked up by the police 
before I could do myself harm; when you help me think through why I might be 
feeling low and what to do about it; of the laughter we have shared with each 
other and of downright silliness. In the midst of your faithfulness, I have 
been faithless.

So this anniversary I am renewing my commitment to you, especially my vow to 
“forsake all others”. I have realised, too late perhaps, that this includes 
myself. How much stronger and happier we would have been if I had not indulged 
in those behaviours.

No marriage can be perfectly happy, but retreating into the fantasy world of 
cross-dressing, porn and personals makes us unhappier as it worsens my 
depression and reduces my ability to focus on what is important: you. To say I 
am sorry is an understatement – I hope that I can live out the rest of our 
years demonstrating just how sorry I am.

Your (mostly) faithful husband
 