
I have been lying in this hospital bed for 24 hours now, waiting for your 
deathbed confession. I am pretty sure it is not going to come. You won’t salve 
your conscience by telling me the truth, because I know now that you don’t have 
one.

We both know it is a matter of days. After all the treatments we have come to 
this prognosis: that’s all I have.

With the help of friends, I have written my will 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/14/writing-a-will-dying-intestate>. 
You will benefit from my death: I have given you the house but you don’t get 
any cash. Of those friends and relatives who have brought me joy, I decided to 
show my affection by putting aside some money for their children. The remainder 
is to go to the local hospice.

You have looked me in the eye and held my hand steadily as I have pulled at 
the covers in agitation, while we have thrashed out my funeral arrangements. I 
am certain you will carry them out to the letter. You have made a promise I 
know you won’t renege on. Yes, my wishes are a little unusual, but I want 
people to remember my passing as they do me: one of a kind!

Writing a will isn’t a job you’ll relish, but it is a matter of life and death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/14/writing-a-will-dying-intestate> 
Now all that is sorted, I have given you plenty of time to admit that which 
you have covered up almost the whole time we have lived together. I don’t have 
the energy to ask you outright, because I know you will deny that ours has not 
been a mutually exclusive relationship. For whatever reasons, you denied it 
outright when I challenged you. I can only surmise that you think it would hurt 
me too much. It hurt me too much before when I found my husband with my best 
friend – I thought he wanted the same future as me. Obviously not. By the time 
you came on the scene, my body wasn’t my own. It was hard to tell you that sex 
no longer held the allure it once had. We muddled along for a while, then you 
appeared to come to terms with it: we were the best of friends, that was enough.

You helped me through all my treatments without batting an eyelid, and 
accompanied me to all my appointments, sticking your oar in when you felt 
something was being done wrong. I was reassured by your attention; we had 
something special.

Although I have loved you for all you’ve done, I will not let you say you love 
me

You have no idea that I know, but there have been a number of reports from 
people seeing you in the company of a woman. You haven’t been as clever as you 
have imagined: their descriptions of her always tallied, it was too much of a 
coincidence. I cannot imagine she doesn’t know about our situation.

I never rocked the boat because we helped each other through bad times. For 
those, for staying the course, and for all the kindnesses you’ve shown me over 
the years, I am grateful. You have tried so hard to atone for your 
transgression, and it’s undeniable: we have had a good life together. We’ve 
been to places I never thought I’d see.

But (and there has to be one), although I have loved you for all you’ve done, 
I will not let you say you love me. Not even when you bring me flowers. Because 
you don’t do you? By extension, nor do you love her. We have both been a means 
to an end. I know already you and she won’t last – your tiny conscience (such 
as it is) won’t permit it. If she crashes and burns, so be it: it’s what she 
deserves. Such are my consolations.

Goodbye.
Anonymous

• We will pay £25 for every Letter to we publish. Please write about 600-700 
words. Write toFamily <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Life, 
The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU or email 
family@theguardian.com. Please include your address and phone number.
 