
I am sorry that I haven’t written this letter before now. It has taken me four 
years to pluck up the courage. I have started it so many times in my head, but 
was afraid that you would think it presumptuous or disrespectful of me to write 
to you. It does seem strange writing to someone I have never met, but part of 
me feels that I know you so very, very well.

We read your file one morning in September. We knew the contents would be 
difficult. We never anticipated how important these details would be to us or 
how indelibly etched on our memories they would become. Yours was a story so 
far removed from our own that it took every ounce of imagination to understand 
what you must have gone through.

Later that afternoon, we received the call from our social worker to tell us 
that you had passed away. Suddenly, we knew what we had to do.

There was never any doubt. All I remember was an overwhelming desire to 
protect this little boy, to give him the love and care he deserved. And really 
that was that; as far as we were concerned, David was now our son. There were 
further meetings, questions, paperwork, panels, decisions, arrangements and 
preparations. Then, two months later, we met him for the first time. I hope the 
fact that I call him “our son” does not offend you. Sarah, you will always be 
his birth mother. But I make no apology in referring to him as our son.

For the past four years, we have loved and cared for David. We have dealt with 
his rage, and his tantrums, his confusion and his anxieties. We have played 
with him, laughed at his jokes, wrestled with him, calmed him, and nurtured 
him. David was taken away from you soon after his second birthday. I cannot 
imagine the pain that must have caused you. He was your second child, the 
second child to be taken away. It must have been devastating. We know that you 
really wanted to be a good mother to David, but you could not cope when his 
father left, and the pressure and scrutiny of the social workers meant that you 
lied to cover up your mistakes and left them without any choice but to remove 
him from your care.

It is tragic that your life ended so early, and that your addictions meant you 
were unable to prioritise your children’s needs over your own. I don’t know how 
I will explain all these things to David as he grows up, or how he will 
interpret his story and what happened to him during his early years. I hope 
that it does not cast a shadow over his life as his understanding deepens. 
I hope you can find solace in the fact that, from all this pain, Sarah, you 
have given us the most wonderful gift – an amazing little boy who is utterly 
fearless and who wears his heart so openly on his sleeve. We know the road 
ahead may not be easy, and not a day goes by when you are not in our thoughts. 
When he asks about you, we will tell him that you loved him very much and he 
will know that you will always be his birth mother.

In fact, you will always be his only mother – as we are both men. And I cannot 
help but wonder how you would feel about the fact that David has two Daddies 
and I hope that you would be accepting of that.

Nothing can take away the pain you experienced in life. It is so unfair that 
you did not receive the love and the warmth in your childhood that David now 
takes for granted. And although you never chose to hand your beautiful toddler 
over, I can only feel gratitude towards you for this wonderful little boy who 
has made our lives complete.

And I want you to know what a strong, intrepid, open and honest little chap 
you brought into this world, and one who I hope, in time, will be proud both of 
his heritage and of his adoptive family in equal measure.

Anonymous
 