
I fell for you immediately at college. You were beautiful, effervescent and 
nice to me. Even if you had been single (you weren’t), I stood no chance, being 
a gangly, unappealing and late-blooming adolescent. At best, you found me 
amusing and we were friends. 

As college drew to a close, I was distraught that our friendship didn’t exist 
beyond that setting. While others itched for graduation, to me those days were 
a countdown to the last time I’d see you. I thought of little else, and even 
wrote a song – the only one I’d ever write. I still play it occasionally and 
find it painful. The lyrics read like an extract from a diary I never kept: a 
recount of how sad I felt. 

We both left college and by chance, took jobs with the same company, so the 
parting didn’t happen. Mostly, we still got on well, but I found myself 
overcome with jealousy on company nights out when you chatted with other men. I 
got drunk many times and contrived an argument, which was unfair. I suspect by 
then you knew why I behaved that way, but you didn’t want to embarrass me by 
broaching it. 

Eventually we each moved on and the separation I had dreaded at college 
occurred. For several months, I was heartbroken, although by then we had 
solidified a friendship that went beyond work and still occasionally saw each 
other. Seeing you less often eventually translated into thinking about you less 
often, and our friendship was healthier for it. 

Then, in our late 20s and nearly a decade after I’d originally fallen for you, 
we unexpectedly shared a drunken kiss. Having spent so long considering you 
miles beyond my league, I was taken aback. I had grown into myself during my 
20s, but in my head had never re-evaluated the implausibility of “us”. 

I was stunned again when you soberly and plainly told me that you would love 
us to explore a relationship. So we went out a few times and had fun. On paper 
this was dream fulfilment for me, but something wasn’t right. After each date I 
was uncommunicative and hesitant to arrange the next one. When you asked for an 
explanation, I shocked us both by saying that I wasn’t looking for a serious 
relationship. I know that this caused you a lot of confusion and pain. Worst of 
all, it destroyed our friendship. 

It’s now seven years since we last met. I’m in my late 30s and married, and 
you are in a relationship too. I love my wife and wouldn’t change my life, but 
I still can’t help thinking about you often. I care about you so much, but we 
aren’t in one another’s lives any more and that kills me. If you were in my 
life, I would try to give you the real explanation that you deserved but never 
received. Simply, I was a coward. I was embarrassingly immature in my 20s, 
terrified of a committed relationship, even if it was with the woman I had 
adored all my adult life. 

I would also tell you that you were – and are – amazing. I know that you have 
a family now and I genuinely hope you are happy. I’m so sorry that I treated 
you badly and that I allowed my own insecurities to keep us apart. I hope you 
found someone braver and more deserving of you.

Yours, 

Anonymous
 