
You recently celebrated a significant birthday by dining out with a few 
friends but without your own family being invited or present. Sadly, you have 
become a very isolated and lonely man and I wonder if you will ever make peace 
with your three adult sons before your life ends, or, for that matter, theirs 
do.

I visit you each Christmas to deliver your present, but keep these meetings 
very brief to minimise the chances of departing with more emotional damage: the 
scrutinising about money and continual nit-picking about my achievements or 
lack of them. You lack the insight to realise that you do this, despite the 
fact that my two brothers ceased all contact with you many years ago.

Your whole life has been dedicated to the acquisition of money and property 
and in this single pursuit you have been very successful, now being worth many 
millions of pounds. Every waking hour you spend your time focusing on how you 
might make more money and every conversation you have is centred on money. Your 
personal evaluation of all people and family is in monetary terms. How much 
they earn, how much they spend and how much they have amassed.

For reasons we cannot understand, you have perpetuated the myth that you are a 
self-made millionaire who had a tough upbringing and hard struggle to get 
started in business. As testament to this, you have determinedly withheld even 
the most basic support to your offspring, including further-education fees. 
These untruths have destroyed all respect your sons and extended family ever 
held for you.

I recently shared a holiday with my uncle (your brother), who completely 
dispelled the myth that things had been so tough in your earlier years. Money 
was tight, but your father always paid you for the work you did on his farm. He 
paid a generous cash deposit on the mortgage for your first farm purchase in 
the 1950s. You were incredibly lucky to have received a large windfall soon 
after, when some of that land was earmarked for house building.

In the early 1960s, your father advanced a large sum of money for you to 
acquire a second farm and your wealthy father-in-law frequently lent you 
equipment at no cost.

It is accepted by all who know you that two unsuccessful marriages took a 
heavy toll on your wellbeing and finances, especially the second one. However, 
the same common theme was evident in destroying these relationships. A meanness 
with resources, a lack of appreciation for others’ efforts, obsession with 
business matters and an inability to care and share with others.

Your three sons (now in their 50s) have successfully launched their own lives. 
We have good incomes, lovely homes and children. We have managed without your 
love and support and want for nothing. We enjoy good health, good relationships 
and derive huge pleasure from helping our offspring thrive and grow.

Why has it been so hard for you to do the same?

It is never too late to build bridges and correct the mistakes of the past – 
just try.

Anonymous
 