
I remember taking a late-night walk, a few months after you died, when a 
thought reduced me to tears. I was ambling along a bridge that divided my 
apartment building from your former nursing home and I thought: “You’re never 
going to see me as a person in love.”

At that time, I thought I was in love. Maybe I was. My feelings for an 
unavailable man consumed me in a way nothing else had or should. I didn’t know 
how to be apart from my thoughts about him, but I didn’t know how to be with 
him either. All my relationships were suffering as a result.

Though you loved and cared for so many in your life, I always felt that you 
also understood this kind of solitude well

Years earlier, you and I had lived together in your apartment for the summer. 
I cared for you as your Alzheimer’s was taking a turn for the worse, and I was 
between housing, between degrees, between … everything. We sat down for one of 
those long, rambling chats you loved. You were always a natural storyteller. 
The words weren’t coming so freely any more, especially in English, but still, 
you talked. I loved listening to you talk.

You told me that you were worried about me. Because some people naturally 
gravitate towards marriage and family, but I talk to myself. I knew what you 
meant, and it was true. The running feedback loop of thoughts and writing that 
had accompanied me on my life’s journey made it difficult for me to know how to 
let anybody else in.

Though you loved and cared for so many in your long life, I always felt that 
you also understood this kind of solitude well. Maybe this is one of the 
reasons why our bond was always so deep and strong.

You also told me that day, not for the first time, about your first love, the 
man who was not my grandfather, who came first, from whom war and death and 
circumstances tore you apart. You described this love with a sparkle in your 
eyes. This time, I asked what I’d been afraid to ask you before: “Did you ever 
fall in love with my grandfather?”

I’ll never forget your answer: “Love is what you make.” Love is not one thing, 
I understood from you. One great love doesn’t have to overwhelm you and swallow 
you, and all future possibility of love, whole. Life evolves and the nature of 
our love evolves with it, and our capacity to love never changes, but we have 
to find that capacity deep within ourselves. This is where the secret to 
happiness lies, and it will carry you through darker times.

I need you to know that it took a while, but my relationship to love grew 
stronger. The relationship I had with the unavailable man imploded, along with 
my job, and just about everything else. I went travelling on my own for months, 
and made a point of steering away from romantic love.

I did many things I had never done before. Yoga, meditation, thinking less 
about what I should be doing and more about what I was doing – having fun, 
connecting with kind, fascinating people, rekindling my wonder for life.

It is amazing who you will attract into your life when you are kinder to 
yourself. And I did. About a week before my scheduled flight home. Our paths 
crossed in a guesthouse garden and the puzzle pieces seemed already in place. 
It was easy. Even when it was hard. We have vastly different backgrounds and 
were more or less headed to opposite sides of the Earth. But we chose to make 
the decisions that would allow us to stay together and give things a chance.

Six years later, we have travelled far, we have dug deep, we have worked 
through many of our own demons and the ones we stirred up together. We did all 
this knowing what trust and unconditional love feels like. Because this is the 
love I made. Against whatever odds.

I am 42 now. It’s been almost 10 years since you died. I have your exact grey 
streak like a zebra stripe down the left side of my hair. I used to marvel at 
yours when I was little. People who haven’t seen me in a long time mention our 
resemblance. Thank you so much for loving me, and always holding my hand on the 
path to love.

Anonymous

• We will pay £25 for every Letter to we publish. Please write about 600-700 
words. Write toFamily <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Life, 
The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU or email 
family@theguardian.com. Please include your address and phone number.
 