
You captivated me when we first met. You were fiercely attractive and hugely 
independent, and you burned brighter than anybody else in the room. I had never 
encountered a woman like you. I feel it only fair to remind you that I also 
shone in those days, able to silence a room with a ballad sung from the heart 
or to regale people with a humorous story. I was handsome, fit, funny and 
successful. (I believe I still am.) We had lots in common – theatre, music and 
an appreciation of good food. We shared the same values and a sense of what was 
right and wrong. And in those early days, we enjoyed each other.

A year after meeting, we moved in together. Three months later, we got 
engaged. Around this time I began to lose you. Whatever the reason, we began to 
talk less. Little silences at first, that grew into days, then weeks. When I 
asked if everything was OK between us, the answer was always the same – you 
were tired, we would talk about it some other time. We never did. And in the 
silence, your anger grew.

When you did speak to me, shouting became your normal mode of communication 
and it continues to this day

We married. Had our beautiful children. Built our dream home in the 
countryside. And in the 13 years that followed, I lost you completely.

Months would pass without you even looking at me, never mind speaking. You 
began to treat me not just as a stranger, but also as an enemy. When you did 
speak to me, shouting became your normal mode of communication and it continues 
to this day. When I arrive home in the evening, I sit in my car and listen to 
you shout at our children.

In company, you talk across me, shutting me down. It is clear that I am of no 
interest to you. You isolate me by keeping day-to-day family happenings from me 
(how many times have family or friends seen a puzzled look on my face when an 
upcoming family event is mentioned?). This is how you exert your power, your 
control. But worst of all was when you started trying to enlist our children as 
soldiers in our private, pointless war. I’m not sure I can ever forgive this 
act.

Every night when the house quietens, you follow me to bed. In silence, you get 
under the bedclothes, always turn your back to me and switch off the light. No 
goodnight. Just an aching silence. In this moment, I believe I can physically 
touch loneliness. Every night for 13 years I’ve imagined you turning to me. You 
touch my arm and ask how I am. “Is everything OK?” In that moment I feel 
wanted. It never happens. I don’t reach out to you any more. Experience has 
taught me not to.

Three years ago, I convinced you to see a marriage counsellor with me. At one 
stage, I was asked what I wanted most from you. I said I simply wanted 
kindness. You just rolled your eyes. The counselling sessions ceased soon 
after. We never got to identify the source of your anger or of our difficulties.

So here I am, 47 years old. The reality is, I will never leave you because of 
our children, whom I love more than anything in this world. Maybe when they are 
older and have left home, we will part naturally.

Despite everything, sometimes I can still glimpse the beautiful woman I fell 
in love with all those years ago. I know that we are still both good people. We 
are just not good for each other. 

At my relatively young age, I believe I deserve some hope of happiness. I have 
always taken a somewhat jaundiced view of people who have affairs, believing 
their flings were usually the product of a casual physical desire, with little 
care for the consequences. But on my journey through life so far, I have come 
to understand that many physical connections made outside of marriage are as a 
result of deep, basic human need – everyone wants to feel wanted. And sometimes 
the person closest to you just can’t give you that.Anonymous

• We will pay £25 for every Letter to we publish. Write to Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Life, The Guardian, Kings 
Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU or email family@theguardian.com. Please 
include your address and phone number.
 