
It was four years ago that we found out about the cancer growing inside you. 
You called me and soberly told me the news – that it had already spread, that 
you didn’t know how long you had left. I was still at university. A parent 
dying was something that happened to other people, older people. I spent the 
first few months in shock. My precocious but naive self had always, up until 
then, assumed I’d always have the ability to control every problem that might 
come my way. But for the first time I felt powerless. I wished I could just 
reach into you and take the cancer out. But I knew there was nothing I could do.

We’ve been lucky. You responded well to treatment and you’re still 
here, though we don’t know for how much longer.

Though we’ve often talked about the cancer and what it means, in all our 
discussions over the past four years I’ve never been able to say what I really 
want to say. I’ve always wanted to say that I love you, and that I’m grateful 
for everything you’ve given me.

But I can’t. The words won’t come. It feels like there’s this unwritten rule 
in our father-son relationship that prevents it. You’re a man of a certain age, 
conservative and guarded with your emotions. You keep your feelings to yourself 
and expect others to do the same.

But I know you care. I’ve seen your proud looks when I’ve told you about my 
achievements at work and school over the years. I’ve seen your concern when 
things haven’t gone well. I remember all the offers of help.

You have always been the one person in my life I can count on. And despite our 
inability to put emotions into words, you have always been the first person 
I’ve come to when I’ve needed help.

I remember when I came back from working in Africa and I broke down in tears 
in front of you. I’d been back for several days and spoken to other people 
about my experiences, but something deep inside was waiting for me to be with 
you before I could let it all out.

I remember that while my mother and your ex-wife spent most of my childhood 
writing me off, you nurtured the potential in me. I remember all the times she 
kicked me out of her home for this or that imagined infraction, and you would 
always take me in – no questions asked.

I wish we could talk about what we mean to each other. I could tell you I love 
you, you could tell me you’re proud

You’ve taught me to believe in myself. You have showed me there are people in 
life who I can rely on. These lessons have made me resilient and they’ve 
allowed me to see the best in the world. They will stay with me even when 
you’re gone.

I’m getting married soon and I’m so glad you’ll be here to see that. I hope 
you’ll meet your grandchildren as well. I hope I can be as good a father to 
them as you were to me.

I wish we could talk about what I know we mean to each other. I wish I could 
tell you I love you and you could tell me you’re proud. I wish these absurd 
notions of masculinity weren’t so deeply ingrained in both of us. Maybe we will 
still see our way to that conversation before you go. But whatever the case, I 
just needed to say it – I love you, and thank you.

Yours,

Your son
 