
It’s Sunday, 4.50pm. In 10 minutes you will be calling. For at least 13 years 
you have always called me at 5pm on a Sunday, on the dot. I’m thinking about 
what we will discuss. Today we will talk about Brexit (you will be appalled and 
disbelieving), maybe the football, your holiday to Spain which starts tomorrow. 
You were recently diagnosed with Parkinson’s. It’s been a shock for you. You 
feel out of control. You are scared for the future. I’ll ask you how you are. 
You’ll say, “Pretty dreadful, thanks,” and laugh.

Three days ago, you killed yourself. This is going to be a difficult part of 
our conversation. How am I going to raise this touchy subject that has come up 
between us? Deep breath. Let’s tackle this head on. What on earth have you been 
up to, Dad? What have you done? Do you understand what you have put us through? 
Your partner hadn’t heard from you for 24 hours. We called you. No reply. 
Living in the south-west of France, we couldn’t pop round. We called the local 
police. Could they check? Of course, they said. Thirty minutes later, the 
mobile rings. We have found him, I’m sorry, it’s bad news, outside the house, 
he’s dead.

You’ve left me numb. Yet, strangely, I also feel a mixture of anger and 
sadness with an emptiness in my stomach. Anger that you have taken your life in 
such a brutal, horrible, catastrophic way. Anger that you have been so selfish 
and left us with so many questions and so much doubt. Sadness that you felt so 
alone, so isolated, so desperate that you could think of nothing than to take 
your life. And the emptiness that you have gone from your family’s life for 
ever.

I can’t help imagining your final moments. All of them are haunting. All these 
images come to my mind during the day and night. Was it at least quick? Were 
you crying or were you cool and collected? I keep asking why. What were you 
thinking? Why didn’t you call?

Your mother died when you were 14. You said to me that at that time you had 
never felt so alone, so vulnerable, sitting in your kitchen at home. You said 
that you resolved never to feel like that again and that making money was your 
way of protecting yourself.

Then, 59 years later, you must have felt yourself alone and vulnerable again. 
Only you had money, but money isn’t the most important thing in life; it’s 
family, friends, a connection to the world and money wasn’t enough to keep you 
safe in the end. You weren’t alone, Dad, and you not realising that makes me 
feel cross. Now you’ve left us vulnerable and confused. I don’t want you to go 
like this. I don’t think you do either. I’m sure this was an impulsive act in 
the heat of the moment and you would have regretted it straight away. I expect 
you will be telling me when you call that yes, it was a bit silly, sorry about 
that. Won’t happen again.

It’s 5pm now. The phone hasn’t rung. It’s the first time in 13 years. It 
really is true then, you’ve gone. I can’t talk to you about Brexit, footie, 
your hols. I can’t ask you why and give you a big old ear-bashing for being so 
bloody stupid. You can’t tell me it won’t happen again. Because I realise now 
that it already has and there is no going back. I guess I knew the phone 
wouldn’t ring. So today, at 5pm, we have lit a candle and drunk a bottle of 
fizz in your memory. I have no doubt you would have approved.

I really hope, Dad, that out of the trauma of your passing you have found 
peace. I expect we will eventually come to terms with this and learn to live 
with it. I’m not sure I forgive you yet but I’ll work on it. Five o’clock on a 
Sunday will never be the same again. I guess wherever I am on that day and at 
that time I’ll be thinking of you. My greatest wish is that wherever you may be 
now, you understand that we loved you very much and we really, really didn’t 
want you to go just yet.

Much love,

Mark

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 from any phone. In the 
US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, 
the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countries 
can be foundhere <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>

​
 