
I remember the thrill of first seeing you at law school orientation. You were 
radiant in a sea of dour, nervous faces. It quickly became clear that you were 
kind, down-to-earth, engaging, loyal to family and friends. By graduation, we 
were inseparable. We took the bar exam and were married. The future looked 
bright – two freshly minted lawyers with supportive families and a dream of 
starting a family of our own some day.

I started my career with the gruelling hours and high stress that are 
traditionally visited on young lawyers. You were unexpectedly ambivalent about 
finding a good job – or any job. After gentle pressure from me, and more from 
the student loan payments, you puttered around in some non-legal positions more 
suited for someone with half your education and intelligence, and which offered 
commensurately low pay.

Pregnancy – something we both wanted – diverted you to the most important job 
in the world. After a few years, we were blessed with a second child. You have 
never returned to work, although both kids have been at school full-time for 
years, and our firstborn is heading to college soon.

I’ve asked, and sometimes pleaded, for years with you to get a job, any job

I’ve climbed the professional ladder reasonably well. We have the trappings of 
middle-class success – a nice house in a safe, quiet neighborhood; annual 
holidays; happy, healthy children; money saved for their college years. But it 
has come at enormous personal cost to me. My stress level has increased 
dramatically with added responsibilities at work and my health has 
deteriorated. People who haven’t seen me for years flinch when we meet again 
and I’ve attended more than one event at which I have overheard someone 
remarking on how much I’ve aged.

I don’t think I can do this for another 25 years. I often dream of leaving my 
firm for a less demanding position, with you making up any financial deficit 
with a job – even a modest one – of your own. I’ve asked, and sometimes 
pleaded, for years with you to get a job, any job. Many of my free hours are 
spent helping with the house and the kids, and I recognise that traditional 
gender roles are often oppressive, but that cuts both ways. I would feel less 
used and alone if you pitched in financially, even a little.

That’s not going to happen. It has become clear that you are OK with my 
working myself to death at a high-stress career that I increasingly hate, 
as long as you don’t have to return to the workforce.

You keep busy volunteering, exercising and pursuing a variety of hobbies. You 
socialise with similarly situated women who also choose to remain outside the 
paid workforce. You all complain about various financial pressures, but never 
once consider, at least audibly, that you could alleviate the stress on both 
your budgets and your burnt-out husbands by earning some money yourselves.

Our family is grateful for all that we enjoy and we know that we’re far more 
fortunate than millions who work far harder than I ever have, or will. And I 
know all too well that work can be unpleasant. But I don’t want you to work so 
I can buy a Jaguar or a holiday home. I want you to work so I can get a 
different position and we can still maintain a similar standard of living.

I want you to get a job so I don’t wake up in the middle of the night worrying 
that my career is the only one between us and financial ruin. I want you to 
work so our marriage can feel more like a partnership and I can feel less like 
your financial beast of burden. I want our daughter to see you in the workforce 
and I want her to pursue a career so she is never as dependent on a man as you 
are on me, no matter how much he loves her (and he will).

But mostly I want you to get a job because I want to feel loved.

Anonymous
 