
With this letter I am tendering my resignation from kitchen duties, indeed 
general family maintenance, until there is hard evidence of mutual respect and 
consideration within the home.

For years it has been assumed that I will be the one to pick up the dropped 
socks, discard the unwanted leaflets from the newspaper, transfer the dirty 
coffee cups from the table to the dishwasher, find the misplaced trainers, 
extract the remote control from between the sofa cushions, turn off lights, 
turn on the dishwasher, drop off the forgotten homework at school, replace the 
loo roll.

But I reached my breaking point this weekend. Everyone was amused when the dog 
found a strip of mango (or perhaps he was offered it?). He played with it, 
licked it, carried it around, dropped it, nosed it, tasted it again, backed 
away. You all watched, took photos, amused yourselves and then drifted away, as 
the dog did, bored, ready for something new. I was left finishing the lunch 
tidy-up, my heart warmed by all your laughter.

Until I came across the slaughtered piece of fruit in a clump of dog hair in 
the middle of the carpet. You had all seen it and walked away.

Did it really not occur to anyone to pick it up?

I don’t mind cleaning the dog’s ears, emptying cat litter. We have chosen to 
look after them. You are not my pets

I pay the bills, do the grocery shopping, tidy the garden, sort out the car, 
take the animals to the vet, prepare meals, plan holidays, collect and wash the 
laundry – the list is endless. The house is like a business and I run it well. 
Do not abuse the relationship.

I do not mind cleaning the dog’s ears, emptying the cat-litter tray, clipping 
the bird’s nails. I do this with a heart full of love because these creatures 
need us to care for them – we have chosen to look after them. You are not my 
pets.

Perhaps I created the situation, the role growing insidiously from the 
mothering of infants and toddlers. I was building a family, a home filled with 
love and tradition and encouragement.

And look at you now! My spouse, with his growing career, each step forward 
creates another challenge to strive for, an accolade to win. My children, 
fabulous teenagers and young adults growing into yourselves, living your 
unfettered lives, able to focus, to dream, to reach for the stars.

I love you all more than anything else in this world. But something went amiss 
– I became static. It became less of a partnership, more of an assistant role. 
I became less the heart of the family, more the assumed caretaker.

No, no, you might say. You will protest that you do respect me and honour me, 
and love me. You will say, hand on heart, that I am a fabulous mother.

And I am, I really am. But here’s the nub of it: we are a family. A 
multidimensional unit that lives and loves in a mutually supportive way. I’m 
not disengaging from the family, I’m inviting you to step up and join in. My 
position is open for discussion but never again will I assume the role of chief 
cook and bottle washer. I will continue to cook at times – I love to do so – 
but only when I have the time or the inclination. I have a life to live as well.

Pizza is always an option. But someone else can place the order.

Your loving wife and mother
 