
First impressions are important, especially in the precarious world of 
internet dating. You started our date by changing the time we had agreed to 
meet, on the morning of the date itself. I accept that work sometimes gets in 
the way. I know that you are self-employed and I understand that, so I agreed.

But then you were late. You sent a message to let me know that you were on 
your way and would definitely be coming, the inference being that you might not 
make it on time. But then you were a whole hour late. That’s a long time to be 
left hanging and wondering whether you are not just being made one massive fool 
of. I left, feeling angry and humiliated and sent you a message saying “Hi and 
bye”.

You sent an effusively apologetic message when you arrived to find that I had 
gone. It was kind of endearing and at least I felt vindicated for having turned 
up at all. I responded and you suggested dinner (a huge step up from coffee 
when you haven’t even met someone), which was disproportionate. A drink would 
have done. Besides, I already had plans to go out. I replied saying that I 
could meet for a quick coffee. Then … nothing. I sent another message. Again 
nothing. I stuck around for another 15 minutes. Where were you? You just went 
off the radar. Your response eventually arrived 45 minutes later, after I had 
given up (again) and gone home. But you did at least apologise.

Did you really not have access to email alerts all day? You seem to when you 
need to

I slept on it and decided maybe it really was just a “series of unfortunate 
events” and I’d give you the benefit of the doubt. I thought I should suggest 
that we could try again to meet up. So I sent you a message the following 
morning. But then – nothing. I was left hanging for the entire day.

Considering what had happened on Saturday I would have thought you would try 
to make up for lost ground given the mishaps of the day before. Did you really 
not have access to email alerts all day? You seem to when you need to.

By 10pm, I had had enough and needed closure. I sent a final message ending it 
(whatever “it” was). It was brief, pertinent, not offensive.

Of all the reactions I anticipated (including angry, bitter, distant, 
apologetic – or, most likely, nothing at all), I didn’t expected the one that I 
got.

Never, ever tell an angry woman to calm down. Certainly don’t attach my name 
to that phrase and then follow it with, “Where are we meeting up and when? xxx.”

That is dismissive of my feelings and presumptuous. It suggests you have no 
awareness of the effect of your actions – or lack of them – on someone else. 
Your over-familiar use of my name and ending the message with those three 
kisses suggests an intimacy we don’t have. I feel you are insinuating me into a 
relationship that does not exist. This is a non-existent relationship that is 
already causing me problems – and we haven’t even met.

I have already escaped one controlling relationship. It took a huge amount of 
effort and a long time to heal. I am extremely sensitive to the possibility 
that I might become part of something that follows a similar course. I am very 
wary of making the same mistake. In spite of this, I strive to be balanced and 
reasonable in matters of the heart. But I have been left with the feeling that 
I am somehow behaving in an unreasonable and neurotic way.

I am not someone’s afterthought so you will forgive me if I don’t jump at your 
latest offer. I wish you luck in finding someone to have a relationship with. 
But that person won’t be me.

Your date that never was
 