
Our first five years together were great. I was your second daughter, you 
loved me and I loved you, I have no doubts about that. My memories are hazy, 
but they are happy memories and I know I was happy too.

Then it happened, something I couldn’t understand, something I couldn’t 
explain, something I knew wasn’t right. Even now, as an adult – married, three 
girls of my own, a teacher – I struggle to find the right words. 

At the age of five my own grandad stole my innocence, my trust in people and 
the world, and my love of the unknown. As any child in a loving family would, I 
confided in you. I remember it clearly as bath time; feeling dirty, confused 
and guilty. I cried and believed you would rescue me. I wanted you to make me 
feel better.

But you didn’t. You left the room and didn’t come back.

Why?

You are both cowards. I am shocked at your response. I find it unimaginable, 
as a parent myself, that nothing was done about it. 

I must have pushed it all to the back of my mind. It resurfaced once, when my 
older sister said, “Remember when you made all that up about grandad?”

I am glad he is dead. I am glad he suffered in his final days. But his 
punishment should have been greater

Then, as a teenager, it finally hit me. It wasn’t right. You had let me down.

Fast-forward to present day. Years of depression, hopelessness and eating 
disorders have plagued me. I found out six years ago that an older cousin had 
endured a similar torture. Was anyone there for her? No, the family name needed 
to be protected. Imagine the shame on the family. He would have been sent to 
prison. An old person can’t spend his final years there. 

Why not? I am ashamed to be part of this family.

I am glad he is dead. I am glad he suffered in his final days. But his 
punishment should have been greater. This was not justice.

Today, you tell me I don’t visit enough. You don’t see your granddaughters 
enough. There is no mother-and-daughter friendship. My house isn’t good enough. 
My career hasn’t progressed in the way you wanted it to. I am not fashionable 
enough. My lifestyle isn’t as good as my sister’s, who apparently has it all. 
You see no shame in letting me know that I am not good enough for you. You 
don’t know me well at all, nor do you want to get to know me. You want your own 
version of me. 

 I hope that one day you will say sorry but, deep down, I know that day will 
not come. I want you to explain why you failed to protect me, but I know that 
you are not brave enough. I want you to acknowledge all the pain that this 
continues to cause me, but I don’t think you have the strength.

Instead, I want you to know how much I love you. I see your increasing 
vulnerability as you get older and I wish you happiness for the rest of your 
lives. I won’t wish you contentment because I don’t feel you deserve it.

As for me, I will make sure I listen to everything my daughters say to me. I 
will love everything about them. I will protect them. You are not my role 
models; I have built my own model of parenting.

 I am sorry that this is how the story ends for you. A hug would have been a 
good start. A hug that says everything will be all right, you have done nothing 
wrong. But I can’t change the past.

Anonymous
 