
Today, while helping out at the school, I listened at length to one of you 
mums talking about the holiday to Disneyland next year that your mum and dad 
are paying for. I heard about how your mum picks up your kids from the school, 
too. Another mum mentioned how she was able to be here today because her mum 
was looking after the youngest child.

While we were gathering this morning, mum number three was with her mum, 
chit-chat, chit-chat. One of you lives with your mum; someone else, not so long 
ago, went away for a long weekend with her mum; I was informed recently that 
one of you had a lovely pub lunch the other day with – guess who? – your mum.

I used to pepper my conversation with anecdotes about my mum. Now, it is so 
painful to talk about her in the past tense

Another mum looks after her mum who is not well; others miss their mums 
because they do not live near them. Those are sad situations, not perfect – but 
you know what? Their mothers are still alive.

Do you realise how unbelievably lucky you are? Chit-chat, chit-chat. It is so 
casual to you, isn’t it? I’ll ask my mum if she can babysit. My mum loves being 
with the grandkids – chit-chat. My mum got to hold the baby for the first time 
last week. Oh, my mum drives me mad. Chit-chat.

I used to pepper my conversation with anecdotes about my mum. My beautiful, 
funny, dynamic, strong, incredible mum. I feel silenced. It is so painful to 
talk about her in the past tense. I just cannot do it.

I do not think that you wonder why I do not mention my amazing and smart and 
fantastic mum. I think, now, how painful it may have been for other mum-less 
mums to have to listen to me rattle on so carelessly about the latest funny 
story involving my mum or the words of wisdom she imparted, or the life-loving 
example she gave.

This letter has the word mum in it a lot. That’s because these women are the 
most enormous part of many of our lives. The chasm that is left behind when 
your mum dies is deep and wide and wretched. I now think of my life in two 
parts: the first part when I had my mum and all was good (even when sometimes I 
thought it was bad); then part two – my life without her. And although I try to 
live positively (for her), the sadness and grief is often overwhelming.

I think a lot about parallel universes and wish – if they are real – that I 
could be in one of the ones where my mum did not die, and I still had her in my 
life, and she would have watched my child grow up. This means, though, that 
there must be a universe where she died when I was little (how lucky am I that 
I had her for as long as I did), or even a universe where she never existed 
(how unlucky for that universe).

So, all of you mums, if you are reading this and you can pop round to see your 
mother, or give her a call for a chat, just do it. For those of you who can’t … 
well, what can I say? I am here in silence with you.

Anonymous

• We will pay £25 for every Letter to we publish. Please write about 600-700 
words. Write to Family Life, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or emailfamily@theguardian.com <mailto:family@theguardian.com>. Please 
include your address and phone number.
 