
I have never had to tell so many strangers that you are both dead. Weddings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/weddings> are such family occasions, 
it was just expected that you would be there. The florist asked about your 
buttonhole, Dad, the lady in the wedding dress shop wanted to know when you 
would be coming to see my dress, Mum. The celebrant, the venue, the 
photographers, the bridal car, the stationers, they all wanted to know about 
you both, then offered condolences when I explained. All normal things for 
other brides I suppose, but such small, sad moments for me.

You never met my husband, Mum, but I hope you would like him. Like you, he 
loves books. We went through your library together hunting for treasures and he 
sat with me as I found your random bookmarks and inscriptions and missed you 
deeply. Your best friend has been kind to us; she cooks us lunch sometimes and 
says he is gentle and a good man. She baked a tier of our wedding cake, your 
sister baked another, and I covered it all in your favourite lavender flowers.

Dad, one night when you were ill, I sat next to you on your bed and admitted 
how scared I was. Scared that you would leave, that I would be alone, that you 
wouldn’t be at my wedding, something so hypothetical at that time. You smiled 
and held my hand and told me you’d be there. How I wish with all my heart that 
you had been right. Before you died, you told me that you had always liked the 
man I went on to marry and I don’t think you knew how much comfort those words 
have brought. He didn’t let me walk down the aisle alone, Dad; he held my hand 
the whole way.

I wore your solitaire, Mum, and we filmed the day on your old camera, Dad, the 
one you used to film your own wedding

I have missed you both with a new, sharp edge this past year. I missed having 
someone to call and talk about my wedding plans with, to have someone who 
called just to see how I was doing; someone to offer help and guidance. I have 
missed being part of a family. I have been angry and anxious and upset without 
realising why. A bride-to-be is supposed to be happy, so I nodded and smiled 
when people asked how I was instead of saying how lost and alone I felt. People 
kept telling me what a wonderful time an engagement is, but I felt like a fraud 
as I agreed. Throughout it all, my husband-to-be was the eye of the storm, the 
safe place where it was OK to be sad and silent and I love him even more than I 
thought possible for understanding.

You have both been gone for many years, but I was blindsided by how much I 
missed being your daughter on my wedding day. We wanted it to be a celebration 
of love rather than loss and we tried to weave you both into the day in small 
ways. I wore your solitaire, Mum, and we filmed the day on your old camera, 
Dad, the one you used to film your own wedding. But it took all my strength not 
to burst into tears when I put on my wedding dress in the home you built 
together, knowing that you weren’t there to see me.

Getting into the wedding car with my bridesmaids reminded me of all the 
compromises that had to be made. I should have been sitting next to you, Dad. I 
am in my 30s, but in that moment I was a child who just wanted my daddy beside 
her. As we drove down the drive and past the rose bushes you had planted, I 
missed you both so much it hurt.

The day was beautiful, though. Our ceremony was full of joy and hope and love. 
The sun shone and we laughed and danced with all of our favourite people. We 
fell asleep giddy with excitement and giggling at the new names of “husband” 
and “wife” that we had acquired. I hope you would be proud of me, of what I’ve 
done in the years since we last saw each other. It has been so hard and lonely 
and sad, but I wanted you to know that I’m not alone any more. He became my 
family on our wedding day and we are building a future together.

With all my heart, your daughter

• We will pay £25 for every Letter to we publish. Please write about 600-700 
words. Write toFamily <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Life, 
The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU or email 
family@theguardian.com. Please include your address and phone number.
 