
I never once told you I loved you. And now it’s too late. You took me home 
when I was six weeks old and loved me unconditionally. You said I had not grown 
under your heart, but right inside it. Yet, from the moment you told me you 
were not my real mother, I was too scared to accept your love. I felt so little 
and alone in the world. So afraid you would abandon me too.

I lived in fear of exposure. You had red hair and mine was dark brown. Your 
skin was freckled and I was tanned. How could anyone believe you were my 
mother? I was terrified that if people guessed the truth, the game would 
somehow be up. It was my shameful secret. No child wants to feel different, and 
I felt so different from you – and all my friends who lived with a mother who 
had given birth to them.

I had a comfortable childhood, yet something inexpressible was missing. You 
gave me everything a little girl could ask for. Ballet classes and brownies. 
Trips to the park and swimming lessons. But I wouldn’t let you fill the space 
that had been vacated by the mystery woman who had given me away.

My classic teenage rebellion morphed into something more sinister, a wish for 
a new and superior set of parents

Later, being adopted was the perfect excuse for my adolescent angst. Every 
argument became further evidence that I was growing up in the wrong family. I 
had so many unresolved feelings towards my natural mother. How could she have 
given me up? I clearly remember telling myself: “I must be such a bad person if 
my own mother didn’t want me.” I was hurt and confused – and I took it out on 
you. Once you make up a story in your head, it’s very hard not to believe it. I 
was loved very much, but chose not to notice.

My classic teenage rebellion morphed into something more sinister, a wish for 
a new and superior set of parents who would understand me. I wish I could have 
shared my anxieties with you, but adoption was never spoken about in our house. 
We lived a life of middle-class restraint where feelings were kept private. My 
adoption was the elephant in the room. I played by the rules and never once 
gave you a chance to rationalise my fears.

Only after I met my natural family could I fully appreciate what you had given 
me. My boring suburban upbringing felt a much safer place than the chaos I 
could have experienced. The mystery had been solved, and I felt an innate bond 
with you at last.

Three days before you died, I finally found the words to say, “I’m so glad you 
were my mother.” You had been unresponsive for 24 hours, but your eyes shot 
open for the second it took you to whisper, “Why?”. It made me laugh, and as I 
cried I was able to tell you for the very first time.

If I had that moment again, I would keep talking even as you lay there so 
still. I would tell you how grateful I will always be for your patient love and 
loyalty. How being your daughter has made me who I am. Your subtle triumph of 
nurture over nature.

Most of all, I would tell you how sorry I am for my misplaced 
self-preservation. I have always loved you. I just hope that underneath your 
quiet reserve, you knew all along. Ten years on, I still look up at the sky to 
ask for your guidance. No one could have wished for a better mother. I have 
finally learned that giving love is considerably more important than giving 
birth.

Anonymous 

We’d love to hear your stories


We will pay £25 for every Letter to, Playlist, Snapshot or We Love to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/familylife> we publish. Write 
to Family Life, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU or email 
family@theguardian.com. Please include your address and phone number.
 