
It has taken me a long time to even attempt to write this down and it’s an 
effort to condense my thoughts and feelings into something coherent. I’m hoping 
that putting pen to paper may alleviate some of my anxieties. It all started 
when I was about nine and your friend from work started helping Dad out with 
DIY projects and accompanying us on weekend wine runs to France and family 
holidays.

To begin with, it all seemed quite innocent. Dad needed a hand with things and 
your friend supplied his services in exchange for cups of coffee and evening 
meals. Early on, I remember you mentioned that you thought your work friend 
fancied you and as an easily embarrassed child I just giggled and ran off.

Since then, every Christmas and birthday, he has lavished you with gifts. 
You’re always happy to accept then, making excuses such as, “If he wants to 
waste his money on me, that’s fine.”

I can understand your attraction to him. You’ve always been desperate for 
attention and control.

Meanwhile, Dad is calm and reserved but resolute in his views. When you met 
somebody so eager to impress you, agree with you and take you for expensive 
meals while Dad was working the late shift, you couldn’t possibly resist.

You have no idea that I’ve seen the messages, lingering hugs and longing 
glances. I think the instance where you and I went away for my 12th birthday 
tops it off, though. I imagine it has slipped your memory but it’s firmly 
planted in mine. Your phone rang while we were in the hotel and I heard the 
voice at the other end say, “I’m just calling to say that I love you and I miss 
you” – except the voice wasn’t Dad’s.

Our relationship is built on lies and you don’t realise that I figured that 
out a long time ago

Over the years, I’ve confronted you about the situation in my head on 
countless occasions. I’m not sure whether Dad knows. I’m sure he has suspicions 
but has chosen to ignore them in the hope of leading a quiet life in his later 
years.

I remember when Dad was in hospital, you said, “X thinks he could replace Dad 
if anything happens to him.” That will never happen. If Dad leaves us before 
you, I’ll be ready to cut all ties. I have to remind myself that I’d lose 
contact with Dad if I said anything now and I’m not sure how he’d cope with the 
commotion at his age.

I’m still trying to come to terms with the way that you continue to deceive 
your family and friends. You think that everyone is oblivious to your secret: 
that you have been having an affair for almost 15 years with a man whom 
everyone mocks for his lack of personality, gormlessness and general ignorance. 
It’s surprising, too, given that you left your first husband because of his 
infidelity.

Perhaps the hardest thing to bear is knowing that you are unaware of the 
damage that you have already caused. Our relationship is built on lies and you 
don’t realise that I figured that out a long time ago. Your behaviour has left 
deep wounds that will never heal. You often accuse me of lacking feelings but 
how could I ever share my thoughts and desires with anyone when the one person 
a daughter should be able to trust and count on for honesty and advice is all 
but a distant memory, and has been since your friend entered our lives all 
those years ago?

Your “darling daughter”
 