
Can I still call you Dad? It has been more than 10 years since I last saw you. 
Unless you can class the time you walked past me in the shopping centre as 
seeing you. I just thought I’d write you a letter and let you know what’s 
happened to your “family” since the night you walked out.

Your wife? Well, she’s a mess. Pretty much a shell of the person she used to 
be. I think she is just waiting to die. That’s what it feels like to me. Do you 
know what it’s like to watch someone you care about fall into a pit of 
depression and despair? There is nothing I can do or say to help her.

Your son. Do you remember him? I think he has started to come to terms with 
you leaving. He was a mess when you left. Well, he was only 12. I hate to say 
it, but he really needed you. The most defining point in a young boy’s life, 
and you missed it all. Do you remember he tried to keep in contact with you? I 
mean you did try for a while didn’t you? Do you remember what you said the last 
time you spoke to him? That you weren’t a father? Strange saying that to your 
son. But hey ho. I’m not a parent, I clearly don’t understand the definition of 
a father.

And then there’s me. I thought I was fine. You left, so I cut you out of my 
life right then and there. Simple. You tried to keep in contact – well you sent 
a few texts – but I wanted nothing to do with you. I realised about a year 
later that I wasn’t fine. Apparently keeping things bottled up isn’t a good 
idea. I broke down at work. I couldn’t stop crying. I wasn’t making sense. 
There was so much I wanted to say but I couldn’t find the words. A stream of 
madness dribbled from my mouth. Work sent me home.

You have caused so much damage, I will never be able to forgive you. You have 
never told us the truth

I didn’t tell Mum why I was home so early, and still haven’t. I haven’t told 
anyone. I didn’t want anyone to think I was weak, that I missed you. I didn’t 
want you to win. I didn’t want you to think I needed you. That there was some 
gap in my life now you had gone. I didn’t want you to think you had an impact 
on me. But of course you did. You were my dad.

There is so much damage you have caused that I will never be able to forgive 
you. Not only the affair that lasted years and years behind Mum’s back, but the 
fact that you lied about it constantly. Even after you left, you still lied. To 
this day, you have never told us the truth. Do we not deserve that? No. Because 
it’s easy for you, isn’t it? You have your new family. Our new little 
half-sister, who is about 10. Couldn’t even tell us that could you? Will she 
ever know the truth?

I was invited to a wedding shortly after you left. I had no idea the sort of 
impact that day would have on me. It was a family wedding. But seeing everyone 
happy and together, the bride with her father, I had to leave. I needed to get 
out of there. I caused a rift in the family for the way I behaved. I left just 
after the ceremony and sat at a bus stop in the middle of nowhere and cried my 
eyes out. I wanted help for how I was feeling but had no one to turn to. You 
did that. You hurt me.

I’ve seen you on Facebook. Laughing and joking in videos with her. I don’t 
suppose you tell people about us do you? Do you know how that feels? You have 
taken my childhood memories away. You took my family away. Were we ever happy 
as kids? All I see is the misery and destruction you left behind.

You will have no part in my future. You will not walk me down the aisle. You 
will never meet your future grandchildren. You are nothing to me. You are less 
than nothing.

Your firstborn
 