
An established presence in the top flight of British biography, Hilary 
Spurling is renowned for uncovering secrets. A pattern emerges in her major 
books: the subject claims or appears to have had an unexciting domestic or 
emotional life; Spurling get to work and finds quite the opposite. "I'm a good 
ferret," she says. "The families of my subjects may know secrets, but they 
don't realise what sort of animal it is they're putting down their trousers."

In this way, the novelist Ivy Compton-Burnett, about whom she wrote her first 
book, insisted: "I have had such an uneventful life that there is little 
information to give." On the contrary: Spurling's biography revealed an 
extraordinarily painful family history, and a self-transformation – a shutting 
of the door on trauma – that had a deep influence on her work.

Similarly, it was believed that any life of Paul Scott, author of The Jewel in 
the Crown, would be a stolid affair: the received wisdom was that "he was a 
writer who just lived in Hampstead with his wife and daughters and nothing ever 
happened to him". Spurling discovered secrets almost no one knew, and so 
potentially upsetting to the members of Scott's family that she agonised over 
how best to tell them.

The book for which she is most celebrated, her two-volume Whitbread 
prize-winning life of Matisse followed the same trajectory. Spurling remembers 
"the exact words of the leading British expert" on the painter when he was 
approached to give advice: "Tell her she's right there's never been a biography 
and if she wants to know the reason why, it's because his life would be too 
dull to write about." It was generally thought the warm, serene paintings 
reflected a calm personal history; Spurling found rather that it was the 
artist's psychological turbulence that made him seek out serenity in his work. 
"I backed my biographer's hunch against the art historical profession."

It is "the under levels" of lives that fascinate her: "Lives lived almost 
wholly in public can be compelling – politicians, generals – but they're not 
for me. I like a really intense inner life."

Her new book, Burying the Bones, an account of the American novelist Pearl 
Buck – which has come out to eulogistic reviews – is an exercise in uncovering 
of a different kind. Buck, raised in China, was the best-known voice on the 
country in the 1930s, andThe Good Earth was a world bestseller. She was also a 
Nobel laureate, but because of her later output of "trashy" popular novels, has 
been "virtually forgotten. She has no place in feminist mythology, and her 
novels have been effectively eliminated from the American literary map."

When Spurling first mentioned she was writing the book, friends seemed 
perplexed or embarrassed. Yet with China's increasing dominance, Buck appears a 
more significant figure in the history of the 20th century, and ripe for 
rediscovery. Her novels were for years banned in China as insufficiently 
ideological, but now official attitudes have softened. In terms of 
international sales, she could prove a canny choice of subject indeed.

Born in 1940, Spurling spent the war years in Clifton, Bristol – a port city 
that was heavily bombed. "I loved the bangs and flashes," she says. "Children 
ran free, in packs and alone, in the streets and in the woods. And bombsites 
were wonderful playgrounds – ruined houses, façades ripped away. We spent hours 
digging in the hope of finding an unexploded bomb. Thinking about it now, it's 
a metaphor for the way I write biography: I spend a lot of my time digging, 
looking for treasure – something shocking, or certainly surprising."

If childhood was an adventure, her teenage years were a drag. She didn't like 
the Bristol of the 50s ("a very provincial town"), and Clifton High School was 
"hateful": "it signified to me the depths of boredom to which a human being can 
sink . . . We were educated merely to marry and I longed to get away." Her 
undergraduate years in Oxford, on the other hand, were "wonderful . . . We 
arrived looking like middle-aged women; by the end of the first term it was 
very different." The university "opened the door, like it did for my father" (a 
barrister).

She married in 1961, when she was still at Oxford; "then I went to London. We 
were on our uppers and planning to be writers." (They both succeeded: John 
Spurling is a playwright, critic and novelist.) Hilary got a job as a waitress 
in a "sleazy caff" off Tottenham Court Road. She earned £4 10s a week; the rent 
of their run-down flat was £4.

They moved to Ladbroke Grove; one good friend who lived nearby was JG Farrell. 
Thanks to another, Malcolm Rutherford, who worked at the Spectator, Spurling 
got the job of theatre critic on the magazine in 1964, a post she held until 
1969. She was, she says, "the most dreadful, scathing, swingeing, destructive 
critic, a battleaxe". Her strong views led to notoriety at the end of the 
decade when Lindsay Anderson, joint artistic director of the Royal Court, tried 
to ban her from his theatre, having taken against one of her notices. Other 
reviewers, including Harold Hobson of the Sunday Times, pledged to stay away in 
solidarity, and eventually the ban was overturned.

Even before starting as a journalist, Spurling had saved hard to buy her first 
picture, by the St Ives artist, Paul Feier. These days, the walls of the 
Spurlings' house in North London display an impressive collection of paintings, 
etchings and drawings, including the work of her friends Bridget Riley and John 
Hubbard. Modern art was a crucial part of Spurling's experience of the 60s, a 
time when, for her, "the world exploded in light, space and colour", thanks not 
least to the influential "New Generation" shows staged at the Whitechapel 
gallery from 1964.

With Nigel Lawson at the helm, Spurling was, in 1966, also made the literary 
editor of the Spectator (Roy Strong was the art critic and Michael Nyman the 
music critic). One cause she pursued was magical realism (Gabriel García 
Márquez'sOne Hundred Years of Solitude was published in 1967), and Philip 
French remembers a memorable day with the Spurlings guiding Jorge Luis Borges 
around the London sites of his literary heroes.

The magazine also set her on the path to biography. When Giles Gordon, 
editorial director of Gollancz, took her out to lunch to go through the books 
on his list, Spurling berated him for the way in which his firm published 
Compton-Burnett, whose unconventional novels about the Edwardian gentry had 
been favourites of hers for years ("I just thought she was so funny, the writer 
of some of the best one-liners in the English language"). Not long after 
Compton-Burnett died, in 1969, Spurling took Olivia Gollancz out to lunch at 
(of course) the Ivy. "She ordered – I'll never forget – a plain omelette and a 
glass of water. And a salad with no dressing. And being rather nervous I had 
the same. It was a very penitential lunch, quite suitable in a way to 
Compton-Burnett."

Some months later, when she was told she could write the biography – the 
advance was £500 – Spurling was "so delighted" she "promptly resigned" from the 
Spectator ("oh what a relief . . . to think of all those curtains going up all 
over London and I didn't have to be in front of any of them"). But what she 
hadn't been told was that the commission had also been offered "to someone else 
at the same time . . . without either of us knowing". It was a kind of joke 
played by Compton-Burnett from the grave: her friends would meet one biographer 
for lunch and the other for tea.

Spurling prevailed, and the first volume of her biography was published in 
1974. "Writing it was such a training for me in understanding families . . . 
Her novels are to do with power, and she just chose as her theatre a Victorian 
family. Her fiction is really about totalitarian societies – and Victorian 
families, where all the power resided with the father, were totalitarian. So 
her books are about the 20th century, with a kind of bite and pertinacity not 
many other writers have had. I'd put her in the same class as Kafka – she was a 
writer of 20th-century fables."

Ivy When Young was regarded as a stunning debut, and surprised even those 
friends of Compton-Burnett who had talked to Spurling: "We all thought we knew 
her, but it turned out we knew her only partially," says the playwright Julian 
Mitchell. The second volume wasn't published until 10 years later. In the 
intervening years, Spurling had three children and wroteA Handbook to Anthony 
Powell's Music of Time, a detailed guide and index to the 12-volume Dance – 
characters, places, books, paintings. Powell fans treasure her book, but she 
hated doing it: "I took an engine apart, as a mechanic does, and ended up with 
a pile of bits on the garage floor." The novelist, a close friend whom she had 
first met at a Spectator lunch, asked her to write it, and in trying to 
persuade her, remarked meaningfully: "It will give you great power." His 
comment reached her, she says, because (like Compton-Burnett), "his primary 
subject as a novelist is power – the ways it works and the ways it doesn't".

It was agreed long ago that Spurling would write the "official" biography of 
Powell, who died in 2000, and that's what she'll be working on for the 
forseeable future. Their friendship was based partly on a love of gossip 
(according to French, the Spurlings are "gregarious, very interested in social 
relationships and gradations – not that they are snobs"). Of the novelist, she 
says he "was a raconteur and loved to hear about London life. Of course, gossip 
is raised several notches when you're talking to a real master".

Spurling has long been a fixture of London literary society: her friends 
include Michael Holroyd and Antonia Fraser (Powell's neice). Over the years, 
she also continued to know and see many of the people she interviewed in the 
writing of her books (including Sonia Orwell, whose reputation as a 
cold-hearted money-grabber she strongly challenged inThe Girl in the Fiction 
Department). From the evidence of his published journals, Powell seems to have 
been rather smitten with Spurling ("Hilary looking very pretty"; "Hilary to 
luncheon . . . as ever, in terrific form, immensely entertaining" and so on).

He also clearly admired her determination to make things happen: "Hilary 
Spurling rang . . . at her most forceful . . . one imagines Mrs Thatcher 
ringing one of her Cabinet." According to Holroyd, "she has the reputation of 
being quite fierce; I imagine some people are wary of her and that's a tribute 
in a way." Fraser describes her as "cool, which I mean as a term of praise . . 
. she does what she wants to do".

The journals offer glimpses of her family life (her house's drastic 
subsidence; the travails of their cat, Biggles, the "terror of Holloway"). 
Powell also confirms other accounts of her as a memorable cook and inspired 
present-giver: he reports her plan to mark the publication of Holroyd's book on 
George Bernard Shaw "by giving him Russian dolls painted by herself: Shaw 
inside whom Augustus John, inside whom Lytton Strachey, inside whom Hugh 
Kingsmill, representing Holroyd's biographies."

Spurling earned a wage reviewing books for the Observer and the Daily 
Telegraph. Her next big book, published in 1990, wasPaul Scott, for which she 
followed in the novelist's footsteps to Tulsa, Oklahoma, and to India and 
Australia. She regards hisRaj Quartet as an "extraordinarily vivid description 
of the end of empire, the cracking apart of India" and particularly good on the 
experience of women. There was no point in writing his life, she says, "unless 
I could find out what drove him". His friends knew he was an alcoholic, but 
didn't know why; Spurling found a homosexual past long concealed.

As a spin-off from the first volume of her Matisse biography (the two volumes 
took her 15 years to write), Spurling wroteLa Grande Thérèse, the gripping tale 
of Thérèse Humbert, a major player in the Third Republic until her legendary 
wealth was exposed as a hoax (Matisse's mother-in-law was the Humbert 
housekeeper, and his family fell under suspicion – another secret to be kept). 
Thérèse was renowned for her millinery, and at readings of the book, Spurling 
took to wearing a tall, elegant hat with a spotted veil.

Burying the Bones, like other lives she has written, is in part an exploration 
of social and economic vulnerability. It is also another account of an 
individual's strategy for dealing with a traumatic past: Buck grew up as the 
daughter of missionaries in Zhenjiang, and the book's title refers to her 
finding the remains of unwanted baby girls. She lived close to slavery, 
starvation, and cruelty to women, and Spurling asks what else she buried along 
with the bones. "I don't claim she's a great writer . . . she had a powerful 
imagination, but not primarily a literary one." But without question, she had 
an "intense inner life".

The book doesn't attempt to cover the second half of Buck's life, when she was 
a prominent public campaigner: Spurling, having added to the lustre of the 
"golden age" of British biography, which began in the late 1960s with Holroyd's 
life of Strachey, argues that "what we need now is a shorter, tighter, more 
sharply focused form, that concentrates on inner meaning rather than its outer 
chronological and documentary casing."

With the frenzy of publication over, the Spurlings are free to spend time in 
the Greek mountain village, wonderfully named Arcadia, where they have a house. 
Theirs is, according to Richard Cohen, Hilary's long-time publisher, a "good, 
generous marriage". "Each of us reads what the other writes," she says, "which 
may not make for a friction-free life, but is a good thing." (Cohen compares 
Spurling rather dauntingly to Dorothea inMiddlemarch, of whom it is said that 
she is "altogether ardent, theoretic and intellectually consequent".)

Listening to her talk about Powell, it's already possible to envisage yet more 
reviews praising her elegant prose and indefatigable research. She is excited 
about one aspect in particular – the remarkable collage which covers the walls 
of the basement in the Chantry, Powell's small country house near Frome, 
Somerset. Spurling never went down there when Powell was alive, because it was 
the gents' lavatory.

As relaxation from writing the Dance, "he used to cut pictures out 
. . . virtually all of them are of people. He papered the walls with images, 
like a great tide of the sea coming in and covering everything. The walls are 
not organised or structured in a way the novels are structured, but 
nevertheless patterns emerge, as they emerge from the sea or sand – but not 
conscious patterns."

On the surface, Powell lived an "unobtrusive" life, but the collage is a 
perfect invitation to delve beneath that surface – literally, to a hidden 
"under level". "I imagine I'll spend a lot of time down there," she says.
 