
I like going to see female painters - there’s not so many of them about. I 
particularly like going to exhibitions when things are explained, otherwise the 
paintings can feel a bit opaque. In older pictures there are so many codes, 
they can be quite inaccessible unless you’ve studied the painter.

I learnt a lot about Knights’ art. It triggered a lot of other questions for 
me, one being what makes oil paint flat? You can hardly see a brush stroke in 
her paintings and it gives a different aspect to the outline of figures. It 
also means the colour really stands out. There were other artists around the 
same time using the same technique. Stanley Spencer does it.

 Guardian member Eyvor Fogarty Photograph: Guardian Member Eyvor Fogarty 
I knew that in the 20th century murals were a big thing. Ian Dejardin (the 
gallery director) talked about murals, and that brought to mind the Zinkeisen 
sisters from Scotland who were around at the same time and were commissioned to 
do murals for some of the transatlantic liners. I’d never really thought about 
murals in that way.


I liked The Deluge. I looked at it for a long time. I was also fascinated by 
The Marriage at Cana. It was very intricately done and I particularly like how 
the story shifts as you look from table to table. It’s partly autobiographical 
– by the third table she’s the bride. She married the second man in the 
painting; so she was the wife, so to speak. Her husband, Walter Thomas 
Monnington, became president of the Royal Academy.


One of my great pleasures is going into the National Portrait Gallery in 
London and looking at a couple of portraits and reading the biographies. 
There’s always a dialogue between the artist and the sitter. The sitters are 
often upset, but the artist is looking at them in a different way – a different 
story is being told.


Related: Winifred Knights (1899-1947); Mary Heilmann: Looking at Pictures – 
review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/12/winifred-knights-mary-heilmann-looking-at-pictures-dulwich-whitechapel-review>

I also go to the Scottish National Portrait Gallery and see people I know or I 
think I know (I’m a Scot). There are certain types. You go down Princes Street 
in Edinburgh and you see those same faces. You seem them walking down the 
street and you wonder how would you describe that person in 100 words.

Winifred Knights was a brilliant student – she did what was expected of her, 
won prizes, but she wasn’t in the habit of pushing her work. It got me thinking 
about how other people make it. In a university class there are brilliant 
students but what makes some of them come to nothing? What happens to that loss 
of talent? Do they inspire someone else along the way? It made me think about 
how, before we had a larger number people of going to university, talent must 
have been lost all the time.

Eyvor is a translator and editor, working from an office with a view over the 
Strait of Dover to France. She enjoys all opportunities to meet friends, old 
and new, and climb mountains.


This Guardian Live event  
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/private-view-of-winifred-knights-18991947-26115507185>
took place at the Dulwich Picture Gallery on 15 September. To find out more 
about upcoming eventssign up to become a Guardian Member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com>.
 