
I am torn between speeding to get as far as possible before baby Flora wakes 
up and being a responsible driver. As I am driving almost all my children, I 
opt to be law abiding. Also I have seen those extreme cop car video chases and 
fear the children will be scared if I'm hauled out of the car by men with guns. 
But the road to the Grand Canyon is long and straight, and 60mph seems a cruel 
speed limit. There are, however, signs that say "Beware of the elk", which 
don't impress the children (or me) until we actually see one standing regally 
by the side of the road.

I'm not sure why I'm doing the driving anyway, except that I've been here 
before, although it was on a Greyhound bus 28 years ago, and I wasn't exactly 
watching where I was going.

The excitement is building because the Grand Canyon is the highlight of our 
trip. "It's meant to be a life-changing view," says J. "Or maybe that's 
Yosemite."

It's the place that my 86-year-old mother, whose eyesight is failing, wants to 
see, and even the children manage to be a bit enthusiastic. "Is it big?" asks 
Tilly, who is 11.

"No," I say meanly, because I want to stop for lunch, but Flora is still 
asleep. "We've flown all the way across the Atlantic and now we're driving five 
hours to see a small crack in the ground."

Tilly rises above it. "I was only asking," she says.

As it's famous, I expect a long queue at the entrance, but we drive straight 
in. I can't wait to see everyone's faces as they see the Grand Canyon for the 
first time. Except, of course, that I don't get to see their faces because it 
takes me so long to strap Flora into her pushchair that they've all gone on 
without me. If you've seen the Grand Canyon you'll know that, remarkably, it's 
hidden behind a hedge and you only see it when you're right on top of it. And 
it does indeed make you gasp.

By the time I get there, the children are posing for and taking pictures 
alarmingly close to the edge (no fences), and instead of marvelling at the 
moment I start yelling at them. But I do see Mum, transfixed, and stop shouting 
so that I can fix the picture of her there in my mind.

The next day, we visit the canyon from all different vista points and wait 
while Mum and J and my oldest daughter, Maddy, go up in the helicopter. "Why 
can't we go?" asks Lydia, who is eight. "It costs too much," I tell her. "You 
can come back when you're older and do it." We also do the Grand Canyon at 
sunset and by the end of two days we are all canyon'd out.

Our next stop is to stay with my friend M in Sacramento. She is my age, and 
her three children have left home. "We rattle around the house. I can't wait to 
see you all," she said to me before we left – partly to reassure me that the 
seven of us really were welcome to stay.

So I see what life might have been like (in 11 years) without baby Flora – M 
even has the dog that the children (before Flora) were nagging me to get. And, 
although Flora is the biggest blessing ever, some of that life looks pretty 
good.

"M can do whatever she wants. Look at her books and how lovely her garden is," 
I say to J.

But sometimes when you're comparing your phase of life with that of a friend, 
you have to put it in context. J gently points out that M lives in California, 
where the sun shines, and has a huge house, a horde of gardeners, orange and 
lemon trees and a pool. And we don't.
 