
Sixteen years ago, long before there was any prospect of my work being 
published, I dreamed that I found a small book lying in the gutter directly 
outside my front door. The cover was the deep colour of blackcurrants and the 
words were in lemon yellow. I picked it up and read the title: Rare London 
Cheeses. To my amazement I saw that it was a collection of poems written by me.

At that point I’d woken up and stretched out my hand to the bedside table 
where I expected to find it. My disappointment, though intense, was tinged with 
promise, even a sort of serenity. It was as if my poems had already been 
written.

Fast forward to New Year’s Day 2005. Up at the crack. Prepared lavish food 
with Dave, my new man, at his house in West Sussex and covered the dishes in 
foil. Drove into London to my flat in Hackney, behind theEmpire theatre 
<https://hackneyempire.co.uk/>. Climbed the 78 steps to the top of my block 
hauling bags and boxes and got the room ready to welcome my guests, most of 
whom were friends from various poetry-writing groups.

People sat chatting, eating and drinking and at some time in the afternoon 
started talking about their New Year resolutions. When it came to my turn, Dave 
jumped in ahead of me, announcing out of the blue that I was going to have a 
book published. Was I? My friend and poetry tutor,John Stammers 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Stammers>, was there, and asked me if it 
was true and immediately offered his help. A year later I had a contract for a 
first collection with Picador. I was mad with excitement.

That’s when the panic set in. I didn’t have that many poems and quite a lot of 
them were scrappy. Over the next few weeks, I’d get up earlier and earlier, 
full of resolve and deliberation to days of hideous nothingness. I’d juggle a 
line-break. Then I’d juggle it back again. I’d go for walks. I prayed for 
Rumpelstiltskin to come to my aid. I chopped and patched, I teased and stole, I 
panted and whimpered. I spent my days trying and failing to beat off the mad 
dog gnashing its teeth inside my head. I scoured my notebooks for anything and 
then by the application of a sort of stealthy CPR I’d pummel it back to life. 
Or not. I found I had embarked on what Humboldt (inSaul Bellow’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/saulbellow> Humboldt’s Gift) calls the 
“frantic profession”. But that New Year’s Day had changed my life forever. 
There was no going back.

Then I remembered my dream of the blackcurrant-coloured book. I wondered what 
the title might mean. I wondered at its absurdity. Had cheese ever been made in 
London? If so, which were the rare kinds? And as for cheese in poetry, it seems 
thatGK Chesterton <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gk-chesterton> was right 
when he said: “Poets have been mysteriously silent on the subject of cheese.”

Later I wrote a poem with that title, ploddingly taking on the words and 
thinking about what each one meant to me. Surprisingly, it turned out to be 
quite a serious poem, and although I wasn’t really aware of it at the time, 
I found that it dealt with matters of apprenticeship, ancestry, authorship and 
decay. I had a sense of moving towards the possibility of wider, larger 
meanings. Here is one stanza:

“Cheese commands respect. It has ancestral status.

It is aspirational and suggests a connoisseurship

that would exasperate were it not born of greed.

Be they swathed in muslin or dipped in ashes

they will change your humour. And London cheeses?

How can I ever say what anything is like?”

The dream is as vivid as ever, the shiny cover, the feeling of the mud on my 
fingers when I picked it up and my delight on opening it. I’m lucky that I 
dream a lot.

While writing this, I have been reading CK Williams’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/06/ck-williams> wonderful book, 
Poetry and Consciousness. In it he writes: “The few poems that come more easily 
are intriguing to me, mostly because the labour they demanded seemed to have 
more to do with what was actually going on in the poem than in overcoming all 
the various character lapses and lacks that constitute so much of the act of 
writing, but also because there always seems to be a great deal more in them I 
wasn’t quite aware of bringing about.”

I have had similar experiences and I think that some of my best poems have 
come about this way. I am reminded that sometimes it’s the opposite of striving 
that brings the most precious reward. But the opposite of striving has to be 
striven for.
 