
Here’s a Trinity Mirror spokesperson commenting its latest local paper closure 
<http:/2016/news/fourth-newspaper-closure-announced-by-trinity-mirror-in-24-hours/>
: “We focus on markets where we are able to grow audience and revenue. It’s for 
this reason we’ve been forced to close free weekly, the Crawley News and its 
website”.


Not a startling revelation: we know that advertising has been retreating from 
newsprint for years, although the shuttering of the website is surprising.

But the announcement was somewhat disingenuous because audience is not really 
the problem. Given that it is a free title, the publisher controls the level of 
distribution.

What really hurts is the lack of sufficient advertising to turn a profit. And 
the motivation of a publicly quoted company is not about serving readers, but 
about serving advertisers.

There are loads of readers in Crawley, which has a population well in excess 
of 100,000, and there is plenty of community news to report.

Trinity Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> knows that, 
but it doesn’t want to reveal the brutal truth: profit outweighs public 
service. Business trumps journalism.

Newspaper companies rarely admit that reality, although one US publishing 
company’sinternal “manager’s guide” 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/221322085/Thirteenth-Street-Media-manager-s-guide>
 was altogether more candid.

Erik Wemple, writing in the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/erik-wemple/wp/2016/10/17/report-mcnewspapers-are-gobbling-up-small-town-america/?utm_term=.afe0ff0d5fb5>
, discovered several illuminating home truths in aninternal “manager’s guide” 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/221322085/Thirteenth-Street-Media-manager-s-guide>
 produced by the owner of 50 papers in Texas and Arizona. Here are the relevant 
passages:

Many companies in our industry have wrongly divided their focus among many 
customer groups. We do not. Our customer is the advertiser. Readers are our 
customers’ customers.

In other words, we are selling advertisers access to our audience. And we are 
selling our audience to advertisers. We are just the middle man, taking a 
profit on the turn.

Sales are the lifeblood of the company. Sales calls are the primary 
contributing factor toward sales, so it is clear that the top priority at all 
of our newspapers is the sales department.

This is not a reference to circulation, of course. “Sales” refers to the 
selling of advertising space. And it logically follows that...

Staffing levels should be as high as possible in sales and as low as possible 
in all other areas. In sales, that means we should have as many sales staff 
members as our products and market can support. Generally speaking, more sales 
staff means more sales.

As low as possible in the newsroom, eh? Yes... 

We operate with a lean core of newsroom staff and contributors and wire 
services for efficiency.

And what should that “lean core” of journalists be doing?

If our content is truly reflecting our community, the advertisers’ interests 
and our content will closely align.

Translation: editorial content should be aimed at pleasing advertisers. Don’t 
rock the business boat. Favour entertainment material over information. Just 
give us the numbers. Journalism is of secondary importance in the exercise of 
making money.

Sure, I know this isn’t a scoop. It has been the case since the founding of a 
commercial press at the end of the 19th century.

But plenty of people don’t know it. Publishers who are taking an axe to 
editorial staff on a weekly basis are fooling audiences. They pay lip service 
to serving the public but their real intent is to squeeze the greatest possible 
profit from their portfolio.

This runs counter to the journalistic mission to inform, educate and 
entertain. By turning their backs on journalism they are making it more and 
more difficult for us to hold power to account.

Meanwhile, seen from the other perspective, advertisers are increasingly 
intent on overlooking the value of newsprint.

I found myself nodding at an observation by John Witherow, editor of the Times,
in a Campaign interview 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/john-witherow-bucks-print-decline-times/1412896#>
. He said of falling print ad revenues: “A lot of them don’t seem to read 
newspapers in the ad agencies”.

They never have, of course. Journalism was always the annoying bit of 
newspaper content wrapped around their adverts.

Note that Witherow was speaking against the background of the Times’s print 
sales having risen while its ad revenues have fallen for six years in a row.

It may well be an exaggeration to suggest that, between them, newspaper 
publishers and advertisers are conspiring to undermine journalism. But I’ve 
said it all the same.
 