
According to Ivan Lewis, one reason Labour lost the last election was that it 
"talks a lot about rights but not enough about responsibility" (Shadow minister 
withdraws Labour 'spendthrift' claim 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/may/12/lewis-changes-speech>, 12 May). 
Is he serious? Responsibility was the New Labour mantra. In particular, the 
responsibilities of benefit claimants were invariably emphasised through tough 
and often derogatory language and the progressive tightening of the conditions 
attached to benefits.

Yet Labour was remarkably silent – at least until the final manifesto when it 
was too late – about the responsibilities of the rich and powerful. It also 
failed to make the case for the improvements in some benefits it did achieve, 
as it pursued redistribution by stealth. The result was the worst of both 
worlds: benefit recipients did not feel thatLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> was "standing up" for them and 
the wider electorate were disaffected. Election post-mortems should not 
reinforce public misperceptions about Labour's record.

Ruth Lister

Lab, House of Lords

• You describe Labour's recent election results as poor. Scotland may have 
been the story, but why disregard 800 council seats in England and a Labour 
government in Wales – and why did you not mention the Leicester byelection?
 illustration: Gillian Blease <http://gillianblease.co.uk/> 
On the opposite page (Report 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/may/11/plans-reform-house-of-lords>, 
12 May) you talk of "Labour's past failure to reform the Lords" in a report 
about some hypothetical plan of Clegg's, while Labour actually ended hundreds 
of years of rule by aristocracy. Failure to complete reform of the Lords was a 
collective failure, not just Labour's. It seems when Labour is mentioned, it is 
as the object of admonitions (Labour must do this or that), whereas recent Lib 
Dem disasters seem not to be their fault. An effective critique of the present 
government's policies can never be mounted while there is a blank refusal to 
acknowledge what was positive about the previous government's record.

Margaret Pelling

Oxford 

• Policy Network's recent report is a superb example of self-delusion in the 
face of evidence (Labour faces fight for survival as party of power 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/may/10/labour-survival-fight-ed-miliband>
, 11 May). Of course, voters have lost faith in the ability of governments to 
stand up to vested interests (which 84% of people polled in the UK thought too 
powerful); voters are simply observing reality. New Labour was incredibly 
craven towards special interest groups and powerful lobbyists. The data on 
taxation is clear from the YouGov poll – "51% of Lib Dem voters and 32% of Tory 
voters would be willing to pay higher taxes ... if it were guaranteed to 
improve benefits and services". A majority of voters (and certainly centre-left 
voters) think that government spending has tangible benefits. Yet your report 
highlights the "belief among centre-right voters that centre-left governments 
tax too much". That's hardly surprising when every rightwing think-tank, pundit 
and politician has been ramming home for decades the idea that any form of 
taxation is evil.Dr Michael Bunter

Peterborough, Cambridgeshire 

• Paul Birchall (Letters 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/may/11/camden-middle-class-liberals>, 
11 May) is right to highlight the dismay felt by "Labour and Yes" voters. The 
decisive failure of Labour supporters to unite around Ed Miliband's support for 
AV has allowed a vital opportunity to knock back Cameron to be missed. If 
Labour's "fight-back" is to result in electoral success, unity around 
outward-facing and forward-looking principles, attitudes and policies will be 
essential. Its high number of No voters has exposed deep divisions and raised 
questions about whether the party itself is sufficiently progressive and 
capable of responding to the hanging political landscape. Disappointing to 
say the least!

Richard Stainton

Whitstable, Kent 

• Reading your economic pages, gas, petrol, electricity prices rising causing 
imported inflation, Labour need to develop a coherent, green-based, sustainable 
economic recovery plan sharpish. The coalition obviously does not have a plan B 
and plan A is going nowhere!

Brian Keegan

Peterborough, Cambridgeshire

• The insights offered by the Policy Network thinktank will resonate 
exclusively with those who seek at all times to prefix their perception of 
politics with "official" (Labour faces fight for survival as party of power 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/may/10/labour-survival-fight-ed-miliband>
, 11 May). Democratic movements coalescing around priorities of principle and 
necessity seem so alien, so disconnected from their ivory towers that each 
fresh setback for the left can be understood only through the prism of some 
perceived drift into "protest politics". Such myopic, elitist approaches poison 
the well of radical politics. They are nothing less than an attempt to 
demobilise the left's natural constituencies (the working and progressive 
middle classes, the demographic majority in the UK).

Have we not been here before? Is this not the siren call of the Blairites who, 
spellbound by the blandishments of the neoliberals, hollowed out a Labour 
movement founded on the twin strategies of parliament and the streets? Here in 
Scotland (and under a system of PR no less!), a mildly social democratic party 
has won a landslide victory by promising to defend services against the ravages 
of the crash. Labour's response? Send in the London-based New Labour hit squads 
to deal with any residual "coherent ideology" which may frighten voters off! No 
wonder the European left is in such disarray. No wonder the electorate look 
elsewhere for solidarity as their services, jobs, benefits and homes are 
crushed beneath the wheels of unchallenged orthodoxies.

Mike Cowley

Secretary, Scottish Labour party Campaign for Socialism 

• Polly Toynbee is right to ask whether the AV vote heralds a generation of 
Tory rule (Is this the start of a long Conservative hegemony? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/may/06/start-of-long-conservative-hegemony>
 7 May). But the answer to this question does not lie in any particular type of 
electoral system, but in providing a clear alternative to the Tories, that has 
as its foundation an economic policy that challenges the need for cuts, frames 
deficit reduction within a policy for growth and makes a positive case for the 
public sector. Poor Labour party results in Scotland under PR showed us that.

Paul Krugman wrote in the New York Times on 24 March that the UK economy was 
strong enough to pursue a policy of "jobs first, deficit later". Ed Balls made 
the same case in his Bloomberg speech on 27 August 2010 challenging the cuts 
programme and the Labour party's own economic policy, "even trying to halve the 
deficit in four years was a mistake".  Why four years, why front-load cuts in 
the first two years, when our debt is among the lowest for 100 years and the 
debt interest payments are lower than in every year of the Thatcher and Major 
governments? People want an alternative and the Labour party needs to be brave 
enough to offer one.

Barry Kushner

Blue Urban Sky, Liverpool
 