
Few collaborations are so distinctive that the names of those involved come to 
denote a genre, rather than just a credit. A Room With a View, the first of 
director James Ivory and producer Ismail Merchant's EM Forster adaptations, was 
shot before the term Merchant-Ivory had become an insult; watch it today and 
you'll blush to have ever smirked at the cliche. This is incredibly fresh and 
arresting film-making: moving and amusing, swooningly romantic and socially 
ferocious – nothing less than a full-frontal (in every way) assault 
on your soul.

Lucy Honeychurch (Helena Bonham Carter) is on a Baedeker-led tour of Florence 
with punctilious cousin Charlotte (Maggie Smith) when she encounters, at their 
pensione, free-thinking Mr Emerson (Denholm Elliott) and his dreamy son, George 
(Julian Sands). Through a series of bloody physical confrontations and, worse 
yet, sticky etiquette breaches, Lucy's desire for emotional freedom starts to 
bubble, coming to the boil when George kisses her in a cornfield. But Charlotte 
witnessed the snog, so Lucy is whisked back to Surrey, where she gets engaged 
to the horribly priggish Cecil Vyse (Daniel Day-Lewis), to the polite distaste 
of her family, and the Rev Beebe (Simon Callow, uncharacteristically subtle). 
Then the Emersons reappear …

What might have been starched and talky in other hands comes out of the wash 
alive with spring and spirit. The botched embrace between Lucy and Cecil, and 
the heartbreaking moment when he, after being rejected, puts his boots back on, 
are once seen, never forgotten. Smith's Charlotte – so funny as a curmudgeonly 
drag ("The ground will do for me," she says, as cushions are assigned on a 
picnic, "I haven't had rheumatism for years. And if I do feel a twinge, I shall 
stand up") – is just tragic alone, as Lucy might well have been, had her story 
not had such a happy ending. The final scene, a ravishing in a room, with a 
view, as the bells of Florence chime out, would leave only a stone unmoved.
 