
 Author: As a student, EM (Edward Morgan) Forster (1879-1970) was part of the 
Cambridge Conversazione Society, several members of which went on to form the 
Bloomsbury group. In 1901 he took his first tour of Italy (with his mother), 
and his notebooks reveal that he already had the idea for the story that was to 
become A Room With a View. However, other ideas intervened, and Where Angels 
Fear to Tread (1905) - another story of English visitors to Italy - became his 
first published novel. Having gone through considerable rewriting, A Room With 
a View emerged in 1908. Forster's third book, Howards End (1910), proved his 
breakthrough, establishing him as the preeminent literary commentator on the 
British class system. He continued to travel, including a spell in 1921 working 
for the maharajah of Dewas; this experience inspired his final novel, A Passage 
to India (1924). Forster wrote journalism, travel books and essays, including 
the seminal critical text, Aspects of the Novel (1927), and the 1938 essay Two 
Cheers for Democracy. He died in 1970, shortly after accepting the Order of 
Merit.

 The story:  Essentially a critique of repressive British social convention, A 
Room With a View opens at the Pension Bertolini in Florence, where Lucy 
Honeychurch is staying with her cousin Charlotte Bartlett. There she meets the 
eccentric "socialist" Emerson, and his son George; during one excursion George 
"insults" Lucy by impulsively kissing her. On her return to England, Lucy 
becomes engaged to the pompous Cecil Vyse, but her life is disrupted when the 
Emersons rent a villa in the same village, Summer Street. Lucy eventually 
succumbs to her emotions, breaks her engagement with Vyse, and marries George.

 The film-makers: American-born James Ivory (b 1928) met Indian producer 
Ismail Merchant (1936-2005) at the 1961 Cannes film festival, and the pair 
bonded over Merchant's plan to make English-language films in India. Their 
first production was an adaptation of Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's novel The 
Householder (1963). Jhabvala collaborated on their string of India-set, 
low-budget films, culminating with Heat and Dust (1983). Merchant Ivory turned 
to A Room With a View, casting the then little-known actressHelena Bonham Carter
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/helena-bonham-carter> in the lead. A Room 
With a View's success (taking seven times its $3m budget in the US alone) 
encouraged two further Forster adaptations, Maurice (1987) and Howards End 
(1992).

 How the book and film compare: The film is remarkably faithful to its source 
material, with whole scenes lifted almost verbatim from the page. Many of the 
chapter headings are retained, used as Brecht-style structural devices. The 
film does, however, dilute Forster's political concerns; all mention of 
Emerson's socialism is removed.

 Inspirations and influences: A Room With a View proved a landmark in the rise 
of the British costume movie. Films like The Go-Between (1971), Tess (1979) and 
The French Lieutenant's Woman (1981) concentrated on serious-minded sexual 
subtexts; the deftness of Merchant Ivory's comic touch meant A Room With a View 
operated almost independently of historical context, and more like a mainstream 
romantic comedy. It paved the way for a revived interest in other comic 
narratives, principally the Jane Austen revival of the 1990s, with Sense and 
Sensibility (1995) and Emma (1996).
 