
A flock of words rising from the trenches of the first world war and flying 
across the Channel, over the modern capital and taking refuge at the Imperial 
War Museum in London has been created by the animatorsAardman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/aardman>, best known for Wallace and Gromit, 
to mark the museum reopening after a £40m rebuild.

The film, Flight of the Stories, which will be shown in cinemas and is 
available on the museum'swebsite <http://www.iwm.org.uk/>, mixes the voices of 
actors reading extracts from diaries and letters sent back from the front, now 
held in the museum's huge archive, with the sounds of birds, songs from the 
period, wind and waves. The extracts include the words of Private Michael 
Lennon, of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers, newly arrived in Gallipoli in May 1915, 
writing to his brother, Frank: "I suppose we are for it tomorrow if we don't 
get shelled on the way … I can only hope that we have all the luck to come 
through the night and if I should get bowled out – well it can't be helped."

Lennon survived that offensive and wrote several letters over the next week, 
including one on the back of a Walker, Harrison and Garthwaites biscuit card. 
"This is a wonderful place Frank, like a World's Fair, with all the men of 
different nationalities," he wrote. "I only hope that I come back to tell 
little Frankie all about it."
 An image from Aardman's Flight of the Stories for the Imperial War Museum 
His last surviving letter, on 8 June, records that "one of the chaps who left 
Cork with us was bowled out, but I am hoping for something better than that". 
Lennon died three weeks later, on 28 June, the first anniversary of the shot 
fired by the Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip that killed Archduke Franz 
Ferdinand in Sarajevo and toppled the world into war.

The film also includes some words of Sidney Arthur Knight, who had sustained a 
head wound and therefore thought himself "a lucky beggar… shall be shifted 
across the water in all probability tomorrow".

Diane Lees, director of the IWM, said: "Flight of the Stories captures exactly 
what we were trying to convey – for while it is true that some of the people 
never made it back from the fighting front, their stories have, and it is our 
duty at IWM to ensure that they continue to be told."

The museum will reopen on 19 July, including spectacular redisplays of its 
first world war galleries and a special exhibition of British art from the war, 
Truth and Memory.
 An image from Aardman's Flight of the Stories for the Imperial War Museum 
The displays will also feature some poignant curiosities, including a piece of 
charming flowery wallpaper 
<http://www.iwm.org.uk/history/8-peculiar-battle-trophies-taken-from-the-front> 
– pink chrysanthemums on a pale green background – with a handwritten note 
explaining that it was taken from a German dugout. Although life in the 
trenches was wretched for both sides, many of the German dugouts were far 
better developed, with electricity, piped water, sewage systems and telephones, 
said the exhibition's curator Paul Cornish. Lieutenant HE Etherington was 
evidently so stunned by the comparative luxury of the dugout his unit captured 
that he brought the piece of wallpaper back to England as a souvenir.

There are also lucky souvenirs, some of them lifesavers. The bullet that would 
have killed Gunner John Dickinson in 1915 instead ploughed halfway through the 
Bible in his left breast pocket. Rifleman WS Main was carrying a cigarette case 
in his pocket when he was hit by a shell fragment that sliced through one side 
of the lid and lodged inside. He escaped without serious injury.

The museum is a lead partner in the national commemoration of the centenary 
and is building an online archive <http://livesofthefirstworldwar.org/> of the 
lives of more than eight million men and women who were caught up in the war, 
bringing together museum and library archives, and contributions from 
historians and members of the public.
 