
Heading for a First … Pearson

Following the publication of the higher education white paper, Pearson the 
publishing giant has acted speedily to agree a partnership with Royal Holloway, 
University of London, this week, which will validate a degree drawn up and 
designed by Pearson.

This is the first major step taken forward by the private provider, just a 
week after the white paper. It allows them to enter the degree-awarding ring 
for the first time. Pearson has not hidden its desire to gain university status 
itself eventually and award its own degrees, but for the time being this will 
be seen as a real coup. Of course, Pearson has lots of experience in offering 
qualifications; not only does it own the exam board EdExcel, but it also offers 
BTecs and HNDs already.

Of course sceptics have heralded this as private providers simply looking to 
earn a quick buck , but in truth this is likely to lead to more diverse 
offerings for students and the chance for qualifications to be studied in 
different ways. If successful, we are probably only a few strides away from 
seeing the establishing of the Pearson University.

Heading for a Fail … the University of Wales

The past seven days has gone from bad to worse for the University of Wales. 
Once regarded as an academic heavyweight, the last few days have seen the 
institution lurch from one PR crisis to the next. First, question marks were 
raised about the integrity, and even the legality, of links between the 
university and colleges in Malaysia and Thailand offering their degrees, 
according to the findings of a review from the Quality Assurance Agency. Many 
commentators described it as "the most damning report" of its kind they had 
seen, and a rare move away from the judgment of "confidence" which the agency 
has given to 99% of institutions.

Not content with a kicking from the QAA, Wales' education minister, Leighton 
Andrews, also put the boot in, describing the farce as bringing Wales "into 
disrepute". And then, just as things seemed like they could not get any worse, 
talks about the formation of a new super-university in Wales fell apart as UWIC 
walked away from discussions with Trinity St David and Swansea Metropolitan 
University as a clear consequence of the fall-out from the QAA's judgement on 
the University of Wales.

And then, the final cherry on the cake was news that the chief executive of 
Higher Education Funding Council for Wales, Professor Philip Gummet, in a 
leaked letter reported by the BBC to the chair of council at the University of 
Wales, stated the farce was "a significant failure of central processes, and of 
oversight of these processes by senior management and the council". For the 
higher education community, this is pretty damning stuff.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 