
The Asian Cup final between the Socceroos and South Korea had an average TV 
audience of 1.8 million people on Saturday night, but the live coverage was 
seen by more than 5 million people overall.

The match, which the Socceroos won 2-1 in extra time, was broadcast live on 
the main ABC channel everywhere exceptQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>, which carried the 
state’s election results instead. Viewers in the sunshine state watched the 
match on ABC2.

With both the Asian Cup and the ABC’s “Queensland Votes” election night 
coverage, the ABC easily passed its commercial competitors to become the 
most-watched channel on Saturday.

The ABC network of ABC, ABC2, ABC3 and ABC News 24 had its highest share of 
audience since digital channels were introduced in 2008.

The ABC’s main channel and the ABC network were both No 1, with shares of 
20.3% and 28.6% respectively.

“The ABC’s coverage of both the thrilling Asian Cup final and the election 
result in Queensland demonstrated our ability to cover multiple events of 
national and state importance across all platforms,” the ABC’s managing 
director, Mark Scott, told GuardianAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>.

“The Asian Cup final in particular brought many new viewers to the ABC and we 
are very proud of the results.”

The ABC’s election coverage reached 2.1 million viewers across ABC and ABC 
News 24, including 959,000 viewers in Queensland.

Queensland Votes on ABC and ABC News 24 achieved a combined metro and regional 
average audience of 466,000.

The Asian Cup semi-final between the Socceroos and the United Arab Emirates 
reached 3.1 million Australians nationally and the quarter-final between 
Australia and China reached more than 1.8 million people nationally. Reach 
means the number of people who tuned in at some stage and average refers to 
people who watched the entire broadcast.

The ABC’s head of sports and events, Justin Holdforth, said the Asian Cup had 
been a celebration of Australian culture, community and diversity.

“It’s been a privilege to be part of and we are immensely proud to have 
brought this landmark moment in Australian football to audiences throughout 
Australia, live and free-to-air and across ABC radio and iView,” Holdforth said.

There were 43,000 live streams of the Australia v South Korea match, plus an 
additional 12,600 catch-up plays of the first half via ABC’s iView catch-up TV 
platform.
 