
Adam Brickell is to quit racing’s ruling body, where he has been integrity 
director for less than four years, in a development sure to be linked to 
fallout from the Jim Best case, though any connection is officially denied. The 
British Horseracing Authority insists Brickell’s move has not been prompted by 
the disastrous few months his department has endured since news broke that a
finding against Best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/11/jim-best-guilty-ordering-jockey-stop-two-horses>
 would have to be quashed.

“I felt it was a natural time to move on to a fresh challenge,” Brickell is 
quoted as saying in a BHA press release. There is no word, however, on whether 
he has a job waiting for him,plans to take time to assess his opportunities, 
whether he will stay in sports regulation or return to private practice as a 
solicitor at the age of 36 after seven years at High Holborn.

Racehorse owner wants misleading track bulletins to be going, going, gone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/racehorse-owner-going-ritchie-fiddes-descriptions-trust-horse-racing>
Another sporting body might be cautious in approaching Brickell as a possible 
hire, given the catastrophe that has unfolded on his watch. But, for now, his 
employer offers nothing but praise, the BHA’s Nick Rust giving him a slap on 
the back when many other chief executives might have quietly distanced 
themselves.

“Adam has played a key role in ensuring British racing has effective 
governance structures in place and the necessary policies to help keep our 
sport fair and clean,” Rust said. “I am sorry he is leaving but I fully 
understand and respect his decision.”

Rust explained that Brickell’s integrity review, published in March, had led 
to “new thinking” about how the BHA’s regulatory function is organised. “In 
discussing this with Adam, it is clear that future roles are unlikely to fit 
with his personal ambitions.”

In other words Brickell’s review somehow managed to eliminate his own job. 
Sadly the BHA could offer no further detail about why that should happen but 
promises to publish details of “organisational improvements” on 30 September 
alongside the independent Quinlan review into its disciplinary process.

A quiet, restrained and methodical man, Brickell walked into something of a 
firestorm afterhis elevation to integrity director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/nov/08/bha-restructure-departure-paul-scotney>
 in December 2012. By the following spring, he was grappling with the biggest 
doping scandal in the sport’s history, which resulted inMahmood al-Zarooni 
being quickly banished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/25/mahmood-al-zarooni-godolphin-doping-scandal>
, as well as a separate steroid scandal in Newmarket.

Things got worse in October 2013, when the solicitor Matthew Lohn was first 
commissioned to give legal advice to the BHA, a fact that was not public until 
April this year. Lohn was a member of the BHA’s independent disciplinary panel 
and his hiring by the BHA meant all of his verdicts thereafter were open to 
challenge, as in Best’s case, on the grounds of an appearance of bias.

Two such verdicts have now been quashed, while those found in breach in seven 
other cases have been told by the BHA that they may have a right of action. The 
cost to the sport of mopping up this mess remains unclear but seems sure to run 
into six figures.

In view of his seniority there is no avoiding the likelihood that Brickell 
must bear at least a portion of the responsibility for this mess when the BHA 
finally gets round to sharing its view on the subject. But his departure robs 
the regulator of one candidate in the event that a cathartic firing should 
eventually be deemed necessary, leaving those who remain shifting uncomfortably 
in their seats.

Brickell will apparently leave in mid-September which, by remarkable 
coincidence, is also when the Best rehearing is due to take place. Arguments 
continue between the BHA and Best’s lawyers as to whether the rehearing should 
be postponed until after Quinlan reports.
 