
It's been 15 years since his last record, but Adam Ant has celebrated his 
return with an extraordinary interview in which he claims he would beat Liam 
Gallagher in a fight. "I'd like to have a fight with him whichever way he 
wants," the 55-year-old singertold the Quietus 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/04165-adam-ant-interview-oasis-lady-gaga-madonna-punk>
, "physically, mentally, I'd beat him in anyway shape or form, I know that."

Why he dislikes Gallagher isn't entirely clear, but his proclamation comes at 
the end of a lengthy interview in which he takes umbrage with everyone from the 
NHS toJoy Division <https://www.theguardian.com/music/joydivision> and Observer 
journalist Paul Morley.

Calling the latter a "fucking twat", Ant addresses him via the pen of 
journalist Simon Price, saying: "(Morley) remember that shared review you did 
of Dirk Wears White Sox with Throbbing Gristle? And we both got 'berks that 
lurk in the corner of your psyche'. That cunt is now being commissioned by Sony 
to write my liner notes. So, you were wrong. Suck my dick. You're a turncoat. 
Go and write for Frankie Goes to Hollywood. Or go on TV and talk shit for three 
hours. That represents the old school. He's fucked. He's got no credibility. 
Fuck him."

Of Joy Division, Ant says: "I actually had a song that we used to play live, 
but we were told we couldn't put it on the album because it was based on The 
Night Porter, a Dirk Bogarde film about a sado-masochistic relationship between 
a concentration camp prisoner and a Nazi guard. What about Joy Division calling 
themselves that, and then New Order? They only got away with it 'cos they're 
fucking ugly and they look like brewers."

But it is the state of Ant's mental health that dominates the interview. The 
singer, who has bipolar disorder, discusses his experience of being sectioned 
and the side effects of psychiatric drugs leaving him "not able to smile (and) 
dribbling". Ant says he's written a song, called Shrink, about his experiences 
for the new album.

"I was sectioned under the Mental Health Act, a Victorian law, which upset me 
because I don't think I'm nuts. I did wrong, I broke the law, OK. But they made 
a big fucking display of it. I was sentenced in the court where the Krays were 
sentenced, which I thought was a bit out of proportion, maybe they wanted to 
make an example of me, but that's the law."

Ant's new album has a working title of Adam Ant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adam-ant> Is the Blueblack Hussar In 
Marrying the Gunner's Daughter and will be released on his own label, Blueback 
Hussar.
 