
For the first few minutes I'm not even sure this interview should be taking 
place at all. The greeting is an awkward shuffle of hunched shoulders and 
downcast eyes; he can't look at me, and I can't hear him. His gaze averted, 
hands stuffed into pockets, he mumbles in haltingly reluctant whispers, as if 
words can cause him physical pain. The man should be talking to a doctor, I 
worry, not a nosy journalist. We try some small talk, but it's almost 
impossible to make out what he's saying – until I ask what he prefers to be 
called. "Adam," he says firmly, glancing up for the first time. "Adam Ant 
<http://www.adam-ant.net/>." Does anyone ever call him Stuart? "Me mum," he 
half grins. And then gradually, inch by inch, he starts to relax.

It is still quite a stretch to believe this can be the same man whose 
fearless, white-striped face stared down from the bedroom wall of pretty much 
every teenage girl I knew back in the early 80s. Fifteen hit singles – among 
themPrince Charming <http://youtu.be/9p__WmyAE3g> and Stand and Deliver 
<http://youtu.be/q7NyE8o5fxk> – in just three years, and lavishly baroque 
videos, made Ant one of the decade's first pop superstars, inspiring Antmania 
in a generation of hysterical fans and selling more than 16m albums, before the 
singer quit in 1986, to become an actor in the United States.

Over the years since then he has acted in some respectable if unmemorable TV 
shows and movies, made a couple of moderately successful albums, and toured 
small venues across Europe and the US. He married briefly, had a daughter, 
divorced and moved back to London. But he has also been diagnosed with bipolar 
disorder, hospitalised repeatedly, medicated, sectioned and convicted of 
affray. He last made the national headlines in 2003, when he was found by 
police, tearful and half naked, curled up in the basement of his local cafe, 
having just attacked his neighbour's flat.

But next month the singer will take to the stage again, performing live at the 
Proud Gallery in Camden <https://www.proudonline.co.uk/news.aspx>, London, to 
launch a photographic retrospective of his career. As with many 80s pop icons, 
it is easy to recall his flamboyant camp as faintly comical, but the exhibition 
is a startling reminder of his commitment to an aesthetic that was fanatically 
detailed, highly imaginative and heavily influenced by the sensibility of punk. 
Ant's relationship with his younger self bears no trace of ironic nostalgia, 
and he still gets annoyed when anyone muddles him up with the early 80s new 
romantic scene.

"Cos new romantic was nothing to do with Adam and the Ants. The Ants was a 
punk band <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gZQirnLVmno>, or a post-punk band if 
anything, and so historically it's inaccurate.New romantic 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/oct/04/spandau-ballet-new-romantics> was 
basically, in my mind, clubbers with too much makeup on with stupid clothes. I 
never set foot in any of their clubs, so I find it quite distressing to be 
nobbled into new romantic, cos it was just a load of guys who looked like 
they'd had a row with their girlfriends' makeup. There was nothing tough about 
it, nothing dangerous about it, it was soft electro stuff and it just looked a 
bit wet. And I didn't like being associated with it."

A man of 58 who still cares this much should probably come across as faintly 
ridiculous, but the intense seriousness with which Ant deconstructs these 
arcane distinctions conveys an impression of almost heartbreaking 
vulnerability. He is also, though, surprisingly pragmatic about the choice 
between art and commercial success.The first Adam and the Ants album 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dirk_Wears_White_Sox>, released in 1979, was too 
"self-indulgent" to sell well, and he admits: "I wanted money. I just wanted to 
be – well, I'm quite a competitive person, I want to win. When you work as hard 
as you can and as much as you can to make your first album, and you don't make 
any money, then you change things."
 Adam Ant with fellow vocalist Jordan in the early incarnation of Adam and the 
Ants, the Music Machine, London, 1977. Photograph: Ray Stevenson/Rex Features 
So Ant hired Malcolm McLaren to manage the band, but it didn't quite go to 
plan, because McLaren promptly poached most of its members and formed a new 
group calledBow Wow Wow <http://youtu.be/h16ACVQ60FY>. "I was none too pleased. 
But I also realised that Malcolm was pretty much telling the truth. He said: 
'What do you want? Do you want to make records that everybody hears – be as 
popular as cornflakes – or do you want to be a cult artist?' I said: 'I 
definitely want to make hit records.' And he said: 'You're going the wrong way 
about it.'"

Ant found new band members, made a second album in 1980, and struck gold. "I 
played over 100 clubs before I played Top of the Pops, andin three minutes on 
Top of the Pops my entire life changed <http://youtu.be/kwP9mesLxro>." Given 
his formative attachment to punk – he can still recall the moment he first saw 
the Sex Pistols perform live in 1975, and thought, "Now I know what I want to 
do" – did he feel at all squeamish about appearing on the BBC show? "Well, I'd 
watched Roxy [Music] on it, and [Marc] Bolan, and the Stones, so I thought if 
it's good enough for them, why shouldn't it be good enough for you?"

He became a star overnight – and it was everything he had dreamed of. "I loved 
being in a band," he says simply. "But I was working hard, and I didn't drink, 
smoke or take drugs at all – I'd set myself almost a Spartan social life." He 
even drew up a contract prohibiting his band mates from taking drugs. Would he 
say he was quite controlling? "Well, it was my band. And I wouldn't put up with 
drugs. And that's what finished it; drugs began to creep in, and I wasn't 
having it."

Before long he had sacked most of the band, made a successful solo album, and 
continued to work flat out. His prodigious capacity for work was equalled only 
by Olympian promiscuity; he has always said his only form of recreation was 
sex, and when I ask how many women he thinks he slept with, the speed of his 
reply – "No idea" – suggests a man who has a pretty good idea, but is never 
going to say. "I just think it sounds like bragging. It would be naive of me to 
deny there was a lot of girls involved, but for me to give it a number – that's 
disrespectful."

Was he happy? "I was intensely busy. The touring was crazy, it was a lot of 
work. But I enjoyed it." Did he have everything he wanted? "I wanted to make 
good records. But my problem is I've got a low boredom threshold, so I wanted 
it to look and sound different with each album, which is really tantamount to 
suicide, cos people lose it, they lose it – they say: 'I like that, and that's 
not this.' Like with AC/DC or Led Zeppelin, they just stick with that. It's 
pretty much the same thing. But I didn't want to."

An embarrassingly flat Live Aid performance in 1985 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=obXBhSraP3s> confirmed his departure from the 
Top 10 for good, but his other problem was to prove much more serious. "The 
trouble was, I forgot to take any time off. At the end of the day it catches up 
with you. And it caught up with me in a big way."

Born Stuart Goddard in 1954, into impoverished post-war inner London, he was 
the only child of a violently unhappy working-class couple who divorced when he 
was seven. But by then he had already begun suffering from hallucinations. 
"Yeah, nighthorses – horrible. It was just like a very hallucinogenic kind of 
feeling; I was awake but it was terrifying. Obviously you don't need a shrink 
to work out what caused that kind of stuff. If your parents are very unhappy" – 
and suddenly his voice changes, no longer sanguine and philosophical, but angry 
and hard – "and beating thefuck out of each other every night, well, you know 
that's going to happen." The tone of quiet resignation is back as he adds, 
almost to himself: "Yeah, it was a bad do."

After school he enrolled at art college in north London, married a girl on his 
course and moved in with her parents. Still only 21, it wasn't long before he 
began to feel suffocated, trapped in a life that was never going to work – and 
so he swallowed the contents of his mother-in-law's medicine cabinet. "I think 
it wasn't a serious attempt to kill myself, but it was serious enough for me to 
draw attention to the fact that I was very unhappy in that situation, and I 
wasn't telling people how unhappy I was in that situation."

Discharged from hospital, he changed his name to Adam Ant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adam-ant>, formed the band, and success soon 
spelt the end of his marriage. The long list of subsequent girlfriends included 
Amanda Donohoe, Jamie Lee Curtis, Heather Graham and Carole Caplin, but it was 
a woman he had never even met who triggered his second breakdown. Besieged by a 
mentally unstable stalker in the US, who poisoned his fish-pond, tried to kill 
his dog and would stand naked outside his house shouting obscenities and 
threatening to castrate him, in 1994 Ant checked himself into a psychiatric 
hospital, in a state of hypomania, and was diagnosed with bipolar disorder.
 Adam Ant in a publicity shot for the single Stand and Deliver, 1981. 
Photograph: Allan Ballard/Scopefeatures.com 
He remarried in 1997, to a PR for Vivienne Westwood, and a year later their 
daughter was born. "I became a man. Before that I was a little boy. 
My daughter's the greatest thing that's happened to me in my life and she 
turned me into a more responsible man, as opposed to just someone who's a 
perpetual teenager, thinking you're a man when you're not. I took five years 
off to be with her, and I enjoyed being her dad, and I had enough money to do 
it, so I was able to not work for five years and look after my daughter."

But by 2002 the marriage was over, the money had run out, and the pressure was 
reaching danger level again. He had been hospitalised the previous year but had 
stopped taking his antidepressants, and after decades of abstinence had begun 
drinking again. Following an argument with a local man, Ant marched into a 
Camden pub intending to confront him, but was laughed at;he stormed out, 
returned with a second world war pistol, hurled a car alternator through the 
pub window, threatened to shoot, and then fled, before being arrested by armed 
police <http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2002/aug/14/arts.artsnews>, bailed and 
promptly sectioned in a secure psychiatric ward.

He recalls the drama now with a mixture of remorse and righteous indignation. 
"This was someone that had this delusion that I was doing something with his 
wife, and I wasn't. So it all got crazy. I basically took the law into my own 
hands, which was the biggest mistake of my life, I'd never broken the law 
before, I'd never even had a driving ticket. So you do the wrong thing. Like I 
say, it was the biggest mistake of my life."

At the Old Bailey <http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2002/oct/02/arts.artsnews3> he 
pleaded not guilty on grounds of insanity, but later admitted a lesser charge 
of affray, and escaped a custodial sentence. But the following year he attacked 
his neighbour's flat, was sectioned again, and spent six months in a 
psychiatric hospital.

"I was in a very bad state of mind. But you don't walk into a doctor's surgery 
and say I'm nuts – and if you do, they just fill you with antidepressants which 
just turn you into a Tellytubby. Antidepressants are very good, but it's a 
clinical cosh, really. Sometimes you have to be knocked out, just to stop; when 
you're in that state all you want to do is just sleep, and rest your body and 
your brain. But being on antidepressants, if you're not careful you can just be 
sitting on the couch looking at daytime TV, eating and doing nothing at all." 
Which is pretty much what he did for the next four years. "And I didn't enjoy 
it."

Ant talks quite openly about his mental illness, but seems unresolved about 
medication; he knows he's not well, but the drugs that stabilise his mind also 
anaesthetise his creativity, and if that is the price he must pay for sanity, 
he's not sure if it is worth it. When I ask if he is taking medication at the 
moment, he pauses before answering. "No. But I can if I want to, if I have the 
warning signs, and I know the warning signs, I can go and get them."

What would be a familiar warning sign? "Well, the trouble is, when you look at 
the list: sexual promiscuity, spending loads of money, flamboyant behaviour – 
well, that describes every rock'n'roll star I can think of. That comes with my 
profession. So it's very difficult to know."

I hadn't expected Ant to still think of himself as a rock'n'roll star. Forged 
more than 30 years ago, in the heat of Top of the Pops camera lights, this 
self-image should by now be preposterous – and yet, in his case it seems 
somehow heroic. He lives alone with his two dogs, close to his daughter, runs 
his own record label, and talks about his young acts with tenderly paternal 
protectiveness. One of them isGeorgina Baillie, of Sachsgate infamy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/aug/13/georgina-baillie-adam-ant>; 
"I think it was pretty cowardly, what went on there," he offers with gallant 
disdain. "Quite shocking, really."

There is an innocence – an almost monastic purity – about Ant's enduring 
devotion to pop; after coming off antidepressants a few years ago, he began 
performing live again, playing modest venues, often unannounced, and later this 
year he will release a new album. I find myself hoping his audiences are 
respectful, and kind.

Though still beautiful, he has to wear hats and bandanas to disguise the fact 
that he is now bald. He was always very conscious of his own beauty – "I think 
to be a pop star you need sex, subversion, style and humour" – and the hair 
loss seems gratuitously cruel. "Yeah," he admits with quiet sadness. "It was 
pretty awful.

"But – I dunno – you've just got to do what you can. It's part of the job, 
really. Just gotta get up, have a shave, and get on with it, really."

Adam Ant will be performing at Proud Camden in London NW1 on Tuesday 6 March 
to launch an exhibition of portraits, Adam Ant: Dandy in the Underworld, at the 
gallery from 7 March - 29 April. All proceeds from the event will go to DebRA, 
a charity working on behalf of individuals and families affected by 
Epidermolysis. For tickets and further info: visitwww.proudcamden.com 
<http://www.proudcamden.com/>

This article was amended on 19 February 2012 to give Stuart Goddard's correct 
surname. The original article used Hubbard. It was amended on 20 February 2012 
to correct the spelling of Marc Bolan. It previously stated Mark.
 