
"Real life is much stranger than fiction, man." Mike D speaks from the 
turntables in the den of King Ad-Rock's Hollywood apartment. He haphazardly 
scratches a reggae dub record, repeating the same section over and over. 
"Jamaica, Jamaica ... J-J-Jamaica, Jamaica … Jamai-ca, Ja-mai-ca …" the record 
blurts over the loudspeakers. "Much stranger than fiction."

For Mike D, Ad-Rock and MCA, known collectively as the Beastie Boys, the 
cliché about real life is an understatement. From the eye of the hurricane they 
have witnessed the 1980s' most intense and unpredictable phenomenon. 
Irreverent, obnoxious and masterfully creative, theBeastie Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beastie-boys> are perhaps the only recording 
artists to cause international chaos among press, fans and parents alike since 
the Sex Pistols and punk rock.

The group's first LP, Licensed to Ill 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/album/57f5e7c8-2a6e-34a0-b4cd-0e77695bc36f>, 
went quadruple platinum as it transformed the face of hip-hop. Nobody could 
have predicted the impact the Beasties would make, turning white America and 
the rest of the world on to rap music and jacking up the sales of baseball caps 
and heavy-duty car speakers. More importantly, they lived the dream of more 
than one pop-aspirant: they became extremely popular, as Ad-Rock puts it, for 
being themselves. All in wild, three-part rhyme.

Part of the appeal of the Beastie Boys is that they really didn't seem to give 
a hoot as they screamed about the day's adventures. In the prefab, 
pressure-cooked synth-fake 80s they were, and are, an isolated example of truth 
in artistry. After Licensed to Ill, after the controversial tours (featuring 
inflatable penises and girls in cages on stage) and the lawsuits from the press 
and the record companies and their own management, the Beasties disappeared as 
quickly as they exploded. It seemed that, like the Sex Pistols, they had taken 
their own brand of madness as far as it could go.

Today, just as they were being written off by many as a sort of comical 
one-line event, they're ready to explode all over again. Their new LP,Paul's 
Boutique 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/album/b534aa01-d621-31ba-9278-38a500e3cdca>, 
is an astonishing departure from their last, as exotic as Licensed to Ill was 
blatant, yet just as captivating. And it's already been seen darting up the 
charts. The second act of the madness is about to begin.

MCA: It's like, we were the big shit, right, and then like Bon Jovi and U2 and 
those motherfuckers got big and we rolled up to this U2 party and they wouldn't 
even let us in and we said: "Fuck this, man, we've gotta make another record, 
otherwise how we gonna get into all these U2 parties?!"

AD-ROCK: I told the doorman at the U2 party: "Why are you such an ASSHOLE?!"

MCA: There were, like, all these cameras and videos and news stations and 
police and hundreds of people and we pull up in this limo and they won't let us 
in right front of everybody.

MIKE D: There's a lot of shit we wanna do right now. It's just a matter of 
time.

AD-ROCK: When the shit hits the fan, I'll be under the table.

MCA: When the shit hits the fan, I won't be scraping it off the walls. I'll 
tell you that much ... there won't be any umbrellas, man.

AD-Rock: Yauch [MCA] has just been on Clump Avenue all day.

Met a girl at a party and I gave her my card/ You know that it said, Napoleon 
Bonaparte/ Peepin' out the colors I be buggin' on Cezanne/ They call me Mike D, 
Joe Blow the Lover Man/ Your face turns red as your glass of wine/ That you 
spilled on my lyrics as you wasted my time/ Girl you should be with me you 
should drop that bum/ 'Cause I got more flavor than Fruit Striped Gum

– B-Boy Bouillabaisse

Like their surprise return and the barrage of freaky samples and name 
droppings on Paul's Boutique, the one guideline the Beasties seem to operate on 
is "No guidelines". Ad-Rock can appear in a fairly serious movie about teenage 
isolation like Lost Angels and still sing along with a Debbie Gibson video 
using nothing but expletives. The group can go out looking like the Bowery 
B-Boys and return to the public with theHey Ladies video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Naf5uJYGoiU&ob=av2e>, which displays them 
strutting in mid-70s disco gear on Saturday Night Fever-like sets. It's a 
funny, funky kind of anarchy, much more palatable than their punk-rock roots 
ever were, but just as spontaneous.

WEEKLY: Do you think you'll play your instruments on this tour?

MIKE D: We bust out and jam ALL THE TIME, man.

MCA: Any requests from the hardcore set?

WEEKLY: What about some Germs?

MCA: We could do Lexicon Devil. Darryl Jennifer of the Bad Brains used to 
always say that Mike D sounded like Darby Crash.

AD-ROCK: Darryl Jennifer of the Bad Brains must be really pissed off that his 
last name is Jennifer.

MCA (on the broken shards of watermelon on Ad-Rock's street): Is that a whole 
watermelon or a half one that you threw?

AD-ROCK: Whole.

MIKE D: I heard if you break watermelon open like that it fucks with the ozone.

MCA: What is up with the ozone?

MIKE D: We have ROCKED the ozone radically, man. They could probably fix the 
ozone if everybody stopped what they were doing and they put some cement up 
there.

MCA: We're gonna do a Bowling for Dollars-type thing, but it'll be 
Breakdancing on Cardboard for Yen for the ozone layer so it'll be called 
Breaking in Space.

MIKE D: Like, you remember positive fucking at Woodstock and all the people 
were like "No more rain!" and it stopped raining.

MCA: Now it'll be help John Ozone.

MIKE D: It's an underrated and forgotten pastime.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBptQHAW2T5M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBptQHAW2T5M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBptQHAW2T5M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Yeah we've got beef chief we're knockin' out teeth chief/ And if you don't 
believe us you should question your belief Keith/ Like Sam the Butcher bringing 
Alice the meat/ Like Fred Flinstone driving around with bald feet

— Shake Your Rump

Hip-hop <https://www.theguardian.com/music/hip-hop> and rap music thrives and 
survives on newness at an exasperating rate relative to most pop music. Last 
week's jam might be ancient history next week. Thus the term fresh. Uncannily, 
the Beastie Boys have moved from the ultimate hip-hop producer of the mid-80s, 
Rick Rubin, who gave Licensed to Ill some of its blasting hard-rock edge, to 
the ultimate hip-hop producer of the late 80s, Matt Dike, who discovered and 
recorded both Tone Loc and Young MC, and who, along with John King and Mike 
Simpson, gives Paul's Boutique some of its infectious funkiness.

A testament to the Beasties' good ear: they chose to work with the three 
producers, who call themselves the Dust Brothers, before the Brothers had 
multiplatinum sales with Tone Loc's debut album. "Yauch and Mike Simpson went 
to school together in New York years ago, but we didn't even know he was in the 
Dust Brothers," says Mike D. "We met Matt Dike way back at Power Tools … "

"When we met him, Matt was dressed in a fucking witch's costume … it was a 
week before Hallowe'en and my man just busted out with full witch gear – the 
hair and the pointed hat and a short black dress," adds MCA.

In many ways, Paul's Boutique almost sounds like a debut, crossing hip-hop 
terrain never before imagined. The album includes a question-asking mix which 
the Beasties answer, and a 15-minute opus of song snippets, a la the last part 
of the Beatles' Abbey Road. Lyrically, the album is similarly advanced, with 
mind-boggling imagery such as "Over-ripe fresh skweezed California females/ 
With three-inch cherry red press-on Lee nails," and poetic haiku blurts like: 
"The trigger/ I pulled/his face/ The yoke" from Egg Man, a raucous ode to egg 
wars. It's a long way from "I got a hat not a visor/ I drink Budweiser."

AD-ROCK: You know how there's all these rappers like Mike D and King T and Ice 
T and Cool C or something like that? Well, on Mayberry, on Andy Griffith, they 
had Aunt B. She's down with this shit.

MCA: New Kids on the Block are trying to MC now. They've got that song, 
Hangin' Tough <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=By86PcLufOU&ob=av3e>, and then 
the one guy goes: "And it ain't over till the fat lady sings!"

AD-ROCK: They are SO crazy-looking. They have these Bruce Willis haircuts and 
in this one video you see them all standing in a "Drug-Free Zone".

MCA: And it ain't all over till the fat lady douches!

Smoked up a bag of elephant tranquilisers/ Because I had to deal with a 
money-hungry miser/ Had a 'caine-filled Kool with my man Russ Rush/ Saw all my 
teeth fall in the sink when I started to brush

— Car Thief

As with all Beastie endeavors, the release of their new album is already 
surrounded by major controversy and chaos. After claiming they didn't get paid 
for Licensed to Ill, they broke their contract with Def Jam, moved to Los 
Angeles to record with the Dust Brothers and signed a monumental deal with 
Capitol. Meanwhile, Russell Simmons, president of Def Jam, may release a new 
Beastie Boys album of his own this summer, using outtake tracks from old 
sessions and new backing tracks, tentatively titled White House.

WEEKLY: Have you heard White House?

MIKE D: No-one's heard it.

MCA: The only reason he's doing it is to hassle us.

AD-ROCK: It's garbage, it's trash.

MCA: They're talking about using vocal tracks sampled into House music, and 
apart from the fact that we're not fond of House music … it's just weak to have 
… I can't even figure out what he's using … all he has is a couple of lines or 
some shit.

MIKE D: It's not like he has huge vaults filled with master tapes of us. It's 
just every musician's nightmare. Not only your past coming back to haunt you 
but your past in songs you know you won't like.

MCA: If he puts it out we've got a video of him getting boned in the ass and 
we're gonna put that out.

MIKE D: We can probably stop it … stranger things have happened … They ripped 
us off and it sucks.

WEEKLY: Were you ever tired of having to be Beastie and playing a role?

MIKE D: Yeah, man, it wasn't about having to do a job and having to play live. 
But after a while Russell would be sticking beer in our hands and saying "GO … 
this is what you get paid to do."

MCA: That's bullshit. Russell never put shit in my hands.

AD-Rock: No, I remember it. You guys were there and we got into a big 
argument. He said: "You didn't drink beer last night. At least go out there and 
tap a beer, catch a beer."

MIKE D: We were like: "Fuck you, Russell, that's not what we're about." In 
England we were depicted as larger-than-life villains, and by the time we got 
to Liverpool those people weren't there to see the music. They were there 
because of what they'd heard about it and they were psyched to fuck shit up on 
a Saturday night, and the people we were working with could've steered us away 
from that but they didn't and only now can we look back and see that certain 
things had led us to that point. But you can't control it … life is way 
stranger than fiction.

AD-ROCK: Had we made another record then, we'd be over now. But that whole 
shit was so much fun for the first couple of months. People got into the record 
and we didn't have to play fucked-up clubs. It got big, and it was really fun 
and then it got so wack.

MIKE D: I mean, I feel bad even just saying these things and depicting it like 
… It wasn't some plan, it was this spontaneous thing, but it became a job.

WEEKLY (to Ad-Rock): How do you feel about your dad [playwright Israel 
Horovitz] calling Paul's Boutique a homophobic record?

AD-ROCK: I don't know what you're talking about … actually, I do know what 
you're talking about.

MCA: What?

MIKE D: It was this little quote in Us magazine.

AD-ROCK: I don't know where they would've called my dad and asked him about 
the record.

MCA: He said that about this record? I can't figure out why he would say that.

AD-ROCK: I don't think he ever said it.

WEEKLY: Would Us just outright lie like that?

AD-ROCK: Oh, yeah. They had a quote of me the next month saying I don't like 
pretty girls. Why would I? They just make things up. People write all kinds of 
things about us, weird things. In England it was so crazy, it was like cover 
stories like "Pop Stars Sneer at Dying Children" and "Fuck Off, Cripples." One 
was hilarious: "Beastie Boy Mike D Kidnapped Me and Forced Me To Smoke Pot."

MCA: All the papers there are like on the National Enquirer trip. They had a 
picture of us and it said: "We hate England"!

The Beastie Boys' split from Def Jam and Rush Management, both headed by 
Russell Simmons, is significant not only in terms of a legal battle, but in 
relation to their status as a hip-hop act. Rush handles almost every rap outfit 
you've ever heard of, from LL Cool J to Run-DMC to Public Enemy to De La Soul. 
In early 1987, the Beastie Boys and Run-DMC toured, ironically under the banner 
"Together Forever". The Beastie Boys also claim to have discovered Public Enemy 
and brought them to Def Jam, and it is likely that Public Enemy's first album 
was funded by money from Licensed to Ill.

WEEKLY: What about what's going on with Public Enemy?

MCA: They fucked around and wound up with a bald skin head.

MIKE D: It's a hard call because I can't really tell what went on from what I 
read.

MCA: If the whole anti-Semitism thing is true then that's pretty fucking scary 
… fighting for one thing and …

AD-ROCK: It's like, why do you have to disrespect someone to gain respect?

MCA: It's crazy because we brought Public Enemy on the road and showed them to 
America.

Rat soup-eating test-cheating no-business punk/insecure born in the junkyard 
with the junk/ You've gone wet-look crazy and messed with your head/ You fucked 
around and wound up with the bald skin head/ You're all mixed up, like pasta 
primavera/ Yhy'd you throw that chair at Geraldo Rivera?

— What Comes Around

MIKE D: The thing I feel really good about is not selling records but I was 
walking down the street in Pasadena the other day, this conservative nice 
street in Pasadena and I see this car with like eight guys in it, and they're 
screaming and blasting the new album.

WEEKLY: How do you like living in Los Angeles?

AD-ROCK: It's cool … new scenery.

MCA: I'd just like to say that everyone should do their best to stop being 
bullshit artists and yes-men and I would like to lodge a formal complaint to 
everyone in LA to start a petition to re-erect the Beastie Boys flag over 
Capitol Records.

Outside, night is falling over Hollywood and the lights of the city are 
turning on. In a matter of weeks, the Beastie Boys are going to cut through the 
bullshit and the yes-men and give the pop-music world the shot in the arm it 
has so desperately needed. Thank God somebody has the guts to wave their freak 
flag high.

• To see all 23 tracks scroll down the list using the slider on the right hand 
side.

© Danny (Shredder) Weizmann, 1989
 