
Those who make a living from producing journalism ought not to approve of 
“adblocking” software, in the same way that chickens do not hold investment 
portfolios of shares in Paxo and Bisto. So it was theoretically good news for 
publishers (including the Guardian, probably) that culture secretary John 
Whittingdale announced at last week’s Oxford Media Convention that he sees 
adblocking as akin to a “protection racket” and would be urgently convening a 
round table to look into it, which doesn’t exactly suggest the resounding smack 
of firm government.

There are several layers of irony here to excavate before getting to the heart 
of the matter. Firstly, Brexit-tastic Whittingdale is campaigning against one 
very helpful solution to adblocking - Europe. There are laws currently being 
enacted in Europe to protect net neutrality which would almost certainly make 
thescary prospect of mobile operators like 3  
<http://fortune.com/2016/02/19/three-network-ad-blocking/>blocking all 
advertising at network level illegal. Furthermore, you don’t have to spend very 
much time talking to policy staff of the larger platform and telco companies to 
know that potential European regulation is taken far more seriously than a 
Whittingdale round table.

Secondly, adblockers are used by people (voters AND readers) who don’t wish to 
harm the news industry, but do wish to halve their mobile phone data bills; in 
other words adblocking thrives because of a failure towards consumers. Forcing 
people to consume advertising that strips their data and costs them money is 
hardly a vote-winning strategy. And finally the Conservative government has, 
through the BBC charter process, expended massive amounts of hot air and other 
renewable energy sources in trying to undermine and dismantle the one British 
media institution which cannot be weakened by adblocking.

By using a major policy speech to raise this question, Whittingdale has at 
least performed the service of putting several previously undiscussed, critical 
questions about the future of the UK’s media industry on the table. How he 
solves them is going to say a lot about the government’s real views on 
protecting the interests of a strong and independent press.

Adblocking <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ad-blocking> is alarming for 
publishers, because their business models have become overly reliant on 
intrusive advertising carrying heaps of tracking code which upsets users and, 
more importantly, costs them more money (data) on their mobile phones. Seeing 
annoying ads is essentially a bearable irritation; having to pay for something 
you haven’t asked for is enough to motivate people to download adblocking 
software. If adblocking becomes routine at network level as Israeli company 
Shine’s deal with 3 would make it, then only publishers with special exemption 
status would ever be able to show ads (hence Whittingdale’s protection racket 
analogy).

The right of consumers not to look at advertising has run straight into the 
right of companies to advertise, and publishers to make money. Whittingdale has 
said he wishes to convene a group including telecom companies and social media 
platforms as well as publishers and advertisers. If he manages this, it would 
be an opportunity to ask much bigger questions about control and access around 
media.

In the US certain publishers, such as the Washington Post, have experimented 
with blocking people 
<http://adage.com/article/digital/washington-post-test-blocking-people-ad-blockers/300304/>
 who use adblockers from the rest of their site. The other options to avoid 
adblocking include publishers putting their pages carrying advertising through 
major platforms such as Facebook’s Instant Articles (Facebook, incidentally, 
received significant pre-flotation funding from Horizon Ventures, the Li 
Ka-shing vehicle which, having profited hugely from its Facebook investment, is 
now funding Shine).

Adblocking may be a pressing issue for publishers, but it is only a small 
piece of a much larger puzzle about who controls news, information and access 
to the mobile web, and therefore all publishing, revenue and audience on mobile 
platforms. Last week I gave a talk in Cambridge, as a Humanitas visiting 
lecturer, on why the increase in mobile use calls for a re-examination of the 
whole media regulatory environment. In researching it I was surprised to find 
almost no central policy work which has addressed what is a fundamental shift 
in power in the media, not just in part of the market but across all of it.

Ensuring we have informed democracies has always trailed some way behind 
squaring the press as a political aim in formulating media policy. It is not 
really possible to have a coherent view on adblocking without examining the 
broader dynamics of information on the mobile web, or the part that companies 
who lie outside telecoms carrier regulation, such as Apple, Google andFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, might play in it.

And a point for publishers to remember could be this: if your business model 
is totally reliant on something your readers and viewers abhor, then it might 
be time to think about the sagacity of dismantling it, rather than getting John 
Whittingdale to protect it.
 