
An “alarming” number of pre-school children are being prescribed drugs to 
treat hyperactivity – contrary to medical guidelines that say they should not 
be used on children under six – because overstretched health workers go 
straight to medication rather than offering psychological interventions.

More than a fifth of educational psychologists say they know of preschool 
children who are being given medication such as Ritalin even though the 
National Institute forHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and 
Clinical Excellence (Nice) recommends psychological interventions should be 
tried first.

The survey, which aimed to investigate the medicalisation of childhood 
behaviour, also found there was an “intolerance of difference”, so children not 
conforming to the norm were increasingly being seen as having something wrong 
with them.

One educational psychologist who took part in the study, which was carried out 
by the University College London Institute of Education (IoE) and the British 
Psychological Society, wrote: “Our biggest difficulty is that children’s and 
adolescent mental health services and paediatric teams are so short-staffed 
they go straight to medication and completely ignore Nice guidance.”

Ritalin, which is the most commonly used trade name for methylphenidate, is a 
central nervous system stimulant used to treat attention deficit disorder (ADD) 
and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).

The Nice guidelines, which were amended in 2013, state: “Parent-training/ 
education programmes are the first-line treatment for parents or carers of 
pre-school children … Drug treatment is not recommended for pre-school children 
with ADHD.”

The findings are part of a survey of 136 educational psychologists from 70 
local authorities across the UK, seeking their views on the assessment, 
diagnosis and treatment of ADHD.

The report found that medication was seen as the main solution in the 
treatment of ADHD. “Medication was felt to be the predominant form of treatment 
for ADHD despite Nice guidelines that psychological interventions should be 
implemented first,” the report said.

“Multiple systemic factors” were creating a “pressure for increasing rates of 
diagnosis and medication”.

The survey, which will be formally published next year, said there was an 
“urgent need to examine local policies regarding the effective prevention and 
intervention in cases of pre-school behavioural, emotional and social 
difficulties”.

Vivian Hill, director of professional educational psychology training at the 
IoE, who conducted the research with Horatio Turner of UCL, said: “It is very 
alarming to discover that terribly young children who often have not had access 
to alternative treatments are being put on medication.

“It is almost certainly to do with the fact that the whole of children’s 
mental health services is incredibly underfunded. It’s quick and easy – one off 
the waiting list, one intervention in place.

“To work with a child or a young person and their family over time is much 
more costly, but much safer and likely to have much better results. Medication 
has a short-term impact. It will not make the difference long-term.”

Educational psychologists who took part in the survey said “intolerance of 
difference” affected the way adults viewed children’s learning and behaviour. 
One wrote: “There is an increasingly prevalent view in society that people who 
do not fit a particular environment must have something wrong with them.”

The report said “within-child” factors were emphasised too often, rather than 
environmental factors, “due to families and schools wishing to abdicate 
responsibility for children’s behaviour and systemic failings in current 
diagnostic procedures”. One participant said: “It’s an easy explanation, which 
is convenient and comforting and absolves everyone of blame by locating the 
problem within the child.”

Educational psychologists said they were frustrated by factors that limited 
their ability to care effectively for children with ADHD. “Usually when [we] 
get involved the die is cast and is predominantly problem-focused, so much so 
that the only perceivable solution is medication,” one wrote.

The report concluded that educational psychologists should be involved in 
developing a broader understanding of contextual perspectives of ADHD among 
families and recommended establishing a multi-agency approach for its 
assessment and treatment.

One EP said: “My local authority has a behaviour pathway that includes ADHD.” 
Following its introduction one of the survey participants said that behavioural 
observation by an educational psychologist led to a significant fall in the 
diagnosis and medication of ADHD.

A Department of Health spokesman said: “Prescribing decisions are for doctors 
to make, but there are clear independent guidelines for the treatment of ADHD, 
which only recommend the use of drugs in severe cases and as part of a 
comprehensive treatment plan.

“Children’s mental health is a key priority, which is why we’ve formed a 
taskforce to look at how we can provide the best possible care and have 
invested £54m in improving access to psychological treatments.”
 