
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder is the bane of many 
parents, nurseries and schools.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> who suffer from the condition 
find it difficult to concentrate, and they can be disruptive and difficult at 
home and in the classroom.

The argument over what causes the disorder has been raging for decades. Many 
blame bad parenting, whereas others point the finger at disorders of brain 
chemistry or hormonal disturbances in the womb. But research that has just been
published in the Lancet claims to have found the answer: it's all down to genes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/sep/30/hyperactive-children-genetic-disorder-study>
.

The study, headed by Professor Anita Thapar from Cardiff University, examined 
366 children with ADHD and 1,047 in a control group. They searched for 
mutations that occur when a chunk of DNA is either duplicated or deleted. The 
study found these in 14% of children with ADHD, but only 7% of the controls. 
The Lancet press release claimed that the study "is the first to find direct 
evidence that ADHD is a genetic disorder". Thapar stated: "Now we can say with 
confidence that ADHD is a genetic disease and that the brains of children with 
this condition develop differently to those of other children."

But is 14% compared to 7% sufficient evidence for claiming that ADHD is a 
genetic disease? It's easy to turn the numbers around and show that seven out 
of eight children with ADHD had no detectable genetic abnormality. That sounds 
very different from the kind of disease, such as cystic fibrosis or muscular 
dystrophy, that we normally describe as "genetic". The genetic lesions 
discovered in the Cardiff study occur in only a small minority of patients and 
half as frequently in perfectly healthy children. To put it in yet another way, 
of 100 children who inherit the kind of mutation identified by the Cardiff 
group, only four of them will develop ADHD.

The study is clearly not strong evidence for ADHD being a genetic disease. 
However, to make their case, Thapar and other geneticists would cite 
heritability. This is a measure of how much conditions tend to run in families. 
Earlier studies report a rather high heritability for ADHD of about 76%.

So where are the missing genes? It is of course possible that more genes will 
turn up in further studies that might close the gap. But perhaps we need to 
look again at the evidence for these high levels of heritability.

And heritability itself is a funny thing that isn't as heritable as people 
often imagine. For instance, lung cancer was mostly an inherited disease until 
people starting smoking, and then it became a disease that was caused mostly by 
cigarettes. Heritability only really works as a measure of the influence of 
genes if the environment of the individuals concerned is held constant. And 
that clearly is not the case for children with and without ADHD, as many 
studies have found plenty of evidence for environmental influences.

Of course Thapar knows this and, when questioned, is keen to stress that it's 
not just genes but rather a complex mix of genes and environmental factors that 
cause ADHD. But that is very different from asserting that ADHD is a genetic 
disease.

Conditions such as tuberculosis show relatively high levels of heritability in 
some studies, despite having a well-known environmental cause: the tuberculosis 
bacterium, for example. Indeed, all diseases are caused by "a complex mix of 
genes and environmental factors". Claiming that a particular disease is genetic 
when the evidence is, at best, suggestive is misleading and potentially 
dangerous.
 