
Educational psychologists’ alarm about the over-prescribing of hyperactivity 
drugs to very young children (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/21/adhd-medication-treat-hyperactivity-pre-school-children>
, 22 December) is welcome. But the underlying question remains: how it is that 
a “disorder” which scarcely existed in the UK in the 1980s, though widespread 
in the US, is apparently so prevalent that it is said to affect up to 5% of our 
nation’s children? Even the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
guidelines, to which your report refers, do not question that attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder is a “real” brain disorder, rather than a convenient way 
of labelling a child who is boisterous and disruptive in class.

Ask paediatricians how often they saw children with “minimal brain 
dysfunction”, as ADHD was then known, in the 80s, and their answers range from 
one in 100 to one in 500. In the early 90s, Ritalin prescriptions were running 
at about 2,000 a year, although the drug had been available for years and was 
in massive use in the US. Today, the figure is over 600,000. Does the fault 
really lie inside our children’s brains, or is it a further – and dangerous – 
manifestation of a medicalising culture?
Steven Rose
Emeritus professor of biology (neuroscience), The Open University

• I was not surprised to read that “overstretched health workers go straight 
to medication rather than offering psychological interventions” to children 
with ADHD. Being a community paediatrician, I see the lion’s share of children 
who have neurodevelopmental disorders – at my clinic we see around three 
children under the age of six every week that are suspected to have ADHD.

Psychological interventions should always be prioritised (as per Nice 
guidance); however, as the burden of ADHD is grossly under-recognised and 
therefore underfunded, many community paediatric departments do not have a 
clinical psychologist in place. This makes providing psychological treatment 
much easier said than done.

If this postcode lottery does not end and these fragile young children fail to 
receive the appropriate help they so desperately need, they are, albeit 
unwittingly, being set on a slippery path – latest research suggests that 
children with undiagnosed or untreated mental health conditions are much more 
likely to struggle to achieve educational qualifications and are at much 
greater risk of committing crime, suffering alcoholism and abusing drugs later 
in life.

Investment in these vital support services is needed now to help guide these 
children to a safer future.
Dr Neel Kamal
Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health

• Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> under six are meant 
to be hyperactive! In the sense that they should be running around pretty much 
12 hours a day. What they lack is opportunities for exercise, particularly 
outdoors. I see children being taken to and from infant school in buggies, when 
any normal child over 18 months should not be in a buggy at all. Too many young 
children are already obese; cooped up at home, in a car, or plonked in front of 
a TV, then won’t sleep at night.
Mary Smith
Upminster, Essex

• There is a danger of confusing the moral panic in relation to medication 
for ADHD with the reality of the nature of this condition. The result is to 
dismiss it as some sort of pseudo-scientific construct sponsored by 
pharmacological corporations. My own research and working practice shows, if 
anything, that ADHD is underdiagnosed and under-treated in at least some 
localities in the UK. Perhaps it would be helpful to dispense with the 
hyperbole and focus more on the statistical evidence regarding incidence and 
intervention rates.

Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and local authorities need 
precise information about the extent of the problem, and professionals and 
clinicians need actively to identify affected children and young people in 
order to provide adequate services. While “pills are not a substitute for 
skills”, the evidence clearly shows the efficacy of medication as part of a 
comprehensive treatment plan.

In approaching the issue I make no excuses in being biased in favour of 
scientific, egalitarian and humanistic values through seeking to bring some 
measure of objectivity to bear on the subject.
Henryk Holowenko
Deputy principal educational psychologist, London Borough of Tower Hamlets

• At YoungMinds, we have welcomed recent government announcements: the 
increased funding for eating disorder services; the ending of children being 
detained under the Mental Health Act in police cells; and the establishment of 
a taskforce to review children’s mental health services. However, we are deeply 
concerned that the announced cuts to local government funding will be a 
significant step backwards.

Funding for children’s mental health services comes from a variety of sources, 
not just theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. Local government 
plays a crucial role in many areas, especially for early intervention services, 
which the government itself recognises as vital in supporting children and 
young people, helping them before mental illness becomes entrenched. Earlier 
this year we revealed that almost two-thirds of councils had cut or frozen 
their budgets for children’s mental health services since 2010-11, with one 
making a cut of 94%. The 1.8% cut to local government funding is likely to 
further this trend.

If local government no longer has the financial capacity to support early 
intervention in children’s mental health services, it is essential that these 
services are provided elsewhere. If they are not, and early intervention 
services continue to be cut, we will see more children and young people needing 
more intensive and more expensive support for mental illness, a situation that 
will cost millions and cause extreme distress and pain to thousands of young 
people and their families across the country.
Lucie Russell
Director of campaigns, YoungMinds 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/?gclid=CJz195H27cICFUXKtAod5nwA_g>

• All the mental health charities you are supporting are doing excellent work, 
butyour editorial (24 December) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/23/mental-health-matters-why-we-are-supporting-these-charities>
 does not reflect the most recent thinking and practice.

The British Psychological Society’s report Understanding Psychosis and 
Schizophrenia 
<http://www.bps.org.uk/networks-and-communities/member-microsite/division-clinical-psychology/understanding-psychosis-and-schizophrenia>
, praised by your columnist Clare Allen (theguardian.com,2 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/02/psychosis-rational-talk-therapy>
), argues that “professionals should not insist that people accept any one 
particular framework of understanding, for example that their experiences are 
symptoms of an illness”. Diagnosis is helpful for some, but others, even those 
with what you describe as a “critical illness such as schizophrenia”, see their 
distress as an understandable response to life events and circumstances.

We all share your aim of reducing stigma and bringing mental health issues 
into the open. Biological views about chemical imbalances, faulty genes and so 
on are not only unproven but have been shown to increase fear and stigma. 
Avoiding uncritical use of the language of diagnosis and illness is an 
important step that the media can take towards changing attitudes.
Dr Lucy Johnstone
Consultant clinical psychologist, Bristol
 