
Chris Ecarius had so much difficulty filling out his Social Security 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_Security_(United_States)> application 
online that the 62-year-old went to a doctor to find out why his brain didn't 
seem to work properly. Over the years, he'd seen other doctors about similar 
struggles. He'd been told that he was depressed, but he didn't feel depressed. 
This time, Ecarius got a different diagnosis: attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD), a conclusion that seemed more appropriate for a child in grade 
school than an adult in retirement.

When Ecarius, who lives in Houghton Lake, Michigan, was young, he had trouble 
paying attention. He'd dropped out of school and left several jobs, had several 
traffic accidents and had never quite gotten on track. "I could have been a 
doctor," he said. "I could have been a pharmacist, I could have been anything I 
wanted to be," had someone diagnosed his ADHD when he was a child. With the 
help of his wife, Ecarius was able to settle into a skilled trade job with 
General Motors, a position he held until age 58, when, he says, he became 
overwhelmed by the computers at work.

Ecarius is not alone. While ADHD – a condition marked by inattention, 
hyperactivity and impulsivity – is one of the most common brain disorders in 
children, it also occurs in approximately one in 20 adults,according to a 2006 
study <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16585449>. A 2012 study based on 
interviews with almost 1,500 people byresearchers in the Netherlands 
<http://bjp.rcpsych.org/content/201/4/298.long> found that 2.8% of adults older 
than 60 have ADHD, with 4.2% of people in that age group reporting several ADHD 
symptoms and some impairment.

But just being forgetful or scatterbrained doesn't mean you have ADHD. Of 
course, many people, especially those older than 60, have these problems, but 
they could be a sign of something else – or nothing at all.

Health professional differentiate ADHD from the memory-related conditions of 
ageing by documenting symptoms that started before age 12. Although some of the 
symptoms may overlap, ADHD and dementia are not thought to be connected, and in 
fact arecently published study 
<http://www.hindawi.com/journals/jar/2011/729801/> says that ADHD is not a risk 
factor for dementia.

Like other mental conditions, ADHD cannot be measured with something as simple 
as a blood test, said Benedetto Vitiello, chief of the treatment and preventive 
intervention research branch at the USNational Institute of Mental Health 
<http://www.nimh.nih.gov/index.shtml>. Patients fall along a continuum, and a 
mental health professional must analyse a variety of responses to 
questionnaires and symptom checklists, includingone created by Harvard 
researchers 
<http://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ncs/ftpdir/adhd/18Q_ASRS_English.pdf> for the 
World Health Organisation. Questions include "How often do you have difficulty 
getting things in order when you have to do a task that requires 
organisation?", "How often do you leave your seat in meetings or other 
situations in which you are expected to remain seated?" and "How often do you 
feel restless or fidgety?"

"You put together a tapestry of life," said J Russell Ramsay, a clinical 
psychologist who co-directs theAdult ADHD Treatment and Research Programme at 
the University of Pennsylvania <http://www.med.upenn.edu/add/adhd.html> and is 
an associate professor at the Perelman School of Medicine at Penn. "You go 
through a developmental history looking at functioning in school, in the 
workplace, in relationships, and that's when you'll hear various examples of 
difficulties with time management, disorganisation, being able to follow 
through on reasonable plans … that isn't better explained by something else 
like depression or anxiety."

That developmental history will reveal a story of an adult who has chronic 
difficulties following through on reasonable objectives, who makes the same 
mistakes repeatedly, who fails to live up to potential, or who simply has 
trouble being able to do what he wants or needs to do, said Ramsay.

That description fits a 65-year-old entertainment industry executive who asked 
to remain anonymous. The man says he suffered a lifetime of problems with 
attention and focus: at work he had succeeded by compensating – assiduously 
making notes and using humour to cover for his difficulties. Retirement a few 
years ago made things worse: he no longer had the excuse of being too busy to 
explain why he didn't remember appointments or birthdays.

He had such troubles with focus and mental sluggishness that he went to a 
psychiatrist. He received a diagnosis of ADHD last year, was prescribed a 
long-acting stimulant and was given counselling. "Before, I thought I was old 
and over and done and washed up," he said. "I fought it for 65 years."

Research on ADHD in older adults is evolving. Psychiatrist JJ Sandra Kooij, a 
co-author of the Dutch study, diagnosed her first such case a decade ago. The 
patient was the 71-year-old mother of one of Kooij's ADHD patients; she had 
broken her hip and couldn't sit still enough to get it to heal. Her doctor 
suspected the disorder was present in his elderly patient, especially after 
learning that the patient's daughter and granddaughter had the syndrome. The 
woman was referred to Kooij, and the daughter recounted her mother's lifelong 
symptoms. Her mother was eventually treated with medications for ADHD and 
depression.

Kooij, who heads the adult ADHD centre PsyQ, the largest outpatient mental 
health organisation in the Netherlands, said that as more people become aware 
that ADHD persists and can be diagnosed in older age, she expects to see "an 
emancipation of older people suffering from a lifetime as victims of ADHD that 
were never recognised or treated".

Many older patients "had ADHD before there was ADHD", said Ramsay.

The definition and diagnosis of the disorder have evolved. In the 1940s, a 
variety of brain disorders were labelled "minimal brain dysfunction", which was 
refined to "immaturity" of attention and impulse control in the 1950s. This 
immaturity was labelled "hyperkinetic impulse disorder" in 1957. That name 
evolved to "hyperkinetic reaction of childhood" in 1968, "attention deficit 
disorder" in 1980 and finally "attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" in 
1987. Three subtypes of ADHD were identified in 1994: inattentive, 
hyperactive-impulsive and combined.

Some adults did not receive a diagnosis of ADHD because their inattentiveness 
was not recognisable as hyperactivity. "Historically, children who were getting 
diagnosed were the disruptive children, the children that couldn't sit still," 
said David W Goodman, a psychiatrist who directs theAdult Attention Deficit 
Disorder Centre of Maryland <http://www.addadult.com> in Lutherville.

"We thought that disruptive kids would [later] have disruptive lives," Goodman 
said, "but we discovered that it's actually the inattention and the 
disorganisation that causes greater difficulties in adulthood." Goodman, an 
assistant professor of psychiatry and behavioural sciences at the Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, said that parents and teachers act as an 
inattentive child's support system. But "as we get older, the support falls 
away", he said.

Some older adults curious about their own condition head to a doctor once the 
disorder is diagnosed in their children. Research has shown that if a child has 
ADHD, there's a 30-40% chance that one of his or her parents has it, said 
Goodman.

On occasion, Goodman has seen three generations in his practice: a teenager 
might get an ADHD diagnosis, which brings in a parent and even a grandparent 
who recognise symptoms in themselves.

The treatment for older adults with ADHD is similar to the protocol for 
children with the disorder – usually a combination of "pills and skills", 
according to Goodman.

Medications for ADHD include stimulants such as Adderall XR, Concerta, Focalin 
XR and Vyvanse, or non-stimulants such as Strattera, according to Goodman.

Since older adults are more likely to have multiple illnesses, including 
diabetes and high blood pressure, and to take multiple medications, it's very 
important to give them a full medical assessment, Goodman says. Stimulants can 
elevate pulse and blood pressure. "We don't have systematic studies for adults 
in middle and old age, so it's left to the clinician to monitor blood pressure 
and cardiovascular system," said Vitiello.

Older adults can have difficulties getting insurers to cover ADHD 
prescriptions, and they sometimes need to get a waiver to have medications 
covered. Many of these drugs have been FDA-approved and tested in patients only 
up to age 55 or 65, Goodman said. At age 62, Ecarius had to wait several weeks 
for pre-authorisation of his medication.

Older people <https://www.theguardian.com/society/older-people> coping with a 
new diagnosis of ADHD often must relearn a lifetime of behaviours. In one 
approach, cognitive behavioural therapy, a therapist works with the patient to 
understand how thoughts and behaviours mix. "Once we have an understanding 
about all the steps that go into being disorganised, not being on time, 
procrastinating, then we can get in there with more specific coping skills, 
time management skills, using the planner," Ramsay said. Then the patient has 
to learn how to use these skills for maximum benefit. Ramsay said that in many 
cases, that requires a dozen or more one-hour sessions over four to six months.

Coaching is another option for ADHD patients. "So often [with] adults with 
ADHD, their lives have been like a train wreck. And they have self-fulfilling 
negative scripts about themselves," said Terry Dickson, a medical doctor who is 
founder and director of the Behavioural Medicine Clinic of NW Michigan in 
Traverse City.

Patients are directed through a series of exercises, such as having a 
conversation with their spouse in which they really listen and ask questions. 
Such coaching can be done over the phone or by video chat, typically for three 
months of hour-long weekly sessions, according to Dickson. Sessions can cost 
around $120 to $150 an hour, Dickson said, and are not typically covered by 
insurance. Adults with ADHD who feel they have deep-seated issues to address 
may also choose more traditional psychotherapy.

Goodman says older patients shouldn't feel ashamed of their condition. "I 
don't care what age you are, you should not be denied the opportunity to pursue 
happiness," Goodman said. "And if happiness is a product of getting diagnosed 
and treated to get a condition under control, I don't care if you're 14 years 
old or 75 years old, you shouldn't die thinking that you were just stupid and 
an idiot like everybody told you."

Since his ADHD was diagnosed three months ago, Chris Ecarius has been treated 
with medication – first Ritalin, then Concerta – and plans to try online group 
therapy or a coach. Knowing his problem and treating it properly has brought 
him "a new life", he said, and he hopes to continue to volunteer at boot camps 
for troubled youth – especially those with ADHD.

This article appeared in Guardian Weekly <https://www.theguardian.com/weekly>, 
which incorporates material from the Washington Post
 