
Banned former Essendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> player 
Brent Prismall is standing down from his player welfare role with the Western 
Bulldogs in a public relations disaster for the AFL.

Prismall is among 34 past and current Essendon players who are serving doping 
bans that stem from the Bombers’ supplements saga.

New-look Essendon canter to big win over Carlton in NAB Challenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/28/new-look-essendon-canter-to-big-win-over-carlton-in-nab-challenge>
After it emerged earlier in the day that Prismall was working at the Bulldogs 
during the ban, the club said they had advice from theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> that it was alright for him to continue 
in the role he had had since 2012.

But Asada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asada> declared otherwise, saying 
it had previously told the AFL Prismall should not be in the job while 
suspended.

“The AFL has today again been in discussions with Asada on the matter of the 
implications of the suspensions for past and present players of Essendon and is 
pleased that the position of Brent Prismall’s employment has been resolved,” 
the league said in a statement.

“The AFL has forwarded advice to the Western Bulldogs this afternoon that 
Brent should stand down from his current role. At all times, the Western 
Bulldogs have complied with directions and advice from the AFL.”

The AFL added it would continue to have discussions with Asada about the 
banned players and their activities.

The Bulldogs were caught in the middle, saying they had written advice from 
the AFL that it was alright for Prismall to keep working with them during the 
ban.

“Brent Prismall returned to his employment with the club after the club had 
clarified with the AFL that his duties and job description did not conflict 
with the arbitral award of the Court of Arbitration for Sport and the penalties 
contained in it,” the Bulldogs said.

“The AFL also informed the club at this time that it provided such consent and 
authorisation on the basis of advice received from Asada. If the club is 
informed by the AFL that its position has changed, it will of course act in 
conformity with the AFL’s direction.”

But Asada was equally adamant on Wednesday it had told the AFL that Prismall 
should stand down from his Bulldogs job while he served his suspension.

“On the issue of Mr Prismall’s employment ... Asada has previously provided 
clear advice to the AFL that he should not be working in that role,” the 
anti-doping body said in a statement to the AFL website.

“Asada has not been privy to any conversations between the AFL and the Western 
Bulldogs since that advice, but we hope the situation is rectified as soon as 
possible. The AFL is the body responsible for enforcing the players’ sanctions 
in the first instance.”

Under section 22.1 of the AFL anti-doping code, no player declared ineligible 
may participate in any capacity in an AFL competition or activity.

After the AFL’s announcement, the Bulldogs said on Wednesday night that 
Prismall would stand down and they would continue to support him during his ban.
 