
How quickly halos lose their shine. Antony Jenkins – aka St Antony – found out 
last week,when he was fired from Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/08/barclays-fires-chief-executive-antony-jenkins>
, how rapidly the mood can change. Only six months ago he had even won the 
endorsement of the Archbishop of Canterbury for his efforts to install a moral 
compass inside Barclays – a bank that caused such outragewhen it was fined 
£290m for rigging Libor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/27/barclays-chief-bob-diamond-bonus-fine>
 that the government had to launch a parliamentary commission on banking 
standards. Even the bailout of the banking sector in 2008 had not sparked such 
a public inspection of bankers’ ethics.

Jenkins’s job was to stop the wave of Barclays-bashing. Instead, he laid 
himself open to ridicule by installing huge clear blocks in the foyer of the 
headquarters emblazoned with the words respect, integrity, service, excellence 
and stewardship. We got management babble, such as his quest to create the 
“go-to bank”. His Transform programme was an acronym: Turnaround, Return 
Acceptable Numbers, Sustain FORward Momentum.

But by ousting him less than three years after his appointment, the Barclays 
board is entering dangerous territory. Look at what Sir Michael Rake, a 
longstandingBarclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> boardroom 
director, said when forcing Jenkins out: “Notwithstanding Antony’s significant 
achievements, it became clear to all of us that a new set of skills were 
required for the period ahead.”

What does this mean? The only clue so far has come from John McFarlane, the 
chairman who is to take on the chief executive role for an indefinite period. 
He is putting his foot on the accelerator. The new goals will remind some of 
the gung-ho banking that led up to the crisis –double the share price in three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/09/barclays-john-mcfarlane-board-double-share-price-three-years>
 or so years, be more aggressive in lending decisions, put more emphasis on 
Africa.

Barclays Capital generated billions of pounds in profits, but has also been 
the source of endless rows

And, it would appear, put more emphasis on the investment bank, which is as 
troublesome now as it was in the 1990s when Martin Taylor (now a policymaker at 
the Bank of England) broke it up – when it was Barclays de Zoete Wedd – and 
sold most of it off. In jettisoning BZW, however, Taylor paved the way forBob 
Diamond <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bob-diamond> to recreate it in 
the form of Barclays Capital, which generated billions of pounds in profits but 
has also been the source of the endless rows over jaw-dropping bonuses and 
multimillion-pound fines for rigging Libor rates and foreign exchange markets.

Taylor admitted in 2012  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/09/barclays-bob-diamond-martin-taylor>
that he wished in retrospect he had fired Diamond in 1998, when his division 
had almost imploded during the Russian debt crisis. With last week’s events, 
however, it is the boring retail banker that is being jettisoned in favour of 
the new head of the investment bank, Tom King.

And there lies the dilemma for the Barclays board, even if it has already 
insisted Jenkins’s departure “does not signal any major change in strategy”. 
Jenkins had already announced a plan to scale back from the fixed-income, 
currencies and commodities trading (FICC in the City’s jargon) for which the 
investment bank had become so well known under Diamond. Instead the focus is to 
be on serving customers and trading equities. The trouble is the transition has 
had a startling impact: the investment bank’s return on equity has sunk to 
under 3%.

Almost two decades on from Taylor’s battle with investment banking, Barclays 
continues to face the question of how to combine it with a high-street 
operation that also needs surgery. The ringfencing requirements that come into 
force in 2019 are already forcing Barclays to rethink how it structures its 
high-street operations.

So far McFarlane – who formally becomes executive chairman once he gets a nod 
from the Bank of England – seems to have the backing of investors. The shares 
are up 7% since Jenkins was ousted. But the clock is ticking to the end of the 
month, when McFarlane has promised a new plan – note, not a strategy – for the 
investment bank. It may not be long before McFarlane’s halo also begins to lose 
its shine.

The free market for energy is losing its power to convince

The average energy customer is not king, according to the Competition and 
Markets Authority. The customer is a klutz. Foolish gas and electricity users 
just will not get off the sofa and switch to a lower-cost provider.

Which is why domestic householders and others have overpaid the big six energy 
suppliers by £8.5bn between 2009 and 2013, according to theCMA in its report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/cma-sets-out-case-for-energy-market-reform> 
issued last week. And the result is that transitional price caps will have to 
be introduced until the consumer knows how to behave properly.

This is a national joke. The CMA knows what the real problem is, but as a 
protector of free-market orthodoxy it cannot bear to admit it: people do not 
want dozens of different providers and tariffs to choose from. They just want a 
local power provider whom they can trust not to rip them off while keeping the 
gas and electricity on. It is the same, largely, with schools, hospitals and 
even trains.

It is not as though any of these power suppliers are offering anything 
different. The same therms and kilowatts move along the pipes and wires whether 
it is British Gas, SSE or a new independent such as Ovo Energy that sends out 
the bills.

But what makes power more important than, say, mobile phone networks is that 
fuel poverty kills. Cold homes really do lead to thousands of fatalities every 
year, so an energy contract is not just another commercial transaction.

The CMA argues that it is going to have to intervene (ever so reluctantly, it 
insists) to make sure that customers are not getting fleeced until people learn 
to switch providers and the market “works”.

The contradiction here, of course, is that if competition really was working 
properly then all the prices would converge on each other within a very small 
band, rather than the current 30% difference.

Deregulation – privatisation and a free-for-all energy market – has been with 
us for quarter of a century, yet the CMA report underlines that companies, 
rather than customers, are the key beneficiaries.

A worthwhile €400m for low-cost O’Leary

On the face of it, Ryanair’s boss, Michael O’Leary, suffered a rare defeat 
last week. The low-cost airline agreed to sell its near-30% stake in rivalAer 
Lingus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aer-lingus> to the owner of 
British Airways, after its attempted takeover of the former Irish flag carrier 
was stymied by competition watchdogs.

As an investment, it has not been a spectacular success. Having spent €407m 
(£293m) on its shareholding, Ryanair will receive €406m and has pocketed €18m 
in dividends over the years. However, there is an argument that O’Leary has 
boosted his airline financially by befuddling scores of Aer Lingus executives 
since launching the bid in 2006. Some industry executives believe the Ryanair 
boss ran rings round his biggest Irish competitor throughout the process, 
distracting Aer Lingus management from the day-to-day competitive battle against
Ryanair <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ryanair>.

Yes, €407m is a big number for a penny-pincher like O’Leary. But it was money 
well spent.
 