
Aga Rangemaster struggled to sell its aspirational cookers 
<http://www.agaliving.com/> last year, as cash-strapped Britons stopped making 
home improvements.

The shares stayed broadly flat on the news, down just 0.25p at 86.1p.

The company, which counts Gerard Depardieu among its customers, said sales 
slipped 3% to £251m. Chief executive William McGrath said: "It was not an easy 
year for higher ticket consumer products."

Sales of Agas are closely linked to the housing market, as it is the kind of 
product people buy when they move into a new home. McGrath said:
 January was a good month. House prices and the number of transactions has 
been tracking sideways and a bit up. That gives us a bit more confidence for 
2012 compared with 2011, but it doesn't take much to knock that confidence. 
He said the future of the company lay in the new generation of products, which 
make the Aga more accessible. The company is pushing its Aga Total Control 
cooker, which can be switched on and off.

McGrath also hopes to sell more cookers abroad. Last year exports accounted 
for a quarter of sales, with France its largest market outside the UK.

"It would be exciting if we could become another British brand which can have 
a material impact in international markets," he said.

The company cut costs with new computer systems, improved business efficiency 
and better warehousing. Performance in the Fired Earth unit, which sells tiles 
and paint, also improved, although losses remain above £1m.

Pre-tax profits more than halved to £7.5m. The company said last year's 
figures were flattered by a change in the way the pension scheme is run and 
that underlying pre-tax profits, in fact, more than doubled.

Aga continues to grapple with its vast £750m pension scheme, a hangover from 
the days when it owned engineering businesses in the Midlands and Scotland. The 
scheme is currently in surplus by £5.3m. Aga said in its results statement:
 We are in discussions with the trustee of this scheme to ensure that the 
reasonable funding requirements of the scheme are met while also ensuring the 
strategy of the Group continues to be focused on our long-term development 
objectives. 
Aga announced a full-year dividend of 1.9p, compared with 1.7p last year, to 
be paid on 1 June.
 