
We bought our Falcon 1000 range cooker from Aga Twyford for £3,200 in June 
2012. But just before Christmas 2015 the induction hob developed a fault and 
half the rings stopped working, and our family of six has been without a fully 
functioning hob ever since – more than nine months. We contacted First4Service, 
Aga Rangemaster’s recommended repairer, and were offered a fixed-fee £175 
repair. We checked this would cover anything that could be wrong, which was 
confirmed.

We had to chase it for the repair, which was not successful, and after 
spotting water on the power boards underneath the hob the engineer advised us 
not to use it at all.

So we went from five working rings to two just before Christmas, and then none 
at all in late March. During this time I contacted First4Service numerous times 
and the matter was escalated to its chief executive, Matt Jeffers. He said he 
was constrained by what Aga Rangemaster would supply under the terms of the 
fixed repair scheme. He believed the whole hob needed replacing, butAga 
Rangemaster <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aga-rangemaster> wouldn’t 
agree to this.

Eventually I contacted Aga Rangemaster direct and it agreed to replace the hob 
at no cost, though this didn’t happen until the end of April. The new hob came 
with a 12-month warranty but within a couple of weeks (mid-May) the central 
ring had stopped working. The repair was assigned to Wash Care Kent, which said 
it was waiting for a part.

Aga Rangemaster said it couldn’t replace the whole range as it was out of 
warranty (though the hob was covered), and couldn’t reimburse me as I had not 
purchased from it directly.

I received an offer from Aga Twyford in early July of another replacement hob 
for 60% of the list price.

We rejected this on the grounds that we now feel the induction hobs are not 
fit for purpose. In mid-July, Aga Twyford informed us that Aga Rangemaster 
still felt another replacement hob was the best option and that it was willing 
to pick up 50% of the price of a whole new cooker, which we again rejected.

In early September I turned one of the rings on and there was a flash and the 
fuse blew. I wrote again to all parties to say I felt this proved the hob was 
not fit for purpose and that I was now in an emergency situation with no hob. I 
am staggered any company would leave a family without a fully functioning hob 
for what is now more than nine months.CW, Horsmonden, Kent 

We were appalled to hear of your treatment and your valiant struggles to feed 
your young family as well as trying to test products for your food business, 
which you run from home. We know state-of-the-art induction hobs have many 
enthusiasts, but your case highlights that when things go wrong they are easier 
to repair and replace when not part of an integrated range cooker. You were 
sent from pillar to post in your quest to prove that the fault was not down to 
ordinary wear and tear or caused by you.

Strictly speaking, the retailer, Aga Twyford (Twyford Cookers of Leominster, 
Herefordshire), should have been your first port of call for help, but while it 
is an authorised distributor of the Aga brand, it is not part of the Aga 
Rangemaster group.

Aga Rangemaster responded to us quickly and offered to reimburse you for the 
full purchase price of the faulty cooker and remove it. You have accepted this. 
But efforts to find out what went wrong drew a blank and, after being promised 
a statement for nearly three weeks, we received this pathetic reply: “We are 
sorry that this customer experienced difficulties but we are happy to say that 
the situation has been resolved to their satisfaction.”

This is one of the worst examples of customer service and this limp 
explanation is not good enough.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto: consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 