
Aga Rangemaster <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aga-rangemaster> has 
seen its annual profits almost wiped out after running up big reorganisation 
costs and a sharp drop in demand for its traditional cast iron stoves during 
the recession.

Not surprisingly, sales fell off a cliff at the height of the downturn, but 
the upmarket cooker maker said markets improved as the year progressed. Demand 
slumped in the first half of last year, before levelling out and, in some 
areas, strengthening later in the year.

Chief executive William McGrath is optimistic that sales will pick up in 
coming weeks. Thecold weather should give the company a boost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jan/15/aga-feels-warm-glow-of-sales>
, highlighting the benefits of the firm's all-in-one cookers and boilers, with 
more people keen to become less reliant on the grid.

McGrath is also pinning his hopes on the company's continental and North 
American operations. Aga's European sales have benefited from the pound's 
weakness against the euro. It hopes to make greater inroads into the American 
market by launching "punchily priced" products and pushing its self-cleaning 
cookers that carbonise dirt.

"The right thing to do last year was to hammer down on costs and to go for 
cash. This year we can be more expansive," McGrath said. The group makes a 
third of its sales outside the UK, of which 20% comes from France, Holland, 
Belgium and Germany, but wants to raise the overseas share to half of overall 
revenues.

He also hopes to turn around the loss-making Fired Earth division, and noted 
that its new tile range is attracting an "unprecedented level of interest". A 
new generation of "smart control" is also in the pipeline, which will tie 
together various energy sources like solar collectors and boilers to come on 
the market in the summer.

Trying to improve its green credentials, Aga is also bringing out a new 
Rayburn cooker-boiler this spring as part of its A-rated condensing boiler 
range.

Profits plummeted to £500,000 last year from £14.4m in 2008, while revenues 
fell to £245m from £279m. Stripping out one-off costs related to factory 
mergers and management reorganisations, pre-tax profits halved to £12.6m. The 
company has streamlined its operations; for instance, in Canada it now sells 
directly to dealers.
 