
I disagree with Roy Hattersley's objection to the BBC televising Alan Clarke's 
diary (A soggy souffle of self-regard, January 19). Were Clark just a 
self-opinionated over-educated windbag who needed to spread a little outrage to 
attract attention, then he would be indistinguishable from many other 
backbenchers who applied successfully for the wrong job.

He was, in fact, a shining example of someone whose path, from birth, was 
paved with opportunity and who was gifted with an envious intellectual 
pedigree, both of which he wasted. He failed to develop, choosing instead a 
posture of aristocratic infallibility for which recognition would surely flow 
without the need to earn it.

Low self-esteem is a crush ing handicap for under-privileged people making 
their way in life. In Clark's case, an over-abundance of self- esteem had the 
same effect. That this loser was appointed a minister in the Thatcher 
government is an important enough reason to believe that his insights and 
behaviour would throw an entertaining and revealing light on the values of her 
regime.

It also makes an important statement in the debate about top-up fees. Had Alan 
Clark's place at Cambridge been available to someone whose abilities and 
motivation were deemed more worthy of it than Clark's privileged background, 
the country would have been the better for it.
Peter Nielsen
 Worcester 

The point is not whether Alan Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> was a good MP or a jolly good 
chap, but whether he wrote good diaries. Was Pepys a good civil servant? Was 
Kilvert a very good vicar? Was Turner a very good shopkeeper? It doesn't 
matter. The man and the work are quite separate. And the fact is that Alan 
Clark's diaries are among the finest of modern times.
Robert Giddings
 Poole

Roy Hattersley rather misses the point about the Alan Clark diaries. While in 
some respects Clark's character was reprehensible, at least he had one - making 
him vastly more interesting than most politicians.
Peter Arnold
 London
 