
Saltwood/Albany, February 1991 - September 1999

Still obsessive about "X" but haven't the nerve to end it. Darling Jane is 
looking strained, she knows something is up. Tension headache my pulse up to 
87. I'm not at all well. How much longer have I got? Five years? Ten years. 
Finances in a total mess. Don't want to get rid of Big Red so might have to 
sell the Degas; 300 would clear the tax bill. State of abject depression. The 
party is in a mess and I feel now is the time to step down. But I can't bring 
myself to do it yet as ACHAB*.

Slept very badly. Had to get up three times for a tinkle. I must book a PSA. 
"X" is ignoring me and I'm taking it out on Janey. Cleared my office at 
Westminster and said my goodbyes; my health is good, my stamina is up but my 
mood is black. I SHOULD NEVER HAVE LEFT THE HOUSE OF COMMONS. I really need to 
organise a car cull and get on with my life. God has been good to me; I've had 
a great career, sex-life with Janey has never been better and there's the 
prospect of grandchildren on the horizon.

Is it too much to ask for one last chance at power and 10 more years? Richard 
Ryder isn't returning my calls - little shit. How I miss the thrill of power. 
JM is almost isolated, the party rudderless. Publication of my diaries has 
caused something of a stir. It's nice to still be famous. Or should that be 
infamous?

Desperate to get back into the House. Had an approach from Kensington & 
Chelsea but Nick Scott is hanging on. Am I too old? Still, ACHAB. My vision is 
going. Cancer of the optic nerve? Scott enquiry still rumbles on, find it 
increasingly hard to trust Tristan G-J. See in the Sunday Times my name has 
been put forward as possible leader of the Tory party. I feel marvellously 
young once more. A miracle. K&C have adopted me against all the odds. But how 
long will I be alive to enjoy it? Disastrous general election, but my seat 
quite safe.

Alastair Campbell phoned twice to offer me a K. BB published but poor reviews. 
My headaches are getting worse. The doctors say there is nothing wrong with me.

The fact is I have a brain tumour and I'm going to die.

* Anything can happen at backgammon.

The digested read... digested: AC's observations both on his health and his 
fellow politicians remain spot on to the last
 