
Alan Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan>, the shadow 
prisons minister, was today cleared of breaking Commons rules in relation to 
expenses claims for his second home.

The Commons standards and privileges committee said that Duncan was obeying 
"the rules at the time" when he claimed the second-home allowance in relation 
to a property on which he was not paying a mortgage.

Duncan did this because he had secured a mortgage on his London home to obtain 
the money he needed to buy a house in his Rutland constituency. From 1992 to 
2004 he claimed the second-home allowance in relation to the Rutland home, even 
though he was using it to pay interest on the mortgage secured on his London 
home.

John Lyon, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, who investigated the 
case for the committee, concluded: "The costs incurred as a result of Mr 
Duncan's mortgage secured on his London home were solely and exclusively for 
his constituency property. They were incurred as a result of his overnight 
stays in his constituency home and away from his London home on parliamentary 
duties.

"The costs arising from his occupancy of his constituency property were in my 
judgment a legitimate call on his [second-home allowance]."

In 2004 Duncan ended the arrangement and took out a new mortgage, which he 
secured against his Rutland home, because he wanted to tidy up his affairs.

The frontbencher, who was demoted from his post as shadow leader of the 
Commons in the summer after complaining about MPs being forced to "live on 
rations", asked Lyon to investigate his case after a critical story about his 
expenses arrangements was published in the Daily Telegraph.

The commissioner will only investigate a "self-referral" from an MP if the 
standards and privileges committee agrees, and in this case the committee gave 
permission for an inquiry because of the large sums of money involved.

In its report, the committee said that it did not want MPs to make a habit of 
referring themselves to the commissioner. "We will not allow the commissioner's 
office to be used by members simply as a means of refuting unfounded 
allegations that appear in the press," the committee said.

This reflects its concern that some MPs are reportedly considering referring 
themselves to the commissioner as an alternative to repaying expenses in 
response to a demand from the auditor Sir Thomas Legg.
 