
Yesterday, the Today programme 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_8254000/8254300.stm> ran an item 
about Ion Trewin's new biography of Alan Clark. Trewin was asked to sum Clark 
up in a sentence and he replied:

One of those wonderful people. He's a philanderer, but he's also a wonderful 
politician who could write and he could write probably better than any other 
politician alive today.


That prompted Dominic Lawson to respond in today's Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/opinion/commentators/dominic-lawson/dominic-lawson-alan-clark-was-not-wonderful-he-was-sleazy-and-cruel-1787343.html>
 with a blistering hatchet job. His key point is that Clark was essentially, 
and by his own admission, a Nazi.

[Clark] was indeed a notable historian of wars, one of his most acclaimed 
works being Barbarossa, an account of the eastern front in the Second World 
War. He was intent on proving Hitler's talent as a military leader, but over 
the years it became clear that there was more to it than mere technical 
admiration of Hitler the war strategist. In 1981, his diary records: "I told 
Frank Johnson that I was a Nazi; I really believed it to be the ideal system, 
and that it was a disaster for the Anglo-Saxon races and for the world that it 
was extinguished."

Johnson, who was then on the staff of The Times, gulps and tells Clark that he 
can't really mean it. Clark really did mean it. But even when he complains in 
his diary that Johnson "takes refuge in the convention that 
Alan-doesn't-really-mean-it", his readers continue to believe that this is all 
an uproarious joke. Yet, and this is to his credit as a diarist, he does not 
attempt to mislead his readers about his true opinions: at one point he records 
his thoughts of defecting to the National Front, and when two NF emissaries 
come to visit him he writes: "How good they were and how brave [those] who keep 
alive the tribal essence."

Lawson also retells a good anecdote that sheds some light on Clark's chat-up 
technique.

Some years ago the (married) journalist Minette Marrin recorded her own 
experience of it. They had both been invited to a "political" dinner at a 
private house. He instantly pressed himself on her in a most unsubtle way, 
demanding that she leave their hosts, join him for a private dinner and then...
Marrin recalled: "He thought 'no' was a form of flirting ... When at last he 
came to believe that I was impervious to his charms and would not rush off with 
him into the night, he turned to me with a particularly vicious look. And this 
is what this self-styled gentleman, this intellectual, this flower of our 
civilisation, then said: "Well, fuck you then. Fuck off. I'm not talking to you 
any more."

I never had any dealings with Clark, who died 10 years ago, although 
everything I know about him makes me side with Lawson rather than Trewin.

What do you think?
 