
It was hailed, if not as the saviour of BBC4, then at least its biggest 
breakthrough yet. The first episode of the much-hypedAlan Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> Diaries, starring John Hurt, 
brought a record audience of nearly 1 million viewers to BBC4.

But by the time the six-part dramatisation finished last night, its audience 
had dwindled to just 153,000 viewers - an 82% drop on the first night's record 
ratings.

The slump will come as a blow to BBC4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc4> 
chiefs, who hailed the opening night's performance as "further proof of the 
coming of age of digital television". However, the series still managed to 
average 445,000 viewers across its six-part run, and remains one of the 
channel's best performing shows.

A BBC spokeswoman said: "As a whole we are very pleased with the Alan Clark 
Diaries. It had the highest average viewing figures for any series on BBC4 so 
far.

"The wide attention that the show received will have helped encourage people 
to come to BBC4 and raise awareness among viewers of what the channel has got 
to offer."

 The opening episode was well received by critics, with particularly good 
notices for Hurt's portrayal of the womanising Tory MP.

The Guardian said it was "jolly good fun" while the Mirror said it was "slight 
but charming, very well presented but ultimately rather ineffectual - a bit 
like its subject, perhaps".

But the Sunday Times's AA Gill was unconvinced, dismissing it as a "pot-pourri 
of half-forgotten Westminster incidents".

On the back of a huge publicity and marketing drive, the first episode drew 
873,000 viewers, more than 300,000 more than the channel's previous best 
audience, 560,000 for an episode of BBC1 drama, State of Play.

However, the second episode lost 200,000 viewers, down to 653,000, and the 
third lost another 200,000, slipping to 441,000. It appeared to have bottomed 
out with an audience of 272,000 for the fourth episode, before plummeting 
downwards again last night, ending with a share of 1.3% in multi-channel homes.

Before the series began, Hurt embarrassed BBC bosses by claming the 
corporation had failed to invest enough time and money in the show, describing 
the budget as "ludicrous".

The series, which also starred Jenny Agutter as Clark's wife Jane, Victoria 
Smurfit and Julia Davis, was shot in only four weeks. The BBC said the nature 
of the diary format meant Hurt was on screen for virtually the entire filming.

The Alan Clark Diaries is due to transfer to BBC2 next month, where channel 
bosses will be hoping it manages to maintain its ratings rather better during 
the six-part run.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 