
Alex "Hurricane" Higgins was snooker's anti-hero, seeking neither acceptance 
nor respectability. A fast, flamboyant shotmaker in his prime, whose acute 
non-verbal intelligence instantly read the implications of any configuration of 
the balls, he constantly undermined his extraordinary talent with 
self-destructive excess.

Higgins died yesterday, aged 61, after a long battle with throat cancer. When 
he won the first of his two world titles in 1972, the venue for the final, a 
now demolished British Legion function room in a Birmingham suburb, symbolised 
snooker's status as a down-at-heel folk sport. By the time he regained the 
title 10 years later at the Crucible theatre, Sheffield, it had become a major 
television entertainment.

His 16-15 semi-final win over Jimmy White provided the most often reprised 
item from the BBC's snooker footage. Trailing 0-59 in the penultimate frame, 
Higgins produced, like a gunfighter down to his last bullet, a clearance of 69 
to level the match and added the decider comfortably. This was the death or 
glory situation in which he revelled. His compulsive urge to live on life's 
dangerous edge, stronger than any mere desire to win, was like an addiction to 
the thrill of gambling. Always at his most dangerous and most fascinating in a 
situation of peak emotional intensity, he accessed a similar seam of 
inspiration in the final when, from 15-15, he ran through a trio of frames to 
beat Ray Reardon 18-15.

Crying with emotion, he beckoned his wife, Lynn, and 18-month-old daughter, 
Lauren, to join him in a surreal but spontaneous winner's tableau that has 
remained one of snooker's most iconic images. Three years later, though, he and 
Lynn were divorced.

He served his snooker apprenticeship in the Jampot, a Belfast billiard hall 
where older men would unforgivingly take his money if they could. He lived on 
fizzy drinks and chocolate bars. At 18, he won the Northern Ireland Amateur 
Championship and, playing for Belfast YMCA, won the British team championship 
at Bolton almost single-handed. A couple of local enthusiasts arranged 
exhibition engagements for him and he based himself in Blackburn, at one point 
being successively resident at 9, 11, 13, 15 and 17 Ebony Street, moving along 
as each house was demolished.

Tales of dashing centuries, bust-ups, punch-ups, drinking, gambling and women 
spread through the snooker world. His challenge matches against the late John 
Spencer, then the reigning world champion, packed venue after venue as he 
acquired an army of supporters who were to give him their unqualified support 
throughout his career.

In those days, the world championship lasted for a year. Each match took at 
least three days and the latter stages were a week's duration. The organising 
body, the World Professional Billiards andSnooker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/snooker> Association, was simply a group of 
leading players, some of whom did not think Higgins was "the right type" to 
join their ranks. They were overridden by those who saw that as a box-office 
attraction he was clearly going to help them all make money.

The semi-final provided an archetypal clash between snooker's traditional and 
revolutionary forces: Rex Williams, meticulous in his application and 
calculation, versus Higgins, impulsive, inspirational, hustling round the table 
to assess his shot instinctively and let fly with the minimum of preparation. 
The outcome of a week's endeavour was in doubt until its last five minutes but 
Higgins won 31-30 and then displayed the same dashing, sublime confidence in 
beating Spencer 37-32 for the title.

The national press sensed snooker had changed and that there was an unusual 
character at the centre of it. Promoters began to sniff commercial 
possibilities. One of them condensed the 1973 world championship into a 
fortnight and BBC television, which then screened snooker for only 25 minutes a 
week through its own Pot Black on BBC2, awarded it some coverage. Higgins's 
title defence was snuffed out by Eddie Charlton in the semi-finals and even at 
that early stage many questioned how long he could last with such an 
uninhibited lifestyle. He drank heavily; only a boxer could have collected more 
black eyes than he did; he was thrown out of clubs; a tour of India lasted only 
a day before he was sent back to England in disgrace on the first available 
plane.

For the next 15 seasons, he was invariably in contention for titles. He lost 
the 1976 and 1980 world finals but won the 1978 and 1981 Masters. Remarkably, 
his 16-15 victory over Steve Davis, his first for four years, in the 1983 UK 
Championship final came from 7-0 down.

Just as Reardon, though, with six world titles, was the dominant force of the 
1970s, Davis, with six world and six UK titles, bestrode the 1980s with his 
consistent textbook excellence usually proving too much for those, like 
Higgins, reliant on more fitful inspiration.

Umpteen fines for miscellaneous disciplinary offences were shrugged off until 
Higgins prevaricated over giving a urine sample for a drug test at the 1986 UK 
Championship. When the tournament director tried to hurry him, Higgins 
headbutted him. Higgins was at the centre of the ensuing scrum that spilled out 
into a corridor and resulted in his being fined £200 for assault and £50 for 
criminal damage to a door by Preston magistrates. A disciplinary tribunal 
chaired by Mr Justice, now Judge, Lightman fined him £12,000 and suspended him 
from five tournaments. On his return, he was again in the news after a row with 
his girlfriend, Siobhan Kidd, a psychology graduate he had met while she was 
working as a waitress. When she locked him inside her flat, he attempted to 
crawl round her building on a ledge only to plunge 25 feet to the pavement, 
breaking bones in his foot.

A couple of weeks later, on crutches, he displayed farcical courage in getting 
through a round of the 1989 European Open and, as his condition improved, won 
the Irish Championship shortly afterwards. No longer hopping but limping, he 
won the Irish Masters by beating Stephen Hendry, who was to win seven world 
titles in the 1990s, 9-8 in the final. It was the last title he ever won.

Siobhan was the love of his life but she departed finally with a fractured 
cheekbone for her trouble. Out of his mind with rejection, he threatened, 
backstage at the World Team Cup, to have his team‑mate Dennis Taylor shot the 
next time he visited Northern Ireland, reducing him to tears with vicious 
verbal abuse of his late mother. Disciplinary action was pending from this 
when, after losing in the first round of the 1990 World Championship at the 
Crucible, he punched the WPBSA's duty press officer on his way to the 
obligatory press conference. This was nothing personal, simply an expression of 
his consuming rage against any form of authority. He was suspended for a year 
and docked so many points that his ranking fell to 120. On top of this, a 
management entanglement with Howard Kruger, whose group of companies left 
several players out of pocket, dealt him a financial blow from which he never 
recovered. Higgins claimed he was owed £51,536 and it was on his application 
that Kruger's Framework Management Ltd was wound up with debts of £374,361. In 
October 1991 in a Brighton court, Kruger was disqualified for five years from 
holding a company directorship.

Higgins qualified for the world championship in 1994 for the last time but was 
beaten 10-6 by Ken Doherty and was in troublesome mood when he gave a urine 
sample. Words were exchanged with officials and Higgins smashed one of the two 
full sample bottles against a wall. The disciplinary case was so imperfectly 
presented by the WPBSA that Robin Falvey, for Higgins, successfully argued 
there was no case to answer. On the spur of the moment, Higgins was found 
guilty of two other charges which had not been notified to him. Falvey filed 17 
complaints against the WPBSA but neither these nor other outstanding complaints 
against Higgins were proceeded with. Higgins never paid the £50,000 in fees he 
had run up with Falvey.

His last match on the circuit was in August 1997 in a qualifying event in 
Plymouth. He lost 5-1, became truculent, was escorted from the venue by police 
and was found at 4am sprawled on the ground outside a nightclub, the victim, so 
he claimed, of an unprovoked assault with an iron bar. Quickly discharging 
himself from hospital, he made his way to the Manchester home of a girlfriend, 
Holly Hayse, who stabbed him with a kitchen knife when an altercation broke 
out. Higgins declined to give evidence against her.

In 1996 he was operated upon for cancer of the palate and in 1998 the disease 
returned to his throat. Some 50 radiotherapy sessions virtually cinderised his 
teeth; his face and frame grew ever more gaunt; he joined some 200 other 
smokers to sue Embassy and Benson & Hedges, two prominent snooker sponsors. 
Both actions lapsed.

Dave Moorhouse, a former policeman with 30 years' service, twice had him 
resident at his hotel, Pymgate Lodge, as he tried to help him. "When he's good, 
he's charming," he said. "On Christmas Day and Boxing Day, he helped us serve 
guests and tidy up. I just feared it was too good to be true. I'm genuinely 
fond of him and so were the guests but then he snaps. Alex suffers from great 
highs and great lows. He has sung love songs outside my window at 3 o'clock in 
the morning, woken me up and asked me if I wanted a sleeping tablet."

Sporadic attempts to compete on the fringes of the professional circuit were 
cruelly unsuccessful as he lived out his declining years in a small flat in 
sheltered accommodation. In his prime, he could play brilliantly in an imitable 
way even, at times, well enough to give himself the illusion of the omnipotence 
he craved to keep at bay the vulnerability he feared. When snooker could no 
longer serve as the glue to hold his life together he made no concessions, no 
pleas for sympathy.

The one‑man play, Hurricane, written and acted by Richard Doormer, ends with 
its eponymous hero standing , fag in one hand, glass in the other, trademark 
fedora on his head, amid the detritus of his life – money, beer cans, fag 
packets, betting slips – declaring defiantly: "Don't pity me. I've stood on top 
of the world."
 