
Alex McLeish relished the transformation of his Birmingham City side who came 
back from 3-1 down on aggregate to beatWest Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> and reach a Carling Cup 
final against Arsenal. The visitors had opened the scoring here but the home 
side clawed their way back into the game and West Ham were eventually beaten by 
Craig Gardner's goal in extra time.

"There had to be guts," McLeish, the Birmingham manager, said. "In the first 
half we were huff and puff. They scored with an unbelievable shot. They were 
comfortable and scored an amazing goal. At half-time we were out of the Cup. We 
had to change the tactics and the approach."

McLeish made an impact by introducing the physical presence of his Serbia 
forward Nikola Zigic, whose displays had been moderate for the club until now. 
The manager told his team to be more direct and that suited the target man. 
"Zigi had his best game for the club. The big fellow realised tonight what it 
takes to succeed in England. In everything he did he was verging on the 
unplayable."

"It was a very exciting moment for me when I heard the final whistle and 
realised what this team and my staff had achieved. To lead a team out at 
Wembley will be one of the proudest moments of my career. I had quite a lot of 
them in Scotland but we always want to achieve something [in England] with the 
big chip on our shoulder."

McLeish, notably, won the 1983 Cup Winners' Cup with Aberdeen when Real Madrid 
were beaten in the final, yet making his mark in England now obsesses him. For 
the time being, however, his side and the beaten West Ham now return to the 
fight against relegation.

McLeish was noncommittal when asked whether reaching the final would 
strengthen his position. "I don't want to talk about that," he said. "I just 
keep working to the best of my ability and whatever happens, happens. But I'm 
not invulnerable if results don't go our way. We are in the results business 
and that's football. I've got to get results. I've got a good one tonight so 
maybe I'll be here for a few days yet. It is a fantastic achievement."

The match-winner and Birmingham boyhood supporter Gardner, whose extra-time 
goal sent the club to Wembley for the first time since they lost to Manchester 
City in the 1956 FA Cup final, described the experience as "unbelievable".

"You dream of these things," he said. "I was saying to my mates I wanted to 
get the winner to take us there and to do it was unbelievable."

Avram Grant <https://www.theguardian.com/football/avram-grant>, the West Ham 
manager, expressed his deep disappointment that his side could not produce a 
result that would lift the air of gloom hanging over the club. "They started 
using a lot of long balls and we didn't deal with them," he said. "I felt we 
played well in the first half, scored one goal and could have scored more than 
one. In the second half Birmingham scored from two corners."

Grant does not believe the result will have any bearing on the club's bid to 
stay in the Premier League. "I don't think it will have an impact on the 
players' confidence for the relegation battles ahead," he said. "We did not 
play like a team who are bottom but we have to defend better at set pieces. We 
will not give up, we will keep fighting."
 