
The personal problems suffered by the snooker legend Alex "Hurricane" Higgins 
stemmed from him becoming famous at a young age, mourners at hisBelfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> funeral were told today.

The Anglican Dean of Belfast, Dr Houston McKelvey, also criticised the media 
coverage of the twice world champion's life.

As he delivered a tribute to the 61-year-old at St Anne's Church of Ireland 
cathedral, in Belfast, McKelvey said: "Alex, at a very young age, encountered 
two of the greatest temptations possible – fame and fortune.

"He found it difficult to cope with both. He was not the first to find this 
difficult, and he certainly will not be the last."

McKelvey said some of the coverage of Higgins's life and death had been too 
judgmental, adding: "Many people – informed and ill-informed – have commented 
publicly on Alex, his life and his lifestyle over the past few days.

"It has been a media fest fed by a public which turns, often like a shoal of 
piranha fish, from one personality to another.

"Since Alex's death, many have been judgmental – despite the fact that there 
are few Irish families that I know of who don't have their own character to 
cope with in the family system."

Earlier, snooker stars joined mourners at the funeral service. Higgins's close 
friend and fellow player Jimmy White arrived at the cathedral to pay his 
respects.

Speaking outside the cathedral, White said he had spoken to Higgins only five 
weeks ago. "He wanted to get better," he said.

He said he had played "many, many fantastic matches with him ... he was a 
great friend. He had the heart of a lion".

Other famous names in attendance included the Dubliner Ken Doherty, also a 
world champion, the seven-times world champion, Stephen Hendry, and the Irish 
professional Joe Swail.

The final journey of Higgins, who was found dead at his flat in Belfast last 
weekend after a long battle with throat cancer, began from the south of the 
city following a private service at his family home in Roden Street.

His coffin was taken to the cathedral on a horse-drawn carriage and passed by 
a mural in the Sandy Row area paying homage to the "people's champion".

Hundreds of fans lined the route from the Donegall Road area through the city 
centre.

Higgins will be buried at Carnmoney cemetery, on the outskirts of north 
Belfast.

The 'Hurricane' won the world title in 1972 and 1982.

A controversial figure, he was banned from five tournaments and fined £12,000 
in 1986 when he headbutted the UK championship tournament director, Paul 
Hatherell.

In 1990 he was banned for the rest of the season after punching a tournament 
director at the world championship.

Despite numerous rows with referees, he continued to play the game regularly 
and competed in the Irish professional championship in 2005 and 2006.
 