
As the flower-covered coffin of Alex Higgins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-higgins> was carried from St Anne's 
cathedral in central Belfast, one voice rose up from the throng. "Alex, you 
were the greatest," came the shout, followed by a roar of spontaneous and 
thunderous applause.

The snooker player known to fans as the Hurricane, who died 10 days ago, aged 
61, after long treatment for throat cancer, was honoured at a funeral service 
today in front of a series of past and present stars of the sport, as well as 
thousands of fans waiting outside.

Among those paying their respects was the player-turned-TV-presenter John 
Virgo. "Alex changed the face of the game," Virgo said. "He revolutionised 
snooker."

Another leading player of Higgins' era, Jimmy White, recalled how the pair had 
fought "many, many fantastic matches". White added: "He was a great friend. He 
had the heart of a lion."

At times overcome with emotion, White read out a tribute to his former rival 
and friend. He said: "Only a year ago, Alex was talking about playing again and 
coming on the road with me.

"It angers me that he never listened to anyone, close friends or family, but 
that was Alex. He was an individual, his own man; he was the Hurricane. I will 
miss him to the end."

White added: "When I was 13, I saw Alex Higgins on Pot Black. He was 
mind-blowing, he did things I'd never seen before. I used to copy him doing the 
flair shots and Tony Meo used to impersonate him. Then we met him and became 
very close. I loved him. I often had big rows with him and I didn't speak to 
him for months, but he always knew I had a soft spot for him."

According to the Anglican dean of Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast>, who officiated at the service, 
Higgins' closely documented personal problems – including alcohol, gambling and 
drug use – flowed from becoming famous so young. Dr Houston McKelvey attacked 
media coverage of Higgins' life. In his tribute, McKelvey told approximately 
500 mourners packed into the cathedral: "Alex at a very young age encountered 
two of the greatest temptations possible – fame and fortune. He found it 
difficult to cope with both. He was not the first to find this difficult and he 
certainly will not be the last."

McKelvey criticised some of the coverage of Higgins' life and death.

"Many people – informed and ill-informed – have commented publicly on Alex, 
his life, and his lifestyle over the past few days," he said. "It has been a 
media-fest fed by a public which turns, often like a shoal of piranha fish, 
from one personality to another."

The best way to commemorate Higgins' life, McKelvey added, would be to support 
a cancer treatment centre at Belfast city hospital, close to where the former 
world champion was born.

Among other big names from the sport attending the funeral were Dubliner Ken 
Doherty, seven times world champion Stephen Hendry, and local snooker player 
Joe Swail.

During the service, Higgins' daughter, Lauren, read a poem of tribute.

The 28-year-old was seen on television screens around the world in 1982 when, 
having clinched his second world championship at Sheffield's Crucible theatre, 
Higgins took his then-baby daughter from the crowd to hug her in emotional 
celebration. She told mourners yesterday that there were "no words to tell you 
just what I feel inside".

Higgins' final journey began at his sister's house in south Belfast. Watched 
by hundreds of fans lining the route, his remains were taken to the cathedral 
in a horse-drawn carriage, passing by a mural in the Sandy Row area that pays 
homage to the "people's champion". He was later buried at Carnmoney Cemetery on 
the outskirts of the city's north.

Higgins was found at his flat in south Belfast on 24 July, having possibly 
lain dead for several days.

Higgins won the world championship in 1972 and 1982. Ever controversial, he 
was banned from five tournaments and fined £12,000 in 1986 when he headbutted 
the tournament director of the UK championship, Paul Hatherell. In 1990 he was 
banned for the rest of the season after he punched another tournament director 
at the world championship.

Despite such clashes, Higgins continued to play regularly and appeared at the 
Irish Professional Championship in 2005 and 2006. He squandered a £4m fortune 
and, in his final years, was reduced to making small sums of money charging 
amateur players to take him on in pubs and clubs around south Belfast.
 