
My parents never quit in the middle of something. They said: "If you're gonna 
do it, don't justkind of do it." I decided I was going to make Alice the 
scariest villain in rock'n'roll and I wasn't going to stop until I was done. 
Well, 45 years later, I still don't feel I've hit my peak. So my parents taught 
me endurance.

My dad was a Protestant pastor. He could preach all day, keep you interested, 
tell jokes. I got that from him. He also loved music: Sinatra and Elvis. When 
the Beatles came along, I was surprised when he went, "Yeah, they're pretty 
good," because other parents were going, "Oh, no". And my mom only worried 
about the lifestyle: "You're gonna get caught up in drugs, you're gonna get 20 
girls pregnant."

My dad was called up on the carpet a couple of times by his church. They said: 
"What is your son doing?" He said: "Look, he's an actor, an artist. This is his 
sense of humour. He's not Satanic." My dad had to defend me a lot.

My relatives were like characters out of 1940s movies. My uncle Lefty was a 
playboy, who lived in LA and used to go out with Ava Gardner. I don't think 
I saw him when he wasn't in a tuxedo, a Martini in one hand, a cigarette in the 
other. My uncle Vince owned a pool hall. He was an ex-boxer and every illegal 
pool game that went on in Detroit was his. My uncles would come over and sit 
smoking, drinking and watching fights on TV. Aged seven or eight, I would sit 
in the middle inhaling all this stuff. They were a lot of fun.

I've been married to Sheryl for 35 years and never cheated on her. I am one of 
the good guys. If you marry the person you're in love with, you would never do 
anything to hurt her. Honestly, I have seen spectacularly beautiful women and 
said: "I'm not interested."

The secret is keeping romance in the marriage. Men are microwaves and women 
are pressure cookers. Sex is the whole thing for men: bang, ready, let's go. 
Women want romance beforehand, or they feel they're not appreciated. Once in a 
while, you have to whisk your wife off to a motel for ridiculous sex. You have 
to keep things surprising. My wife is a ballet teacher so she is very 
organised. I'm the spontaneous one – she never knows what's coming, except that 
I'm gonna be home and I'm gonna be sober. After that, there might be a ticket 
to Jamaica in there.

Every child gets through 7,000 diapers. That's 21,000 with three kids. And 
I changed at least half of those. I was really hands-on when it came to 
homework as well. My daughter Calico, 29, is an actor and does improv comedy. 
If I'm working in LA, I stay at her house so I can go to dinner and the movies 
with her, watch her rehearse. My son Dashiell graduated from Arizona State 
University with the highest honours and has just married. My other daughter, 
Sonora, 18, is going to college now. She teaches hip-hop to inner-city kids.

I told Calico: "If you try to con me, understand that I was Ferris Bueller." 
I ran my school, had the teachers conned. I said: "When you think you're going 
to tell me a lie, it better be good because I'm better at it than you are."

Calico told me something interesting: "If you said, 'I'm really disappointed 
in you,' that would crush me. I'd rather you threw me off a building than say 
that." So I think we raised great kids.

Alice Cooper's Halloween Night of Fear tour starts in Sheffield on 25 October. 
For details, visitlivenation.co.uk <http://www.livenation.co.uk> 
 