
NOEL FIELDING Hi Alice, thanks for talking to us from Hawaii. You haven't 
bumped into Mick Fleetwood down there have you?

ALICE COOPER Yes, Mick's down here, we do a charity show for New Year's Eve 
together. This year it was Steven Tyler, the Doobie Brothers, Weird Al 
Yankovic. It was really very loud, so it was great.

NOEL Wow, that sounds like a brilliant group of people.

ALICE And of course, next year: you!

NOEL I've never been to Hawaii, it looks amazing.

ALICE I can't picture you with a tan …

NOEL There's trees there, right? I could stand in the shade. I can't imagine 
you sunbathing, actually.

ALICE I don't sunbathe, but I do play golf every day.

NOEL Thank you for doing this: I'm just going to fire some questions at you, 
and I won't make them too painful. So, you were in a band called the Earwigs, 
weren't you?

ALICE That was our original band. We were all on the track and field team; we 
were distance runners. The oddest thing is that to the audience we were 
probably the most disgusting … we were the Sex Pistols times 20, but everybody 
in the band were athletes. We came from really wholesome Midwest homes, and our 
image was just the opposite. It couldn't have been more odd that we ended up 
being the Clockwork Orange-type band that we were.

NOEL You were all really healthy and fit? The Sex Athletes!

ALICE We ended up not so healthy and fit; rock'n'roll will do that to you. We 
started out being much more wholesome than the Monkees.

'The Mamas And The Papas, James Taylor – they all had heroin problems! We were 
meant to be the really badass boys and we drank beer and that was it'
 Noel Fielding. Photograph: Neil Bedford 
NOEL The Monkees? I heard that they were quite into their party scene at one 
point.

ALICE It was quite odd: the Mamas And The Papas, and James Taylor, David 
Cassidy and the Monkees were all on the cover of 16 Magazine, which was like 
purity personified. And bands likeAlice Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alicecooper> and Black Sabbath were 
demonised as the worst things ever for you. But we were all into beer; those 
other bands were all into hard drugs! The Mamas And The Papas, James Taylor – 
they all had heroin problems! We were meant to be the really badass boys and we 
drank beer and that was it!

NOEL And went running!

ALICE Well, in all honesty, when you think of how there was so much energy in 
the show - back in Billion Dollar Babies and School's Out - you really did 
realise that most of the guys in the band were athletes, or you would not have 
been able to do two hours like that on a stage.

NOEL I read somewhere that you were quite influenced by the early Pink Floyd. 
Is that true?

ALICE You know, there was a time in 1968, I think it was, when we played the 
Whiskey A Go Go: it was Alice Cooper and Led Zeppelin. And nobody had ever 
heard of either band, we were just two bands. And the next night, we played the 
Cheetah Club with Pink Floyd; these were just clubs, because nobody had ever 
heard of any of these bands. At the time, we were all out of money. They stayed 
at our house for a while. We were just trying to put our money together to get 
food. At the time, nobody knew if anybody was going to make it or not.

NOEL That's blowing my mind!

ALICE My favourite story about Syd Barrett  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/sydbarrett>was, I get up one morning and I 
went in the kitchen, and there's a box of Corn Flakes in front of him. And, 
he's watching the box of Corn Flakes the way I would watch television; he was 
really enjoying himself … I guess the Corn Flakes must have been dancing and 
singing and doing all sorts of things …

NOEL He was changing through the channels?

ALICE Oh, he was having so much fun with this box of Corn Flakes. And I 
realised then how out-there he was. He was on a lot of LSD or something.

NOEL Or he was on a different plane. You partied quite a bit; do you feel 
happier now you've given it all up? You had a good run, didn't you?

ALICE I was right there. We had a club called the Hollywood Vampires. That was 
sort of like the old drinking club in Hollywood – Errol Flynn and WC Fields, 
all these great actors, the Barrymores – who could drink anyone under the 
table. So we created a group which was sort of a modern version of that: it was 
Harry Nilsson, Mickey Dolenz and Keith Moon and myself, and we would meet at 
the Rainbow every night and it was sort of last man standing … we would sit 
there and drink, and just wait to see what Keith Moon would wear that night. 
One night he would be full-out Hitler, with a sidecar and a motorcycle, and the 
next night he would be the Queen of England. He would get these immaculate 
costumes and walk into the Rainbow, and we would just applaud, that's how 
amazing it was.

NOEL He was a bit like a chameleon wasn't he, Keith Moon?

ALICE When I first got married, my wife did not understand who Keith Moon was. 
She was a ballerina from New York City, so she didn't even know who the Who 
were. So, Keith would come over and stay for a week at the house. He would just 
show up, and he was the thing that wouldn't leave! It was sort of like, we all 
knew that, and it was cool that he would stay for a week, and then he would go 
and stay at Harry's for a week and then he would go and stay at Ringo's for a 
week; he just made his rounds. He was the guest that was always welcome. We 
would come home and he would be in a French maid's outfit, dusting the house, 
and he would be like, "Oh 'ello Monsieur Coo-per and Mrs … " And my wife's 
going, "Who is this?!" He was like your crazy uncle that you really loved 
because he was so crazy.

'Well, I met Elvis, I met Sinatra, I met the Beatles, the Stones, but the guys 
that I really admired were the Groucho Marxes, the Bob Hopes, the Jack Bennys'
 Alice Cooper. 
NOEL Keith sounds brilliant. You must have met a lot of famous people; who was 
the most famous person you met?

ALICE Well, I met Elvis, I met Sinatra, I met the Beatles, the Stones, but the 
guys that I really admired were the Groucho Marxes, the Bob Hopes, the Jack 
Bennys … the real old stars that went back to vaudeville. Which has totally 
affected you by the way; I look at what you do, and it's total vaudeville.

NOEL I love the Marx Brothers. I read somewhere that Groucho liked your act, 
that he came to see you.

ALICE He saw the show. He said, "You guys are the last hope for vaudeville," 
and I went, "Wow, what a great thing to say." My manager was managing Groucho 
at the time, and he was just sharp as a tack until he passed away. But then 
Salvador Dalí came to see the show, and he said, "Well, it's surrealism", so 
everybody had their own take. Fred Astaire would come and see the show, and he 
would go, "Ah, yeah, I see this whole dancing skeletons thing; I saw that in 
Abbott And Costello Meet Frankenstein!"

NOEL How old were you when you wrote your first song?

ALICE We were in high school, listening to the Yardbirds, the Who, and after 
learning all the Beatles songs, and Chuck Berry, we learned from the Rolling 
Stones how to make it a little tougher. In high school we were writing these 
horrible little songs, and some of them ended up on Pretties For You.Frank Zappa
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/frank-zappa> liked us because he would say, 
"You've got five songs here that are two minutes long, and there's 38 changes 
in each one of them!" The great compliment was, he would go, "I don't get it – 
that's great, that's why I'm signing you."

NOEL I heard that he signed another band – the Tubes maybe – because they 
cleared a gig?

ALICE No, that was still us! We were playing a big party in LA, with the 
Doors, Buffalo Springfield, Love – – all those great bands – and we came on 
next to last because we were the house band. Everybody in the audience was on 
acid, of course, grooving on peace and love, and then all of a sudden you hear 
this DA-NA-NAA-NAAA and there's these insanity-looking clowns onstage. We 
scared the hell out of these people. They were all on acid, we looked like we'd 
just come up out of the ground, and we didn't mind a little violence onstage. 
That audience couldn't get out of the room fast enough. It was like somebody 
yelled "FIRE!" There were three people left standing: Frank Zappa, my manager 
Shep Gordon and one of [celebrated groupies] theGTOs 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_GTOs>. Frank said, "Anybody that can clear a 
room that quick, I've got to sign."

'Keith Moon, Jim Morrison, all the guys that we grew up with were dead at 27. 
This was like a signal to us going, you can either live, or die'
 Photograph: Sara Lee for the Guardian 
NOEL When you decided to give up partying, drink and drugs and the whole 
lifestyle, how did you do that? Did you play golf back then?

ALICE I hit balls and that was about it. Really at that point it was a matter 
of survival – Ozzy got there, Steven Tyler got there – where you're either 
going to stop or die. It's not like, "Oh I'm going to make a really good choice 
in my life now", it wasn't that. It's more like, I'm either going to fall off 
this cliff or I'm going to take a step backwards, and I took the step 
backwards. I think it took getting up in the morning and throwing up blood 
before I really realised how far gone I was. And Keith had already died, Jim 
Morrison, all the guys that we grew up with were dead already at 27. This was 
like a signal to us going, you can either live, or die. I just chose, you know, 
I'm going to live.

NOEL You love what you do, too. You've made, like, 26 albums haven't you?

ALICE I think I'm on my 29th right now … Back then you made two albums a year, 
and you toured. That was normal. Now, there's an album every five years; people 
have just stretched it out now. There was a time in the 70s where the whole 
thing was, "How expensive was your album"? It was really stupid. It was a 
prestige thing: "We spent $5m and 28 months making this record … " And I would 
go, "Boy, it'd better be good!"

NOEL I read once that some disabled people tore a chicken apart at one of your 
shows: is that true?

ALICE Well, we were at the Toronto Peace Festival and Shep Gordon my manager 
had put the show together, and he said: "I don't want any payment, what I want 
is my band to go on second to last." There were 70 to 80,000 people there, and 
we were used to playing to 70 or 80 people. It was back when we'd open up 
feathered pillows and CO2 cartridges, and blow the feathers all over the 
audience so it looked like a snow storm. And the music was just blaring, high 
pitched, almost white noise at the end of the show. Right before us was the 
Doors, and after us was John Lennon and Yoko Ono. So I had Jim Morrison and the 
Doors on the right side, and John and Yoko on the left, watching this show. It 
was just chaos. The next thing I know, in the middle of this feather flurry I 
look down and there's a white chicken onstage. I know that we didn't bring it. 
Who would bring a white chicken to a show? I pick up the chicken. I figure it's 
got feathers and wings and it would fly, so I throw it into the audience. The 
audience tore it to pieces! This is the Peace Festival, ironic huh? They threw 
the parts back up onstage. The next day the paper says, "Alice Cooper rips up 
chicken to pieces and rips the head off and drinks the blood". So Frank Zappa 
calls me, and he goes, "Alice, did you kill a chicken onstage last night?" I 
said no. And he said, "Well, don't tell anybody; theylove it!" Now, the kicker 
to the story of course, is that the first 10 rows of these 80,000 people were 
all people in wheelchairs. They were the ones who killed the chicken!

NOEL Ozzy's got bats, you've got chickens!

ALICE You guys need to kill something onstage, like a hamster or a foal or 
something.

NOEL I think our fans would be absolutely outraged! Maybe if there's a chicken 
with an injury we could heal it onstage, make a small wheelchair.

ALICE You know what would be funny? If you've got Ozzy killing the bats, and 
me killing the chickens, and you guys were sort of like the emergency squad who 
try to put them back together …

NOEL … with a stretcher! We could run onstage with a tiny little stretcher …

ALICE … breathing life into the chicken, pounding on its chest, going, "Live 
dammit, live!"

NOEL "We can save this one!" OK, I'm going to ask you some quick questions; 
I've had so much of your time. If you had to pick one, who would you prefer: 
the Beatles or the Stones?

ALICE I gotta go with the Beatles. They were more influential, and nobody 
wrote songs that were that good. The Stones wrote a lot of great songs and they 
were truly hard rock personified, but the Beatles affected everybody. I'm still 
pretty sure they're aliens.

NOEL As a performer: Iggy Pop or Jim Morrison?

ALICE I grew up with both of them … Iggy was the heart and soul of Detroit, 
Jim Morrison was the heart and soul of Los Angeles; being a Detroiter, I felt 
more at home with Iggy. Jim had this thing: "I'm going to die, there's nothing 
that can stop me." Iggy had a survival thing built in, so I've got to go with 
Iggy on that.

NOEL Frank Zappa or Captain Beefheart?

ALICE Zappa! Frank was the maestro. All the musicians looked up to Frank as 
being the Leonard Bernstein of rock – the know-all. That goes for Clapton, the 
Beach Boys, the Beatles.Everybody looked up to Frank.

NOEL OK, this one's easy: leather trousers or golf slacks?

ALICE I gotta go with leather trousers; I look so much better in leather 
trousers. If I was on the PGA tour, I'd be wearing all-black out there.

NOEL That would be amazing! We should bring out a range of gothic golf 
clothes! If you haven't already done that it has to be done.

ALICE You know, if you can deliver the goods, be out there in the top 25, 
shooting five-, six-under, then well, why wouldn't you? Have all the full 
makeup on!

NOEL I could be your caddy!

ALICE That would be perfect.

NOEL All right, last one: Noel Fielding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/noel-fielding>, or Russell Brand?

ALICE I've got to go with the Noel Fielding thing! You know, the very first 
time I saw the Mighty Boosh, I said, "Oh my gosh, I'm in Dennis Dunaway's 
head!" Dennis [the original Alice Cooper bass player] was so bizarre and he
thoughtthe way that you guys perform. And he was always very funny, thought 
provoking; I thought, "This is what Dennis's brain must be like."

NOEL That's an amazing compliment, thank you. I'm going to let you get back to 
Hawaii now.
 