
Terrifying sci-fi chiller Alien is an unlikely inspiration for a festive 
family TV treat. But the monsters in the Christmas edition of BBC1’sDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> bear more than a passing 
resemblance to the “facehuggers” from the classic horror film.

The hour-long special, the centrepiece of BBC1’s Christmas Day lineup, also 
features the Doctor’s first-ever encounter with Santa Claus, played by Shaun of 
the Dead starNick Frost <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/nick-frost>.

Such is the resemblance of the Doctor’s latest adversaries to the monster in 
Alien that one of the characters in the episode refers to the 1979 film. But 
Steven Moffat, the show’s lead writerand executive producer, said he did not 
seek permission from its makers. “They never asked Doctor Who to borrow the 
plot of the Ark in Space,” said Moffat, a reference to fourDoctor Who episodes 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ark_in_Space>, starring Tom Baker, from 1975.

“I thought, what are the paradigm scary adventures of Doctor Who that have 
been serially ripped off in the cinema,” said Moffat. “Essentially it’s Alien. 
[It] has scenes like you get inAlien <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien>, 
but with Santa.

“I really wanted to do Doctor Who meets Santa … but I thought it would be 
useless if Santa came into one of the Doctor’s lighter adventures. Santa should 
be at the Doctor’s side during a really scary adventure, a really nasty one.”

Moffat defended the level of shocks in the show, saying it was “fun scary”. He 
added: The thing that people never say is that hiding behind the sofa is itself 
fun. Kids like being scared of Doctor Who – it doesn’t horrify them, it doesn’t 
petrify them. It’s an enjoyable thrill.

“The Doctor turning up in any scene anywhere makes the scene less scary. A man 
in stupid clothes walks out of a phone box and says: ‘I can save the world.’ 
Kids have nightmares about monsters whether or not Doctor Who happens. But 
Doctor Who gives them the Doctor, the man who fights monsters but does not 
become one.”

He added: “The thing about children is they are much more serious than we are, 
they live in a more frightening world than adults do, in a civilised country 
anyway. Imagine living in a world where everyone is taller than you.”

The first festive special to feature former Thick of It star Peter Capaldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peter-capaldi> as the Doctor also 
ends his first year in the role since succeeding Matt Smith.

The show lost viewers after it was moved later in the Saturday schedules to an 
8.30pm slot to accommodate Strictly Come Dancing. The festive edition, airing 
at 6.15pm, is likely to be one of the most popular programmes on Christmas Day.

Capaldi said: “I can’t believe it’s gone so quickly, we just had the 
read-through for the first of next year’s series. When I went through the same 
thing last year, I was absolutely terrified because I didn’t know anyone. It’s 
been fabulous, really good fun.”

Asked at the programme launch on Wednesday if it was a difficult role, Capaldi 
said: “No, it’s the easiest thing I have ever done in my life. People keep 
saying to me: ‘Is it weird suddenly being recognised?’ You walk down the street 
and people smile as if they are happy to see Doctor Who. That’s a lovely and 
very special experience.”

Moffat said the Christmas special had to appeal to everyone from hardcore fans 
“to people who watch it three times a year”. He added: “I think most people 
would agree that Doctor Who meeting Santa Claus is overdue – that just seems 
like automatically a good idea.”
 