
Bitfinex, the cryptocurrency exchange that lost $72m (£55m) to hackers last 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/03/bitcoin-stolen-bitfinex-exchange-hong-kong>
, has told customers they will lose just over 36% of the assets they had on the 
platform but will be compensated for these losses with tokens of credit.

The Hong Kong-based exchange said in a blogpost 
<http://blog.bitfinex.com/uncategorized/bitfinex-interim-update/> that losses 
from the theft would be shared, or “generalised”, across the company’s clients 
and assets, widening the group of those affected beyond those announced last 
week. “This is the closest approximation to what would happen in a liquidation 
context,” Bitfinex said on its website early on Sunday. “Upon logging into the 
platform, customers will see that they have experienced a generalised loss 
percentage of 36.067%.”

The company said it would also give all affected clients a “BFX” token 
crediting them for their losses that could be redeemed by the exchange or for 
shares in iFinex, the exchange’s parent company. The company suggested it was 
looking for investment to allow the credits to be redeemed. “We are actively 
discussing various strategic options with numerous potential investors as part 
of our strategy to fully compensate our customers. Such discussions, however, 
are in early stages and will likely take time to play out.”

Bitfinex said it would explain its methodology in a later update and that it 
was talking to investors about how to fully compensate its customers.

Hackers stole 119,756 bitcoins from Bitfinex last Tuesday in the second 
biggest breach of a cryptocurrency exchange ever, in US dollar terms. The hack 
accounted for about 0.75% of all bitcoins in circulation. This is the second 
attack on the Bitfinex exchange in less than two years – the last hack occurred 
in May 2015 and involved the loss of a more modest 1,500 coins.

The exchange is the world’s largest for trading digital currencies such as 
bitcoin, litecoin and ether, and is used for its deep liquidity in US 
dollar/bitcoin trades.

A major downward swing in bitcoin prices before the attack, from $650 a coin 
to about $600, has led to speculation that knowledge of an upcoming attack 
might have been leaked to the market beforehand. Following Bitfinex’s 
confirmation of a hack, bitcoin prices fell a further 20%.

It is still not clear how the hackers gained access to the company’s customer 
accounts.

However, both Bitfinex and outside experts have dismissed suggestions the 
breach was due to the security of the blockchain, the decentralised ledger that 
tracks every bitcoin transaction and which traditional banks are considering 
adopting to increase the speed and transparency of their transactions.

Bitfinex said last week it expected to “socialise” its losses across bitcoin 
balances and active loans to bitcoin/US-dollar positions. Its statement on 
Sunday, however, indicated a wider application of the losses to all accounts, 
which include other digital currencies.

On Sunday Bitfinex said customers should be able to log on to its platform 
within 48 hours.

A blockchain analysis company, Chainalysis, confirmed that it is helping to 
track the stolen bitcoins.
 