
Trainer Bob Baffert might well be expecting a call from the Bureau of 
Competition after the 48th running of the $1.75m Grade I Haskell Invitational 
Stakes at Monmouth Park in whichTriple Crown hero American Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/06/american-pharoah-triple-crown-belmont-stakes>
 treated his opposition to a wholly one-sided display of big race dominance.


The first Triple Crown winner in 37 years – who went off a prohibitive 1-9 
odds-on favorite in the Haskell – sauntered home two-and-a-quarter lengths 
clear of 18-1 shot Keen Ice, with second favorite Upstart in third and 
Competitive Edge in fourth.

The winning time for the nine-furlong race was 1min 47.95sec, less than a 
second off the Haskell record – a remarkable time considering the 
breathlessness of American Pharaoh’s victory.

“He ran like a champ,” said winning jockey Victor Espinoza, who never once 
reached for his whip and sat motionless as they passed the post. “The other 
horses worked hard to keep up with him.”

American Pharoah the best Triple Crown winner? He's the most important anyway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/07/american-pharoah-the-best-triple-crown-winner-hes-the-most-important-anyway>
“He was just having fun out there,” he added. “And me too. We were both having 
fun.”

“That was nerve-racking,” said a tearful Baffert, who was enjoying his fifth 
Haskell in six years and his eighth victory in the race overall.

Few superlatives do justice to the ease with which American Pharoah coasted to 
victory. As expected, Competitive Edge under Mike Smith made straight for the 
lead, withAmerican Pharoah <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah> 
sitting near his haunches in second.

Smith and Competitive Edge proceeded to set decent fractions up front, but as 
the field rolled around the home turn, Victor Espinoza turned his horse loose, 
quickly opening up a sizeable lead that looked insurmountable as they careened 
into the stretch.

From the top of the home stretch all the way to the wire, Espinoza sat as 
quiet as a flag on a windless day as his nearest pursuers slugged it out 
behind. Keen Ice did well to plug on for second. In closing the gap between him 
and American Pharoah to fewer than three lengths at the wire, he provided the 
only anxious moment for fans of the favorite, in case Espinoza had played it 
too cool up front.

Needless to say, he hadn’t. 

In winning the Haskell, American Pharoah’s total earnings have swollen to 
$5.63m.

“This horse, he just keeps bringing it. It’s a great crowd. I love bringing my 
horses here. I’m just glad they got to see a great horse,” said Baffert, 
understanding the star-power of American Pharoah, whose exploits have ensured 
that his everyday routine is closely monitored by a sizable entourage of fans.

Indeed, in the days leading up to the race, Monmouth Park attracted 
5000-strong crowds who came just to watch the son of Pioneerof the Nile go 
through his paces in the morning.

When asked about his colt’s next race, owner Ahmed Zayat responded: “No clue. 
We’re going to enjoy this moment.”

Nevertheless, an injury-free remainder of the season is expected to conclude 
with American Pharoah signing off in the Breeders’ Cup Classic at Keeneland on 
31 October, before he assumes stud duties for breeding giants, Coolmore.

Baffert was similarly noncommittal about where American Pharoah heads next. 
But he has stated in recent weeks how before the Classic, the Triple Crown 
winner could race twice more (though more likely just once). The question is: 
exactly where?

One possibility could be the Travers Stakes at Saratoga Race Course on 29 
August. As an enticement to connections, the New York track has promised to 
increase the race coffers from $1.25m to $1.6m if American Pharoah shows up.

 Should he take the Travers route, American Pharoah could face last year’s 
Breeders’ Cup Juvenile winner, Texas Red. An absentee from the Triple Crown 
trail owing to foot problems, Texas Red proved himself to be in good heart when 
winning Saturday’s Grade II Jim Dandy Stakes at Saratoga. It would also mark 
the second time that these two colts have met, but the first this year.

Another interesting wrinkle is Baffert’s record in the Travers. In stark 
contrast to his sparkling Haskell resume, Baffert has won the Travers only 
once, with Point Given in 2001. The best performance from his four subsequent 
runners came from Roman Ruler, who finished third in 2005. The other three – 
Coil in 2011, Liaison in 2012 and Bayern last year – all ran dismally.

Parx Racing near Philadelphia has lobbied hard for American Pharoah to run 
next in the $1m Pennsylvania Derby on 19 September, and have offered a bonus of 
$50,000 for both the winning owner and trainer of an entrant that has won a 
Triple Crown race.

One more race possibility is the Pacific Classic at Del Mar on 22 August. 
Though the purse offered is smaller than the Travers – $1m to be exact – the 
Southern California venue is American Pharoah’s home track, and would afford 
the much-journeyed three-year-old an alluring opportunity to race at home in 
California, especially with his big end of year target of the BC Classic 
looming large on the horizon.

Though the Pacific Classic this year has been deprived of much of its 
potential lustre due to the injuries sustained by leading west-coast warriors 
Shared Belief and California Chrome, it could still throw up an interesting 
competitor or two. Indeed, the race was mooted as the next stepping stone for 
seven-time Grade I winner and duel Breeders’ Cup heroine Beholder, after her 
victory in Saturday’s Grade I, $300,00 Clement L Hirsch Stakes at Del Mar.

Nevertheless, in light of American Pharoah’s dismissal of the field in 
Sunday’s Haskell, the air of invincibility surrounding the horse has only been 
amplified. And one gets the feeling that whoever squares up next to the Triple 
Crown champ will need to bring even better than their very best to dethrone 
American Pharoah from the head of the table.
 