
After 37 years and a dozen bitter disappointments on the unforgiving dirt of 
Belmont Park, American racing finally got its 12th Triple Crown winner over the 
line on Saturday, and from wire to wire, it was never in doubt.American Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah> gave the sell-out crowd of 
90,000 jammed into Belmont’s immense grandstand the piece of history that some 
feared they would never see again, and he was roared to victory not only in New 
York, but all over the United States.

American Pharoah was the first Triple Crown winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/07/american-pharoah-the-best-triple-crown-winner-hes-the-most-important-anyway>
 of the social media age, and while NBC’s rating for the race was a little 
disappointing – it attracted fewer viewers than California Chrome’s attempt to 
complete the Crown 12 months ago – it was a moment that was made to be shared 
on Twitter.

The delight, and relief, exploded nationwide the instant that his victory was 
assured. One memorable, and telling, image showed Mike Trout, one of the 
biggest stars in baseball, with his arms aloft as he watched the closing stages 
in the locker room. Even after nearly four decades without a winner, America 
had not forgotten the Triple Crown.

It was a clear sign of the value to any sport of an achievement such as the 
Double in football that does not come around every year, or even necessarily 
every decade. But it was a reminder too that all the crushing disappointments 
and near-misses since 1978 had also served a purpose.

The steady trickle of horses, one every three or four years, who made it to 
the Belmont with a Triple Crown still within reach meant that it was all but 
inevitable that one would complete the set sooner or later. Each failure 
represented an emotional investment helping to keep the collective memory 
alive. It was paid back with interest when American Pharoah finally ended one 
of the longest and most frustrating losing runs in any sport.

If there is a negative attached to American Pharoah’s triumph, it is that 
while US racing now has a horse with a name and achievement to strike a chord 
with the vast majority of sports fans, it does not have the national structure 
or personnel to exploit the good fortune as it might. The fractured nature of 
its administration means that there is no equivalent of Great British Racing to 
swing into action and promote the remainder of his racing career for all it is 
worth, which is a great pity for all concerned.

In Britain, it is the other way around. A potential Triple Crown winner would 
be an excellent way to get mainstream airtime and attention, but there is 
almost no hope at all that any horse will ever again complete the sequence of 
Classic wins in the 2,000 Guineas, Derby and St Leger. In contrast to the 13 
horses who took the Kentucky Derby and Preakness between Affirmed and American 
Pharoah, a dozen of whom duly lined up in the Belmont, only Camelot, in 2012, 
has made it to the St Leger starting stalls for the final leg since Nijinsky 
completed the set in 1970.

It is not the lack of a winner that suggests our own Triple Crown is dead. It 
is the lack of frustrating failures, the near-misses that underline the 
magnitude of the achievement. America’s Triple Crown requires a horse with 
speed for the first two legs and stamina in the last. The demand in Britain, 
with races from a mile to an extended mile-and-three-quarters, is for a 
stamina-laden colt with the speed to win a Guineas. If there is a near-miss – 
and Australia, who was third on the wrong side in the Guineas before winning 
the Derby last year is one name that springs to mind – it goes unnoticed, 
because the quest is already over.

It is not a disaster. British racing has survived 45 years with only one 
attempt to win a Triple Crown, and will continue to produce memorable Classic 
winners, such as Golden Horn in the Derby a few hours before the Belmont.

But in its traditional format, there is no chance whatsoever that British 
racing will ever experience either the serial Triple Crown disappointments that 
helped to keep the dream alive, or the final, redemptive euphoria that swept 
through American racing on Saturday.
 