
Seven years ago, 10 minutes before post time for the 140th running of the 
Belmont Stakes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/belmont-stakes>, I started to 
wonder if, having crossed the Atlantic to see a horse called Big Brown attempt 
to complete the Triple Crown, I was going to end up watching the race on TV 
after all. It felt as though all of New York had crammed itself into Belmont 
Park’s main grandstand. I needed to find a gap in a seemingly impenetrable wall 
of backs, and then enough space to breathe. Unlike Big Brown, I was definitely 
odds-against.

But I was armed with an English accent, and it worked. “You’ve come from 
England? Hey you guys, make some room. This guy’s come from England to see the 
race.” A moment later, I was in the midst of the crush, an honoured and 
grateful guest at the biggest party of the year.

It was an extraordinary experience, unlike anything I’ve known at a racecourse 
before or since. The crackle in the air, the sense of imminent history in the 
making and the euphoria of being there to see it happen swelled by the minute 
as post-time approached.


American Pharoah draws No5 post in bid for Triple Crown at Belmont
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/03/american-pharoah-draws-no5-post-in-bid-for-triple-crown-at-belmont>
Many among the crowd of nearly 100,000 had been disappointed before, when 
horses like Real Quiet,beaten in a head-bobber in 1998 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KLV7xZPwvM0>, and Smarty Jones failed to add 
the Belmont <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZuLGsOjnGmo> to the first two legs 
of the Crown, the Kentucky Derby and Preakness Stakes. This time, though, there 
was little doubt that Big Brown was about to become the first Triple Crown 
winner since 1978. Casino Drive, his main rival in the morning-line betting, 
had been scratched a few hours beforehand. Big Brown was now favourite at 
30-100 to beat eight inferior opponents. What could possibly go wrong?

Then came the crash. Big Brown walked over the line a distance behind the rest 
of the field, having dropped out rapidly before the turn for home. Just three 
minutes after the wild expectation had reached its peak as the stalls snapped 
open, the mood turned ugly. A few yards away, a fight started. One spectator 
had thrown a punch at the stranger standing next to him. The victim’s crime? He 
had backed the winner, Da’Tara, at 39-1, and celebrated the moment as any 
normal person would. In the poisonous atmosphere that followed Big Brown’s 
defeat, it was enough to get him thumped.

Such was the depth of the crushing disappointment, and the sheer disbelief 
that after so many years and so many near-misses, it had happened again. There 
overwhelming sense in the crowd was that they had, collectively, been robbed of 
their moment for the ages. The immediate instinct was to find someone to blame, 
and the winning punter was an obvious target.

But when the anger subsided, the search for blame continued. Seven years and 
two more failures in the Belmont later, the question is still being asked ahead 
of American Pharaoh’s attempt to complete the Crown on Saturday. There were 
three Triple Crown winners in the space of six seasons in the 1970s, so why has 
it proved impossible to win ever since?

On the face of it, this is a sequence of results that defies explanation. 
Leaving aside I’ll Have Another, who was scratched the day before the Belmont 
in 2012, there have been 12 attempts to complete the Triple Crown in the 
Belmont since 1978. All but one started as the favourite – Charismatic was an 
8-5 shot – and eight went off at odds-on. Two more were even-money favourites. 
Only one, War Emblem at 6-5 in 2002, started at odds-against.

In theory, inverting the odds about any individual horse offers at least a 
crude estimate of the chance that it willnot win. Since Sunday Silence was 9-10 
to win in 1989, and Pleasant Colony 4-5 in 1981, it was around 10-9 and 5-4 
respectively that they would not. Simply multiplying out the odds against 
success suggests that the price against the long losing sequence being down to 
nothing more than pure chance is just under 40,000-1.

That, however, assumes that the all of the Triple Crown contenders are 
starting at a realistic price. In practice, however, every last one of them 
will have been overbet, which is to say that it has attracted more money than 
its chance merits. It is inevitable, because when history beckons, everyone 
wants to buy their own small stake in the story.

It is also a factor that tends to be exaggerated by pari-mutuel betting 
systems, and means in turn that all the downcast spectators at Belmont when a 
Triple Crown contender is beaten are, to some extent, responsible for their own 
disappointment. The betting makes the race look like a slam dunk for the 
favourite, but the reality is rather different. If, say, the 11 contenders were 
all 3-1 against, the implied odds against all 11 being beaten would be more 
like 22-1: unlikely, yes, but in racing, stranger things happen every day.

If I love animals, how can I love horse racing? It requires denial ...
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/03/if-i-love-animals-how-can-i-love-horse-racing-it-requires-denial->
So it is possible that the Triple Crown is just on a really rotten run of 
luck. But while the true price against any horse winning will always be a 
matter of opinion rather than absolute fact, any horse that lines up for the 
Belmont with US racing’s holy grail within reach has already proved itself to 
be one of the best of its generation. Even at an average price of 2-1 against, 
the implied chance of 11 losers is about 85-1. Sheer bad luck may have played a 
part in some of the disappointments, but the overwhelming likelihood is that 
when it comes to the Belmont, there are other factors at work too.

The most obvious possibility, of course, is the extra distance. Triple Crown 
contenders arrive at the Belmont having won over 10 furlongs at Churchill Downs 
and nine-and-a-half in the Preakness. The Belmont is almost certainly the 
first, and probably the only, time in their career when they will be asked to 
race over 12. An extra two furlongs or so might not sound like much, but for a 
horse that has been trained and conditioned throughout its life to race at 
shorter trips, it is almost like starting afresh in a new discipline.

And that is before the opposition is considered. Most horses have quite a 
limited range of distances at which they can be fully effective, and a 
Preakness winner with a pedigree based on speed rather than stamina is unlikely 
to run to its best over 12 furlongs, never mind actually improve, for the step 
up in trip. Of course, it might not need to run to its best in order to win. 
Its opponents might struggle to cope with the extended trip too. But if just 
one of them not only runs to form, but improves as well, it is going to be a 
much more formidable opponent than its starting odds might suggest.

In all probability, it will be a fresher opponent too. In the aftermath of 
California Chrome’s defeat in last year’s Belmont, Steve Coburn, one of the 
colt’s co-owners, pointed out rather sourly that Tonalist, the winner, had not 
run in either theKentucky Derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kentucky-derby> or the Preakness. “It’s not 
fair to these horses that have been in the game since day one,” Coburn said. 
“This is not fair to these horses that have been running their guts out to have 
somebody come up [without racing in the first two Triple Crown events]. This is 
the coward’s way out in my opinion.”

Coburn was talking amid the collective despair of yet another Triple Crown 
failure, and a few days later said that he was “very ashamed” of his outburst. 
Like the punchy punter after Big Brown’s defeat, he was angry, frustrated and 
looking for a scapegoat. As a result, he forgot that it is in the very essence 
of any Triple Crown that it is very difficult to achieve.

Compare it, for instance, to the original Triple Crown, in Britain. This has 
gone without a winner for even longer than its American equivalent, and only 
one horse since 1970, when Nijinsky won the 2,000 Guineas, Derby and St Leger, 
has even arrived at the final leg with a chance to complete.

The range of distances in the British Triple Crown is much wider than that in 
the US, with races at eight, 12 and then 14 furlongs. But its internal 
structure is very different too. To win a Triple Crown in Britain requires a 
staying horse with the speed to win a 2,000 Guineas: the most difficult part, 
in other words, comes first, and a Guineas-Derby double is something of a 
rarity in itself. In the US, a speed horse needs to stay. The difficult part 
comes last. The Kentucky Derby and Preakness are broadly similar, but the 
Belmont is a different challenge entirely.

The result? No one notices when the Triple Crown goes without a winner for yet 
another season in Britain. It rarely gets beyond stage one. But in America, and 
above all roughly every third year when a Triple Crown contender turns up in 
New York, everyone notices, and then shares and remembers the disappointment.

The odds on offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/03/american-pharoah-draws-no5-post-in-bid-for-triple-crown-at-belmont>
 about American Pharoah might suggest otherwise, but the Belmont Stakes is the 
most difficult assignment of all for a prospective Triple Crown winner. There 
are a number of reasons why, which include its breeding and conditioning for 
speed, a set of fresh opponents, better opponents at the trip and the immense 
physical demands that are placed on a young horse when it is asked to race 
three times in five weeks. Bad luck – a bump at the start, an injury or a 
ill-judged ride – can always play a part too.

The significance of these factors inevitably varies from one year to the next. 
There is no simple answer that will take the sport back to the 1970s without 
changing the fundamental nature of the challenge, no jubilant punter with a 
39-1 ticket asking for trouble.

One day, all the cogs will align and a horse will follow Affirmed onto the 
Triple Crown’s roll of honour, but if just one is awry on Saturday, it will not 
be American Pharaoh, and anyone at Belmont who has backed the winner would 
probably be well advised to pipe down.
 