
American Pharoah (9.35) may be the first horse to win the US Triple Crown for 
37 years, not to mention the top-rated horse in the world, but, according to 
the betting at least, he still has something to prove as he steps on to a track 
for the final time at Keeneland in Kentucky on Saturday. There are bookmakers 
in Europe willing to lay him at even money for the Breeders’ Cup Classic, the 
most valuable and prestitigous event at the meeting. The market sees the race 
as a coin toss that could come down either way.

This is, in part, because American Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah> was beaten last time out, 
when a sustained duel for the lead in the Travers Stakes at Saratoga left him 
unable to resist the late charge of Keen Ice. But the favourite’s price also 
reflects the fact that, even at this advanced stage of his career, all that can 
be said with any certainty is that he has been the best three-year-old in the 
States this year by some distance.

On Saturday he will finally face older horses for the first time and two very 
solid Grade One performers, too, in Tonalist and Honor Code. Gleneagles, the 
2,000 Guineas winner, is another unknown as he makes his dirt debut but he does 
not have a huge amount to find with American Pharoah if he takes to the surface 
and stays the trip.

American Pharoah’s most significant rival, however, was expected to be the 
mare Beholder, who was ruled out on Thursday due to injury. With Beholder in 
the race there would have been obvious potential for a repeat of the Travers, 
with the mare taking on American Pharoah for the lead and possibly opening the 
way for a closer. Now, it is hard to see what might lie up with the favourite, 
who has looked in exceptional condition this week.

Beholder took out 20% of the book when she was ruled out, while also making 
life a lot easier for the favourite in terms of the run of the race. Yet 
American Pharoah’s price with British bookies contracted by only around 10% in 
terms of implied chance, from 11-8 to evens.

His odds seemed fair with Beholder in the race but, with the mare now absent, 
evens looks like a gift. American Pharoah’s legion of fans should see him 
secure his legacy as one of the greats, and — if they bet with the British 
books, at least — all but double their money in the process.

An all-star double with Golden Horn (8.50) looks like a very solid bet, too, 
as John Gosden’s colt also arrives at his swansong in peak condition and has 
plenty in hand of every opponent in the race, with the possible exception of 
Aidan O’Brien’s Found. She had no luck in running in the Arc last time, while 
Golden Horn enjoyed a perfect trip under Frankie Dettori, but she still needs 
to find significant improvement to beatGolden Horn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-horn>.

The favourite is much better than his field and Dettori is riding with as much 
polish and confidence as he has at any stage of his career. This is an 
opportunity that he is unlikely to let slip.

The Mile is always an obvious target for the Europeans at the Breeders’ Cup 
but this year’s challenge is overwhelming and it will be a big surprise if the 
prize money stays at home. Make Believe is a worthy favourite for André Fabre 
butKarakontie (7.30) has crept into the defence of his title at a big price 
after failing to win in two runs so far this year. His campaign seems to have 
been designed solely around a return to the States, however, and today is very 
much the day and 12-1 a generous price for a repeat.

Undrafted, with Dettori booked to ride, is the probable favourite for the Turf 
Sprint but this trip is very much a minimum for him and he was only third home 
behind Bobby’s Kitten 12 months ago. In the circumstances a price around 7-2 is 
quite thin and the improving three-year-oldLady Shipman (4.45) could offer more 
value.

Dettori also rides for Wesley Ward in the Filly & Mare Sprint, where he will 
be aboard last year’s winner, Judy The Beauty.La Verdad (5.25), the winner of 
all five of her starts this year, could be the one to frustrate him there, but
Miss France (6.10), who took the 1,000 Guineas last year, can beat Legatissimo, 
this season’s winner of the Newmarket Classic, to give Dettori a boost before 
his ride on Golden Horn as the card reaches its climax.
 