
American Pharoah <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah> will run 
out of the No5 post in Saturday’s 147th running of the Belmont Stakes and is a 
better than even money favorite to become only the 12th horse to win 
thoroughbred racing’s Triple Crown.

The bay colt, owned by Zayat Stables and trained by Bob Baffert, was installed 
as the 3-5 morning-line favorite at Wednesday’s draw, held for the first time 
at Rockefeller Center in Manhattan instead of Belmont Park’s Garden Terrace 
room.

“We’re going in with no excuses,” owner Ahmed Zayat said. “It’s an incredible 
feeling to go in confident that you have the horse to beat.”

The Pioneerof the Nile colt will attempt to become the first three-year-old 
since Affirmed in 1978 to win America’s three most celebrated races. Since 
then, 13 horses have won the Kentucky Derby and Preakness Stakes but fallen 
short in the one-and-a-half-mile Belmont, the third and most difficult of the 
Triple Crown legs.

“I’ve always liked the five, it’s a number I always do well with,” said 
Baffert, the Hall of Fame trainer who has been thwarted in three previous 
Triple Crown tries, with Silver Charm (1997), Real Quiet (1998) and War Emblem 
(2002). “Right now we just want to stay focused, keep the horse happy, healthy. 
I’ve got a great team around me.”

The most likely potential spoilers in American Pharoah’s bid for history 
include Frosted (fourth in the Kentucky Derby) and Materiality (sixth), the 
second and third favorites at 5-1 and 6-1 respectively, who are superior 
closers capable of overtaking fading contenders down the stretch. Both are 
well-rested after skipping the Preakness – while American Pharoah will be 
running his fourth race in eight weeks – yet both drew outside posts generally 
considered unfavorable given the Belmont’s formidable length.

“This is going to be a racer’s race: it’s a small, quaint and talented field,” 
Zayat said. “I’m confident in American Pharoah because the horse is giving me 
that confidence. I’m not arrogant about it. I think he’s a special horse.”

This time last year Victor Espinoza, who rode American Pharoah to a one-length 
victory at the Derby and a seven-length win in the slop at Preakness, was in an 
identical position: one win away from a Triple Crown with California Chrome. It 
marks the first time in history a jockey has entered the Belmont with a chance 
at sport’s most elusive prize in consecutive years.

“They’re two different horses,” Espinoza said. “Both have tremendous talent, 
but they’re different. American Pharoah has always been special. Since the 
first time Baffert put me on him, he was special.”

The Mexican jockey also rode War Emblem in 2002, the Baffert-trained horse 
that won the Triple Crown’s first two legs but stumbled out of the gate at 
Belmont before rallying to finish eighth.

“I’ve come here twice and I’m feeling lucky this year,” Espinoza said. “Third 
time’s the charm.”

The full slate of post positions and morning-line odds was revealed shortly 
after noon: No1 Mubtaahij (10-1), No2 Tale of Verve (15-1), No3 Madefromlucky 
(12-1), No4 Frammento (30-1), No5 American Pharoah (3-5), No6 Frosted (5-1), 
No7 Keen Ice (20-1), No8 Materiality (6-1).

The post time for the 147th running of the Belmont Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/belmont-stakes> is 6.50pm ET.
 