
The rain that has been drenching Keeneland for several days continued to fall 
on Wednesday, and keptAmerican Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah>, the Triple Crown winner, 
in his barn when a platoon of reporters and camera crews had hoped to see him 
on the Kentucky track. But the damp weather could not take the bounce out of 
Bob Baffert, American Pharoah’s trainer, in advance of the colt’s final race – 
the $5m Breeders’ Cup Classic on Saturday.

Baffert was a late arrival at the track on Wednesday morning after suffering a 
flat tyre, and immediately decided it was too wet to allow American Pharoah 
outside. “Better me having a flat tyre than the horse,” he said asthe first 
Triple Crown winner for 37 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/28/why-american-pharoahs-victory-lap-is-setting-a-worrying-precedent>
 walked a few circuits of the last barn he will see as a racehorse. “We’re just 
trying to keep him [in good condition], we’re worried more about the elements 
[than our opponents]. I don’t want to take him out there, with horses getting 
sick and stuff you have to be careful.”

Why American Pharoah's victory lap is setting a worrying precedent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/28/why-american-pharoahs-victory-lap-is-setting-a-worrying-precedent>
This time next week, American Pharoah will be settling in to his new life as a 
stallion at the nearby Ashford Stud, part of John Magnier’s Coolmore breeding 
empire. His status as the 12th winner of US racing’s Triple Crown was secured 
in early June, when he won the Belmont Stakes in front of a jubilant crowd of 
90,000 in New York, and he will be the most eagerly-anticipated new stallion in 
US racing for decades. The only question that remains is whether American 
Pharoah will retire as the first horse to win both the Triple Crown and the 
Breeders’ Cup Classic, which some in America are calling the sport’s “grand 
slam”.

Baffert is dubious about the title – “they should give it a fancier name, it 
sounds like tennis to me” – but confident that his colt is as fit and healthy 
as ever before his final trip to the track.

“He looks good, he’s been training well and working well,” Baffert said. “I’ve 
had horses that are really fast, good horses, but their window of staying at 
top performance, they have a short window. They run really well for a month or 
two and run four or five good races. He gets shipped everywhere, all over the 
country. Most horses can’t do it, they can’t sustain it, and that’s what makes 
him different.

“He’s very tough. In the old days they used to call that “hickory”, he’s like 
an old-time thoroughbred where you can just run them every week and have a lot 
of starts. And he still looks good. He’s got a great mind, and he takes good 
care of himself.” American Pharoah was special from the moment he started 
breezing as a two-year-old, and his rise to become the country’s most famous 
racehorse for almost 40 years could not have come at a better time for the 
sport.

“I could tell from the way he moved,” Baffert says. “The real special horses, 
when you breeze them they get stronger at the end of the work. The really good 
ones will let you know immediately.“Racing’s been under sort of a dark cloud 
the last few years with not a lot of good publicity, and this horse came at the 
right time to pick everybody’s spirits up,” The trainer said. “People love 
horses and a lot of people in America, when they watched the Triple Crown, he 
made them feel so good that day.

“I keep hearing over and over from people that they’re following him now, and 
he’s a majestic horse with a personality. He’s just a really class act – if he 
was a human he’d be a real gentleman. He’d be doing a lot of commercials, 
selling a lot of pizzas.”

The only significant setback on Baffert’s journey with American Pharoah was 
the sole defeat of his career, in the Travers Stakes at Saratoga in August. 
Keen Ice, who ran down the Triple Crown winner in the final strides after 
American Pharoah’s finishing speed had been blunted by a long duel for the 
lead, will be among his opponents again on Saturday.

“That was terrible, I felt so bad for the horse,” the trainer says. “It took 
the wind right out of our sails, all that excitement just leaves the body, that 
ride and momentum completely gone. [But] I’ve been in that position before, so 
we’re used to this game. You get knocked down, pick yourself up, get knocked 
down.

“That stall is going to be empty [at home] and I told them not to put anybody 
in that stall. It’s getting a little bit tough. I know it’s going to be 
emotional but right now I’m just trying to stay focused.

“I feel like a father and he’s my son, and I want to make sure that he goes 
out there and puts on a good performance.”

Channel 4 said on Wednesday that Clare Balding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/13/clare-balding-earnings-bbc-bt> 
will extend her commitment to its racing coverage in 2016. Balding anchored 
just nine days of Channel 4’s output this year – at Cheltenham in March and 
Royal Ascot in June – but will add the Grand National at Aintree, the Derby 
Festival at Epsom and Champions Day at Ascot in October, to her schedule next 
year.

Nick Luck, who hosted coverage of the Grand National in April, will continue 
to co-present coverage from the sport’s major meetings.
 