
American Pharaoh, the first horse to win the US Triple Crown for 37 years, 
ended his career in emphatic style with an imperious success in the Breeders’ 
Cup Classic in Kentucky.

Victor Espinoza sent American Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah> straight into the lead and 
while the outsider Efinex tried to harry him on the pace, he could not lie up 
with Bob Baffert’s colt, who was sent off as the odds-on favourite.

American Pharoah turned for home with a useful lead, and to a great swell of 
cheers from the crowd he stretched further clear all the way down the straight, 
leaving Efinex and Honor Code, the second favourite, to fill the places at a 
respectful distance. The winner paid $3.40 for a $2 stake, though few here 
expected many of the winning tickets to be cashed, but kept instead as a 
souvenir of a great moment in American racing.

The winner passed the line six-and-a-half lengths clear of the runner-up, and 
Espinoza waved his whip in the air as American Pharoah headed into retirement 
as the first horse to win what the Americans are calling the sport’s grand 
slam: the Triple Crown plus the Classic.

Ahmed Zayat, the owner of American Pharoah, who retires to Coolmore’s Ashford 
Stud in Kentucky, said: “What a horse, the kindest, friendliest, happiest, 
easiest, most brilliant horse I have ever seen in my life. He just does it all, 
he runs with his heart. He is a different kind of animal. He connects with 
people, he loves people.”

Baffert said: “I feel so proud of the horse, but also a sense of relief. It 
was very emotional, this horse has brought so much to racing. It’s been a 
privilege to train him. He gave everyone what they wanted to see today.”

“I’m just glad the Pharoah goes out as the champ he is. I think he has done 
enough, he’s proved enough. We’ll miss him – he’s going to be a tough act to 
follow.”

Gleneagles, whose trainer Aidan O’Brien had earlier won the Turf on the same 
card with the filly Found, did not face the kickback and trailed home in last 
place.

Found, who was beaten behind Golden Horn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-horn> in the Prix de l’Arc de 
Triomphe after finding trouble in running, denied the season’s outstanding colt 
a final victory in the Turf, finishing half-a-length in front of John Gosden’s 
Derby winner.

Ryan Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ryan-moore> rode a perfectly 
judged race on Found, who was having her third start in a Group One race this 
month having also run in the Champion Stakes at Ascot.

Frankie Dettori <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/frankie-dettori> soon had 
Golden Horn settled close to the head of the chasing pack as Shining Copper, a 
habitual frontrunner, set a suicidal pace on the lead. Golden Horn lost a 
little ground on the tight turn after the field passed the stands for the first 
time, but was still ideally positioned as the runners started to close on 
Shining Copper towards the end of the back stretch and swing towards home.

Found, though, was also in a good position to strike, and after Dettori sent 
Golden Horn into the lead at top of the stretch, Moore moved through to deliver 
a winning challenge inside the final furlong. There was just half a length in 
it at the line, but it was still a decisive success.

“I talked to Frankie and he said it was just too soft,” Anthony Oppenheimer, 
the owner of Golden Horn, said afterwards. “We were very lucky in the Arc, we 
had the right ground, but today it just wasn’t quite right for us. But full 
marks to the filly that beat us, she’s had a fantastic career and we knew she 
was the danger. He ran a very good, tough, honest race.”

Aidan O’Brien, Found’s trainer, paid tribute to the three-year-old’s 
durability and talent.

“She’s an amazing filly and Ryan gave her a great ride,” O’Brien said. “A lot 
of people have put a lot of hard work into her to get her here. We trained her 
for the Arc and she didn’t have much luck in the Arc, but I couldn’t be 
happier. All credit to the lads [Found’s owners] who said to let her go if she 
was well.”

Earlier on the card, Moore had endured a frustrating near-miss in the same 
colours as Legatissimo, the hot favourite for the Filly & Mare Turf on the 
nine-race card, could finish only second behind Stephanie’s Kitten after 
stumbling badly at the start.

Legatissimo, three times a Group One winner in Europe this season including in 
the 1,000 Guineas in May, was an odds-on chance to end her season with another 
success at the highest level. She was almost on her nose as the stalls opened, 
however, and Ryan Moore did well just to stay in her saddle before settling her 
against the rail in mid-division.

“She ran a good race, but she’s had a long season,” her trainer, David Wachman 
said. “I was pleased with her run. She met a good horse today. No excuses.” 
Queen’s Jewel, another European-trained runner, finished third for Freddy Head 
while Ralph Beckett’s Secret Gesture was seventh.

There was disappointment too for a strong European challenge in the Mile, 
which included Make Believe, the recent winner of the Prix de la Forêt at 
Longchamp, Karakontie, the winner of the race last year, and Time Test, who 
recorded an impressive success at Royal Ascot in June.

They had no answer to the finishing kick of Mark Casse’s filly Tepin, however. 
Julien Leparoux kicked her into the lead at the top of the stretch and she then 
stayed on strongly to the line to win by two-and-a-quarter lengths. 
Mondialiste, who gave David O’Meara his first Grade One winner in the States 
earlier this season, emerged from the pursuing pack to finish second.
 