 I was grateful that the captain, an artisan fisherman from Surinam, was a 
master navigator. As he edged his boat, a vessel not much bigger than a 
traditional dug-out, towards the rocks, cranking its old engine from forward 
into reverse and then forward again to combat the violent swells of the 
crystal-green sea, the dangerousness of the venture hit home. Suddenly we were 
less than six feet from Devil's Island, the most notorious prison island in the 
world. In that moment, as I perched on the tiny rocking bow preparing to 
disembark, I understood why it had been so difficult to persuade anyone local 
to bring me here. "Allez!" shouted the second mate, pointing at the one 
flat-faced rock among the jagged mass. There was no time to hesitate and no 
turning back. I jumped.
Within a few adrenaline-pumped minutes I had scrambled over the rocks and 
entered the thick jungle undergrowth, almost immediately getting tangled up in 
the huge sticky cobwebs that hung all around. Panic began to rise in my chest 
as hand-sized spiders appeared from nowhere and dashed blindly over me. I felt 
bites on my legs and arms, but kept running, faster, slipping and sliding on 
ground knee-deep in rotting coconuts. At last a clearing, and there, 20 paces 
ahead of me, stood the one-man prison measuring just four metres (13ft) square 
where Alfred Dreyfus, the Jewish French army officer convicted on false charges 
of treason in 1894, spent nearly five years of a life term before eventually 
being pardoned. I stopped running and walked nervously towards the tiny stone 
building. The iron barred gate, rusting and bent, hung open. I walked inside 
and breathed in the cool air.

I had been intrigued by Devil's Island for a long time, ever since first 
reading about Dreyfus, and about Henri Charrière, aka Papillon, author of the 
best-selling 1968 book of the same name. Charrière, who claimed to have been 
framed for murder, spent 13 years of his life sentence in the French Guianan 
penal colony before escaping from Devil's Island on a raft made from coconuts. 
Then I was in the earliest stages of my own, uncontested life sentence. Though 
our circumstances differed vastly, I felt a measure of empathy with both men. I 
could relate to the isolation they endured, and their determination to survive 
against the odds and emerge to a better life. The biggest obstacle to overcome, 
however, in all our cases, appeared to me to be punishment, deserved or 
otherwise.

This year marks the centenary of Dreyfus's final exoneration (Charrière, had 
he not died in 1973, would have celebrated his 100th birthday last month). As 
our own society struggles to look beyond a generally punitive approach towards 
crime and anti-social behaviour, this anniversary seems to me to be sufficient 
grounds to revisit the most punitive prison regime in recent western history, 
to examine the value of punishment

French Guiana operated as a penal colony from 1852 until 1946. Those 
transported ranged from political detainees for whom, officially at least, 
confinement on Devil's Island was specifically reserved, to people convicted of 
the most serious "common" crimes such as murder, rape and robbery, as well as 
habitual petty criminals. Under the policy of doublage, when their terms had 
been served convicts sentenced to hard labour were forced to remain in French 
Guiana for a period equal to their original sentence. Anyone receiving more 
than eight years was exiled for life.

The transport ships' docking point in the colony was St-Laurent-du-Maroni on 
the banks of the Maroni river. Some prisoners served their time in St Laurent's 
massive Camp de la Transportation; others were dispersed throughout the colony, 
to logging camps in the jungle, where many were forced to work naked. Those 
deemed troublesome were sent to the Iles du Salut (Salvation Islands). The 
closely grouped islands, Ile Royale, Ile St Joseph and Ile du Diable (Devil's 
Island), situated 10 miles off the coast of French Guiana, were the most 
notorious prison settlements in the colony.

Forty per cent of new arrivals to the colony perished within the first year. 
Of the 80,000 or so who were transported during the colony's 94-year existence, 
few made it back to France. Most were killed by the merciless nature of the 
forced labour, the poor diet and lack of protection from the myriad diseases 
rampant in the unfamiliar tropical environment. Many died during escape 
attempts, savaged by wild animals, ravaged by scurvy, or picked off by 
professional escapee hunters - or in the case of sea-bound escapes, drowned or 
were eaten by the sharks that infest the coastal waters. The last convicts were 
repatriated toFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> in 1952.

After a nine-hour flight from Paris, I landed in Cayenne, the sparse capital 
of French Guiana and took a taxi to Kourou, formerly the main administration 
depot for the jungle labour camps and now the point of departure for trips to 
the Iles du Salut. My plan was to visit the islands, which had in effect acted 
as the hub of this unique penal experiment. My readings had given me a flavour 
of what life had been like for these forgotten people. But I wanted to see for 
myself what conditions the likes of Charrière and Dreyfus and other 
incorrigibles - the so-called worst of the worst - really endured.

Kourou feels like a frontier town. The populace is mainly French Creole, but 
includes a significant number of white metropolitan French and a regiment of 
Foreign Legionnaires. I made my way to the "port", which turned out to be no 
more than a patch of wasteland with access to a couple of river pontoons. I 
asked around, but though tourist trips were available to the Ile Royale and 
from there to St Joseph's, it was made clear to me that going anywhere near 
Devil's Island was strictement interdit. So next day I headed for Royale on a 
tourist catamaran. Soon after we pulled anchor, I asked a French woman her view 
of the penal colony history. "Monsieur," she said, "en France c'est un sujet 
tabou!" ("In France, the subject is taboo.") When I asked her why, she said it 
still caused embarrassment in her country.

Before long, the islands appeared in the distance. The skipper's mate told me 
the chances of getting on Devil's Island were "pas bons". Both he and his boss 
were metropolitan Frenchmen, here solely to crew the catamaran back and forth 
to the islands. Drawing closer, the lush greenness of the islands seemed to 
glow under the canopy of the dazzling blue sky. Soon we were anchored in the 
small harbour of Ile Royale. I disembarked and made my way up to the auberge, 
formerly the guards' mess hall, where I was booked in for one night.

An official guide offered tours but visitors were free to wander. I made first 
for the "Crimson Barracks", a building notorious for the number of 
prisoner-on-prisoner killings that had taken place within its confines. The 
thick walls were still intact. The big iron gates were closed but could be 
pulled open. Gingerly, I stepped inside. Rusting barres de justice, the steel 
poles that ran through the manacles securing the prisoners by the ankles to 
their beds, lay all around.

I moved to the cell block. The doors had all long since been removed, yet the 
atmosphere of claustrophobic isolation was intense. The corroded bars of the 
cell windows were festooned with monstrous tree roots and creeping vines. 
Everywhere punishment loomed large.

Back out in the open, I found the site of the island's guillotine. The four 
brick foundation blocks were still in place. Here countless men had been 
beheaded, sentenced by a special court often for little more than raising a 
pathetic hand to a guard. Executions were assisted by a trusted convict. Taking 
the severed head from the basket, the official in charge would raise it to the 
assembled convicts made to kneel and watch, and announce "Justice est faite" 
("Justice is done"). The heads were later preserved in jars of alcohol and sent 
back to Paris as proof that executions had been carried out.

In the chapel I admired the murals painted by the French artist Francis 
Lagrange, sentenced to 10 years for counterfeiting currency. Lagrange peopled 
his crowd scenes with fellow prisoners. In one, Guillaume Seznec, a Frenchman 
almost certainly wrongfully convicted of murder in 1924 who spent more than 20 
years in the colony, is depicted as a John the Baptist figure. Even today, a 
powerful lobby in France campaigns to have Seznec pardoned. Lagrange famously 
said that penal life in French Guiana was not as bad as some escapees had made 
out. But he was fortunate that he had a talent that made life here more 
survivable, although he did serve two years in solitary in the reclusion block 
on St Joseph's after being caught counterfeiting five-franc notes.

After lunch, the skipper of the catamaran invited me on an excursion across 
the bay to St Joseph's. I nagged him for assistance to get on Devil's Island. 
"We'll see," he said eventually. It emerged that he had a fisherman friend 
working from St Joseph's. After we landed, I watched him speak to the man on 
the jetty. A shake of the head, a shrug of the shoulders, and a resounding 
"Non!" Resigned to no more than a distant view of the palm-crowned stump of 
rock that for generations of French people symbolised the very essence of 
punishment, I set off to inspect the prison at the top of the highest hill on 
St Joseph's.

The scene that came into view over the brow was one of the most harrowing I 
have ever seen. The prison buildings, though entangled with jungle overgrowth, 
are surprisingly well preserved. Above the open gate, foot-high letters carved 
in a stone lintel announce Réclusion (Imprisonment). I stared for a while at 
this monument to retribution and then stepped over the threshold. Picking my 
way through the narrow corridors, avoiding the tribes of fire ants and massive 
cobwebs, the vines and the rampaging tree roots, I was astounded by the 
quantity of rusting iron. Scattered everywhere were pieces of chain, steel 
bars, bolts and fetters. The cells where prisoners spent up to five years in 
isolation had no ceilings, only iron grids, through which armed guards mounting 
24-hour patrols would keep a constant watch from steel walkways. Crouching in 
one of the cells, I looked up and imagined the eyes of the keepers looking 
down. On the walls were the remnants of the man-shackles that secured countless 
wretched inhabitants of this space over the years; they made me want to weep. 
This was punishment and beyond. Here souls were extinguished as, en masse, 
thousands of men were systematically imprisoned to death.

What I found in the failed and shameful French Guiana penal experiment went 
beyond what I had anticipated. France is right to be embarrassed. Here was a 
social cleansing operation of enormous magnitude, the mass destruction of 
unwanted segments of humanity, all in the name of punishment. I know that 
though my separation from society for 20 years was necessary and deserved, it 
was productive in the end not because of any punishment element, but in spite 
of it. Before this visit, my prison experience had made me sceptical about the 
value of punishment. Now, seeing all this, I was even more so.

Then I heard a voice call out. "Monsieur! I have a fisherman!" The skipper's 
friend had spoken to a passing crew from Surinam. The captain had agreed to put 
me on Devil's Island and would collect me 30 minutes later for €100 - about 
£70. "It's a deal," I said, and soon I was boarding the long, narrow fishing 
boat.

Too soon for comfort we arrived and I was instructed to jump from the boat to 
the rocky shore. Dreyfus's prison is in remarkably good condition. Evidently, 
it has been rebuilt in recent years. But there is no sign to tell of his 
ordeal, no plaque to mark his courage. (Dreyfus was later decorated with the 
Légion d'honneur, the highest honour in France.) As I paced his stone floor and 
looked out through his window bars, I was exhilarated but at the same time 
troubled by the pervading sense of deprivation. This was life without hope, 
banishment to the edge of the world, a true living death.

I wanted to stay longer but, with the minutes passing, I stepped back outside 
and strode towards the centre of the island. By the time I reached the quarters 
where other political prisoners were held, my time was almost up. Each one-man 
block was self-contained, with a stove and a stone bed. All were draped in 
vines, exposed roots and the ubiquitous cobwebs. High to my left, the gaping 
windows of the warden's house kept vigil. Next to it stood the sentries' 
quarters, the banana store and the pigsties. Up ahead I could just make out the 
site of Dreyfus's bench, the highest point on the island, where, ever the 
patriot, he spent so many long hours staring longingly towards France, and from 
where Charrière launched his coconut raft before leaping after it and riding to 
freedom on the seventh wave, the one he called Lisette.

With my time almost up, I turned and raced back to my landing point. Grazed, 
filthy and bleeding, I emerged from the undergrowth, relieved to see the 
fishing boat waiting as promised. Carefully, the crew brought the boat in close 
enough to the rocks for me to leap back on board. We were halfway back to Ile 
Royale before my heartbeat resumed its normal pace. The youngest crewman asked 
me, dour-faced, if I'd seen the devil. "No," I replied, "only ghosts" ·
 