
Here's a scene you won't see on TV any time soon. Current affairs reporter 
says toRoyal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> boss Adam 
Crozier outside his office: "You earned £995,000 last year running a public 
company. Are you worth it?" Crozier: "I'm glad you asked …"

You won't see it because it is highly likely to lead to an Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> complaint on fairness. What's more, 
it will almost certainly be upheld, leaving the broadcaster out of pocket and 
forced to make a humiliating on-air apology.

When I tried to put that very question for an ITV1 Tonight last year we had to 
settle for what broadcasters always settle for in such situations: a short 
written response from Royal Mail read out on air. The Ofcom code allows 
impromptu interviews if the story is on the news agenda but forbids 
doorstepping for factual programmes "... unless a request for an interview has 
been refused, or it has not been possible to request an interview, or there is 
good reason to believe that an investigation will be frustrated if the subject 
is approached openly … Broadcasters may, without prior warning, interview, film 
or record people in the news when in public places."

In the Royal Mail example, the interview request was refused, but it was 
decided a doorstep was not "warranted". The issue of a highly paid chief 
executive of a public company may be interesting to the public, the argument 
goes, but it is not in the public interest.

Yet is it "unfair" to approach the boss of a publicly owned company, in a 
public place, to politely ask him to justify his salary? Fielding such 
questions is surely part of a chief executive's job. Once Royal Mail had 
responded in writing, however, we couldn't go anywhere near them with a camera 
as, under the Ofcom code, they had given a sufficient response.

Doorsteps are broadcasting's equivalent of the newspaper headline. The viewer 
will often learn far more from a two-minute doorstep than from a bit of written 
corporate speak.

In the early 1990s Lorraine Heggessey doorstepped the investigative reporter 
Roger Cook over allegedly dodgy reporting tactics he had used during a show on 
Arthur Scargill. She then chased him down the road shouting, legend has it, 
"Answer the question, you fat bastard!" in a superb case of the biter being bit.

But then it all changed. Article 8 of the Human Rights Act 1998 started the 
ball rolling, with its commitment to respecting privacy. But then the bar got 
higher and higher as one corporate lawyer after another began to realise the 
protection afforded by the Ofcom code.

This despite the ludicrous anomaly of the internet. When the Tory MP Alan 
Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan> was secretly filmed 
comparing his wages to "rations", there was nothing to stop it being plastered 
all over cyberspace. From there, it was a short journey to the TV news 
bulletins.

So what needs to change? Well, Ofcom could update its rules and get rid of the 
anomalous distinction between news and current affairs, between TV and the net. 
Broadcasters could get more daring. But since the Ross/Brand affair that looks 
unlikely. Or people like me could migrate to the net, funded by some rich, 
philanthropic mischief maker – www.doorstep.com anyone?
 