
Because I enjoyed the Arthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/apr/30/arthur-c-clarke-award-macleod> 
ceremonyso much last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/may/01/mynightinthenewworldofs>
, walking back into the foyer of the award venue in the Apollo Cinema in 
central London last night was reassuring in its familiarity. I had to push past 
a couple of stormtroopers to get into the hot fug of the crowded foyer, I saw 
several men sporting Gandalf beards and my nerdometer went into overdrive when 
I mistook someone for the publisher of one of the nominees, asked if he was 
nervous and he said:

"I'm not too bad. I've been here before so I know what to expect. It's 
actually quite nice to get out of the house."

It was only later in the conversation that it emerged that he had been pulling 
my leg and the joke was on me.

But, no matter. I was having a nice evening. The most pleasing repetition from 
last year was the excited atmosphere and the general conviction that this award 
wasn't just about media exposure and money for the winner. The fans and 
organisers seemed to share the genuine belief – no doubt inherited fromArthur C 
Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarke> himself – that SF can 
be a force for good. These books can inspire scientific exploration and 
discovery as well as amuse and entertain. And that – as someone said – is a 
worthwhile endeavour in a country where university physics departments are 
closing because of a lack of interest rather than a lack of funding. Marek 
Kukula, the public astronomer fromthe Royal Observatory 
<http://www.nmm.ac.uk/places/royal-observatory/>, proved the point in a short 
and sweet keynote speech in which he explained how he owed his career path and 
continuing sense of wonder to the SF he read as a teenager.

It was all quite heartening even if this sense of continuity and lack of 
cynicism seemed at odds with the world outside the Apollo Cinema. If anyone was 
worried aboutswine flu <https://www.theguardian.com/world/swine-flu>, for 
instance, they weren't letting on. As someone pointed out to me, there was no 
point worrying anyway because the room we were in was so crowded that "we're 
all fucked anyway. And that's assuming that the tube journey here hadn't got 
them first".

"It," noted another, "at least provides excellent opportunity to accessorise. 
I haven't been able to get away with wearing a face mask in public since the 
days of rave".

Maybe such nonchalance will seem horribly blasé in a few days. Hopefully, it 
will seem quite the right attitude. I took comfort from the fact that so many 
science-minded people, (who were also almost certainly well-versed in seriously 
frightening apocalyptic fiction scenarios) didn't seem to think that the 
purported pandemic worth a mention.

It was also the first gathering I've been to in a long time where I didn't 
overhear a single conversation about the recession. Admittedly, my ear-wigging 
was limited by the fact that the room was too busy to easily move from 
conversation to conversation, but my overriding impression was one of unusual 
optimism.

And I did at least manage to overhear a fantastically awkward encounter 
between two women walking into the prize-giving auditorium:

"Who are you here with?" asked the first.

"I'm one of the judges," the replied the second.

"Ah."

Things weren't made easier by the fact that the first lady had recently been a 
judge herself, clearly thought she should be seen to know more about the 
current panel, and started falling over herself in apologies. Nor was the 
embarrassment allayed by my own cack-handed attempt to act the journalist and 
get the current judge to tell me how the voting had gone. She wasn't allowed to 
say. Quite rightly, the Clarke judges are expected to keep schtum before the 
announcement – although a nervous strained expression and a few vague words 
about it being pretty tough really, did suggest certain difficulties.

This was confirmed by Paul Billinger, the chair of the judges, who said in the 
run-up to the envelope-opening that the choice of the winner had been 
"particularly difficult and particularly close" and that his job had mainly 
involved "keeping the judges on the right track without killing each other".

When the announcement came, however, it met with a roar of approval. It was 
Ian R MacLeod's Song Of Time. As the most overtly literary and perhaps even 
flowery, on the shortlist, the book might seem at odds with the ceremony's 
emphasis on the importance of hard science. But then again, this artfully 
composed novelcertainly has the inspiration aspect of the Clarke mission covered
 <http://vectoreditors.wordpress.com/2009/04/29/notes-on-a-shortlist/>. Even 
the packaging of this book is beautiful, and it's good to see a clear labour of 
love from a small press getting such a boost.

MacLeod was literally speechless as he walked up to collect his prize. He'd 
prepared nothing in advance, claiming to have been certain that he wouldn't 
win. But the few words he managed were all the more touching for being so 
shambolic. The whole event had once more been a most uplifting experience. And 
if I don't catch swine flu because of it I will remember it fondly once again.
 