
It is a surreal inversion of the chessboard logic of the cold war, which 
pitted a string of Soviet prodigies against the best of the west. In those days 
the Kremlin would bask in the reflected glory of a succession of all-conquering 
grandmasters, chief among them Anatoly Karpov andGarry Kasparov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/garry-kasparov>.

Now however, the players and the Kremlin find themselves on opposing sides in 
a bitter battle for control of the global game. Karpov is standing for 
presidency of the world chess federation, Fide, a body that has been run for 
the past 15 years by Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, an eccentric Russian millionaire and 
regional governor who claims to have encountered aliens and to have been 
reincarnated 69 times.

Last month the presidential aide Arkady Dvorkovich announced that the Kremlin 
was backing the incumbent for re-election. Russia's chess federation threw its 
support behind Karpov.

Sharp accusations rang out from both sides. Ilyumzhinov accused Karpov of 
"clear deceit" and denounced the federation's vote as "completely illegal". In 
apparent revenge, the authorities evicted the Russian chess federation from its 
Moscow offices on Friday, prompting a sharp rejoinder from Karpov: "Knocking 
the pieces off the board when you lose does not change the result."

In an interview with the Guardian, Karpov said he was mystified by the 
Kremlin's moves. The incumbent, an autocratic ruler of Kalmykia, a large chunk 
of barren steppe, has been accused of bringing chess into disrepute through his 
bizarre antics as Fide president. "I don't know why. It's a theatre of the 
absurd," Karpov said. "Ilyumzhinov says that for him chess is a hobby. I was 
world champion. For me chess is my life. It is everything."

Critics accuse Ilyumzhinov of treating world chess as his plaything, and 
plunging the game into schism, obscurity and disrepute. There have been 
accusations of sleaze, including from Britain's grandmaster Nigel Short, 
complaints of erratic tournament management, and allegations that in 1998 two 
of Ilyumzhinov's aides murdered an opposition journalist, Larisa Yudina ‑ an 
accusation Ilyumzhinov denies. Yudina was stabbed to death. Her body was then 
chucked in a pond. Then there is Ilyumzhinov's unpredictable behaviour, most 
recently manifested in a claim that he had been abducted by aliens, who, he 
said, appeared at his balcony wearing yellow spacesuits and invited him aboard 
their spaceship. This extra-terrestrial encounter took place in September 1997, 
he said, adding that three people including his personal driver witnessed it. 
In his defence, Ilyumzhinov styles himself as a champion of the game, arguing 
that his aggressive promotion of chess in his fiefdom has done wonders to 
transform Kalmykia's image as a poverty-stricken backwater. He has constructed 
a £35mChess <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> City in the steppe and 
made the sport compulsory for children.

"Maybe they want to keep the person in charge under control," Karpov said. 
"But I don't see why the president of Fide should be under the full control of 
any one country. We don't make politics. We play chess." One theory is that the 
Kremlin is weary of Ilyumzhinov, and wants to replace him as ruler of Kalmykia 
when his term expires this year. But it is reluctant to make him an enemy, and 
is lobbying to give him the Fide job as a consolation prize.

Fide elections take place in September, when chess federations from 165 
countries will vote. Karpov is enlisting support from other federations fed up 
with Ilyumzhinov's rule. The US, France, Germany, Switzerland, the English 
Chess Federation, and 16 others are so far behind him. In an email last week 
Short called Ilyumzhinov an "alien-abducted fantasist dictator" who "never has 
the slightest qualms about lying through his teeth, especially not now, when he 
is fighting for his political life".

Karpov also has the support of top players, including Kasparov. The two have 
ended a feud that developed over years of acrimonious championship play. A 
nostalgic tournament in Valencia in Spain last September marked the 25th 
anniversary of their first extraordinary duel in 1984. Kasparov, who retired 
from professional chess five years ago, has also criticised Ilyumzhinov, and 
believes Fide needs urgent reform.

Unlike Kasparov, a leading critic of Vladimir Putin, Karpov has eschewed 
political activity. During Soviet times he was a model citizen, and a member of 
the Communist party. Last week he embarked on a world tour, travelling to New 
York, Paris, the Middle East and Africa in pursuit of his campaign to become 
Fide president. On Monday he held a glamorous campaign launch in Manhattan, 
attended by Kasparov and other chess greats. If elected, Karpov says he wants 
to restore the popularity chess enjoyed during the 1970s and 80s, when he 
fought his epic duels with Kasparov. He wants to attract corporate sponsorship: 
world chess does not have a current backer. Karpov also plans to open Fide 
offices in Moscow, New York and Paris. "My idea is to make moves to bring chess 
back to the world's map, to make it part of the world's geography again," he 
said. He is critical of the way Ilyumzhinov and his team promote chess. The 
2010 world championship, won in Sofia by Viswanathan Anand, made few ripples. 
"I have nothing against Sofia. But there were just four international 
correspondents covering the matches, excluding the Bulgarians. When I was 
playing Kasparov more than 680 journalists watched us."

Despite the sport's low profile, Karpov believes the current grandmasters are 
every bit as strong as their predecessors. He cites "the very talented" Magnus 
Carlsen, the 19-year-old Norwegian prodigy who is ranked no 1 in the world. 
Carlsen also attended his Manhattan campaign launch.

There are outstanding grandmasters from countries including the US, China, 
India and the Netherlands, he said. "I think internationally chess could become 
very interesting again."

• This article was amended on 25 May 2010. The original gave Magnus Carlsen's 
age as 21. This has been corrected.
 