
Citizens of this tiny, snow-capped mountain state squeezed between Spain and 
France are looking forward with apprehension to a new year's revolution that 
will see Andorrans learn what it is like to pay direct taxes.

A four-year economic slump has confirmed the end of decades of dizzying growth 
which meant that one of smallest countries inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> country, perched on top of the 
Pyrenees, could survive mainly off a modest tariff on imports.

"What do I feel about paying taxes? Awful!" said shop assistant Samuel Díaz, a 
Spanish immigrant who sells cheap cigarettes and cigars to tourists. "But for 
the first time ever I have Andorran friends who are unemployed."

Amongst the first to pay taxes will be Joan Iglesias, whose two shops on the 
busy Meritxell street of the capital,Andorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/andorra> la Vella, sell CDs, DVDs and 
videogames to Spanish visitors.

As of January he will be liable to a modest business tax of up to 10%. "I 
don't think the politicians know what they are doing," he said. "What I really 
need is for my rents to drop, so I can handle the downturn in business."

The business tax will be followed by a sales tax to be introduced in 2013. 
Income tax will come after that. "We haven't done this before, so we don't yet 
know exactly how much we will bring in," admitted finance minister Jordi Cinca.

A decade ago 12 million visited this pocket handkerchief country every year, 
attracted to the endless shopping malls, car dealerships and petrol stations 
that line its main roads.

But by last year the numbers had dropped to 8 million and – for a country that 
gains three quarters of its income from visitors who come to shop, ski or do 
both – that has brought a dramatic fall into recession.

Add in a burst housing bubble, which brought construction work to a jarring 
halt, and the economy has shrunk by 12% over four years.

"Until 2007 we really hadn't stopped growing for several decades," explained 
Cinca. "It was a permanent boom."

Andorrans have been shocked by the eruption of unemployment in a country where 
annual employment growth ran at between 2% and 16% for all but a handful of 
years over the past four decades.

Companies only had to start making their books available for inspection last 
year, so working out the size of the economy has traditionally been a matter of 
calculated guesswork.

Dependence

The population, officially at around 85,000, but probably 10-15,000 less – is 
another mystery. Many of the immigrants are believed to have left after losing 
construction jobs in recent years, but town halls have not been keen to strike 
them off their registers, because they are funded according to their population.

Half of the country's population remains immigrant, however. Only after 20 
years living and working here are they allowed to apply for nationality.

The collapse is mainly because tax-free Andorran shops now find it hard to 
compete with large Spanish chains that can force suppliers' prices down.

The booming businesses of the moment, as a result, are high tax goods such as 
cigarettes, perfume and alcohol. Pharmacies sell US-approved drugs that do not 
yet have EU licences. Non-prescription Viagra, displayed in at least one 
chemist's window and on websites is another sideline.

But the new changes are designed to wean Andorra off its dependence on Spanish 
shoppers.

Taxation, in fact, is part of a process of opening up Andorra to the world 
economy. It has successfully had itself removed from the OECD's list of tax 
havens.

This was, in part, done at the insistence of French president Nicolas Sarkozy 
– who was embarrassed to find himself as one of the joint heads of state, or 
"co-princes", of Andorra while he publicly fumed about tax havens across the 
world. The other co-prince is the bishop of the nearby Spanish town of La Seu 
d'Urgell.

"We have gone from being a fiscal paradise to something very normal," said the 
prime minister, Antoni Martí. "It is a revolution, but a controlled one."

New rules will remove some of Andorra's notoriously protectionist laws. 
Foreign investors, currently only allowed to own 49% of a business, will be 
welcome. In the past some Andorrans got wealthy simply fronting companies for 
foreigners.

"Let's go and compete in other parts of the world, and allow others to compete 
here," said foreign minister Gilbert Saboya, who sees the lack of crime as a 
major attraction for those wanting to set up businesses. "We are the safest 
country in Europe."

An association agreement to make it easier for Andorra-based companies to 
operate within the EU is one of the government's main aims.

At the shoe shop he opened 40 years ago, Francesc Marquez agreed it was time 
to start paying taxes. "Everyone else does, so why not us?" he said. "But they 
mustn't put them too high."
 