
There were many "really stupid, brilliant films" played on the VHS player in 
Andrew Garfield <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrew-garfield>'s house when 
he was young.Teen Wolf, the Wayne's World movies, Back to the Future and Bill 
and Ted's pair of adventures were favourites. So were boxing stories. A clutch 
of heroes could be seen swinging their fists on screen — Stallone, De Niro, the 
Garfield brothers themselves…

"My dad had this awesome old VHS on-the-shoulder camera that he was very proud 
of," explains Garfield when we meet on the Sony Pictures studio lot in Los 
Angeles. "We made a boxing movie once, which was really good fun. Dad was a 
good director, actually, very nurturing and good to his actors. The films 
usually ended up with me crying, though, because my brother accidently on 
purpose hit me too hard."

Even in his preteen years Garfield was showcasing both action chops and a 
ready ability to burst into tears, handy qualities for a Hollywood A-lister. 
"Movies were a massive part of my upbringing," Garfield continues. "My dad has 
always loved movies; he would drive past Fox or Paramount in Los Angeles when 
he was a young man and would dream about what was going on in there. He has 
this really romantic view of moviemaking. Now that I'm doing what I'm doing he 
is able live it alongside me a little bit."

Highlights for Richard Garfield this year will include watching his 
30-year-old son produce his first movie, take the lead in a Martin Scorsese 
film – and, of course, save New York City once again, as he reprises his role 
as Spider-Man. His casting for the first instalment of theAmazing Spider-Man 
series, announced four years ago, took the industry and fans alike by surprise 
– Garfield had largely played troubled, sensitive souls, as in Robert Redford's
Lions for Lambs, opposite Carey Mulligan in Never Let Me Go and, of course, as 
Mark Zuckerberg's betrayed friend Eduardo Saverin inThe Social Network. Then 
again, Spiderman's previous incarnationwas Tobey Maguire.

In the new film, Peter Parker sheds his teen angst and embraces his 
superpowers, battling a phalanx of villains played by Paul Giamatti, Jamie Foxx 
and Dane DeHaan. "I wasn't satisfied with the first movie," says Garfield, "but 
I think there is a cohesiveness on this film that we didn't quite have on the 
first. We were finding our feet a little bit on the first one." Still, the 
first film didn't do too badly – it grossed upwards of £450m in worldwide 
ticket sales, despite some clunky moments and a leading man who never seemed 
entirely comfortable when asked to promote the film. "I feel like I've changed 
a lot since I shot the first movie," Garfield says.

I've interviewed him several times in the past few years, and he's never been 
as excruciatingly uncomfortable as he was during the press tour for his first 
Spider-Man film, in 2012, where he mumbled his way through interviews, eyes 
cast to the ground.
 Andrew Garfield, left, and Jesse Eisenberg in Columbia Pictures' The Social 
Network. 
Today, by contrast, he is full of energy and charm. His tall, wiry frame, 
which is wrapped in black T-jeans and jumper, fidgets in the chair as he talks. 
He is a thoughtful chap – he quotes both Shakespeare and Cat Stevens during the 
course of our chat – and like Peter Parker in the new film, he seems more 
settled in his superhero skin. He makes regular eye contact and his rat-a-tat, 
many-words-a-minute delivery is punctuated by bouts of self-deprecation.

"There is something crass about self- promotion," he says. "I can't do the 
Twitter thing either. Maybe there is something wrong with me. Maybe I need to 
be better at saying: 'Check me the fuck out, motherfuckers.' I should do that." 
He laughs and deepens his voice, "Yeah, so go see the fucking movie," he says 
jabbing his index figure at an imaginary camera, "because it's the best fucking 
thing that you will ever see!"

Garfield was born in Los Angeles in 1983 and was raised in England, his 
parents moving to Epsom in Surrey when he was three years old – his mother, 
Lynn, is orginally from Essex. His father was born in the US and his paternal 
family name was originally Garfinkel – his grandfather, Samuel, switched it to 
its current incarnation.

"I enjoyed my childhood, though looking back on school, that was both great 
and awful," he says of his youth. "My best mates in life are my best mates from 
secondary school. There is something about being bored together every day for 
six or seven years. Your roots get entwined. But my sensitivity and my thin 
skin got in the way of me having really a good time in school. I am stupidly 
sensitive."
 Andrew Garfield in Boy A (2207), for which he won a Bafta. Photograph: Allstar
It was a trait that attracted the attention of the school bully, who taunted 
him over his skinny frame.

"I didn't have this really abusive experience." he says. "I had the general 
bullying experience where there was a kid who wasn't very happy and he threw 
his weight around. He targeted me because I was skinny and thin-skinned and he 
knew it.

"It is really interesting, though," he continues, "what you perceive as your 
wounds can later on turn into the biggest gifts you have. At the time, I was 
like, 'Man I've got to toughen up, get a thicker skin,' whereas in fact, being 
sensitive and thin-skinned and all the things I still am, lends itself to a 
career as an actor. Also, if it weren't for that bully, I wouldn't have found 
Spider-Man. That's why I got so lost in the comics and the cartoon series. I 
would fantasise about being him, and I would fantasise about him coming to beat 
the crap out of my bully."

It might sound a handy line for promoting the movie, but Garfield's delivery 
is deadpan, and he did grow up a bona fide Spider-Man nut, famously dressing up 
as the red and blue web-slinger for his first Halloween party. His journey to 
the real costume began at the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama and he 
was turning heads soon after his graduation with stage performances inKes and 
Romeo and Juliet, winning the Manchester Evening News award for Best Newcomer 
in 2004 before scooping Outstanding Newcomer at theEvening Standard theatre 
awards two years later.

He shone on TV, too: in 2007 he summoned a troubling performance in the 
television filmBoy A, a story that shares similarities with the James Bulger 
case, winning a Bafta for his portrayal of a young man struggling to 
reintegrate into the social fabric in the aftermath of his childhood crime. And 
he brought a cocky recklessness to his newspaper reporter in the first chapter 
of the 2009Red Riding trilogy.

Actor-director Robert Redford gave him his cinematic debut alongside Tom 
Cruise and Meryl Streep inLions for Lambs, but his breakthrough came with The 
Social Network. He met the film's director, David Fincher, to discuss the role 
of Mark Zuckerberg, but Fincher cast him instead as Eduardo Saverin. "I was 
like: 'Why would we waste an actor like this on the part of the guy [who seems 
like he has] Asperger's?'" Fincher said at the time. "'I'm trying to cast 
somebody who doesn't have this access.' And yet that is Andrew's greatest 
strength."
 Caught in his web: Andrew Garfield with his co-star and girlfriend Emma 
Stone. Photograph: Kevin Lynch 
It was this emotional access that brought Garfield to the attention of the 
Spider-Manproducers – who were looking to reboot their franchise following the 
termination of the series by Sam Raimi – and also to theatre director Mike 
Nichols, who was casting the 2012 Broadway revival ofDeath of a Salesman and 
was still searching for his Biff.

"What you could see in The Social Network is Andrew's enormous emotional 
equipment," Nichols said in theNew York Times during the play's celebrated run. 
"In the scene where they'd stolen the company from him he was astonishing. He 
was practically exploding."

The actor's performance as Biff earned him a Tony Award nomination, proving, 
in case anyone had forgotten, that he is not just a movie star – Garfield is a 
wonderful stage actor, too. "I often think that if all this movie palaver fails 
and I never get to make a film again, I know that I can always do theatre," he 
says. "I could rent a studio apartment in London and I know I'd be happy. 
Making money has never been the main intention. Because my father was a 
businessman, I became allergic to that."

Indeed, for all his success Garfield has still not purchased a home. He lives 
an itinerant lifestyle, he says, with a Vespa and a surfboard in LA, a storage 
unit in New York and the majority of his personal effects at his parents' house 
in Surrey. When he is not working, he spends much of his time with his 
girlfriend andThe Amazing Spider-Man co-star Emma Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone>, who features in the series as 
his on-screen belle, Gwen Stacy.

"What I like about Andrew is his passion," Stone tells me when I speak to her 
later in the day. "He is completely able to transform and he looks at every 
facet of the character that he is playing. It looks like it might be a 
potentially exhausting process, but he is so invigorated by it. He is the most 
prepared actor I ever worked with. He leaves no stone unturned."

Ignoring the obvious pun, I wonder: what does Garfield adore in Stone? Their 
relationship has been hiding in plain sight ever since they met on set of the 
firstAmazing Spider-Man film and they've both previously dodged questions on 
the subject whenever it has come up.

The moment the question leaves my lips, Garfield's smile suddenly drops and 
his eyebrows knit into a scowl. "What can I say? How about: 'Fuck off you 
fucking…'" Cue momentary alarm before, thankfully, his face relaxes and he 
laughs out loud. "No, I'm able to talk about her, but I want to protect 
something that I respect in my life," he says.

"I don't feel the need to speak publicly about my private life. And on a 
professional level I don't want people watching me on screen to know about my 
dirty laundry.
 Andrew Garfield and Emma Stone at the world premiere of the first The Amazing 
Spider-Man in 2012. Photograph: Kento Nara 
"It's not that interesting anyway. I'm about to do a film where I play 
a Portuguese priest and if people are reading about my personal life, they'll 
be watching the screen going: 'Oh that Portuguese priest is having sex with 
whoever!'"

The Portuguese priest will make his appearance in Silence, a forthcoming 
feature from Martin Scorsese, which goes into production this winter. Starring 
in a Scorsese film is a reminder that Garfield has much more to offer the world 
of Hollywood than shooting webbing from his wrists. The film is based on
Shu-saku Endo- <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sh%C5%ABsaku_End%C5%8D>'s 1966 
novel: "It's a wild one," says Garfield. "I play a Jesuit priest travelling to 
Japan in the 1600s."

He calls it a father-son story (the father, in this case, being God), and the 
same theme emerges in99 Homes, the first film he has produced himself, in which 
he plays a single father battling eviction from his Florida home. "I thought 
that the story was fascinating," he says of his decision to invest in the film, 
"because I was raised with a value system that emphasises community and family."

Does he dream of starting his own family one day? "Fatherhood is a scary thing 
because as soon as you've done it you've messed up the kid," he says. "You're 
only human and you'll be projecting your own shit on them and putting your own 
expectations on them and treating them as though they're a part of you rather 
than a separate entity.

"I am absolutely fascinated by fatherhood, though, and have been for a long 
time," he adds. Presumably, when the time comes he will be out there with his 
camera, making movies with his kids just as his father did with him? "I hope 
so," he says. "I intend to be the perfect father. I'm sure I'll fail miserably."

The Amazing Spider-Man 2 will be released in the UK on Wednesday 16 April
 