
Andy Kershaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-kershaw> is making his 
return to Radio 3 this autumn with a major new world music series that ties in 
with BBC1 show Human Planet.

After more than two years off the airwaves, following well-documented personal 
problems, in Music Planet Kershaw will take listeners on a journey around the 
world in whatRadio 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3> calls its 
"most significant and ambitious world music project ever".

During the series Kershaw and fellow presenter Lucy Duran will visit the same 
destinations as BBC1's Human Planet, a new landmark anthropological series 
celebrating man's remarkable ingenuity and success as a species.

Music Planet will record music from destinations including Switzerland, Peru, 
Madagascar, Kenya, Greenland and Mali, through to the Solomon Islands and Papa 
New Guinea. The series will also visit the frozen communities of the arctic 
winter and Amazonian villagers who have never met Europeans.

Highlights will include the sounds of the Bat People of Papa New Guinea, the 
voices of the shamans of Mongolia and Greenland's "katajjaq", a vocal contest 
between two women with songs that involve throat singing and imitating animal 
cries. Music Planet and Human Planet will air this autumn on Radio 3 and BBC1.

Kershaw said: "I am thrilled to be back on Radio 3 working again with a team 
of bright, imaginative, enthusiastic, people who also happen to be dear friends.

"Nowhere on earth is safe again from my attentions. So far we have – literally 
– hacked through mountain jungles to bring Music Planet listeners extraordinary 
music from some of the world's most isolated locations. And I cheerily risked 
incineration at a rocket festival in Thailand to take our Radio 3 audience into 
the fiery thick of the action.

"I have been even to Switzerland, the last country in which I expected to find 
myself. And, if listeners thought that yodelling was valuable only as a device 
to evict stragglers at the end of a party, or as a surefire way to secure an 
international novelty hit in 1956, the music we recorded in the Alps will – 
like so much to be heard in Music Planet – shatter such preconceptions and, 
simultaneously, delight and exhilarate."

Producer James Parkin added: "What makes Music Planet so exciting for me is 
that one minute you're listening to Cambodian hip-hop, and the next, Swiss 
yodelling recorded in the Alps. And this is the music that people are making 
right now, all over the world, recorded especially for Radio 3."

One of Kershaw's most famous broadcasts was his 1988 journey up the River 
Niger to Niafunke in Mali, where he went in search of the blues guitarist Ali 
Farka Toure.

Kershaw has not worked for the BBC since 2007 because of upheavals in his 
personal life. His separation from his partner of 17 years, the restaurateur 
Juliette Banner, led to a restraining order. He has since given up alcohol and 
declared himself "reborn".

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 