
'In my view, if you do something, it's worth doing it in a very big way; 
whether you are talking about travel, listening to Bob Dylan, or romance." For
Andy Kershaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-kershaw> this is still as 
close to a guide for good living as it gets. And the credo has served him 
fairly well, though it did prove unreliable three years ago when he applied it 
both to drinking and to a widely reported domestic and emotional meltdown.

Now recovered, on the wagon, and on the brink of returning to BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> radio with a series of world music 
documentaries, Kershaw is determinedly sticking with his passionate approach to 
life. Innately curious and with an encyclopaedic memory for facts and figures, 
he cannot understand people who do not want to know how the world works: people 
who are happy, in his words, "to listen to Phil Collins" for the rest of their 
days.

"Music and culture have never been divorced for me," he says. "How can you go 
to somewhere like Cambodia and have no sense of the history and the politics of 
the place? Music does not exist in isolation. It's dynamic, like language. It's 
self-referential and always changing."

For his new Radio 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3> show, Music 
Planet, due to broadcast in tandem with the BBC1 natural history series Human 
Planet in the new year, Kershaw has been to Thailand to record a 
singer/songwriter who had been inside a Burmese jail for 10 years. A supporter 
of Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese opposition leader under house arrest, he and 
his fellow prisoners smuggled protest songs out of prison, word by word, on 
cigarette stubs. "So the next time you hear a big rock band complaining their 
sandwiches are the wrong shape," says Kershaw, "this puts it all in context."

Kershaw's comeback show, announced last week, has actually been in production 
since March and the presenter has already travelled from his home on the Isle 
of Man to far-flung places new even to an enthusiastic traveller, who "at the 
last count had been to 87 of the world's 195 countries".

However, this weekend the former Radio 1 DJ is back in the Manx seaside home 
that he shares with his 13-year-old son, Sonny, and is free to watch the famous 
motorbike road races that first drew him to the island. The daily Grand Prix 
sessions that mark the end of the Manx summer follow the same notoriously 
challenging course as the TT race, tracing the shape of the Isle of Man through 
a succession of tiny lanes and rural villages. Kershaw and his son rarely miss 
a session.

As the sun set last Thursday, the two were together on a grass verge opposite 
the ad hoc track, equipped with a vacuum flask and a bag of biscuits. On the 
other side of the road the hanging baskets outside a pretty white cottage 
rocked jauntily as every 20 seconds a motorbike roared past spectators standing 
just inches from the road.

By chance, this is the same Kirk Michael cottage that Kershaw once rented and 
where he was often visited by his colleague, the late John Peel. It was here 
one summer, Kershaw remembers, that Peel heard by telephone the news that his 
wife, Sheila, had suffered a dangerous brain haemorrhage. For several years the 
two DJs shared Room 318 at Egton House, the old Radio 1 building next to 
Broadcasting House in London, sitting alongside their influential producer and 
fellow broadcaster John Walters.

When Kershaw, now 50, moved down to London after making his name promoting 
gigs at Leeds University, Walters became "a kind of surrogate father" to him, 
or, Kershaw corrects himself, "a kind of exotic uncle would be more accurate". 
Walters used to phone his young acolyte at 2.15 every afternoon. "I knew it 
would be him becauseThe Archers had finished," says Kershaw.

"He was the source of so much wisdom and wit and he guided me on all sorts of 
things, like buying my first flat in London, and who were suitable girlfriends. 
I was just devastated when Walters died, because he went very suddenly."

He adds: "I had been almost disowned by my own father for choosing a life of 
rock and roll, rather than becoming a lawyer." In an early confrontation with 
his father, a headmaster, Kershaw once told him he did not want to spend his 
allotted time on Earth "house conveyancing in the Rochdale area". Now, however, 
he suspects he might have made a good lawyer. After serving time in a Manx 
prison for breaking a restraining order that prevented him from approaching his 
ex-partner, Juliette Banner, the mother of Sonny and his younger sister Dolly, 
Kershaw chose to represent himself in family court proceedings. The legal case 
followed a long period in which the presenter's friends watched in horror as 
the break-up of his relationship, the loss of contact with his children, and 
the ultimate loss of his livelihood sent him spiralling out of control.

While his ex has now set up home in Scotland with a new partner, Kershaw has 
his son back with him on the Isle of Man, the two of them living with their 
dog, Buster, on the old-fashioned seafront of a town coincidentally named Peel.

"Walters once told me that human society could be divided into two eras, 
pre-avocado and post-avocado," says Kershaw. "I think Peel on the Isle of Man 
is definitely pre-avocado."

His daughter Dolly has also stayed with him this summer. He divides his time 
on the island between writing and going out to sea with Sonny on their boat to 
drop lobster pots. "The boat has proved very therapeutic," Kershaw says.

In his book-lined study, across the bay from Peel Castle, Kershaw is putting 
together an autobiography that will chart his wildly varied career as a roadie, 
a youthful presenter of Live Aid, an influential figure in world music and an 
occasional news correspondent from dangerous hotspots such as Haiti, Rwanda 
and, most recently, Bangkok during the red shirt rioting.

"I found I couldn't start the book until I came up with a title. It is going 
to be calledNo Off Switch, and, once I had that, I knew how to do it," he says.

At the end of a recent whistle-stop tour of Cambodia, Burma, Laos and 
Thailand, Kershaw found himself in Bangkok during the riots and filed a 
newspaper dispatch from the midst of the fighting, dodging a sniper by diving 
into an empty market stall. "There were chips of asphalt jumping off the road 
surface each time one of these measured cracks of gunfire rang out," he recalls.

The adventure was no accident. Kershaw is fearless, accepting an invitation to 
go into Rwanda in 1994 and providing memorable coverage for the BBC.

"There are a lot of amateur psychologists who like to say Rwanda screwed me 
up. It didn't," he asserts. "My grandparents' generation went through this kind 
of thing routinely for years in the first and second world wars. Some neurotics 
may tell me I am suffering from something called post-traumatic stress 
disorder. I am not. Rwanda was horrific, but I just reported it."

Aside from his consuming passion for news, Bob Dylan and motorbikes, a love of 
Africa has absorbed much of Kershaw's career, peaking in 1985 when he became a 
devotee of the Zimbabwean band the Bhundu Boys. At one of their early London 
gigs with John Peel, he turned to see his "soppy bugger" colleague with tears 
running down his cheeks. "You see, after first hearing American rock music as a 
young man, Peel never imagined he would feel so blown away by any music ever 
again."

It is this urge to bring new talent to British ears that is driving the Radio 
3 shows. Travelling with a producer, and sometimes a sound recordist, Kershaw 
visited four African countries in eight days last month after taking a 
fortnight to sample the Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea. High points have 
included recordings made in a temple on the Mekong in Laos, the bizarre 
Yasothon Rocket Festival, featuring 50ft-long missiles fired for fun by drunk 
students ("there was not a health and safety officer, not a fireman, not an 
ambulance, not even a hose in sight"), a Siberian throat-singing festival and, 
perhaps most surprisingly, jazz yodelling in Switzerland. He is off to Namibia 
soon – one of the few African countries he has never visited – to make another 
Radio 3 programme,

"It is better than house conveyancing in the Rochdale area," Kershaw confirms. 
And if it is, he owes thanks to Roger Wright, the controller of BBC Radio 3. It 
was Wright who took the DJ out for an Indian lunch when he left Radio 1 and who 
has kept faith in recent years. "Back then he said he liked my show because he 
never knew what was coming next," says Kershaw. "And that was it. He had me."

But what still gives Kershaw most professional pleasure, he says, is the idea 
that a band first heard onMusic Planet might play the Womad festival next year. 
"That is what is satisfying about being back on the radio."

Music Planet will air on Radio 3 next year
 