
When you retire, your private or company pension doesn't magically transform 
itself into an annual income. You have to do that yourself, and it is one of 
the biggest financial decisions you will ever take.

Make a mistake and you could regret it for the rest of your life.

If you are one of the dwindling number of people lucky enough to have a 
generous final salary pension, the scheme does the legwork for you. The income 
you get depend on factors such as your years in the scheme and your salary at 
retirement.

Most of us are now in less attractive money-purchase schemes, where our 
contributions are invested in shares, bonds and other assets, and the amount we 
get at retirement depends on how much we have paid in and how well those 
investments have performed.

At retirement, you can either convert your pension into income by purchasing 
an annuity or keep it invested and withdraw money when you need it. This is 
known as income drawdown.

In both cases, you can take up to 25% of your pension as a tax-free lump sum 
and most of us should do that. Thereafter, annuities and income drawdown work 
in very different ways. So which is right for you?

Annuities

What is an annuity? A financial product that guarantees to pay you an income 
for a set period of time. It is bought with a lump sum of cash – usually 
someone's pension scheme.

"Most people buy an annuity at retirement," says Simon Nicol, pension director 
at BroadstonePensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> & 
Investments. "It pays you a guaranteed, taxable income for the rest of your 
life, giving you certainty throughout retirement."

Who is it right for? If you have a relatively small pension, say £50,000 or 
less, an annuity is almost certainly the way to go. "You don't have enough 
money to justify the expense and risk of alternatives such as income drawdown," 
Nicol says.

What income will I get? You will probably be shocked at how little income your 
pension fund generates. Annuity rates have fallen for 15 of the last 18 years, 
according to Moneyfacts, including a 11.5% drop in 2012.

A 65-year-old single man with a £100,000 pension could buy a flat income worth 
£5,800 a year at best, according to figures from The Annuity Bureau. This would 
fall to a starting income of just £3,500 a year if he wanted it to rise in line 
with the retail price index each year.

He would get even less if he chose a joint life annuity, which would continue 
to pay a smaller income to his wife or partner after he died.

Annuity rates have been hit by low interest rates, falling gilt yields and 
rising life expectancy, which means insurers have to pay out income for longer, 
says Richard Williams, director at The Annuity Bureau.

Once you have bought an annuity, you can't change it afterwards. "Some people 
will be tempted to delay until rates improve, but this hasn't proved a good 
strategy over the last 20 years, and there's no good reason to suppose it is 
now," Williams says.

How do I buy one? Your pension provider will offer to sell you an annuity but 
you must shop around for the best deal you can get. This is known as "taking 
the open market option", and can boost your income by as much as 20%.

If you've got health problems, are overweight, or smoke, look for an "enhanced 
annuity". This pays you a higher income because your life expectancy is shorter.

Start by browsing websites such as The Annuity Bureau, Annuity Direct, 
Hargreaves Lansdown and Just Retirement. Or speak to an independent financial 
adviser.

Income drawdown

What is income drawdown? Income drawdown involves leaving your pension fund 
invested in shares, bonds and so on, and drawing a regular income from it by 
cashing in some of those investments. It is riskier than locking into an 
annuity because your money remains in funds that can go up and down, but may be 
more rewarding. "It allows you to benefit from any future stock market growth, 
and manage your cash flow better, as you only draw income when you need it," 
says Fiona Tait, business development manager at Scottish Life.

Who is it right for? As a general rule, income drawdown works better for 
people with larger pension pots than people with less saved. Many advisers 
suggest you need at least £100,000 to make it viable, because the fees and 
charges are quite high. Income drawdown also involves greater investment risk. 
If you have a larger pension pot, you are better placed to survive stock market 
volatility.

What income will I get? That depends on the size of your pot and how well your 
pension performs, Tait says. "Your income could rise if stock markets do well, 
but fall if they do badly. You could even run out of money if you live longer 
than expected, something that can't happen with a conventional annuity."

The decision to opt for income drawdown has backfired in the last five years, 
says Andrew Tully, pensions technical director at MGM Advantage. "Many people 
have seen their incomes drop by 40% or 50%. Worse, the investment risk 
increases as you get older. Many people who take income drawdown eventually end 
up buying an annuity anyway."

There is an increasingly attractive halfway house, Tully says. "An 
investment-linked annuity combines the flexibility of drawdown with the 
security of an annuity."

How do I sign up for it? Income drawdown is complicated, and you will need 
help from a specialist pensions adviser. You can find the names of three in 
your local area atunbiased.co.uk <http://www.unbiased.co.uk/>. Don't rush into 
any decision. It may have taken you 30 or 40 years to build your pension pot. 
It is worth spending three or four months deciding what to do with it.

• For all the latest news and deals sign up for our weekly Money Talks email 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/signup/2012/oct/18/1?INTCMP=MODARMTXFT158>
 