
I ask in a spirit of genuine inquiry: is there just a tiny element of 
anti-semitism in the gloating which has accompanied Peter Mandelson's fall? Not 
openly, of course, and I suspect that 99 people out of every hundred who were 
glad to see him go would be genuinely appalled if you suggested that 
anti-semitism had anything to do with it. In any case, Mandelson can rightly 
point out that many of his best enemies are Jews.

 But I felt just a twinge of unease as I listened to Michael Howard pour 
vituperation over the government the other day. Like Mandelson, Howard was the 
most unpopular member of the last cabinet, even more loathed than Michael 
Portillo. Leon Brittan and Sir Keith Joseph (as in the popular Labour war cry, 
'Margaret Thatcher has one, Keith Joseph is one') were also greatly disliked 
for different reasons. Looking back, I've been rude in print about Gerald 
Kaufman and Michael Fabricant - though to be fair, I had no idea at the time 
that Fabricant was Jewish.

 What I'm trying to tease out is whether there is some deep, hidden, 
atavistic, unwitting prejudice against people who are deemed to be outsiders 
and whom, without conscious thought, we can mentally push into the margins. I 
very much hope not, but perhaps we should all be careful.

 I went to two pantomimes this year. One was in Richmond, and came straight 
off the E&B/AMG panto conveyor belt. It was sponsored by Cadbury's, whose brand 
name was mentioned many, many times. Even the announcer at the beginning told 
us to 'hold on to your Cadbury's!', which probably wasn't even a double 
entendre, since those seem to be banned these days. The whole show was slick, 
professional, utterly predictable and rather depressing.

 The main source of fascination was Toyah Willcox as Jack. She had legs not 
like beanstalks, but resembling twin redwoods in a forest, and I doubt if there 
was a dad in the audience who didn't fantasise - well, never mind about what 
exactly.

 The other panto we saw was in the East End. The London Bubble Company, which 
mainly tours schools, had put on their own version of Little Red Riding Hood. 
The sets were cheap, the seats wooden, the actors first-rate - though probably 
earning less than the minimum wage - but it had an honesty and invention which 
nothing sponsored by a giant food combine was every likely to match.

 One of the great luvvie cliches is how deprived working-class children, bred 
on TV, respond wonderfully to the magic of live theatre; in this case it seemed 
to be true. In any case the children in New Cross obviously enjoyed the panto 
more than those in Richmond.

 It was like the difference between finding a delicious sandwich made by your 
loving mother in your lunchbox, or one of those processed cheese snacks wrapped 
in plastic.

 Thanks for the endless drifts of circular letters you've sent. There were so 
many that I've written a separate longer article about them, due to appear in 
G2 on Monday. Even so, I couldn't quote more than a fraction of those you've so 
kindly sent in. A few people have complained that my attitude is curmudgeonly, 
but I don't object to all these letters. We've had some good ones among the 
dross: humorous, well-judged, neither boasting nor whingeing. Reading others, 
however, is like being placed next to an incredibly dreary guest at dinner, 
someone determined to tell you every detail of their lives, no matter how 
tedious or annoying.

 At some point I'll go through all the letters again looking for the most 
off-putting introduction, the one which makes you want to scream and hurl the 
whole thing into the waste basket. At present these two are leading: 'We toyed 
with the idea of making a trendy circle out of our news - if only because the 
sensation of decision-making as spiralling into the centre of a black hole is 
uppermost in our minds after a year of shall-we-shan't-we!!!' Or, 'Having just 
gone through the diary to remind myself of the main events of our year, I'm now 
with a glass of Spanish 'Pasheran' (sloe berries and alcohol) reflecting, as 
one does, on just how quickly it all happened.' Aarggh, and thank you very much.

 Thank you too for your thoughts on what they got up to in Gomorrah. Clearly 
no one has the faintest idea, though as several people pointed out, whatever it 
was, God must have given them gomorrhea as a punishment. One or two people 
sarcastically suggested that if it was a sin so monstrous that it could not 
even be named, and merited total destruction for its practitioners, it must 
have been - smoking.

 My own theory is that their perversion was the same as the one in which Bill 
Clinton indulged with Monica Lewinsky - failing, in Kenneth Starr's coy word, 
to reach 'completion'. Hence the old phrase, passed down through the centuries, 
'Gomorrah never comes.' First , I hope, in a series of many descriptions by 
wine writers which would make you decide never ever to buy, still less open, 
the bottle in question. This is from Joanna Simon in the Sunday Times about a 
Gewurtztraminer: 'Exotic lychee aromas, with hints of spice and Nivea Cream.' 
If you see any more, please send them in.

 When you live abroad, you learn the most surprising things about your own 
country. For instance, American guide books would solemnly describe a Britain 
in which people still form orderly bus queues, fogs swirl daily around London, 
colourful old characters tell you 'yarns' in smoky pubs in exchange for a pint 
of 'bitters ale', and where 'at 4 o'clock, everything stops for tea!' They 
would also give you unexpected extras.

 Living in Washington, where the dry cleaners routinely handed back clothes 
with the stains intact, with creases put in trousers almost parallel to the 
ones already there, we were startled to read 'under no circumstances ever trust 
your precious clothing to a British dry cleaners'.

 The other day I was listening to Letter From America on the radio, and 
Alastair Cooke was going through a well-loved routine, as comforting and 
familiar as the words of an old carol. This was the one about how religious 
sensitivities mean you can no longer wish anyone a Happy Christmas in the US - 
you have to say 'Season's Greetings' or 'Happy Holidays'.

 He then solemnly provided a footnote about how in Britain we used to wish 
people 'Merry Christmas', but because the word 'merry' implied having too much 
to drink, and because the government wanted to cut down on drunk driving, this 
had been changed to 'Happy Christmas', now the only acceptable greeting here.

 For a moment I thought the old boy had been away too long, and would soon be 
raving about the swirling fogs and orderly bus queues. But then I wondered if I 
had missed something, that a diktat had been handed down, and that soon we 
would be ordered to say: 'Have an agreeable but sober festive season!' to each 
other. Have I?
 