
A group of scientists and public health experts are to take legal action 
against the Times newspaper after it reported claims from a leading charity 
that they were in the pay of the tobacco industry.

The experts, who work in fields that aim to limit deaths and health 
complications caused by smoking, are looking to sue the Times for defamation 
following a story that termed them “experts making a packet”.

The Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> has published an 
apology to one of the scientists cited, Clive Bates, the former head of Action 
on Smoking and Health. The correction stated that he had funded his own travel 
and accommodation costs at an industry-sponsored tobacco forum in Brussels and 
had not received any funding from tobacco or nicotine companies.

But other scientists say that the same apology was not extended to them and 
they claim they have been falsely accused of accepting “tens of thousands of 
pounds from tobacco companies to carry out research into e-cigarettes”.

Lewis Silkin, a legal firm specialising in libel, will be acting on behalf of 
five scientists, including professor Karl Fagerström, an expert in addiction 
science. “My life’s work has been built on helping reduce the death toll from 
tobacco smoking. Yet The Times has portrayed me and my colleagues as hirelings 
of big tobacco,” he said. “The Times has chosen to traduce our reputations. Now 
it is time for the paper to profusely apologise or face a battle it will not 
win.”

Professor David Nutt <https://www.theguardian.com/science/david-nutt> of 
Imperial College London, the former government drugs policy adviser, was the 
lead author of a study that endorsed e-cigarettes and informed Public Health 
England. Some of the scientists named by the Times also worked on it with him.

Professor David Sweanor said: “My reputation has been trashed by The Times. 
Despite ample evidence of my independence, it claimed that I am beholden to big 
tobacco companies. It is like saying that Robin Hood was in the pay of the 
Sheriff of Nottingham. I have to fight this.”

The Times’s story reported that Cancer Research UK had criticised scientists 
who “accepted thousands of pounds from tobacco companies to carry out research 
into e-cigarettes”. The scientists deny they did so.

 