
The number of antidepressants given to patients in England has doubled in a 
decade, official figures show.

In 2015 there were 61m such drugs prescribed and dispensed outside of 
hospitals. They are used to treat clinical depression as well as other 
conditions such as generalised anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder 
and panic attacks.

The total was 31.6m more than in 2005 and up 3.9m, or 6.8% on 2014, according 
to a report from theHealth and Social Care Information Centre 
<http://www.hscic.gov.uk/> (HSCIC). 

The net cost of ingredients of antidepressants, before taking account of any 
money reclaimed by theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, was nearly 
£285m last year. About nine in 10 of all medicines are dispensed to people 
eligible for free prescriptions, including older people and children.


Drugs used to treat diabetes cost the NHS the most under the same measure – 
nearly £837m a year. In all, more than 1.08bn prescription items were dispensed 
in 2015 – a 50.4% increase in a decade.

The rise of antidepressant prescriptions, a persistent upward trend across the 
UK, comes amid mounting concerns aboutmental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health> in Britain.

Susie Orbach: in therapy, everyone wants to talk about Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/jul/01/susie-orbach-in-therapy-everyone-wants-to-talk-about-brexit>
Vicki Nash, head of policy and campaigns at the mental health charity Mind, 
said: “These latest figures show no sign of this trend slowing and we need to 
understand why we are seeing persistent year-on-year increases.

“It may be that more people are coming forward and seeking help, or that 
doctors are getting better at spotting the symptoms of mental health problems, 
but these are unlikely to be the only reasons.”

She said it was vital to better understand “exactly how many people are taking 
antidepressants, for how long and whether they are receiving other treatment 
alongside medication”.

 Though talking therapies such as cognitive behavioural therapy and 
counselling were becoming more widely available, they were still not available 
to everyone who needed them, said Nash.

“It is also likely that some areas of the country with particularly high 
prescription rates simply don’t have other forms of treatments as readily 
available. We must remember that while antidepressants can be very effective 
for some, they are not the solution for everyone and they should never be used 
as a first-line treatment for mild depression.”

Gillian Connor, head of policy at another charity, Rethink Mental Illness, 
said: “The reasons for this increase in antidepressant prescriptions could 
include a greater awareness of mental illness and more willingness to seek 
help. However, with our overstretched and underfunded mental health services, 
too often antidepressants are the only treatment available.

“One in 10 of us will experience depression at some point in our lives. What 
we want to see is people experiencing depression offered the full range of 
treatments available, including talking therapies. People have to be able to 
access the treatment that is right for them, whether it’s antidepressants, 
therapy or a combination of the two.”

NHS England welcomed a fall in antibiotic prescriptions amid continuing 
concerns that their overuse could further contribute to bacteria resisting the 
effects of drugs.

It said the latest figures reinforced “the vital work of prescribers, 
including dentists, nurses and pharmacists, working closely with patients every 
day to ensure the best outcomes for individuals and to protect precious NHS 
resources.”
 