
AO World, the recently floated online retailer, has dipped following a sell 
note which says the company's shares would be overvalued even if it was 
responsible for every domestic appliance sold in the UK.

Starting coverage on the company, Shore Capital analyst Michael Stewart said:
 AO World is a fabulous online retailer to our minds with an excellent 
founder/leader. However, at a price of 271p per share, a near 61% premium to 
what we estimate to be fair value, we initiate coverage on AO with a sell 
recommendation. The group has a bright future but Shore Capital's message to 
potential investors is to avoid the stock at current levels. If an eye-watering 
valuation is not enough to curb enthusiasm for the stock then low returns, 
margin headwinds and potentially risky earnings certainly should be; no 
dividend is forecast. 
He elaborated his reasons:
 A tough market to operate in: Selling domestic appliances is a 
capital-intensive, low-return activity. The consumer has limited brand loyalty 
in this market, price competition is incredibly high and demand is elastic.

For the bulls out there who believe that the online penetration rate will 
continue to rise and AO will continue to gain market share, consider the 
following: if the online penetration rate reached 100% and AO sold every single 
major domestic appliance in the UK, the stock would still trade on a PE 
multiple of 22 times in our analysis.

Product protection plans: Whilst AO may well be profitable without selling 
protection plans it certainly would not be as profitable – commission earned 
from selling product protection plans forms a material proportion of earnings 
(around 50% of adjusted EBITDA in 2014) and in our view their contribution to 
earnings was the difference between a profit and a loss in 2012.

Margin headwinds: According to Bloomberg, the market is forecasting an EBIT 
margin of 4.3% for the group in 2017, some 60 basis points above our estimate. 
The market, in our opinion, has massively underestimated the impact that 
continental Europe will have on the group's margins and investors should be 
aware of this.

Our discounted cash flow analysis shows that the intrinsic value of the firm 
is 173p with continental Europe contributing 30p towards this value. Sell. 
In the market, AO shares are down 4.1p at 267.1p. It floated in February at 
285p a share.
 