
AO World <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ao-world>, the online appliance 
seller, cooked up a cash bonanza of up to £29m for bankers when the website 
floated on the stockmarket this week.

Rothschild, AO's main financial adviser in the run up to the flotation, will 
make £12m in fees, or 1% of the company's initial market capitalisation, and 
could also receive a further £500,000 "at the company's discretion," according 
to the prospectus released late on Wednesday.

Meanwhile, JP Morgan, Jefferies International and Numis Securities, which all 
acted as underwriters to the float, will share about £10.6m. They could also 
get a further £4.2m at AO's discretion.

JP Morgan also has a chance to earn a further £1.56m fee as the bank arranged 
a so-called "green shoe" offer. This will be triggered if there is strong 
enough demand for the stock and would mean a further 22m shares being put on 
the market.

The bankers' payments dwarf the company's £8.7m pre-tax profits in the year to 
March 31 2013, as analysts said the ratio of AO's valuation to its earnings was 
reminiscent of the dotcom boom. Back when the potential for the internet was 
first spotted in the late 1990s, technology company valuations soared before 
crashing when the bubble burst in 2001.

AO achieved a bumper market capitalisation of £1.2bn on Wednesday, four times 
the valuation bankers put on the company only last year. The shares soared in 
initial trading from the launch price of 285p to 378p, valuing the company at 
£1.6bn at close of play on Wednesday. On Thursday the shares slid 2.9% as a 
sense of reality began to return, wiping nearly £50m off its value.

Independent retail analyst Nick Bubb said AO's initial valuation was "somewhat 
excessive". He added: "AO's excellent customer service has clearly excited 
investors, but AO has yet to prove that its recent UK success (following the 
demise of Comet) is sustainable."

The excitement over AO matches the fervour around online fashion retailer Asos 
and online grocer Ocado, both of which have seen their valuations climb to new 
heights in the last year.

John Roberts, the former kitchen salesman who founded and still leads AO, made 
£86m from selling some of his shares in the business ahead of the flotation and 
still holds a stake worth more than £408m.

But analysis of the prospectus reveals that Roberts and his fellow 
shareholders had already split £2.8m in dividends last year, as they took the 
first payout from the company in at least three years.

Roberts, who owned about 38% of the company's shares before the flotation, 
would have taken home just over £1m of that dividend payment even as he 
prepared to hand the company over to the public markets. The founder, who has 
committed to staying with the company, said last month: "We are not taking 
profits and running for the hills or refinancing our balance sheet to pay off 
debts."

However, the payouts to founder shareholders and their advisers are likely to 
lead to heavy exceptional costs on AO's maiden results announcement this spring.

They also set the bar for a longed-for revival in bankers' fees as a string of 
retailers head for the stockmarket in the next few months. While convenience 
store group McColl's only managed a valuation slightly lower than it had hoped 
for when it joined the market this week, online fashion retailer Boohoo.com, 
specialist retailer Pets at Home and discounter Poundland are all expected to 
be embraced by the stock market in the next few weeks.

As many as 15 retailers, including B&M, Fat Face and House of Fraser are also 
looking at joining the market.
 