
AO World, the online electrical retailer, plans to start selling computers 
this year, as it made an operating loss after investment in its European 
business.

It reported full year operating losses of £10.6m after trading losses in 
Germany and start-up costs in other European countries. But EBITDA moved from 
£16.5m to £17.2m.

The company said it expected European losses of between €26m and €30m for the 
current year, but overall revenues were expected to be ahead of expectations, 
and trading in the new financial year had started well. On the computing move, 
chief executive John Roberts said:

You’ll see us take a different approach to the traditional ‘feature-led’ way 
of selling this category, to the benefit of all customers. Computing is a 
natural extension of our current categories and there is good potential for 
cross-selling to our existing customer base, making it an exciting opportunity 
for the business.

The news has seen AO’s share fall 1.6% to 164.4p, but analysts were still 
positive. David Reynolds at Jefferies said:

A good set of results to finish the year, very pleased with the format of the 
2017 guide. A revenue range and EBITDA positioning. Something for the bulls and 
the bears. Reduced revenues in Europe as the company focuses on operational 
efficiencies. But what falls out is an in-line or slightly improved adjusted 
EBITDA for the group, along with a solid cash position, bolstered with the £30m 
RCF, and the launch of computing in the UK and floor care in [Germany].


[The] key risk continues to be operational execution.

At Numis, Andrew Wade said:

AO has reported full year results consistent with its March update, including 
UK EBITDA up 31% in the second half, and given clear guidance for 2017. As a 
result, we raise our 2017 UK EBITDA forecast by 13% but, with the group 
choosing to slow growth while it builds product margin and capacity, lower our 
estimates for Europe. We retain our positive stance, confident that AO’s 
leading customer proposition can support long term profitable growth in the UK 
and internationally.
 