
My first indirect encounter with the then editor of the Manchester Guardian, 
who had been in office for two years, was unpropitious. On the strength of 
cuttings I had submitted, I had been invited to Manchester for an interview to 
see whether, at the age of 24, I was a suitable recruit for the famous Cross 
Street reporters' room. When I arrived, I was greeted by Harry Whewell, the 
news editor, who - sitting at a rolltop desk straight out of Ben Hecht's The 
Front Page - explained that the editor had been called away 'on pressing 
business' and that, therefore, the most I could expect that day was a 
preliminary chat with him.

 Our talk seemed to go well enough - Harry bought me a lunchtime pint at the 
office hostelry, Rowntree's, which was round the back of the Cross Street 
building - but when we returned to the news room, Harry rummaged in his desk to 
produce the clippings I had sent in and handed them back to me. It was only on 
the train back to London that I opened the envelope up.

 Attached was a little note signed 'AH' - the editor's initials as well as 
mine. It started off with the announcement that on the day I was due to arrive, 
he expected to be 'over the hills and far away' climbing in the Lake District - 
but that this didn't matter as he hadn't much cared for 'the supercilious tone' 
of my writing. Would Harry anyway talk to me - and then, when he got back, he 
would write me a formal note saying 'Thanks, but no thanks'? I felt a bit 
crestfallen. Fate had deemed that I was never to be allowed to follow such 
legendary figures as Neville Cardus. Harry must have done his best for me - for 
within a week I received an invitation to talk to Alastair Hetherington in the 
Manchester Guardian's London office, which was then just above the post office 
in Fleet Street, virtually next door to El Vino.

 This time there was no offer of a friendly drink - just a figure sitting 
behind an immaculately tidy desk as he conducted a businesslike interview. At 
the end of it, he said (with, I thought, just a touch of trepidation) that - if 
the idea still appealed - I could join the MG in Manchester for a trial period 
of three months starting on January 1, 1959, at a salary of £20 a week.

 It was £10 a week less than I was then getting from the long-since defunct 
Co-operative Sunday newspaper, Reynolds News. But I accepted - and have never 
regretted it. Within a month I had been summoned to Manchester again - this 
time to spend my day off getting to know the 'feel' of the office and to stay 
the night at the editor's home in Didsbury Park.

 That is not the kind of thing that would happen with editors today - but 
those were far more informal days and, in any event, Alastair saw to it that I 
sang for my bed and board by composing a leader (about the new Labour shadow 
cabinet) on my very first evening in Cross Street.

 Taking the leader (knocked out on an antediluvian typewriter) into him in his 
office on 'the corridor' was one of the more intimidating experiences of my 
journalistic life - not helped by his first question to me being 'Are you 
sober?' (I had, in an effort to boost my confidence, that evening been back to 
Rowntree's.) I sat across the desk trying not to breathe beer fumes over him, 
as with a sharp pencil he deleted a sentence here, added a phrase there and 
finally changed my rousing concluding sentence from a statement into a 
question. He threw the page back at me and enquired whether his emendations 
were OK. They were more than that, they had transformed my amateur effort into 
a professional piece of work. It was my first lesson in one of the necessary 
attributes of an editor. He should always have the gift of being the alchemist 
of other people's copy.

 Alastair had that talent- and for the next 18 months I was to be the 
beneficiary of it. The MG did not then print in London, and the offices in 
Cross Street resembled an old curiosity shop. There was on the editor's desk a 
rubber stamp and a pad of violet ink in a tin.

 The stamp bore the letters 'AH' and, once they had been imprinted on any 
piece of copy, it meant that the subs interfered with it at their peril.

 Since Alastair - whether out of protectiveness or prudence - insisted that 
all my copy went direct to him, I had distinctly 'favoured nation' treatment 
from the start. I do not think I had the slightest notion of how lucky I was: 
that realisation came only when I spent an unhappy year working at the Thomson 
Sunday Times as the victim of tough old brutes on the subs' table who viewed 
their task as one of turning the idiosyncratic loaves that reporters delivered 
into processed bread.

 But there was a downside to being brought so closely under the editor's wing. 
Mistakes were not forgotten or forgiven. Six years after he ceased to be 
editor, Alastair was still ruefully to recall in his memoirs - Guardian Years 
(1981) - what he termed 'the one bad lapse' in the paper's coverage of the 1959 
election campaign.

 It was 'an unbalanced, late edition report' of Harold Macmillan's final rally 
at Bellevue, Manchester, a few days before polling day. The heading on that 
front-page sketch - 'Full stomachs in faithful congregation' - was not mine but 
the copy was. 'It reeked,' the editor told me, 'of anti-Tory prejudice' - and 
for the remainder of that election I was in the dog-house.

 Throughout the campaign I had been allowed remarkable latitude. I had the job 
of drawing up the notes of guidance - for the previous nine months I had been 
the paper's byelection reporter - for the editorial staff conducting what were 
known as 'constituency surveys'. Though today (surveying that yellowing 
document) I shudder at the peremptory tone of the instructions I gave, Alastair 
- in that same volume in which I get chastised for my coverage of the Macmillan 
rally - was generous enough to remark that my memorandum became 'an office 
classic'.

 That was wholly typical of him. As an editor, he was not just an enabler but 
a great encourager. On a Friday evening he would quite often casually inquire 
about whether you had any plans for the next day - and, if you had none, 
whether you would care to go out with him for 'a hike' round the Peak District 
in Derbyshire.

 As an alfresco experience, it did not always turn out to be unmitigated 
pleasure: as the rain slashed down, he would stride determinedly forward past 
the welcome dryness and warmth of roadside pubs, implacable in his resolution 
to reach the number of miles he had set himself to meet as a target in a given 
space of time. Nevertheless, on those sometimes rugged outings he always 
treated you as a total equal - talking freely not just about political and 
public affairs but also about delicate problems he faced in the office, 
discussing the latter with a remarkable frankness and candour.

 Only years afterwards did it occur to me that, with the somewhat innocent boy 
scout side to his character, he probably felt closer to young reporters of my 
age than he did to those in the official hierarchy of the paper (who, for the 
most part, were a great deal older than he was). There was certainly never any 
side to him - and, though in the reporters' room we used occasionally to mock 
his temperate approach to life (his idea of a drink, we used to say, was a 
glass of lemonade), it was almost always done with amused affection.

 Later on, with all the initial difficulties of the London printing and the 
very real threat in 1966 of the paper's forced merger with the Times, problems 
were to crowd in upon him, and he became a more remote figure to younger 
members of the Guardian staff than he had been in those early Manchester days. 
But I shall always be glad that I first knew him in his youthful prime - and 
never will be shy of boasting that anything I know about journalism I learnt at 
his feet.

 This is an edited version of an article which appears in Alastair 
Hetherington: A Man Of His Word, published by Carrick Publishing ( £9.95), 2/1 
Galt House, 31 Bank Street, Irvine KA 12 0LL; tel 01294 311322.
 