
The front-page headline 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/95-of-new-workers-are-foreigners-6c3m3b7jd>
 on Thursday’s Times says “95% of new workers are foreigners”. Is that right?

The story, which reports on the latest Office for National Statistics (ONS) 
figures on the labour market, says: “Employment levels in Britain are at an 
all-time high, fuelled by the biggest surge of foreign-born workers since the 
expansion of the European Union.

 “The number of people in work increased by 454,000 between July and September 
last year and the same period this year. Workers born overseas made up nearly 
95% of the increase – just over 430,000.”


The clear implication is that hardly any of the new jobs have gone to British 
workers.

 What do the ONS figures say 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/releases/uklabourmarketstatisticsnov2016>? As part of 
its quarterly labour market statistics, the ONS publishes a breakdown of 
employment by nationality and country of birth.

 The figures for country of birth do indeed seem to show a surge in 
foreign-born workers newly employed in Britain.

Looking at the estimates by country of birth, between July to September 2015 
and July to September 2016:

• UK-born people working in the UK increased by 36,000 to 26.32 million.

• non-UK-born people working in the UK increased by 430,000 to 5.55 million.

 But the ONS also adds: “For July to September 2016, there were 5.55 million 
people born abroad working in the UK, but the number of non-UK nationals 
working in the UK was much lower at 3.49 million. This is because the estimates 
for people born abroad working in the UK include many UK nationals.”

 The ONS figures for employment by nationality paint a very different picture:

Looking at the estimates by nationality, between July to September 2015 and 
July to September 2016:

• UK nationals working in the UK increased by 213,000 to 28.39 million.

• Non-UK nationals working in the UK increased by 241,000 to 3.49 million.

This shows that foreign citizens in work in Britain account for 53% of the 
overall increase, rather than the 95% the Times claims. Within this figure 
there has been a surge of eastern Europeans working in Britain, perhaps because 
they fear the door will be closed on unskilled labour, while numbers of western 
Europeans such as French and Germans have dipped, perhaps because they are 
worried about their future status in Britain.

Economists tend to prefer the country of birth statistics to those by 
nationality because the series goes back much further. But to use country of 
birth to define someone as a “foreigner” is fundamentally misleading because it 
refuses to acknowledge that many people settle in Britain and become British 
citizens. The “foreign-born” figure also includes many British people who were 
born overseas. Classic examples are Prince Philip and Boris Johnson, who 
recently got a new job and may be counted in the 95%.

The official statisticians also point out that their estimates cannot be used 
to claim “foreigners are taking all the jobs”. The ONS says they “show the 
number of people in work and changes in the series show net changes in the 
number of people in work (the number of people entering employment minus the 
number of people leaving employment). The number of people entering or leaving 
employment are larger than the net changes. The estimates therefore do not 
relate to ‘new jobs’ and cannot be used to estimate the proportion of new jobs 
that have been filled by UK and non-UK workers.”

Verdict: It is misleading to claim that 95% of new workers are foreigners. The 
figure is closer to 53%.

 * This article was amended on 17 November 2016. An earlier version 
incorrectly said Sir Winston Churchill was born overseas. He was born in the UK. 