
Most of the Argentina players who face USA in Tuesday’s Copa América 
semi-finals are part of the generation who were kids when the countrysuffered 
its economic collapse <http://www.economist.com/node/1010911> at the start of 
the century. But the game is particularly special for one of them: Ramiro Funes 
Mori lived in Texas for eight years and grew up as an American.

At the beginning of 2001, Argentina’s economic crisis left many families’ 
finances in ruins. Queues at foreign consulates were so long that people would 
wait in lines all night, hoping to get the magic number to apply for a European 
passport.

Argentina's great tactical dilemma: where should Lionel Messi play?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/argentina-copa-america-lionel-messi-tactics>
The Ezeiza airport was busiest than ever. Families were leaving the country 
every day. One plane carried 13-year-old Lionel Messi and his father, Jorge, to 
Barcelona, as none of his family in Argentinacould afford the $900-a-month for 
his medical condition 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/football/players/lionel-messi/10487181/Lionel-Messis-improbable-progression-from-struggling-youngster-to-world-super-star.html>
. Another plane carried the Funes Moris to the United States, willing to start 
a new life.

Ramiro and Rogelio Funes Mori are identical twins born in Mendoza, Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina>. They started playing football 
at four, at Godoy Cruz. They left home with their parents when they were nine. 
Ramiro, originally a holding midfielder, was a good tackler. Rogelio was a 
natural striker. Their dream was to become professional footballers. The moment 
they boarded that plane to Dallas, they thought their dream would shatter.

“My husband’s self-imposed condition was that they didn’t quit learning 
football, or, as they call it in the US, soccer. It wasn’t easy,it’s very 
expensive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/01/us-soccer-diversity-problem-world-football>
, but they made it,” wrote Silvana Mori, the boys’ mother, in a letter to El 
Gráfico in August 2008 sent from Arlington, Texas. It was there that the family 
settled, the twins learned English and lived the American life for eight years, 
attending the Arlington High School, making friends and learning to enjoy 
baseball, an intriguing – if unfamiliar – sport for most Argentinians.

In March 2008, Sueño MLS, the reality show broadcast by Univision, crowned 
Rogelio as winner. “Ramiro suffered a knee injury and couldn’t compete until 
the end, but his brother would vindicate him, against more than 2,000 
footballers from different countries. Now they are part of FC Dallas,” added 
Silvana Mori in that letter. Scouts who had already completed the transfer of 
Franco Di Santo (also born in Mendoza) to Chelsea set a week’s trial for the 
twins. Their first day at Chelsea was 11 August 2008.

But without European passports, it was very difficult for them to remain in 
England. River Plate opened their doors to both brothers, who returned to 
Argentina, almost a foreign country after so many years in the US.

How exactly do USA beat Argentina in the Copa América semi-final?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/21/usa-argentina-copa-america-tactics-semi-finals>
Despite the fact they had never been part of an official club academy, the 
Yankees, as they were called, were physically outstanding and didn’t feel the 
difference with kids that had been training for five years.

Rogelio (who now plays for Monterrey, in Mexico) was seen as the true star of 
the family. As the brilliant goals rolled in, he was compared to the likes of 
Hernan Crespo and Diego Milito, adding a weight of expectation that eventually 
told. He helped River win promotion to the Primera Division, after a 
catastrophic season that had seen them relegated for the first time in their 
history. However, it was Ramiro –seen as the less talented twin – who emerged 
as the hidden gem of River’s academy a few months later, becoming a club idol 
in a few months of top flight action.

In 2010, he travelled to the World Cup South Africa with Argentina, as part of 
a kind of sparring partner team that played practice matches against Messi & 
Co. Ramiro marked Higuain and Agüero without fuss and barked orders as if he 
was playing the World Cup in that isolated stadium in Hatfield, Pretoria.

It was his personality that transformed him into the quickest unexpected 
improvement since Gabriel Batistuta, who was seen as an overweight striker in 
the Newell’s academy in 1987, and later became a River reject in 1990, before 
erupting as a brilliant striker in Europe. Funes Mori has the same tenacity and 
attitude as Batistuta: he’s not afraid of making mistakes, he doesn’t hesitate, 
and he doesn’t feel the pressure. He’s always eager for more.

In just two years, he became an untouchable part of the River team that won 
the Copa Sudamericana and Copa Libertadores, South American’s equivalent of the 
Champions League. He also scored the winner in the 2014 Superclásico, the first 
River victory at Boca’s La Bombonera in 10 years.

“Ramiro was the one that caught my attention from my first day, due to his 
physical qualities, mental toughness and his personality. He had no fear of 
mistakes, and if he made one, he would assimilate it quickly and naturally. He 
is clearly better than the rest in the air, but he’s also a defender with good 
passing, not just long balls”, said River manager Marcelo Gallardo in his 
biography, Gallardo Monumental.

Funes Mori was sold to Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> 
for a record fee of $14m, the highest transfer ever paid for a River defender. 
The previous record was set by Martin Demichelis when he went to Bayern Munich. 
“He is equally good with both feet, is very good at headers and a lot of 
power”, says Demichelis.

Everton gave him a chance and he has been a regular in the first-team ever 
since. He played 37 games last season, scoring five goals. And if Argentina 
need better defending on the flanks, he can also switch from centre-back to 
left-back, as he did against Bolivia.

“He did well in England and keeps evolving game after game. He’s a top 
centre-back, despite being young. I think we complement each other really 
well,” says his Argentina team-mate, Nicolás Otamendi.

Argentina have had great attacking talent available in recent years, but 
defending was always a problem. Until last year, many fans demanded that Javier 
Mascherano should be deployed at the back, as he does regularly for Barcelona, 
to solve the existing problems. That was before the emergence of Funes Mori, 
who came from obscurity in Texas to lead the defence. If that’s not the 
American dream come true, then what is?
 