
The British Government, having failed to deter the Argentinian invasion of the 
Falkland Islands <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/falklands> by diplomatic 
pressure or an early show of naval strength, was this morning coming to terms 
with the hard fact that the South Atlantic archipelago and its 1,800 
inhabitants are almost certainly beyond military recovery.

The Defence Secretary, Mr John Nott, hinted as much last night when he said 
although a substantial new naval task force was being assembled a decision on 
whether to send it will not be taken for several days.

His admission followed a day of deeply embarrassing confusion for Mrs 
Thatcher's Administration, during which Whitehall was unable to confirm the 
invasion many hours after the Argentinians began celebrating it in Buenos 
Aires. Casting desperately around for an effective response, Britain's hopes 
now seem to centre on the possibility of American leverage on the Argentinian 
regime.

The Argentine navy said in a communiqué that its casualties occurred when 
British Marines resisted an initial landing in the attack early yesterday. A 
captain was killed and a lieutenant and corporal wounded. The communiqué did 
not mention any British casualties. The Argentine military governor warned 
islanders that "resistance to Argentine rule would be punished" after the 
surrender of the British Governor, Mr Rex Hunt.

A local radio station broadcast martial music for most of the day but later 
said that the British troops, the Governor, and heads of government departments 
were being flown off the island and would be returned to England.

The blackout of radio communications with Port Stanley meant that the first 
official confirmation of the invasion was not released in Whitehall until 6pm - 
about 16 hours after it began and with MPs no longer around to hear the grim 
news. The first message apparently came from HMS Endurance, the ice patrol ship 
investigating the illegal Argentinian landing on South Georgia with which the 
crisis began.

Last night the Cabinet held its second emergency meeting of the day. The Vice 
Chief of Naval Staff and the Air Chief Marshal were present.

Although there was no general mobilisation, Army units were recalled from 
leave last night and special army posts set up at all main line stations into 
London for men returning to rejoin their regiments. Blackboards spelt out the 
message: "All ranks 3rd Parachute Regiment. Return to barracks immediately." 
Messages were tannoyed every 15 minutes to alert soldiers on leave.
 