 Argentine troops landed on the Falkland Islands during the early hours of 
yesterday morning in an invasion involving all three of the country's powerful 
armed forces.
An Argentine navy spokesman claimed that within 12 hours of the initial 
landing the British Governor, Mr Rex Hunt, had surrendered.

The Argentinians reported that one of their naval officers - apparently a 
frogman - had been killed and two soldiers injured during the early stages of 
the takeover.

The Argentine Navy said in a communiqué that its casualties occurred when 
British Marines resisted an initial landing. It added that in a tough clash a 
captain was killed and a lieutenant and a corporal was wounded when the first 
wave of Argentine troops disembarked.

The communiqué said that there were no civilian or military casualties among 
the British subjects.

Argentina also announced that the South Georgias, a further 950 miles to the 
east of had also been occupied. This is where a group of Argentine citizens 
landed illegally two weeks ago yesterday, sparking the dispute between 
Argentina and Britain.

The first reports of the invasion were made in the Buenos Aires press, 
although rumours that an invasion was imminent had persisted for much of the 
preceding day.

By the middle of the week Argentine officials were privately giving warning 
that the 149-year-old dispute between the two countries over the sovereignty of 
theFalkland Islands <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/falklands> and dependencies 
would be resolved "one way or another".

The first landing is said to have been made by Marines at Cape Pembroke, three 
miles from the Falkland Islands capital of Port Stanley.

However, reports differed over the timing of this first landing. The leading 
Buenos Aires daily, La Nacion - which is generally recognised as expressing the 
views of the armed forces - reported that a commando-style raid had been 
launched at about midnight.

But unconfirmed reports quoted navy sources as suggesting that the troops may 
have landed as early as 10pm on Thursday - about the time that when the 
Argentine Foreign Minister, Mr Nicanor Costa Mendez, was saying that the 
rapidly worsening quarrel with Britain was in the hands of the United Nations.

The Marines were said to have seized the airport near Port Stanley within the 
first two hours and planeloads of other soldiers were reportedly flown in.

The Argentines blacked out communications and the position of a group of 
British marines stationed on the main island was not clear.

The first indication that a serious invasion attempt was under way came with 
reports suggesting that the Argentines had dispatched almost all their fleet to 
the South Atlantic. "Everything that can float is out there," said one defence 
source.

Heavy military activity was also reported on shore during Thursday, 
particularly at the air force's main transport group base at El Palomar, near 
the north-western industrial city of Cordoba.

From there, it was suggested, crack troops had been moved to Atlantic coast 
ports and air bases near Rio Gallegos and Comodoro Rivadavia, well in the south 
of the federal capital and roughly in line with the Falklands.

Military sources also said that the Argentines had at least six ships in the 
region of the South Georgias including the former British aircraft carrier, The 
25th of May. The fleet sailing to the trouble zone was said to be under the 
command of Rear Admiral Wallara.

The flotilla near the South Georgias - the centre of increasing tension as the 
dispute worsened through the course of this week - included two French-built 
missile corvettes, Drummond and Granville, perhaps three destroyers, a 
submarine and Argentina's only large tanker supply ship.

Diplomatic sources here suggest that the British decision to send the 
nuclear-powered submarine, Superb, and other warships to the area may have 
persuaded the Argentine military of the need to go for a pre-emptive strike 
before reinforcements reached the zone.

The immediate indications were that the Argentine Government intends the 
takeover to be permanent and not just a demonstration of power or a brusque 
negotiating tactic designed to push London into making concessions during 
future negotiations over the sovereignty of the islands.

They have been under British rule since they were occupied by British troops 
in 1833.

Diplomatic sources think that Buenos Aires's attitude in future talks with the 
British will be that the discussions should primarily be about the orderly 
transfer of power.

President Galtieri, in a celebratory speech, said that the decision to seize 
the islands had arisen from "the necessity to put an end to the evasions of 
Great Britain in order to perpetuate its dominion over the islands and the zone 
of influence".

Argentina would not go back on its occupation of the islands because of 
threats from Britain.

The Government's first statement - in which it claimed already to have 
returned the Falklands to Argentine rule - spoke of Argentine citizens having 
to make an "extreme sacrifice in carrying out the objectives we have imposed 
upon ourselves".

This statement also alluded to Argentine troops "in combat" to recover the 
islands.

In Buenos Aires, where curiously, two popular weekly magazines had published 
long "hypothetical" reports of how an Argentine occupation of the Falkland 
Islands might have been achieved this week, the initial reaction to the news 
was generally subdued.

However, this rapidly gave way to patriotic fervour - there was a 
demonstration in the city's central square, the Poazode Mayo, and calls for 
president Leopoldo Galtieri to appear. Taxis bearing the national flag moved in 
columns around the streets of the city, with their drivers tooting their horns 
with joy.
 