
And so, once again, Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> 
stand on the brink. For them, Gabriel Batistuta’s two goals against Mexico in 
the 1993 Copa America final have come to seem an awful long time ago. Since 
then they’ve won five Under-20 World Cups and two Olympic golds but no senior 
trophies.

How Latino fans at the Copa América stuck it to Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/25/latino-fans-copa-america-donald-trump>
After defeat in a World Cup final and three Copa America finals (and a 
Confederations Cup final), Argentina are once again one game from ending their 
trophy drought. Fail to beatChile <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile> 
in East Rutherford on Sunday night at 8pm ET, Diego Maradona has already said, 
and this side shouldn’t bother going home.

It wasn’t a helpful comment, nor one with much perspective, but it did capture 
a mood. It’s not just frustration at the repeated near misses, or the fact that 
Uruguay in 2011 went past Argentina as the most successful side in Copa America 
history, that provides a sense of urgency. There hasn’t been an Under-20 World 
Cup success since 2005.

The river of talent is no longer in spate and the great generation of Lionel 
Messi <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi>, Sergio Agüero and 
Angel Di Maria, veterans of the Olympic success of 2008, will all be over 30 by 
the time of the next World Cup.

This additional Copa America has come as an extremely useful bonus. “I don’t 
know if this is a last chance,” said Messi, “but we have to take this new 
opportunity and grab it as though it is. This is the fourth final I’ve played 
with the national team and I would like some day to change history and be a 
champion.”

That’s why Argentina from the start have been taking the tournament seriously, 
unlike, say Brazil, who left Neymar out so he can focus on the Olympics, and 
Uruguay, whose coach Oscar Washington Tabarez has been sceptical about its 
validity. Even the Conmebol president Alejando Dominguez, in confirming this 
week that Chile will represent South America at next year’s Confederations Cup, 
described this as a “one-off event” and said Chile remain Copa America 
champions until 2019. But if Argentina win on Sunday, few there will care.

Argentina have played some superb football in the tournament, scoring more 
than three goals on four occasions in a tournament for the first time since the 
legendaryAngels with Dirty Faces 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Angels-Dirty-Faces-Footballing-Argentina/dp/1409144437/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1466841458&sr=8-2&keywords=angels+with+dirty+faces>
 side of Omar Sivori, Humberto Maschio, Omar Orestes Corbatta and Antonio 
Angelillo lifted the 1957 Campeonato Sudamericano in Peru.

But the coach Gerardo Martino, desperate to regain some credibility after last 
year’s final when he was tactically out-thought by Jorge Sampaoli, is well 
aware that that will mean nothing unless Argentina win. “How we are judged will 
depend exclusively on the outcome of the final,” he said.

Last year’s final in Santiago seems far more relevant to Sunday’s clash than 
Argentina’s comfortable 2-1 victory over Chile at the beginning of the group 
stage.

The Chile that has blown away Panama, Mexico and Colombia in their last three 
games, scoring 13 goals in doing so, is not the tentative team that began the 
tournament having won only one of its previous six games.

What has happened over the past week or so has been remarkable, a team 
suddenly finding its bite and drive again. Doubts, though, remain over Juan 
Antonio Pizzi, who replaced Sampaoli in February. Sampaoli successfully stifled 
Argentina in last year’s final, moving Gary Medel into a left-sided role to 
shut down Lionel Messi. It’s not immediately clear that Pizzi is capable of the 
same sort of tactical masterplan.

There are clear similarities to last year, though, in Argentina’s injury 
problems, particularly on the left. Having missed the 2014 World Cup, Di Maria 
was forced off in the first half of that game; now he is on the brink of 
recovery. Ezequiel Lavezzi and Augusto Fernandez out, while both Nicolas Gaitan 
and the left-back Marcos Rojo are major doubts. That probably means Erik Lamela 
operating from the left with Lucas Biglia coming in to the centre of midfield.

There has been further disruption in the form Lionel Messi’s outburst in which 
he described the Argentinian Football Association, currently in the hands of a 
Fifa normalisation committee as it attempts to manage the aftermath of a 
botched election last year, as “a disaster” as he waited for another flight. He 
has since said it was “not the time” for such comments but he has promised he 
will make a full explanation after the final.

Chile will be without the midfielder Pablo Hernandez and the left-back Eugenio 
Mena while there are doubts over the midfielder Marcelo Diaz.

What they have, though, is a sudden sense of momentum, one wholly unexpected 
two weeks ago. Pizzi deserves credit for bringing the likes of José Pedro 
Fuenzalida and Edson Puch into the side, even if there must be scepticism about 
his claim to have deliberately delayed their promotion to aid the evolution of 
the group but Chile’s greatest strength is that, in contrast to what happened 
over the bulk of the last century, they have been inspired by the tournament. 
“In their minds,” said Pizzi, “they are convinced they are going to win. That 
mentality allows them to strive and to have the self-belief to succeed.”

Argentina, meanwhile, are still locked in a psychological battle with 
themselves.
 