
American home advantage counted for nothing against Lionel Messi’s brilliance 
as Argentina progressed serenely to the final of theCopa América 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa-america> Centenario, 4-0, in a match 
the favorites controlled from start to finish.

Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> will meet Chile or 
Colombia, who play in Chicago on Wednesday night. And they will fear neither in 
Sunday’s showpiece as they look to win a first major title since they claimed 
the Copa in 1993.

Messi’s goal from a stunning free-kick made him his country’s top goalscorer, 
his 55th goal taking him clear of Gabriel Batistuta’s total, and he added two 
assists in the game for good measure.

His head coach Gerardo Martino paid tribute to his striker, saying: “It makes 
me happy that Messi has surpassed the previous record of Bati, but knowing how 
he is, he is more happy for the team.


“It is very good that the best player in the world is also the leading scorer 
of the national team.”


The downside was that Ezequiel Lavezzi, Augusto Fernández and Marcos Rojo all 
suffered injuries during the victory. Lavezzi fractured his left elbow after 
tumbling over the advertising boards, while Fernández has a hamstring injury 
and Rojo a thigh strain.

A statement from the Argentinian FA said Fernandez “may not participate in the 
next game” but offered no timescale on Lavezzi’s and Rojo’s recoveries.

If Messi was busy meeting expectations, so, in their own ineffectual way, were 
the US. The perceived inconsistency in results under Jürgen Klinsmann is 
perhaps quite the reverse: in competitive games the US typically beat the sides 
you’d expect them to beat, but lose to higher-ranked opposition. As such, how 
deep they go into a major tournament is more about the luck of the draw than 
how they perform.

USA 0-4 Argentina: Copa América semi-final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/21/copa-america-usa-argentina-semi-final-latest-score>
Reaching the semi-final was a satisfactory outcome for the hosts, who now 
travel to Arizona for Saturday’s third-place match. And there is no shame in 
losing to an Argentina team that may currently be the best side on the planet; 
it certainly has the finest player wearing the captain’s armband.

Still, almost straight from the first whistle there was never any sense that 
Klinsmann’s men might subvert their underdog status, provide inspiration as 
well as perspiration and achieve something amazing. Never any sense that the US 
would be so organised, or so bloody-minded, or so propelled by the home crowd, 
that they would deliver 90 minutes of stunning overachievement. The US did 
manage something remarkable, though: they failed to muster a shot in the match, 
on or off target.

“Any time you play a big game against a team like that, one of the best teams 
in the world, you have to be on top of every little thing in a good way. For 90 
minutes. Today we weren’t able to do that,” said the midfielder Michael Bradley.

“As time goes on a little bit we can take a lot of positives from the 
tournament but it’s still a little too early for that,” he said. “You get to 
this point, nobody has the mentality that all of a sudden just because you get 
to the semifinal you’re playing with house money. It doesn’t work like that. 
The ideal was to take it another step farther and get into a final and we 
weren’t able to do that.”


In the Americans’ defense, the underdogs were under strength. A coach who has 
repeatedly questioned whether the standard of MLS is high enough to develop 
talent capable of beating the world’s best selected a starting XI with six 
MLS-based players.

Bobby Wood, Alejandro Bedoya, and perhaps most crucially, the midfield dynamo 
Jermaine Jones, were all suspended, their absences a blow given the inferior 
quality of their replacements and Klinsmann’s preference for a settled line-up 
in this tournament, even if tactically the side has oscillated between a 4-3-3 
and 4-4-2.

In came Kyle Beckerman, a solid shield for Real Salt Lake; another experienced 
MLS man, the winger Graham Zusi; and Chris Wondolowski, 33 years old but – as 
ever – in fine scoring form for the San Jose Earthquakes. Still, he is 
something of an avatar for the gap between MLS and top-level international 
competition, and here he was only notable for inadvertently enabling a stunning 
goal for the other side.

These were his most important minutes for the national team since his miss 
late in the second half of the 2014 World Cup game against Belgium, which the 
US ultimately lost after extra time. It was a traumatizing moment for one of 
the best finishers in the American game, even if it ended up being overshadowed 
by the positive narrative of Tim Howard’s goalkeeping heroics.

Opting against beginning with younger, faster but highly inexperienced choices 
in Christian Pulisic and Darlington Nagbe, it was a contentious act of faith in 
a veteran from the coach who infamously left the nation’s best-ever player, 
Landon Donovan, off the roster for the Brazil World Cup while selecting an 
almost untried 18-year-old, Julian Green.

How many chances, really, was Wondolowski ever likely to get on Tuesday? With 
Clint Dempsey also starting, 33-year-old strikers were tasked with exploiting 
perhaps Argentina’s only potential weakness, central defence. If that seemed 
worrying against such fluid and fast opponents, Dempsey at least entered the 
night in good form, with his teammates also exuding increasing levels of 
confidence.

After a flaccid opening-night loss to Colombia, the US got here by beating 
Costa Rica and Paraguay, then Ecuador in the quarter-finals, while Argentina 
battled to a 2-1 win over Chile then glided past Panama, Bolivia and Venezuela.

Messi, his pre-tournament back problems all but forgotten, entered the game 
with four goals in the Copa, including one in the 4-1 quarter-final win over 
Venezuela that was his 54th international strike, tying Batistuta’s record.

Though perhaps two-thirds of the crowd was clad in red, white and blue, 
judging by decibel level during the pre-match line-up announcement the 
Barcelona man was easily the most popular player in the arena.

It said something about the Americans’ stiff start and Argentina’s instant 
dominance that the opening goal only took three minutes and yet it felt like it 
was coming. Lavezzi was left free to connect with an impudent sand-wedge of a 
chip over the defence by Messi and looped a header over an inert Brad Guzan, 
his reactions slower than airplane wi-fi.

Some sharp interplay five minutes later led to a good chance for Messi, who 
shot over the bar. He then forced a save from Guzan after a barnstorming run 
through the core of the defence.

On his first start since the Gold Cup 11 months ago, Wondolowski’s sole 
memorable contribution in the first half was a 31st-minute foul for which he 
was yellow-carded, just outside the US’s penalty area, leading to Argentina’s 
second goal.

From the free kick, Messi bent his shot over the wall and beyond Guzan’s dive 
into the far top corner of the net. Not a bad way to stand alone as his 
country’s all-time top goalscorer.

There was no attempt at deception, no cluster of players standing around the 
ball threatening trickery. Everyone knew it would be Messi. It was striker 
versus goalkeeper, mano a mano. It was hard to fault Guzan’s positioning or 
dive; the shot was, quite simply, unstoppable.

Wondolowski was replaced by Pulisic at half time but the contest was finished 
four minutes after the restart. Gonzalo Higuaín stole behind the back line and 
connected with a cross, but though Guzan saved the shot, the forward scored on 
the rebound.

“The game didn’t start the way we wanted to, the early goal, that was really 
tough for us and once they got going it was really hard to stop,” Beckerman 
said.

Despite the spirited running of Gyasi Zardes, Argentina continued to look the 
more likely side to score, and Messi forced a decent low save from Guzan inside 
the last ten minutes. The goalkeeper was powerless to stop the fourth in the 
86th minute, however, as Messi gorged on a defensive blunder and crossed to 
give Higuaín an easy finish.


Without the thrill of a surprise result, at least there was pleasure for 
neutrals in the predictable: Messi being Messi.
 