
When I was a boy, I used to play, swim and fish by, in and on the waters of 
the River Loddon where it flowed through Twyford, between Reading and 
Maidenhead. It was the Alf the sacred river of my childhood and adolescence, 
for those who remember their Coleridge.

In all those years, I never gave a thought to where its easy, streamy waters, 
full of chub, perch, roach, bleak, gudgeon, the odd barbel, the odder pike and 
the oddest trout, actually came from. So it was with wonder I stood on the bank 
above some watercress beds, a secret world with traffic on the M3 hurtling by 
just beyond it, and looked on its source - four or five springs of limpid 
liquid simply bubbling out of the ground among the dense, vivid, livid green 
cress.

There have been watercress beds here since time immemorial, explained Shaun 
Brown. The original beds may have been created by monks at an abbey nearby. 
Shaun's family had been working them for the last 100 years. The techniques 
hadn't changed much in that time. The beds are divided into squares by channels 
down which the water runs off, so they can be cut in rotation, section by 
section.

"There are two growing seasons," he explained. "We don't really start cutting 
until February. April and May are the best months. In June, we dig the beds out 
and reseed them with seed we've kept from the last season, so the Loddon 
watercress is the same it's always been. Then there's a second season running 
from July to September. We can cut it every six weeks."

"What's that?" I said, pointing to a large, triangular wooden frame lying on 
top of one of the sections.

"A patter."

"A patter?"

"For patting down the roots and stalks of the watercress into the silt so 
it'll grow again. Some growers use rollers, but we find this works, so why 
change it?"

There are only two threats to watercress, apparently - weather and ducks. 
"When it's frosty, we can't start picking until the frost has gone, or the 
leaves will turn black. And ducks come in to feed on the shrimps and pull up 
the watercress by the roots to get at them. So we discourage ducks." I didn't 
inquire how.

Ducks and weather aside, the process is disarmingly simple. The cut watercress 
is put into plastic crates and taken back to the packing station, a shed in the 
garden. There they're "bunched", the stalks trimmed by the simple but effective 
method of tearing them off, and packed into polystyrene boxes ready for 
delivery.

It seems almost incredible to me that a few watercress beds - the Browns have 
four - can provide a family with a healthy living in this age. Mind you, 
managing them is pretty demanding. Shaun gets up at first light every day, and 
gets back home at about 8pm. His wife, Alison, looks after the marketing side 
of things, and his parents, Angela and Arthur (pictured above), help out at the 
farmers' markets. Still, they all look remarkably hale and hearty on this 
punishing schedule.

There are other, larger watercress producers, but I don't think it's just my 
boyhood nostalgia that makes me find the Loddon watercress tastier, more 
minerally, with a better balance of mustardy pepperiness than cress from other 
rivers, and certainly those from other European countries that prop up the 
salad section of our supermarkets.

The Browns also make a mean watercress soup and a watercress sauce that would 
do with fish or pasta. But how does Shaun eat his? "A watercress and Marmite 
sandwich. It's great. And healthy. Don't forget, ounce for ounce, there's more 
vitamin C in watercress than an orange, more iron than spinach, and more 
calcium than milk. Watercress is a superfood. That's what it is."

Where to get it

Brown's Mapleleaf watercress

From the gate at Parrots, Greywell Road, Mapledurwell, Basingstoke, Hants , 
01256 464221. Email:mapleleafwcress@aol.com <mailto:mapleleafwcress@aol.com>. 
Also from the following farmers' markets: Alton, Farnham, Guildford, Newbury, 
Petersfield, Purley, Reading, Selsey, Winchester and Windsor
 