

Record of a tragedy ... detail from Arshile Gorky's The Artist and his Mother 
(1926 - 36)

The artist Arshile Gorky was a survivor of a genocide that officially didn't 
happen. To this day, the government of Turkey denies that in the dying days of 
the Ottoman Empire in 1915 to 1918, the Armenian population of Turkey was 
deliberately eradicated. Yet there is ample evidence of what happened. There 
are written eyewitness accounts, there are photographs - and there is Gorky's 
paintingThe Artist and his Mother 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/portrait/story/0,11109,740398,00.html> (1926 - 36).

Can a painting be historical evidence? Can it "prove" something happened? 
Those who still deny the historical reality of the Armenian genocide are 
capable of ignoring or explaining away photographs of emaciated bodies in 
heaps, photographs that back up contemporary written evidence that starvation 
was a key element in the pogrom. Armenian men were shot dead in their tens of 
thousands. Women and children were driven on forced marches towards Syria and 
Iraq without food or water, in a herding intended to kill. At least one million 
people were massacred.

Gorky's family were peasants who lived beside Lake Van. In 1915, when he was 
12, the Armenian ordeal began - for him a grim adventure of siege, flight, and 
hunger. His mother Shushan died of malnutrition in March 1918 after giving 
every scrap of bread to her children. Gorky reached America in 1920 and went on 
to become a great artist, one of the generation that created abstract 
expressionism. His two versions of his memory picture The Artist and his Mother 
- one is in theWhitney Museum <http://www.whitney.org/> in New York, the other 
inWashington's National Gallery <http://www.nga.gov/> - are based on a 
photograph of the young Gorky with his mother.

If all other evidence of the fate of Armenians in Turkey in 1915 - 18 were to 
vanish, this moving image would endure as testimony to what happened. You know, 
looking at it, that it records a tragedy. It is a painting of distance and 
loss: the artist meditates on the distance history has imposed between him and 
the place he came from, him and the child he was. There's a dry hardness to the 
figures that's at odds with his natural grace as a painter - it communicates 
his sense of remoteness. His mother is frozen forever in his photographic 
memory. You want to know the story: you find out about the painting and 
discover the horrifying facts. The victims of this genocide still haven't been 
properly acknowledged. But Gorky gave at least one of them a face. How can the 
government of Turkey look Gorky's mother in the eye and stilldeny the facts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/oct/12/turkey.comment>?
 