
Jane Rogers' vision of a world crippled by biological terrorism, The Testament 
of Jessie Lamb, has won the UK's top prize for science fiction, theArthur C 
Clarke award <http://www.clarkeaward.com/>.

Published by tiny Scottish independent press Sandstone, Rogers' novel – 
narrated by a teenager – waslonglisted for last year's Man Booker prize 
<http://www.themanbookerprize.com/perspective/articles/1519> but missed out on 
a shortlist place. Now it has beaten some of the biggest names in science 
fiction, including China Miéville, Charles Stross, Greg Bear and Sheri S 
Tepper, to take the 2012 Arthur C Clarke award. Rogers has previously won the 
Somerset Maugham award and been a runner-up for the Guardian fiction prize, but 
The Testament of Jessie Lamb is her first venture into science fiction.

"It wasn't an obvious Arthur C Clarke winner – it's not from a science fiction 
publisher but from a small Scottish press. But I don't think anyone was 
surprised it was nominated. It really is a very good book and it has found a 
real audience in the science fiction readership," said the prize's director Tom 
Hunter. "It offers a route into dealing with quite serious issues, about 
science, about maternity and about making choices."

Taking place in a world in which a deadly virus, Maternal Death Syndrome, 
affects all pregnant women, putting the future of the human race in jeopardy, 
The Testament of Jessie Lamb is the story of one 16-year-old who decides she 
wants to save humanity. She volunteers for a programme in which she will be 
injected with an immune embryo, but also put into a coma from which she will 
not recover. Her parents object, and imprison her.

"It's frighteningly plausible," said Hunter, who compared the novel to 
Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale, which won the inaugural Clarke award. 
"The Handmaid's Tale is set further in the future but there are lots of 
concerns the two books share."

This year's Clarke prize was marred by criticism from the eminent science 
fiction author Christopher Priest 
<http://www.christopher-priest.co.uk/journal/1077/hull-0-scunthorpe-3/>, who 
slated the six titles chosen for the shortlist as "dreadful" and called the 
judges "incompetent". Rogers' novel, he said, was the only worthy one in the 
lineup.

"Ms Rogers is a successful and intelligent writer from what the SF world calls 
the 'mainstream'. Her venture into speculative fiction gave her career an 
unexpected setback, in that none of the trade publishers would accept it. It 
eventually appeared from Sandstone, a tiny indie publisher based in Dingwall, 
Ross-shire. It was quickly recognised by many commentators in the SF community 
as a work of real interest, and to the credit of the judges (the only one they 
deserve) it has made it to the shortlist," said Priest. "If this alone 
encourages Ms Rogers to try her hand at more speculative fiction in future then 
the whole business has been justified. It is not to my mind a wholly achieved 
novel: it is written with real style, excellent characterisation and a lot of 
genuine emotion, but to be fully realised as a work of speculative fiction it 
needs a wider canvas, a sense that larger events are mounting in the 
background. However, it deserves its place on the Clarke shortlist, and if 
things go on as they are at present it ought to win."

But Hunter said the judges' decision to award the prize to Rogers was 
"absolutely nothing to do" with Priest's opinion. "It will look great on the 
list of former winners – it absolutely makes sense there," he said. "It's a 
fantastic book [and] a real genuine world-of-mouth success story." Hunter paid 
tribute to this year's judges, Juliet E McKenna, Martin Lewis, Phil Nanson, 
Nickianne Moody, Rob Grant and chair Andrew M Butler, for doing "a really good 
job, which gets harder every year".
 