
The massive copperplate printing press was commissioned in 1900 to print the 
3ft x 2ft etchings of the Welsh artist Frank Brangwyn, who was extremely 
popular at the turn of the century. It's a mangle-type press, which generates 
enormous pressure - pressing damp paper into the etched copperplate, to pick 
out the ink (the same process that's used to print bank notes). It was 
engineered in London's East End by Hughes and Kimber, who were among the finest 
etchings press manufacturers in the world. The fineness of adjustment and the 
beautiful balance and engineering make it a delight to work with. The shelves 
behind are full of pigments and oils to make the etching inks; I make a lot of 
my own inks, grinding them in myself.

Hanging up above is an etching on stainless steel of Oranmore Castle, in 
Galway Bay, a favourite place of mine. It's one of 20 of my images of the 
British coastline that make up a frieze on the outside of the new headquarters 
of Lazards Bank in Stratton Street behind Green Park underground in Piccadilly, 
London. I've long been drawn to the west coast of the British archipelago. It 
is also the west coast not only of Europe but of Asia. It is a confrontation 
with 3,000 miles of the Atlantic. Next year the Royal Academy of Arts is 
publishing a book of my etchings of the coast of the British Isles, along with 
15 new poems by the Scottish writer Douglas Dunn.

The studio is on the ground floor of a four-storey former leather warehouse in 
the heart of the old leather district in Bermondsey (Tanner Street, Morocco 
Street), south London. I live on the top two floors. The beauty of living above 
the shop is that if I wake up at four in the morning, I can start work straight 
away. I get up early, and often work listening to Radio 4 or the World Service. 
I like the studio being very private: the windows are blocked up so no one can 
see me in here. The floor above has good windows, and on the top floor there's 
skylit north light, which is incredibly good for painting and watercolouring.
 