
Jorinde Voigt <http://jorindevoigt.com/>'s drawings and collages have the 
visual appeal of sheet music or maps: a sense of order and the beauty of 
abstract forms. Working systematically over huge pieces of paper, she layers 
fine point pen lines – with feathery slanting script and topped with arrows – 
in intricate networks of fans, arcs and ripples. From a distance the results 
resemble spinning ribbons, dandelion clocks or whirring propellers. Up close 
they could be complex diagrams of sound waves or genetic code, albeit 
painstakingly hand-realised ones.

In fact, this rising German star does conceive her drawings like musical 
scores or algorithms. Her spiralling lines and arrows are always on the move, 
ebbing and flowing across the page. Africa, a series of drawings created during 
a trip to the isle of Lamu near Kenya, features annotations on red and blue 
graph paper from locally produced stationary. "Zions Systems Job Time Sheet" 
reads the print above one page on which Voigt has created a hectic 
constellation of black and red arrows.

The tension between the tick-tock of workaday order and apparent randomness 
recalls German art iconHanne Darboven 
<http://www.camdenartscentre.org/exhibitions/?id=101222>'s repeating scribbles 
in calendars and diaries. Where Darboven's inscriptions are punishingly uniform 
and meaningless, the schema Voigt lays down allow her to freely respond to 
shifting phenomena.

The unique system that governs how Voigt creates her images can also seem like 
algebra. "The overall space is divided by three by means of three changes in 
counting," reads one cryptic line from a text accompanying Intercontinental II, 
a work that responds to airports. Yet all the drawings speak of something 
slippery and volatile.

Her series Horizon <http://jorindevoigt.com/blog/?p=2240> is a 
rainbow-coloured reminder that even the most apparently constant thing in the 
world changes depending on how we look at it. Here she takes the timeless guide 
for orienting ourselves, the horizon line, and draws it not as a stable 
horizontal, but as it might be experienced on the move: doing a somersault 
maybe, or a pirouette. Composed of stacked juddery crayon lines in pinks, 
oranges and blues, the results suggest a jumble of the sonic, sensory and 
solid, like vibrating harp-strings, mineral strata or a head-rush.

Why we like her: For Königliche Gartenakademie Berlin. These collages made 
with coloured paper and ink look like maps of newly discovered lands: blood red 
archipelagos or mauve and blue continents float against a sea of white. Each 
work records the artist's observations of different trees, from their outlines 
glimpsed at a distance to the colours of their leaves and branches.

A different beat: Voigt trained to be a cellist until the age of 18 and she 
cites the intense concentration demanded by her musical education as the basis 
of her art. Today, when it comes to making drawings, techno is her sound of 
choice.

Where can I see her? At Lisson Gallery <http://www.lissongallery.com>, London 
to 28 April.
 