
John Berger <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/john-berger> is 90. An 
excellent age. In his presence, however, age seems utterly irrelevant. This is 
not just because John seems to live in a perpetual present, forever scanning 
the world around him with as much intensity as he might ever scan the world 
within – and therefore seems to live without a trace of nostalgia – but also 
because he is full of excitement and curiosity about the future.

The story of my encounters with him begins before I was born. John taught art 
to my mother. She was a teenager and he was only a few years older. It was 
probably for no more than a few months, a temporary job in a school in north 
London. Yet somehow, throughout my childhood, his name floated in my 
consciousness, conjuring up the image of a dashing young soul, handsome, 
charming, militant and dedicated to the making of art. At 21, already an 
inspiring teacher.

His way of expressing ideas and the ideas themselves felt both brand new and 
yet obvious

The next moment that he came sharply into focus for me was with his book – and 
the television series that it emerged from –Ways of Seeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/sep/07/ways-seeing-berger-tv-programme-british>
. His way of expressing ideas – pithy, plain language, bold – and, above all, 
the ideas themselves that he shaped with such clarity, had the startling effect 
of feeling both brand new and yet obvious, creating a feeling of recognition. 
Of course, of course, we all thought; that is how it is; it’s just that we 
hadn’t found the words for it before.

No one had found the words for it before.

Some years later, sitting in Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tilda-swinton>’s bedroom, surrounded by piles 
of books and clothes – it may have been in the midst of dissection of part of 
my screenplay forOrlando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jul/03/featuresreviews.guardianreview10>
 – she pulled out her copy ofWays of Seeing in order to read out one particular 
sentence to me. It was a sentence with which I was familiar but which bore 
repetition.

“Men look at women. Women watch themselves being looked at.”

I was in the process of looking at her, I was already the eyes of the camera 
in our collaboration. She was looking at herself being looked at by me. We 
became conspirators in the conceptual field so neatly laid out by John. Except 
that I was a woman.

After I had finished my journey through the epic process of making Orlando and 
found myself, to my surprise, wanting to be looked at, as a woman in motion – 
dancing – I madeThe Tango Lesson. After its release in France, somewhere near 
the beginning of a long run in a cinema in Montparnasse, I received, out of the 
blue, a handwritten letter from John.

John Berger <https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-berger> had written to me 
saying that he liked my film. But he didn’t use the word “like”. He used long, 
flowing sentences and short staccato ones expressing with the utmost generosity 
and precision the experience he had had while watching the film. If I remember 
correctly, what struck him in particular was its exploration of the nature of 
relationship; the intimate space existing in the relatedness of all people and 
all things, the dance of “I and Thou”. The feeling when receiving and reading 
his letter was exactly that: it was he who was creating a space, the space of 
relatedness, in which what I had given out to the world, not knowing where it 
would land, had landed in him. He had received it. He had thought about it. He 
had made the effort to pick up his pen and write a letter to me. The film had 
become a conversation.

He reminds us how to think about Charlie Chaplin, how to listen to songs, how 
to remember that everything matters

This was the beginning of a conversation with John that has continued to this 
day. I still can hardly believe my good fortune that I exist somewhere in his 
field of vision, among the many who know and admire him, either close or far.

And now? His books keep coming, the essays keep appearing in newspapers and 
magazines. He reminds us how to think aboutCharlie Chaplin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charliechaplin>, how to listen to songs, how 
to rage about prisons, how to remember that everything matters. Not just big 
politics, or big ideas, not just paintings or novels, but also the meal put on 
the table, the glass of wine shared; the sweetness in a bear hug, the 
complicity in a chuckle, the pleasures of a shared rage against injustice.

John the encourager, John the enthusiast, John the true critic, John the 
friend. John at 90 or at any ageless age. Are we not blessed?

• A Jar of Wild Flowers: Essays in Celebration of John Berger, edited by 
Yasmin Gunaratnam and Amarjit Chandan, is published by Zed. There are a number 
of events in November to mark John Berger’s 90th birthday. Details:zedbooks.net 
<https://www.zedbooks.net/events/>
 