
'How jealous are you?' On the first day of rehearsals for The Winter's Tale - 
a play fueled by jealousy -the director, Greg Doran, puts this question to the 
company. It's meant as a light-hearted ice-breaker, but since Greg is my 
partner I have to be careful how I answer. In fact, as we jot down responses to 
the Cosmopolitan-type questionnaire which he reads out - viz. 'If you found 
your lover in bed with someone else, would you (a) kill them, (b) kill 
yourself, (c) join in? - I score quite low. I'm not a particularly jealous man 
apparently. Greg seems rather disappointed.

 Mind you, the questionnaire concerns sexual jealousy. Were it about 
professional jealousy my score might shoot off the Richter Scale - particularly 
as a younger actor. Then I was convinced that Simon Callow was having my career 
and there was little point in continuing. Eventually we flourished in different 
directions, thank God, and now enjoy one another's work, but I'll never forget 
the terrible sensations that consumed me whenever I saw his name. (Simon, I 
hereby apologise for the daily mutilations which you unknowingly suffered at my 
hands). Jealousy is an exhausting, insatiable feeling, both tiny and huge, 
somewhere between an itch and a fever. A kind of hunger, a kind of despair. A 
fear, a dread, a murderousness.

 So although it's sexual jealousy that torments Leontes in Winter's Tale, I'm 
confident I have some rich personal experience to bring to the part. All the 
same, there is a problem. A big problem. One that has taxed not only every 
actor and director who has tackled the play, but countless scholars, audiences 
and other Bard-watchers over the centuries. What causes Leontes's jealousy? His 
life seems terrific. He's the king of a prosperous country, happily married to 
a good woman, Hermione, with one child, another on the way, and enjoying a 
reunion with his boyhood friend, Polixenes. But then - bang ! Out of the blue 
and with no evidence, he decides Hermione is screwing Polixenes, and, ignoring 
all denials, destroys everything in sight. I find his violence - a kind of 
domestic violence - more shocking than that of other Shakespeare characters 
I've played. At least Richard III is driven by ambition for the crown, Shylock 
and Titus by revenge. But Leontes's violence seems motiveless. This has 
affected his reputation, and he is sometimes branded with crude labels: wicked 
king, mad tyrant, fairy-tale monster.

 Yet the writing of Leontes feels very particular, very personal; as if 
Shakespeare has experienced, or witnessed, the same terrible brainstorm. There 
are powerful soliloquies, full of raw, jagged thoughts, taking you right inside 
Leontes's head, a visceral den awash with sexual juices and sexual horror 
(wives are 'sluiced,' are 'slippery'). Rather than nudging us to view Leontes 
as the evil king of fairy tales, Shakespeare fills the text with references to 
illness. He seems not to be describing just common-or-garden jealousy, but 
something much, much sicker. What though? As actors are assigned research 
projects for rehearsals - Alex Gilbreath (Hermione) goes off to pregnancy 
classes, Emily Bruni (Mamillius) to study seven-year-old boys - I attempt to 
put Leontes on the couch, into the psychiatrist's chair, by asking different 
experts in mental dis-order to diagnose his case. First off is Dr Mark Doran, a 
consultant neurologist (and Greg's brother). A stocky, boyish, hugely energetic 
character, Mark doesn't know the play, but from the symptoms I describe, 
wonders if Leontes is schizophrenic. The man's overwhelming delusions, his 
tendency to be uncontrollable one moment, almost comatose the next (he's 
weirdly inactive during Hermione's trial), these fit the schizophrenic.

 My next expert offers a startlingly opposite view: Leontes is normal. 
'Ordinary people will all take you to the most ghastly places in their minds,' 
comments psycho-analyst Helen Taylor Robinson, black-haired, bright-eyed, 
brimming with appetite for this investigation. Unique among the people I 
interview, she knows the play, having studied English before psychology. As she 
talks about a sense of loss driving Leontes to his ferocious behaviour, I 
realise she's not so much analysing Leontes as Shakespeare. The Winter's Tale 
is one of the last plays, and these are thought to be more autobiographical 
than the rest. But although I can also hear Shakespeare's voice clearly in the 
writing of Leontes, I resist viewing the part as a man nearing the end of his 
life, tired, angry and bitter.

 'Is he a manic depressive perhaps?' muses psychiatrist Dr Anthony Bateman, a 
gaunt but amiable chap who arrives for our meeting clad in motorcyclist's gear. 
As before, Leontes's symptoms seem to suit this diagnosis: his thoughts dance; 
there's a speediness, almost an exhilaration to his home-wrecking; he stops 
sleeping, has brief moments of awareness, of sorrow, and then he's off again.

 Schizophrenic? Wracked by a sense of loss? Manic depressive? I still don't 
know which of these fit Leontes, still can't explain him, although I begin to 
feel him invading me in rehearsals. He makes sense to my flesh, if not my 
braincells. Shakespeare is inviting me into a very dark place, a place I like 
going. The venom of Leontes's speeches has a sweet, addictive taste. It excites 
and horrifies.

 We try an experiment: staging Leontes's waking dreams. Since the man is 
driven by his sexually inflamed view of the world, maybe the audience should 
see it too? Greg and our choreographer Sian Williams (of the Kosh Dance 
Company) invite me to contribute to these sessions. It's a unique opportunity 
for an actor. Stage the inside of your character's head. (Will I get a credit? 
'Technical adviser to Mr Sher's hallucinations: himself.') Our production is 
set in the early 1900s, a time of intense sexual repression, so Leontes's 
dreams take shape with corsets used as harnesses and other strange, aggressive 
couplings. As Greg notices me becoming increasingly attached to these 
sequences, he warns that they might not make it into the actual show: they 
might be too much. Never mind. They exist in my brain now - and in my 
sketchbook - and have alerted me to a note of prurience in Leontes's language; 
his disgust sometimes sounds like desire.

 On the research trail again, I meet Maria Ronn of the Maudsley Hospital. 
Don't know what I expected of a professor of psychiatry, but Maria is a 
surprise: small, young and Spanish. She radiates enthusiasm and curiosity ('Do 
you, pardon my asking, suffer from stage fright?'), and tackles Leontes's case 
with great certainty. He's unlikely to be schizophrenic - 'he simply wouldn't 
be functioning, he'd be too delapidated' - and while he might have elements of 
manic depression, she's convinced he classically fits a condition known as 
'morbid jealousy' or "psychotic jealousy". Descending out of the blue, and 
mostly affecting men, the dominant symptom is a delusion that the patient's 
partner is betraying him. It causes wildly obsessive behaviour (frantically 
searching for clues, for smells and stains on clothes or bed-linen, 
misinterpreting every blush, every slip of the tongue, hiring detectives and 
lawyers) as well as gruesome visions and fantasies, often on themes of 
poisoning and the paternity of children - exactly as in the play. These 
frequently lead to paroxysms of rage and extreme violence, even murder, 
followed by periods of intense remorse. Maria mentions that morbid jealousy can 
be a side-effect of two other diseases: Parkinson's and alcoholism. I imagine 
Greg's face if, at the next rehearsal, I start playing Leontes with either a 
boozer's slur or the distinctive shake of Parkinson's. No, there's probably no 
way of explicitly demonstrating the condition, other than by playing the text. 
It's amazing. Every symptom is there. I'm absolutely convinced that Shakespeare 
had some first-hand experience of this rare illness.

 Knowing about morbid jealousy gives me new conviction in the role. It feeds a 
need - something which is perhaps invisible to an audience, but crucial - my 
own trust in the script. Maybe it's the writer in me trying to challenge the 
greatest of them all. C'mon Will, I'm not sure you've given Leontes proper 
motivation here. In fact, what seemed like a rather fantastical creation by 
Shakespeare is revealed to be an utterly realistic one.

 My final piece of research comes from an unexpected source: a visit to 
Buckingham Palace. In rehearsals, we've been watching documentaries about the 
royal family to study the etiquette, but now, invited to Prince Charles' 50th 
birthday party, I get a close-up view of the real thing. Most fascinating is 
the small army of private secretaries, equerries and aides who, via 
walkie-talkies, discreet commands, or their own graceful body movements, 
facilitate a route through the crowds of guests, making it possible for the 
royals to perambulate casually, chatting to some of us as they go. How 
extraordinary it must be to have this amount of support, of protection - of 
cushioning - around you. What would it be like if you were ill, like Leontes? 
The illness might have more room to breathe, to fester, to get worse. The pain 
might become quite dreamlike: you're suffering and yet people still bow and 
curtsy, agree with everything you say, laugh readily at your jokes. The present 
royal family has experienced its own traumas, and there must have been times 
when it felt most peculiar to host events like this, but what is it like if 
you're really in trouble? What was it like for George III as his madness grew, 
or for Victoria when Albert's death induced something far worse than grief? 
What is it like for Leontes? That's the real task: to absorb all this research, 
to convert it into flesh and blood. It's a funny job - playing at kings, at 
madmen. Luckily there's always ordinary life to keep you sane yourself. We have 
a new domestic help these days, a kind-faced Portuguese lady called Rosinda who 
hardly speaks English. The other morning I was practising lines, pacing wildly 
round my study, morbid jealousy unleashed, when I spotted her in the doorway, 
eyes wide with shock. 'I'm just. . . just pretending,' I spluttered, 'I'm an 
actor!' (I don't think she knows this.) She frowned and hurried upstairs, while 
I caught sight of myself in a mirror, blushed and laughed. Now that's something 
Leontes definitely wouldn't do.

 The Winter's Tale is at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford, until March 
4
 