
How about this for an eye-opening claim: “arts coverage in all British 
newspapers breaches suicide reporting guidelines”.

Two academics carried out an analysis of arts reviews of recent UK exhibitions 
of the work of four artists who died by suicide: Van Gogh, Mark Rothko, Ernst 
Ludwig Kirchner andArshile Gorky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/arshile-gorky>.

They found that 100% of the 68 articles that mentioned their deaths had 
breached media guidelines by omitting information on sources of support for 
people affected by suicide.

Additionally, they found that 38% provided explicit descriptions of the 
suicide method; 27% romanticised or glorified the suicide; 21% used 
inappropriate language (such as “a successful suicide attempt” or “to commit 
suicide”); and 7% employed simplistic explanations for suicide triggers.

The academics, Alexandra Pitman and Fiona Stevenson, determined that the 
reviewers had failed to adhere to the recommendations in media guidelines 
developed by the Samaritans, MediaWise Trust and the former PCC (now Ipso).

Their paper, “Suicide reporting within British newspapers’ arts coverage: 
content analysis of adherence to media guidelines”,can be found here in pdf 
format <http://psycontent.metapress.com/content/q01k8804025k28vr/fulltext.pdf>. 

Pitman, a research psychiatrist at UCL, emailed me to explain the thinking 
behind their decision to analyse the content of arts, rather than news, 
reporting of suicide:

“We felt that arts content was an area of journalism in which the suicides of 
arts or entertainment celebrities, both contemporary and historical, may be 
reported and disseminated widely, but where messages about sensitive reporting 
of suicide may not have penetrated.

The recent reporting on the suicide of Robin Williams is one such example. 
Given the evidence that irresponsible media portrayals of suicide can promote 
copycat suicide attempts, particularly in young and vulnerable people, we hoped 
that all journalists would be aware of the importance of following media 
guidelines.

This research suggests that there is great scope to improve the training of 
arts journalists to address their awareness of media guidelines on the 
reporting of suicide, and the potential harmful effects of irresponsible 
reporting”.

Here are a couple of examples that Pitman feels illustrate what she and her 
colleague mean by the glorification or romanticising of suicide. Both are drawn 
from reviews in theSunday Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> 
by Waldemar Januszczak:

“Rothko’s problem… is the dark myth that he allowed to emerge around him while 
he was alive… This tremulous Rothko story line presents him as the Melancholy 
Martyr of Modernism, a deeply pessimistic presence whose painted fogs sag, 
paradoxically, with tons of heavyweight spirituality…His suicide topped it all 
off splendidly.I am not embarrassed to admit that this, more or less, is how I 
too have always understood him. We all did.”

That was on 28 September 2008, and then there was this about Van Gogh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/van-gogh> on 20 September 2009:

“My favourite letter was written on July 19 1888 in Arles: ‘We take death to 
go to a star…. To die quietly of old age would be to go there on foot” . It’s 
an argument for suicide. And it surely explains his own”.
 