
Storytelling is part of most people’s lives, almost from the moment we can 
understand language at all. Family tales, fairy stories, popular history, news 
and gossip are integral parts of human life. When I taught literature at 
University College London I was lucky enough to be invited to sit in the Senior 
Common Room bar with the artists from the Slade School of Art. I started to 
think about the fact that they worked with concrete materials – clay, stone, 
paint, film – whereas what I work with is the language we also use to conduct 
our daily lives.

In Amsterdam recently I had the great pleasure of talking with Edmund de Waal 
about how – and how early in his life – he understood that clay was what he 
would work with. Why do some of us need to make works of art? How do we choose 
what we work with? What effect does the shift from dailiness to art have on us 
as writers and readers?

I remember first noticing that the written word had a form that needed to be 
understood and thought about. Many of my generation of British children will 
have grown up with the series of school reading books,The Radiant Way, in which 
there is the unforgettable sequence of words: “Pat can sing. Pat sing to 
Mother. Sing to Mother Pat. Mother sing to Pat.” And so on. We discover the 
“th”, the “ng” which are not part of the sounded out phrases we are first 
taught. We discover the written word as opposed to the spoken word.

I think some writers become writers because they need stories, characters, 
other worlds. But there are those – and I have very slowly come to see that I 
am one of them – who think about words as painters think about paint. (Most 
writers have elements of both of course.) And yet, words retain their 
doubleness – their dailiness, their utilitarian ordinariness, and their work in 
poems and other works of art.

It is interesting to read what writers have written about the inability to 
write. One of the most startling and imaginative descriptions of this state is 
Hugo von Hofmannsthal’s story, “The Letter of Lord Chandos”, written in 1902. 
In this story the imaginary Lord Chandos writes to his friend Francis Bacon to 
say that he has completely lost the ability to put ideas into written language. 
Chandos tells Bacon that he can no longer grasp the ideas of a tract he wrote 
at the age of 23 “as a familiar image made up of connected words, but now I can 
comprehend it only word by word … ” Nevertheless he is able to tell Bacon of 
his experience of having given orders for rat poison to be strewn in the milk 
cellar of one of his farms. He can describe the “sharp sweet smell” of the 
poison, the screams and struggles of the rats, when he has lost the capacity to 
generalise – he does not use this word or write of it in this way. It is an 
extraordinary essay, making its readers rethink the very nature of the relation 
between language and the world of things.

Ernst Gombrich, in his essay “Image and Word in Twentieth-Century Art” touches 
on the gap between words and things from a different angle. He writes of 
paintings and sculptures where the artist has deliberately made a distance 
between words and things –Magritte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/magritte>, for instance, in The Key 
to Dreams, captioning a handbag as “le ciel” (sky), a leaf as “la table” 
(table), a pocket knife as “l’oiseau” (bird) and then, as Gombrich points out, 
dismissing us with laughter by simply calling a sponge “l’éponge” (sponge). We 
can and do think without language – with simple or tough images or with 
feelings and passions – but the normal run of our consciousness is linguistic, 
and we almost automatically translate passion into words.

10 words that don't mean what they used to: when meerkats were monkeys and 
bimbos were boys
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/26/blockbuster-meerkat-10-words-bizarre-change-meaning>
What goes on in our minds when we think about using language? When we use 
language to write? I find I increasingly notice the language I am using as well 
as what I am trying to say or describe.Iris Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/irismurdoch> spoke of the space between 
looking out of a window at the sky and the light and looking, at the same time, 
at the window itself, glass, dust, frame. When writing I switch from the 
emotion of the imagined world – curiosity, smells and sounds, spaces – to the 
forms of the words themselves.

As a child, like many of my generation of British children, I read Beatrix 
Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/potter-beatrix> after having had her 
tales read to me. The stories were full of life – the puddle duck looking for 
somewhere to lay her eggs, the badger snoring and pretending to sleep, the 
little dog unintentionally ingesting a pie made of mouse. It may be that they 
are now out of date. When I looked up Potter on Google I found, somewhat to my 
bemusement, a series of letters condemning her for cruelty and unpleasantness. 
As a child, and as a parent, I found her matter of fact sense of how things 
are, and pain, difficulty, fear and satisfaction, exciting and satisfying. I 
was a child in a war, in a world of danger and death, but her stories revealed 
cruelty and fear in a storytelling context. One of the glories of reading 
Potter – of having her books read to me – was the discovering of unexpected and 
unknown words. I think my favourite was and is “soporific” fromThe Tale of the 
Flopsy Bunnies – in which the author informs the reader that lettuce is 
“soporific”. Anyone who will want to be a writer will be excited by the 
juxtaposition of the words soporific and flopsy. There were sentences such as 
“Mr Drake Puddleduck advanced in a slow sideways manner and picked up the 
various articles” or ‘“I am affronted,” said Mrs Tabitha Twitchett.’ 
“Affronted” is a wonderful word to learn. I think that the shift in my childish 
attention from the story to the language may have been a beginning of my need 
to be a writer. Though that may be a story I retrospectively tell myself.

As I have suggested, writers may come only gradually and slowly to think about 
the medium in which they work. Words and language are the medium of our daily 
communication. Perhaps fortunately I only came gradually to be aware of, and to 
think about, the difficulty and the glory of the gap between words and things, 
the shifts we have to make as readers and writers between thinking about words 
and things and taking pleasure in the gap between them.

In the unforgettable scene in Macbeth where Macbeth and his wife meet after 
their murder of Duncan most of what they say to each other is practical and 
terrible. Their hands are bloody, there is a knocking at the gate. Lady Macbeth 
tells Macbeth to “get on thy night gown” and look as though he has come from 
bed. Macbeth meditates on murder and produces one of the great metaphors in the 
English language, calling in the ocean to the bloody bedroom.

Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood
Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
The multitudinous seas incarnadine
Making the green one red.

This shows one of the glories and beauties of the English language – the 
juxtaposition of Latin and English words. “Multitudinous” and “incarnadine” are 
pure Latin, and Shakespeare’s audience and readers I imagine almost all take a 
sensuous pleasure in their sound and rhythm, rather than “seeing” anything. 
“The green one red” is Anglo‑Saxon, and appeals to the visual imagination 
inside our heads. We “see” green and red, all of us differently, more or less 
vividly, all of us more intensely because of the preceding “multitudinous” and 
“incarnadine”. We hear the music of the terrible words.

 * © AS Byatt. Byatt was awarded this year’s Erasmus prize. This is an extract 
from her speech.
 