
The chief of Australia’s anti-doping police on Monday retreated from his 
public lectern and his employers issued a press statement. “Asada CEO Ben 
McDevitt has today announced that he will not appeal to the AFL Anti-Doping 
Appeals Tribunal in respect of the findings in relation to 34 current and former
Essendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> players and one support 
person, Stephen Dank.” Beyond that, McDevitt says he has no further comment.

OK. That’s it then. All over. Back to work, boys. Not sure what all the fuss 
was about. Move on. Unless of course the World Anti-Doping Agency decides in 21 
days time to refer it to the Court of Arbitration for Sport in Lausanne. But 
for that to happen Wada would need to find evidence that has escaped 
investigators here for the past two plus years.

Let’s remind ourselves of the many threats and allegations we’ve heard thus 
far. First, there was the press conference that became known as the “blackest 
day in Australian sport”. “Come forward before you get a knock at the door,” 
Jason Clare, Federal (Labor) Justice Minister, said on that day in February, 
2013, while the Federal (Labor) Sports Minister, Kate Lundy, said, “We are well 
on the way to seeking out and hunting down those who will dope and cheat.”

Asada rules out appealing AFL anti-doping tribunal's Essendon rulings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/20/afl-asada-rules-out-doping-appeal>
Much of the media were more than willing to play along. Rumour, innuendo, 
suspicion was accepted as fact. Here is theABC’S 7:30 program 
<http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2013/s3685766.htm> from 7 February, 2013: 
“A 12-month investigation by Australia’s top crime body has found 
performance-enhancing drug use is widespread in the major sporting codes, a 
habit fed by organised crime. Sports scientists, high-performance coaches and 
other staff are running the illicit programs.”

So how does that description stack up with the facts? The biggest target was 
theEssendon Football Club <http://www.essendonfc.com.au/> in the AFL. Coaches 
and support staff were demonised and had their reputations trashed publicly. 
Players were named and also dragged through the mud. All before a single charge 
had been laid – or as it turns out, enough evidence gathered to force a single 
charge.

On 31 March of this year, the AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> 
Anti-Doping Tribunal found 34 past and present Essendon players not guilty of 
taking banned substances. Not a single one. The findings prompted McDevitt to 
claim what happened at Essendon was “a disgrace”.

“Let’s make this clear, this was not a supplements program, this was an 
injections regime,” he declared, bringing back to life another out-of-context 
statement made somewhere in the turmoil of this saga, that of, “a 
pharmacologically experimental regime”. This was a direct reference to the
Switkowski report 
<http://www.essendonfc.com.au/news/2013-05-06/dr-ziggy-switskowski-report>, an 
internal study into governance at Essendon carried out by leading business 
figure Dr Ziggy Switkowski. Rarely cited is another part of that report, where 
Switkowski himself concedes knowledge of supplements was way outside his sphere 
of knowledge and that’s not what he was reporting on anyway.

Then, on Friday just gone, the same Anti-Doping Tribunal released its findings 
into the sports scientist Dank, the alleged mastermind of this “doping regime”. 
Of 34 charges levelled against Dank, 24 were dismissed.

The remaining 10 upheld are an interesting mish-mash of also-rans: two relate 
to baseball (which I, like many, wasn’t aware the AFL had jurisdiction over); 
one relates to the Medical Rejuvenation Clinic – a legal business Mr Dank had 
ties to (again, something I was unaware the AFL had jurisdiction over); three 
concern support personnel at clubs that were not Essendon or NRL club Cronulla 
(and involved the individuals being given a supplement they were legally 
allowed to take); two of them involve “attempting to traffic” and “assisting 
with trafficking” supplements to a support person at Essendon (again, that 
legally, they were entitled to have).

And, then, these two – which do relate to Essendon and potentially the 
players: attempting to traffic and assisting in trafficking to Essendon FC 
‘Humanofort’ – a supplement alleged, byAsada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asada>, to contain a cocktail of banned 
substances.

The only problem is this – the Therapeutics Good Administration conducted 
testing on the Humanofort product and found there to be no banned substances, 
from a human consumption perspective. You and I can visit a number of 
supplement stores or health food shops and buy it in either powder or tablet 
form. While that doesn’t necessarily mean that it is a permitted substance for 
athletes (as the rules are different to the general public and are even 
different between sports), in my view it’s a good indicator that there isn’t 
anything nefarious in Humanofort.

Needless to say, Dank is appealing the findings. Asada is not. Monday’s events 
are telling. The then sports minister Lundy declared at the “blackest day” 
press conference, “today is about the integrity of Australian sport”. She was 
right. It was the day federal government politicians, a crime authority and the 
anti-doping authority blackened the reputations of Australian athletes. Who 
pays for that? Who rights the wrongs? Who gives back the two years of trauma 
and allegations dished out to players and coaches? Asada? No, its role in this 
whole saga is now over. Just ask Ben McDevitt…oh sorry , he’s not taking any 
more questions.
 