
Households in England can look forward to a 14-page booklet landing on their 
doormat this week, making the case for Britain’s remaining in the EU. 
Responding to criticism of the £9m publicity drive, which will eventually reach 
the whole of the UK, the government said a survey had shown that 85% of people 
wanted more facts about the referendum.

If it is facts we get, fair enough. Voters are being asked to decide on 
something that until recently they knew little about, and probably cared even 
less. Now, with less than three months to go to the poll, it’s little surprise 
people want a crash course in the pros and cons of EU membership. 
Understandably, many simply want to know whether they will be better or worse 
off if we leave.

And that’s where the “dismal science” steps in. But should it? Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> is seen as a great simplifier, 
and we all love simplicity when faced with a decision. Wouldn’t it be nice if 
economists could plug some numbers into a spreadsheet and come out with a cold, 
hard figure: how much Brexit might cost, or benefit, the UK?

Plenty of economists have tried, and their calculations have been lapped up by 
the media and campaigners alike.

Analysts at investment bank Credit Suisse say a vote to leave the EU would 
trigger a snap UK recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/25/brexit-would-trigger-economic-financial-shock-for-uk>
, prompt a fall in share prices and house prices and knock as much as 2% off 
GDP.

BlackRock, the world’s largest fund manager, has warned about potential losses 
to the exchequer if the financial industry is depleted by Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/02/brexit-damage-uk-economy-blackrock>
. If 10% of workers in financial services lost their jobs after a vote to 
leave, it says, the government could lose up to £3bn in annual employment taxes.

The CBI has gone further, seeking to pinpoint what each household would lose. 
Analysis it commissioned from accountant PricewaterhouseCoopersclaimed that 
Brexit would cause a serious shock to the UK economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/21/brexit-could-cost-100bn-and-nearly-1m-jobs-cbi-warns>
 that could lead to 950,000 job losses and leave the average household as much 
as £3,700 worse off by 2020.

PwC examined two exit scenarios: one at the optimistic end of the range, and 
the other assuming difficult trade negotiations that eventually result in trade 
deals being concluded. It also said that much more pessimistic scenarios could 
be envisaged.

And therein lies the problem. No accountant or economist can tell voters what 
trade deals would be negotiated in the event of a vote to leave. Nor can they 
tell us what immigration rules will be hammered out, which international firms 
will leave Britain or how UK government bonds will fare on international 
markets.

Economists themselves would probably admit as much, given the chance. After 
all, devotees of this discipline are passionate about probability distribution 
tables and many-hued fan charts that map out potential outcomes. Robert Chote, 
chair of the government’s forecaster, the Office for Budget Responsibility, has 
in the past useda fan chart in tones of red and orange 
<https://twitter.com/KatieAllenGdn/status/540166869677006848> to show likely it 
thought the government was to meet its fiscal rule: Chote called it “the 
flamethrower of uncertainty”.

Harry Truman famously summed up his frustrations with wishy-washy advisers 
when he reportedly exclaimed: “Give me a one-handed economist. All my 
economists say, ‘on the one hand … on the other’.”

Yet still we turn to economists for answers, making oracles of people who 
can’t even agree on what the UK’s trend rate of growth is, who can’t predict 
what inflation will be from one month to the next – and who largely failed to 
predict the biggest financial crisis in living memory. Much as voters and 
politicians would like economics to be an objective way of quantifying the 
effects of staying in or leaving the EU, it is not.

There is a second problem with taking a purely economic approach to the Brexit 
debate: it tends to focus on the short term. But if people really believe the 
UK should not, for whatever reason, be part of the EU, they should accept some 
short-term disruption from a decision to leave.

Similarly, those who want to stay but worry about how much the UK pays to 
Brussels must accept that being part of the EU comes at a price. The decision 
cannot be based merely on near-term profit or loss.

Take the example of German reunification in 1990. Marrying two countries with 
vastly different productivity levels, work cultures and politics made little 
economic sense. The same went for the one-for-one exchange rate for ostmarks 
and deutschmarks. But it wasn’t about the economics – reunification was about 
history and politics. As former chancellor Willy Brandt put it: “What belongs 
together, will grow together.” More than a quarter of a century down the line, 
Germany is still growing together, the economies of east and west still 
struggling to run to the same rhythm. But that does not make reunification a 
mistake.

One thing that Remain campaigners are right about is that leaving the EU would 
be a “leap in the dark”. Or asAirbus executives told staff in a letter warning 
against Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/04/airbus-executives-brexit-warning-letter-uk-eu>
: “We simply don’t know what ‘out’ looks like.”

No country has ever left the bloc. That puts the onus on Leave campaigners to 
come up with more than reassurances that it will all be OK. But those on the 
other side do themselves and the dismal science few favours by bandying around 
flaky figures.
 