
It is probably as far from Atonement, Anna Karenina and the new Brad Pitt 
advert for Chanel No 5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/video/2012/oct/16/brad-pitt-chanel-no-5-video>
 as it is possible to get. Joe Wright, director of all of those, admitted he 
was "terrified" as he talked about one of his next projects, the UK premiere of 
an epic play charting the rise and fall of the Congolese rebel leader Patrice 
Lumumba.

Wright will direct Chiwetel Ejiofor as Lumumba in A Season in the Congo at the 
Young Vic <http://www.youngvic.org/>, it was announced last night, marking the 
actor's first return to the London stage after his award-winningperformance as 
Othello <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/dec/05/theatre.shakespeare>, 
four years ago.

For Wright, best known for his film adaptations of books including Pride and 
Prejudice and Ian McEwan's Atonement, 2013 will be the year of his theatrical 
directorial debut, beginning with Arthur Wing Pinero's late Victorian comic play
Trelawny of the Wells, at the Donmar Warehouse 
<http://www.donmarwarehouse.com/pl154.html>, followed by A Season in the Congo, 
in July.

Wright said: "I've been wanting for some time to work in theatre, and so I 
decided to make a concerted effort this year as I've made five films in eight 
years and I just felt I wanted a different kind of rhythm."

Wright said the two theatres he liked the most were the Donmar and the Young 
Vic <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/young-vic>, so he had approached their 
respective artistic directors, Josie Rourke and David Lan.

"Quite early on," he said, "David kind of wafted this play under my nose. And 
I read it, thought 'This is incredible', and then it was, 'No, no, we can't do 
this: it's far too expensive and ambitious,' and he began sending me wonderful 
two-handers. Every time I read them, I thought: 'Actually, what I really want 
to do is A Season in the Congo.'"

That led to Wright's agreeing to cut his cloth accordingly: there are about 50 
characters in the play but the director anticipates using eight actors and 
three dancers, as well as musicians.

He also expects to use puppetry, which may reflect his upbringing above the 
Little Angel puppet theatre in Islington, which his parents set up.

Not that that is any preparation, he says: "It's terrifying, to be honest with 
you, and it is absolute rubbish to say that because I grew up in a puppet 
theatre I have any idea how to direct actors in a theatre. I'm terrified. And 
that is another very good reason to do it."

A Season in the Congo, by the French writer and politician from Martinique, 
Aimé Césaire, was first performed at the Venice Biennale in 1967. It tells the 
true story of the 1960 Congo rebellion against Belgian rule, whichresulted in 
the US- and Belgian-sponsored assassination of the charismatic Lumumba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/jan/17/patrice-lumumba-50th-anniversary-assassination>
.

Getting Ejiofor, who starred in BBC2's The Shadow Line last year, was clearly 
a coup. "He read the play, we had a chat, and he said yes," said Wright. "It is 
an amazing role."

The Young Vic play is very different to his Pinero project at the Donmar, but 
Wright said the important similarity was that "both of them would be impossible 
to do on film. I didn't want to do a piece of naturalism, like – although it 
would be wonderful – an Arthur Miller play; I wanted to do something that was 
only possible in the theatre."

He now hopes to criss-cross more regularly between film and theatre work. 
"That's my hope, unless the plays are a complete disaster, and then I'll go 
back to Working Title with my tail between my legs."

Lan does not think that is likely. He says: "One thing about Joe's movies is 
that technically they are incredibly accomplished. I can't think of anybody 
else who is in love with the play who could handle it as adroitly as I think 
Joe will."

The Young Vic's 2013 season will kick off with Feast, a celebration of Yoruba 
culture written by five playwrights, with Rufus Norris directing.

Other highlights include the return of Carrie Cracknell's acclaimed A Doll's 
House, and more Ibsen in the shape of a new production of An Enemy of the 
People, renamed Public Enemy, adapted by David Harrower and directed by Richard 
Jones. A new interpretation by the composer Olga Nuewirth of Alban Berg's 
unfinished operatic masterpiece will be staged. Neuwirth sets American Lulu in 
the jazz clubs of the Deep South, against the backdrop of the civil rights 
movement, and provides a new third act.

• This article was amended on 18 October 2012. The original referred to Aimé 
Césaire as Mauritanian. This has been corrected.
 