
View or download the concert's programme here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/interactive/2012/feb/23/reverb-festival-2012-classicalmusicandopera>

Nicholas Collon introduces the programme

One of the most exciting things about working with the players that make up 
Aurora is the breadth of their musical interests. Oliver Coates, our Principal 
Cellist, is heavily involved with electronic and other experimental 
contemporary music making, and programmes his own Harmonic Series as an artist 
in residence at the Southbank. Principal viola Max Baillie is just about the 
most omnivorous musician I've ever come across - his recent collaborators 
include Bobby McFerrin, Zakir Hussain, Krzysztof Penderecki and Tinie Tempah. 
This outward-looking and adventurous approach greatly influenced our decision 
to create a cross-arts series New Moves, which launched in 2010. New Moves 
comprises four major programmes each year, each featuring a collaboration with 
an outstanding artist or ensemble operating in a different artistic sphere 
and/or musical genre, making use of an underpinning theme to thread together 
eclectic music and ignite dialogue across art forms.

Saturday's concert sees the series expand from LSO St Luke's to the Roundhouse 
for the first time. When we first started thinking about what to programme, we 
were struck by how brilliantly the Roundhouse - one of our city's greatest 
venues - would suit a city-themed programme. It's difficult to think of a space 
that is more evocative of the urban landscape.

The programme is in three parts, starting with Strauss's extraordinary 
Metamorphosen, then Michael Gordon's Gotham, with film by Bill Morrison, and 
ending with the Symphonic Dances from Bernstein's West Side Story.

All three pieces share a common theme of being written about, or for, a 
particular city.

Metamorphosen was written in 1945, at the end of Strauss's life and at a time 
when allied bombs were raining down upon Munich, Dresden and other German 
cities. The piece, scored for 10 violins, five violas, five cellos, and three 
double basses, seems to me to be a summation of post-war hope and grief.

Gotham - mvt 2, excerpt <http://vimeo.com/6552293> from Bill Morrison 
<http://vimeo.com/user1561795> on Vimeo <http://vimeo.com>.

For the second part of the concert we move to the other side of the Atlantic. 
I don't think I've ever had as intense a reaction to a piece of music as I have 
to Michael Gordon's Gotham, written in 2004 and accompanied by film by Bill 
Morrison that shows breathtaking images of New York. His film - cut to fit 
Gordon's music - is an amalgam of old black and white archive footage of the 
heyday of New York's construction, with some new colour footage for the final 
movement.

Their partnership is widely acknowledged as one of the great cross-art form 
collaborations of the 21st century to date. "The idea of the series is to 
capture the aura of a city through music and imagery," wrote Gordon about his 
composition. The Roundhouse is the perfect venue in which to experience it.

Finally, there's Bernstein's Suite of Symphonic Dances from West Side Story. 
Everyone knows the musical and the film; we're perfoming a new arrangement by 
Iain Farrington that distils the music down to a slightly smaller chamber 
orchestra, meaning that we can recapture some of the vitality and virtuousity 
of Bernstein's original Broadway pit-band score. It's a great arrangement of a 
fantastic piece that will leave you dancing in the aisles. Incidentally, 
Farrington's arrangement is the first ever to be authorised by the Bernstein 
Estate and this is the first time it has ever been broadcast.
 