
If the semi-final results of the Asian Cup constituted your sole basis for 
making forecasts, you might be tempted to issue warnings before tomorrow's 
final of a storm of Australian gloating. After all, the Socceroos won 6-0 
against Uzbekistan, one of the highest-ranked teams in the tournament, while 
Japan edged past South Korea on penalties. But to make such a claim would be to 
trumpet your own ignorance, and not only becauseAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> drew with South Korea in the 
group stages. This final, which is being shown live from Qatar on British 
Eurosport at 3pm UK time, promises to be keenly contested.

Japan and Australia have brewed a healthy rivalry since their epic battle at 
the 2006 World Cup 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2006/jun/13/worldcup2006.match1>. In 2007 
it was Japan who thwarted the Socceroos' attempt to waltz into the world's most 
populous confederation and immediately be crowned kings. Japan beat Australia 
in the Asian Cup quarter-finals, following a penalty shoot-out.

A broken foot will deprive Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/japan> 
of their top striker, Borussia Dortmund's Shinji Kagawa, in Sunday's final but 
the Australia centre-back Sasa Ognenovski reckons the key will be the 
Socceroos' height advantage and attitude. "From past clashes, even in the 
Champions League games we've played, they're intimidated by big bodies and by 
the aggression that's shown by Aussie players," said Ognenovski, seemingly not 
bothered about sounding cliched.

That, presumably, is because the cliche has often been proved to be true: 
Japan have struggled against teams who play directly, towards tall forwards. 
But while the Japan manager, Alberto Zaccheroni, is striving to embed a slick, 
attacking brand of play through a 4-2-3-1 system that plays to his team's 
technical strengths, the most recent World Cup suggested that they were no 
longer as vulnerable physically as Ognenovski thinks they are.

"They probably got the worst possible draw that they could have got at the 
World Cup," saysBen Mabley, a blogger on Japanese football 
<http://mabley.footballjapan.co.uk/>. "They were pitted against Denmark, 
Holland and Cameroon, probably three of the biggest teams they could have come 
up against. Yet they were not overpowered and, thanks to their technique, 
played their way out of the group. They could do the same against Australia, 
who are not as good as Japan technically."

Australia, too, are bucking received wisdom – specifically the wisdom imparted 
by Pim Verbeek, their conservative former coach. Under the German Holger 
Osieck, Australia have sought to develop an enterprising, high-tempo style, the 
most complete expression of which was seen the semi-final destruction of 
Uzbekistan.

Unlike Verbeek, who was openly contemptuous of domestic football in Australia, 
Osieck has not succumbed to preconceived ideas of players' merits. For example, 
one of the Socceroos' outstanding performers has been the Brisbane Roar 
midfielder Matthew McKay, who after impressing in a narrow win over Iraq in the 
group stages, retained his place for the semi-final ahead of Blackburn's Brett 
Emerton.

This is meritocracy, not Osieck trying to cultivate an image as some sort of 
strongman. If he had wanted to do that his first move, à la Steve McClaren with 
David Beckham, would have been to jettison Harry Kewell: instead he has coaxed 
the former Liverpool player back to something approaching his best form. Kewell 
has enjoyed a fine tournament and may be set to confound expectations by 
sampling glory again.
 