
After their heroic and improbable win over Japan, it was always a question of 
which UAE side was going to show up in the Hunter. Would they be buoyed, ready 
to continue their fairytale run? Or would the exertions over a grueling 120 
minutes against Japan take their toll?


It didn’t take long to find out – with many at Newcastle Stadium still finding 
their seat, or patch of grass, Trent Sainsbury rose virtually unmarked to nod 
home a Massimo Luongo corner inside Majed Naser’s right post.

If the marking was questionable it typified a sluggish defensive display from 
a backline that was tremendous in the quarter-final against the Samurai Blue, 
rebuffing 55 crosses and 18 corners.

Conversely, it was as fresh and as spritely an Australian side as we’ve seen 
at this tournament. And as they did against China, following the opening goal 
the Socceroos lifted, and played with the full confidence they’ve displayed in 
fits and starts over the last 15 months, but seemingly never for 90 minutes.

Pressing high, and with constant energy, the Socceroos made it difficult for 
the UAE’s midfield to find time on the ball, with three or four gold shirts 
swarming to snuff out any attacks.

Australia beat UAE 2-0 to reach Asian Cup final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/jan/27/asian-cup-semi-final-australia-v-united-arab-emirates-live>
Despite Australia’s comfortable dominance throughout the first 30 minutes, the 
lively Ahmed Khalil did hit the post in the 11th minute after a fine flowing 
move involving the right-back Abdelaziz Sanquor, whose cutback expertly found 
Khalil, and his instinctive clipped shot smacked against the base of Mat Ryan’s 
goal.

It proved an unfortunate miss, as only minutes later the Socceroos struck 
again, with Jason Davidson grabbing his first ever international goal. After a 
burst down the right flank Ivan Franjic picked out Robbie Kruse, whose chipped 
cross intended for Cahill gave rise to a goalmouth scramble, with Luongo 
eventually prodding the ball back out for the Socceroos defender to sweep home.

From there a bit of the sting went out of the game, with the UAE presumably 
becoming awed at the size of the challenge ahead.

Kruse was extremely lively, arguably the best in a Socceroos shirt, as both he 
and Mathew Leckie twisted the UAE backline into desperate contortions, with 
direct, aggressive running.

The UAE enjoyed a patch of opportunity with Khalil on two or three occasions 
finding the chance to run one-on-one against Sainsbury or Spiranovic, but 
failing crucially to pick out the necessary final ball to provide his side a 
lifeline.

Omar Abdulrahman, upon whom such huge expectations rested, was largely well 
marshalled by captain Mile Jedinak, but he did conjure the occasional sublime 
lofted pass for Ali Mabkhout, and excited the crowd with one surging run, 
beating both Jedinak and the player who questioned his work-rate pre-game, 
Trent Sainsbury, before his final pass was well intercepted.

At half-time, coach Mahdi Ali looked to force the tempo, bringing on Ismail Al 
Hammadi, a pacey winger who was brilliant against Japan, for the older 
Abdulrahman, Mohamed.

If their ears were ringing the UAE players showed better fight after the 
break, with Khalil flashing a thunderous drive just wide of Ryan’s left upright.

Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> however regained 
their dominance in midfield, and both Luongo and Leckie tested Naser from 
distance with consecutive shots that were curiously both missed by referee and 
linesmen, and adjudicated goal kicks.

Ange Postecoglou withdrew Mark Milligan for Matt McKay, and Tim Cahill was 
given a thunderous ovation when he left the pitch for Tomi Juric in the 66th 
minute.

Light drizzle returned, to the slight annoyance of the 21,079 inside the 
ground, but it didn’t hinder the quality of the Australian passing, which 
remained crisp.

The wonderfully-named Haboosh Saleh, sporting a hairstyle matching Omar 
Abdulrahman injected some pace into a tiring UAE frontline, but the Socceroos 
defence proved itself obdurate.

A third clean sheet for Australia then, as they booked their place in the 
Asian Cup final, and a 28th meeting with South Korea. They’ve only beaten Korea 
once in their last seven meetings, but on the form shown tonight, Postecoglou 
has solid grounds for optimism.

“I just think we’ve been very good the whole tournament,” he said. “There 
haven’t been too many periods in any game where I feel we’ve been dominated. 
We’ve scored 12 goals, and we’re in the final. It’s great for the players, 
they’ve got real belief now, and hopefully they’ll challenge themselves and 
continue to get the results.

“Walking in the dressing room now there’s no champagne corks popping. The 
staff are already planning for the final, so from that perspective I won’t have 
too much to do.

“We made the final four years ago, which is great for our nation, but we 
haven’t won anything in the men’s game, so it gives us a great opportunity to 
win something. It’s been a great tournament, it’s been great for the game, but 
for us not to be in the final would take a bit of the lustre off the whole 
thing.”

 