
David Cameron ordered Tory cabinet ministers to avoid signs of triumphalism 
after the prime minister led his party to a strong performance in local 
elections in England and played a decisive role in winning theAV referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av-referendum>.

No 10 sent a message to ministers to avoid gloating as the Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> sought to repair relations 
with the Liberal Democrats, who are enraged by the way the No to AV campaign 
depicted Nick Clegg as untrustworthy.

Behind the scenes, Tories were ecstatic. One ministerial source said: "Cameron 
is lord of all he surveys. He finally got a grip of the referendum campaign and 
ended all the muttering on the Tory right."

The prime minister adopted a different tone as he went out of his way to 
congratulate the Lib Dems for their work in the coalition when he paid an early 
morning visit to Tory HQ before heading to Birmingham for his latest meeting in 
the government's NHS "listening exercise".

He said: "I am absolutely committed to make this coalition government, which I 
believe is good for Britain, work for the full five years of this term. It is 
then that I believe the coalition and its parties will be judged by the 
electorate. But I would pay tribute to the work that Liberal Democrats have 
done, and are doing, in this coalition and will go on doing, because we are 
absolutely committed to make sure it works hard for the people of Britain."

The Tory party was keen to point out Labour's poor performance in Scotland and 
a weaker than expected showing in England, but silent on the Lib Dem 
performance. They declined to mention 11 gains on North Norfolk council, where 
the Lib Dems had 12 losses. This will be a blow to Norman Lamb, Clegg's senior 
parliamentary adviser, who used Lib Dem success there to capture a safe 
parliamentary seat from the Tories in 2001.

The Tories had expected losses in the English council elections because the 
same set of seats were last contested in 2007, when Cameron secured 40% of the 
vote. The party notched up modest net gains, largely a result of the collapse 
of the Lib Dem vote.

There had been fears on the Tory right that the yes campaign could win the 
referendum after Cameron initially indicated he would not play a central role 
in the no campaign. These fears evaporated overnight.

One Tory commentator said: "Cameron is the luckiest man alive. He was lucky to 
face David Davis in the Tory leadership campaign, he was lucky when Brown 
didn't call an election in 2007, he was lucky when Clegg didn't have enough 
votes to form a coalition with Labour last year and now he is lucky the Lib 
Dems are taking all the flak in the coalition.

"His biggest problem was conceding a referendum ... to the Lib Dems which he 
did in very dodgy circumstances. He sold something to the 1922 Committee – that 
Labour had offered AV without a referendum – that turned out not to be true. 
But he pulled off victory and all credit to him."

One cabinet minister said: "These elections were always going to be difficult 
– doubly difficult because these were really tough local elections and because 
on AV we agreed to disagree in the coalition on day one. But I am optimistic 
you will see the mettle of the coalition showing through when it is back to 
business on Monday."

There was one ominous sign for the Conservatives. They beat the Lib Dems into 
third place in Scotland but won only three constituency seats at Holyrood, 
raising questions about their ability to form an overall majority at 
Westminster if they cannot approach double figures in Scotland.
 