
The people have spoken. I am very proud that we have given people the 
opportunity to have a say about the way they elect their MPs. It's the first 
time in British history that we, the people, have been able to make such a 
decision. And, as I said, the people have spoken. As a democrat, I fully accept 
and respect that result; accept that we failed to bring the country with us on 
this issue.

I could now engage in petty recriminations and try to assert the blame on 
someone: to paraphrase the Canadian Liberal party leaderMichael Ignatieff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/michael-ignatieff>, the only thing Britons 
like less than a loser is a sore loser. Yes, maybe Ed Miliband could have done 
more to bring his entire party along given that a referendum on AV was in their
manifesto <http://www.labour.org.uk/labours-manifesto-for-a-future-fair-for-all>
. Yes, maybe the "Yes to fairer votes" campaign was a little too timid or 
defensive at times. And yes, maybe this referendum wasn't ideally timed given 
that the Liberal Democrats are having to make tough decisions together with the 
Conservative party to bring down the deficit.

Ultimately, though, we collectively failed to convince the British people of 
the merits of thealternative vote <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av> to 
replace the current first-past-the-post system. That is my fault as much as it 
is anyone else's. And as a democrat, I accept my responsibility in that and I 
accept that the no to AV campaign message stuck better in voters' minds – 
though I continue to dispute their truthfulness.

That doesn't mean that we rest on our laurels. Liberal Democrats will always 
remain a reforming party, and passionate supporters of reform. That will not 
change and there is still much to be done. In the political reform section of 
the coalition agreement we committed ourselves to fixed-term parliaments, 
ending the arbitrary power of the prime minister to call a general election 
whenever he or she thinks it most convenient to them – a bill that still going 
through parliament. We will establish a committee to look at theWest Lothian 
question 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/the-big-question-what-is-the-west-lothian-question-and-can-it-be-resolved-satisfactorily-406571.html>
, we will make sure that any petition securing 100,000 signatures will be 
debated in parliament and we are introducing a right to recall MPs who have 
engaged in serious wrongdoing, such as those who fiddle their expenses. The 
Scotland bill, giving more powers to the devolved Scottish parliament, is still 
going through parliament. The list goes on.

Most important to me is the reform of the House of Lords. The UK is the last 
ancien régime in Europe: a country where we still have people deciding our laws 
who are doing so merely because they were born in to a certain family. A 
country where the upper house has important powers to revise legislation but 
its members are not democratically accountable. That is not right and many 
people recognise that it is wrong. And we will change that.

No, I'm not suggesting that I will demand further concessions from our 
Conservative coalition partners on this issue as some have suggested the 
Liberal Democrats will now do. We're grownup people and not children who have a 
tantrum when they don't get something they strongly wanted. We accept we lost 
the argument on AV. I'm merely reminding my Conservative colleagues that our 
programme for government, the coalition agreement,states 
<http://www.conservatives.com/Policy/Where_we_stand/Cleaning_Up_Politics.aspx> 
that "we will establish a committee to bring forward proposals for a wholly or 
mainly elected upper chamber on the basis of proportional representation". That 
committee will report soon and I expect Tory backbenchers to abide by the 
agreement we made – just like we respect that we lost the referendum.

It's always been abundantly clear where the coalition parties stand on the 
issue of voting reform. We decided to let the voter decide and that decision is 
now in. Regardless of the result, this is a committed five-year coalition: two 
different parties, of two different ideologies, coming together in the national 
interest. And there's still a lot of work to be done. So let's get back to it.
 