
Voters have come out in stronger numbers than expected to cast their vote in 
theAV referendum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av-referendum>.

As officials began to count the result for the national poll on changing the 
system for electing MPs, provisional figures published for eight of the 12 
regions across Britain showed Scotland has seen the highest turnout (50.7%) and 
London the lowest (35%).

But predictions that the capital would see a turnout as low as 15%, being the 
only region without other elections taking place, proved to be wide of the 
mark, with more than twice that number casting their vote in a referendum in 
which the No campaign is tipped to secure a resounding victory.

The turnout figures were published amid bitter recriminations among the 
Liberal Democrat camp over the anti-AV tactics of their Conservative coalition 
partners.

Lord Ashdown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/paddy-ashdown>, a former 
Lib Dem leader, who appeared effectively to concede defeat in the AV battle, 
said the Tories were also guilty of "bloody stupidity" for failing to prevent 
the No campaign – mostly funded by its supporters – targeting Nick Clegg 
personally.

"I don't put that in the box marked betrayal but I put it in the box marked 
bloody stupidity. And the truth is there are consequences for that," he said.

Moving his sights toward David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, Ashdown said that any 
other prime minister would have dissociated himself from the "lies" produced by 
the No campaign.

"This is a triumph for the regiment of lies. We live with pretty strenuous 
political campaigns in Britain, but these were downright lies," he told the 
Guardian.

"David Cameron is the prime minister. He sets the tone of politics in this 
country. It is an unhappy fact that when he was asked to dissociate himself 
from a campaign that was run on the basis of personalisation and personal 
attacks, and messages that were far more than some subtle bending of the truth, 
he refused to do that."

Cameron sought to build bridges by insisting earlier that there would be "no 
celebrating, no congratulations" if the British public rejects AV.

He said he wanted a "clear result" but tried to play down the implications for 
the coalition, saying: "Whether [the result] is a 'Yes' or a 'No' there will be 
no celebrating, there will be no congratulations, the issue will be settled and 
we can get on with the vital work we're doing as a coalition, governing in the 
national interest."

But the Lib Dems signalled that tensions were far from resolved. Chris Huhne, 
the energy secretary, said there was "extraordinary anger" about the 
Conservative behaviour in the No campaign "from top to bottom of the Liberal 
Democrats".

A No vote will come as a second serious blow to the Lib Dems after the loses 
in local and devolved elections, which Clegg described as "a real knock".

The Lib Dem deputy leader, Simon Hughes, told the BBC that the No camp had 
conducted a "fundamentally fallacious campaign" which would affect the 
coalition.

"It will reduce trust in the Tory party among our members and amongst 
colleagues," he said. "The coalition is a five-year deal. That won't change, 
because that is in the national interest. We did a deal and we will keep to 
that deal.

"But it will mean, from now on, we are very clear that we will keep to what 
the coalition has agreed in the coalition agreement — that other stuff will not 
be allowed in as policy unless our party has agreed to it, and I guess that the 
same will apply for the Tory party."

The result will be announced formally by the Electoral Commission later 
tonight when all 440 local areas have declared their individual scores. 
Regional turnout as percentage of registered voters was:

• London 35.4% (1.86 million)

• South-west 44.6% (1.80 million)

• Eastern 43.1% (1.84 million)

• West Midlands 39.8% (1.63 million)

• Yorkshire and the Humber 39.9% (1.53 million)

• North-west 39.1% (2.05 million)

• North-east 38.7% (0.76 million)

• Scotland 50.7% (1.98 million)

Four of the regions have yet to published their figures.

Though lower than the 65% turnout for only other national referendum – whether 
the UK should stay in the European Community – 36 years ago, the AV turnout is 
nevertheless higher than many thought.

It vindicates the Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats>, who argued that 
staging the referendum on the same day as local and devolved elections would 
help boost turnout amid opposition from the Conservative camp.
 