
In the Platinum Suite of the cavernous ExCeL Centre in London's East End, 
David Dimbleby's election panel discussion was the high point of a sleepy 
afternoon. Outside in the sunshine, young men in shorts nursed pints of chilled 
lager in tall glasses. Inside the centre, young men in dark suits nursed 
chilled ambitions to be the best spin doctor in the press room when the results 
of the referendum on the alternative vote finally started coming in.

It was a long wait during which tension stubbornly refused to mount.

At 4pm Jenny Watson, chair of the Electoral Commission – the referendum's 
equivalent of the US Navy Seals – announced that counting had just started in 
the 440 local counting offices throughout the country. Hurrah! It would all be 
over by 8pm, pundits told each other. Or possibly by 10pm.

On the telly, Caroline Lucas, the Green leader and sole Green MP, was 
celebrating the news that Brighton and Hove council would now be Green-led, 
another first for the party. Home Counties Tories shuddered. They'd always 
suspected that the Germans planned to establish a bridgehead somewhere on the 
Sussex coast – and here they were, disguised as Greens.

For a proponent of the new politics Lucas was sounding disconcertingly like an 
old-politics talker, scoring points off the Lib Dems for not insisting on real 
electoral reform instead of that AV rubbish. No, she wouldn't reveal Green 
plans for Brighton either.

"Come on," said Dimbleby Senior, bursting playfully into life. "We're talking 
privately on the BBC news channel, it's not as if we're broadcasting to 
Brighton or the world." Cheeky. That'll teach the BBC suits to break with 
protocol and let a commoner like Huw Edwards do last week's royal wedding.

In the Platinum Suite press room younger reporters hunted for wet paint which 
they could watch drying. A trickle of politicians started arriving to do their 
soundbites for the cameras, Labour's John Reid for the no voters, the Lib Dem 
Treasury minister,Danny Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/danny-alexander>, for the yes camp. On 
telly, the SNP leader, Alex Salmond, could be seen grinning as if he'd broken 
into the Bank of England vaults (which, in a way, he has).

Then, at 4.52pm, a result! Admittedly it was from the Scilly Isles, where 288 
people had voted yes and 542 had voted no, 65% to 35%. It was followed from the 
other watery end of the kingdom by Orkney. In Britain's only other nationwide 
referendum, on Europe in 1975, Orkney was almost alone in rejecting the EU. 
This time oil-rich Orcadians conformed: 3,817 yes votes to 4,829 no votes, 
60.24% to 39.76%.

And that was it really. The rolling tally on the Electoral Commission's screen 
at the ExCeL started moving more quickly, though not as fast as the TV 
networks. The first million no votes (to 421,857 saying yes) were reached 
shortly before 6pm, but there was no sign of a late upset – apart from 
progressive ghettoes such as Islington, Camden and Cambridge. The spin doctors 
were left with little or nothing to do but plot. When Jenny Watson officially 
announced the first regional result from the north-east – 212,951 votes to 
546,138 – they managed a feeble partisan cheer.

Time for an early bath? Of course not. In huddled corners and on ITN, Sky and 
the Beeb, Lord Reid warned anyone who'd listen that the yes camp must not try 
to sneak electoral reform into Westminster via the back door, such as an 
amendment in the Lords. Thrusting apparatchik Tory MP Matt Hancock insisted 
that the result "puts off electoral reform for a generation".

Not at all, countered Lord Rennard, the Lib Dems' election strategist. Labour 
had introduced PR voting for Wales and Scotland. The Tories had conceded the 
principle for a reformed House of Lords. It will be back, he predicted.

Yet it was his coalition colleague, Danny Alexander, who may well have spoken 
most eloquently for the mood of Britain. Waiting to be interviewed at Sky's 
Millbank studios just after dawn he eased off the most enormous fart heard in 
those parts since the Blitz – unaware that he was being recorded on 100 monitor 
screens by startled Sky staff. It may prove to be the election's Facebook 
moment.
 