


Avram Grant will refuse to walk away from West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> even if they are relegated 
this season, leaving the club with a compensation bill of around £3.5m if it 
wants to get rid of the Israeli. West Ham will go down on Sunday if they lose 
at Wigan Athletic and even with a victory could be condemned by other results.

The 56-year-old will decline the chance to return to Chelsea, where he was 
formerly manager, to become the west London club's director of football if 
offered the post, contrary to reports.

Grant has told friends that despite a troubled season in which West Ham have 
rarely been out of the bottom three he still believes in the project David Gold 
and David Sullivan, the co-owners, signed him to do last summer.

This was to build a foundation on which to take the club forward over the next 
four seasons while developing the potential within the West Ham academy. While 
Grant may not get the chance to continue this if the club does go down, 
Sullivan and Gold would face a huge pay-off to remove him as he has three years 
remaining on his contract.

Sullivan said recently that Championship football next season would leave a 
£40m hole in the club's finances.

If Grant does depart he sees his long-term future as a manager so would reject 
the chance to move upstairs at Chelsea, who are searching for a new director of 
football following the departure of Frank Arnesen this year.

Scott Parker, though, has admitted he will almost definitely leave West Ham if 
the club is relegated. Grant's side are four points behind Wolves, the 
17th-placed side, with two matches remaining and West Ham's owners have 
signalled they would be prepared to let their England internationals leave if 
they drop down to the Championship. Parker said: "I'm like every player, I want 
to be playing at the highest level I can and in the Premier League. I don't 
know what the future holds for me but, for the moment, I'm still keeping 
everything crossed that West Ham stay up. Otherwise ...

"It is not looking good. It is out of our hands a bit even if we win both our 
games. I would be lying if I said we had a good opportunity of surviving but 
there is still a slight chance we can do something. All we can do is win our 
final two games and then see what happens. You never know.

"From the minute that I signed for West Ham I learned what a good club they 
are, the history, the fan base. They're a massive club and it's a great shame 
that, over the past few years, they have been dogged by one problem after 
another. When the current owners took over it looked as though there would be 
more stability but then came this season and the poor results on the pitch.

"It's very disappointing and it hurts me a lot. I have the utmost respect for 
the fans. Yes, I'm winning awards because I'm playing the best football of my 
career. Why? Because I feel wanted here and it feels like home." Parker signed 
a new five-year contract in September 2010, making him the highest-paid player 
in the club's history.

Parker's team-mate Jonathan Spector still believes West Ham can escape 
relegation. "We know we have got two games left and need to be positive and 
keep going. We're certainly not going to give up until the very last minute of 
the very last game. Each time you go out, it's different, but hopefully our 
record against Wigan will continue."
 