
Avram Grant has told David Gold he is being unhelpful following the West Ham 
United United co-owner's admission that the club's Englandplayers will be sold 
if they are relegated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/06/west-ham-england-players-david-gold>
.

Gold claimedthat players such as Scott Parker and Rob Green would not want to 
play in the Championship should the club, who are bottom of the Premier League 
with three games remaining, go down.

Asked if all messages emanating from West Ham should be positive the manager 
said: "I think yes. [But] David Gold was here yesterday and he seems to me very 
positive, he spoke to me very positive about what happens. I need to focus 
about what I need to do with the team. Of course everybody around the club is 
worried about this possibility [relegation]. I understand this. We need to 
think positively. I agree we need to be together and I feel that we are 
together.

"To put West Ham in a good position you need to keep the good players, a good 
positive player can help you do that. About the profile of the squad, the 
strategy, you need to think more than one year. Newcastle were relegated and 
they kept their team and they are now in the middle of the league. I can give 
you many examples. Most of the teams in the second division have become much 
stronger. We don't want to do it. We want to stay in the league and do it in 
the Premier League, and I believe that we can do it."

West Ham host Blackburn Rovers on Saturday afternoon knowing they must win if 
the three-point gap to safety is to be bridged. To prepare for the match, Grant 
and his squad went for a meal this week during which the manager spoke of how 
to deal with criticism from some former notable players of the club, including 
Geoff Hurst, Julian Dicks and Tony Cottee.

Grant said: "It was fish. We spoke about what people say and don't say, and if 
they need to speak or not. I told them the story about the fish. Why it's on 
the table? [Because it opened its mouth and drowned]. I told them the story and 
they ordered steak. We spoke about one of the former players that spoke too 
much.

"Sometimes ex-players forget what they are doing. One of the players that 
[was] criticising one of our players was relegated twice at this club. So I 
think when you point the finger at others you have to look at yourself.

"Look, if I listen to the voices around us we would have been relegated in 
December. All the voices of the former players started to speak in October and 
November and said that in January we would be 20 points behind. I respect 
everyone's opinion. Everyone has an opinion. It is good for people to have 
opinions, but I don't have to agree with it."

Grant said Parker will have a last-minute test on his achilles on Saturday 
morning, along with Matthew Upson, who suffered a dead leg against Manchester 
City last Sunday.
 