
Avram Grant has ruled out returning to Chelsea either to replace or work 
alongside the club's interim managerRafael Benítez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rafael-benitez>.

Benítez has been under pressure since controversially replacing Roberto Di 
Matteo as Chelsea's manager last week and two draws and a defeat in his first 
three Premier League matches did little to placate angry supporters.

Reports emerged earlier in the week that Roman Abramovich was considering 
appointing Grant to help the former Liverpool manager but the Israeli, who 
guidedChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> to the Champions 
League final in 2008, has denied the link.

"Nobody from Chelsea has offered me this job," Grant said. "I heard a rumour 
but I think this is not what's important.

"What's important is Chelsea have a manager and the club need to support him 
and not look for any other things."

When asked if he would consider working alongside Benítez, Grant responded: "I 
don't think it's the right idea for the moment. I don't like to speak about 
myself now because I have other things to do at this stage.

"I think Benítez is a very experienced coach and manager and I don't think a 
few weeks after they give him the job he will leave and I don't think it will 
be right.

"He needs to use all experience to take the club in a different direction and 
they need to do everything to support him and not to look around."

Benítez did at least claim his first victory with the Blues on Wednesday night 
although a6-1 win over Nordsjaelland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/dec/06/chelsea-victory-champions-league-exit>
 was not enough to seal a passage to the knockout stages of the Champions 
League following Juventus' 1-0 win at Shakhtar Donetsk. Chelsea instead became 
the first holders of the Champions League crown to drop out of the tournament 
at the group stage.

Grant, who was last in charge of Partizan Belgrade, believes Chelsea need to 
carry on winning in order to convince the club's supporters Benítez is the man 
for the job.

"Any winning is good and what Rafa needs is a good win and good football 
really to convince the supporters that they need to support him," he said.

"But I think more than this the club needs to support him, then it will be 
easy for him because it's not easy times for Chelsea, first time out of the 
Champions League next stage, and the gap between them and the first place in 
the league. I think he needs it and they need it."
 