
Avram Grant <https://www.theguardian.com/football/avram-grant> has defended 
his managerial record ahead of West Ham United's vital trip to Wigan Athletic . 
While he accepted responsibility for the team's position, Grant also refused to 
be drawn on his future if the club is relegated.

It is understood that the Israeli will not resign if his side are relegated 
and, with three years left on his contract, it would cost West Ham's owners 
around £3.5m in compensation to pay him off. Grant said: "Nothing is over until 
it's over. Let's speak when we see what has happened."

West Ham have been in the bottom three for nearly all of the season and while 
the Israeli refused to answer further questions regarding his own future, he 
defended his managerial CV in England, saying he had exceeded expectations in 
his previous roles. "I don't like to speak about myself but I did something 
that nobody expected me to do before – not in Portsmouth and not in Chelsea," 
said Grant. "Here they expect me to stay in the league and I want to do it. I 
hope I never have to experience this again [fighting relegation]."

Grant took Chelsea to their first Champions League final in 2008 and in 
guiding Portsmouth to the FA Cup final last season he matched Harry Redknapp's 
feat from the same year. Unlike Redknapp, though, he failed to bring back the 
trophy.

Grant will know that a draw will not be enough to avoid relegation if 
Wolverhampton Wanderers gain a point or more at Sunderland on Saturday, and 
even a win may not be enough if results go against his team. But he is 
determined that West Ham do everything to win so that they are in a position to 
take advantage of favourable outcomes elsewhere.

Asked what he will say to his players ahead of kick-off, Grant said: "'Let's 
do our job. We need to do our job because everybody thinks about the other 
results. We play against a team [for] which [this game] is very, very important 
for them and they are good. So we need first to do our job in their home – we 
didn't do it yet – and [then] let's think about the other results.'"

David Gold, the co-owner, was at the club's Chadwell Heath training ground on 
Friday and he spoke with the manager. "David is always positive when he comes 
here, very positive about everything that's happening," said Grant, who added 
that if West Ham can escape it would provide him with the most content moment 
of his career.

"I think I would be happy more than at any time in my life – my professional 
life. I have a lot of happy days in football. If you remember the last games in 
Portsmouth [FA Cup final] and in Chelsea [Champions League final] most of the 
supporters came to these games, it was in Moscow, it was in Wembley, so many 
were so happy. I want the supporters from West Ham to feel the same at the end 
of the season."

Scott Parker trained on Friday following an achilles injury that has kept him 
our for the last four games and may start against Wigan. "I think there is a 
chance," Grant said. He added that he had not spoken to Robert Green about the 
goalkeeper's reported decision to consider his international future. "I spoke 
with him only about the game," he said.
 