
Avram Grant has claimed that his West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> team have suffered the 
poorest refereeing decisions of any side this season, with at least 10 points 
being lost due to mistakes from officials – a total that would have taken the 
Premier League's fourth-bottom club clear of danger.

West Ham host Manchester United on Saturday lunchtime. Sir Alex Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sir-alex-ferguson> claims that United 
have had some terrible decisions but Grant said: "We have suffered more than 
any other team at the very [decisive] moments – as everyone has seen on the 
television, the decision was against us too many times. If the decision was 
right, we would have had at least 10 points more.

"This is part of the game. You can accept one decision that was for us but 
most of the decisions was against us. Everyone understands what Alex said and 
what he spoke about in the last games. I don't know aboutManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>, I think about us.

"This is referees – sometimes they make mistakes. I am not saying that one 
referee did it on purpose. But the game is much quicker [so] we need to help 
the referee so that they can do their job better. I have a few ideas about that 
but I don't want to speak about this now, as when I speak what I think people 
think I am criticising the referee, which I don't have an intention of doing."

Grant will face a disciplinary hearing shortly regarding comments he made 
about Mike Jones after West Ham lost 2-1 to Stoke City in their FA Cup 
quarter-final. The Israeli accused Jones of being "weak", suggesting that 
because he missed Frédéric Piquionne handling the ball before equalising for 
West Ham the official subsequently compensated by favouring Stoke in his 
decisions until Danny Higginbotham's winner.

Ferguson will serve the second of his five-game suspension for questioning the 
integrity of Martin Atkinson, after United lost 2-1 to Chelsea in the league. 
While an unrepentant Ferguson claimed on Thursday that United have had some 
"terrible" decisions, Grant does not believe refereeing standards have declined.

"No. They are making the same mistakes that they did before, the same good 
things," he said. "But I think that if you look at games even five years ago 
and now – and I suggest to everyone that they look – the game is much more 
quick. More players are athletes. Even if you look 10 years ago half of the 
players then were athletes and half technical, so the game has become more 
physical and more quick, so it is more difficult for the referees to take 
decisions."

Despite United heading the division by five points Grant says West Ham will 
not deviate from their normal approach. "When you play Manchester United or 
against other teams that are better than you on paper, I believe that you need 
to play our game," he said, "but we know the strength of Man United and we 
cannot let them play like they want because, when they do, they are a very good 
team."
 