
Rafael Benítez believes he retains the support of the Chelsea owner, Roman 
Abramovich <https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich>, despite seeing 
his team endure a third winless match under his interim management at West Ham 
on Saturday, though the oligarch could yet offer Avram Grant a consultative 
role back at the club if results continue to deteriorate.

The loss at Upton Park extended Chelsea's run without a win in the Premier 
League to seven matches, their worst sequence since 1995, with Abramovich 
understood to have been infuriated by his players' second-half capitulation. 
There are concerns that Benítez, who remains the subject of intense hostility 
from the club's fans given his long-standing ties with Liverpool, has been 
unable to spark an immediate upturn in the side's form withChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> now 10 points behind Manchester 
United in the title race.

While there is no great desire to instigate further upheaval within the 
coaching set-up following the abrupt dismissal of Roberto Di Matteo less than a 
fortnight ago, Chelsea will consider more changes to their staff if results do 
not improve swiftly. To that end the possible reappointment of Grant – who had 
briefly been considered as an alternative to Benítez when the board deemed Di 
Matteo's time to be up – in an advisory role to assist the Spaniard has been 
discussed by the hierarchy.

The Israeli's return to the club would represent further antagonising an 
increasingly disillusioned fanbase, though that he is under consideration 
reflects the chaos currently gripping the European champions. Grant, a personal 
friend of Abramovich and previously the club's director of football, had 
controversially replaced José Mourinho as manager in the autumn of 2007 and 
went on to steer the team to the League Cup and, most notably, Champions League 
finals only to lose them both. His contract was terminated in the wake of the 
European Cup defeat by Manchester United in Moscow on penalties, with Grant 
later claiming he had turned down the chance to revert to his former position 
as director of football.

The 57-year-old has remained on good terms with Abramovich since and spent 
time in charge at Portsmouth, West Ham and Partizan Belgrade, but is currently 
available and in London having delayed a trip back to his home in Tel Aviv. 
While Grant has not been contacted formally over any potential involvement at 
Chelsea, it is understood he would be willing to take up an advisory role if 
the club came calling, though the specifics of any such position are as yet 
unclear.

Benítez brought in Xavi Valero, Paco de Miguel and Bolo Zenden on his 
appointment 11 days ago on a seven-month contract, though Zenden, nominally his 
No2, is still to secure all his Uefa coaching badges and cannot enter the 
technical area during games. The interim manager admitted on Saturday he 
"cannot be 100% sure" he will see out his short-term contract the 52-year-old 
has called for more time to make his impact felt having benefited to date from 
only a handful of training sessions and three winless matches in a cluttered 
schedule.

Benítez has confirmed there were angry words exchanged by staff and players in 
the dressing room after the frustrating 3-1 reverse at Upton Park but 
reaffirmed his belief that he can arrest the side's slump in form. Indeed, 
having spoken face to face with Abramovich after his first two games in charge, 
against Manchester City and Fulham, and again at the club's Cobham training 
base last week, as well as attending a board meeting last Thursday, he is 
confident he still benefits from the owner's immediate support.

Benítez will hope to register a first win against Nordsjaelland in Chelsea's 
final Champions League group game on Wednesday, though even victory over the 
Danes may not be enough to force passage into the knock-out phase. Should 
Juventus avoid defeat against Shakhtar Donetsk, then Chelsea will be consigned 
to the Europa League, a reality they would still be digesting as they depart 
for the Fifa Club World Cup in Japan immediately after Saturday's trip to 
Sunderland. Both John Terry and Frank Lampard will be on that flight to Tokyo 
with the pair due to play some part in training on Monday as they step up their 
recoveries from knee and calf injuries respectively.
 