
ERADIATE (‘Spoonerisms’)


1 R. C. Teuton (54 Court Road, Frampton Cotterell BS36 2DN): Spread like buns 
seems to excite Remove’s oversized character, ‘I’d eat and eat endlessly’ (
sun’s beams;anag. incl. R less t; ref. Billy Bunter).

2 A. Whittaker (38 De Villiers Avenue, Liverpool L23 2TJ): Bend seems to 
widen, with ‘50’ sign disappearing after a time (send beams; era + di(L)ate).

3 T. C. Borland (2 The Knowle, London Road, Cuckfield, West Sussex RH17 5ET): 
Variety of aerated drinks I lay out, like Sprite (spray out like light; I in 
anag.).

VHC

D. Appleton: ‘Bend seems tight dear,’ I gulped (send beams; anag. + ate).

D. K. Arnott: Beginnings of awareness Adam and Eve tried desperately to purge 
from souls (surge from poles; anag. incl. a, A, E).

M. Barley: Seam as from bowler fires Root out short of century (beam as from 
solar fires;eradi(c)ate; ref. Joe R., England cricketer).

M. Clarke: Root out short of century? Bowler: ‘Seam will do this!’ (solar 
beam; eradi(c)ate).

M. Coates: Around one fantastically aerated dames flew (flames do; I in anag.).

W. Drever: Foreign letter I presume must return to lend out site (send out 
light; eta I dare (rev.)).

D. V. Harry: Throw bait out in stream, snarling a tree. Help! – bring it back 
in! (straight … beam; aid (rev.) in anag.).

R. J. Heald: Frightfully odd things in an Alice adventure start in a dream (
dart in a stream;anag. of alternate letters).

J. R. C. Michie: Fare rise return I challenge at end of freeze (fire rays; I 
dare (rev.) + at e).

T. J. Moorey: Police awaited re missing whiskey, issue with rye of late (ray 
of light; anag. less w).

Dr. S. J. Shaw: Wrongly eject strays to root out missing canine (strongly … 
rays; eradi(c)ate).

N. G. Shippobotham: Like rise of late spring tide, a rare flow brooking no 
resistance (rays of light; anag. less R).

B. Solomons: Batter scheme, tear idea apart (scatter beam; anag.).

J. R. Tozer: Late riser seen to do it – dispense with all but a drop of coffee 
(light rays’re; eradi(c)ate).

J. Vincent & Ms R. Porter: Fare rise? – a risky venture backing one at 
commencement of election (fire rays; dare (rev.) + I at e).

Ms S. Wallace: Refuse days off at Eastertide regardless of set time worked (
diffuse rays; anag. less anag incl. t).

A. J. Wardrop: Route chaise ride erratically, having imbibed a bit (shoot 
rays; a in anag. + ate).

G. H. Willett: Lurk, like a White House aide fluttering around time after time 
(work … lighthouse; era + t in anag.).

Dr E. Young: Go as new bowler produced seam at a dire English collapse (
solar-produced beam; anag. incl. E).

HC

 T. Anderson, P. Bartlam, J. G. Booth, Dr J. Burscough, C. J. Butler, J. A. 
Butler, Mrs S. Brown, Ms A. Busby, M. Davies, Mrs L. Davis, E. Dawid, V. Dixon 
(Ireland), P. Evans, J. Fairclough, Dr I. S. Fletcher, G. I. L. Grafton, J. 
Grimes, P. Gumbrell, A. & R. Haden, P. Halse, R. Hesketh, M. Hodgkin, L. M. 
Inman, E. C. Lance, J. P. Lester, J. C. Leyland, E. Looby, M. Lunan, M. A. 
Macdonald-Cooper, P. W. Marlow, C. G. Millin, J. Pearce, R. Perry, W. Ransome, 
T. Rudd, P. L. Stone, P. Taylor, D. H. Tompsett, Mrs A. M. Walden, J. West, T. 
West-Taylor, D. Whisstock (Italy), K. J. Williams, J. Woodall (France), R. Zara.

Comments

 Only 126 entries this month, with virtually no mistakes in the grid (but see 
below). Too stiff a challenge? Several admitted that they hadn’t worked out all 
the Spoonerisms, but the overall message was that it was an enjoyable struggle, 
some even nominating this particular special as their favourite. Devising 
serviceable Spoonerisms does take time, perhaps more than occasional 
competitors were prepared to give it, but my hope is always that it will add an 
element of extra fun to the business of devising standard cryptic clues. I 
noticed no absentees from among the real regulars. 18 of my own efforts were 
chosen as favourite with one or more votes, divided about equally between the 
two different types. There were three equal winners: ‘Been in some mate’s ace 
apartment, neat, fashionable’ (AFLATOXIN), ‘Dodgy sound from ticker? Operation 
a big success, I see’ (OPHITIC), and ‘See nanny steep muddied girl’s underwear, 
no matter which’ (PENNY ANTES). OPHITIC actually worried me a bit because
Chambersindicates that the first vowel is pronounced as a schwa, i.e. neutral, 
but luckily for me theOED disagrees, giving the ‘o’ the same value as in e.g. 
‘hot’. Hence my note below the clues.

 Some competitors got in a bit of a tangle in devising their clues, usually by 
blending elements from both clue types, e.g. ‘Note seizure period and day of 
month in which one occurs’ or ‘Irate Ed – a scuppered close call’, both of 
which contain ‘definitions’ of Spoonerisms of definitions, i.e. ‘note seizure’ 
= ‘mi bout’ (‘beam out’) and ‘close call’ = ‘nigh shout’ (‘shine out’); ‘Weird 
pasha consumed date after date around one’, which contains a definition of a 
phrase sounding (approximately) like the clue word, i.e. ‘eery dey ate’ 
(ERADIATE) but no actual Spoonerism, or nothing that could be interpreted as 
such. Some other Spoonerisms were just too inaccurate to be acceptable, e.g. 
‘sacked – lichen?’ for ‘act like sun?’ and ‘slight hoot’ for ‘light shoot’. One 
cannot imagine the good reverend ever coming out with either of these 
linguistic slips. And ‘to shout’ isn’t an exact Spoonerism of ‘shoot out’, the 
‘o’ of ‘to’ being inescapably a neutral vowel, quite different in value to the 
‘oo’ of ‘shoot’.

 One regular raised the interesting question of rhotic speakers, like the 
Scots, who normally pronounce an ‘r’ when it occurs within or at the end of a 
word, and for whom therefore ‘bill as pace’ is not an accurate Spoonerism of 
‘pillar’s base’. No one actually complained about this; had they done so I 
would have defended myself on the grounds that I follow ‘received 
pronunciation’ as shown in dictionaries. Making allowance for regional 
variations in pronunciation would, I submit, make the whole business of 
producing Spoonerisms puzzles unbearably fiddly. I rest my case.
 