
CUMBERSOME

1 T. C. Borland (2 The Knowle, London Road, Cuckfield, West Sussex RH17 5ET): 
Unmanageable canine harassed Burmese tom, slipping its lead (c + anag. less t).

2 Dr S. J. Shaw (1 Simfield Cottages, Langley, Goosnargh, Lancashire PR3 2JS): 
Shiftingsuch loads and dropping nothing might give me broad muscles (comp. 
anag. less 0, & lit.).

3 W. Drever (Shekinah, 60 Beaks Hill Road, Kings Norton, Birmingham B38 8BY): 
Clumsy routine gets beginner eliminated in opening ofStrictly Come Dancing (
(n)umber in anag. incl. S).

VHC

M. Barley: See Morse inventively secure title, an annual honour not easily 
managed (U MBE in c + anag.; ref. AZ honours list).

A. & R. Haden: Unmanageable amount includes items without number ((n)umbers in 
come).

R. Hesketh: Clunky songs with note missing in climax ((n)umbers in come).

M. Hodgkin: Members united in struggle with company, causing management 
difficulty (anag. incl. U, co.).

J. R. Howlett: Ponderous Brown enters final stages of dramatic 'Yes No' 
referendum debate (umber in last letters; ref. Scottish independence referendum
).

D. F. Manley: Summer becoming uncertain – Scottish politician for secession 
hard to deal with (anag. less Ming (Campbell)).

C. G. Millin: Child's first attempt to walk without lead's a bit ungainly (c 
(l)umber some).

T. J. Moorey: Awkward position as Commons slumbered, crafty Salmond's 
delivered? (anag. less anag.).

C. J. Morse: Difficult leading actor leaves set to take on an unspecified part 
((Benedict) Cumberbatch with some for batch).

C. Ogilvie: Dodgy rum becomes difficult to shift (anag.).

S. Randall: Ungainly amateur stifled in tight sumo embrace (anag. less a).

W. Ransome: College becoming Head of the River? A bit hard to manage, perhaps (
Humber with c for H + some).

P. L. Stone: We sober men much coordinated can be this when drunk (comp. anag. 
& lit.).

R. C. Teuton: Clumsy turn – not the first to be seen during opener of Strictly 
Come Dancing((n)umber in anag. incl. S).

Mrs A. M. Walden: Ham actor dashing off set has a few (Cumber(batch) + some; 
ham2).

G. H. Willett: In these days we find more bums sadly elephantine (anag. in CE).

Dr E. Young: So member found way out, faced with copper (Cu + anag., & lit.; 
ref. Plebgate).

HC

P. Bartlam, Ms K. Bolton, G. Borooah (USA), C. J. Brougham, Rev. Canon C. M. 
Broun, Dr J. Burscough, C. J. Butler, P. Cargill, S. Collins, N. Connaughton, 
V. Dixon (Ireland), R. J. Fletcher (Belgium), M. Freeman, R. Gilbert, Dr H. 
Gilmore, G. I. L. Grafton, J. Grimes, D. V. Harry, R. J. Heald, M. A. 
Macdonald-Cooper, A. Macmillan, P. W. Marlow, L. Marzillier (USA), P. McKenna, 
M. McMahon, R. J. Palmer, K. Parekh, A. Plumb, N. Roper, T. Rudd, I. Simpson, 
P. Taylor, S. J. J. Tiffin, J. R. Tozer, Ms S. Wallace, L. Ward (USA), A. J. 
Wardrop, A. Whittaker.

Comments

177 entries, no noticeable mistakes. Favourite clue by far: 'Like sweet wine? 
I'll open can' (AMABILE), well ahead of those for MIMOSAE, PAPPOOSE and SANIES, 
all in joint second place. Nineteen clues received one or mentions.Nul points 
for my describing the Yankees as a basketball team. I knew them to be baseball 
players, but checked on Google to be sure, rather carelessly as it turns out. 
Therewas a New York Yankees basketball team, of no great fame, but this is now 
called the New York Knicks (for knickerbockers?). Anyway my apologies, 
especially to the transatlantic contingent, small but much valued, one of whom 
described the NY Yankees as 'the most famous team across any sport in the US, 
let alone America's "National Pastime", mostly because it is, like cricket, a 
game with plenty of longueurs for drinking beer'.

 I don't have much to say about clues submitted this month, except that they 
were mostly sound if a little uninspired. This can happen if the word itself 
fails to get the creative juices flowing. The estimable actor Benedict 
Cumberbatch turned up quite often, as did references to the nail-biting events 
north of the border. One or two competitors opined that I had Morse in mind 
when choosing CUMBERSOME (last five letters). Not guilty, m'lud. With reference 
to my comment in the last slip, CJM tells me that he has forgotten his clue to 
SHEEPRUN, but he still treasures the first prize-winner from W.K. M. (later Sir 
William) Slimmings: 'It might suggest a Bach chorale or a baa corral! (Puns 
here are out of place)'. This was 1947, remember. Brilliant, still.

There were a few grumbles about moving to the new edition of Chambers in 2015. 
I sympathize, but don't think that I can continue to recommend an earlier 
edition when a new one is available. Given the relatively few innovations 
introduced in the 13th edition, I'm sure the 12th edition will continue to 
suffice for those disinclined to buy the new one just yet. I shall try to 
mention it when I use a word or phrase appearing in 13/e for the first time. 
The 'project editor' at Chambers has sent me the following (not wholly 
reassuring) message: 'We are working on compiling all the corrections for the 
reprint of the dictionary with the "highlighted words" from the 12th edition 
which have gone missing from the 13th edition … We will look to provide a free 
PDF available to download for free to purchasers of the first print of the 13th 
edition so they can have all the missing words at their disposal.'
 