
BUST-UP/PIT-PAT (R & L)

1 R. J. Heald (13 Eshton Court, Mapplewell, Barnsley, South Yorkshire S755QG): 
Quarrel with Republican candidate shortened odds of Trump beating frontrunner 
for presidency spreading sanctimonious rubbish ((Jeb)Bus(h) + alternate 
letters; p in pi tat; ref. US politics).

2 T. Anderson (136 Bridgwater Drive, Westcliff on Sea, Essex SS0 0DS): Split 
bosom’s prominently displayed oomph gets the old man in a little bit of a 
flutter (bust up; it + pa in pt).

3 Mrs A. M. Walden (15 Foxhill Close, High Wycombe HP13 5BL): Row at school 
after police raid set teachers’ union aflutter (bust up; pit PAT).

VHC

M. Barley: Flapping PM’s apparently backtracked in row: admitting migrants 
ultimately is aim ahead (ap. (rev.) in Pitt; s in but + up).

T. C. Borland: Likely to be back nesting in hole, fluttering tits raise 
commotion(apt (rev.) in pit; bust up).

R. Gilbert: Effect of certain lingerie’s a disturbance of passions, beginning 
with sex appeal hitting spot, generating singular palpitations (bust up; p + it 
+ pat).

D. V. Harry: Recommended runner backed by Paddy produces thrilling finish 
crack riding can provide (tip (rev.) + Pat; bust up).

R. Hesketh: In a flutter old man in prison, tense in court after a couple 
ofboobs, spat (pa in pit + t; bust up).

J. C. Leyland: Needing data circuit and RAM, scrap laptop, it’s mad spending 
50 with disk also rattling (bus tup; anag. less L, O).

M. A. Macdonald-Cooper: Row boat backwards, then ram palpitating old man in 
Chatham (sub (rev.) + tup; pa in Pitt (the Elder, Earl of Chatham)).

W. F. Main: Disturbance in chest at an end – for palpitations pressure has 
been applied to it at the right time (bust up; p + it + pat).

D. F. Manley: Row puts British into confusion about EU’s ultimate settlement 
with PM going round thumping a bit (U in anag. incl. B; pa in Pitt).

C. J. Morse: Repair station’s rightly placed for quivering jalopy getting 
driven back for scrap (pit + pat; bus + put (rev.)).

T. Rudd: Rebellious Brutus, unleashing Rome’s first power clash, cut down 
friend, piercing political dynast with a succession of low blows (anag. less R 
+ p; pa(l) in Pitt).

Dr S. J. Shaw: Disturbance in chest excited heart of victim to keep it 
pathologically palpitating (bust up; hidden centrally).

P. L. Stone: Having a flutter backing top tip at Ayr, placed second, 
overhauled in run-in (tap tip (rev.); put sub (rev.)).

A. Varney: Return to station by public transport – scrap car repair place has 
run out of part needed to resolve possible pinking (bus + put (rev.); pit + 
pa(r)t).

J. Vincent & Ms R. Porter: Palpitating sensation resulting from grave stroke – 
spat blood initially then mostly sputum in a distressed state (pi pat; b + 
anag.less m).

L. Ward (USA): No energy at all … reduced appetite … palpitating chest: first 
signs of ulcerative pulmonary disorder (anag. les e e; bust + u, p).

Dr E. Young: Burrell say goes after coach starts row playing ‘suitable’ back 
in match (bus tup; burrell sheep; ref. Luther B., Rugby World Cup player; apt 
(rev.) in pit; play = flutter).

HC

D. Appleton, D. & N. Aspland, M. Barker, J. G. Booth, J. M. Brown, Mrs S. 
Brown, Dr J. Burscough, C. J. Butler, A. & J. Calder, D. Carter, A. 
Chamberlain, C. A. Clarke, V. Dixon (Ireland), W. Drever, C. M. Edmunds, A. S. 
Everest, J. Fairclough, J. Grimes, C. Loving, P, McKenna, Rev. Prebendary M. R. 
Metcalf, J. R. C. Michie, C. G. Millin, T. J. Moorey, D. J. R. Ogilvie (USA), 
J. Parke, J. & A. Price, T. J. Railton, A. D. Scott, D. P. Shenkin, N. G. 
Shippobotham, C. Short, Dr G. Simpson (Australia), P. A. Stephenson, Ms M. 
Stokes, P. Taylor, R. C. Teuton, J. R. Tozer, Ms S. Wallace, A. J. Wardrop, T. 
West-Taylor, R. J. Whale, G. H. Willett, K. J. Williams, A. J. Young, and an 
unnamed entry from 82 Fitzjohn Avenue, Barnet.

Comments

150 entries, no noticeable mistakes. Favourite clue, of 12 nominated once or 
more: ‘Coup converts Chinese VIP, one with blinkered view bagging power’ 
(PUTSCH/BIG POT). In this double clue the division occurs at the comma, and 
though there is nothing intrinsically wrong with this I do try where possible 
to disguise the join by avoiding punctuation at that point, as many of those 
quoted above have done. This was partly the reason for my adding (for the first 
time) to the preamble the note that the individual clues forming part of each 
double clue may not make much sense. It occurred to me that this may well 
happen when one is striving for free-flowing wording in the double clue as a 
whole. The point is that when this does happen I do not regard it as a 
weakness. It’s just that I have sometimes expressed the opinion that single 
clues are better if they have a meaningful surface reading. When they are half 
of double clues this seems to me less crucial – though I’d welcome your views 
on this.

 I don’t know where and when ‘Right & Left’ originated (and why it isn’ t the 
more logical ‘Left & Right’), but it was certainly part of the regular Ximenes 
repertoire. I’ve given you many of them over the years (plus variants such as 
‘Up & Down’). I’ve also always tried, as I think Ximenes did, to make the 
single clue word vaguely relevant to the idea of double-sidedness, though I 
suspect I’m running out of suitable vocabulary for this. Many said they solved 
CROSS-BENCHER quite quickly, making the positioning of entries that much 
easier, at least in the top half of the grid. The pattern of bars, however, 
with only the four 8-letter words extending from the top to the bottom half of 
the grid, made the bottom half a lot more challenging in this respect. The 
reason for this was my (perhaps perversely masochistic) determination to make 
all the across entries 6-letter words. I do like to set myself these little 
challenges!


No time (or space) for more, except to mention the latest from John Tozer: 
‘Solvers and competitors may like to know that the andlit.org.uk homepage now 
has a link to the latest Azed puzzle in its printable form. The link updates 
automatically each week when a puzzle is published on the Guardian website.’
 