
MILESTONE (with O omitted in clue)

1 J. R. Tozer (22 Raymond Avenue, London W13 9UZ): Azed’s celebrated reaching 
it with bean very much sound (beano; miles tone).

2 A. J. Wardrop (5 Hillymead, Thornton Hill, London SW19 4JJ): Principals in 
La Scala and ENO change with time – something to be celebrated with Met? (Moet; 
anag. incl L, S).

3 P. L. Stone (7 Appleby Court, Knaresborough, North Yorkshire HG5 9LU): Event 
when cheese is tasted, mildest one lacking depth (toasted; mil(d)est one; 
cheese2).

VHC

M. Barley: What we tasted at Azed lunch is very much high quality (toasted; 
miles tone).

Dr J. Burscough: On stele, I mark curses (courses; anag. & lit.; course = run).

J. & B. Chennells: A significant event to solemnise fully? Not so (foully; 
anag. less so).

Mrs L. Davis: Roadside assistance time – Len’s broken down (Leon’s; anag.).

W. Drever: Enlist me to ultimately have organised this celebratory pint for 
Azed (point; anag. incl o).

G. I. L. Grafton: It’s hard belonging to Huguenots, eliminated, travelling 
westwards for new start? (hoard; hidden rev.).

R. J. Heald: For Azed’s latest Tozer rated and uncovered Ximenes’ lost slips 
(orated; anag. less X, s; ref. speech by JRT at AZ 2250 lunch).

G. Johnstone: Cryptic ‘lions’ meet raising a celebratory pint for Azed’s 
output (point; anag.).

E. C. Lance: No hint of dryness in supremely mellow drink – an occasion for 
tasting? (toasting; mil(d)est one).

J. C. Leyland: Swinging ‘lone male’ site may guide one to gal (goal; anag. 
incl. m).

D. F. Manley: This pint is for celebrating Azed No. MMCCL – see it unravelling 
with cricketers getting out? (point; anag. less MCC; ref. Lord’s test).

P. W. Marlow: Time one’s spent tackling foremost character in logodaedaly – 
pint for celebration (point; l in anag.).

T. J. Moorey: Enlist to fight with heart of stone in M East – may lead to many 
gals (goals; anag. incl. o in ME; supposed reward for Islamist bombers).

R. J. Palmer: Dozens sit and start to enjoy meal arranged for Azed’s ——: 
something to be tasted ((toasted; comp. anag.).

Dr S. J. Shaw: Object numerically evaluated originally by Roman pen on start 
of trek (peon; miles + t + first letters; & lit.).

N. G. Shippobotham: Shut away, Hamlet is playing the same significant stage 
(shout; anag. less ha! + one).

P. Taylor: With endless money, one lets funders indicate significant progress 
here (founders; anag. less y, incl. I).

J. Vincent & Ms R. Porter: Something appropriate for tasting at Azed 2250 
lunch: drinks, after starter cleared away, having fine quality (toasting; 
(s)miles + tone).

L. Ward (USA): Landmark (in delightful setting) Monet reworked when capturing 
features of local cast (coast; îles in anag.).

A. Whittaker: Stage fund reorganized in Leno’s time (found; anag. ref. Dan L.).

HC

T. Anderson, D. K. Arnott, J. & J. Barnes, M. Bath, J. G. Booth, C. J. Butler, 
P. Cargill, C. A. Clarke, M. Clarke, M. Coates, C. Daffern, E. Dawid, J. 
Doylend, C. M. Edmunds, P. Evans, C. D. S. & E. A. Field, Dr I. S. Fletcher, R. 
Gilbert, Dr C. P. Hales, D. V. Harry, M. Hodgkin, J. R. H. Jones (Mexico), M. 
Joslin, C. Loving, M. Lunan, M. A. Macdonald-Cooper, L. F. Marzillier (USA), P. 
McKenna, K. Milan, C. G. Millin, C. J. Morse, D. J. R. Ogilvie (USA), J. Parke, 
D. Protheroe, W. Ransome, N. Roper, P. Sant, D. P. Shenkin, D. Stanford, P. A. 
Stephenson, R. C. Teuton, Mrs A. M. Walden, Ms S. Wallace, R. Whale, G. H. 
Willett, J. & K. Wolff, J. Woodall (France), Dr E. Young.

Comments

165 entries, a few with KAYAK/MYOSIN for KAIAK/VIOLIN (which must have been 
pure guesswork) and a few more offering clues with omission of the wrong 
letter. For such a ‘milestone’ puzzle I was hoping that the entry would be 
bigger, but perhaps less experienced solvers were daunted by the theme. This 
received general approval – just as well since the idea took ages to gestate – 
and I was much heartened by the many complimentary comments. It was only after 
completing the grid that I noticed that there were no unchecked letters in the 
clue word, and that therefore, strictly speaking, it did not require to be 
‘deduced’, but I decided, rightly as it turned out, that no one would pick me 
up on this. (One regular competitor, having got to M_L_STONE, became concerned 
that it was going to be MY LAST ONE, an Araucaria-style announcement of my 
imminent retirement!)

Asking you to devise clues that made sense with and without the missing O 
presented a tough extra challenge, one I had decide to set myself early on in 
the cluing process. It just seemed more satisfyingly elegant and I certainly 
don’t regret making this stipulation, though some overlooked it, or perhaps 
simply gave up the struggle. The most popular ‘doctored’ words were P(O)INT 
(which I had used myself in the clue to PARAMO, albeit with a different sense 
of ‘point’), and T(O)ASTED/T(O)ASTING, but you cleverly found plenty of others, 
many of them featured above. Favourite among my own clues, of no fewer than 20 
receiving mention, was ‘Luther might have fashioned this blend of oil in wine’ 
(VIOLIN). ‘Luthier’ was, I admit, a happy find.

Another milestone reached and passed, then. The celebratory lunch at Wolfson 
College was a splendid occasion, organized with great efficiency by Will 
Drever. It was a real pleasure for me to meet and chat to so many old friends.

The meal was first-rate, followed by a fascinating speech by John Tozer in 
which he talked about aspects of the task he’d recently completed of adding all 
the Ximenes slips to his andlit.org website. I also spoke, mainly to thank 
everyone who had helped to arrange the celebration. The handover of the silver 
salver from Jeremy Morse to Mark Barley followed, as mentioned in the previous 
slip, with both of them speaking about the special nature of the Azed series, 
and Richard Heald then handed over the monthly cup to Mick Hodgkin.

To round off the proceedings I was presented with a framed poem based on MMCCL 
written and recited by John Burscough, and a recently-published collection of 
limericks (subtitled A History of the World in 100 Limericks) by Mick Hodgkin, 
inscribed with one ‘To Azed’. The assembled company then repaired to our house 
nearby, whereby Mrs AZ (Alison) had laid on a sumptuous tea party. The sun 
shone throughout –the perfect end to a perfect day. Further details are 
accessible onthe andlit.org.uk website <http://andlit.org.uk>. Onward, then, to 
No. 2,500.
 