
(O)CT(O)BER

1 L. Ward (1230 Elmwood Avenue 1W, Evanston, IL 60202, USA): When insurgent 
left-wingers in Russia (explicitly Bolsheviks) took control? (first letters 
rev., & lit.; ref. October Revolution).

2 M. Barley (Rivermeade, Romsey Road, Hampshire SO51 6AF): It's when in the 
year leaves turn and drop ((a)ct + be(a)r, & lit.; a = anno, drop = give birth 
to).

3 N. G. Shippobotham (11 Penstones Court, Marlborough Lane, Stanford in the 
Vale, Faringdon, Oxon SN7 8SW): Strong ale can be cloudy and bitter when brewed 
without that special ingredient (c + anag. less it).

VHC

D. K. Arnott: Suspect this ale (not cloudy) could be a belter (comp. anag. 
incl. c, & lit.).

J. A. Butler: This month, the leaders of Communism, the Bolsheviks, engineered 
revolution (first letters).

D. V. Harry: Peculiar to English, ale drawn specially to celebrate a month (
anag. less anag. incl. E, & lit.).

R. J. Heald: Time around which we'll see tree that's cast first of autumn 
leaves (t in c(a)ber, & lit.).

R. Hesketh: This month's strong ale consumption breaks flipping record! (TB in 
rec. (rev.)).

R. J. Hooper: Time cases of exotic bier will be drunk (t in anag. of outer 
letters, & lit; ref. Oktoberfest).

M. A. Macdonald-Cooper: Old ale bottled between Pontefract and Berwick (hidden
).

D. F. Manley: What may suggest the number eight, Roman originally – time for 
university's start? (t for U in cube + R, & lit.).

P. McKenna: It is consumed by those leading CAMRA but ends in possible 
hangover ('t in first letters and last letters, & lit.).

G. McStravick: One finds this time evoked by Dowson's poem (recitable, getting 
odd bits wrong) (anag. of alternate letters).

P. W. Marlow: Instant crisis with Isis unleashed having captured territory 
beside Euphrates principally (first letters in cr).

C. J. Morse: When a tree reddens, it's caught by last of light, not morning 
amber (c + t + (am)ber).

C. Short: Coming up, openings for retailers – expect busy trading conditions 
for days leading up to Hallowe'en (first letters (rev.)).

R. C. Teuton: Such strong beer? You could get awful roughness with this (comp. 
anag. & lit.).

J. R. Tozer: Time associated with rebel uprising under lead of communists (c + 
t + reb (rev.)).

Ms S. Wallace: First signs of Christmas trade beginning early ruin this month (
first letters).

A. J. Wardrop: Brecht, lacking a touch of humour, turned out historically 
powerful stuff (anag. less h; stuff = liquor).

Ms B. Widger: This month sees the start of Christmas toys being energetically 
retailed (first letters).

HC

D. Appleton, M. Barker, M. Barnes, C. J. Brougham, C. J. Butler, C. A. Clarke, 
M. D. Cooke, E. Dawid, V. Dixon (Ireland), J. Fairclough, J. Glassonbury, J. 
Goll (or Croll?, from Bartley Green), Dr C. P. Hales, Ms S. Hart, J. R. 
Howlett, L. M. Inman, B. Jones, C. Loving, M. Lunan, Ms R. MacGillivray, W. F. 
Main, K. Manley, K. Milan, C. G. Millin, T. J. Moorey, D. R. Ogilvie (USA), K. 
Parekh (USA), Ms M. Pedler, M. L. Perkins, T. Rudd, D. P. Shenkin, P. A. 
Stephenson, P. L. Stone, Mrs A. Terrill, J. Vincent & Ms R. Porter, Mrs A. M. 
Walden, K. Ward Bailey, A. Whittaker, R. Zara.

Comments

219 entries, almost no mistakes. Favourite clue, of 13 mentioned at least 
once, was 'One uttering shrill cry (animal by the sound of it)' for 
(S)CREECHER. LL 'words' don't usually lend themselves to homonym-type clues, of 
course, but in this case I felt that the non-word entry could hardly be 
pronounced in any other way, and your votes justified my decision. From your 
comments the puzzle was generally much enjoyed. It was the fifteenth 'Letters 
Latent' I've given you over the years, though LL has featured in quite a number 
of other specials. I don't know who first dreamt it up – Ximenes, I guess, from 
the punning title. There were a few mildly disgruntled comments on the fact 
that my chosen quotation is not to be found in theODQ, but I'm unrepentant. It 
did mean that you could rely less than usual on identifying it in order to 
discover the latent letters, and it introduced many to an unfamiliar poem, 
traceable on the Internet (rather a fine one, I think, by a somewhat neglected 
poet whose sad life was brought to a premature end by alcoholism).

October ale, pace Chambers, is apparently still brewed, by Naylor's of 
Keighley. The fact that OCTOBER was, and is, the name of a strong beer as well 
as a month persuaded me to choose it as the clue word, but you still found 
plenty of other ways to indicate it (revolution, German beer festival, 
Eisenstein film, clocks going back, Hallowe'en, etc), all valid ideas 
demonstrating how lateral thinking can open all sorts of possibilities for even 
the most unpromising words. I didn't care for '10' on its own as a definition, 
on the basis of the way dates are rendered numerically. This suggested to me 
floodgates I'd rather not open. A number of clues submitted also suggested that 
October is the time for blackberrying, but the season is surely over by the end 
of September at the latest. The RHS website suggests so anyway.

A date for your diaries or forward planners: to mark Azed No. 2,250, which is 
due to be published on the following day, a get-together is being planned for 
Saturday 18 July 2015, probably in Oxford. Will Drever has generously agreed to 
take on the task of organizing the event, further details of which will be 
announced in various places in due course. I do hope as many of you as possible 
will be able to come. We're particularly keen to attract guests, especially 
younger ones, who may not (yet) be familiar with the Azed series, so please 
spread the word.
 