
What happens in an hour can make all the difference. When I had my first baby, 
the support I received from my nurse was indispensable in helping me initiate 
and continue breastfeeding. It may not be obvious, but putting newborns to the 
breast within the first hour of life can make the difference between life and 
death. Delaying the start of breastfeeding beyond one hour after birth can 
raise a newborns risk of dying by 80% compared to those who are breastfed 
immediately.

Newborns now account for nearly half of all deaths of children under five. 
Early breastfeeding plays a critical part in reducing newborn mortality and 
keeping babies healthy. But are we doing everything possible to make that 
happen?


 It turns out we’re not. New research 
<http://www.unicef.org/nutrition/files/FromTheFirstHourOfLife-Part1.pdf> from 
Unicef shows that more than half of all newborns are not breastfed within one 
hour of birth. That means that 77 million newborns – over 50% of babies born 
each year - are losing out on the benefits of early initiation, exposing them 
to a higher risk of disease and death.

This is happening because women are not getting the support they need around 
the time of birth, even when a doctor, nurse or midwife is assisting their 
delivery.

Globally, more than three quarters of all mothers give birth with the help of 
a skilled birth attendant. But in many hospitals, rather than initiating the 
practice of breastfeeding by immediately placing a newborn on the mother’s 
chest, well-intentioned attendants will take the baby away to give the mother 
time to rest or feed the newborn formula. In the Middle East, North Africa and 
in South Asia, women who deliver with a skilled birth attendant are less likely 
to initiate breastfeeding in the first hour of life, compared to women who 
deliver with unskilled attendants or relatives.

When babies are given alternatives to breastmilk, they breastfeed less often, 
making it harder for mothers to start and continue breastfeeding. In some 
countries, the rise in caesarean deliveries has reduced this crucial practice 
and delayed breastfeeding initiation; however, with the right support, even 
most newborns delivered by Caesarean section can be put to the breast within 
the first hour of life.


Traditional practices also interfere with getting an early start to 
breastfeeding, depriving newborns of the essential nutrients, antibodies and 
skin-to-skin contact with their mother that protect them from disease and 
death. In India, some women are taught to discard colostrum—the nutrient-dense 
breast milk a mother produces right after birth. In Nigeria, some newborns are 
given water or tea in lieu of breast milk, putting them at risk of diarrhea and 
malnutrition. Countries in other parts of the world are inundated with formula 
marketing, which has led to plummeting breastfeeding rates.


Placing newborns on their mother’s bare chest – known as skin-to-skin contact 
– immediately after birth helps reduce mortality by regulating a baby’s heart 
rate, temperature and breathing, while also facilitating breastfeeding. Not 
only that, exposure to the bacteria on the mother’s breast helps to colonize a 
newborn’s digestive system with essential antibodies. Immediate skin-to-skin 
contact promotes bonding between newborn and mother and ensures that babies 
receive the nurturing they need from the very first moments they enter the 
world.

And mothers practicing early skin-to-skin contact and early initiation of 
breastfeeding with their newborns are more likely to produce sufficient milk, 
breastfeed within the first months of their baby’s life, and continue 
breastfeeding longer –a practice proven to improve health outcomes for both 
children and mothers 
<http://www.pediatric.theclinics.com/article/S0031-3955(05)70290-X/abstract>.


The Lancet reported earlier this year that breastfeeding exclusively for the 
first six months could save more than 800,000 children’s lives each year 
because it acts as a baby’s first vaccine, protecting infants from diseases, 
and giving them a perfectly adapted nutritional supply they need at each 
developmental stage. This amounts to a 13% reduction in the deaths of children 
under five and also supports healthy brain development, increased IQ scores and 
better school performance for all children.


Breastfeeding is a powerful intervention – it’s time-tested, backed by 
research and doesn’t require preparation or expensive new medications.
Breastfeeding <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/breastfeeding> has 
incredible developmental benefits, and, in areas that lack access to clean 
environment and clean water to mix with formula powder, saves babies from 
life-threatening diseases such as diarrhea and pneumonia.


To be sure, there are many barriers to breastfeeding we must work to overcome 
so mothers who want to breastfeed are able to, and there are a small number of 
mothers for whom breastfeeding isn’t an option. But to serve millions of 
mothers and children better, one simple and important thing we can do now is 
support early initiation of breastfeeding.

Providing new mothers with guidance on initiating breastfeeding, not supplying 
any liquids or foods other than breastmilk and ensuring that staff are 
appropriately trained are all simple adjustments that can help a woman 
breastfeed successfully.

Given what research has taught us about the importance of early initiation, we 
have countless reasons to do everything possible to increase rates globally – 
especially when solutions come at little to no extra cost.

 