
The hip hop world has seen some fearsome rivalries. East Coast versus West 
coast; Bad Boy versus Death Row; Suge Knight versus Sean "Puffy" Combs. But 
last week saw two unlikely entrants enter the fray - Andy Parfitt, the head of 
Radio 1 versus DJ and voice of the old Radio 1,Andy Kershaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-kershaw>. And while the row between 
these two white, middle-aged men will not result in the loss of life, limb or 
liberty, as so many rap-rows unfortunately do, the possibility that it may yet 
claim a casualty cannot be ruled out.

The source of their "beef" - as rappers would call it - goes back to another 
white, middle-aged man - Radio 1 hip hop DJ,Tim Westwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tim-westwood>. A week after Westwood was 
seriously injured in a drive-by shooting in south London, New York's premier DJ 
Funkmaster Flex, who is a friend of Westwood, made a guest appearance in his 
slot.

Some of the songs, played in the wounded DJ's honour, were peppered with 
violent lyrics. One spoke of "Sticking people up at the cash machines", another 
promised to "blow your legs off with a grenade", and yet another sang of using 
20 bullets to put someone in a wheelchair.

Kershaw heard about the show, was furious about what he saw as a lack of taste 
and emailed Parfitt to tell him so. Parfitt replied with a defence and Kershaw 
decided to take the row public, writing about it in his radio column in 
Saturday's Independent. Parfitt is expected to respond.

The lyrics are inappropriate, claims Kershaw, because they express the kind of 
mindset which got Westwood shot in the first place. Parfitt does not agree, 
saying that the words reflect the grit and urban reality of hip hop which 
Westwood has done so much to promote in his show.

Parfitt claims that both he and Westwood heard the show before it went out, 
and that both were happy with it. "This was a show made by one DJ as a tribute 
to his friend," says Parfitt. "Hip hop draws heavily on narrative so it is easy 
to take a line out of context and make distort it. Tim wanted it to be business 
as usual with theRadio 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1> rap show."

But those close to Kershaw argue that if Parfitt did listen to the show before 
it was broadcast, his decision to OK it reveals a serious lapse in judgement. 
"It amounts to gross incompetence. In the light of what happened to Tim it is 
just extraordinarily insensitive," said one.

One sign that Parfitt believed the show could be regarded as lacking in taste 
came with the warning at the beginning of the show that first time listeners 
might find some of the material offensive. Parfitt says this is because he knew 
the publicity surrounding Westwood's shooting would draw in lots of new 
listeners who may not be as familiar with rap's tough-talking as more seasoned 
listeners.

The fact that there was not one complaint following the show, only calls of 
sympathy and good wishes for Westwood, is proof that the general public were 
not offended, he says.

But the row is about more than some poorly-timed and ill-judged lyrics. It 
goes to the heart of battles within Radio 1 about how to retain young listeners 
and compete with broadcasters who are regarded as having far greater 
credibility in popular youth culture, while maintaing standards as a public 
service broadcaster.

Parfitt's response to those who have criticised his decision to broadcast it 
is that they simply do not understand what hip hop is all about. At times he 
sounds like an evangelist for the genre. "We want to maintain Radio 1's place 
as the authentic home of hip hop and hip hop is about telling stories about 
what is going on."

His detractors say that listening to BBC executives talking in this way is 
like watching a grown-up play in a paddling pool. "You can look at it in the 
context of hip hop or you can look at it as common sense. You don't play music 
about shooting people just after someone has been shot. It's not cool. It's 
sick," said one.

But while the head of Radio 1 will almost certainly survive his attempt to 
push the boundaries of taste, the rambunctious Andy Kershaw may find he has 
overstepped the mark this time. Despite Kershaw's most recent attack on his 
boss, Parfitt is keen to play down all reports of a rift. "There is no question 
of a row between myself and Andy Kershaw," he says. Kershaw, reportedly, sees 
it differently.

His friends says he is well aware that this may be his final outburst. "I 
think he knows there are other things he could do if it came to it," said one. 
"On this particular issue he believes that if anyone should leave the station 
it should be Parfitt."
 