
The talent in jump racing is certainly concentrated in fewer hands these days 
but Caroline Keevil proved that smaller stables can still win the big prizes 
when her Bally Legend provided a 28-1 shock in the Betbright Chase here on 
Saturday. Victory in this handicap, better known by its past name, the Racing 
Post Chase, doubled Keevil's win prize money for the season, which started in 
May.

While acknowledging this was "by far the best and the biggest triumph we've 
had as a yard", Keevil found time to be mildly piqued that Bally Legend "was so 
far out in the betting", given that he generally runs well here. "He just loves 
it atKempton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton>. He's spring heeled 
and he jumps the fences so well.

"He's always been a legend. It's quite hard as a small trainer, you have a few 
highs and a lot of lows and, whenever I've been at my lowest ebb, Bally Legend 
seems to come along and pull something out of the bag. I think we can retire 
for the rest of the season now."

The 55-year-old Keevil's base is at Motcombe, north of Shaftesbury in Dorset, 
an area still reeling from recent appalling weather conditions. She has 
occasionally had to use the facilities of other trainers in order to keep her 
20 horses fit.

"It's desperate. Everywhere around us, the fields are literally lakes. The 
gallops have had quite a lot of damage in the last few weeks, so it's been a 
real trial, this winter. Days like this mean we can shrug it off."

This was a 22nd win of the season for Bally Legend's jockey, Ian Popham, whose 
most notable success to date was over this same course and distance, when 
Annacotty won a Grade One on Boxing Day. He praised Keevil for staying loyal to 
him after long periods when he was sidelined by breaking his pelvis and then 
rebreaking it.

Paul Nicholls <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paul-nicholls> trained the 
runner-up in this race for the second year running and looked unlucky this 
time. His Bury Parade was making what seemed likely to be a race-winning move 
up the inside rail on the approach to the final fence when he was cut off by 
Tour Des Champs, who had been nudged aside by the eventual winner.

But things went more smoothly for Nicholls in a race that probably mattered 
more to him, when his Irving was an authoritative winner of the Dovecote. The 
horse was cut to 4-1 from 7-1 for the Supreme Novice Hurdle, the opening race 
at next month'sCheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival>.

Nicholls said he was "thrilled" with the horse and predicted Irving would cope 
better than the average novice with the hyped-up Festival atmosphere. "He's 
very laid back in everything he does, there'll be no problem with him at all."

Two other races on this card are often informative Festival trials but, as it 
turns out, neither winner is likely to show up at Cheltenham this year. Alan 
King left very little doubt that the plan is to go straight to Aintree's Grand 
National meeting with his Balder Succes, who looked a very capable novice 
chaser in landing the Pendil.

There was a bit more equivocation from Harry Fry after his Activial won the 
Adonis, making him one of the four most likely winners of Cheltenham's Triumph 
Hurdle, according to the revised betting. His jockey, Noel Fehily, told Fry he 
was unsure if Activial was the right horse for that race and the trainer seemed 
disposed to accept that view. The horse is expected to have a big future over 
fences.

At Fairyhouse, On His Own may have run his way out of the Grand National by 
landing the Bobbyjo Chase, leavingWillie Mullins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins>, his trainer, thinking 
instead of a tilt at Punchestown's Gold Cup. "Coming off a hard race in the 
Thyestes, I thought that was a magnificent performance," Mullins said.

"After that, we might have to rethink about Aintree. I was quite keen after 
the Thyestes but now we might look at the Bibby Gold Cup at Punchestown.

"We'll have a chat with Mr Wylie. I think he's after taking a jump in grade 
after that. I was thinking that in the stands and, funnily enough, that was the 
first thing Ruby [Walsh, jockey] said to me when he came back in. He's just 
going out of handicaps and could win a really good race."
 