
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> commuted the 
sentences of 153 federal inmates on Monday, the most on a single day by any US 
president in history.

The announcement brought the total for his presidency to more than 1,150, with 
the overwhelming majority issued just this year.

'We go rotten': man granted clemency describes life in the US prison system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/31/norman-brown-obama-clemency-us-prisons-drugs-mandatory-minimum-sentence-reform>
Obama also issued 78 presidential pardons, a power he has exercised much less 
freely during his presidency. In fact, Obama issued more pardons on Monday than 
he had throughout his entire eight years in office to date (70). The power to 
grant pardons is one historically reserved for the waning days of presidential 
administrations.

The latest round of commutations, which come barely a month before Obama 
vacates the Oval Office, are part of the Department of Justice’s Clemency 2014 
initiative aimed at reducing the sentences of nonviolent federal prisoners. 
Since that effort began, Obama hasgranted clemency to more inmates than the 
last 11 president’s combined, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/barack-obama-criminal-justice-reform-prison-sentencing-police>
 including nearly 400 individuals serving life sentences.

“As the clock counts down on the Obama administration, the need for 
commutations of these nonviolent drug offenders – and many more like them – is 
more important than ever,” said Jessica Jackson Sloan, National Director of 
#cut50, which advocates clemency as part of an overall mission to cut the US 
prison population in half.

“Justice requires that the president accelerate the rate of clemencies he is 
granting. In the 80s and 90s, hundreds of thousands of people were handed 
decades-long or even life sentences behind bars for nonviolent drug offenses – 
but the laws have changed. These men and women would be given a shorter, more 
equitable, sentence if they were to be tried for the same crime today,” Jackson 
Sloan added.

A commutation is the shortening of a sentence, while a presidential pardon 
absolves a person of a crime as if they were never convicted. The supreme court 
has ruled that pardons carry an admission of guilt, but pardoned individuals 
are able to fully claim all the rights, like voting, that are denied to 
convicts in some jurisdictions.

Advocates of reducing the prison population through the use of clemency have 
been pushing Obama to release as many people as possible in the remaining days 
of his second term. Both President-elect Trump and Jeff Sessions, Trump’s 
nominee for the role of attorney general,have been critical of Obama’s use of 
executive power to grant clemency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-criminal-justice-reform>
, even for long-serving non-violent inmates.

“The 231 individuals granted clemency today have all demonstrated that they 
are ready to make use – or have already made use – of a second chance,” read a 
statement from the White House on Monday’s historic announcement. “While each 
clemency recipient’s story is unique, the common thread of rehabilitation 
underlies all of them. For the pardon recipient, it is the story of an 
individual who has led a productive and law-abiding post-conviction life, 
including by contributing to the community in a meaningful way.”

Jackson Sloan said her hope was that with just over a month left in office, 
Monday’s announcement would not be Obama’s last. “President Obama has raised 
the hopes of thousands of families with his historic clemency initiative,” 
Jackson Sloan said. “We urge him not to dash those hopes by failing to process 
all of the applications currently awaiting his review.”

According to the Department of Justice, more than 20,000 applications have 
been received in the past three years.
 