
 In an ancient city, America's still-new president aimed to heal a rift that 
has endured for decades, if not centuries. Barack Obama stood before a crowd of 
3,000 in the great hall of Cairo University todeliver a speech that 
demonstrated not only his trademark eloquence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/jun/04/obama-muslim-world-new-understanding>
 but also the sheer ambition of his purpose – nothing less than bridging the 
divide between Islam and the west.

"No single speech can eradicate years of mistrust," Obama began, mindful of 
the expectations that preceded today's event. Still, as he has proved, a major 
address can have a major impact – and there will be few more masterful speeches 
than this one.

The president did not unveil a new policy programme or Middle East peace plan. 
Instead, it will be the tone – even the vocabulary – he used that will have the 
greatest impact. For the thread that ran through every paragraph was a simple 
but radical idea: respect for the Arab and Muslim world.

It was there in Obama's use of the traditional Muslim greeting, met with 
cheering applause: assalamu alaykum. There, too, in his quotations from "the 
holy Qur'an" – pronouncing the word the way his Cairo audience would pronounce 
it. "I know civilisation's debt toIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>," he declared, before listing a 
Muslim record of achievement that stretched from algebra to poetry.

All of this was a world away from George W Bush, who was unable to address 
Muslims in a tone that was not bellicose or patronising. If Bush had said the 
same words, they would have sounded phoney. But Obama had the credibility of 
his own life story: the Muslims in his father's family, the childhood years in 
Indonesia. What had threatened to be a liability for Barack Hussein Obama in 
the 2008 election campaign was deployed as an asset.

But it went deeper than flattery about the great Islamic past. He showed 
understanding, if not always acceptance, of what one might call the Arab and 
Muslim narrative. So he spoke of past "colonialism", a word shocking to hear 
from a US president. He admitted the cold-war use of Muslim nations as 
"proxies", and confessed to US involvement in the toppling of Iran's elected 
prime minister in 1953. One analyst noted references to "dignity" and "justice" 
and against "humiliation", words that resonate in Muslim discourse. Obama's aim 
was to break through the suspicion and cynicism that have accreted over decades 
and show that America is under truly new management. So he did not defend the 
invasion of Iraq, but called it a "war of choice".

Nowhere was the effort to acknowledge the Arab and Muslim narrative more 
dramatic than in the long passage on Israel-Palestine. There had, reportedly, 
been a debate among Obama aides over whether he should use the charged word 
"occupation" to describe Israel's hold of the territories it gained in 1967. 
Obama used it – and spoke of "Palestine", not a "future Palestinian state."

More striking, he did not confine his recognition of Palestinian suffering to 
the situation since 1967. "For more than 60 years, they have endured the pain 
of dislocation," he said, surely coming closer than any previous US president 
to acknowledging what Palestinians call thenakba – catastrophe – of 1948. And 
he repeated his demand for Israeli ­settlement activity to stop.

But make no mistake: this was no exercise in pandering to the Muslim world. He 
passionately defended Jews' right to a homeland, before condemning Muslim 
antisemitism and Holocaust denial as "baseless … ignorant …hateful". He 
recognised that Hamas has genuine support among Palestinians, but excoriated 
the group's methods: "It is a sign neither of courage nor power to shoot 
rockets at sleeping children, or to blow up old women on a bus," he said. 
"That's not how moral authority is claimed; that's how it is surrendered."

He invoked the struggles for civil rights in the US, against apartheid and 
slavery, urging Hamas to follow the path of non-violent resistance. From any of 
his predecessors, that would have rung hollow. From the first African-American 
president, it carried great weight.

Obama navigated perilous terrain. He urged the Muslim and Arab world to 
embrace democracy, women's rights and economic development – difficult to do 
from the capital of a sclerotic regime. And when he called on the Muslim world 
to respect women's rights, he stressed his respect for the hijab and his 
opposition to westerners "dictating what clothes a Muslim woman should wear".

Whether this sensitive, supple and sophisticated speech will be remembered 
will depend on whether the rhetoric of respect is matched by a change in 
action. And that, as Obama admitted, is more than the work of one day.
 