
The BBC should “reflect the nation in all its diversity” once its new charter 
comes into force next year, the head of media regulatorOfcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> has told the Guardian.

Laying out her vision for Ofcom’s role in the future of the BBC and UK 
broadcasting for the first time, chief executiveSharon White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sharon-white> says the new unitary board at 
the BBC must be strong enough to act as the first port of call for any 
complaints so that the regulator could be the “backstop” for the most serious 
issues. “It will be for the BBC to deal in the first instance with accuracy and 
impartiality.”

That means that despite the BBC attracting 10 times as many complaints as the 
total for the public service rivals currently overseen by Ofcom – 250,000 v 
25,000 – White only expects investigations handled by her organisation to 
roughly double to about 500 a year. She is planning to appoint “tens more 
people” – equivalent to about 5% additional staff or 40 new people to cover the 
expanded role. Ofcom employs 800 people while theBBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust>, which currently regulates and 
governs the BBC, employs about 65.

In comments likely to be seized on by the BBC and its rivals looking for 
insights into the way Ofcom will carry out its new responsibilities, White also 
says she is opposed to making the regulation of its online content a statutory 
duty and that theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> will simply be 
“integrated” into its current responsibilities for regulating all other public 
service broadcasters.

“We recognise that the BBC has special status, but we are not planning to give 
it special treatment. The advantage of [this] is it has to to be consistent and 
fair with the decisions we would take on ITV, Sky or C4.”

Ofcom’s new role, which begins in 2017 when the current royal charter ends, is 
part of a radical overhaul which ended the BBC’s 94-year system of 
self-regulation.

Although Ofcom currently regulates parts of the BBC – notably its market 
impact – it will add responsibility for impartiality and accuracy in the new 
regime as well as, for the first time, oversight of the BBC’s written output 
online.

White says she was “personally very wary” about new legislation to give Ofcom 
greater power to regulate the BBC’s online content. Currently, it is regulated 
by the trust while there is no formal oversight of written content from other 
broadcasters.

She points out that the Clementi report into BBC regulation published earlier 
this year held out the possibility that the BBC could continue to self-regulate 
such content or operate a “voluntary system where Ofcom is the backstop”.

While the government white paper stressed that there would be no “diminution 
in the degree of oversight on website text”, White is keen to avoid statutory 
oversight, which would make Ofcom the first government-appointed regulator in 
the UK to regulate written content online.

This issue is key in the battle over press regulation. Asked why she was so 
opposed to statutory duties in this area, White says that the boundaries 
between written text and broadcast are “fuzzy”.

On the contentious subject of distinctiveness – which will form part of the 
BBC’s public purposes for the first time under the new charter agreement to be 
finalised by the end of the year – she says that the regulator would be led by 
the opinion of viewers and listeners.

And when asked how she would define distinctiveness, she refers to Ofcom 
research which suggests that, while viewers and listeners “generally believe 
the quality of the BBC’s output is good … they want UK stories that reflect the 
nation in all its diversity”. The issue of distinctiveness has been used to 
suggest that the BBC would not be able to make popular or copycat programmes, 
with Strictly Come Dancing and Homes Under the Hammer both criticised over the 
past year.

Talking in the relatively anonymous House of St Barnabas in London’s Soho 
rather than Ofcom’s riverside headquarters, White says: “What’s distinctive to 
you may not be distinctive to me or the 65 million people living in the UK. 
Both on distinctiveness and diversity the key for us is what viewers and 
listeners want.”

A highly respected economist and permanent secretary at the Treasury before 
being appointed Ofcom’s chief executive in December 2014, White believes in 
general the “audience think the BBC quality is good – better than ever”, but 
refuses to give examples of programmes that could be deemed distinctive.

However, Ofcom research last summer found that over half of respondents from 
black ethnic groups felt they were both under-represented and negatively 
portrayed across all public service broadcasting, while around half (51%) of 
disabled people felt under-represented.

In terms of nations and regions, one in five viewers in Scotland and a quarter 
in Northern Ireland felt they were negatively portrayed.

Last week, the BBC announced a reorganisation of its senior team, reviving the 
role of director of nations and regions. The details of the new unitary board, 
from how many of its appointees are to be made by the government to its size, 
are still being worked on.

White declines to comment on an appointments process she calls “a matter for 
the government”, saying only that she is “very keen that it’s a strong, 
effective board whatever the appointments process is”.

She makes it clear that the new responsibilities were not part of an Ofcom 
land-grab. “I had always been very cautious about Ofcom taking on 
responsibility for the BBC. I absolutely see the logic but to work it is 
contingent … on there being a strong and effective board to take on governance 
for the BBC ... It’s incredibly important that the board is running the BBC.”

Given the highly charged nature of so many previous BBC regulatory issues, 
from Sachsgate to the 6am Today item in 2003 on the sexed-up WMD dossier which 
led to the resignations of a director general and chairman, it is perhaps 
understandable that White declines to give a verdict on previous controversies.

The government is expected to publish the draft charter before the summer 
recess and an interim transitional arrangement with Ofcom, followed by a formal 
agreement finalised before the end of the year.

There have recently been several departures of Ofcom executives with 
broadcasting experience, and no head of content has so far appointed. However, 
White dismisses concerns over this, saying the role could not be filled until 
after the white paper was published in May.

She is understood to have met culture secretary John Whittingdale last 
Wednesday, and the regulation of online content remains one of several 
remaining sticking points.

Famously private, White has refused to discuss her politics, friendships or 
work at the Treasury. Such reticence extends to her views on the EU referendum: 
“We are an independent body. We oversee referendums and elections. We are 
completely politically impartial.”

She is however sanguine about the “unknown” nature of the outcome of the EU 
referendum.

“Until something happens we’ll continue under the same rules and regulations,” 
she says, pointing out that the UK’s 2002 Communications Act “matches very 
closely” the rules set in Brussels. “We’ll see but it’s unlikely to be a big 
difference. We’ll basically carry on 99% as business as usual.”
 