
The actor John Hurt has accused BBC executives of failing to invest enough 
time and money in a television adaptation of theAlan Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> diaries, in which Hurt plays 
the flamboyant, outspoken Tory MP.

Hurt, 63, said the budget allocated to the six-part dramatisation, to be 
broadcast on the digital arts channel BBC4 early next year and then repeated on 
BBC2, was "ludicrous".

The actor also criticised the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> for 
allowing BBC4 - available in only about half of UK homes with digital TV - to 
replace BBC2 as the channel where risk-taking and mould-breaking were possible.

BBC4 shot The Alan Clark Diaries in only four weeks, including a week of 
filming at Saltwood, the late MP's Norman castle in Kent, with the cooperation 
of his widow Jane.

"We shot three hours of screen time in four weeks. That's ludicrous," said 
Hurt, who has starred in films such as The Naked Civil Servant, The Elephant 
Man and Alien.

"You couldn't have a tighter schedule and I don't approve of it. If I had to 
do it again, I would certainly be heard to squeal a bit louder."

But he praised the BBC production team, who had taken the attitude: "We don't 
have that much money - how do we do this? Let's see how far we can push it."

He added: "It ended up as something that I'm very happy with and I think the 
producer and director concerned were wonderful people dealing with wonderful 
material. But you have to remember they are not the same people who make the 
schedules. They were not entirely understood by people who should understand 
how programmes are made."

Roly Keating, the BBC4 controller, defended the way The Alan Clark Diaries had 
been made and praised Hurt's performance in the drama. "We are obviously sorry 
that John found the production schedule so demanding," he said. "The unique 
nature of the diary format put unusual pressure on him as the leading actor - 
requiring him to be on screen in almost every scene.

"But, like him, we are delighted with the finished result. John should rest 
assured that the BBC's commitment to investment in innovative, quality drama 
across all its networks remains as strong as ever.

Jenny Agutter stars alongside Hurt as Clark's wife Jane, who had to put up 
with his many years of philandering - well-documented in his diaries. Victoria 
Smurfit co-stars as Clark's secret mistress, referred to as "X", and Julia 
Davis plays his frosty secretary, Jenny Easterbrook.

BBC4 is also planning to broadcast a television adaptation of the Tricycle 
theatre's play based on edited transcripts from the Hutton inquiry into the 
death of the weapons expert David Kelly next month - shortly before Lord 
Hutton's report isexpected to be published.
 