
His radio show went out long after most people were in bed, and played obscure 
tracks from distant countries by bands few had heard of.

But his abrupt removal from Radio One, slipped out in a press release last 
week, has prompted a storm of criticism from across the music world, and 
provoked soul-searching within theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
about the direction its flagship pop music station is taking.

Andy Kershaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-kershaw> is a champion of 
world music, his thick Lancashire accent attracting a cult following among 
lovers of African giants such as the late Fela Kuti. But beyond that, his was 
one of the few Radio One shows devoted to playing the diet of blues, R&B and 
alternative rock that forms the staple listening for millions of the 25-45 
generation reared on Bob Dylan, Bruce Springsteen and Ry Cooder.

When Lou Reed visited London recently, Kershaw's was the only show he appeared 
on.

This weekend Radio One stands accused of stripping itself of challenging 
content and apeing commercial stations. Musicians, promoters and arts 
administrators have all joined together to speak out against the station's 
plans to become a barometer of new dance trends, rather than the best place to 
hear high quality rock and pop.

Kershaw - who can claim to have introduced to British audiences Youssou 
N'Dour, the late Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan and even the kings of grunge, Nirvana, 
among others - presented his last show on Thursday night, having refused to 
work out a three-month farewell period. He joined the station 15 years ago and 
Radio One's decision to remove him has exposed the new controller's 
determination to focus on its core listenership - the 15- to 24-year olds.

The eclectic genre of world music, which promotes sounds from cultures all 
over the globe, has become phenomenally popular with CD consumers and 
concert-goers in the past five years. Many fans have put the surge in interest 
solely down to Kershaw, the disc jockey who first brought the music to a 
mainstream pop and rock audience in his Radio One show. Now they believe they 
have lost their champion.

'It is disgraceful that the best-known and loved music DJ has been treated 
like this. It is a pretty poor way to behave to someone who has worked so 
diligently for 15 years,' said Simon Broughton, editor of the magazine 
Songlines and co-editor of The Rough Guide to World Music.

'Andy is the sort of person who has a passion and does his research around the 
world himself. He will be replaced by something formulaic.'

The fresh row about the nature of Radio One mirrors the uproar that greeted 
plans to re-model Radio Four under its former controller, James Boyle, and the 
more recent re-jigging of Radio Three's schedules under Roger Wright. The BBC 
is streamlining the profile of the audiences for each station at the expense of 
minority programmes. The changes are unpopular with presenters too, many of 
whom resent the idea that because of age they should graduate to shows on Radio 
Two. It is understood that Kershaw has not been offered a Radio Two slot.

Britain's taste for music from around the world is reflected not only in the 
success of specialist record labels and huge sales for albums by bands such as 
the Buena Vista Social Club, Ladysmith Black Mambazo and The Gypsy Kings, but 
also in the size of the audiences attending festivals.

The big warehouse dance rave is on the wane and summer rock festivals, barring 
the evergreen Glastonbury, have fallen into a decline too. On the other hand, 
the world music festivals, such as Womad (World of Music Arts and Dance) in 
Reading or the Fleadh, in north London, are booming. The Barbican Arts Centre 
in London has also drawn record audiences to its recent festivals of Cuban, 
African and Gypsy music.

'The BBC is being very naive about the nature of the listening public,' said 
Graham Sheffield, the artistic director of the Barbican.

'Audiences are pluralistic these days and happy to zap between different 
sounds.'

Yet Radio One is bullish in the face of the onslaught of criticism. The 
station says it must make room for new DJs with new interests.

'Radio One has a very special role,' said Andy Parfitt, the station's 
controller.

'It is the one service from the BBC that attracts a young audience and the 
Beeb has to serve as wide an audience as possible.

'We don't want to serve a dwindling audience - although we never say you are 
not welcome if you want to keep in touch.'

Parfitt admits there are increased sales for world music and that Kershaw's 
show had audience ratings 'to be expected for that type of programme at that 
time'. But he said his station needs a balance of fresh artists and DJs.

'It is really about there being a limit in schedules as to what you can do,' 
he said.

Thomas Brooman, the artistic director of Womad, fears that young people will 
no longer come across a variety of music on the radio.

'Andy Kershaw's abandonment makes it look as if Radio One is closing itself 
off into even more of a narrow vein,' he said. 'They seem to think audiences 
want a diet of machine-driven dance music. It is as if they want to deny the 
existence of world music.'

BBC broadcaster and pro ducer John Walters, Kershaw's long-term mentor, 
appears to suspect that young people are being shortchanged.

'We have come a long way from the days when Lord Reith was asked, "Are you 
going to give the people what they want?" and replied, "No. Something better 
than that,"' he said.

The BBC claims that this 'something better' can now be found on other 
stations. Both Radio Two and Radio Three, stations with a much older audience 
profile, are moving in on the world music scene.

Radio Three will broadcast live from this year's Womad festival for the first 
time in July and its new late-night world music show, Late Junction , has 
earned praise from critics and comparatively large listening figures.
 