
The BBC has said new rules to force it to reveal the pay of its on-air talent 
are “disappointing” and likely to cause a “massive headache” after the 
government confirmed that any employeeearning more than £150,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/14/bbc-presenters-pay-to-be-made-public>
 would be identified.

Culture secretary Karen Bradley said the new obligations to reveal details of 
stars’ pay would help make theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> a 
more “transparent and open” organisation as she launched a draft charter which 
also confirmed changes to the BBC’s historic system of governance.

In response, Rona Fairhead <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rona-fairhead>, 
who is to stand down as chair of the BBC Trust, said the governing body was 
“disappointed” by the change in disclosure rules.

BBC presenters' salaries over £150,000 to be made public
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/14/bbc-presenters-pay-to-be-made-public>
“We don’t agree with the government on everything and are disappointed with 
the decision on the disclosure of presenters’ pay. We don’t believe this is in 
the long-term interests of licence fee payers.”

BBC director general Tony Hall said the corporation, along with all major 
broadcasters, questioned the merit of the government’s decision to reduce the 
level at which pay would be disclosed from £450,000 to a third as much. “The 
BBC operates in a competitive market and this will not make it easier for the 
BBC to retain the talent the public love,” he said.

 “The BBC is already incredibly transparent and we publish what we spend on 
talent pay – a bill which has fallen in recent years ... Ultimately, the BBC 
should be judged on the quality of its programmes.”

In setting the disclosure level at £150,000 the government brought the BBC 
into line with other publicly funded organisations – redundancy payouts are 
also capped at £95,000 – but the BBC has argued that the change could hurt the 
ability of its journalists to do their jobs properly.

One BBC insider warned: “We will be really tough in ensuring that politicians 
don’t use pay to intimidate our journalists in interviews.” Trawling through 
how much presenters are paid by the licence fee (as opposed to other sources of 
income) would cause a “massive headache”, he added.

In unveiling the draft charter, which follows the white paper published in 
May, Bradley said: “We have made considerable progress since the publication of 
the hite paper and resolved a number of important areas with the BBC, which go 
further in the key areas of transparency, fairness and securing the BBC’s 
independence,” she said.

“Licence fee payers have a right to know where their money goes. By making the 
BBC more transparent it will help deliver savings that can then be invested in 
even more great programmes.”

The culture secretary also justified the government’s decision to look for a 
new chair of the BBC as she moved to head off criticism that the corporation’s 
independence was under attack.

The government is to directly appoint five of the 14-strong board, including a 
new chair and the four national directors for England, Wales, Scotland and 
northern Ireland, leaving the BBC able to appoint four executive members of the 
new unitary board alongside another five “independent” members.

Fairhead, who had agreed to carry on until 2018 after a behind-closed-doors 
agreement with the previous government,decided to stand down earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/13/rona-fairhead-to-stand-down-as-bbc-chair>
.

Bradley explained the decision to reopen the role: “This is a significant new 
post and transparency and fairness is vital.” She also promised “strict rules 
to ensure all appointments made fairly and openly”.

Hall welcomed the fact that the government had “reconsidered” earlier 
proposals as part of a charter agreement he called “hard won”.


“I set out my concerns regarding the new board appointments back in May and 
said we would continue to make the case to the government,” he said. “The BBC 
is a public service broadcaster – not a state broadcaster.”

In a statement, Fairhead said: “It is good that, for the first time, there 
will be a more transparent process for setting the licence fee. The government 
should go further and we will continue to urge them to publish future funding 
proposals for external scrutiny before making a final decision.”


Fairhead and director general Tony Hall agreed a “shotgun” deal last July in 
which the government imposed the cost of paying for free licence fees for the 
over-75s on the corporation.

 The delay in appointing the new governing body, at the same time as ending a 
historic system of self-regulation, means that a transition arrangement will 
have to be put in place until April.

The draft charter is set to be debated by the Commons, Lords and devolved 
parliaments.


Though widely trailed, the draft charter confirmed new auditing oversight by 
the National Audit Office and rules on distinctiveness as well as pay and 
governance.

SNP MP John Nicolson said BBC concerns that revealing pay would be a poachers’ 
charter were “nonsense”.

“The danger of this particular announcement is that the BBC will be forced to 
reveal many of its more mediocre or overpaid employees,” he added. “There may 
be some national teeth gnashing as a result once they recognise what goes on 
behind closed doors.”
 