
Athene Donald <https://www.theguardian.com/science/athene-donald> was never 
the kind of child who liked taking radios to pieces. But she did like to know 
how things worked - "a more intellectual making sense". And she was only a 
couple of years into secondary school when she found something that offered the 
answers. "As soon as I was taught physics I thought, 'this is wonderful'," she 
says.

Now professor of experimental physics in Cambridge University's Cavendish 
Laboratory, she has just become a laureate in the For Women inScience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/science> awards, set up by L'Oreal, the 
cosmetics company, and Unesco on the premise that "the world needs science and 
science needs women". One laureate is chosen per continent each year, and 
Donald is only the second British scientist to be chosen in the programme's 
10-year history.

What caught the judges' attention was her work "in unravelling the mysteries 
of the physics of messy materials". Her expertise lies in developing techniques 
to study "soft" materials, from plastics and cement to starch and ice-cream. 
Recently, she has turned her attention to the way protein molecules stick 
together, which could help reveal what causes Alzheimer's disease, and is also 
studying how cells adhere to surfaces, which has implications for the 
development of hip replacements and prosthetic limbs.

Donald is not your usual kind of cosmetics company public face. She is intense 
and direct, and wary of the media attention that has followed the L'Oreal 
award, although prepared to endure it for the cause of science - and women in 
science.

Her work reflects this pragmatic attitude. It is a physics that has a clear, 
practical end, rather than the kind that wrestles with the deep philosophical 
questions involved in the big bang or the intricacies of atoms. Electron 
microscopy, in the form that her department has pioneered - environmental 
scanning electron microscopy - is all about getting better images of materials 
in their natural state so that their structures are easier to interpret. She 
is, she says, very good at seeing patterns and thinks of her molecules in an 
anthropomorphic kind of way, in terms of how they are behaving.

"Another phrase for the kind of physics I do is mesoscopic," says Donald. "I'm 
not terribly interested in individual molecules - and then there is the 
engineering and macroscopic end - but the mesoscopic is where you've got many 
molecules, and the manyness matters."

Bridging the gap

Manyness matters to Donald's work in another way, too, because it is so 
interdisciplinary. Her work on Alzheimer's has involved talking to clinical 
neuroscientists and biologists to try to bridge the gap between the kind of 
experiments physicists are doing and what may be useful in a medical context. 
When she was researching starch, she worked with plant breeders, biochemists 
and industry to get a better understanding of what was happening. Much of her 
time has been spent identifying the right people to talk to in the right 
disciplinary area.

This interdisciplinarity raised eyebrows at first, she says, but has since 
become much more common. A new building has just opened in Cambridge to house 
thePhysics <https://www.theguardian.com/science/physics> of Medicine 
initiative, which is designed to create an environment in which researchers in 
the physical, life and clinical sciences can mix freely and share ideas. Donald 
is the initiative's director.

"I suppose my basic philosophy is trying to use physics to solve problems that 
physicists traditionally have not solved," she says. She started her PhD at 
Cambridge, studying metals, and followed her husband, a mathematician, to 
Cornell University to do a postdoctorate, which she hated. "I was the first 
woman postdoc they'd had, and I don't think my professor was very able to deal 
with that," she says. "And I think the project bored me. So yes, it was awful. 
I hope that makes me more understanding of students who have problems, because 
it's easy to assume that if I'm successful I must always have been successful - 
and it certainly wasn't true."

Her breakthrough came when she decided to do a second postdoctorate, studying 
plastics with Ed Kramer, who became an inspiration and a mentor.

She returned to Cambridge when her husband was awarded a research fellowship 
there, and got a research fellowship herself, followed by a lectureship, 
replacing someone who had set up a grant in food physics. Through that, she got 
into starch. By the time their second child was born, it became clear that her 
career was the one taking off. Her husband put his on the back burner, 
continuing to work as a mathematician but without a salaried job.

In the early days, the children went to nursery three days a week and Donald 
and her husband covered the other four days evenly between them. "These days 
one would say, 'I'm going to work x days a week', and just declare it, but that 
wasn't at that point available, and so we shared it - and I worked odd hours 
and nobody noticed," says Donald. What she did try to avoid was travelling. She 
says that probably affected her international profile, but benefited her 
relationship with students.

As director of WiSeti, Cambridge University's Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in Science, Engineering and 
Technology Initiative, Donald is trying to pass on the message that it is 
possible to work part-time and still get promoted.

Neither of Donald's parents went to university, and there was no family 
tradition of studying science. Her father was an accountant and her mother was 
a housewife until her 40s, when she began part-time interviewing for the 
Greater London Council and ran an Oxfam shop. Yet it never occurred to Donald 
at Camden school for girls that she shouldn't study physics or that her gender 
might make it difficult. She recalls being invited to a party at Harrow public 
school just before her first year at Girton College, and the boys asking her 
what she did. When she told them she was going to Cambridge to read physics, 
they ran a mile.

Overwhelmingly male

At Cambridge her peers were overwhelmingly male. "You had to think, 'OK, I'm 
the only girl in this room, I'll get on with it'," she says. She believes that 
the difficulties for women scientists often come later, "when you're not simply 
doing the science, when other things come into play".

She is loth to generalise about gender characteristics but says women often do 
have a more consensus-building approach and that differences in approach can 
become apparent on, for example, appointment committees. "That is why most 
appointment committees now say you've got to have at least one woman. But if 
you are the one woman, and say, 'Well, actually, I think that's rather good', 
you don't necessarily get listened to."

From being the only woman in the room at a conference, Donald now finds that 
about 10% of fellow delegates are female. But female physicists are still rare. 
She says although there is little overt discrimination, "I think there are 
subtle things that it's very hard to get to the bottom of".

Some of these things are to do with assumptions made, sometimes unconsciously, 
about women scientists, and she believes people must be made to realise that 
they may hold preconceived notions - and that these notions may be wrong. But 
they are also to do with women's feelings of isolation or lack of confidence. 
While nobody is questioning their ability to do the science, she argues, there 
may be "softer" issues about how effective they are in a committee meeting full 
of men, or how they handle a hostile conference hall.

Then there is the problem of getting girls to study physics in the first 
place. One answer, she says, is more role models, which is why prizes such as 
the L'Oreal laureate are so important. She is keen to see more young scientists 
spending time in schools and sharing their knowledge and enthusiasm. The media 
can also play a part, not only through dramas such as Silent Witness, which 
have had a huge impact on the number of women wanting to study forensic 
science, but on showing the variety of things that science can do. Donald 
suggests that teenage girls are often more career orientated than boys, and if 
they don't understand what a science degree can lead to, they won't do science.

One obstacle is the poor quality of much science teaching. As a bright child, 
Donald could go to her physics teacher, who had studied the subject to degree 
level, and ask her anything she didn't understand, and she would be able to 
answer. Now, many physics teachers do not have a degree in the subject. Nor is 
maths teaching always of a high enough standard, says Donald. This not only 
discourages some girls from pursuing the subject to university level but also 
makes the lives of physics lecturers harder. "It means we can't start from a 
position you would have done 10 or 20 years ago," she says.

Donald now divides most of her time between teaching and committees; her days 
in the lab are largely over. This is partly because the kind of equipment she 
works with is so sophisticated that you really need to work with it every day 
to be any good with it. But it is also partly because she didn't want to spend 
her time delving deeper and deeper into the study of starch, which had become 
her area of expertise.

"I reached a point where it was absolutely clear to me that I wasn't doing 
anything innovative, and it wasn't therefore exciting," she says. "It is 
important to know when to stop."

Curriculum vitae

Age 55

Job Professor of experimental physics, Cambridge University

Likes being able to cycle to work and not being dependent on a car

Dislikes the fact that if a scientist doesn't know Shakespeare they may be 
derided, but it is acceptable for an arts graduate to plead ignorance of science

Married to Matthew Donald, a mathematician, with two children
 