
Wouldn't it be good if policymakers paid more attention to research and 
evidence? From drug regulation to macroeconomics to education, politicians seem 
to love basing their policies on woo, pseudoscience and guesswork.

But consider for a moment the difficult position of a politician who decides 
to make policy based on robust evidence. One problem is that they might 
encounter unpalatable truths: "don't ask a question you don't want to hear the 
answer to", as an old cynic once said. But there's also a more practical 
problem when they look for experts to consult. Too many policy wonks 
unwittingly fall into two dangerous tribes. Let's call them, in homage to the 
lateKingsley Amis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/kingsleyamis>, berks and 
wankers.

First a word of explanation. In Amis père's curmudgeonly old age, he railed 
against bad writers 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Kings-English-Penguin-Modern-Classics/dp/0141194316>. 
He divided them into two groups, whom he called berks and wankers. The berks 
were clumsy and semi-literate, the kind of people you can't trust with an 
apostrophe. The wankers on the other hand were tiresome pedants, more concerned 
with split infinitives and six-dollar words than with clarity. Amis thought 
good writers should steer a middle course between these tribes.

If you think about the kinds of people whom policymakers generally hear from 
when they cast about for advice, the distinction between berks and wankers is 
rather useful.

The berks of the policy world are easiest to recognise. They're 
oversimplifiers, charlatans and blowhards. Berks can be trusted to take a 
complicated issue and deliver a simplistic and superficially plausible answer. 
In their search for a convenient message, they misrepresent research or ignore 
it entirely. They happily range far from their field of expertise and offer 
opinions on subjects about which they know little – while pretending to be on 
their expert home turf. And they are very good at soundbites.

Policymakers who consult berkish experts will get clear, actionable advice. 
But it could very well be wrong.

Most researchers, especially those with an academic background, will find 
avoiding berkhood comes naturally. After all, graduate school teaches rigour 
and caution. Academia reserves an especially withering contempt for professors 
who use their intellectual authority to advance controversial positions outside 
their area of expertise, from Linus Pauling's speculations on vitamin C to 
Niall Ferguson's opinions on US economic policy. No one wants to be a dodgy 
dossier merchant.

The risk of becoming a wanker is far more subtle. If the berks of the policy 
world are too ready to give an opinion, the wankers never give an opinion on 
anything, except to say how complicated it is.

In some ways, wankers are more harmless than berks, in the sense that being 
overconfident about what you know is often more dangerous than being too 
modest. Much bad policy is based on bad evidence, and rigorous research can 
expose that. Sometimes policymakers are asking the wrong questions entirely, 
and need to be told as much.

But policymakers who get all their advice from wankers are likely to be as 
ill-served as those who rely on berks. As anyone who's ever advised a friend 
will know, good advice is not just a matter of providing information, or 
summarising research. It also involves making a judgment about the balance of 
facts, helping frame the issue, and communicating in a way that the person 
you're counselling will understand and act on.

Alan Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> is not the first 
name that springs to mind when it comes to policy analysis. But in between 
seductions, his notorious diaries contain an interesting insight into the 
policy-making process. It comes when Clark (who fancied himself as a writer and 
thinker) seized the opportunity to write a controversial assessment of 
Britain's defence needs.

 … not only was my paper first in, it was only five pages long. All this stuff 
[civil servants are] sending up now is ten, twenty pages per memo. 
On-the-one-hand, on-the-other-hand balls. No one will bother, and in any case 
all will be read in the context of my argument.
Julian told me that the Treasury had commented that mine was 'the first 
decently written paper' they had seen for thirty years.

Clark was arguing that the British Army in Germany should be massively reduced 
in response to the end of the cold war, which ran counter to the Ministry of 
Defence's party line, and by force of argument and cunning, got his way. 
Clarity, brevity and a sense of narrative are all important parts of good 
advice, and this is something that wankers can forget in their desire to be 
comprehensive and robust. Correct advice that gets ignored because no one reads 
it, or because no one understands it, or because it doesn't inspire confidence, 
is not good advice.

Grumpy arch-conservatives like Amis and Clark are unlikely heroes for many 
wonks. But there are a couple of lessons here for researchers who want to 
influence policy. First of all, Amis's berks and wankers show the importance of 
avoiding extremes when advising policymakers. Neither glibness or prolixity 
make for useful advice. There are lots more tips on this from initiatives like 
theAlliance for Useful Evidence <http://www.alliance4usefulevidence.org/> (of 
which Nesta, my employer, is a funder) andWonkComms <http://wonkcomms.net/>.

Clark's musings on the Defence Review also show that drab advice often gets 
ignored. But they also hold a more optimistic message. They show that ideas and 
analysis can make a difference, and that advising can even be fun. Being a wonk 
may not be a straightforward choice for a researcher, but it can be worthwhile.

Stian Westlake is executive director of research at Nesta, the UK's innovation 
foundation. On Twitter he is@stianwestlake 
<http://www.twitter.com/stianwestlake>
 