
"Can a video game be art?" asked David Cage, the writer and director of 
Beyond: Two Souls, at the recent Bafta annual games lecture. I suspect he 
already knew the answer was yes, or at least he would have done if he'd ever 
heard the intro music to Streets of Rage 2, which more than comfortably 
satisfies the most useful definition of art I've come across, formulated by 
Scottish author Alasdair Gray: anything that stimulates people into "thinking 
about their feelings, and feeling about their thoughts". The complication being 
that, in reaching laudably for emotive, meaningful content, Beyond lurches so 
forcefully towards cinema that a more pertinent question for us to ask is, "Can 
this art be considered a video game?"

Beyond tells the story of a young woman, Jodie Holmes, who for unknown reasons 
is tied to an entity called Aiden. Her life is presented as a fragmented 
timeline, jumbled moments from tender infancy to defiant adulthood stacked upon 
each other non-chronologically. Players – if that is the right term – control 
both Jodie and Aiden during most of these scenes, hopping to Aiden's hovering 
perspective with a button press, gradually piecing together a story of 
laboratory experimentation, CIA induction and subsequent rebellion.

So why wring hands about whether or not it's a game? Because there's not much 
gameplay. Beyond is technically extraordinary, and certainly one of the finest 
looking things that run onPS3 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ps3>, but 
its points of interaction are building block-simple. Mostly they involve 
guiding Jodie through conversations with simple choices, or activating 
pre-determined physical motions with single button presses. Exploring scenes 
with Jodie or wandering through rooms (and walls) with Aiden grants more 
obvious freedom, but there is nothing skill-based here. You can only be better 
than someone else at Beyond if you shift the regular expectation of what 
"better" means – to experience the story more profoundly, perhaps, or to 
unobtrusively input button presses to allow the story to continue smoothly (and 
absolutely not raise and lower Jodie's can of beer repeatedly while saying 
"Emotion" in a thick French accent).
 Beyond: Two Souls: stars Ellen Page as Jodie Holmes 
So, Beyond might open up a troubling, legitimate gap in our use of the term 
"video game" to describe all interactive electronic media (or, you know, it 
might just be a starry-eyed evolution of the point-and-click adventure). More 
urgent is the issue of whether it's worth your time, and on this point it helps 
that Beyond looks fantastic. This isn't just a result of Quantic Dream's 
technology, but the artistic eyes behind it, and like the studio's previous 
game, Heavy Rain, Beyond is a triumph of both visual imagination and image 
quality. Like discontented Saturday night spouses we often complain that games 
have the ability to take us anywhere yet we always seem to end up in the same 
brown, dark corridors. Beyond gives us flair and spectacle – a warm, autumnal 
park at sunset; a still sheriff's office with dust motes illuminated by 
moonlight; a long, hazy road stretching through a baked orange desert.

But the core of Beyond is its story. Beyond is a predominantly narrative 
experience that has introduced elements of interactivity in order to heighten 
the emotional involvement of the player/viewer/interactee. One is only as 
enjoyable as the other, and both are imperfect, clumsy, and occasionally 
maddening, and yet somehow still compelling.

It helps that while Cage talks so earnestly about meaning and art he finds 
himself endearingly, irresistibly drawn to hokey sci-fi plotting. As talk of 
"the other side" and gateways built in government facilities take centre stage, 
it's clear that Beyond is exploitation dressed as art house – if not full-on 
Roger Corman, then at least John Carpenter, genre nous mixed with sporadic 
intelligence. This is no bad thing, as the juicy hook of this sci-fi pitch – 
who is Aiden, and where did he come from? – provides the mystery that gives the 
narrative its driving momentum.
 Beyond: Two Souls: a young Jodie 
But there are significant problems of choice and agency. This single hook is 
problematic when compared, say, with the multi-threaded structure of Heavy 
Rain. There Cage's writing weaves together an ensemble cast whose choices and 
interactions cumulatively represent a significant set of potential outcomes. 
There are substantial, plot-changing decisions (and mistakes) to be made, 
tension borne of consequence, of knowledge that each of those characters can 
die. Beyond features expensive Hollywood star Ellen Page as Jodie Holmes, a 
single protagonist essential to the narrative, which consequently must be 
driven in a largely pre-determined direction. This means choices are limited, 
or often (even more infuriatingly) illusory, which in turn means that there is 
no grander interactivity to compensate for the lack of moment-to-moment 
mechanical control.

And yet, as flawed and constricting as this format can feel, it still offers 
some extraordinary experiences. Many of Beyond's most touching moments are 
non-essential in narrative terms, and only discovered through exploration – 
like Jodie singing a mournful song on guitar as she busks for dinner money as a 
freezing down-and-out, or infant Jodie in her bedroom trying to play 
make-believe with dolls only for her real imaginary friend to disrupt her game.

Beyond deserves credit for presenting us with ideas and situations few other 
games (especially of this budget level) would touch, or even think of. The 
disrupted doll play is just part of a series of scenes in which young Jodie 
struggles to come to terms with her unique ability – Beyond is strongest here, 
in these early years, capturing the mannerisms and heartache of childhood with 
pinprick accuracy, turning a neighbourhood snowball fight into a rush of escape 
and excitement. When an older Jodie joins the CIA, she becomes a physically 
commanding action heroine – admittedly, the action moments aren't particularly 
fun to sort-of-play, but my young daughter, catching a glimpse of this section, 
fist-pumped at the very idea of a leading lady who can handle herself. Later, 
in a disorienting change of pace, several minutes are given over to Jodie alone 
in her apartment, preparing for an imminent dinner date – a rushed tidy, a 
flick through a cook book, a frantic decision about what to wear.
 Beyond: Two Souls: Willem Dafoe as Dr Dawkins 
The complicating factor is that, as well as doing things no other game does, 
Beyond also does some things really badly. There's a teenage party scene which 
seems like an excruciating parody of what teenage party scenes would be like if 
they were all written and conceived by middle-aged games designers (rule 
breaking, sexual frisson, rejection – it's Carrie in five clanging minutes). 
There's a lengthy portion in which Jodie lives with some Navajo indians 
("Because they're a bit mystic too" seems the general reasoning). And the 
climactic escalation of Beyond's final scenes will be familiar to anyone with a 
working knowledge of Brian Yuzna's films, the works of HP Lovecraft, or 
derivative cautionary science fiction in general.

All of this makes it difficult to plot the quality of Beyond on a regular 
scale. It's technically extraordinary, but mechanically base. The quality of 
its drama is wildly inconsistent, with elegant emotional moments followed by 
clumsy cliche. And it contorts itself in service to a story that's both deeply 
derivative but also reliably compelling. It's a maddening flux of excellence 
and overambition that rejects many overplayed conventions of big-budget gaming, 
but fails to provide a comprehensive alternative. Beyond feels like an 
unfinished – and often unconvincing – theory of where games can go next. It is 
not the way forward, but it might help show the way for others, and it's worth 
exploring for yourself.

• Nathan Ditum has opted not to provide a score for this review
 