
Streaming is now a global playing field, dominated by a handful of enormously 
powerful contenders all desperate to topple their rivals in a bid for ever 
greater influence. In other words, it’s a scary place for the little guy. Kudos 
to the homegrownBFI Player, then, for daring to shun such world-conquering 
tendencies, and instead carving out a niche as a decidedly domestic streaming 
alternative.

Though the platform is divided into a potentially confusing set of tiers and 
subcategories, each aspect of the BFI Player is an attempt to underscore the 
organisation’s longstanding role in British film culture. A transactional store 
mimics the high-end Curzon Home Cinema platform in prioritising UK indie films 
over glossier US fare, while also acknowledging the BFI’s part in their 
creation. Elsewhere, an impressive selection of titles from the BFI archive are 
available to stream for free, many as part of a time-sucking app that allows 
you to index a century of British cinema by postcode. And then there’s BFI 
Player Plus, a new subscription offering priced at £4.99 a month.

Despite the service boasting a relatively tiny catalogue of some 300 titles, 
most are specialist offerings unlikely to found on any competing platform, 
perhaps because Netflix’s coldly mercenary algorithms would implode at the very 
notion of licensing Shane Meadows’s meandering debut feature Small Time, which 
serves as a fascinating primer for the director’s illustrious career but drags 
like an 11-year-old’s feet on school induction day. Such rarities abound on the 
service, many of them the product of the BFI’s world-leading restoration work 
(next week, the platform will add a number of titles from the organisation’s 
ongoing Alan Clarke retrospective).

A personal touch is evident across the BFI Player, from its welcoming user 
interface to its insightful plot synopses, which favour thoughtful assessments 
of a film’s historical and artistic significance over the mixed-metaphor word 
jumbles of the Netflix catalogue (“His taste for revenge is a one-way ticket to 
adventure”, etc)

That said, the platform’s modest scale does have its downsides, especially 
when it comes to tech. Small Time, for instance, is presented in a frustrating 
windowbox format presumably carried over from an earlier DVD release – 
something the aspect ratio sticklers at Netflix would undoubtedly have 
corrected – while the film’s listless plotting is rendered all the more 
gruelling by the platform’s habitual crashes.
 