
Racing’s ruling body has moved to explain the background to events at Ascot on 
Champions Day, when four trainers were called before the stewards to explain 
various contraventions of the sport’s drug rules. The trainers’ staff had been 
found to possess substances which were either not allowed in the racecourse 
stables or for which permission was required but had not been granted.

The offences, while warranting low-level penalties, caused some consternation 
on social media, in light of four cases arising from such a prestigious card. 
But a BHA official expressed surprise at the degree of interest, pointed to 
other cases this year which have gone almost unreported and denied any 
suggestion that there might have been a change in BHA policy aimed at shocking 
trainers on a high-profile day.

Almanzor beats Found again to win the Champion Stakes at Ascot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/almanzor-beats-found-champion-stakes-ascot-horse-racing>
“The checking of bags in the stables is fairly routine,” said the BHA’s Robin 
Mounsey, “and a logical way of checking that prohibited substances aren’t 
present on raceday. There have been other cases this year which have not 
attracted as much attention and can be found on the BHA’s website.

“The substances involved at Ascot are very innocuous, being electrolytes and a 
gastric ulcer treatment, but it is right that we should follow up on these 
things when they are discovered.”

Two visiting French trainers, Jean-Claude Rouget and Francois Rohaut, were 
among those hauled before the stewards. Hugo Palmer and James Fanshawe were the 
others. The runners trained by all four, includingthe Champion Stakes winner, 
Almanzor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/almanzor-beats-found-champion-stakes-ascot-horse-racing>
, were “routine tested” and the cases referred on to the BHA for a final 
verdict.

Palmer shouldered responsibility for his involvement which, he said, was the 
result of his team having to manage runners at Maisons-Laffitte, Keeneland, 
Ascot, Newcastle, Redcar and Wolverhampton within a 36-hour period. “Our kit 
was at a stretch and, when the Ascot kit was prepared, an old box was grabbed 
which still had some detritus in the bottom and new kit on top.

Tony Hind: The man Flat jockeys go to if they want to become champion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/gary-hind-jim-crowley-champion-flat-jockey>
“Unfortunately that detritus included an out-of-date packet of very routine 
antibiotics and very routine electrolyte paste. We would keep these things 
routinely in the horsebox but not in the racecourse stables. Horses can 
sometimes be given electrolytes on the way home if we feel they had a very hard 
race or, if they sustain a cut in a race, we might seek permission to 
administer antibiotics on the site.

“Both were very old and out of date. They were not there with the intention of 
being used. No one knew they were there. But I accept we’ve broken the letter 
of the law and will be fined. We’re putting procedures in place at home to make 
sure it doesn’t happen again.

“But I do think there is a wider point and the question needs to be asked, why 
the BHA feel it’s appropriate to go through a massive spot check of every 
trainer’s bags on racing’s biggest day, as if they were looking to make an 
example of people.

“I just wish they would take their finger off the self-destruct button, after 
the whip issue ahead of the first Champions Day.” Palmer was referring to the 
lasting controversy that arose in 2011 when the BHA ramped up punishments for 
whip-related infractions days before the Ascot fixture, only to soften those 
punishments some weeks later.

Mounsey noted that previous cases could be found on the BHA’s online database 
by searching for Rule (C)33. They include cases involving the trainers Gay 
Kelleway and John Ryan that were referred to the BHA, for which the resolutions 
do not seem to have been made public yet.

It appears that Mille Et Mille, trained in France by Christophe Lerner, was 
allowed to take part in the Gold Cup at Royal Ascot in June, finishing fourth 
at 33-1, after it was found that Lerner had “administered an allowable 
substance in the racecourse stables without the permission of the veterinary 
officer”. Lerner was fined £290 and the horse was tested.
 