
An investigation is under way into suspicious betting patterns around the 
withdrawal of Faugheen from theChampion Hurdle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/champion-hurdle>. The horse’s all-conquering 
trainer, Willie Mullins, who is not suspected of any wrongdoing, spoke to 
officials from the British Horseracing Authority some months ago and was 
reported on Sunday to be interested in the case’s progress.

“I wasn’t given specific details by the BHA,” Mullins was quoted as saying by 
the Irish Times, “but they were looking for certain dates and times and I did 
that. I haven’t heard anything else. I’m as anxious to know what happened, if 
anything happened, as quickly as possible.”

Faugheen won last year’s Champion Hurdle, has been beaten only once in his 
career and wasthe hot favourite for this year’s running 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/17/faugheen-ruled-out-champion-hurdle-injury-cheltenham-festival>
 of the Cheltenham race until 17 February, one month before the Festival 
contest, when Mullins reported that he had a damaged suspensory ligament and 
would miss the rest of the season. It now appears that a number of bets against 
Faugheen, placed before that bad news became public, are under investigation.

The Irish Times reports that the sums involved were sufficient to change the 
odds on offer and that those under suspicion have not yet been paid, pending 
the outcome of the investigation.

The BHA has looked into several similar cases in which individuals were 
suspected of having used inside information to profit from injuries to 
high-profile horses. As yet no such case has resulted in charges being brought.

Faugheen puts up ‘electrifying’ show to land the Irish Champion Hurdle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/faugheen-irish-champion-hurdle-leopardstown-willie-mullins-douvan-victoria-pendleton>
However, there are rules that could be invoked if the BHA felt sufficiently 
sure of the evidence, including the general bar on passing inside information 
for reward. The BHA also has a catch-all rule under which it can act against 
those who engage in conduct “prejudicial to the integrity, proper conduct or 
good reputation of horse racing in Great Britain”.

The BHA is not limited to acting against licensed professionals, owners or 
racing employees. It can ban members of the general public from entering 
racecourses and racing stables and can ban trainers and jockeys from speaking 
to such people about racing.

A BHA spokesman said on Sunday: “It is BHA policy not to comment on 
investigations or speculation surrounding potential investigations.”
 