
The British Horseracing Authority is urgently investigating how a race at 
Musselburgh on Thursday afternoon was widely advertised as being staged over 10 
furlongs when it was run over nine.

Horses were entered and declared for the HBJ Gately Handicap, worth £2,588 to 
the winner, on the basis it was a 10-furlong race. The racecard at Musselburgh 
also listed its distance as 10 furlongs, along with the Racing Post and most 
national newspapers, and the fact it was officially scheduled to be contested 
over a furlong less became apparent only late on Thursday morning.

Cheltenham Festival: Sprinter Sacre wins Champion Chase – as it happened | 
Barry Glendenning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/16/cheltenham-festival-day-two-live>
Moments before the off, as betting on the race reached its peak, the Racing 
Post’s website still listed the contest as being over 10 furlongs, although 
other internet sites had corrected the distance to nine. Despite the confusion, 
the race was not declared void for betting purposes, with Exclusive Diamond, 
the winner, returned as the 5-6 favourite.

Robin Mounsey, the BHA’s media manager, said the error was “deeply 
regrettable” and the authority is working with Weatherbys, which handles the 
sport’s administration, to find the cause.

“The implications for horsemen and the betting public are obvious and we would 
like to apologise to all affected,” Mounsey said. “As soon as the issue was 
identified, a correction was distributed by Weatherbys, and all trainers were 
called to inform them of the error and to inform them they were able to 
withdraw theirhorses and have entry fees refunded should they not wish to run 
over the revised distance. No trainers took up this option.

“The BHA and Weatherbys are working together as a priority to understand what 
caused the issue. This is a serious matter and once the cause has been 
determined we will take whatever action is appropriate, including taking all 
steps to try to ensure that this does not happen again.”

On a busy day for the regulator, Any Currency became the first horse since 
1980 to be disqualified from a race at theCheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival> owing to a failed 
post-race dope test when the BHA’s disciplinary panel confirmed Martin 
Keighley’s chaser had been stripped of his win in the Glenfarclas Cross Country 
Chase in March.

Any Currency tested positive for triamcinolone acetonide (TCA), a painkiller 
used to treat horses in training but not allowed to be present in a horse’s 
system on a race day. The normal withdrawal time after use of the drug is 14 
days but the disciplinary panel accepted Keighley’s evidence to the hearing 
that Any Currency had been administered with TCA 41 days before his race at 
Cheltenham, describing its continued presence in the horse’s system as 
“exceptional”. As a result the panel did not impose a fine.

“I’m delighted the panel has vindicated my actions by deciding not to impose a 
fine against me,” the trainer said in a statement released through his 
solicitor. “Naturally still to be punished by losing the race in these 
circumstances is difficult to take but we must now look forward to the next 
Festival and Any Currency’s next run where I and my team will be all the more 
determined to win.”

Mark Boothright, who runs the syndicate which owns Any Currency, suggested the 
BHA had “bottled it” in remarks reported in the Racing Post. “The ruling is he 
has been disqualified, he will lose all the prize money but that Martin has 
done nothing wrong, so the BHA have bottled it,” he said. “It’s a complete 
shambles.”

Mounsey stressed the Authority’s “strict liability” rules on positive tests 
left the panel with little alternative but to disqualify Any Currency from 
first place. “There is no discretion,” he said. “The rule is one of strict 
liability and once a horse has tested positive, the automatic consequence is 
that it is disqualified, irrespective of whether any penalty is imposed. Our 
rules are in line with the European racing community, and the majority of the 
international racing community.”

Josies Orders, the runner-up in March, was promoted to first place. Any 
Currency is the first horse to be disqualified from first place for a failed 
dope test at the Festival since Tied Cottage, who was first across the line in 
the Gold Cup in 1980.
 