
Racing’s disciplinary system is to be separated from the sport’s ruling body 
as part of changes recommended by the Quinlan review, published on Thursday. 
Christopher Quinlan QC, hired to give an independent overview of the system 
which has attracted so much criticism this year, concludes in a 151-page 
document that the current set-up is broadly fair but makes 24 recommendations 
for change, all of which have been immediately accepted by theBritish 
Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority>.

BHA commits to publishing Quinlan review of disciplinary panel process
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/27/british-horseracing-authority-bha-publish-quinlan-review-disciplinary-process>
However, Quinlan declines to say anything about the vexed Jim Best case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/28/jim-best-high-court-ruling-rehearing-bha>
, which created the need for his review to be accelerated. A finding against 
Best was quashed in May because of an appearance of bias and insufficiency in 
the published reasons, with the result that the case will be reheard in 
November. As the case remains live, Quinlan says it would be inappropriate for 
him to investigate it.

His main area of concern is racing’s disciplinary panel, which, he says, “has 
not evolved sufficiently with modern and best practice. That is not through 
malice or ill will or bad faith on the part of anyone”.

A BHA director, currently Jamie Stier, has been responsible for running the 
panel and appointing its members but that is to change. Under the new system, 
the panel is to be run by a “judicial panel chairman” who is to be a senior 
legal practitioner, independent of the BHA, with in-depth knowledge of the 
sport.

He is to preside over an expanded pool of people who can be called upon to 
make up disciplinary panels, to be doubled in size to 22, including more 
lawyers but excluding those who also work as raceday stewards. Those stewards 
have accounted for at least two-thirds of all panels under the existing system 
but Quinlan rules that “to remove them would enhance confidence in the process 
… by addressing the concern that active stewards adjudicating upon the 
decisions of stewards with whom they have officiated is unfair”.

Instead, Quinlan urges broadening membership of the panel, perhaps to include 
former trainers or jockeys, or veterinary surgeons. He adds that it would be 
desirable for an experienced lawyer to chair every inquiry, rather than just 
the more complex cases, as happens now.

Quinlan appears stunned at the informality of the system for appointments to 
the disciplinary panel. “It might be said to be organic,” he notes, the closest 
he ever comes to being scathing. “Insofar as there is a procedure, it is not 
set down in the rules or elsewhere. Plainly it is not transparent.”

Rehearing of BHA case against trainer Jim Best delayed further
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/06/rehearing-bha-case-against-trainer-jim-best-delayed-further>
He recommends that the appointments procedure be formalised and opened up to 
competition against published criteria. He sets down time limits for 
publication of verdicts and clarifies the situations in which the BHA must 
disclose documentation to the defence. There is to be a fast-track system for 
minor offences and pro bono advice for those who cannot afford their own 
defence.

Quinlan also tackles the disciplinary panel meetings which have been the 
subject of some suspicion, as they amount to regular meetings between those who 
act as judges and prosecutors in BHA cases, with others excluded and no minutes 
published. While he stops short of insisting on opening those up to external 
scrutiny, he offers stern counsel about what can be discussed.

“It should not be a vehicle by which the regulator or the defence comments 
upon the correctness or otherwise of the decisions,” Quinlan says. “Nor should 
it be one in which the regulator or the defence are able to make submissions 
on, for example, the meaning of the rules or of policies.”

BHA officials have welcomed Quinlan’s review and expressed the hope that a 
judicial panel chairman might be appointed by the end of the year, in time to 
appoint the rest of the newly expanded panel by the end of March. 
Simultaneously, the authority announced a reshuffle of responsibility among its 
senior personnel so that the duties of Adam Brickell, the recently departed 
integrity director, are absorbed by his former colleagues.

Nick Rust, the BHA chief executive, said: “The changes we are making mean that 
everyone connected with our sport will be able to have the utmost confidence in 
the impartiality and fairness of the BHA’s disciplinary panels. As well as 
providing his own expert, independent view, Christopher Quinlan’s report has 
given us the opportunity to address the concerns of our sport’s participants 
and stakeholders and to improve their confidence in what we do and how we do 
it.”

The review was also welcomed by Paul Struthers, chief executive of the 
Professional Jockeys Association, who has been advocating changes to the 
existing system for years. “Whilst we have never accused the disciplinary panel 
of, nor believed its members were, biased, we believed that the perception or 
feeling of such bias existed for various reasons,” he said.

“It is important that these recommendations, along with those outstanding from 
the previous integrity review, are implemented in full and it is to the credit 
of the BHA board that they have all been accepted and will be implemented 
within a six- to eight-month time frame, which in our view is reasonable, given 
their scope. This needs to be done in a way that is collegiate and has the 
involvement and buy-in of relevant stakeholders.

“It is also important that this is complemented by a continued culture shift 
as already advocated and demonstrated by Nick Rust. Both elements are equally 
crucial to a fairer system that remains robust and to regaining the full 
confidence of participants and the public alike in the BHA’s disciplinary and 
integrity processes.”

Rupert Arnold, chief executive of the National Trainers Federation, was also 
encouraged by the review. “We believe trainers will welcome Christopher Quinlan 
QC’s recommendations,” Arnold said. “His finding that, viewed in totality, the 
BHA provides a fair disciplinary system is important as it clarifies any doubts 
that some may have had. That in itself engenders confidence.

“However, more significantly, the BHA’s confirmation that it will adopt all 
the report’s recommendations for further strengthening of the disciplinary 
structure, making it structurally independent of the BHA means trainers will be 
confident that when they face a disciplinary panel, it meets the highest 
standards of modern sports regulation.

“Another positive aspect of the report is the recommendation to broaden 
membership of the panels to include suitably qualified people with racing 
knowledge. This will create a deeper sense that disciplinary decisions are made 
with appropriate understanding of the evidence.

“Combining the licensing and disciplinary panels makes sense, though we have 
some concerns that applicants for a licence do not currently have more timely 
access to an independent assessment of their case. This could be dealt with 
using similar protocols to those that have been recommended for disciplinary 
cases in the BHA’s Integrity Review carried out earlier this year.

“Finally, in relation to the changes to the BHA Executive team, we are 
particularly pleased at the news that a new role of director of equine health 
and welfare is to be created. Equine welfare is a primary objective in our 
sport; this position gives it the standing it deserves in the governance of 
racing.”
 