
The Jim Best case has exploded again into a furious row between racing’s 
ruling body and solicitors for the Lewes trainer, with theBritish Horseracing 
Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority> 
having decided to insist on a date for the proposed rehearing, despite 
objections from Best’s lawyers.

The BHA has also refused to budge as to the identity of the three people it 
wishes to make up the disciplinary panel, despite queries being raised in 
relation to two of them.

BHA hope to stick Jim Best rehearing timetable after legal challenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/06/jim-best-legal-team-lose-faith-bha-rehearing>
The Authority now faces an accusation that it is determined to hold the 
rehearing before publication of the Quinlan review, an independent survey of 
its disciplinary practices and procedures which is due to be released on 30 
September. The BHA says the Best case must be heard in the week beginning 19 
September and refuses to consider a fortnight’s delay, as suggested by Best’s 
solicitor.

Robin Mounsey, a spokesman for the BHA, denied that this amounted to 
strong-arming Best, saying the trainer could still voice his objections to the 
panel itself as to the date and the membership of the panel, with a right of 
appeal beyond that. Mounsey was not impressed by suggestions that Best might 
not wish to antagonise the panel from the very outset by asking them to recuse 
themselves.

The BHA’s inflexibility drew anger from Harry Stewart-Moore, Best’s solicitor, 
who pointed to the fact that the regulator’s own QC, Graeme McPherson, had said 
at the appeal hearing in May: “This is not a case where anyone would be imposed 
on Mr Best or where the objective observer would be able to say, ‘Oh, the BHA 
has picked its own chairman.’”

Stewart-Moore said it was “deeply cynical and utterly unacceptable” for the 
BHA to “crowbar” the rehearing into the time available before Christopher 
Quinlan QC publishes his report.

“In the absence of any meaningful explanation as to why the BHA insists on the 
rehearing taking place in September, the obvious conclusion is that it wants 
one more go at Mr Best before it is forced to clean up its act,” he said.

Jim Best conviction to be quashed following BHA climbdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/13/jim-best-conviction-quashed-british-horseracing-authority-climbdown>
“Further, having apologised to Mr Best three times and assured him that the 
BHA would not impose its own chairman while grovelling before Anthony Boswood 
QC [the appeal chairman] in the hope of securing the right to hold a rehearing, 
the BHA has now unilaterally imposed a panel and has refused to engage with Mr 
Best regarding his entirely legitimate concerns on that subject.

“Frankly, any other organisation would have accepted by now that there cannot 
be a fair rehearing of the Best case. The BHA, however, appears determined to 
destroy what remains of its credibility by conducting the rehearing in such a 
way that no one can have any faith that a fair process has taken place.”

That met with a robust response from Mounsey, who said it was in the best 
interests of the sport for the rehearing to take place as soon as possible. He 
added that the week of 19 September had been identified in May and that all 
parties had been asked to keep it free.

“The BHA has sought to put together a suitably qualified and impartial panel, 
in accordance with the rules of racing. It is entirely incorrect to state that 
a panel is being imposed on anyone.

“While we have proposed a provisional panel – as Mr Best has chosen not to 
accept our offer to use Sport Resolutions to convene one – we also already have 
in place a process which allows the parties to formally raise a challenge to 
any panel member, a process which, if followed to its conclusion, would see an 
appeal board ruling on the suitability of the panel. This process is clearly 
fair and transparent and will ensure the appointment of a suitably qualified 
and impartial panel.”

Trainer Jim Best found guilty of ordering jockey to stop two horses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/11/jim-best-guilty-ordering-jockey-stop-two-horses>
Mounsey saw no benefit in delaying the rehearing until after Quinlan’s report, 
saying that the review in question had been announced in March, “prior to the 
issues regarding the Jim Best case having arisen. It is entirely separate from 
the Jim Best case and racing’s disciplinary process must continue while that 
review is ongoing.” He did, however, acknowledge that the Best fallout had 
prompted an independent person, Quinlan, to be put in charge of the review.

Best is accused of instructing a jockey, Paul John, to stop two horses in 
December, which the trainer denies. His four-year ban from a hearing in 
February was quashed due to an appearance of bias and inadequacy of the panel’s 
published reasons.

The BHA’s panel for the rehearing will consist of Sir William Gage, a former 
High Court judge, Nicholas Wachman, a former senior steward in Ireland, and the 
barrister William Norris QC, who is to chair it. Norris was the man proposed by 
Sport Resolutions and the BHA appear particularly keen on him, having put his 
name forward once again. Norris has served on the National Anti Doping Panel, 
as has Matthew Lohn, the solicitor whose involvement caused the original Best 
verdict to be quashed. The BHA insists that that fact should be no barrier to 
the involvement of Norris.

The Quinlan review could produce many recommendations on subjects affecting 
the Best rehearing. These include the manner in which the BHA appoints 
disciplinary panel members, the qualifications necessary to sit on such a 
panel, whether the BHA should continue to use a QC who is also a licensed 
trainer to present its cases, the BHA’s approach to disclosure, the use made of 
expert evidence and the manner in which the BHA presents its cases.

Quinlan may yet urge a complete change of approach in any or all of these 
areas. That would cause difficulty for the BHA if Best’s case had been 
concluded under the old system just days beforehand, but officials appear 
sanguine at the prospect.
 