
Details have emerged of arguments made by the British Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority> against 
disclosing a document that has since been judged to be relevant in the case it 
is pursuing against the Lewes trainer Jim Best. Racing’s ruling body repeatedly 
refused to share with Best’s lawyers a record of communications between the BHA 
and its sole prosecution witness, the jockey Paul John, who was accused 
alongside Best in a matter relating to two horses that were allegedly stopped.

Trainer Jim Best found guilty of ordering jockey to stop two horses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/11/jim-best-guilty-ordering-jockey-stop-two-horses>
The BHA denies that any deal was made with John in advance of the initial 
hearing in March. At the appeal hearing in the case, however, Best’s QC, 
Jonathan Laidlaw, argued that consideration should be given to an email dated 
31 January from the BHA to John’s solicitor, Rory Mac Neice. The email, which 
alludes to a recent telephone conversation on the subject, shows the BHA 
writing to confirm what it will seek in the way of punishment for John if his 
evidence at the hearing is as Mac Neice indicates. On the basis that John will 
say he stopped the two horses on the instructions of Best, the BHA says it will 
not ask for John to be disqualified from the sport. The BHA position is 
understood to be that the email does not amount to a deal or evidence of same.

Best denies the charges. On his behalf Laidlaw began the March hearing by 
asking the disciplinary panel to order disclosure of communications between the 
BHA and John that he argued were “plainly relevant” to the question of 
motivation for John giving evidence against Best. The BHA had refused to 
disclose that material before the hearing and did so again at the hearing.

According to the BHA transcript, the regulator’s position was: “There is 
nothing relevant to credibility in there whatsoever … No assurance or promise 
has been made to Mr John as to how he might be dealt with”.

The panel chairman, Matthew Lohn, nevertheless ordered that the material was 
“potentially capable of being relevant” and ordered the BHA to disclose it to 
Best’s lawyers. However Lohn made no reference, in the reasons for his eventual 
decision to ban Best for four years, to the January email or the arguments on 
that subject presented by Best’s side.

Jim Best conviction to be quashed following BHA climbdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/13/jim-best-conviction-quashed-british-horseracing-authority-climbdown>
That was a point noted by Anthony Boswood QC in his appeal verdict, when he 
quashed the verdict against Best, the insufficiency of Lohn’s reasons being one 
of the reasons for that outcome, along with concerns over a perception of bias 
relating to the panel chairman, who had carried out some private work for the 
BHA. Boswood wrote: “Surprisingly the panel does not refer in its reasons to 
the arrangements made between [the BHA] and Mr Mac Neice which led to Mr John’s 
giving evidence against Mr Best, although these were clearly of potential 
relevance on the issue of Mr John’s credibility.”

The BHA’s approach to disclosure is one of many topics due to be addressed in 
the Quinlan review of disciplinary procedures, to be published on 30 September. 
Best’s lawyers argue the rehearing in his case should not take place until 
after that review but BHA officials maintain it is appropriate to stick to the 
scheduled rehearing date in mid-September. Best’s lawyers have also said they 
are “deeply troubled” by the BHA’s handling of disclosure issues.

Pressed on the subject of disclosure, a BHA spokesman confined himself to 
saying: “The case regarding Jim Best remains ongoing, with a rehearing to be 
scheduled in due course. It would not be appropriate to comment on these 
matters while the proceedings remain ongoing. It is usual BHA policy not to 
comment regarding ongoing investigations or disciplinary cases.”

The BHA email of 31 January to Mac Neice states: “I am emailing to confirm the 
position that the BHA intends to adopt as regards the appropriate penalty for 
Paul John on the basis that (1) he is intending to plead guilty to the 2 
alleged breaches of Rule (B)59.2, and (2) his evidence as to why he rode the 
horses as he did at Plumpton and Towcester will be as you have previously 
indicated i.e. because Mr Best had instructed him to ride the horses other than 
on their merits.

“On that basis the BHA would not [‘not’ was underlined in the email] be 
suggesting to the panel that disqualification would be an appropriate penalty 
for Mr John. The BHA’s position would be (1) that the breaches should be 
categorised under d), e) or f) in the Guide to Procedures and Penalties (2) 
that in the ordinary course of events the appropriate penalty would be a 
suspension of a jockey’s licence, but (3) that since Mr John does not currently 
hold a licence, the appropriate period for any suspension (i.e. whatever 
suspension the panel would otherwise have been [sic] imposed) should be 
replaced by a period of the same duration for which the licensing committee 
should not grant him a licence.”

The BHA’s decision to categorise John’s breach “under d), e) or f)” is highly 
significant, since the entry point punishment for such offences is a 42-day 
suspension. If the BHA wished to argue there had been some reward to the jockey 
for his rule-breaking, it would be alleging a breach under category a), for 
which the entry point is an eight-year ban.

Charlotte Kerton, a jockey found to have stopped two horses, was told by the 
BHA in 2012 that she would be prevented from applying for a jockey’s licence 
for six years. In her case, the panel, chaired by Lohn, ruled she had stopped 
horses for reward, the reward being the prospect of more rides from the trainer 
involved. It made that finding even though there was no direct evidence of such 
rides being promised.

In the case involving John and Best, the BHA does not argue that there was any 
reward for John’s actions, not even the prospect of more rides. As a 
consequence, his suspension was for six months, backdated to the time he left 
Best’s yard, so that he was able to reapply for a licence less than three 
months after the panel’s reasons were published. He has recently been granted a 
licence to ride as an amateur jockey, stating that he wishes to recover the 
sport’s trust before trying to be a professional once more.

During the March hearing, Lohn asked on behalf of the panel if the BHA wished 
to argue there was an aspect of reward in the fact that Best booked John to 
ride for him at Lingfield just days after the alleged stopping rides. The BHA 
response was that it did not wish to make that argument.

Asked about the difference between the BHA’s handling of the two cases, a BHA 
spokesman said the cases were decided independently of the regulator by 
disciplinary panels for reasons that were published at the time.
 