
Graeme McPherson will not present the case against Jim Best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/06/rehearing-bha-case-against-trainer-jim-best-delayed-further>
 when the latter’s vexed disciplinary case comes to a rehearing later this 
month. McPherson has acted for the British Horseracing Authority from the 
outset in the Best case and is believed to have missed only one procedural 
hearing to this point but the ruling body has decided to use a different 
barrister in order to minimise possible controversy at the rehearing.

Rehearing of BHA case against trainer Jim Best delayed further
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/06/rehearing-bha-case-against-trainer-jim-best-delayed-further>
Best is accused of ordering the jockey Paul John to stop two horses in races 
last December, a charge he denies. The rehearing, starting on 21 November, is 
expected to last five days.

Asked to confirm the change, the BHA’s Robin Mounsey said: “Jim Best and his 
legal representatives have raised objections to the BHA’s decision to instruct 
Graeme McPherson QC to present this case. While we do not agree with their 
objections, we do not want the parties involved in this case to waste any time 
considering the matter, or to risk any further delay to the rehearing.

“Accordingly, the BHA has instructed Louis Weston to present its case. It is 
in the best interests of racing to ensure this case proceeds without delay and 
we will not allow any dispute about the choice of the BHA’s counsel to provide 
any possible reason or justification for further delay.”

The BHA has, in recent years, made regular use of McPherson in presenting its 
cases at disciplinary hearings. It does not accept there is anything 
inappropriate about hiring him while also being required to regulate him in his 
capacity as a licensed trainer and maintained that position in the face of 
controversy this summer.

In June, a BHA panel disqualified a Jamie Snowden-trained winner and awarded 
the race to the runner-up, trained by McPherson, who had presented his own 
argument in favour of that outcome. Snowden took to social media to complain 
about the regular working relationship between McPherson and the BHA, 
suggesting it raised a perception of bias.

In response, a BHA spokesman at that time noted McPherson “has won and lost 
cases when acting both for and against the BHA. He is subject to our 
disciplinary procedures, just like every other licensed participant.”

There is no suggestion of wrongdoing on the part of McPherson, who declined to 
comment when asked about the BHA’s decision not to use him in the Best 
rehearing. It is believed he remains instructed by the ruling body in at least 
one other case.

Best’s representatives are understood to have made sustained objections to 
McPherson’s involvement, noting in particular that McPherson and Best, both 
being trainers, are commercial rivals. They contend it is inappropriate for one 
trainer to present the prosecution case against another.

While the BHA maintains it is giving way only in the particular circumstances 
of the vexed Best case, any trainer facing disciplinary proceedings in the 
future and seeing McPherson on the other side of the room may be tempted to run 
a similar argument.

McPherson being substituted for Weston is only the latest personnel change in 
the buildup to the rehearing. The need for a rehearing was triggered by the 
discovery Matthew Lohn, a solicitor who chaired the original panel, had also 
been engaged to give private advice to the BHA, raising an appearance of bias; 
a completely new panel will be convened this time.

The BHA’s integrity director, Adam Brickell, left the regulator in September, 
insisting his departure was in no way related to the unfolding Best-related 
embarrassment. Brickell explained his March review of the department had 
resulted in his own role being marginalised.
 