
Several smaller racecourses could be forced out of business over the coming 
year if the government does not act to reform the horserace betting levy, 
senior racing figures have warned.

Revealing that the predicted take from this year's levy – the 10% charge on 
all domestic horseracing bets that goes to racing – was likely to be £77m at 
best, the British Horseracing Authority's chief executive, Nic Coward, warned 
"tough choices" would have to be made, saying: "The consequences of this will 
put at risk quite a number of well-loved racecourses and the ongoing viability 
of trainers and their yards, and all the good that racing does."

It is understood that unless the BHA succeeds with its long-running campaign 
to force the government to overhaul fundamentally the relationship between 
bookmakers and horseracing, it will be forced to slash the prize money that is 
allocated to smaller courses under the complex distribution formula. With a 
parallel move under the Racing For Change banner to persuade newspapers to 
promote featured meetings or races at the expense of the racecards of smaller 
courses, the results could be cataclysmic for smaller courses such as Ludlow, 
Hereford, Nottingham, Leicester and Folkestone.

Three years ago, the income from the levy was £116m but this year it will be 
no more than £77m. The BHA argues it should be between £130m and £150m if all 
bets taken on UK races are taken into account.

The BHA has long argued that the liberalisation of the gambling market under 
the Labour government, combined with a failure to redraw the boundaries of its 
relationship with horseracing, could fatally undermine the sport.

Major bookmakers such as Ladbrokes and William Hill have taken their online 
arms overseas where they are not subject to the levy, while the expansion of 
betting exchanges has also had an effect.

Coward claimed the relaxation of rules that prevented a proliferation of 
betting shops in a certain area had also caused a knock-on effect. Up to six in 
10 bookmakers now fall below the threshold at which they have to pay the full 
10% rate.

Coward believes the situation has reached "crunch point" and urged John 
Penrose, the minister for tourism who now has responsibility for the issue 
within the Department of Culture, Media and Sport, to bring forward "wholesale 
reform" as a matter of urgency.

Coward said: "We are at the crunch point and those solutions have to be 
applied by the government and the levy Board because bookmakers will continue 
to exploit the loopholes to their maximum advantage, to the detriment of 
racing.Racing is a complex endeavour involving a great many people across the 
country. In the coming weeks and months we will have to address that. It is 
that close."

Under the previous government, proposed plans to redraw the relationship 
between racing and bookmakers by replacing the levy with a new statutory 
database right and giving the Tote to the industry were stymied by European 
law. In Labour's sports manifesto, published just before the election, it 
promised to ensure all operators taking bets on British races paid the Levy.

Coward and his colleagues plan to make a strident case to Penrose in the 
coming weeks, highlighting the potential knock on effect for rural economies 
and for racing as a sport if they fail in their campaign. They will argue that 
the energy generated by the Racing For Change agenda will dissipate if they 
can't afford to fund it properly.

Greg Wood, page 9 
 