
The British Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority> pointed to 
the government’s “clear and unambiguous” commitments to the sport on Wednesday 
as it effectively shrugged off a claim that the sport could receive only £10.4m 
in direct funding from the betting industry when – or if – the Levy system is 
replaced next year. The BHA also said it remains confident that the proposed 
start date for the new regime of 1 April 2017 will be achieved, despite 
widespread fears that Brexit could delay the process on both sides of the 
Channel.

Tony McCoy says he is unlikely to move to ITV in January
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/30/tony-mccoy-not-approached-by-itv>
Racing hopes, and expects, to receive at least £100m annually in direct 
funding from bookmakers when the Levy system, which has returned money to the 
sport from betting for more than 50 years,is finally abolished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/02/government-to-end-racing-levy-funding-british-horseracing-authority>
. The claim that it could in fact be little more than £10m was published in 
Wednesday’s edition of the Racing Post, and is taken from a report commissioned 
by the government and compiled by Frontier Economics, a consultancy firm.

About two dozen copies of the report were circulated to key industry 
stakeholders, including a number of bookmakers’ representatives, this month. 
According to the Post’s report, it examines a number of possible models for the 
new funding system, including an extreme case in which the bookies’ payments 
for media rights – such as live broadcasts of racing in betting shops and 
online – are taken into account, along with their racing sponsorship programme. 
That would, in the economists’ opinion, leave only £10.4m to be raised directly 
from betting.

The Levy system dates back to the legalisation of off-course cash betting in 
the 1960s and the decision to replace it follows the shift in recent years 
towards online gambling in offshore locations, beyond the reach of the Levy 
Board.

The annual Levy yield averaged more than £100m before the betting industry’s 
move offshore, without taking subsequent inflation into account, and while 
maintaining its line of refusing to comment on a leaked report, the BHA made it 
clear on Wednesday that it remains confident its £100m target figure is 
realistic.

“We are working on the unambiguous and repeated government commitment that it 
will restore to racing a fair contribution from all operators, which has been 
lost to racing simply because of the shift towards offshore remote betting,” 
Will Lambe, the BHA’s director of corporate affairs, said.

Referring to the timetable for introduction of the new funding regime, Lambe 
added: “The replacement of the current Levy is on track to take effect from 
April 2017. Work within racing is at an advanced stage on various fronts, 
including the formation of the Racing Authority to distribute the enhanced 
funding.

“Our own direct discussions with the European Commission have been very 
encouraging, including since the referendum, and we have had confirmation that 
this case has clear precedents, most recently in France, and will be dealt with 
as promptly as possible.”

While the precise details of the Frontier Economics report remain 
confidential, the Post’s report suggests that it made some extreme, indeed 
almost grotesque, assumptions to reach its figure of £10.4m.

These include an analysis of high-profile racing that the economists believe 
would “still take place without off-course betting” and seems to ignore the 
vast supply chain, including maidens, novice events and other lower-grade 
races, that underpins the major events. Regulatory, integrity and welfare 
expenditure are only a few of the other essential costs that seem to have been 
ignored.

It is inconceivable that top-level racing could survive without off-course 
betting turnover feeding money into the system and any prediction based on an 
assumption that it might is one that can be safely ignored.
 