
The wood-panelled mountain restaurant sits on wide meandering slopes dotted 
with larch trees. Beyond the floor-to-ceiling windows, high-speed chair-lifts 
and gleaming gondolas whisk you across the sixth largest ski area in Europe - 
an area bigger than Banff or Breckenridge. But this is no big-name French or 
Austrian resort; it is Grandvalira in Andorra.

Ten years ago, the Pyrenean principality was the bargain basement of European 
skiing, with tacky apartments, raucous nightlife, and an unremarkable 
collection of five separate areas mainly suited to beginners. But now a £100 
million makeover has created two giant ski areas with modern lifts flanked by a 
new generation of hotels.

The largest area is Grandvalira, a union of the once rival resorts of Pas de 
la Casa/Grau Roig on the French border and adjoining Soldeu/El Tarter. The 
previously private resort of Canillo has also been linked into the 63-lift 
system, and a lengthy gondola from the town of Encamp provides access to the 
highest point.

Further down the track are plans to add more resorts across the border in 
France. Grandvalira has bought the land between Pas de La Casa and 
Porté-Puymorens. This will add another 50km of runs as well as some good 
ski-touring, powder bowls and off-piste couloirs.

Mountain restaurants abound. Refugi Llac de Pessons is the gourmet choice. 
Close behind is Gall de Bosc with Catalan mountain cuisine and spectacular 
views. Try Faves (warm bean, pea and ham salad).

For now, the four-star Sporthotel Village in Soldeu heads the list of 
Andorra's new-wave accommodation. It boasts a vast lobby with slate and 
terracotta tiled floors, which is overlooked by an atrium with a traditional 
hacienda-style facade.

The large wood-panelled bedrooms are made mountain cosy by forest green 
curtains, carpets, sofas and bedcovers, as well as painted wooden headboards. 
The main gondola is actually in the hotel, although the ski room is 
inconveniently located in a separate building across the road.

In December, the owners are opening the Sport Hermitage, the resort's first 
five-star. It will be linked to the Sporthotel Village by a four-storey spa.

Soldeu's main claim to fame is its ski school. One hundred of its 240 
instructors are native English speakers. Head of the English branch is Gordon 
Standeven, who came here from Yorkshire 20 years ago. He took us around the ski 
area - mostly wide trails interspersed with some steeper sections.

Skiing from Soldeu to Pas de la Casa is like going from Val d'Isère to Tignes 
(beauty and the beast). Pas is a mass of concrete, billboards and flashing neon 
lights - the old Andorra of crowds and sweaty bars. But even Pas is looking up, 
with a four-star hotel and spa - the minimalist Hotel Font d'Argent - and 
decent eateries such as L'Husky.

To escape the bustle, head to Vallnord. The smaller of its two ski areas 
centres on Arinsal and Pal, linked on the mountain by cable-car. This season, 
you can also reach the pistes from La Massana, a dormitory town for 
Ordino-Arcalis, Vallnord's other ski area and the most demanding in Andorra. It 
is a 20-minute drive away and is not linked into the combined lift system, but 
shares the new Vallnord area lift pass.

One of the major reasons to stay in Vallnord is its proximity to the capital, 
Andorra La Vella, where you can shop your duty-free heart out at boutiques 
selling designer names at discount prices.

Also in town is Caldea, a futuristic spa inspired by Gaudí, constructed from 
glass and metal. Inside is a miniature mosque housing Turkish baths, as well as 
Roman baths, Icelandic baths, Aztec baths, and the "Bombay Elephant Caves", 
filled with pools of different temperatures. My favourite is the grapefruit 
bath, a series of swim-through canals filled with floating grapefruits that you 
rub against your skin for exfoliation.

Way to go: 

 Getting there:  Inghams (020-8780 4433, inghams.co.uk 
<http://www.inghams.co.uk>) offers a week's half-board at Sporthotel Village in 
Soldeu from £600pp including flights and transfers. A similar deal at Princesa 
Park in Arinsal costs from £442pp, and at Font d'Argent in Pas de la Casa from 
£490pp.

 Skiing:  Grandvalira: pre-booked skis and boots £53, ski school (5 hours x 3 
days) £73, 6-day area lift pass £134. Vallnord: pre-booked skis and boots £54, 
ski school (3 hours x 5 days) £63, 6-day area lift pass £92.

 Spa: a three-hour visit to Caldea ( caldea.com <http://www.caldea.com>) costs 
€30; individual massages from €22.

 Further information:

Country code: 00 376. 

Flight time London-Toulouse: 1hr, 50 mins. 

Time difference: +1hr. 

£1 = 1.40 euros.
 