
Heading for a First … Birmingham Aimhigher

Definitely worthy of a first is news that AimHigher 
<http://www.aimhigher.ac.uk/sites/practitioner/home/> has been reborn in 
Birmingham as a joint venture between Aston, Birmingham City, University 
College Birmingham and the University of Birmingham. To date, one of the most 
counter-productive coalition cuts has been to the AimHigher programme, a 
dedicated activity with schools to encourage young people to consider higher 
education. At a time of trebled fees, difficult graduate employment and the 
removal of the education maintenance allowance, there couldn't be a more 
important time to salvage such activity, particularly as we learnt just last 
week that the initial figures for 2012 university applications give cause for 
concern.

When AimHigher funding was withdrawn, it was such a blow. But news from the 
second city that the universities had come together to salvage the activity is 
a rare piece of good news. It's also worth noting that a number of other cities 
have also managed to bring their higher education institutions together to set 
up similar arrangements, such asAccessHE <http://www.accesshe.ac.uk/> in 
London. At the last count, this brings together 20 institutions. But in truth, 
aside from a handful of cities, it appears that many institutions have not been 
able to retain a collaborative AimHigher-style programme. And it's great to see 
that in Birmingham the four universities have managed to retain the AimHigher 
brand.

At a time when universities are being coerced by the coalition toward 
competition, it's great to see that the spirit of collaboration can still live 
on. And when it comes to widening access and promoting participation, there can 
be more no greater issue worthy of institutions coming together.

Heading for a Fail … Core and margin

News this week that 27 higher education inistiutions have applied to lower 
their prices is hardly surprising given the dogs dinner the government has made 
of setting out their higher education strategy. While at first glance it may 
seem like good news for prospective students, on further analysis it raises 
some more concerning questions.

As a consequence of the government getting its higher education sums badly 
wrong, the core and margin model has been introduced in a desperate attempt to 
force some universities to lower their prices. But, depressingly for me, the 
courses or institutions lowering their prices are doing so not necessarily 
because what they are providing isn't up to scratch, but rather because their 
perceived reputation may not be high. Worse still, these are decisions not 
based on what it actually costs to teach a particular course, but manipulated 
to suit the Treasury finances.

Then consider the socio-economic backgrounds of the students likely to be 
forced into courses on £7,500 or less, and the backgrounds of students still 
likely to proceed on to degrees at £9,000 per year. The idea that students from 
richer backgrounds will have more spent on them, while those from more deprived 
backgrounds are slung into economy class stands against what higher education 
has, up until now, played such an important role in countering.

Rather than improving social mobility, there is a real danger that government 
miscalculations and an ideological bent on the market through mechanisms like 
core and margin will see a widening of disadvantage, rather than a closing of 
the gap.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist. He was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 