
A Miami court judge has sent ripples through the cryptocurrency community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/03/bitcoin-tech-future-craig-wright-blockchain-transactions>
 in a ruling in which she said bitcoin was not real money.

Defendant Michel Espinoza was on trial for illegally transmitting and 
laundering $1,500 worth of bitcoins to undercover agents who intended to use 
them to purchase stolen credit cards.

His attorney argued that the charges should be dismissed because, under 
Florida state law, the cyber-currency could not be considered money. After 
extended deliberation, Judge Teresa Mary Pooler agreed in a ruling issued on 
Monday.

Craig Wright U-turns on pledge to provide evidence he invented bitcoin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/05/craig-wright-u-turn-on-pledge-to-provide-evidence-he-invented-bitcoin>
“This court is not an expert in economics,” Pooler wrote in her ruling. 
“However, it is very clear, even to someone with limited knowledge in the area, 
that bitcoin has a long way to go before it is equivalent of money.”

She proceeded to dismiss all three counts against the defendant. 

Due to the severe lack of jurisprudence and ambiguous regulations surrounding 
bitcoin, Espinoza’s case has been a focus of interest for the virtual currency 
community but the ramifications remain unclear.

Bitcoin <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/bitcoin> is a virtual currency 
that allows its users to exchange value online and that can allow the source, 
or recipient, of the funds to remain anonymous. As it’s grown in popularity 
among netizens, and libertarians who distrust the central banking system, it 
has also gained a reputation for use in nefarious transactions.

Charles Evans, associate professor of finance and economics at Barry 
University, has studied virtual currencies extensively. He was hired as an 
expert witness by the defense in Espinoza’s case, where he testified that 
bitcoin is not money.

“Today is a good day,” Evans said. “The battle isn’t finished but at this 
particular moment we should all take our victories where we can take them and 
this counts as a victory.”

Evans said bitcoin users in Florida would now have an easier time sending 
bitcoin as remittances with fewer regulatory hurdles, as a result of this 
ruling. Individual users will not be considered money transmitters and they are 
free to purchase bitcoin using real money.

But Judith Alison Lee, a partner at the Gibson Dunn law firm who has written 
on virtual currency regulations in the US, said the judge’s ruling was counter 
to the direction federal regulators were headed.

“This decision by the judge is flat-right inconsistent with what the feds are 
doing,” Lee said. “It is surprising.”

The case’s ramifications, however, may be limited due to the small 
jurisdiction of the court, she added.

Espinoza’s money-laundering charges were also dismissed in the case, but more 
due to the circumstance of his arrest. Undercover detectives bought bitcoin 
from Espinoza after informing him they intended to use the virtual currency to 
purchase stolen credit card numbers. The judge found that this did not equate 
to laundering. “There is unquestionably no evidence that the defendant did 
anything wrong, other than sell his bitcoin to an investigator who wanted to 
make a case.”

Brian Klein, a partner at the Baker Marquart law firm in California who works 
on financial technology cases, said the case could have wider ramifications.

“The judge got it right,” he said. “Florida law enforcement overreached in 
charging Espinoza as it did. This decision will reverberate throughout the 
country and hopefully cause federal and state prosecutors to think twice before 
pursuing similar criminal charges.”

The case is one of very few court rulings on bitcoin and there were no 
regulations whatsoever in Florida before this case, which Judge Pooler noted in 
her ruling.

“The Florida legislature may choose to adopt statutes regulating virtual 
currency in the future,” Pooler wrote. “At this time, however, attempting to 
fit the sale of bitcoin into a statutory scheme regulating money services 
business is like fitting a square peg in a round hole.”

Regulators have been grappling with how to address bitcoin as more Americans 
adopt it. Many financial regulations operate at the state level. New York has 
been the most aggressive state in tackling bitcoin, introducing a BitLicense 
which provides a framework for bitcoin businesses.

At the federal level, FinCEN, the agency within the treasury department that 
handles crime, has been aggressively trying to clamp down on illegal activity 
using bitcoin. The Internal Revenue Service taxes bitcoin as intangible 
personal property, not currency.
 