
I think and write a lot about mental health. Since being diagnosed with 
anxiety and clinical perfectionism, writing has become an important way of 
coming to terms with my own psychiatric ailments, while trying also to raise 
public awareness. It’s not an easy task. Despite my eagerness and many 
importunate attempts to give a voice to mental illness, I am often left feeling 
like the world isn’t ready to listen.

But when mental health week 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-10/mental-health-week-more-than-just-a-hashtag/7918386>
 ticked around this year, ears pricked up. My news feed was awash with articles 
about mental health, friends brandishing popular hashtags and events popping up 
all around my city.

Finally, a week where mental health was a hot topic, where my issues were on 
the frontline. If ever there was a time when my humble opinions on the human 
brain might count for something, this was sure to be it. I panicked.

'Mental health is not only about darkness and depression'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/oct/10/mental-health-not-only-about-darkness-depression>
Determined to seize the opportunity, I started bashing out stories and pitches 
with intensity, like I was trying to give my computer’s motherboard some kind 
of frantic deep tissue massage. My mind turned cartwheels. Within 20 minutes I 
had chewed all my fingernails back to the quick and yanked out a few generous 
handfuls of hair – telltale symptoms of my escalating anxiety.

I forgot to have lunch. I forgot to pick my little sister up from school. I 
missed two calls from my partner. But somehow I still managed to singlehandedly 
pluck all the tiny hairs on my leg, another delightful habit I tend to deploy 
with fervour whenever I need to curb my anxiety.

As time ticked by and the pressure mounted, I realised I was heading for a 
nervous breakdown. Maybe I was making too big a deal of mental health week, but 
that is the very nature of my mental illness – the tendency to inflate and 
catastrophise. It was a bitter irony: my anxiety was the very thing that 
stopped me from writing about it.

So I closed my laptop and resolved to stay silent for mental health week. I 
decided that protecting my own mental state was more important than writing 
about it. And I reassured myself there would be other opportunities.

See, that’s just it with mental illness. Often we cannot talk about it when 
the world wants us to – whether that be our families, therapists or the media. 
And when we are ready to speak up, we can’t find the ears.

Even with efforts to reduce stigma, mental health is an extremely sensitive 
topic. It takes a long time to develop the personal insight and vocabulary to 
be able to communicate about our mental states. In my experience, you can only 
really talk (or write) about it on your own terms and in your own time. This 
means we need a culture that is receptive to discussions the year round, not 
just at designated calendar points.

While initiatives like mental health week are exceedingly important, they are 
not always as beneficial to sufferers in the ways they intend to be. The sudden 
spike in publicity may feel like a fleeting injection of sympathy that leaves 
us even more isolated once the week is over and our issues fall into the 
background once again.

The ephemeral support for mental illness shines with a suspicious veneer, 
tarnished by the knowledge that talking about mental illness might earn you a 
hundred likes on Facebook on one day but compromise your job application the 
next.

Neoliberalism is creating loneliness. That’s what’s wrenching society apart | 
George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/neoliberalism-creating-loneliness-wrenching-society-apart>
On the other hand, the sudden spotlight on mental health can also cause people 
with mental illness to cringe and withdraw, unnerved (so to speak) by the 
unfamiliar pressure of public exposure. And then there is the risk oftriggers 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/blogs-ouch-26295437> that comes with a disordered 
flurry of news articles and tweets about mental health.

I am not disputing the merits of mental health week and the media’s reporting 
of it. I think these initiatives are noble and necessary. I think they are 
crucial to creating a society that makes it easier to live with a mental 
illness. But if listening to people with mental illness and understanding their 
experiences is the most important step in dissolving the silence and stigma, we 
need to be open on a more general, everyday basis.

We need a culture that is attuned to the nuances of mental illness and 
accepting of the silences as well as the disclosures. We need a world where 
mental health is an acceptable topic regardless of time and place, beyond the 
field days and short-lived social media campaigns.
 