
Film director Richard Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis> had to phone the UN to 
make sure they didn’t mind being portrayed as animals in a new cinema ad to 
promote global development goals.


The ad for Global Goals for Sustainable Development 
<http://www.globalgoals.org/> is set to debut on Saturday in more than 30 
countries and aims to reach 7 billion people in seven days.

Curtis, responsible for Blackadder and films including Four Weddings and a 
Funeral and Notting Hill, launched Project Everyone to promote the new global 
goals. He helped organise the cinema ad’s global launch with help from Sawa, 
the cinema advertising association with the aim to show the same ad across the 
world.

“There couldn’t have been a more amusing moment than when I had to ring my 
partners at the UN and say: ‘Can I just check with you that it’s OK you are 
going to be portrayed as animals?’” said Curtis. “There was a long pause, and a 
laugh and they said ‘that sounds fine to us’.”

Curtis who has previously promoted projects such as Comic Relief, said it was 
vital to launch the ad globally to help get people in developing countries on 
board with the new goals, which are designed to replace the Millennium 
Development Goals set by the UN in 2000.

“There was a mood around the first goals that it was [creating action] from 
north to south,” said Curtis. “With these it is meant to be country by country, 
getting people in each country to fight within their own countries. It’s very 
important to us that as much as we can do is create people [who are] 
compassionate in their own countries and not just people from rich countries.”

The ad has been created by Aardman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aardman> 
Animations, the production company behind Wallace and Gromit, and BBH, the ad 
agency run by Sir John Heggarty.

Aardman executive producer and head of partner content, Heather Wright, said 
the company had stepped in when the organisers were having difficulty getting 
the ad done in time for the UN meeting this month to ratify the new goals.

“The budget was coming out almost double what it needed to be,” she said. “We 
came up with a brief on how to make this film in this time and this much money.”

“It was quite a lot of work to create all the characters. There wasn’t the 
time to shoot in the assembly hall of the UN in New York … we had to use 
photographs to texture map.”

Liam Neeson to play God in global cinema ad with 'to-do list for planet'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/24/liam-neeson-play-god-global-cinema-ad-richard-curtis>
The ad also features Liam Neeson voicing God. Other stars, such as Chris 
Martin, Freida Pinto and Chiwetel Ejiofor, are signed up to a broader campaign 
to raise awareness called Project Everyone and mobile phone companies are also 
planning to send text messages to 1.4 billion people, said Curtis.

The Global Goals for Sustainable Development range from improving women’s 
rights around the world to encouraging the use of renewable resources and 
ending hunger.
 