
Black patients are about half as likely to be prescribed opioid medicines in 
the emergency department than white patients, according to a new study.

The findings, published on Monday in Plos One 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0159224>, 
are the latest to show that minorities are treated differently when it comes to 
pain management. 

“A black patient with the same level of pain and everything else being 
accounted for was much less likely to receive an opioid prescription than a 
white patient with the same characteristics,” said study co-author Astha 
Singhal, an assistant professor at Boston University’s dental medicine school.

To determine whether there was a racial bias in pain medication prescriptions, 
the researchers looked at more than 60m records of pain-related emergency 
department visits from 2007 to 2011 for people aged 18 to 65.

Five conditions were examined and divided into two categories: definitive and 
non-definitive. The first referred to conditions that were easily diagnosed – 
kidney stones and long-bone fractures – and the second to conditions that are 
not: toothache, abdominal pain and back pain.

War on prescription drugs: what if you depend on opioids to live a decent life?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/12/prescription-drugs-what-if-you-depend-on-opioids-chronic-pain>
Black patients had about half the odds of being prescribed opioids compared to 
white patients for non-definitive conditions, according to the study, which 
Singhal co-authored with Renee Hsia of UC San Francisco and Yu-Yu Tien from the 
University of Iowa.

The findings may also point to a contributing factor to the opioid addiction 
crisis that claims 78 lives in the US a day and has primarily affected the 
white population, particularly peoplein rural areas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/31/rural-us-counties-hiv-outbreak-cdc>
 and the north-east. “We think this type of differential prescribing could be 
contributing to it [the crisis],” said Singhal.

The study found no race-based differences for definitive conditions or 
toothaches, which Singhal said could be because emergency room doctors may be 
quicker to treat these conditions with medication because they are not dental 
experts.

“This study unfortunately tells us what we already know – black patients are 
improperly treated for pain and that is mostly because of their skin color,” 
said Keisha Ray, a postdoctoral fellow with the McGovern Center for Humanities 
and Ethics at the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston.

She said the fundamental problem is that black patients are treated as an 
“other”.

This has been suggested for decades, but was starkly depicted in an April study
 
<https://news.virginia.edu/content/study-links-disparities-pain-management-racial-bias>
 about how disparities in pain management may be attributable to bias from 
medical providers who believe things such as that black people age more slowly 
than white people, and that black people’s blood coagulates more quickly than 
white peoples.

“Black patients are not afforded the luxury of being seen in EDs, physician 
offices, and clinics as just patients in need of help and healing,” Ray said. 
“Rather they are seen as less than human, drug seekers and overall 
exaggerators.”

Ray and others said that because some clinicians assume black people are more 
likely to be addicts, they are less likely to receive pain medication.

Christopher Ervin, an advisor to the Black Women’s Health Imperative advocacy 
group, said there is a history of assuming black people are more likely to be 
addicts, so even if they receive adequate pain treatment in the emergency room, 
they may not receive a prescription for it once they are discharged.

Ervin said these study findings also show how differences in race can amplify 
the power discordance that exists between a patient and doctor.

For instance, a clinician may not recognize someone’s pain because of cultural 
differences in describing pain. “Many cultures may not be as demonstrative or 
vocal or assertive about pain and say: ‘Hey, I am hurting,’ particularly when, 
women in color in general, being vocal is not always to your benefit,” Ervin 
said.

And the dearth of black physicians exacerbates the situation. Only 4% of 
physicians are black, according to the Association of American Medical 
Colleges, and that number is not expected to improve: theassociation also found 
that in 2014 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/10/24/449893318/there-were-fewer-black-men-in-medical-school-in-2014-than-in-1978>
 fewer black men were in medical school than in 1978.

Ervin and the study authors said their findings show the benefits of 
incorporating sensitivity in medical training to show providers their inherent 
biases.

“If you don’t have that culture of diversity in your training and in your 
development, when will you get it?” Ervin said. “Until someone sues you.”
 