
Rob Hughes, the chairman of the Levy Board, yesterday launched what he 
described as a "pre-emptive strike" to stop British bookmakers moving their 
operations overseas when he called for a boycott of betting firms that do not 
pay Levy on their offshore business.

However, the boycott may prove difficult to organise, as Douglas Erskine-Crum, 
the board's chief executive, later confirmed that the board is unable to name 
the bookmakers concerned "for legal reasons".

A number of bookmakers taking bets on British racing run operations that are 
either partly or wholly based outside Britain. These include Victor Chandler 
and Stan James, which have offices in Gibraltar, and Paddy Power, which has a 
base on the Isle of Man. There is no legal requirement to pay either Levy or 
betting duty on profits generated offshore.

A statement released by the Levy Board yesterday morning included a suggestion 
that "everyone in the media and racing … should review the relationships they 
have with overseas-based betting operators, specifically advertising, 
sponsorship, promotion and indeed betting with overseas-based bookmakers who 
are not paying or contributing to the Levy."

The statement also suggested that "bookmakers operating overseas, and taking 
bets from British customers on British racing, have a moral obligation towards 
supporting British racing by paying a Levy contribution." Hughes said later 
that his call for those involved in the racing industry to "review their 
relationships" with offshore bookies was an attempt to stop other betting 
operations following them abroad.

"It is up to us all to take a view as to whether we want to support these 
people who are using UK racing to make profits but are avoiding the Levy," 
Hughes said.

"This is really a pre-emptive strike prior to what we understand might happen 
with other bookmakers. William Hill have made no secret of the fact that they 
may take their online and telephone operations offshore, and other bookmakers 
have said that they might then have to follow suit for competitive reasons. If 
that were to happen, we estimate that between £20m and £25m would be lost to 
the Levy, which is a quarter of the total.

"It is no good racing just looking to the UK government to sort this situation 
out, when part of the answer also lies in our own hands. Too often in racing, 
we close the stable door when the horse has bolted, and the key message here is 
that part of the answer lies in our own hands."

Steve Fisher, the founder of Stan James, which has a small chain of UK betting 
shops in addition to its Gibraltar telephone and internet business, said 
yesterday that "Stan James UK of course pays Levy and tax and always has done. 
I'm not a shareholder or director in any other company apart from Stan James UK 
so I can't comment on anything else."

A statement issued by Victor Chandler said that "Victor Chandler have long 
been a supporter of British horse racing and have always paid the required Levy 
on business through the Victor Chandler UK business, and continue to pay the 
Levy on our operations in the UK." It added that "Victor Chandler support 
British horse racing commercially with an investment in excess of seven figures 
each year".

Both Ascot and Newmarket, which have major sponsorship agreements for the 
Victor Chandler Chase and Stan James Guineas Festival respectively, said 
yesterday that they have no plans to review their relationships with the firms.

"We have a relationship with Victor Chandler which is extremely beneficial 
both for us and for them," Nick Smith, Ascot's head of PR, said. "From our 
point of view, we are happy to continue to work with Victor Chandler as we have 
always done in the past."

Stephen Wallis, the managing director of Newmarket, said that "Newmarket has a 
very healthy relationship with Stan James and we hope that will continue."
 