
Online fashion chain Boohoo.com has confirmed it will list on the London stock 
market next week with a market value of £560m, adding further fuel to the 
debate over whether UK investors are stoking a mini-dotcom boom.

With recent profit of £10m on earnings of £92m, the firm will have to persuade 
investors that it won't repeat the history of Boo.com, the online clothes 
retailer that became a symbol of the excesses of the dotcom era when it 
collapsed in 2000.

Manchester-based Boohoo.com, an entirely separate company catering for 
16-to-24 year olds, confirmed on Friday that it plans to sell 600m shares at 
50p each. Founder Mahmud Kamani,who stands to make £240m from selling his stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/07/boohoo-sale-company-shares>, 
has rejected claims Boohoo.com is the latest symbol of an investment bubble and 
said the firm needs capital to expand.

Kate Ormrod, senior analyst at Verdict, said the online fashion chain was 
using its share offering to fund overseas growth, where there were huge 
opportunities. "Boohoo is really following in Asos's footsteps. There is huge 
international potential," she said, citing the brand's trendy and affordable 
collections, as well as its entry into plus sizes and menswear.

Maureen Hinton at Conlumino agreed that the brand could do well. She said: "It 
is at the right end of the market. Young fashion is far easier to sell 
internationally, so it has got a lot of potential to sell globally. There is a 
lot of enthusiasm about it online. It is its own brand, it's got good margins."

But she cautioned it will take a while for enthusiasm for the stock to be 
justified by the price. The company also faced a highly competitive market and 
when expanding overseas was "going to be up against local retailers that might 
have established themselves much faster".

Boohoo is only the latest company to take advantage of the recovering economy 
with a stock market listing, following convenience store McColl's and online 
appliance retailer AO.com. Poundland and Pets at Home are also planning 
listings, putting the market for stock market flotations on course for its 
strongest quarter since before the credit crunch.

But Hinton said she wouldn't advise people to rush into buying Boohoo.com 
shares. "I would leave it for now. I imagine there will be lots of balancing 
out at that price and then it will settle down."
 