
No 6: Just William by Richmal Crompton (1922)

I fell in love with William Brown the very first time we met, in Torridon Road 
library. He had just received an entire shilling from a generous aunt and was 
swaggering into his local sweetshop to buy an unprecedented sixpenn'orth of 
Gooseberry Eyes from the surprised owner. And then I read "'Gotter bit of money 
this mornin,'' explained William carelessly, with the air of a Rothschild," and 
lost my heart to Crompton's hero for ever. Oh, the exuberant confidence of it — 
the splendour! The magnificent insouciance!

I did not know then, of course, that Richmal Crompton's creation had been 
famed for his cavalier attitude to life and those who would seek to 
circumscribe his enjoyment of it ever since he first appeared in 1922. Nor did 
I know quite what a Rothschild was, but I deduced (and had confirmed later by 
my father) that it must be the name of a famously rich family, and it was 
actually this — this oblique promise of induction into a world of fluent and 
evocative expression — more than William's notoriously anarchic spirit, that 
drew me in.

I realised, I think, even at that early age that opportunities for imitative 
anarchical expression were going to be severely limited by my misfortune of 
having been born a particularly weedy girl in early 80s suburbia instead of a 
sturdy village boy 60 years earlier. I didn't have a gang of outlaws or a dog, 
I'd never seen a barn and if I'd ever tried to dig up one of my mother's flower 
beds she would have beaten me into a coma, not given a weary sigh of 
resignation and returned to her pile of mending. Why set myself up for failure? 
Serious injury, and failure?

But the new possibilities for self-expression — well, they were something 
else. The books I had read so far had all stayed carefully within the semantic 
and grammatical comfort zone of their readers. Now I saw that an author's 
vocabulary should exceed her audience's grasp — else what's the bloody book 
for? That they were funny, too, sent me into paroxysms of delight and back 
again and again to the library for more sustaining doses of descriptions like 
that of the Brown family's profoundly boring and unwelcome house guest, Mr 
Falkner, whose "accounts of his varied exploits of dauntless bravery and 
dazzling cleverness seemed to induce in William's family a certain apathy of 
hopelessness, which William thought a very proper attitude on the part of a 
family. No one told him to go and wash his hands and brush his hair again … 
They simply had not the spirit. In fact such is the humanising effect of a 
common misfortune, they almost felt drawn to him."

I was on a great polysyllabic spree, a grand tour round the glories of the 
subordinate clause. William was my guide, my inspiration and the gatekeeper to 
a new and better world. The suburbs suddenly expanded to infinity.
 