
Britain's four largest off-course bookmaking chains will make voluntary 
payments to the Levy scheme for the first time under the terms of a 
groundbreaking, and potentially historic, deal between the racing and betting 
industries which could see prize money reach a new record total of £120m in 
2014.

The addition of voluntary payments due to start in April 2014 with the 53rd 
Levy, the mechanism by which money is returned to the sport from off-course 
betting, is a significant step towards the eventual abolition of the statutory 
basis to racing's principal funding mechanism.

William Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/business/williamhill>, Ladbrokes, 
Coral and BetFred will contribute £4.5m a year for the next four years to an 
incentive fund, overseen by the Levy board, which will aim to produce more 
competitive racing and, by extension, more Levy revenue. The total of £18m in 
voluntary funds is in addition to payments required by law, which will remain 
at 10.75% of gross profits on British racing earned in the country's betting 
shops.

Bets placed on British racing in the rapidly expanding online sector, all but 
a fraction of which are placed via the major firms' offshore operations in 
Gibraltar and Malta, will remain outside the reach of the Levy system. Yet it 
is still highly significant that, for the first time, bookmakers will be paying 
money to racing not because the law forces them to do so but because it will be 
good for business.

The deal for £18m in voluntary funding over four years follows a deal struck 
between the sport and the Betfair betting exchange in 2012, under whichBetfair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/betfair> – which operates entirely online 
and offshore – will make a voluntary payment of around £7.8m to the 2014-15 
Levy scheme. As a result the scheme is expected to yield £80.2m, a 10% increase 
on the estimated yield of £72.9m of the current Levy scheme when it was agreed 
12 months ago.

The four bookmakers involved in the deal said in a joint statement on Thursday 
that the incentive fund will be "used to improve the competitiveness of the 
racing product, making it more appealing to both racegoers and betting office 
customers alike". The statement added: "We look forward to working closely with 
our colleagues from racing over the next four years and maintaining, and 
enhancing, Britain's status as the number one horse-racing nation in the world."

Paul Bittar, the chief executive of the British Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority>, said that 
the "arrangement has the support of the principal organisations in the sport, 
including the Racecourse Association and Horsemen's Group, and represents a 
positive step forwards in the prevailing circumstances. This additional funding 
… brings a degree of certainty and considerable upside in the coming years".

Annual wrangling over the amount that would return to racing from the betting 
industry has been a feature of the Levy system throughout its history. Several 
schemes have been referred to the government for determination after the two 
sides failed to agree on a figure, much to the annoyance and exasperation of 
the politicians concerned.

The new framework brings far more certainty, and offers a basis too for 
further progress on the issue of offshore betting revenue. If, as intended, the 
incentive fund boosts field sizes and competitiveness, it will also make 
British racing more attractive to backers abroad.

"This has all been achieved with no major structural reforms, through 
negotiation and a lot of goodwill from lots of parties," Bittar said. "Racing 
and betting having a good relationship has to be a good thing, and in terms of 
a platform this is a good opportunity for growth while we also pursue the right 
long-term mechanism for the sport."

Menawhile, on the track on Thursday, Tony McCoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tony-mccoy> made good headway towards 
securing 4,000 winners over jumps by riding a brilliant five-timer at Carlisle.

McCoy now needs just 16 winners to set yet another record in a truly 
remarkable career. His first four winners came in the green and gold silks of 
his boss, JP McManus, with three of the horses trained by Jonjo O'Neill.
 