
Boys conceived using an assisted reproductive technique in which sperm is 
injected directly into the egg have lower fertility than average, scientists 
have found.

The results come from the first generation of boys conceived using a technique 
called intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), who are just reaching 
adulthood, and show that the young men have lower sperm quantity and quality 
than those conceived spontaneously.

ICSI is normally used to help couples conceive when the man has a low sperm 
count, or where there are abnormalities in the shape or movement of the sperm. 
The latest findings suggest that these problems tend to be passed on to the 
next generation - there is no suggestion that they are caused by the technique 
itself.

The study found that the men conceived through ICSI, who were aged between 18 
to 22, had almost half the sperm concentration and half as many motile sperm 
(sperm that can swim well) than naturally-conceived men of a similar age.

ICSI men were nearly three times more likely to have sperm concentrations 
below the WorldHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
Organisation’s threshold for “normal” fertility.

“These findings are not unexpected,” said Andre Van Steirteghem, emeritus 
professor at Vrije Universiteit Brussels, who led the work. “Before ICSI was 
carried out, prospective parents were informed that it may well be that their 
sons may have impaired sperm and semen like their fathers. For all the parents 
this information was not a reason to abstain from ICSI because, as they said: 
‘If this happens ICSI can then also be a solution for our sons.’”

The findings confirm for the first time that the problems that had caused the 
father’s infertility – usually genetic factors – appear to be inherited by 
their sons.

'Modern twist' on fertility technique may offer hope for sterile men
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/02/modern-twist-fertility-technique-hope-sterile-men>
Scientists believe these genetic flaws would be passed on regardless of 
whether their children were conceived naturally or using ICSI.

“These first results from the oldest group of ICSI-conceived adults worldwide 
indicate that a degree of ‘sub-fertility’ has indeed been passed on to sons of 
fathers who underwent ICSI because of impaired semen characteristics,” said Van 
Steirteghem.

ICSI differs from conventional IVF <https://www.theguardian.com/society/ivf> 
treatments because the sperm is injected directly into the egg, rather than 
many sperm being mixed together with an egg and waiting for fertilisation to 
occur.

In 2014, the most recent year for which figures are available, around half of 
all IVF cycles in the UK involved ICSI, according to a report by the Human 
Fertility and Embryology Authority.


Nick Macklon, professor of obstetrics and gynaecology within medicine at the 
University of Southampton, said: “This was always going to be a concern, and 
couples were counselled that sons might inherit genetic flaws that nature was 
trying to get rid of by rendering the man infertile. It justifies our cautious 
approach. It isn’t any cause for alarm.”

Prof Richard Sharpe, an expert in male reproductive health at the University 
of Edinburgh, said: “In showing, as a group, that the ICSI sons have starkly 
abnormal semen quality compared with normal, non-ICSI-derived sons, the results 
suggest strongly that male fertility problems severe enough to require ICSI may 
be inheritable.

Importantly, the results are a reminder to us that Icsi is not a treatment for 
male infertility, but simply a way of bypassing a problem and leaving it for 
the next generation to deal with – something my generation seem horribly adept 
at doing.”


Prof Simon Fishel, managing director of Care Fertility, said that the findings 
were useful but not unexpected. “Just having low semen parameters is not 
evidence for the requirement of ICSI or IVF technologies,” he said. “We know 
many men with such are indeed able to conceive naturally. More follow up 
studies will be required to ascertain meaningful outcomes.”



 