
The Brazilian authorities are poised to send the army into the slums of Rio de 
Janeiro less than three months before theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>. The move follows 
attacks on police that have resulted in the most tense standoff for years in 
the favelas.

The Rio state governor, Sérgio Cabral, has requested the reinforcements after 
assaults on police bases, apparently co-ordinated by the city's biggest gang, 
Comando Vermelho.

An escalation of murders, revenge killings and fire-bombings have prompted 
talk of a war between the police and gangsters. Favela residents and NGOs say 
the situation is now more tense than at any time since 2010, when the 
authorities began a "pacification" programme to regain control of communities 
from armed traffickers.

The government is expected to announce details of the military deployment in 
the coming days, before the expected arrival in June of hundreds of thousands 
of football fans, players and support staff for the seven World Cup matches 
that will be held in Rio.

The pacification campaign is a crucial element in the city's preparations for 
the tournament. Since it started, 38 police pacification units (UPP) have been 
established in favela communities, which are now occupied by more than 9,000 
police.

Until last year, the gains in public security were evident. But confidence in 
the programme has been sapped by a series of human rights abuses by police 
officers.

Sensing a swing in public opinion, imprisoned Comando Vermelho leaders are 
said to have ordered their members to go on the attack.

Five police officers have been killed since February. The most recent of them 
was an officer shot in the throat during an altercation with two youths in a 
favela at the weekend.

Last Thursday, police posts in three favelas were set ablaze. The Mandela UPP 
– located in the Manguinhos complex, which was visited by Pope Francis last 
year – was gutted, two police cars were set ablaze and several other units 
attacked. Rio's political leaders say the attacks are co-ordinated.
 Police guard the crime scene where an officer shot by criminals on 14 March. 
Photograph: Fabio Teixeira/Pacific Press/BI 
"It is clear that criminals want to weaken our policy of pacification and take 
back territories that were in criminal hands for decades," said Cabral, who 
will meet Brazil's president, Dilma Rousseff, on Friday. "The state will not 
back down. The public may be sure we shall act."

Residents say revenge killings by police death squads are on the rise. The 
most recent occupation resulted in two deaths as police moved into the favela 
communities in Manguinhos, Lins and Alemão on Friday night. Military police 
spokesman Lieutenant Colonel Claudio Costa said the killings occurred when 
police confronted drug traffickers. Those trapped in the middle fear a return 
to the bad old days.

"It's definitely more tense than at any time since the UPP began," said 
Hercules Ferreira Mendes, president of the Caracol residents association, which 
represents 8,000 inhabitants in Penha. "The traffickers are trying to take back 
the territory they held for so long. People are afraid to stay out at night. 
The later it gets, the more shootings and confrontations you hear. Nobody knows 
what will happen next."

Although the biggest impact is felt by residents, the increased tension is 
likely to worry World Cup organisers. Many of the million or so fans expected 
for the tournament along with many national teams will pass by the Penha and 
Maré favelas on their way to and from Rio's international airport. The Nossa 
Senhora da Penha church, perched high on a nearby hill, is one of the most 
visible sights on the road.

The reasons for the surge in violence are disputed. Police blame drug 
traffickers for the new offensive. Others say the main problem is that 
pacification has not been followed by improvements in social services and 
infrastructure despite promises from politicians.

Adding to the tension are human rights violations by police, which add to the 
widely held impression in the favelas that they are no better – and often a lot 
worse – than the gangsters they replaced.

Last week, passersby recorded video of a police car dragging an injured woman 
along a street after the officers had thrown her in the boot. Mother-of-four 
Claudia da Silva Ferreira died soon afterwards in hospital.

Many trace the start of the current increase in violence to the torture and 
apparent murder of Amarildo de Souza, who disappeared after being given 
electric shocks and asphyxiated during questioning by UPP officers in the 
Rocinha favela last July. Despite the arrest of the local police chief and more 
than a dozen officers, the case severely eroded public trust in the 
pacification mission.

"I knew at that moment that the UPP was finished. If I were a bandit, I would 
think 'great'. It was like a bomb that blew up everything," said Yvonne Bezerra 
de Mello, of the Uere Project, which educates children in the Maré favela 
community.

"The gangs have been very quick to reorganise. They're very good at training 
their troops. Now our city is completely out of control."

However, official statistics suggest the city has seen worse. Murder rates and 
gun crimes remain well below the peak of the mid-2000s. But armed robberies are 
back on the rise and with both sides in the drug war preparing for an 
escalation, long-time observers warn that the risks of even deadlier clashes 
are on the rise.

"It's on course to be the worst it's ever been," said Nanko van Buuren, a 
Dutchman who has worked in Rio's favelas for 25 
<http://www.rnw.nl/english/article/desmond-tutu-award-dutchman-rio> years and 
whose Ibiss foundation runs programmes in 68 communities.

"I think when the federal troops arrive, there'll be a war in some areas. If 
it doesn't go well, we'll also see protests during the World Cup."

Although the spotlight is on Rio, this is by no means the most dangerous of 
Brazil's cities. According to arecent study by the Mexico-based NGO, Citizen's 
Council for Public Security and Penal Justice 
<http://www.seguridadjusticiaypaz.org.mx/http://www.seguridadjusticiaypaz.org.mx/biblioteca/finish/5-prensa/177-por-tercer-ano-consecutivo-san-pedro-sula-es-la-ciudad-mas-violenta-del-mundo>
, Brazil has 16 of the world's 50 most murderous cities – more than any other 
country. Six of those cities will host World Cup games – Fortaleza, Natal, 
Salvador, Manaus, Recife and Belo Horizonte. Rio does not even make the list.
 