
As one of the poorest residents in the poorest county in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, life has always been a struggle for 
Maria Eunice Alvis.

The roof of her adobe home leaks during the storm season and vermin pose a 
constant threat to the health of her 10 children. There is so little money to 
go around, the family often goes hungry.

For most of her 40 years, survival depended on farinha, the yellowish flour 
from the manioc root. In wealthy cities like Rio de Janeiro or São Paulo, this 
is a powdery side dish. But for Alvis and other disadvantaged families in 
Belágua, Maranhão, it was until recently the only staple that got them through 
the hard times.

Today, however, the government has thrown them another lifeline – a cash 
handout known asbolsa familia 
<http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/0,,contentMDK:21447054~pagePK:64257043~piPK:437376~theSitePK:4607,00.html>
 that is paid on condition children go to school and get vaccinated.

Each month, Alvis receives 250 reais (£65). This sum is not nearly enough to 
end all her problems but, for the first time in her life, she has a regular 
income.

"I was so happy when I got the first payment. Now I'm used to it. But it's 
still good to know that there is money coming in every month," says Alvis, 
sitting in the small but spotlessly clean two-bedroom home she shares with 11 
others.

It has been 10 years since Brazil's former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/luiz-inacio-lula-da-silva> made bolsa familia
 a central pillar of the country's social welfare strategy. In the years since, 
similar poverty relief projects have spread across the globe. The pioneering 
programme is now arguably Brazil's most successful export, though the pros and 
cons of such a targeted and conditional approach remain fiercely debated.

On its anniversary this year, supporters celebrate the programme as a cheap 
and efficient way to improve the lives of the most destitute. Critics say it 
merely locks the poor into a holding pattern and has little impact on 
inequality.

Few, however, doubt that by directly giving spending money to the poor, bolsa 
familia represents a paradigm shift.

At its most basic, bolsa familia is a payment of 70 reais a person to any 
family living below the poverty line of 140 reais a month.

The programme has grown rapidly. In the past 10 years, the number of recipient 
families has risen from 3.6 million to 13.8 million, which meansbolsa familia 
now covers about a quarter of Brazil's population of 199 million.

Its importance should not be overstated. Bolsa familia is only one of four 
pillars in thegovernment's Plano Brasil Sem Miséria 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-13626951> (Brazil Without 
Poverty) strategy, which also includes a minimum wage, formalising employment, 
and policies to support rural families. There are also pension schemes and 
housing projects that aim to tackle inequality.

But it is the conditional payment scheme that has grabbed the world's 
attention because it is innovative, bold and particularly suited to an age of 
austerity, social networking and platform building.

Social development minister Tereza Campello says bolsa familia was politically 
harder to introduce because there was a deep-seated resistanceto giving people 
cash handouts <http://www.oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/?p=2547>.

"Critics quote Confucius and say it is better to teach people how to fish than 
to give them fish, butbolsa familia recipients aren't poor because they are 
lazy or don't know how to work, they are poor because they have no 
opportunities, no education and poor health. How can they compete with those 
disadvantages? By giving people the money to survive, we are empowering them, 
including them and giving them the rights of a citizen in a consumer society."

Compared to a fully funded welfare state or social pension system, the outlays 
are small. Annual disbursements have gone up from 4.2bn reais to 23.95bn reais, 
but still cost less than 0.5% of GDP. The government says the scheme is also 
cost effective, with a return of 1.78 reais to the economy for every 1 reais 
spent.

The headline gain is a fall in extreme poverty for 36 million people. The 
proportion of Brazilians living in this state (defined as less than 70 reais a 
month) declined from 8.8% to 3.6% between 2002 and 2012. Strong economic growth 
during this period and the introduction of the minimum wage were the major 
reasons, but the government creditsbolsa familia for more than a third of the 
improvement.

"All of those people are in our programme. If it disappeared, they would all 
fall back into extreme poverty," Campello said.

The numbers are disputed. Lena Lavinas, professor of welfare economics at the 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, says the government overstates the 
importance ofbolsa familia and has exaggerated its achievements by failing to 
account adequately for inflation in its statistics. If rising prices are 
properly factored into the calculation, she says, the extreme poverty rate 
ought to be 90 reais a month, which would meanbolsa familia has lifted only 7 
million people above this line.

But while the scale of the gains may be debated, there is no doubt the scheme 
has eased the pressure on the most deprived communities. That is definitely the 
sense in Belágua, where the average monthly income of the roughly 7,000 
residents is 146.7 reais (£38.2).

"This is a very poor area. About 80% of the people here rely on bolsa familia. 
Some people still get by on farinha and salt, but things are better than before 
thanks tobolsa familia," said the head of the local council, Sidrão Soares.

The money doesn't go far, especially for big families, which are common in 
Belágua. Alvis finds that after buying rice (2.2 reais a kilogramme), black 
beans (5.4 reais a kg), tapioca (5 reais a kg) and farinha (3.5 reais a kg), 
she has little left for nappies and toothpaste. Thebolsa income usually lasts 
no more than a week. For the remainder of the month, the family often has just 
one meal a day, either eating what the chickens lay or using any income Alvis's 
husband can find on the rare occasions he can labour in the fields or on a 
construction site.

"There are no jobs here," shrugs Alvis. "The only income in this town is bolsa 
familia."
 Former Brazilian president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva speaks at an October 
ceremony marking the 10th anniversary ofbolsa familia. Photograph: Ueslei 
Marcelino/Reuters 
This is one the main criticisms of bolsa familia – that it does little to 
address inequality because it keeps the poor just above a subsistence level, 
without the means to move up the social ladder. But there is an element of the 
programme that makes it a long-term investment in the future.

Bolsa familia is used as an enforcement method for public health and education 
goals. Parents who fail to have their children vaccinated or send them to 
school are penalised with reduced payments. In Belágua, this is a real threat, 
according to local teacher Rosimat dos Santos Souza.

"When I started teaching 10 years ago, I'd say that no more than 40% of 
children went to school, but now it is more than 70%. When kids are truant now, 
I go to see their parents and I tell them they might lose theirbolsa familia. 
They're really afraid of that, so it works," says Souza.

Nationwide, the government says children are about 10% more likely to go to 
school if their parents receivebolsa familia, while mothers are 25% more likely 
to sign up for health checks.

The biggest gains have been in what were traditionally the poorest areas. For 
the first time in Brazil's history, the graduation rates from schools in the 
north and north-east are higher than the national average, according to the 
social development minister.

"Bolsa familia is a platform not just to alleviate poverty, but to get more 
kids into school and improve public health," Campello said. "The income is an 
incentive that we can use to solve other social programmes. Once people are in 
our database, we can offer them other benefits and target programmes at them. 
In this way,bolsa familia is an instrument for wider programmes. It's a 
platform."

As an example, she says president Dilma Rousseff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dilma-rousseff> is now trying to introduce 
all-day schools, instead of the half-day that is the norm. This is a vast and 
expensive programme that is aimed first at the poorest communities, which have 
the greatest need for extra education and school meals. Thebolsa familia 
database has helped the government to identify such neighbourhoods. Of the 
first 40,000 students to attend all-day public schools, more than 75% are from 
families that receivebolsa familia.

There have been other gains since the programme started – albeit on a less 
impressive scale – in child malnutrition and infant mortality. These have 
raised the human development index of Maranhão state, which has long had the 
highest illiteracy rate in Brazil.

While the bolsa familia is unlikely to lift adults out of poverty, the hope is 
that it will create the health and education conditions for the next generation 
to think beyond the next meal of farinha.

"There has never been a social programme of this size and significance in 
Brazil before," said Maria Ozaniro da Silva of the Federal University of 
Maranhão. "Bolsa familia is bringing the biggest benefits to children. In the 
future, their lives will be better than that of their mothers or fathers."

• Additional research by Anna Kaiser
 