
Like so many allegedly great things – great books, great men, Great Britain – 
it is tempting to conclude that Great World Cups are notions that belong 
exclusively to the past. According to most scholarly opinion the one thing the 
contenders for the canon all have in common is that, in all probability, you 
never got to see them happen. The 1938World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> in France was, they 
say, a fraught and gripping affair. The postwar years 1950-1958 brought a 
thrilling sense of new frontiers, a sport still in a state of furious 
expansion. Mexico 1970 has been enshrined in perpetuity as a kind of 
footballing Woodstock, a free-form, love-beaded triumph of the sporting 
imagination.

Since when the World Cup has given us great moments: Brazil’s indolent charm 
in 1982; the brilliance of Diego Maradona; fine teams from Holland, France and 
Spain; and beyond this a kind of high-grade uniformity, a hammering out of 
those exhilarating extremes into the single, homogenised substance that is now 
elite level international football.

In this context Brazil 2014 looks increasingly like a shared opportunity 
missed. This was it: our shot at greatness! Bolstered by the presence of some 
wonderful players, staged in one of football’s most evocatively authentic 
heartlands, here was a chance for 21st-century football to snap back at the 
stuffed and mounted heads on the wall. And while it might seem perverse six 
months on to describe such a vivid and memorable tournament as a 
disappointment, the fact remains that Brazil 2014 was in many ways a case of 
almost-but-not-quite, of potential unexplored, chances missed.

Indeed by the final knockings a tournament that started so brightly had begun 
to project a degree of familiar entropy – not just the gathering suspicion that 
the basic idea of a great World Cup is a receding chimera as the world game is 
skewed by the unstoppable rise of European club football but that the World Cup 
itself, as we have come to know it, may be in the process of slipping beneath 
the waters.

First, though, the good bits. Oh, Brazil 2014. We will always have those first 
10 days. This was a World Cup that split neatly down the middle, divvied up 
between the familiar high-intensity slog of the knockout rounds and the 
cloudless brilliance of the opening matches. What a time it was, a moment when 
football seemed, briefly, to forget itself, when fear and pragmatism fell away 
and international football became a kind of glory game again.

The group stages brought an average of 2.83 goals per game, the most since 
Sweden in 1958, en route to a final total of 177, which is still a joint record 
tally despite the slowdown in the last two weeks. These were hard-fought goals 
too, with a succession of unusually even contests and seven group matches 
decided in the last five minutes of play.

As ever, though, the figures tell only part of the story. The early stages 
were above all a peculiarly sensual experience, a combination of the light, the 
moist winter heat and the sheer diffuse, terribly hackneyed poetry of Brazil 
and World Cups that seemed to bring about a shared exhilaration of the senses. 
There was naturally a tactical element, too, to this. The greatest interest 
often lies at the edge of things, that point at which one well-worn system 
begins to crumble at the advance of another, and there was at times an almost 
audible wrenching of the gears as one established method of play – patient, 
possession-based football – found itself overrun by the rise of fast-paced, 
pre-planned counterattack.

For a while there seemed to be a collective sense of release, the dominant 
early images of Brazil 2014 those bands of furious little muscular attacking 
playmakers – the Chilean Blitzkriegers, the Costa Rican flyers – shuttling out 
across the halfway line with thrillingly murderous intent.

Simultaneously Brazil 2014 looked, briefly, like turning into the tournament 
of the 10s, a reawakening of inventive, attacking football at this level via a 
small coterie of talented playmakers. Presented here in the full glare of the 
vogue for heavily marketed (and indeed heavily hair-gelled) individual club 
superstars, for a week or two it was possible to envisage a tournament pegged 
out around the competing celebrity-genius schtick of Lionel Messi, Neymar, 
James Rodríguez and, very briefly, Cristiano Ronaldo. Messi was the masterful 
Barça-Messi at times in the early group stages. Rodríguez was inventive in his 
floating role. Arjen Robben looked at times – indeed right to the end – the 
single most penetrative player on show, a miracle of stamina, drive and 
quick-footed menace.

Which just goes to show how wrong one can be. Steadily the blizzard of 
attacking play became a drizzle and then a grudging drip as football, with a 
flush, remembered where it was. Here was the first of many chances missed as 
the knockout stage reverted to the club football template of well-tempered 
caution. Costa Rica and Greece drew 1-1, painfully; Germany edged out France 
1-0 in one of the real tournament disappointments; and Holland-Costa Rica 
produced 120 minutes of goalless stasis as Brazil 2014 unspooled into a series 
of familiar high-tension arm-wrestles, tribute to the discipline and deep 
background preparation of teams at this level but also to the mechanical 
advances – players press, harry and chase as energetically in the last minute 
as in the first – that have eradicated any real changes in the narrative 
texture of a World cup knockout match over 120 minutes.

As a result a tournament that might have been great became a tournament of 
impressive medium-range quality. There were some wonderful moments: Rodríguez’s 
goal for the ages against Uruguay at the Maracanã, Michael Bradley’s 
awe-inspiring energy against Belgium in Salvador, David Luiz’s freakish 
side-footed 35-yard free-kick against Colombia in Fortaleza. But there were no 
real sustained peaks, precious few all-time scruff-of-the-neck performances. At 
the final whistle in Rio de Janeiro on 13 July Messi was, bafflingly, announced 
as player of the tournament, an award he almost immediately disowned.

In Argentina and Messi the sense of chances missed is most clearly captured. 
Argentina should have won this World Cup, just as their fans dominated the 
streets of Rio, their Bad Moon Rising anthem the signature tune to the final 
two weeks. With a little distance it seems ever more frustrating that Alejandro 
Sabella allowed his team to creep through the tournament, juddering against the 
handbrake, a group with players of the calibre of Sergio Agüero and Ángel Di 
María reduced to a constrained and mannered guard of honour for the team’s 
central genius.

In the end the most talented squad at the finals, featuring a 27-year-old 
all-time great, never once played with anything approaching abandon. In all 
Argentina trailed their opponents for seven minutes at Brazil 2014: the last 
seven minutes, enough for Sabella’s team of swaddled talents to exit a 
tournament they might just as easily have illuminated.

Brazil itself should be congratulated, warily and with all due caveats, for 
staging a tournament that worked after looking for quite a long time as though 
it might not work at all. There is a separate discussion to be had about the 
morality of Brazil’s lopsided World Cup development programme, the excess 
millions poured into stadiums while much-needed development was simply 
abandoned.

The contrast between new-build splendour and neighbouring poverty was often 
uncomfortable. The Arena Fonte Nova in Salvador is a magnificent, swooping 
cantilevered thing: throughout its seven tournament matches the rows of 
jerry-built temporary housing surrounding it peered in above its manicured 
edges like a spectre at the feast.

Football was never going to solve Brazil’s social problems, which date back at 
least as far as the arrival of the Portuguese royal family in retreat from 
Napoleon Bonaparte and with 60,000 time-serving noblemen in tow, imposing at a 
stroke the time-serving monied overclass that endures to this day. But more 
could have been done.

Brazil 2014 cost $11bn to build and stage but still left a sense of promises 
dodged and corners cut – again a chance missed. Similarly this was in many ways 
the tournament where corruption came home. It was in part Brazilians within 
Fifa who expanded and embraced and successfully monetised the carpet-bagging 
corporate practices that had also driven the Brazilian national team during the 
Nike years (Ricardo Teixeira, the father of the tournament, spent Brazil 2014 
in plea-bargaining exile in Boca Raton, Florida).

In the years following the second world war Brazil gave international football 
its sense of unfenced adventure. More recently Brazil’s gift has been a 
peculiar kind of murkiness, ajeitinho culture of favours and deals and 
financial opacity. To expect anything pure or identifiably untainted – some 
kind of football-powered purging of the old order – to emerge from this meshing 
of interests was always a little hopeful. The world wanted a Brazilian World 
Cup. Well, we got one, warts and all.

Where does this leave us now? Six months on most of the leading teams look a 
little drained. The world champions’ period of post-tournament dignity has been 
bound up in rebuilding after some key retirements. Holland have lost four of 
their six matches since the third-place play-off. Only Brazil, so supine while 
being mercilessly euthanised out of their own tournament by Germany in Belo 
Horizonte, have looked stronger, winning six facile friendlies while conceding 
only a single goal, a team still furiously building for a moment that has 
already gone.

And then there was England. This was probably not the most disappointing 
tournament-stagger England have produced in recent years (that honour surely 
belongs to 2010, where a more obviously toxic presence was stretched out into 
the second stage).

But it was the most eerily frictionless, a sequence of two defeats against 
competent opposition over five days of competitive football that felt even more 
alarming than the ragged, operatic failures of the past. England were perhaps 
unlucky. They lost to Italy and Uruguay on details: a slight but telling 
slackness in defence; a failure to keep the ball in midfield; possession 
without incision in attack.

But really these were the kind of details that creep back from the foot, up 
the leg and back into a 60-year history of managed decline and a profiteering, 
scorched-earth club game that has left England for so long underachievers and 
now simply an irrelevance to the powerhouse nations of world football.

Beyond this Brazil 2014 confirmed what we already know, that the real power 
and influence – and indeed interest – is located now in the club game. European 
teams have now won the last three tournaments and provided five of the last six 
finalists. Beyond this the Champions League influence is everywhere.

Even Costa Rica, the first Concacaf team to make it to the official last 16, 
played like a brilliantly prepared, expertly staged imitation of a European 
team, all hustle and discipline and well-drilled counterattack.

And really these are interesting times for the World Cup generally. No one can 
predict with any certainty what the next two tournaments might look and feel 
like. Or indeed how many more Fifa World Cups, in the form we currently 
recognise, we can really expect to follow Russia 2018 and Qatar – it still 
sounds odd – 2022.

One of the more outré possibilities currently being floated around is the 
emergence of a competing Uefa World Cup before we even reach Qatar, a more 
transparent, openly euro-centred alternative to the cowboy-ish corporate 
culture of Fifa.

Brazil 2014 may not have been the World Cup to end World Cups. But it might 
just end up looking like a last real shot at something that had already 
vanished in any case.
 