
Two weeks ago, Fred, the diminutive Shakhtar Donetsk forward, made his home 
debut for Brazil in a friendly against Mexico in São Paulo. When his name was 
read out before kickoff, he was roundly booed: the crowd did not realise he was 
the 22-year-old Frederico Rodrigues Santos, and assumed he was the other Fred, 
the 31-year-old Frederico Chaves Guedes, the Fluminense striker who was one of 
the chief scapegoats for the disaster of theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>.

Mexico 0-0 Bolivia | 2015 Copa America Group A match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/13/mexico-bolivia-copa-america> 
The older, taller Fred retired from international football after the World 
Cup, jumping before he was pushed, but he has not been forgiven. The mood in 
Belo Horizonte the night of the7-1 defeat to Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/08/germany-brazil-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 may have been one of shock, but as the numbness has worn off what has been 
left is a sense of pain and anger that will perhaps never be wholly erased.

Moacir Barbosa, the goalkeeper blamed for Brazil’s vital defeat to Uruguay in 
1950, was haunted by the sense he was being judged everywhere he went: “Under 
Brazilian law, the maximum sentence is 30 years,” he said shortly before his 
death in 2000. “But I have served 50.” Fred, it seems, may endure something 
similar.

At least if Fred is being blamed, the rest of the players are not. Since 
taking charge for the second time after the World Cup, Dunga’s main task has 
been to restore self-belief. “We went down to the second or third division but 
we’re stillBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> and proud of 
our quality,” he said. He has done all he could reasonably have been expected 
to, winning 10 friendlies in a row, but even that is not enough to restore 
faith: Luiz Felipe Scolari’s side, after all, won nine in a row in the buildup 
to the World Cup.

Moreover, Wednesday’s friendly against Honduras in Porto Alegre ended in an 
unconvincing 1-0 win after which Brazil were booed off.

“The competition is approaching and it’s normal to be out of rhythm,” Dunga 
said. “Our opponents defended the whole game, our goalkeeper didn’t have 
anything to do and we made four or five good chances to score.”

In a sense it did not matter; they could have won 10-0 and it would not have 
soothed nerves any more before Sunday’s Copa América opener against Peru, 
Brazil’s first competitive game sincethe 3-0 defeat to Holland at the World 
Cup’s third-place play-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/12/brazilholland-world-cup-2014-third-place-play-off-match-report>
.

It did, though, perhaps, hint at Dunga’s thinking for that fixture. He played 
his usual blend of 4-2-3-1 and 4-2‑2-2, just as Scolari did. Neymar, having 
played in the Champions League final, started on the bench, eventually 
replacing Philippe Coutinho, who shuttled from a position between Fred and 
Willian to support Roberto Firmino.

It is possible Coutinho will start ahead of Fred on the left when Neymar 
returns, but that Fred has started in that position in Brazil’s last two games 
suggests Dunga prefers him despite Coutinho’s goal in the friendly against 
Mexico.

But the story of Fred’s debut is telling for another reason: he is part of an 
increasingly number of Brazilians who move abroad before making a name for 
themselves and then return, almost as strangers, to take their place in the 
national side. Fred made 29 starts for Internacional in 2012 and 2013 before 
moving to Ukraine, where he joined Shakhtar’s Brazilian legion. A few 
connoisseurs in Porto Alegre perhaps had high hopes of him, but he was by no 
means well known.

He is not the only one. Willian was 18 when he left Corinthians for Shakhtar 
in 2007. Douglas Costa was 20 when he left Gremio for Shakhtar in 2010. Roberto 
Firmino was 19 when he left Figueirense for Hoffenheim in 2011. These are the 
economics of modern football: Brazilian talent is sold often before it has 
matured. Since the early 80s South Americans have become used to the idea that 
their best talent moves to western Europe, but these days it is moving earlier 
and to a greater range of countries than ever before.

The route to Shakhtar has proved productive for more than a decade now and 
Spain and Portugal are common destinations, but it is telling that there are 
players in this squad who play in China (Diego Tardelli, at Shandong Luneng) 
and Dubai (Everton Ribeiro, at Al-Ahli).

Dunga was criticised for not having watched Coutinho at Liverpool, but his is 
a squad drawn from an almost impossibly wide area.

Perhaps, then, it is not surprising that Dunga has turned to Fred, whom he 
coached briefly at Internacional. “I know his personality and his 
competitiveness,” Dunga said when he called him up. “So I didn’t need to 
explain things to him. People who just watch the ball know nothing about 
football.”

Spirit and humility are Dunga watchwords: he likes his players, those he can 
trust, around him that may yet mean Diego Tardelli, who Brazil first called up 
in 2009, returning in place of Roberto Firmino.

That may be bad news for Coutinho, with Dunga seemingly likely to decide that 
the best way to redeem the fault of one Fred is with another.
 