
It has been almost six months since Brazil’s 7–1 shellacking by Germany in the 
World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> semi-finals 
but that is not nearly enough time for many to get over what happened.

Some Brazilians are in denial. Others still reeling from a football 
apocalypse. Most sit somewhere in the middle but there are two main camps of 
thought in the debate about the significance of such a humbling defeat.

Rebels and reformers saw the drubbing as a sign of wider, deeper malaise and 
hoped it would serve as a spur to change the way the game is played and run, 
much as the 1950 defeat in the final to Uruguay prompted a thorough overhaul 
and a new national team shirt. Out, they hoped, with negative, dirty football. 
Out with the corrupt, secretive leadership of the Brazilian Football 
Confederation. Out with half-empty stadiums, fan violence and the growing gap 
between players and supporters.

Those on the other side were more inclined to see the result as a blip in the 
outstanding record of the most successful World Cup nation. This camp includes 
establishment cronies who benefited from the status quo, those who pointed out 
that comparisons with 1950 were fundamentally misleading and world-weary 
sceptics who doubted that any single game could shake Brazilian football’s 
grandees.

The debate between the two raged briefly, but six months on there is no doubt 
which side are in the ascendant.Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> is quietly back to its familiar 
and comfortable patterns. Few heads have rolled. Debate about the white 
elephant stadiums has died down. Street protests are a distant memory. And 
while there are occasional grumbles about the seemingly non-existent – or even 
negative – impact of the tournament, there appears to be very little appetite 
for change.

Juca Kfouri, a columnist, said the bitter memory of the semi-final had not yet 
become easier to accept but it had not resulted in any major change. “It was a 
shame, a national embarrassment,” he said. “The game will not be forgotten any 
time soon. But there has been no discussion of the causes. Nothing has been 
done beyond the switch of managers.”

The highest-profile victim of the Mineirazo was, inevitably, the Seleção 
manager, Luiz Felipe Scolari, who resigned after the tournament to become the 
coach of Grêmio. Scolari’s side are seventh in the top division, 19 points off 
the leaders, Cruzeiro. His departure did not herald a bold new start. Far from 
it. His replacement is one of his predecessors, Dunga, who coached the national 
side from 2006‑10. His team have continued with the no nonsense, hard-tackling 
defensive mindset to great effect, winning six out of the six games they have 
played since the World Cup, with a 14-1 goal record.

Higher up the political ladder the repercussions were even less evident. The 
president, Dilma Rousseff, has beenvoted back into office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/26/brazil-re-elects-dilma-rousseff-president>
 despite the chorus of boos and abuse to which she was subjected during the 
opening game and the final. The head of the CBF, José Maria Marin, is still in 
place, and the sports minister, Aldo Rebelo, was until last week when he was 
moved to science. Despite the semi-final humiliation, they argue, the World Cup 
was a success because it avoided the worst fears – protests, transport chaos, 
stadiums not ready – and provided a stage for some excellent matches.

People are moving on, or at least getting back to what they do best. Some 
villains have already become heroes. Brazil’s striker Fred, who was lambasted 
during the tournament for managing only one goal, has bounced back with 
Fluminense to be the top scorer in the first division. Others say they are 
moving on: “We have to make the World Cup in the past and think about the 
future,” Chelsea’s Willian said recently. “We are beginning to overcome that 
trauma.”

There are also faint signs that playing styles may be changing. The most 
recent champions of Serie A were Cruzeiro, who play a fluid German-style game. 
One legacy of the World Cup has been a heightened appreciation in Brazil of all 
things German, particularly Lukas Podolski, who may not have played a central 
role in the tournament but has built up something of a cult following with his 
unfailingly genial comments about Brazil on Twitter.

Some of the most vocal naysayers have swung round. Among them is the former 
Brazil striker-turned-congressman Romario. “The World Cup, with all the 
problems, with absurd expenses, theft everywhere, turned out to be good, 
especially for tourists,” he said.

The economic benefits – although much heralded before the tournament – are 
still far from clear. Tourist spending in Brazil set a record, rising 6.2% from 
January to October compared with the same period in 2013. In Latin America as a 
whole, international tourism slowed by almost half. One study claims the Brazil 
brand was hurt by the tournament to the tune of $75bn (£48.2bn) in image value 
because the protests and reports of stadium delays reinforced negative 
stereotypes about poorly managed Latin American nations.

Similarly the pre-World Cup claim that stadiums would become white elephants 
seem to be being born out in some cases 
<file:/Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/WC2014%20Retrospective.pdf>.

The Arena Amazônia in Manaus, where England played their opening match, has 
staged only four games since the tournament. Despite the 62.3% attendance rates 
at those matches – and extra income from evangelical Christian rallies and 
music concerts – officials admitted they were still unable to cover the 
R700,000 (£168,600) per month running costs.

There is a similar story at the Pantanal Arena in Cuiabá, where the only 
decent crowds have been for games played by visiting teams from Rio de Janeiro 
and São Paulo. The Mané Garrincha stadium in Brasilia has fared a little 
better, with 73 events in five months, including a Paul McCartney concert that 
drew 46,000 people, and a mass wedding by more than 100 couples. The biggest 
crowd at the stadium has been for a performance by Beyoncé. Even so, government 
officials say a new strategy is needed to make the facility profitable. The 
Maracanã has also been busy, with 77 games and an average attendance of 25,000 
– still only a third of capacity.

Altogether, the 12 World Cup stadiums have staged 218 games, with an average 
attendance of 18,300 (just above the national average), according to a study 
published in the Folha newspaper.

The grounds were not the only infrastructure projects related to the 
tournament. The government also upgraded roads and airports. Almost half of 
these construction works arestill not complete 
<http://g1.globo.com/bom-dia-brasil/noticia/2014/12/metade-das-obras-nos-aeroportos-para-copa-do-mundo-nao-esta-pronta.html>
, according to the federal audit court, which also reported the total bill for 
World Cup works has swollen from R2.6bn to R4.4bn.

Resentment of the tournament remains among communities broken up or relocated 
to make way for infrastructure and real estate projects. Gustavo Dopcke, a 
member of the Mariachi collective who have tried to resist relocation, said his 
abiding memory of the World Cup is one of glaring inequality, muted national 
support and a brutal police crackdown against protesters and favela residents.

“The biggest lesson was to see that the true role of the state is to guarantee 
the profits of big businesses regardless of the human cost,” he said. “Fifa 
earned $10bn. But to do this business, many people had to die in the slums, 
while others were forced to leave their homes.”

In the past such cases may not have reached the public eye but this is 
changing as a result of another of the tournament’s unplanned legacies. The
Mídia Ninja journalist collective <https://ninja.oximity.com/> gather reports 
from the streets and broadcasts them through social networks. The pre-World Cup 
protests were a major breakthrough for the then new organisation now struggling 
to build on the momentum from that highly charged time.

Felipe Altenfelder, one of its journalists, recalls the event with mixed 
feelings. “From a personal point of view, it was worthwhile … We worked hard 
and published a lot of content from dialogues with a wide range of people. But 
I think the issue is broader and more difficult to measure because we know so 
many families were removed from their homes, many workers were prevented from 
carrying out their activities and local culture was disrespected at various 
levels by the rules of Fifa.”

There are now far fewer protests and those that continue draw only a small 
fraction of the media attention. Whether this is a lull before the 2016 
Olympics in Rio de Janeiro or a more significant change of public mood remains 
to be seen.

Despite the focus on the protests and the 7–1 defeat some fans say what they 
have taken away from the tournament is an awareness of a wider world beyond 
their favourite sport. There are as many different views on this as there are 
fans but one legacy of the World Cup may be the undermining of the canard about 
football being the “religion of Brazil”.

That may never have been completely true but even if it were a great many 
people found reasons in 2014 to start doubting their faith.
 