
Getting men to be active fathers may not seem the most obvious way to tackle 
gender-based violence. But, according to Gary Barker, CEO and founder ofPromundo
 <http://promundoglobal.org/>, which engages men and boys in ending violence 
against women and girls, policies that encourage men to do more unpaid care 
work are a vital part of achieving gender equality.

“To us, it seemed obvious that we needed to figure out more constructive ways 
to engage men on this topic,” he says.

In fact, there can be consequences when men aren’t brought into initiatives to 
empower women.

According to Barker, while in the long-term, women who are better off 
financially are less likely to be involved in a violent relationship and more 
likely to leave a violent partner, in the short-term, the opposite can be true. 
Micro-credit programmes that target women, for example, can initially lead to 
an increase in violence.

“[Her partner] may be feeling economically disempowered, the power dynamic 
feels like it’s shifting … and in some settings and some relationships, men 
might not be ready for that,” Barker explains.

To tackle this in Brazil, Promundo runs a companion project 
<http://promundoglobal.org/2016/08/02/final-stages-economic-empowerment-project-promundo-trains-hundreds-professionals-gender-transformative-methodologies>
 to the government’sbolsa familia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/dec/17/brazil-bolsa-familia-decade-anniversary-poverty-relief>
 cash transfer programme, which for more than a decade has given cash to 
families living in poverty in return for enrolling their children in school and 
attending regular health checks.


Bolsa familia reaches nearly a quarter of the country’s population, and 93% of 
its beneficiaries are women. Promundo’s companion project trained public sector 
staff to discuss gender equality and the importance of sharing care work when 
administering bolsa familia grants.
 Gary Barker, CEO and founder of Promundo, which engages men and boys in 
ending violence against women and girls. Photograph: Brad Barket/ 
WireImage/Getty Images 
“We worked with staff who implement that programme to say, let’s encourage him 
to be part of helping the child with homework, let’s encourage him to go to the 
meetings with teachers,” says Barker.

The project seems to be working. At the start, 75% of male participants said 
men’s responsibilities included childcare, by the end, 100% agreed.

Promundo, which works in more than 20 countries and receives funding from 
foundations and government sources, including the US Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) and the World Bank, also recently successfully 
campaigned forBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> to increase 
entitlement to paternity leave – one of few policy examples promoting men’s 
involvement in care work. Men are now able to take 20 days of paid parental 
leave, as opposed to the previous five.

Barker had campaigned for more paternity leave in Brazil in 2007, but failed 
because too many employers did not want to provide this extra benefit to staff. 
He was also told by women’s rights organisations that mothers did not believe 
their partners were ready to care for their children.

Barker hopes the country becoming one of only a handful in the global south to 
offer paid leave for fathers will begin closing the huge gap between men and 
women in time spent on caregiving. Combined with better policies around 
education and psychosocial support, he hopes it will also reduce levels of 
gender-based violence.

According to the annual Map of Violence 
<http://www.mapadaviolencia.org.br/pdf2015/MapaViolencia_2015_mulheres.pdf>, in 
2015 a woman was killed every two hours in Brazil.

Whereas Brazilian women spend 22 hours a week, on average, on care and 
domestic work, men only spend 10 hours and eight minutes, according to 
Promundo’s 2015State of the World’s Fathers report 
<http://sowf.men-care.org/download/>.


The key, Barker says, will be scaling up work to engage men from small-scale 
projects at community level to become a more mainstream part of government 
policy and development programmes. “There’s a growing amount of evidence that 
if we can do this long enough and deep enough, and with enough key actors, we 
can see change. But they’ve been in limited areas – five schools, four 
provinces in a country,” he says.

His views are shared by a number of women’s and girls’ rights organisations. 
According to Kerry Smith, head of girls’ rights and youth at Plan International 
UK, which works with men and boys to prevent female genital mutilation and 
child marriage: “If you want to address stereotypes of what women and girls 
are, you absolutely need to address stereotypes that men have to operate under 
as well.


“In our minds, it isn’t the most important element, it isn’t the only element, 
but it is an essential ingredient of tackling and ending violence against women 
and girls. You need to look at it in a public health way. You need to treat and 
respond to the actual violence and you also need to take preventative measures, 
both of which need funding.”

Toral Pattni, Care International’s senior humanitarian adviser for gender, 
acknowledges that in the context of limited funds, the balance between work 
with men and boys and protecting women who have experienced violence is 
“something many organisations struggle with. But if we are simply responding to 
the need but not tackling, not preventing it, then we are only ever going to be 
responding to the need.”

Barker believes it’s time to assess how much it would cost to engage more men. 
“It’s a really key moment to now say how much would it cost to scale this up 
... and to build it in to other streams of funding. To say, what does it cost 
to [engage men] in what you’re already doing?”










 