
Breaking Bad <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> writer 
Moira Walley-Beckett has been picked to adapt the much-loved Anne of Green 
Gables books for a new TV series.

The series for Canadian broadcaster CBC, Anne, will follow the narrative of LM 
Montgomery’s coming of age story about an orphaned girl sent to live in a small 
town. However, CBC said the production would also introduce new elements 
“reflecting timeless issues, including themes of identity, sexism, bullying, 
prejudice, and trusting one’s self”.


“Adapting Anne’s story really excites me,” said Walley-Beckett. “Anne’s issues 
are contemporary issues: feminism, prejudice, bullying and a desire to belong.

“The stakes are high and her emotional journey is tumultuous. I’m thrilled to 
delve deeply into this resonant story, push the boundaries and give it new 
life.”

The series will begin production in spring and is due to air in 2017. The 
story of Anne Shirley, sent as an 11-year-old orphan to live with childless 
middle-aged siblings on their farm inPrince Edward Island 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prince_Edward_Island> has sold more than 50 
million copies and has been translated into 20 languages.

It has been adapted as film, made-for-television movies, and animated and 
live-action television series.

Walley-Beckett will be working with Canadian producer Miranda de Pencier, and 
Monumental Pictures, the studio founded by Alison Owen and Debra Hayward, who 
have numerous period films under their belts including Elizabeth and the 2005 
adaptation of Pride and Prejudice starring Keira Knightly.


CBC scripted content executive director Tara Ellis said: “We’re thrilled to be 
working with this exceptionally talented group of women on this exciting 
project.”

“This new take on Lucy Maud Montgomery’s beloved story will be highly 
anticipated by fans of Anne and a whole new generation of viewers who have yet 
to meet her.”

Walley-Beckett began working on Breaking Bad as a writer in series two and 
went on to wina best writing Emmy 
<http://time.com/3181038/emmys-2014-breaking-bad-true-detective-win/> for work 
on the fifth season episode Ozymandias, making her the first solo woman to win 
the award since 1994.
 