
Bret Easton Ellis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/breteastonellis> was 
secretive at school. Buckley was private, up in the hills, a rich teenagers' 
refuge of tiled roofs and lawns. The rest of Los Angeles, random and vast and 
frightening to Buckley parents, who mostly worked in Hollywood, stewed far away 
below: some of their children would work there too. At the beginning of the 
eighties, Buckley pupils watched their grades, threw parties and footballs, and 
never burned in the sun.

Ellis' father was a property developer. He bought and sold skyscrapers. He was 
a big, thick-necked man who believed in work and little else. He had married 
young, had children young, and his frustrations were bursting from his 
carefully-brushed suits. They lived in Sherman Oaks in the San Fernando Valley 
- New Jersey to smart LA's Manhattan.

But his son disappointed. He didn't bother much with studying, and his grades 
were poor. He was flat-footed and towering. He got sick notes to avoid sport. 
He didn't tan well. He was not overwhelmed with friends. 'Bret stayed very 
apart from the other students,' says Steve Robbins, who taught him. 'He was not 
a particularly happy person.' Yet behind Ellis' blank stare, and his black 
coats, and his perpetual pout, an unusual and self-confident mind was whirring. 
He had written his first novel, about a boy who wakes up as a pancake, at the 
age of ten. By 14, he had finished another. By 17, he was on his fourth. 'I 
took English very seriously,' he says. 'It was the only thing to take 
seriously.' Every now and again, he would bring a fragment to school and show 
it to Robbins, who worked in the literature department. Robbins was impressed - 
'he had a style and a voice; he was definitely a talented writer' - and began 
publishing the stories in Buckley's literary magazine.

Ellis grew more confident. His offerings lengthened. He started to pose around 
Buckley, pale and brooding against the sunshine, holding volumes by Joan 
Didion, California's most famous and elegant literary pessimist. He even 
started writing for the school newspaper. His pop and film reviews were tart: 
'I would put down the new Journey album,' he remembers now, his eyes laughing, 
'And the last Police album, the one with that stupid do-do-do song on it.' 
Ellis was having his first revenge on wider society.

Then he appeared to stall. The Journey review got him fired. Robbins began to 
grow disenchanted: 'I felt he wasn't bringing his best stuff in. He was 
reluctant to publish it at school.' Meanwhile Ellis did less and less other 
work. When the time came, he applied to a tiny but very expensive progressive 
college with no set entrance requirements in southern Vermont, almost as far 
from his father and Buckley and Los Angeles as it was possible to go. in the 
autumn of 1982, aged 18, he disappeared to Bennington. His intended degree had 
only a minor writing component.

Less than three years later, he was the most fashionable young novelist in the 
world. The book on which this ambiguous distinction relied was a bare 200 pages 
long, essentially plotless, and had taken only eight weeks to write. At first 
sight, Less Than Zero seemed to be nothing but a Buckley diary: the minor 
escapades of rich teenagers, coupling and clubbing and speeding across a Los 
Angeles miraculously devoid of parents. The weather was always 'hot'. Every 
character was 'tan'. Everyone was either 'flirting' or 'bored'.

Ellis's family were appalled: 'There was a lot of resentment from my sisters,' 
he says, 'Because they were still in high school, and all their friends were 
reading it, and they assumed that the [narrator's] family in the book was based 
on them.' When he went back to Los Angeles to see some friends, shortly after 
the novel came out, he was surrounded by awestruck teenage boys in every 
nightclub.

Yet Less Than Zero was more than teen exploitation. Its parties and beach 
interludes and drug deals via parents' telephones were so stylized, so similar 
to each other, so smoothly repetitive in the re-telling, that most readers did 
not care whether they had happened at all. The selling-point was the 
atmosphere: by turns, blissed-out and ominous, seductive and spooked, as if the 
characters were flies settling comfortably into amber. The narrator was on 
Valium. His friends were making snuff movies. There was a lizard behind the 
toilet door, and, out in the desert beyond the city, 'the sound of coyotes 
howling and dogs barking and palm trees shaking in the wind.' Ellis' sentenes 
were as long and flat and hypnotizing as LA freeways. To readers who lived 
there, they rang true; to the many thousands who didn't, they seemed 
deliciously exotic. Or scandalous. Within weeks of publication, Less Than Zero 
was being discussed by critics and newspaper columnists and film executives, 
not as a notable first novel, but as a state-of-the-nation address. It did not 
hurt, of course, that its author was 20, and apparently as glazed and deadpan 
as his most nihilistic characters. Ellis did his first interviews in expensive 
restaurants, in a slur of vodka and cocktails. Before 1985 was out, he had 
become 'the voice of a generation'.

He has expertly sustained his fame ever since. He has not published a great 
deal: two more novels, and a dozen short stories. Only one of these volumes, a 
witty and vicious creation called American Psycho, has sold substantially. Yet 
last year, without a book to publicize, without a novel to his name for seven 
years, Ellis was the subject of an extended South Bank Show documentary, and a 
whole day of public discussion - normally reserved for famous visiting 
philosophers - at the ICA. It was the second time he had been questioned 
onstage there.

There are 1,048 websites partly or entirely devoted to him and his fiction, 
many set up by Spanish-speakers and Scandinavians. The Bret Easton Ellis Page 
includes aphorisms ('I don't feel any success is deserved'); transcripts of his 
interviews (Do you feel human nature is inherently evil? Yes); details of 
characters murdered in American Psycho ('Men - all quick deaths - 7... Women - 
all slower deaths - 7); even suggestions for who should star in the proposed 
film (John Travolta, Brad Pitt, or Julian Dicks, a West Ham footballer). He 
also enjoys more respectable attention. 'He's been taught quite a lot in 
universities in recent years,' says Malcolm Bradbury, who established the 
creative writing course at the University of East Anglia. 'He's a writer who's 
had an enormous influence on the last three years' intake of our students.' 
Ellis doesn't bother with metaphors. He barely uses adjectives. His only 
descriptive passages are scenes of sex and violence. His books seem neither 
off-puttingly literary nor restricted by morals. Thus Less Than Zero and 
American Psycho, in particular, have spread their themes and style far. In the 
films of Quentin Tarantino and in John King's bestsellers about football 
hooligans, in Irvine Welsh and Will Self novels, and in the work of young 
British artists, what you might call a post-Ellis sensibility is in evidence: 
cold-eyed, bleak but comic, much concerned with the body and gore, doomy yet 
never judgmental.

In person, Ellis has slyly played up to all this. He has worn the same sort of 
black suit - half undertaker, half bond trader - on all his book jackets. He 
has taken every interviewer to his tomb of a flat in New York. They have 
written about the bare walls, the lack of furniture, the mattress on the floor. 
He has frozen into a pout for their photographs. He has taken a bodyguard on 
book tours.

As at Buckley, the reaction has been everything he hoped for. In 1986, Less 
Than Zero was declared malign and unfilmable by the head of the studio that, 
later that year, adapted and filmed it. In 1991, Norman Mailer called for 
American Psycho to be examined, before publication, by a panel of '12 respected 
novelists'. Last summer, Leonardo DiCaprio decided to withdraw his services 
from the film version.

And all the while, with every boycott, bookshop ban and leak of the goriest 
bits of the manuscripts, and long and horrified review (American Psycho was 
'without doubt the nastiest bit of writing I have ever encountered,' decided 
Sebastian Faulks, who writes novels about war), his readership has widened. 
Less Than Zero sold about 50,000 copies the year it came out; double that since 
then. American Psycho, now eight years old, still manages over 1,000 a month. 
It has just been issued for the first time in hardback. The film starts 
shooting in March.

This month Ellis has a new novel to sell. Glamorama, he says, is 'the big 
book'. His publishers are putting it out, he pretends to let slip, in the time 
slot they had previously reserved for Michael Crichton. Copies have been 
creeping into bookshops prematurely for weeks. The reviews, as usual, have been 
very early, very lengthy, and very mixed. As the literary editor of a New York 
paper puts it, 'A lot of people hate the book.' Glamorama is, in a way, the 
ultimate Bret Easton Ellis product. He is 34 now; he began it when he was 26. 
It is two and a half times as long as Less Than Zero, and contains characters 
from that and every other Ellis volume. Glamorama has sections set in 
Manhattan, Los Angeles, London, Paris, Milan, and the middle of the Atlantic. 
Its protagonists are supermodels and slouching teenagers, nightclub owners and 
terrorists, spies and slack-jawed tranquillizer addicts. Their wandering and 
wealthy lives are detailed, as Ellis always does, with immensely mocking 
dryness. One character is described as 'Uma Thurman if Uma Thurman was five 
feet two and asleep'.

Most of this droll sociology, though, disappears halfway through. What 
replaces it - recklessly perhaps - is Ellis' first ever effort at a plot. There 
is a mysterious assignment, a voyage on an ocean liner, a scramble against 
time, a villain. His great drifting paragraphs are compressed and accelerated, 
in places, into one-line shots of story development, just the sort of thing 
Crichton favours.

To match this shift towards convention, Ellis's image has undergone a subtle 
reworking. He has stopped wearing his 'writer's suits' for interviews. He has 
warmed up his flat: he has bought a couch, a coffee table, bookshelves. He 
sleeps on a bed now. He is keen to talk about cooking.

'My life is much simpler than it was,' he says. 'I'm, I guess, more focused. 
I'm not necessarily happy; things aren't necessarily that great... but you get 
used to it. You kind of adapt. And that tends to relax you.' He is eating a 
salad straight out of a plastic pack. He is wearing slightly scuffed deck 
shoes, label-free chinos, and a black polo shirt that might be from the Gap. 
His bare arms look worked-on. His hair is quietly greying and tidied back. He 
is sitting in a new black office chair, and his pout no longer seems to be 
intact.

'I can't sit on the floor any more,' he says, 'Because then I need help in 
getting up.' Later on, he volunteers, 'As I get older, I'm no longer able to 
process drugs through my body... ' He pauses; his cheeks and jaw, which have 
thickened since the early photographs, relax into resignation. 'It's not quite 
worth the trouble.' He seems to have calmed down his literary persona too. When 
American Psycho first came out, and he received death threats and furious 
critical dismissals, Ellis responded with exasperation, almost contempt. 'It's 
not really about Patrick Bateman [the narrator] killing anybody,' he told those 
offended by his extended depictions of murders. Women shocked by a chapter 
involving a rat and a vagina had missed the point, in his view, that the book 
was 'basically almost a feminist tract'.

These days, he says, 'I think the questions I'm asked about the morality of 
American Psycho are legitimate.' He doesn't think teenagers should read it, 
'doesn't know' whether a film should be made out of it. He describes Glamorama 
as 'not as nasty'.

But he is still putting on an act. His voice flits constantly between tones: 
one moment slow and pensive, the next, self-mocking and camp, or sulky, or 
declarative. He rolls his chair back and forth as he speaks, perpetually 
switching postures. Its shiny castors are silent on the smooth floorboards, and 
behind him every wall is still blank and pale, every surface is hard, and no 
sun enters from the north-facing windows. His new domestic trappings look 
marooned, like gestures; the bookshelves, for one thing, are far too high on 
their wall. Ellis has bought a step-ladder to reach them, but it looks 
decorative and too small.

His concerns about teenagers reading American Psycho, it turns out, are 
actually to do with the 'terrible publicity'. His worries about the movie 
revolve around whether the book will 'translate'. Last year, he was more 
optimistic: 'Oliver Stone was going to direct. Cameron Diaz was going to be in 
it...' Ellis's words suddenly rush out like a screenwriter making a pitch. 'I 
thought Leo [DiCaprio] was a great idea. There was something very perverse and 
exciting. I think he's a great actor.' The lead, now, is to be the less 
well-known Christian Bale. The director is an art film auteur called Mary 
Harron. The budget has been downgraded from $80 million to $6 million. Yet 
Ellis still sees the adaptation (which he, in fact, wrote a rejected script 
for) as an opportunity for self-justification: 'It may make people look at the 
book a little bit differently, people who might have assumed it was nothing but 
sado-masochistic shit... What the screenwriters did is make it funny, keep a 
lot of the humour intact. It's a black comedy at heart.' He still feels 
misrepresented. 'The press here,' he says, 'For some reason, just don't like 
me... They don't like the way I write. They don't like my take on America.' He 
has kept count of his proportion of unfavourable reviews in the New York Times: 
all of them.

In less cautious places, though, he is gaining the odd defender. Dennis 
Cooper, another Californian writer with a reputation for casual brutality, 
thinks 'People have a very narrow idea of what is literature in America right 
now, and Bret Easton Ellis doesn't fit into it. There's a real tradition here 
of dismissing literature that involves youth. It took years and years for 
Catcher In The Rye to be respected.' British reviewers and readers tend to be 
more instantly impressd by conversational, or cruel, American authors. Ellis's 
books sell more copies here than in his homeland. For the South Bank Show, he 
was filmed stalking around Los Angeles in a long coat, rattling through racks 
of Prada jackets in a Manhattan boutique, and goofing around with two friends 
in a hired limousin. 'I felt loved!', he says, swiftly switching gears from a 
mumble to a shriek.

Yet the documentary steered away, it was noticeable, from close scrutiny of 
the actual writing. This may not have been for want of trying. For all his 
array of conversational gambits, his hand-flutters and smiling confidences, 
Ellis can still be as secretive about his motivations as he was at Buckley.

'I kind of just go out and write what I wanna write, and see what happens,' he 
says at one point, like a cartoon character from Beavis and Butthead. Other 
favoured answers, to any question about authorial intentions, are 'I don't 
know' and 'I never really thought about it'. When, rarely, he can be lured into 
a longer response, he just thinks out loud, his plump lips pursing, his words 
as loose and pragmatic as the social lives of his characters: 'I've read 
recently that I'm certainly suspected of being addicted to sensationalism,' he 
begins. 'I thought, 'Maybe I am... Is that a bad thing? Or is that just part of 
your baggage as a writer, part of my make-up, and you can't put a value 
judgement on it?' He would much rather talk technique. His whole pages of 
throat-slashing and disembowelling, for example, are done as follows: 'You've 
been making notes about how this scene is going to be played for so long that, 
by the time it comes to actually writing it, you're sort of so prepared...' He 
switches persons: 'I'm emotionally involved on a technical level. I don't feel 
some terrible sadness or fear for the characters.' He sits back in his office 
chair, with its seat covers of fine wire mesh and forest of adjusting levers. 
His writing desk is as far as possible from the windows, from the lusty street 
life of New York. 'It's a very technical process,' he says again.

Ellis learned very young to subordinate his feelings. Before he went to 
Buckley, his childhood should have been blissful: a big gabled house near the 
school, umbrellas in the back garden, a dog, a pool, two younger sisters to 
plot with, a young mother to bus them around. In their home movies from the 
early seventies, there were always palms, as if the blue sky was held aloft by 
circus poles.

But he was already hiding indoors. He read science fiction and his mother's 
Stephen King novels. When he was 10, he went to see the rock opera Tommy. 'That 
was the pivotal moment in my childhood,' he said later. For the time, Tommy was 
not an unusual film for boys to like, with its war scenes and writhing women 
and power-chords, but for Ellis, most likely, it had two additional qualities. 
The hero was a prodigy, misunderstood by others. And the monster of the story 
was a father.

Ellis's own hit his family sometimes. More often, he drank. 'I remember one 
morning in the Plaza Hotel in New York,' says Ellis, 'When we kept circling the 
lobby, and I didn't understand why. He was waiting for the Oak Room bar to open 
at 10. We went in and he had three drinks, and he ordered me a couple.' Around 
1980 his father began making a lot of money. He was profiled by the Wall Street 
Journal. He began working from home, taking over parts of the house. Steadily, 
'He became a lousier individual.' Ellis avoids giving details, except about 
one, climactic incident: 'I think it was a bar mitzvah for the family next 
door, at a dancehall or something, at noon. My father did not want to go. He 
drank a lot at the party, and left with the car - didn't tell us. So we had to 
take a cab home. He'd locked all the doors, locked the gate. I finally climbed 
over... We broke a window with a baseball bat.' His voice drops. 'The next day 
he was gone.' His father died in 1992 leaving debts, out of the blue, of $10 
million. Ellis says he still thinks of him every time he looks in the mirror. 
His fiction is haunted by bullying fathers: spying on their sons, trampling 
them with ostentation, trying to pick up their girlfriends. Back in 1982 he 
tried to escape all this as soon and as directly as he could by going to 
Bennington.

He loved it there. Vermont was cold, and the college was tiny - just 500 
students - but the frost and the fuggy rooms and the isolation generated their 
own energies: 'There were a lot of drugs without guilt, a lot of sex without 
fear.' AIDS was a mere rumour; Ellis had girlfriends and boyfriends, watched 
everything for his notebooks, and, here and there, worked towards a music 
degree.

He also joined bands. Becoming a famous musician, he had decided, would 
provide quicker rewards than being a novelist. He could play keyboards and 
write tunes; he soon ended up in a raucous five-piece called The Parents. He 
still sounds lyrical about it: 'It was the best time... We played a lot of 
parties, some of the festivals at the college... People would come and just 
hang out, get stoned, and watch us. A couple of hundred people dancing and 
getting into it...' His eyes have lost their smirk. 'We did have a couple of 
singles that would've been huge.' He was hedging his bets, though. Towards the 
end of his first year, he persuaded one of the creative writing tutors to let 
him join his class. Less Than Zero was the result: written in a great rush, 
praised by everyone at Bennington, and immediately despatched to publishers. It 
was sold for $5,000, but it soon became apparent that it was worth rather more. 
Ellis was being compared to Truman Capote.

The attention helped give him a nervous breakdown. He stopped going outside, 
then stopped getting out of bed. A rumour went round, absurdly, that his editor 
had written the book. Ellis became too 'damn scared' to respond. 'It was a sort 
of emotional exhaustion,' he says now. 'My mom came over, I started seeing a 
shrink, I got my medicine - kind of regulated myself.' Has he had any more 
breakdowns since? 'No. It doesn't happen any more.' He still has 
anti-depressants in his bathroom, though.

His life since Bennington has not been peaceful. In 1987, he moved to New York 
for another fresh start. He was 23, quite rich, with a second novel finished 
and his own apartment. The problem was, the book he had written about 
Bennington, The Rules Of Attraction, was almost universally panned. It was too 
self-conscious, too cold and snobbish, too much of a campus memoir. One chapter 
was in French. Another was left blank. Mocking student hippies for their BMWs 
was not enough.

The film of Less Than Zero was equally disastrous. Ellis had nothing to do 
with it, but the ease with which his book was reduced to a mildly risque teen 
movie - like Beverly Hills 90210 with more kissing - raised suspicions about 
the original. Meanwhile, Ellis was being photographed, red-faced and blasted, 
in various New York nightclubs. By the end of the eighties he had little money 
and a thinning reputation. He began sketching out American Psycho.

'I had a lot of confidence about the work,' he says. 'And I never had a 
problem about separating the work from the rest of the chaos... The work is so 
separate. There's no one else in it. It's completely white and pure and 
untrammelled by other people's footsteps. It is the point of being a writer: a 
place you can feel safe in, an entire world, that you control.' He still spends 
most days at his desk by the door. He keeps the same hours as his friends, who 
are 'mostly writers and editors and people at magazines', working from 
mid-morning to early evening, filling up his notebooks, then linking them into 
outlines, then fattening up these skeletons with his satire and shock-prose. 
For breaks, he watches television - day-time talk-shows - on the great, fat set 
at the foot of his bed, or walks to the corner shop, his coat pulled tightly 
round, complaining to himself about the cold.

By late afternoon, his phone is usually ringing. Does he want to come to 
dinner? What about the party afterwards? Should they make reservations? His 
friends leave messages in clear, confident voices. He can't resist calling 
back. 'I like having nice drinks in nice places,' he says. Then, later, 
forgetting his official lines: 'The allure of drugs can be much stronger after 
being in an apartment all day.' Ellis, it is said, used to have a heroin 
problem. Earlier this decade, he admits, he had his blank periods, with 
American Psycho and Glamorama both stalled on the runway, his publishers 
waiting for The Informers - his short story volume - a seven-year relationship 
crumbling, and a table-top of spirits in the kitchen. But the precise facts of 
his substance use, like those of his sexuality, or his social life, or his 
future ambitions, remain out of reach.

Last year he told an interviewer he had acquired a dog; now, it turns out, he 
was looking after it for a friend. 'I've been telling people my next book is 
set in the world of politics. That's not necessarily true.' Actually, it suits 
him to be misunderstood. While confusions and controversies reign, Ellis the 
technician can keep quietly tinkering with his creations, getting their 
'aesthetics' right, flattening his sentences into perfect ambiguity.

'I doubt a morally profound thought has ever crossed his mind,' says one 
enemy. 'He has a tone that suggests intelligence.' This may be right, yet it 
somehow misses the point. The violence and doominess like everything else, is 
just surface. It does lack a worked-out rationale. And it does seem to be his 
only authorial voice, besides the odd, deeply-buried hint of melancholy.

But narrow kinds of brilliance can still compel. Modern publishing, what is 
more, finds one-note artists easiest to sell. As do other, more important 
cultural industries: Ellis is doing screenplays as well.

When he goes to Hollywood for meetings, he still stays with his mother in 
Sherman Oaks. His sisters come round to the big gabled house. And when they get 
tired of arguing about their dead father, Ellis shuts himself away and plays 
the piano. As he sings, and the sun beats down on the pool, and the great city 
glows golden through the smog, a thought increasingly formulates itself. 'I 
actually like Los Angeles much better now than I did when I was younger.'
 