
Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> conceded 
that Brexit will blow a £59bn black hole in the public finances over the next 
five years, as he outlined plans to boost investment in infrastructure and 
housing to equip the UK economy for life outside the EU.

In his first fiscal statement, the chancellor, who had supported remain, 
sought to strike a cautiously upbeat tone about the country’s prospects, saying 
the economy had “confounded commentators at home and abroad with its strength 
and its resilience” since the referendum result last June.

But the first official projections conducted after the vote of the likely 
impact of leaving the EU pointed to significantly weaker growth after Brexit.

The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) announced that there would be a 
cumulative £122bn of extra borrowing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/brexit-uncertainty-will-hold-uk-gdp-growth-back-says-obr>
 over the next five years, with £59bn of that as a direct result of Brexit. 
Other factors included weaker-than-expected tax revenues, and policy changes, 
including Hammond’s decision to spend more on infrastructure.

George Osborne was expecting to achieve a surplus of £11bn on the public 
finances by 2020-21; instead, the OBR is now forecasting a £21bn deficit – and 
public debt is expected to peak at more than 90% of GDP.

At a glance: autumn statement – 26 key points
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/key-points-autumn-statement-at-a-glance>
With little cash to spare, Hammond offered only modest handouts to the “just 
about managing” families (Jams) Theresa May’s government had said it wanted to 
help, although he repeatedly used the mantra of “building an economy that works 
for everyone”.


The chancellor announced a renewed freeze in fuel duty, to help motorists – 
largely paid for with an increase in insurance premium tax from 10% to 12% – 
and a partial reversal of planned cuts to universal credit.

But Labour said there was no cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/labour-pours-scorn-over-autumn-statement-for-ignoring-sick-and-old>
 for either the NHS or social care, which are under increasing strain with 
winter approaching. Instead, the main thrust of Hammond’s first set-piece 
outing at the dispatch box was how to help Britain withstand the challenges of 
leaving the EU.

The Guardian view on the autumn statement: half right, half wrong | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/the-guardian-view-on-the-autumn-statement-half-right-half-wrong>
Instead of a headline-grabbing gimmick, Hammond ended his speech with the 
surprise announcement that he had delivered the final autumn statement. In 
future, budgets will be held annually in the autumn, with a more slimmed-down 
update in the spring, meaning that there would be two budgets in 2017.

Hammond told the Commons that the Brexit vote “makes more urgent than ever the 
need to tackle our economy’s long-term weaknesses, like the productivity gap, 
the housing challenge, and the damaging imbalance in economic growth and 
prosperity across our country”.
The chancellor abandoned the intent to run a surplus by the end of the 
parliament 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-23T13:44:19/embed.html>
The chancellor added: “In the real world, it takes a German worker four days 
to produce what we make in five; which means, in turn, that too many British 
workers work longer hours for lower pay than their counterparts.”

Hammond said he would set aside £23bn over the next five years, to be spent on 
areas such as new housing projects and hi-tech research, funded by extra 
borrowing. A Treasury spokesman, lifting a phrase more commonly used by Labour, 
said “he is borrowing to invest”.

Labour pointed out that other policies, including a ban on letting agents’ 
fees, were taken from its 2015 manifesto, as Theresa May’s government 
deliberately takes a more interventionist approach to what it regards as 
failing markets.

Hammond also promised to take another look at the household energy market, 
where consumer groups have repeatedly warned customers are being ripped off.

In a sign that the government expects the public finances to continue to be 
fragile, the chancellor also hinted that costly pledges, including the 
“triple-lock” on pensions, would have to be reviewed before the Conservatives 
draw up their manifesto for the next general election.

“As we look ahead to the next parliament, we will need to ensure we tackle the 
challenges of rising longevity and fiscal sustainability,” Hammond said. “And 
so the government will review public spending priorities and other commitments 
for the next parliament in light of the evolving fiscal position at the next 
spending review.”

The OBR revised down growth forecasts for the next two years 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-23T13:57:57/embed.html>
Peter Dixon, UK economist at Commerzbank, said: “The government remains 
hamstrung by its desire to further reduce the fiscal deficit at the same time 
as Brexit-related uncertainty is likely to rise. For this reason, it will prove 
difficult to help the Jams who suffered under George Osborne’s tenure as 
chancellor.”

The OBR warned that Brexit would lead to weaker growth and lower tax receipts, 
because of higher inflation, slower immigration, and a decade-long slowdown in 
trade growth. It has assumed “that the negotiation of new trading arrangements 
with the EU and others slows the pace of import and export growth for the next 
10 years”.

In total, the OBR said it expected the chancellor to have to borrow an extra 
£122bn over the next five years – with almost half of that, £59bn, attributable 
to the impact of Brexit. Austerity is now expected to continue into the next 
parliament: more than a decade after Osborne promised to tackle the deficit run 
up during the financial crisis.

The OBR said it had been forced to base its forecasts on “broad-brush 
judgments” about the likely path of Brexit, because of the lack of clarity from 
the government. It asked for “a formal statement of government policy as 
regards its desired trade regime and system of migration control,” but the 
government directed it to public statements from Theresa May, who has 
repeatedly refused to give a “running commentary” on Brexit.

OBR projections also showed economic growth sliding to 1.4% in 2017, from the 
2.2% the OBR was expecting in March, before recovering to 2.1% by 2020. But the 
OBR warned that there was more uncertainty than usual surrounding its forecasts 
– and some commentators suggested there could be worse to come.
The national debt is set to reach £1.95tn by 2020-21 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-23T14:48:27/embed.html>
With the public finances expected to deteriorate, Hammond could have made 
emergency spending cuts; but instead he formally abandoned George Osborne’s 
target of dragging the public finances back into the black by the end of this 
parliament in 2019-20, and introduced new, looser tax and spending rules.


Under the new framework, the budget deficit is now not expected to be 
eliminated until some time in the next parliament. In the autumn statement 
“green book”, the Treasury said its approach “strikes the right balance between 
restoring the public finances to health in the medium term whilst providing 
sufficient flexibility to support the economy in the near term”.

Treasury sources said this approach would leave him room for manoeuvre to take 
emergency measures, if the economy weakens more sharply than expected, as 
article 50 is triggered next year.

In the House of Commons, Hammond’s predecessor Osborne, who rose from the back 
benches to congratulate him on his “assured delivery”, said: “The independent 
OBR has given us a very sober assessment of the economic and borrowing 
challenges that Britain faces and the chancellor is right to keep his powder 
dry.”
The chancellor confirmed corporation tax will fall to 17% by 2020-21 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-23T15:02:08/embed.html>
While Hammond unravelled some of Osborne’s policies, including his strict tax 
and spending rules, he reaffirmed several of his predecessor’s key pledges, 
including raising the tax-free personal allowance to £12,500 a year by the end 
of this parliament, and cutting corporation tax to 17%. Most of the welfare 
cuts Osborne planned, including a cash freeze in working-age benefits, and a 
£30-a-week cut in employment support allowance for disabled people, will go 
ahead.

Labour MPs repeatedly challenged Hammond about the price of Brexit. Former 
Labour leader Ed Miliband said the new forecasts were “a salutary warning to us 
about the decisions we take in the coming months”, adding “isn’t it a very 
strong argument for us to remain as close as possible to our largest trading 
area, the single market, and inside not outside the customs union?”

Shadow chancellor John McDonnell said: “Today’s statement places on record the 
abject failure of the last six wasted years and offers no hope for the future. 
The figures speak for themselves: growth, down; business investment, down; and 
their own deficit target, failed; their debt target, failed.”

Andrew Harrop, general secretary of the Fabian Society, said: “This wasn’t a 
Brexit budget, it was a Brexit uncertainty budget. Almost all the dire economic 
and fiscal news that was revealed today was the result, not of Brexit itself, 
but of the referendum decision and the pending article 50 negotiation. This 
could be just the start.”
 