
Coming home after a long spell abroad can be a surprise. Returning to London 
last month after nearly four years as the Guardian’s Washington bureau chief 
felt like escaping from a frying pan into the fire.

Fortunately, editors in London cushioned the landing by asking me to follow 
one story almost as wild as watching the election of Donald Trump: covering 
Britain’s efforts to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

Many experienced Guardian colleagues have already been charting this seismic 
upheaval for months, helping make sense of a referendum that looked 
particularly baffling from 3,000 miles away.

But my new job as Brexit policy editor is one of two additional roles intended 
to complement the expertise of our political and business teams and European 
specialists by looking holistically at the consequences of this historic 
decision.

Together with Lisa O’Carroll, who is our newly-appointed Brexit correspondent, 
we hope to help join the dots between what politicians are saying in London and 
Brussels; particularly by looking at what their decisions mean in the real 
world.

As an Irish citizen living in London, Lisa has a particular interested in the 
fate of EU nationals based here. She is also keen to explore the potential 
consequences of Brexit on local and business communities across the country, 
particularly outside London and will be working with our regional 
correspondents to ensure those outside the Westminster bubble are heard. Do get 
in touch atlisa.ocarroll@theguardian.com <mailto:lisa.ocarroll@theguardian.com>

For me, Britain already feels a very different country to the one I left. From 
the relative stability of Barack Obama’s America I watched a general election, 
a Scottish referendum and an EU vote that defied expectations and rewrote the 
rules of British politics in my absence. As Labour MP Chuka Umunna reminded me 
at a briefing on Wednesday: “We are a united kingdom in name only”.

But two years on the campaign trail covering the US presidential election was 
useful preparation too. Just as memories of the Brexit earthquake helped warn 
of the potential for similar anti-establishment upset in the US, I hope all 
that time spent talking to Trump supporters and travelling the backroads of the 
American rustbelt may provide some fresh perspective on the mood back here in 
the UK.

Just a few days into the job, it is clear this is still going to be steep 
learning curve. But the beauty of any new job is the excuse to pose dumb 
questions. A week or two of asking people to square the statements of 
politicians in London with those of their counterparts across the channel is 
reassuring only in making me realise there are currently many dumb answers out 
there too.

Short of an upset even bigger than the referendum result, Brexit is happening 
– though this week’s Commons vote perhaps marks the end of the “phoney war” 
phase – and over the next two or three years of attempted implementation things 
are going to get very real, very quickly.

My background in financial journalism, both as Guardian business editor and 
the industrial editor of the Financial Times, gives me a particular interest in 
the trade and economic consequences of leaving the single market. I have also 
worked at the other end of political spectrum on this question, as deputy 
editor of the Sunday Telegraph, and I remember well the genuine passions 
ignited byEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> on both sides 
of the debate.

Research by the National Centre for Social Research 
<http://natcen.ac.uk/media/1319222/natcen_brexplanations-report-final-web2.pdf> 
published this week found that the Guardian had by far the most united 
readership on this vexed national question. Even the Sun, at the opposite end 
of the media, saw only 70% of its regular readers vote leave, while just 9% of 
Guardian readers did so. Despite the confident bluster of many Eurosceptic 
papers, all had ambivalent readerships.

The Guardian giving a voice to Brexit-supporting Britons may seem like an 
oxymoron, but we need to be more than just a voice of the “bremoaners”, as this 
nonetheless sizeable demographic is dismissively nicknamed. The polling 
research suggests our readers backed remain because they are informed and 
outward-looking. My guess is they want to stay that way.

For me personally, this means learning another lesson from covering Trump’s 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/donald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house>
: the importance of getting out on the road and listening to people as well as 
politicians. Last time I came home from America – after two and half years in 
New York for the FT – I was reminded how much more like each other London and 
the Big Apple are than the rest of their countries. This time, I hope to get 
out of the metropolitan bubble as much as possible and back to areas such as 
the West Midlands and Yorkshire, where I started out in regional newspapers.

It is easy to overstate the similarities between Trump’s election and the 
continued strong support for Brexit that there seems to be in Britain. Whatever 
one might think of Theresa May, she has not yet packed her cabinet with a junta 
of former generals or called for a wall to be erected at the mouth of the 
channel tunnel.

But there is a common problem for journalists. How do we give voice to all 
those who did not vote for this, while understanding the motives of those who 
did? It is, I hope, a challenge the Guardian is well-placed to take on.
 