
Mike Gilson, the best editor the Brighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton> Argus has had in many a long year, 
has left the newspaper in somewhat mysterious circustances.

Staff have not been informed why he has gone. The managing director of 
Newsquest <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsquest> Sussex, Tony Portelli, 
did not return a phone message. However, his personal assistant, who also acted 
as Gilson’s secretary, did confirm that he had departed.

Some of the Argus journalists were not surprised at the turn of events. They 
know that Gilson pressed for investment in order to transform the Argus into a 
quality paper. They say his plans were rejected out of hand.

Last week, Gilson was quoted in his own paper  
<http://www.theargus.co.uk/business/14927700.The_Argus_waves_goodbye_to_Hollingbury_and_says_hello_to_central_Brighton/>
when celebrating the move of editorial staff into new offices in the city’s 
centre after 24 unhappy years in its outer fringes.


He said the move “sees the Argus rooted back into the community it serves” and 
believed it would help to “keep our finger on the pulse of the county’s beating 
heart.”

Gilson’s finger, however, will not be one of those on the Brighton pulse. He 
has been removed unceremoniously after less than two years in the post.

 It is further confirmation of Newsquest’s parsimonious approach to newspaper 
publishing in general and the Argus in particular. It is a profit-seeking 
company that does not care about journalistic quality.


As long as the paper comes out every day, it has little interest in the 
content. Its managers - whether in Britain or in the United States, where its 
parent company,Gannett <https://www.theguardian.com/media/gannett>, is based - 
view editorial as an expensive necessity to ensure there is something between 
the all-important adverts.

Unsurprisingly, readers have turned their backs on the paper. It now sells 
barely 12,000 copies a day in one of Britain’s most thriving cities.


For 20 years, I have watched the Argus’s newsroom being strangled almost to 
death. And its final breath cannot be far away.

Gilson was almost the only experienced journalist on the staff and, under his 
leadership, there was no doubt that it had improved. Local politicians and 
business people were full of praise. But Gilson recognised that if it was to 
have any worthwhile future, then it needed a new focus.


With two large universities and a large educated, affuent, middle class 
population, he thought he had the answer in moving it up-market.

Gilson joined the Argus in February 2015 after spending five years as editor 
of the Belfast Telegraph. He also edited three papers before that: the 
Scotsman, The News in Portsmouth and the Peterborough Telegraph.

He has contributed a superb chapter to a forthcoming book about the parlous 
state of the newspaper industry, Lost for words: how can journalism survive the 
decline of print?*

His piece, based on the case histories of public interest reporting by his 
Argus journalists, illustrates the importance of a regional journalism that 
holds power to account.

He noted that “since 2008 more than 8,000 journalists have lost their jobs” 
across Britain, and commented:

“Ironically this has not been deemed important enough a story. Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> have folded, commercial 
television news is decimated and only the BBC has staff in numbers... digital 
technologies have driven a coach and horses through media company business 
models.”

He praised “old-fashioned journalism” that tells “people things they didn’t 
know.” Accepting that news can be transmitted at speed, he argued that “we 
still need journalists with the time, training and passion to avoid this 
ever-increasing [democratic] deficit.

“No amount of digitally empowered bloggers, many of them diligent thorns in 
the side on a range of issues, will make up for the loss of professional 
reporting.

“In some towns, courts, council meetings and trust boards are all going 
unreported now. Meanwhile the explosion of press officers, more often 
journalists fleeing a shrinking industry and skilled at ‘social engagement’ now 
outnumber salaried journalists in many areas.”

It is hard not to imagine he had his employers, Newsquest, in mind when 
arguing that “the printed product can be re-invented... Long form journalism, 
analysis and investigation remain the best hope for the printed product.”

At the time of writing, Gilson had not returned messages asking him to comment 
on his departure from the Argus.

*Edited by John Mair, Tor Clark, Ray Snoddy and Richard Tait with Neil Fowler, 
it will be published next month by Abramis.
 