
Thistlecrack, a novice with only three races over fences to his name, needed 
just six minutes on Monday to establish himself as the most exciting 
steeplechaser around, as he jumped and galloped four rivals into submissionin 
the King George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/brilliant-thistlecrack-smooth-winner-king-george-vi-chase-kempton-horse-racing>
.

Tom Scudamore, Thistlecrack’s jockey, enjoyed a spectacular ride to his first 
victory in the feature event of the Christmas racing programme, a race his 
grandfather Michael won as a jockey in 1956 but always eluded his father Peter, 
who was National Hunt’s champion jockey eight times. Several of Thistlecrack’s 
jumps drew gasps from the packed grandstand and he effectively secured victory 
with three fences to go as a burst of speed carried him clear.

ITV makes last throw of dice in racing’s Get-out-of-Trouble Stakes | Matthew 
Engel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/23/itv-last-throw-dice-racing-get-out-of-trouble-stakes>
“Dad rang me up around Christmas and said: “Eight championships and I never 
had a good ride in the King George,’” Scudamore said. “To be associated with a 
horse like this … I’ve ridden over 1,000 winners, dad rode the best part of 
2,000, grandad rode 500, and none of us have ever been associated with a horse 
like that.

“We’ve all been so blessed, racing’s been our livelihood, we were brought up 
with it, all three of us. And for me to be the lucky one that’s associated with 
a horse like that, that’s where the emotion comes from. I grew up watching 
horses like Desert Orchid and Kauto Star, and this horse has gone and won a 
King George on his fourth start over fences.

“I thought they’d come to me down the back and I thought, here we go, let’s 
see how we get on now, and then I realised they couldn’t even get to me. I just 
had to concentrate fence to fence and not take any chances. He was bold, brave, 
clever, he did it all.”

The Cheltenham Gold Cup also slipped through Peter Scudamore’s grasp as a 
rider butThistlecrack <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/thistlecrack> is now 
odds-on with several bookmakers to become the second novice in three years to 
take steeplechasing’s greatest prize.

The best price available about Thistlecrack is 5-4, while Cue Card, his stable 
companion at Colin Tizzard’s yard in Dorset, is as big as 12-1 for the same 
race after clinging on to second place in the King George. Coneygree, who won 
the Gold Cup as a novice in 2015, is the second-favourite at around 8-1.

“He’s eight and he’ll be nine in a few days’ time, and he’s at the peak of his 
powers,” Tizzard said. “His jumping was so good, when he was long, he was 
immaculate, and then at the second-last, when he didn’t need to go long, he’s 
jumped it like a show jumper. This horse has got absolutely everything.”
 