
As the Jim Best case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/jim-best-guilty-bha-stop-two-horses-non-triers-case-horse-racing>
 breathes its last after a year of legal debate and as racing’s ruling body 
admits it has blown a six-figure sum through its failure to provide a 
demonstrably fair hearing at the first attempt, it is instructive to see the 
first concern for some people is the penalty given to the trainer. The British 
Horseracing Authority has lost a significant chunk of the sport’s money by 
persisting in an avoidable mistake and there are several worrying aspects to 
the way it has pursued this case, but the main irritant for several observers 
is that Best has not been immediately put out of business.

This just goes to show what a strong authoritarian streak runs through horse 
racing, its practitioners and its followers. It also suggests a failure to 
engage with some of the details revealed over the past eight months that 
indicate the respect for due process at the BHA is not all that it might be.

Jim Best says BHA case has torn him to pieces after horse-stopping ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/22/jim-best-bha-case-ban-horse-stopping>
Nothing was more disappointing on Thursday than the spectacle of Nick Rust, 
the BHA’s chief executive, denying that the ruling body had done a pre-hearing 
deal with the jockey Paul John, and then in the next breath adding: “There was 
an assurance given … I’m not denying there was an arrangement made.”

This is the kind of sophistry that a regulator must avoid if it wishes to 
recover the faith of those governed and it comes from a man fairly new to the 
job, who cannot be blamed for what has gone wrong since much of it predates his 
arrival and ought therefore to be able to speak frankly.

Rust’s line was that the panel, independent of the BHA, was free to choose a 
penalty for John and could not be bound by any deal the BHA might strike. That 
glides over the reality of the deal that was done, that John’s offence would be 
pursued as a breach of particular rules where the attached penalty is lower 
than the alternative rules on offer.

But the real mischief is that had the BHA got its way none of us would have 
any idea that a deal had been done. The relevant email came to light only 
because the disciplinary panel ordered the protesting BHA to disclose 
pre-hearing communications with John. “There is nothing relevant to credibility 
in there whatsoever,” was the BHA line on day one of the first hearing, which 
proved to be at 180 degrees from the truth.

Jim Best decides not to appeal verdict of BHA disciplinary committee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/jim-best-bha-disciplinary-committee-harry-stewart-moore>
Rust insisted that the BHA had to continue its pursuit of the case, despite 
the procedural bumps in the road that left an open question about whether any 
kind of justice could be achieved. “We had no option,” he said. “These were 
serious allegations and we needed to put the case on.”

But justice is also owed to the accused and however painful it would have been 
for the BHA to walk away from the case after the first verdict was quashed 
through an appearance of bias, that would have been the fairer course. Instead, 
it persisted in rehearing a case of one man’s word against another, where the 
only BHA witness was unreliable and had done a secret pre-hearing deal to 
secure a lenient penalty in exchange for giving evidence against his 
co-accused. Who can be happy with such a situation?

Had the original four-year ban stood, instead of being reduced to a licence 
suspension of six months, Best’s career would be all but over. That would be a 
graver outcome than faces many of those accused in criminal courts each day and 
yet the BHA merely has to prove its case on the balance of probabilities.

Jim Best: ‘All the fun I’ve had over the years has been taken out of me’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/22/jim-best-bha-verdict> 
No one would insist on the regulator’s hurdle being raised as high as beyond 
all reasonable doubt, but there must be scope for insisting on a raised 
standard of proof in the most serious cases. That might avoid verdicts like the 
one with Best, where the panel appears to rely on a process of elimination, 
ruling out a betting motive for John on the basis of no evidence and concluding 
that the riding instructions must therefore have come from the trainer.

Despite some fears of a lenient sentence, Best has suffered and will continue 
to suffer through this verdict. Is he guilty? Having heard every scrap of 
evidence that was presented over a five-day hearing, I can’t say either way and 
unless you have evidence that has not been disclosed in public, I suggest that 
you don’t know either.
 