
The Rector of Haworth's three daughters were with him last week as he prepared 
his sermons for Christmas and the new year, given in the church at the top of 
the steep hill of Main Street.

"Yes, I have three daughters, but they are not Charlotte, Emily and Anne, and 
happily they have all grown up to have families of their own," said the Rev 
Peter Mayo-Smith, incumbent at St Michael and All Angels parish church, where 
190 years ago the Rev Patrick Brontë lived in the adjacent parsonage with his 
own three girls, the writers now established as among the most famous 
Englishwomen ever to have lived. "I did discover I was married on the same day 
as Rev Brontë married his Maria though, which was rather spooky."

But the Anglican clergyman does not really have to search about for reminders 
of his celebrated predecessor. Any time he steps into his church he finds 30 or 
40 visitors clustered around the floor plaque that marks the early graves of 
Charlotte and Emily Jane. "It is very definitely a place of pilgrimage," he 
said. "People leave money and flowers, poems and books, every day."

Leaflets in the West Yorkshire church are being translated into Japanese, 
Chinese and Korean and visitors from Europe, Australia, New Zealand and America 
are commonplace.

"We have come here because of the books, of course," say an Italian couple, 
shaking off the cold rain in the porch of the church on Friday. "I studied them 
at university and I love them very much.Wuthering Heights is my favourite," 
explains the young woman, who plans to stay for a week. In the old parsonage, 
which houses the Brontë museum, custodians often have to put up the sign asking 
tourists to wait outside for 10 minutes because the place is full.

But all is not well in "Brontëland". This winter Mayo-Smith has found himself 
at the centre of a battle to communicate to the wider world just how popular 
Haworth is as a tourist destination. The fate of the historic parish church, 
together with the future appearance of the whole Pennine village, is soon to be 
decided. In the middle of this month time will run out both on an appeal for 
maintenance funds for St Michael's and on a plan to build more modern housing 
estates in Haworth.

Regardless of the sale at auction last month of a miniature handwritten 
manuscript penned by the 14-year-old Charlotte for £690,850 and of the recent 
release of two new acclaimed film versions of Brontë novels,Wuthering Heights 
andJane Eyre, the geographical legacy of the writers, a crucial source of local 
income, is in peril.

Along with John Huxley, secretary of the parochial church council and chairman 
of the parish council, the rector is fighting to preserve his church. Since the 
duo revealed its plight a year ago they have found staunch support among 
parishioners and from the international Brontë fan club, but they still need to 
find tens of thousands of pounds more.

St Michael's roof is leaking badly in several places and the plasterwork and 
rare wall paintings above the altar are disintegrating. Unsightly plastic 
sheeting covers the beams over the organ console at the entrance to the corner 
of the church which is now designated the Brontë Chapel.

Of equal importance to many in Haworth this new year is the parallel struggle 
to deter developers from building further housing estates across the hills once 
crossed by the literary sisters and their potent cast of characters.

"There is an assault on the Brontë landscape going on," said Huxley. "It is 
not deliberate, but the reason so many people come here is to see the streets 
and the hills and moor that the sisters wrote about. Some of these views should 
be sacrosanct."

Campaigners point out that the village is already dotted with new housing 
estates and several of the older villagers already regard their Haworth as a 
distant memory. The narrow, cobbled streets, or more correctly "setted" 
streets, that the Brontës walked may survive, but cul-de-sacs of bungalows and 
modern terraces are visible at every turn. Nevertheless, a further 14 potential 
development sites have been identified in a Local Development Framework 
document under consultation.

Huxley is bemused. "The document says it wants to preserve and promote Haworth 
as a tourist destination," he continued. "After all, it's perhaps second in 
England only to Stratford. Then, just a few pages on, it says we have to have 
new housing estates."

On the other side of the valley from the parish church stands the former home 
of the Merrall family, one-time mill owners and village benefactors who are 
commemorated in the stained-glass windows of the church. It has been usefully 
converted into an imposing youth hostel, but the once wild land surrounding the 
house has been covered with new builds and another planning application is 
lurking in the wings.

Huxley understands the need for new housing, he said, particularly for young 
first-time buyers, and he and his fellow campaigners are not opposed to 
shouldering some of the burden imposed by Bradford council's edict that 45,500 
new homes must be built in the wider area, but they are desperate to protect 
what they – and EnglishHeritage <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> 
– regard as a location of international significance.

"There are three old mills in the village," said Huxley. "Surely we can 
develop a couple of these as brownfield sites, without going out into the 
greenfield areas?"

Mayo-Smith adds that Haworth may have craft shops and the Villette Coffee 
Shop, but it is not a well-to-do area and cannot look after its own future 
unaided: "There are houses I go to around here with no carpet and no paint or 
paper on the walls. There is need in Haworth."

This year the campaigners will be launching fresh strategies to get across 
their case. Not only will they be making a new appeal for repairs to the 
dilapidated roof of the Old School Room, built by Patrick Brontë and once 
taught in by Charlotte, but they are also planning to cost repairs to the wall 
paintings and sound out support for an annual Haworth Festival.

Since the villagers have begun to realise the parlous state of the church 
roof, they have rallied round. The Baptist, Catholic and Methodist 
congregations have offered support. Calendars with photographs of assorted 
naked villagers, one including the Baptist minister, are being sold to raise 
money. Small sums of money have also arrived in envelopes from Brontë readers 
in America.

Now 20 January looms large in Haworth, which is when English Heritage will 
come back to see if the church has raised the required £65,000 in order for it 
to release a pot of £100,000 to repair the worst side of the roof. So far the 
parish has raised just under £30,000. By chance 20 January is also the last day 
for objections to be registered to the planned housing developments before 
Bradford council rules on Haworth's future.

The isolated hill village, 700ft above sea level and still buffeted even in 
middling winter weather by the "wuthering" winds, is waiting to learn its fate.
 