
What links Fleabag, the dark comedy based on a one-woman play, with tense TV 
thriller The Missing? The answer for any future quizmasters is the Williams 
brothers, the siblings behind two of the biggest TV hits of the year.

Jack and Harry Williams co-wrote The Missing and produced Fleabag, the BBC’s 
hit of the summer, written and performed by bright new star Phoebe 
Waller-Bridge.

With the second series of The Missing finishing less than two weeks ago, and a 
slate of new shows planned for 2017 and beyond, the plan they hatched four 
years ago of not only writing but producing other people’s work under the aegis 
of the not very originally named Two Brothers Pictures has begun paying off.

Given their success and the fact they are now in high demand with new writers, 
it comes as something of a surprise that Two Brothers is based in a tiny 
top-floor office up a rickety staircase in London’s Soho.

The second surprise is that the writers of grim thrillers about missing 
children (both series one and two) and serial killers are about as far from 
angst-ridden auteurs as it’s possible to be: both funny and cheerful with a 
nice line in self-deprecatory wit.
 Phoebe Waller-Bridge in Fleabag. Photograph: BBC/Two Brothers Pictures Ltd. 
But before we start, I have to ask whether Fleabag is coming back for a second 
series and whether they will write another Missing. Their answers, made 
jointly, suggest that it depends on the star herself for the former and for the 
right idea and time for the latter. I’m left ready to put money on both coming 
back, just not on when.

The BBC, which launched the six-parter Fleabag on BBC3 online before 
transferring it to BBC2 in the summer, are keen for another series, as are the 
producers. “The main thing is, does Phoebe want it to happen?” begins Jack, 
older by a couple of years. “If she does, how would she like it to happen?”

“The intention is there from everyone,” Harry chips in, “she’s just got to 
find the right time, I think that’s it, and we’ve got to work how much we’ve 
got to do.”

The men sound almost protective of 31-year old Waller-Bridge, who is currently 
performing in a sold-out run of the original theatrical monologue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/07/fleabag-five-star-review-phoebe-waller-bridge-soho-london>
. Yet the hints of a future series with the same all-star cast including Olivia 
Colman, Hugh Dennis and Bill Patterson, grow broader. “It’s looking positive, 
I’d say,” says Harry, almost an hour into the interview.

“I’d say it’s a question of timing and giving her the space she needs to do 
it,” adds Jack. “Yeah, everyone wants to do it. Including her.”

Listening to the way the Williams brothers talk about Waller-Bridge’s plans is 
a good example, it seems to me, of the way they work both with each other and 
with other writers: collaborative and entertaining.

This tendency to complete each other’s sentences and interrupt with 
alternative thoughts must help enormously when they’re writing, but makes the 
interview tricky. Only Jack’s slight lisp makes telling them apart possible on 
the recording.

“I don’t even know we do it,” says Jack, pointing out that one of their wives 
has complained that their dual conversations are hard to follow. “We were 
talking about half an hour and they literally didn’t understand a word we were 
saying to each other.”

He says they are perfectly happy if I attribute words to one or either of 
them. “We really don’t mind. Happens all the time,” says Jack. Or Harry.

It is when they talk about how they write that they literally start talking 
together, almost creating the same sentence. Their habit of writing together 
started when they were teenagers. “We tried to write a book on holiday. When we 
were teenagers. But we didn’t finish it and it was shit,” they laugh.

After appearing in a band and writing comedy separately, they joined up to 
write comedy “to sort of share the abuse”. An attempt at a British South Park, 
which aired four years ago on Channel 4, succeeded only in raising the ire of 
theDaily Mail by appearing to laugh at Princess Diana.  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2236151/Is-sickest-cartoon-Channel-4s-Full-English-shows-ghosts-Princess-Diana-Jade-Goody-scrapping-Peoples-Princess.html>

The ratio of pitch to commission in the early days 10 years ago was about 
10:1, they say, with commissioners who knew Jack balking at the idea of even 
letting his brother into ideas meetings. Nowadays, they tend not to bother 
until they think the script is right and the ratio is about 2:1.

“These days we don’t go out to commissioners with that much. It’s quite a high 
hit rate, I would say.”


They still try to spend two days a week writing, tending to divvy up scenes 
and work the night before, and then sitting in a room in Jack’s house with 
earphones on, interrupting each other when stuck.

If one has a hugely productive day and the other is watching cats online, what 
happens? “You guilt the other one,” they begin, before admitting that it 
doesn’t really work like that. “You’re like, thank fuck you wrote that.”

“It all balances out because one will feel guilty for not having pulled their 
weight. And the next day one will do all the rewrites on it or take all the 
risks, really annoying meeting, or to talk [to someone] about his part for four 
hours.”

“It’s like its own little process,” they say. 


After struggling with comedy, the two men started The Missing, co-produced 
with New Pictures and Charlie Pattinson, who has been a sort of mentor to the 
duo. When launched in 2014 it was their first big hit.

The two series are connected by the central role of French detective Julien 
Baptiste and it is this character fans hope might return, possibly with actor 
Tchéky Karyo in a sort of Poirot-like eponymous role.

They admit the character, based on a real-life detective featured in a 
documentary made by their father, a writer for the BBC, “is of great interest 
to us”. But they are far from ready to start the “consuming” process of writing.

“The only reason we did the second one was because the story we wanted to tell 
was different enough and we thought was as good or could be better then the 
first one,” they begin. “If we were to do a third one it would have to be a 
similar thing.

“We would be the first ones to say don’t bring it back just for the sake of 
it. It’s not that it’s a no. It would be in five years if there was to be 
another one.”

Besides, 2017 will see two new six-part thrillers written by the brothers: Liar
 
<http://www.itv.com/presscentre/press-releases/itv-announces-new-six-part-series-liar-starring-joanne-froggatt-and-ioan-gruffudd>
, starring Joanne Froggatt and Ioan Gruffudd, on ITV andRellik 
<http://deadline.com/2016/11/cinemax-rellik-serial-killer-limited-series-the-missing-creators-1201861304/>
, a BBC1 series about a serial killer story told backwards (the title is killer 
backwards).

Yet the duo want to “focus more on other writers”. They hope White Dragon 
<https://www.itvmedia.co.uk/programmes/programme-planner/white-dragon>, by new 
writers Mark Denton and Jonny Stockwood, will become a returning series after 
it launches on ITV in 2018.

Unsurprisingly for men who pitch to commissioners all the time, the two have 
nothing but positive things to say about the BBC – saying that without the 
often-maligned online-only BBC3 “I don’t think Fleabag would have existed [on 
TV]”.

They come from a TV family and Jack has worked with his father and mother, a 
television producer. Their elder brother, Ned, is a director for Grand Designs. 
Do they ever talk about anything other than work?

“Sometimes your family can just be your family,” says Harry. “You know, they 
all watch what we do. They watch early edits of what we do and they give us 
very helpful thoughts.”

Then Jack, and sometimes Harry, admits it’s slightly different with each 
other: “We don’t switch off. We sort of don’t at Christmas and stuff like that. 
That’s true. It doesn’t really stop. But that’s kind of good, I really enjoy 
it.”
 