
Remembering the torturous scene at the end of series two of Breaking Bad, in 
which Jesse’s girlfriend Jane dies of an overdose while Walter White watches 
over her,Bryan Cranston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bryan-cranston> opens his 
autobiography A Life in Parts with a gripping anecdote. Slowly overlaid onto 
Jane’s face, as filming continued, was that of his own daughter, Taylor, and 
that day, Cranston recalls, “I went to a place I had never been”:

I’d put everything, everything into that scene – all the things I was and all 
the things I might have been, all the side-roads and missteps, all the 
stuttering successes and losses I thought might sink me. I was murderous, and I 
was capable of great love. I was a victim lured by my circumstances, and I was 
the danger. I was Walter White – but I was never more myself.

Whether it’s a truly transcendental experience or simply the product of sheer 
exhaustion – Cranston describes gruelling 13-hour days filming in New Mexico – 
its emotional power surpassed what he had been prepared for, as he reveals in 
this reading, detailing the moments before, during and after the scene he calls 
“the most harrowing I did on Breaking Bad”.

When I do the homework for such a delicate scene, I don’t make a plan. My goal 
when I prepare isn’t to plot out each action and reaction, but to think,what 
are the possible emotional levels my character could experience. I break the 
scene down into moments, or beats; by doing that work ahead of time, I leave a 
number of possibilities available to me. I stay open to the moment, susceptible 
to whatever comes. The homework doesn’t guarantee anything; with luck, it gives 
you a shot at something real.

Membership Event: An evening with Bryan Cranston 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/an-evening-with-bryan-cranston-27774619635>

 In A Life in Parts, Cranston looks back over his life and career, from his 
first break in acting, a recurring spot on Seinfeld and his turn as hapless 
father Hal in Malcolm in the Middle, to the career-defining role of White.

Detailed anecdotes lead to musings on the meaning of performative arts, their 
inextricability from real life and whether it’s ever really possibly to shed a 
character’s emotions once filming has stopped.

To hear more from Cranston, join us at a Guardian Live event on Monday 24 
October when he will be in conversation with film critic Peter Bradshaw. Find 
out more and book ticketshere 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/an-evening-with-bryan-cranston-27774619635>
.
 