Which substance, to the embarrassment of the Bank of England, was found in the 
new plastic £5 note?  Cocaine  Tallow  Bones Which of the following will NOT be 
demolished by Heathrow’s third runway, as approved in October?  About 900 homes 
 The Norman church in the neighbouring village of Harmondsworth  British 
Airways’ head office What did Liverpool offer to pay £2bn for?  Lionel Messi, 
Luis Suarez and Neymar  A direct connection to HS2  Relocating the London Stock 
Exchange after Brexit What is a “twodio”?  Developer speak for a small newbuild 
flat for two people  A droid that will eventually replace two workers  A new 
dating app from Amazon Hofmeister beer, once advertised by George the bear, is 
back. Who directed a famous advert featuring the slogan “Follow the bear”?  
Ridley Scott  Sergio Leone  Orson Welles What did unions win for cabin crew at 
British Airways in 2016?  M&S sandwiches  An inflation-busting 2.5% pay rise  
Trousers The very public spat between Tesco and Unilever over price increases 
was dubbed what?  Marmageddon  Tescogate  Persil wars Landlords were rushing to 
buy properties before the end of March – what were they trying to avoid?  A new 
tax on rental income  Tougher affordability checks on buy-to-let mortgages  
Higher stamp duty rates on second homes The Brent crude oil price has been at 
rock bottom for most of 2016 but how low did it go, to the nearest dollar, in 
January?  $35  $27  $18 What surprise did George Osborne spring on Tracey 
McDermott, acting head of the Financial Conduct Authority?  He turned up for a 
meeting wearing a hard hat and goggles  He announced she wasn’t a candidate for 
the permanent job  He said if banks didn’t like tough regulation they could 
leave Three footballers teamed up to build affordable housing near Luton – Rio 
Ferdinand, Mark Noble and Bobby Zamora. Which club have they all played for?  
Machester United  Luton Town  West Ham Austin Reed, which went into 
administration in April, made Sir Winston Churchill’s famous one-piece “siren 
suits”. Why were they so named?  Because their dashing cut was designed to 
attract admirers  They were designed to be put on at speed, such as when an air 
raid siren sounded  They were created by Sir Simon Siren Which Brexiteer told 
BBC Newsnight: “There’s a great line from Cicero that there’s nothing so absurd 
that it hasn’t been said by some philosopher. I think suspicion of experts goes 
back into antiquity. It’s a very healthy thing to have. Experts, soothsayers, 
astrologers are all in much the same category.”  Jacob Rees-Mogg  Michael Gove  
Boris Johnson What product kept tills ringing at WH Smith?  Giant chocolate 
bars for £1  Colouring books for grown-ups  Sir Craig Oliver’s book about the 
EU referendum How much were two tickets to see Barcelona v Real Madrid 
advertised for on controversial ticketing website Viagogo?  £196,150  £19,615  
£1,961 What did Anna Turley MP, a member of the business select committee, find 
hidden in a meeting room at Sports Direct’s Derbyshire headquarters when MPs 
made an impromptu inspection of the sportswear group’s warehouse?  A Newcastle 
United shirt  A video camera  Mike Ashley Which of the following did not hit 
Foxtons’ share price in 2016?  Brexit  The rising cost of Minis  Government 
plans to ban letting agents' fees At the start of 2016, long before a 
referendum called by his party resulted in a vote for Brexit, what did former 
chancellor George Osborne say the year had opened with?  “The promise of a 
Britain stronger than ever in Europe”  “A dangerous cocktail of new threats”  
“Hope for hardworking families” What was Bank of England governor Mark Carney 
photographed reading on the tube?  Freedom, Responsibility and the State by 
Jacob Rees-Mogg  The End of Alchemy by Mervyn King  Dethroning Mammon by Justin 
Welby What is the name of Sir Philip Green’s new £100m superyacht?  Dun 
retailing  Lionheart  I'm alright Jack What did Lord Wolfson, Next’s chief 
executive, say 2016 might feel like?  Going round and round in a revolving door 
 Walking up the down escalator  Wearing a badly fitting suit Which bank didn’t 
say it would contribute money to the remain campaign?  Goldman Sachs  Barclays  
JP Morgan Which company announced it would have an employee on its board?  
Sports Direct  Asos  Tesco Who raised the prospect of free air travel in the 
next decade?  Sir Richard Branson  Ryanair boss Michael O’Leary  Sir Stelios 
Haji-Ioannou What did Deliveroo boss William Shu apologise for?  Working at 
Morgan Stanley before launching Deliveroo  Allowing a dispute with his delivery 
riders to escalate  Too many late deliveries Who did an anonymous bidder pay 
$3.5m to have lunch with?  Sir Richard Branson  George Soros  Warren Buffett 
Talking to schoolchildren in September, Bank of England governor Mark Carney 
revealed his childhood nickname was “Carnage”. What did he say his dream job 
would be?  Celine Dion’s drummer  Prime minister of his native Canada  Ice 
hockey goalie in North America's National Hockey League How did Warren Buffett 
cause a surprise?  Kicking his Coca-Cola habit  Buying shares in Apple  Buying 
shares in Tesco What did the Treasury refuse to reveal to the Office for Budget 
Responsibility?  Philip Hammond’s hairdressing bill  The potential cost of a 
deal to save Tata Steel  The potential cost of keeping Nissan in the UK Who 
dismissed the idea that Britain could have its cake and eat it in Brexit 
discussions by saying “To all who believe [in that] I propose a simple 
experiment. Buy a cake, eat it and see if it is still there on the plate”?  ECB 
president Mario Draghi  EC president Donald Tusk  Remain backer Lord Rose Who 
called for model train manufacturer Hornby to be saved when it was in financial 
trouble?  James May  Michael Portillo  Rod Stewart Who said “We do not discuss 
politics at our meetings”?  Bank of England governor Mark Carney  Federal 
Reserve chair Janet Yellen  Nigel Farage A store belonging to which chain was 
described by veteran City retail analyst Tony Shiret as “a shocker … a 
disappointingly poor store where the trading strategy was unclear to customers”?
 B&Q  WH Smith  Argos Who admitted that taking popular items off its menus had 
hit its sales?  Frankie & Benny’s owner Restaurant Group  McDonald's  Pizza 
Express What did Sports Direct boss Mike Ashley pull out of his pocket at the 
firm’s open day for the press?  A platinum Amex card  A wad of £50 notes  A 
huge mug Two days before the US presidential election, who said: “In previous 
presidential elections the favourite at this point has always gone on to become 
the president of the United States. So with Trump’s odds drifting despite huge 
support for the Republican and several six figure bets in the week prior to 
election day, all signs point firmly towards a Clinton victory”?  Betfair 
spokesman Barry Orr  Ousted William Hill boss James Henderson  Michael Fish In 
his first autumn statement, chancellor Philip Hammond said his ability to pull 
rabbits from hats was on a par with what?  Theresa May’s chances of walking out 
of a shoe shop empty handed  George Osborne’s ability to balance the UK’s 
public finances  Boris Johnson’s ability to retrieve a rugby ball from the back 
of a scrum As commodity price swings and the weak pound keep UK food producers 
under pressure, which Christmas dinner staple is in peril because of an 18% 
increase in wholesale prices?  Christmas pudding  Pigs in blankets  Sage and 
onion stuffing How much was Sir Martin Sorrell, chief executive of advertising 
company WPP, paid for 2015?  £7.4m  £17.4m  £70.4m Who has become too powerful, 
according to former Labour shadow chancellor and Strictly Come Dancing 
contestant Ed Balls?  The Bank of England  Conservative chancellor Philip 
Hammond  Craig Revel Horwood How did Tidjane Thiam, the boss of Credit Suisse, 
describe European banks?  Fit for purpose  Not really investable  Difficult to 
understand What rumour, since denied, caused consternation for John Lewis 
shoppers?  Abandoning the “never knowingly undersold” policy  Closing the 
haberdashery departments  Scrapping the company’s partnership structure Why did 
Kevin Roberts quit suddenly as the boss of Saatchi & Saatchi?  He claimed 
sexism wasn’t a problem in the advertising industry  He said the company’s ads 
for the Tories in the 80s were regrettable  He claimed racism wasn’t a problem 
in the advertising industry What did Sir Philip Green tell Richard Fuller MP to 
do at the Treasury committee?  Stop tweeting while Green was talking  Stop 
looking at him  Show some respect How did JD Wetherspoon chairman Tim Martin 
campaign for Brexit?  He printed 700,000 anti-EU beermats  He threatened to ban 
all EU-produced beer  He had 100,000 pint glasses embossed with “vote leave” 
Where was then business secretary Sajid Javid when Tata Steel held crisis talks 
in Mumbai before announcing it would pull out of the UK?  On a trade trip to 
Australia with his daughter  On a trade trip to Miami with his son  At a JP 
Morgan dinner with his wife When ITV’s programming chief heard that Channel 4 
had failed to sign up nearly all of the Great British Bake Off on-screen team 
in its £75m poaching of the hit BBC show, he said they had effectively bought 
what?  A soggy bottom souffle  The world’s most expensive blank recipe book  
Baking powder and a tent Supermarket chain Edeka was accused of what when it 
launched its Christmas TV campaign?  Not including enough ethnically diverse 
actors  Including neo-Nazi symbolism  Failing to include its best food deals 
What didn’t Tesco run short of in 2016?  Pot Noodle  London Calling by the Clash
 Quinoa David Bowie, who died in January, was associated with which financial 
innovation?  Starman shares – Bowie pioneered crowdfunding to finance an album  
Ziggy zero – Bowie extracted the first 0% overdraft from his private bank  
Bowie bonds – Bowie parcelled up song revenues for sale to investors  You got…  
Poor. What an (Ed) Balls-up  So-so. Your knowledge is shakier than an Italian 
bank  Not bad. Though we suggest you spend more time on the business website 
next year  Very good. Like Hornby trains, you're on the right track  Excellent. 
Are these answers rigged?  Challenge your friends Submit answers 
For your overall score, please complete all the questions
 