
Heading for a First… Reading University and Sir David Bell

This week Reading University announced the appointment of senior civil servant 
Sir David Bell as its new vice-chancellor. Bell's career is almost the 
definition of 'meteoric rise'. He started as a teacher in Glasgow, went on to 
become a headteacher, before rising to national prominence as Her Majesty's 
Chief Inspector of Schools and then into the civil service as the permanent 
secretary in the Department for Education.

Born in Glasgow, reading history and philosophy at his home city's university, 
he then went onto obtain a PGCE at Jordanhill College of Education. His direct 
experience at schools in Glasgow and Essex and as assistant director of 
Education at Newcastle City Council clearly gives him in a genuine education 
background. Not to mention his subsequent experience as the chief inspector of 
schools and then in government.

As universities are increasingly grappling with the implications of the White 
Paper, and their link up with business, it's vital that their core purpose as 
educational establishments is not lost. For those who have met him, Sir David 
is an impressive individual, with an obvious passion for what education can do 
to transform an individual's life.

He strikes me as a man who can breathe new life into Reading University, 
ensure it is fit for purpose in the 21st century, but without losing sight of 
why the institution exists. I also can't help but think, he's chosen a very 
wise time to stop working for Michael Gove…

Heading for a Fail… Abdul Arain

Notable previous chancellors of Cambridge University have included Thomas 
Cromwell, Prince Albert, and Stanley Baldwin, and since 1976 the honour has 
been bestowed upon the Duke of Edinburgh. Of course while the role is largely 
ceremonial, cutting ribbons and shaking hands at degree congregations, there is 
a perception at least that this person is a figure head for the institution. 
And in some respects, a role model for prospective and current students.

So when an election was called to replace Prince Philip earlier this year, 
there was a faint hope that the result may deliver something other the usual 
line up of noble lords, dukes, or relatives of the monarch who generally hold 
the post. Who knows, perhaps the first woman may have been chosen to break the 
monotony of man after man since 1246. But given some of the rather ancient 
rules at Cambridge University, I've no idea whether a woman is even allowed to 
hold the role. Even if they are permitted, 800 years of history suggests the 
culture won't permit it yet.

However the line up of candidates, although all men, was at least drawn from a 
variety of backgrounds. It was made pretty clear, that the preferred choice 
from the university hierarchy was Lord Sainsbury, the former chair of the 
supermarket giant and a significant donor to the institution. Up against him 
were the loud-mouthed actor Brian Blessed, high profile QC Michael Mansfield, 
and Nariobi-born grocer Abdul Arain. Running a classic protest vote campaign, 
Arain's candidacy was two-fold; to show that Cambridge University really is 
open to people from non-traditional backgrounds, and perhaps more pertinently 
to him, to highlight the damage a new chain of Sainsburys in the city will do 
to local stores like his own.

Sadly Arain came last when the results were announced, but he secured a 
creditable 312 in the final tally. Despite some ill-feeling from a minority 
toward Lord Sainsbury, in truth he sailed through securing nearly 3000 of the 
5888 votes that were cast. By weighing in with more than 50% of the vote in the 
first round, it didn't even matter whether it was first past the post, or a 
more elaborate transferable voting system.

So Cambridge University may not have taken the chance to break with tradition 
of choosing someone outside the established hierarchy or heaven forbid a woman. 
But Arain's candidacy did at least raise a valid debate, if only temporarily.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 