
In August last year a consortium of Britain’s leading national newspaper 
publishers launched an advertising campaign to draw attention to the merits of 
their titles as platforms for advertising. It was an unprecedented initiative. 
The very fact that six highly competitive rivals were willing to bury their 
hatchets showed the depth of the problem. They needed advertisers, and most 
especially their media agencies who book ads for them, to think again about 
having turned their backs on newspapers.

But the campaign failed. Newspaper groups are reporting further reductions in 
ad revenue, with falls in money made from print ads in early 2016 even worse 
than already gloomy predictions and digital far from taking up the slack. The 
outlook for summer looks anything but sunny.

Why should this be? Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> 
may be losing readers for their print versions, but they attract huge online 
audiences. The figures are a matter of record. And more than 7 million people 
still buy a newsprint paper in the UK each day while a further 2 million pick 
one up free.

Looking across both digital and print platforms, some 46 million people read a 
news brand each month. That is a mighty slice of the country’s overall 
population. As Rufus Olins, chief executive of Newsworks, the marketing body 
for national papers, points out, that is “even more than the number of people 
who use Google in the UK”.

Advertisers surely know those figures but many are ignoring them. There are 
conflicting views about the reasons. Some believe there is a structural problem 
because creative agencies tend to outsource responsibility for media planning. 
They say planners, who buy space cheaply and sell it back to agencies at a 
profit, fail to act in the advertisers’ best interests. Others think a 
disconnect exists between agencies and their clients, with agencies having 
become overly convinced about digital technology’s advantages in reaching 
audiences.

Advertisers are drawn to the shiny new world of digital, but ads in papers 
have been a key component in brand creation down the years. Self-styled “ad 
contrarian” Bob Hoffman contended at a Newsworks conference  
<http://www.newsworks.org.uk/Shift-2016>last month that no brands have been 
built by online advertising.

Then there is the problem of advertisers’ obsession with youth, which has been 
identified by David Wheldon, chief marketing officer of RBS, who says it runs 
counter to the reality of economic power. While 80% of ads are aimed at young 
people, some 80% of money is spent by people over 40. Note also that 
London-based media agencies tend to be staffed by the young.

Print is also losing out to television. Despite the fragmentation of TV and 
the relatively high cost of screen ads, advertisers seduced by fame are still 
prepared to spend on the medium, thereby reducing the budget available for 
buying space in print, which they have come to regard as “legacy media”.

Then there is the significant halt in the rise of digital advertising for news 
brands. One possible problem there has beenthe growth in adblocking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/jan/03/2016-predictions-ad-blocking-and-pose-big-questions-for-online-advertising>
.

Last month, the Internet Advertising Bureau found that 22% of Britain’s adult 
web users were using software to strip ads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/more-than-nine-million-brits-now-use-adblockers>
 from digital content, up from 15% eight months before. Another survey 
discovered that more than 40% of people aged under 35 were using mobile 
adblockers. They do so, evidently, because they find ads interruptive and/or 
annoying.

Wheldon, who is also president of the World Federation of Advertisers, argued 
in a speech to an Isba conference last month that the best response was for 
advertisers to improve the quality of their ads. That may be somewhat 
idealistic.

More positively, both Wheldon and Olins stress that there are advertisers who 
still see virtue in print advertising. It is regarded as the most effective 
medium for Waitrose, for example, and John Lewis remains faithful to print too. 
One of the world’s most successful digital companies, Apple, has also been 
happy to advertise in “old media”.

Olins says: “I certainly don’t think it’s all gloom and doom. I’ve spoken to 
many people who believe the exodus from print is overdone and we are reaching a 
more stable point in relation to ad spend.”

His final claim may be more than a little optimistic because that tipping 
point, if there is to be one, may yet be a way off. In an address to the Isba 
conference, its president, Simon Litherland, began by speaking of “another 
eventful and challenging year for UK advertisers”.

Turning to the immediate future, he predicted that the pressures would 
increase, notably because of the continuing slowdown in the global economy and, 
in specific British terms,due to the economic uncertainty caused by the EU 
referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/27/brexit-add-to-printed-press-woes>
.

If newspaper advertising, the lifeblood of British journalism for the best 
part of 200 years, is not to dry up completely, publishers must find new ways 
to convince advertisers that they have audiences worth targeting. And quickly.
 