
Marianito sat in the clinic office looking downcast. He’d been referred to me 
in the primary care clinic because of fights at school. Despite complaints from 
the school about aggression, to me, a child and adolescent psychiatrist, he 
presented as a soft spoken and quiet 12-year-old of Salvadorean parents. After 
telling me a little about his favorite video games, he told me that some of the 
kids at school “have been messing with me” because “I’m fat and I smell.”


Marianito was morbidly obese, and to make matters worse for a twelve-year-old, 
he had a condition called encoporesis, in which he would have bowel movements 
without warning at school, leading to bad smells and social humiliation.


Aside from a regimen with his paediatrician to improve his bowel control, and 
psychotherapy, it seemed to me that increasing his exercise to address his 
mood, social isolation, and obesity, might benefit him. Marianito brightened a 
little when we discussed the idea of getting involved in a sport. He admitted 
that he was often bored at home, and would really like to get involved with 
football especially, or maybe play soccer.


As I explored exercise possibilities with his mother, it became clear that the 
simple plan of more exercise in the fresh outdoors was a seeming impossibly 
idea. His mother worked two jobs, and was not often home when Marianito was 
awake. The pair lived in a large low-income housing development outside of 
Washington, D.C. There were no parks nearby save the small patches of grass off 
the walkways in the development. Plus, the mother did not want Marianito 
walking any distance on his own.


Are Hispanics less likely to get diagnosed with ADHD in the US?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters/2016/jun/14/are-hispanics-less-likely-to-get-diagnosed-with-adhd-in-the-us>
“There are bad people who live in our neighbourhood,” she said. She relayed to 
me a story about her other son, who was now living with a girlfriend, who’d 
gotten beaten up nearby when coming home.


Paying for an extramural team was also not an option. How could they pay the 
fee to be on the team? How would he get to the practices?


As I considered Marianito’s predicament, I became interested in the issue of 
greenspace in communities, and the impact this can have on children and 
adolescents in urban environments.


A creative study in the July issue 
<http://www.jaacap.com/article/S0890-8567(16)30172-1/pdf> of the Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry examined levels of 
aggression in 1,287 twins and triplets in Southern California born between the 
years of 1990 and 1995. The authors used satellite imagery to find an aggregate 
measure of vegetation called the Normalised Differential Vegetation Index 
(NVDI) surrounding the home. The study found that both in the short term 
(6-months to 1-year) and the long term (1 to 3 years), having greenspace within 
1000 meters was associated with reduced aggressive behaviours in this group of 
9 to 18 year olds. Even when authors controlled for things like socioeconomic 
factors, age, gender, race, self-rated neighbourhood quality, maternal 
depression, traffic density, and even ambient temperatures, the difference in 
aggressive behaviours remained. In the sample studied, boys, people with lower 
perceived neighbourhood quality, children born to mothers who smoked, and those 
with lower socioeconomic status were more likely to be aggressive.


The authors estimated that the benefits of increased greenspace was equivalent 
to 2 to 2.5 years of behavioural maturation. The actual individual-level 
difference in aggressive behaviours was relatively small, but when looked at in 
the aggregate the difference from a public health perspective was impressive.


What is it about greenspace that may result in reduced aggression? Does having 
a field or park nearby simply allow kids to get more physical activity? Is 
there something about the presence of trees and grass? Or, presuming adequate 
safety measures, does greenspace provide a place for children and adolescents 
to interact socially?


Several recent studies have found that exercise reduces depression and anxiety 
in adolescents, factors which may be contributing to aggression. For example,a 
meta-analysis in the same journal 
<http://www.jaacap.com/article/S0890-8567(16)30170-8/pdf> reported that aerobic 
exercise at least three times per week for 7 weeks had moderate effects on 
depression in adolescents ages 13 to 18.


Is it exercise alone that provides the benefit or the natural surroundings? 
BMC Public Health published anothersystematic review 
<http://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com.ezp.welch.jhmi.edu/articles/10.1186/1471-2458-10-456>
 which found that there seems to be a benefit to physical activity in a 
“natural environment” over that of a “synthetic environment” like a gym. 
Potential factors suggested by other authors include decreased noise density 
and reduced air pollution with greater vegetation. Alternatively, there may be 
still unseen/undetectable factors that make the families who live near 
greenspace different from families who don’t.


Certainly for Marianito, having a park nearby would be no panacea. For 
example, there was a sense of hopelessness emanating from the mother-son pair – 
the feeling that problems were insurmountable – something to work on in 
therapy, and potentially, to help the mother get into her own treatment.

Elections, Syria, and the health of presidential candidates – these are the 
current obsessions of America’s divisive politics. But if adding greenspace in 
cities could result in less depression, less aggression, better health of urban 
youth – isn’t this a policy many of us could get behind? Marianito, for one, 
would be grateful.
 