
Going out for dinner, learning to tap dance or seeing friends are all 
effective treatments for depression, according to recentresearch published in 
the Lancet 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(16)31140-0/abstract>
. These activities even have a therapeutic name – behavioural activation. The 
research says it works as well as established treatments, such as cognitive 
behavioural therapy (CBT). But how does it work?

The solution

Activities that reduce isolation and are enjoyable are at the heart of 
behavioural activation. This therapy – promoted by Neil S Jacobson at the 
University of Washington in the 1990s – works on the premise that, when people 
are depressed, they avoid interacting with others, which reinforces the 
depression.

“People with depression will often think they feel down all the time, but 
their mood will go up and down, depending on what they are doing,” says 
Professor David Richards of Exeter University, lead author of the Lancet paper. 
“When we stop doing things that make us human and we close in on ourselves, 
that’s what keeps depression going.”

Behavioural activation is an “outside-in” therapy, in which people with 
depression are encouraged to experience mood-enhancing activities and monitor 
how they feel. CBT is “inside-out” and focuses on how people think and 
challenges their beliefs. The research reported in the Lancet randomly 
allocated 440 people with depression to either behavioural activation or CBT. 
After a year, there was no difference between the two groups. Two-thirds of 
people in each group reported a 50% reduction in their symptoms of depression. 
Richards says that behavioural activation works as well as antidepressants and 
can be used for mild, moderate and even severe depression. It is not suitable 
for people who are suicidal.

Could Pokémon Go improve people's health?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jul/27/pokemon-go-improve-health-walking>
Behavioural activation is not a soft option. “It is actually difficult,” says 
Richards. “We are not minimising the restrictive effect of depression. We ask 
people to actively monitor what they are doing and their connection with their 
mood. This helps them to establish that how they act influences how they feel.”

People often tell themselves they will do an activity when they “feel more 
like it”. In depression, that can take a long time. So behavioural activation 
gets people to schedule activities a week in advance. They must then do them, 
even in an unmotivated way, and record their mood afterwards. The Lancet 
findings support ameta-analysis of the effectiveness of behavioural activation 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0100100> 
published in PLOS one, a medical journal. This combined results of 26 
randomised trials and concluded that the therapy was effective. Depression 
often needs more than one therapeutic intervention – behavioural activation may 
be a tough but useful option.
 