 The German cannibal killer Armin Meiwes was sentenced to life in prison today, 
as a court overturned his earlier eight-year sentence for killing and eating 
the computer engineer Bernd-Jurgen Brandes in 2001.
The five-month hearing found Meiwes guilty of murder, replacing an original 
sentence for manslaughter imposed in January 2004.

The case posed difficult questions for Germany's legal system about the limits 
of murder. Meiwes's lawyers had been seeking a more lenient sentence of 
"killing upon request", which would carry a sentence of up to five years, 
because of the fact that Brandes, 43, had agreed to be killed and eaten.

The court heard how Brandes had originally replied to a March 2001 internet 
posting by Meiwes seeking a "well-built male" for "slaughter and consumption".

Just over a week later, Brandes travelled to Meiwes's detached house in the 
central German town of Rotenberg, where Meiwes cut off his penis and cooked it 
for them to share as a last meal.

Brandes had drunk a bottle of schnapps and taken painkillers before the ritual 
began. After he passed out from loss of blood, Meiwes began cutting him open on 
his workbench.

The whole episode was recorded on videotape, excerpts of which were shown at 
the original trial in closed hearings.

Meiwes, now 44, ate much of the body and butchered the rest before freezing it 
in pieces. He had eaten 20kg of Brandes's flesh before he was caught in 
December 2002 after other internet surfers reported his activities to police.

Psychiatrists told the court in the original hearing that Meiwes was perfectly 
sane, despite being deeply disturbed and obsessed with cannibalism since 
puberty.

His defence lawyers argued that his sentence should be reduced because his 
insistence on consensual killing meant he was "no danger to society", although 
they admitted he would be happy to kill and eat people who wanted to commit 
suicide.

Prosecutors argued that Meiwes should have known that Brandes was disturbed 
and should have questioned his motives for wanting to be killed.
 