
Capita is one of the leading fallers in the FTSE 100, down more than 2% on 
concerns about the outlook for the outsourcing group and suggestions it may 
need to raise cash.

Its shares are down 23p to £10.24, a near two week low, as analysts at Stifel 
downgraded their recommendation from hold to sell with a 933p price target. 
Stifel’s Caroline de La Soujeole said there were “too many question marks to 
keep us on the fence.” She said:

We conclude that Capita <https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> has 
lost some of its sparkle, highlighting some concerns over organic growth 
potential and M&A strategy. Despite recent share price falls, we think the 
share price is still too high for the value being created. We believe low 
organic growth, a reliance on M&A to meet growth targets, range-bound margins 
(post business disposals) and limited return on capital employed upside should 
translate to a lower valuation.

On organic growth she said:

Visibility is much reduced with flow through the bid pipeline slowing and 
framework agreements becoming more important. The transactional businesses are 
going slowly. Guidance is for organic growth of “at least 4%” in 2016 but on 
our estimate only 1.2% net organic growth has been booked so far and, with a 
bid pipeline geared to the second half, we think there are some risks to 
estimates.

She also questions the value from its spending spree:

Capita is a business built by acquisition. It has made 140 deals over the past 
10 years. This has increased diversification but at the same time it has made 
the company increasingly opaque. Also, the strategy is shifting, raising the 
group’s overall risk profile. In our view the acquisition programme has not 
demonstrably created long-term value despite a 15% post tax return on capital 
employed being targeted. Disposals have stepped up in recent years, including 
some recently acquired businesses. In aggregate, over the past three years, the 
overall losses on disposals have been £126m...

She added:

We are concerned that with pressures on organic growth Capita is starting to 
stray from [its] well trodden path [of small UK purchases], possibly making 
acquisitions to meet investors’ overall growth expectations to the detriment of 
returns. We also question whether management oversight is being stretched given 
an increasingly diversified and complex group with fingers in many pies.

And Capita may need to raise funds, she said:

...Sustained high levels of acquisition spend have taken leverage to levels at 
which we believe an equity issue could be considered. One off costs are a 
relatively new but persistent feature, rising from 0% of sales in 2010 to 39% 
in 2015 with disposals and impairment impacting.

There is more portfolio reshuffling planned for 2016 which will lead to more 
exceptional charges. Group return on capital employed has declined by 550 basis 
points since 2009 and we think the upside potential looks limited, particularly 
if organic growth remains below par.

She concludes:

Valuation reflects past successes, not future challenges, in our view. We see 
no reason to hold the shares... Concerns over the sustainability of growth and 
value creation are not new, periodically resurfacing, but based on our analysis 
we do not expect these concerns to allay any time soon.

A recent report here revealed the company was cutting around 40 jobs as part 
of a restructuring. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/mar/14/capita-cuts-jobs-in-restructuring>
 There had also been suggestions of further reductions but a spokesman for 
Capita said:

Any speculation around widespread activity is incorrect. We delivered good 
financial results in 2015, including 4% organic revenue growth. In 2016, we are 
targeting organic revenue growth of at least 4%, driven by the combination of 
growth from our divisional businesses and conversion of our bid pipeline. As 
you would expect of a business which employs 75,000 people, we regularly review 
resource requirements to make the business more efficient.
 