
James Elwood left school with a clutch of good A-level grades, but despite 
pressure from his teachers to consider university he took an entry-level job as 
bank cashier.

Four years and several promotions later, he works for Santander as a business 
manager, providing advice and support to small companies. He has also completed 
a degree in business studies with the Open University, which delivers all its 
courses via distance learning – an experience he thinks has played a key role 
in his success.

"When I had to write essays, I was analysing my experiences with the companies 
I worked for, so the process helped me become a better employee," he explains.

Combining work with distance learning has allowed Nick Walker to set up his 
own business at the age of 19. He is currently taking a degree-equivalent 
course in games development via the online learning providertrain2game 
<http://www.train2game.com/>. The course typically takes about three years to 
complete. In the meantime, he earns an income from his app development company
Icey Monty <http://www.iceymonty.com/>, which he set up with fellow student 
John Esslemont.

According to Zoe Molyneux, external affairs and communications manager at the 
Studentroom <http://www.thestudentroom.co.uk/>, the UK's biggest online forum 
for students, more young people are exploring distance and part-time learning 
options. "This is partly down to rising tuition fees, but also questions about 
whether a degree will guarantee them a job at the end. So they're keen to find 
out if there are other ways of achieving their goals," she says.

In recognition of this, more colleges and higher education institutions are 
upping the range of part-time and distance learning they offer, including 
blended learning (a mix of distance and face-to-face learning), foundation 
degrees (two-year courses with a focus on work-based learning) and more 
vocational courses like higher national certificates.

Walker feels he made the right choice. Not only does the money he is making 
cover the cost of his studies, but he is debt-free and can afford to take time 
out when it suits him – he plans to spend a couple of months later in the year 
skiing. "I've got the time and the funds to actually have a social life as 
well, which is good."

Now 22, Elwood owns his own home and car and thinks he is "four rungs up the 
ladder" from friends who chose the university route. "Instead of being 22 with 
a degree and one year of work experience, I've got a degree and nearly five 
years of work experience behind me ... I don't regret my decision one bit."
 