
Caroline Lucas is delivering her leader's speech to the Green party conference 
on Friday afternoon. My colleague Damian Carrington has alreadyfiled a story 
based on what she will be saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/sep/09/green-party-caroline-lucas-conference-speech>
, but I interviewed her in her office in the Commons yesterday, and we covered 
some of the tricky questions facing the Greens. Here are the main points:

• Lucas said developed countries like Britain should give up economic growth. 

"Advanced industrialised economies like ourselves cannot afford to go on 
growing, particularly if we want to give people in poorer countries a chance of 
being able to at least meet their basic needs," she said. It was a mistake to 
make growth an economic objective, she added, saying: "Growth is a side issue. 
The end goal is about prosperity in terms of greater wellbeing, in terms of 
greater equality, in terms of having a cleaner environment, in terms of having 
more security for your kids in the future."

But she stressed that giving up growth as a policy goal needed to be 
accompanied by many other social changes. "If you simply said let's throw 
growth out of the window, and didn't change anything else, then you would see 
unemployment rise and you would see some chaos ensue."

• She said she "seriously" thought there was a chance of the Greens being able 
to form a government over the next 20 years or so.

"If we are serious about the depth of the climate crisis that I believe we 
face, then if we don't have Greens of some kind in government pretty quickly, 
if we're not going to change our policies pretty quickly, then in many ways the 
future looks quite grim," she said. She also claimed the odds of having 
"serious Green influence" in a government within her lifetime were "extremely 
high".

• She said people should consider the environmental impact when deciding how 
many children to have.

"I do think that if people are taking the time to think about their 
environmental footprint when it comes to how many flights they take, whether or 
not they have a 4X4, whether or not they are going to have a patio heater, then 
putting the question to themselves about how many kids they are going to have 
is a reasonable thing to do," she added.

• She said she did not think that the campaign for proportional representation 
was dead.

Although many commentators assumed that the no vote in the alternative vote 
(AV) referendum had killed any prospects of PR for the foreseeable future, she 
said she thought pressure for PR would return if the next election resulted in 
another coalition.

• She blamed Nick Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> for 
helping to contribute to the yes campaign's defeat in the AV referendum.

"It's an incredible irony that it's the Lib Dems own unpopularity that helped 
sink the referendum result," she said.

• She said she would like to see MPs sitting in a new, "more effective" 
chamber.

The House of Commons was "a deeply frustrating and inefficient place that 
actually acts an obstacle in so many ways to getting the things done that need 
to be done", she added.

As Damian reports, Lucas and her party are trying to appeal to people who have 
voted Lib Dem. At one point during the interview, I made the mistake of saying 
"Lib Dems" instead of Green – a slip that tells you a lot about the way 
Westminster journalists such as myself habitually think about the smaller 
parties. For a long time, the "what hope have you got of being in power" 
question was one that always went to the Lib Dems. That was in the days when I 
didn't write about them much. Now things are different, of course, and I write 
about them every day. If Lucas is right, at some point in the next few years 
her own party could make a similar breakthrough. Is she being realistic? Here's 
the transcript – you can decide for yourself.

The Greens and their electoral prospects

Q: Can we start with elections? Where do you think the Green party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/green-party> are in terms of electoral 
strength, and where can you go by the time of the next election?

A: Obviously we are riding high at the moment after the success in Brighton, 
and so the challenge is to make sure we can try and replicate that in other 
parts of the country. The signs are looking good. We've got more and more 
people joining the party. People from other parties are joining us; it's no 
accident that our conference is in Sheffield, and we're making a bid, in 
particular, to Lib Dem voters.

Q: The Lib Dem vote has collapsed. But what's the evidence that that is 
helping the Greens, either in terms of membership or votes in local elections?

A: We are seeing that. In a sense, that's not so surprising. If you look at 
some of the reasons people would give for joining the Lib Dems – whether that's 
to do with environmental concerns, social justice, or electoral reform or 
whatever – on many of those issues, they are not getting what they thought they 
were going to get.

The Liberal Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> 
are propping up the government on a whole range of policies that weren't in 
their manifesto. For example, where do you go if you still want an NHS that is 
true to its original principles? If you want an alternative that isn't being 
offered by any of the other political parties, which have all brought in to a 
greater or lesser extent to the marketisation and, increasingly, privatisation 
of the NHS, then it's the Greens.

Q: But what's actually happened to your membership over the last 12 months, or 
your performance in local elections? Can you put some figures on that?

A: We can get you some. [Later, the party sends me an email saying membership 
has gone up from about 10,000 to about 14,500 in the last 18 months – an 
increase of 45%.]

I don't know how systematically we ask people where they have come from, so 
more of that is anecdotal. But, as an example, we've got a byelection in 
Highgate next week, which is Ed Miliband's ward. It has been a Green seat in 
the past. We lost it in 2010 because of the general election effect, but our 
candidate now there is somebody who has been an active Lib Dem councillor and 
who has now joined the Greens out of frustration at the direction of the Lib 
Dems. So we've got a really good chance of winning that seat back.

Q: Are there any parliamentary seats that are good prospects at the next 
election on the back of a fall in the Lib Dem vote?

A: One of the places that was a target last time was Norwich South where our 
deputy leader, Adrian Ramsay, was a candidate and is likely to be again. That 
was won by the Lib Dems by a tiny majority, and all of the others were 
clustering quite closely together [You can see the full resultshere 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norwich_South_%28UK_Parliament_constituency%29#Elections_in_the_2010s>
 – Ramsay was actually fourth].

Now we're the main opposition party on Norwich City council – we've got a huge 
track record there. I think we could do incredibly well in somewhere like 
Norwich at the next election. And down in the south-west as well, we are 
relooking at our strategy down there, where there are so many Lib Dem seats.

Q: Your conference is in Sheffield. On the "what do you want to ask Caroline 
Lucas" blog that I posted, someone(oresme) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/12301936> asked when 
the Greens were likely to win Sheffield Hallam (Clegg's seat).

A: I think that's probably in our next tier of aspiration. There are certainly 
some other places that we are more likely to get first [Lucas is smiling at 
this point, because she's being diplomatic.The Greens only got 2% of the vote 
in Clegg's constitutency in 2010] 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sheffield_Hallam_%28UK_Parliament_constituency%29#Elections_in_the_2010s>
.

Q: In the past (for example, in this Guardian interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/18/interview-caroline-lucas-green-party>
), you've talked about the fact that, 24 years after Labour got their first MP 
(in 1900), they were forming a government. How realistic do you think are the 
chances of the Greens making that kind of breakthrough within your lifetime 
(Lucas is 50)?

A: I seriously think so. I've been in the Green party for a very long time – 
when was it, 1986 – and I joined the party because I seriously wanted the party 
to have influence. I'm impatient for that.

And if we are serious about the depth of the climate crisis that I believe we 
face, then if we don't have Greens of some kind in government pretty quickly, 
if we're not going to change our policies pretty quickly, then in many ways the 
future looks quite grim.

So there's an external urgency to this, as well as, yes, we would like to get 
our hands on some levers of influence. One of the driving forces for the whole 
Green party's raison d'être is around the environmental crisis, and that crisis 
is getting worse by the day.

Q: Labour made the breakthrough from a minor party to a major one because the 
Liberal party collapsed. Who's going to collapse this time?

A: I think it's hard to predict exactly how it's going to happen. I don't 
think the debate about PR is dead – I think, if we have another coalition 
government, people will again start raising questions about first past the 
post. If first past the post is delivering us coalitions, then at least let's 
try and make those coalitions more accountable and more representative of the 
people that elected them.

So I think that debate about PR will come back. And I'm very interested in 
that whole Compass-led debate about realignments of the left, and trying to 
find ways in which coalitions are possible. So we don't necessarily need to see 
the collapse of one party before we come forward with some serious influence. 
There are a range of different ways it might happen.

Q: What are the odds of a Green government happening in your lifetime?

A: I'm not going to put a figure on odds. What I want to talk about are the 
odds of serious Green influence. And that, I would say, is extremely high.

The alternative vote referendum

Q: Who do you blame for the fact that the referendum on AV went as badly as it 
did?

A: The first thing to acknowledge is that selling something that is not a very 
attractive proposition essentially is very difficult.

The problem with the AV referendum is that nobody was wholeheartedly saying 
this is really what we want. Nobody was saying that. So, if you want to try and 
persuade other people to buy into something that even the people who are trying 
to sell it think is not that great, it's not surprising that it didn't actually 
resonate with people.

It would have been much easier to have won a referendum on a genuine PR system.

Q: Would it have been much easier to have won the referendum if Nick Clegg had 
taken a holiday during the campaign?

A: Of course. Yes, it would have been. It's an incredible irony that it's the 
Lib Dems' own unpopularity that helped sink the referendum result, which is 
very sad because, although AV is not what we ideally wanted, it would have been 
a step further forward.

Green policy and growth



Q: Can we move on to growth, because there were a lot of good questions about 
thison the "what do you want to ask" blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2011/sep/07/what-to-ask-caroline-lucas>
. Inthe Green party election manifesto, 
<http://www.greenparty.org.uk/policies/policies_2010/2010manifesto_contents.html>
 you said: "Only the Green party is willing to… say that limitless economic 
growth without thinking about the consequences is a dangerous and careless 
fantasy." What do you mean by that? Do you have a view as to what level of 
growth is appropriate and what isn't?

A: What we're saying is that we need to be thinking about the economy as a 
subset of the overall ecology, of planetary constraints, and the constraints 
will be different as to whether or not you are talking about water, or CO2 or 
what the resources are.

What we're saying is that the turbo-consumerism that is being driven by 
successive governments, where we are being encouraged to measure our wellbeing 
solely in terms of whether or not GDP is going up or down, isn't actually a 
very effective way of measuring anything.

Absolutely, we need jobs right now. We need investment and employment. But 
when the government talks about growth, that's not really what it's talking 
about. It's just talking about more and more people consuming. It doesn't 
matter what they are consuming as long as that leads to a growth in GDP.

Q: But there is a connection between growth and jobs, isn't there?

A: It depends. You've got the chancellor saying he wants to lift the 50p tax 
rate because that's going to led to more growth and jobs. Actually, what that's 
going to led to is people who are earning a lot maybe saving more. It's not 
actually going to be translated into productive investment in the economy.

What we have said is that we want to look back to Roosevelt and his New Deal 
in the 1930s. When we were in a recession, he built lots of roads and bridges. 
I don't think we need lots of roads and bridges. But if we have a bit of space 
in which to have some investment and growth, it needs to be in that 
transitional phase so that we can put in place the green infrastructure that we 
need for the 21st century.

Q: But Roosevelt would have given his right arm for "limitless economic 
growth".

A: I'm saying that our response to austerity is not to say: "Do not invest, do 
not grow." Our response to the austerity challenge, to the recession challenge, 
is to say we need investment – but that investment needs to go into productive 
areas of jobs where we can begin to see a greener economy emerging. And that's 
not where it's going at the moment.

Q: One of the people who posted a question on this (skintnick) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/12302789> wanted to 
know if you think "the era of economic growth is over". Would you put it like 
that?

A: I would say that, increasingly, economic growth is becoming uneconomic. And 
by that I mean if you look at the costs associated with our current growth 
model in terms of the environmental destruction that it causes and some of the 
social inequalities that it gives rise to, the overall costs associated with 
our growth model are actually costing us more than the amount of money that the 
current growth model is producing.

If you build lots more roads and so forth, the environmental damage that you 
are doing with that – with air pollution, health problems – is outweighing what 
this growth is supposed to be producing.

That's why we want to get away from simple measures of wellbeing like GDP and 
instead look at a basket of different measures, in terms of whether or not we 
are having greater levels of well being as a society, instead of thinking that, 
just because GDP has gone up, we're all miraculously going to feel 10 times 
better.

Q: Does that mean, as someone called Bressy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/12304533> asked on 
the blog, if GDP isn't going up, that's a positive?

A: Both of those questions are still making it sound as if growth is the end 
goal. I think growth is a side issue.

The end goal is about prosperity in terms of greater wellbeing, in terms of 
greater equality, in terms of having a cleaner environment, in terms of having 
more security for your kids in the future.

Those are the kinds of outcomes we want to be trying to pursue in this 
society, rather than being obsessed about whether or not GDP is going up or 
down.

Q: Do you have an index for measuring that? Of the various international 
happiness indices, are there any that you can point to and say "that's a good 
way of measuring a prosperous society"?

A: I think that's still a work in progress. You've had the Sarkozy commission 
<http://www.stiglitz-sen-fitoussi.fr/en/index.htm>, which has started to set 
out a range of different criteria that you could use. What is clear is that you 
can't just aggregate everything into one single number, so that you have GDP of 
2% versus one single number.

The New Economics Foundation 
<http://www.neweconomics.org/programmes/well-being> has probably come closest 
to beginning to put together a basket of different things that you could be 
measuring. The government itself is beginning to think along these lines, not 
as a replacement for GDP measurements, but as a parallel to it. So there's a 
debate happening. But I don't think anybody right now would say, yes, that's 
the answer.

Q: Mainstream policymakers have, for the last 50 or 100 years or so, worked on 
the assumption that there is a trend rate of growth and that's a good thing and 
that, in normal circumstances, economies should grow. Do you think economies 
should grow?

A: No. I think that advanced industrialised economies like ourselves cannot 
afford to go on growing, particularly if we want to give people in poorer 
countries a chance of being able to at least meet their basic needs.

The bottom line is if we all lived as we do in the west, we would need an 
extra three and a half planets to provide the resources and absorb the waste. 
No matter how much we talk about producing things more efficiently, and trying 
to decouple our production from its environmental impact, no one is talking 
about a zero relationship.

If you producing more and more stuff, even if you are doing it more 
efficiently, when you have got a rising population the impact of that is still 
going to be upwards.

So the bottom line is – I would argue – that, in a world where population is 
growing and people in the poorer countries quite rightly and legitimately 
expect to be able to have more growth and development themselves, then that 
means that, in the end, advanced countries need to be getting away from growth 
as our objective. We need to be moving towards steady state economies.

Q: So that doesn't just mean slower growth than before, then. That means 
throwing away the expectation that the economy will normally grow bigger, year 
by year, on a GDP measure?

A: It means finding another way of looking at it. But it's really important to 
say that, in order to do that, you would need to change an awful lot of things 
in society. Because if you simply said let's throw growth out of the window and 
didn't change anything else, then you would see unemployment rise and you would 
see some chaos ensue.

Q: Someone (Haroonsaad) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/12305276> posted a 
question asking whether the Greens are an anti-capitalist party. I'm assuming 
from what you are saying that the answer is yes.

A: Yes. It's anti-capitalist not just from a narrow ideological point of view. 
We're saying that a capitalist society, as far as we can see, depends on more 
and more production and consumption of stuff, without much thought as to how 
you are doing that. And that is not compatible with moving towards a more 
stable economy.

Being an MP

Q: You've been an MP for more than a year now. Some people come to parliament 
and fall in love with it. Some people come here and decide that it's a 
wretched, terrible place. What do you feel about it?

A: I feel that it's a deeply frustrating and inefficient place that actually 
acts an obstacle in so many ways to getting the things done that need to be 
done. By that I mean I find that parliament is still bogged down in ways of 
doing things that are deeply inefficient. I'm thinking of everything from, if I 
look at the other parties, the powers of the whips, the amount of time that's 
wasted in filing through the lobbies rather than moving towards something more 
effective like electronic voting, and some of the ways in which what we do is 
still obscure to people outside parliament. If you are trying to follow a 
debate in parliament, even if you've got access to the internet, you are really 
going to struggle to make any sense of it because there's no obligation, when 
you put down amendments, for example, to explain the purpose of those 
amendments.

Q: You covered these points in a paper you wrote last year [pdf].  
<http://www.carolinelucas.com/assets/files/localparties/brighton/publications/THE%20CASE%20FOR%20PARLIAMENTARY%20REFORM.%20NOV%202010-1%20-%20Lucas%20C.%202010.pdf>

A: I did. And what was exciting about that is that the paper then led to a 
debate in Westminster Hall, 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/cmhansrd/cm110203/halltext/110203h0001.htm#11020328000094>
and it was one of the best attended Westminster Hall debates that we've had, 
apparently. We had over 40 MPs there. And what's interesting is that there's an 
appetite, particularly from this new intake of MPs, to try to change the way 
that we do things. I know there are people who will say, as Margaret Beckett 
did, "Don't worry, don't try and change things too fast, you'll get used to 
it." The fact that people get used to it is precisely the problem.

Q: If you were prime minister tomorrow, would you tear down the place and 
start again?

A: I think this is a very beautiful building. I wouldn't like to tear it down. 
But I would perhaps make the chamber somewhere else where we could have a more 
effective way of business rather than this adversarial facing one another, 
shouting at each other. There's only room for 450 people to sit down in that 
place. There are 650 MPs. What's that about? I think we could organise the way 
we do things in a much more effective way.

Q: What do you feel that you have personally by being here that you would not 
have achieved by being leader of the Greens outside parliament? Is there 
anything specific you can point to?

A: I think there are two ways of answering that question. The first is to say 
that one MP out of 650 is very rarely going to be in a position of swinging 
majorities, and I can't say I've swung a majority with my vote.

But I also think it's been effective and important in two ways. One is about 
the credibility and authority that comes with being in this place. We could 
have had 30 or 40 members of the European parliament but, because the media is 
not very interested in what happens in the European parliament, because our 
whole political life is so centralised and focused on Westminster, the 
importance of being there shouldn't be underestimated, just in terms of the way 
in which people think, "Oh, the Greens are serious, they've got an MP." So 
there's that element of it.

In terms of what I've been able to do in terms of the work that I've done 
here, it's about putting things on the agenda that otherwise might not have 
been there. In the health debate this week I was the only MP who stood up and 
went right back to the basics of what the NHS used to be about. When it came to 
a debate about Afghanistan, my amendment was the only one that was in tune, I 
would argue, with the vast majority of people in this country who want to see 
an immediate withdrawal of our troops.

The coalition and nuclear power

Q: In a Huffington Post interview a few weeks ago  
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2011/07/07/caroline-lucas-interview-_n_890129.html>
you predicted that there would be a coalition split "quite soon" on nuclear 
power. What did you mean by that?

A: At the moment the coalition is saying they will support nuclear energy if 
there is no public subsidy. They have found a form of words that they can more 
or less sell to some of the Lib Dems in the coalition. But the point is that to 
say that you will only have nuclear if it does not have a public subsidy is so 
disingenuous, to put it politely. Nuclear has never survived without public 
subsidy. Today, even, there is no proper liability insurance for nuclear. God 
forbid, if there was a Fukushima-type accident here in Britain, are we saying 
the government would just sit on its hands and say "We're not bailing that 
out"? We constantly bail out nuclear. It is impossible for nuclear to happen 
without a subsidy.

Chris Huhne

Q: How do you rate Chris Huhne as an energy secretary? Do you think he's a 
proper environmentalist?

A: I think that in many ways he has tried to do the right thing - although 
obviously I disagree with him strongly over nuclear - but it's interesting that 
time and again his department is over-ruled by more powerful departments in 
Whitehall. I can't seriously believe that he thought it was a good idea to 
cause chaos in the solar industry bychanging the Fits [feed-in tariffs] regime 
so that those slightly larger installations would no longer get the kind of 
support they were expecting. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/apr/19/solar-legal-action-feed-in-tariffs>

The Greens and environmentalism

Q: On the blog someone [michaelswann] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/12303438> accused you 
of playing down the environmentalist aspects of Green policy. Do you see the 
Greens still as mainly an environmental party? Or are you actually now a 
broader, socialist party?

A: We have always been a party that has had policies on everything, from 
education to the economy to the environment. We have always said that, if you 
are serious about the environment, then the policies that you need to change 
most are the economic policies. There's no point in having an economic system 
which works on the basis of "business as usual" and then putting some green 
trimmings around the edges. It's actually about changing the whole way the 
economy works.

Curbing population growth

Q: We had various questions on the blog about curbing population growth. You 
said recently: "We need to have a far greater public debate about population." 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jul/17/population-control-beckham-family>
 What do you mean by that?

A: Population <https://www.theguardian.com/world/population> has been an 
elephant in the room when it comes to many environmental debates. It is clear 
that, if we are trying to reduce our overall impact on the planet, it is going 
to be much harder if there are more of us than if there are fewer of us.

Having said that, we are a world away from any kind of draconian, mandatory 
policies. We're not suggesting that for one moment.

But I do think that, if people are taking the time to think about their 
environmental footprint when it comes to how many flights they take, whether or 
not they have a 4X4, whether or not they are going to have a patio heater, then 
putting the question to themselves about how many kids they are going to have 
is a reasonable thing to do.

It's not about me sitting here lecturing people. But I think we do need that 
debate about what is the impact of a growing population in the industrialised 
countries.

Greenham Common

Q: Finally, I wanted to ask you about Greenham Common (where campaigners 
recently celebrated the 30th anniversary of the creation of the peace camp) 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-berkshire-14775384>. You've said (for 
example, in this Guardian interivew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/18/interview-caroline-lucas-green-party>
), that the Greenham Common protests brought you into politics. Looking back on 
them now, what do you think they achieved?

A: I think they achieve a huge amount in terms of changing people's 
consciousness, how they thought about things. Although I have talked about the 
importance of being here in parliament, I think the extra-parliamentary 
activity is still vitally important too, and I think the Green party as a whole 
has that sense that we need to be part of a broader movement.

Q: But nuclear weapons are still here.

A: But I think that the Greenham Common protest reached people in terms of 
their concern about nuclear weapons in a way that reports from parliament 
didn't. And, as well as getting the message about nuclear weapons to people who 
would not normally have followed it, it really was consciousness-changing.

I can't say it any differently to that. It was about what happens when you 
have a lot of people together, all of whom believe something strongly and feel 
they can really make a difference. It made people understand that politics was 
not just something done by men in grey suits behind doors in Westminster, but 
that politics was something you can do whoever you are and wherever you are.
 