
Carrie Fisher and her mother Debbie Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds> have been laid to rest at a 
funeral in Los Angeles, where the ashes of the Star Wars actor were carried in 
an urn shaped like a Prozac pill.

The actors were buried together during a private family service at Forest Lawn 
Memorial Park in Hollywood Hills following their deaths just a day apart in 
December.

Following the service, Reynolds’ son Todd Fisher said: “We had a beautiful 
service. Everyone is as settled as we can be. We’ll have a bigger service down 
the road for the public and all their other friends but this was a private 
family service. It was fitting.

“We have so much of them that was left behind; all of my sister’s words and 
all the movies and things they created and that’s what we need to remember.

“My mother was one of the most giving people with charities and my sister, of 
course, was another of the most giving. They were both Molly Browns of sorts. 
They were very strong women right to the end.”

Explaining the choice of urn for his sister’s ashes, he said: “Carrie’s 
favourite possession was a giant Prozac pill that she bought many years ago and 
she loved it and it was in her house. Billie [Carrie Fisher’s daughter] and I 
felt it was where she would want to be. We couldn’t find anything appropriate. 
Carrie would like that, it was her favourite thing.

“They’re together and they will be together here and in heaven.”

Fisher had spoken publicly about her battle with bipolar disorder and drug 
problems during her life.

A funeral cortege with two hearses arrived shortly before 9am on Friday at 
Forest Lawn, which is the resting place for celebrities including Bette Davis, 
Stan Laurel and Liberace.

Fisher’s daughter Billie Lourd was seen at the grounds with actor Taylor 
Lautner.

Fisher, who shot to fame as Princess Leia in Star Wars, died on 27 December, 
aged 60, after suffering a heart attack on a flight from London toLos Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> four days earlier.

Singin’ in the Rain star Reynolds died aged 84 following a suspected stroke, a 
day after Fisher’s death.

Meryl Streep, Gwyneth Paltrow and Star Wars creator George Lucas were among 
the mourners who gathered on Thursday at Fisher’s estate in Coldwater Canyon, 
Los Angeles, where she and her mother Reynolds were next-door neighbours.

British actors Stephen Fry and Eric Idle, singer Courtney Love and Hollywood 
stars Jamie Lee Curtis and Meg Ryan were also seen at the compound.

Streep, who starred in the adaptation of Fisher’s semi-autobiographical novel 
Postcards from the Edge, was pictured carrying a bunch of white roses as she 
entered the estate.

A family friend told People magazine that 125 guests attended the service and 
the Oscar-winning actress performed Fisher’s favourite song Happy Days Are Here 
Again.

Eulogies were delivered by Streep, Fry, Lourd and British comedy star Tracey 
Ullman, People reported.
 