
Lots of people said Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-dies-star-wars-princess-leia>
 was wonderful. Lots of them said she was wonderful not because of the 
achievements in her career, but because she used her fame totalk and campaign 
about how she managed her bipolar disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/carrie-fisher-bipolar-dies-mental-illness-princess-leia>
, and about mental illness generally. I agree. Yet, while I’m no Carrie Fisher, 
all this makes me feel guilty about my own silence. Feelings of guilt are one 
of my symptoms.

Forget the gold bikini. For people with mental illness Carrie Fisher was a 
queen | Hannah Jane Parkinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/carrie-fisher-bipolar-dies-mental-illness-princess-leia>
I started being treated in October for a mental illness I hadn’t even heard 
of: complex post-traumatic stress disorder. I realise now that it’s been there, 
thickening, worsening, for many years. Essentially, it comes about when you 
suppress traumas and carry on regardless, failing properly to address emotional 
distress, which you also suppress.

I have trouble remembering. Even after I’ve looked it up, which I often do, I 
have trouble remembering the year my father was first diagnosed with cancer, or 
the year he died; the year I was diagnosed with cancer; the year a huge chunk 
of masonry fell off our terrace of houses; the year my mother was first 
diagnosed with cancer, or the second time, or the year she died; the year my 
first son crashed out of school; the year my second one did; the years when I 
got them back into education; the year my then-husband was diagnosed with a 
chronic blood disorder. Basically, I barely remember the last decade. I’d 
thought my perfidious memory was the result of chemotherapy, or just of ageing. 
But it’s another symptom.

People tell me I’m “intimidating”. I’ve been told that for all my adult life. 
I’ve accepted it without understanding it, sometimes explaining what a shy 
child I was, how endlessly susceptible to bullying, in every context I ever 
found myself in. I’ve always been too scared really to question how it could be 
that other people saw me so differently to how I really felt (I even 
intimidated myself). I told myself it was just because I was someone from a 
working-class background in an upper-middle-class milieu. Anything to protect 
me from my secret shame – that I found everything intimidating.

I kept that shame entirely hidden, especially from myself, by pretending that 
I found nothing intimidating. I even called it “pride”. That “pride” has 
stopped me throwing up my hands, and truly admitting I’m beaten.

The illness can make you appear to other people as someone who is tough, who 
can cope with anything. You take on responsibilities you struggle with, and 
look after other people without looking after yourself. But when you suggest 
you can’t take it, people often don’t even hear you. They think you’ll cope 
because you always cope. That’s who you are. That’s what you’refor. Which is 
not to put blame on others: it’s a natural and rational reaction, the logical 
thing to say to the person they want to see and think they know.

So you carry on coping, and somehow you get through. You thrum with stress, 
take your anger out on the random dude who does the tiny thing that makes you 
crack; or become listless, unable to focus, panicked every time the phone 
rings, every time a letter arrives, a letter you instantly recognise as 
pertaining to the hellish, complex negotiation that no one but you knows the 
intricacies of.

You look like you’re managing things that would floor other people, sensible 
people. Though nothing could be further from the truth. You become a person for 
whom it is second nature to find courage or aggression in yourself because you 
are frightened and vulnerable. Or you resort to passive-aggression, which is 
often my miserable chosen defence. Anything to avoid addressing the fact that 
you are terrified.

Generally, the psychological vulnerability starts in childhood, not 
necessarily with dreadful abuse or neglect. I was not an abused or neglected 
child except in the usual,Larkinesque 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/apr/30/divorce-judge-philip-larkin> way. 
(My parents were neurotic and moralistic: I think of my childhood as like 
growing up in a religious cult without the religion.) But I was a sensitive 
child, in a pretty rough-and-ready, rust-belt culture. Early memories, 
recounted in therapy, have taken on a significance quite different to the 
meaning they had for me.

They include seemingly small things, such as being sent out to play on my own 
for the first time, aged three. A bigger girl asked to see my gold christening 
bracelet, then ran off with it. When my dad went round to confront her mother 
and get it back, the woman said the bracelet was her daughter’s and refused to 
return it. This was my first solo encounter with the outside world, and I see 
now that, rather than accepting it and learning from it, I defied it, even then.

I stride boldly into situations for which I am ill-prepared. I trust people 
very easily and very completely. I find it hard to show that I’m hurting. 
Another memory, aged about seven: I stood on a platform while other kids threw 
bricks at me. One struck me on the temple, but I wouldn’t show them it hurt. 
It’s a habit that gets me into trouble, again and again. Anything rather than 
acknowledge my debilitating fear, of the world and the people in it. I’m an 
idiot. Or I was.

It’s hard, at 54, to find the time and energy to reassess your whole life, 
take responsibility for all the mistakes, and still embrace the part of you 
that did OK, even if it betrayed the part of you that actually needed the 
attention.

It’s hard to see that you’re interested in, and opinionated about, the world 
outside yourself because it distracts you from the churning insecurity inside – 
the anxiety that eventually shoots up and convulses you with the shakes and 
hammers at your heart, the dissociation that has you stepping out in front of 
cars – unless you bang your chest to bring yourself back. That, you thought, 
was normal. Feeling these things is good (kind of). They are manifestations of 
stuff you didn’t even know was there, because it was all stuffed down so deep 
inside. They tell you you’re in trouble.

'Carrie Fisher taught me to be my own hero': readers' tributes to the late star
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/28/carrie-fisher-taught-me-to-be-my-own-hero-readers-tributes-to-the-late-star>
It’s also hard not to start sounding like a victim: and that’s why people such 
as Carrie Fisher,Ruby Wax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/dec/12/ruby-wax-depression-online-website>
 orStephen Fry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/11/stephen-fry-male-depression-boys-cry>
 are so important. They reassure you that you feel worse before you feel 
better. They help you understand that while all the emotions you suppressed – 
the fear, the guilt, the grief, the shame, the anger, the self-loathing – now 
feel overwhelming, this too will pass.

The guilt is especially hard: guilt that you soldiered on and didn’t sort 
matters out sooner. But with courage you can let it go. Because you still have 
the courage you always found, even if you acknowledge at last that it always 
had a lot of competition from other emotions.

For me, I know, 2017 is going to be the most fruitful and honest year I’ve had 
for a long, long time. I’m going to be spending it getting to know myself at 
last and maybe even learning that I’m actually not so awful. And I’m going to 
carry on saying what I feel, and writing about it. I think there are a lot of 
people out there, struggling with emotional trauma that they don’t acknowledge. 
England calls it the stiff upper lip. But it’s your whole being that ends up 
getting stiffed. Enough.
 