
This week is the 50th anniversary of Joseph Heller's satirical war novel 
Catch-22 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/features/2011/1010/1224305515897.html>. 
For some 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/8811117/Catching-up-with-Catch-22.html>
, it's an opportunity to reflect on Heller's innovative injection of absurdist 
humour into the American post-war novel. For others, it's a moment to recall 
with fondness a novel they enjoyed years ago. And for me, it's been an excuse 
for something more humble: actually reading the damn thing.

I've owned a copy for years. But let's face it, it's 500-plus pages long, 
there are more than 50 characters, and everybody knows what a Catch-22 is – 
it's one of those things where you're damned if you do and damned if you don't. 
So did I really need to bother reading it at this late stage?

Well, having arrived 50 years late to the party, I'm pleased to finally be 
able to answer that question with a wide-eyed, emphatic, rapturous yes.

The Catch-22 itself is a bureaucratic idiocy so sublime it leaves you staring 
out the window with wonder. As many of you will already know, the novel is set 
on a made-up island off the coast of Italy during the second world war, where 
an American bombing group is stationed. Desperate to impress his superiors, 
Colonel Cathcart keeps raising the number of missions his men have to fly. Our 
hero, Yossarian, has flown 50. Driven half-mad by his will to live, he wants 
out. But he's thwarted by Catch-22, a clause which states that pilots don't 
have to fly if they are certified as insane, but that being driven mad by fear 
is fundamentally rational. As it's described in the novel: "Orr would be crazy 
to fly more missions and sane if he didn't, but if he was sane he had to fly 
them. If he flew them he was crazy and didn't have to; but if he didn't want to 
he was sane and had to." The result, put simply, is that no one can get off the 
ride.

It's hard to describe briefly just how gloriously, envelopingly hilarious this 
logic becomes as the novel unfolds. (I can't remember another book which I've 
had to put down so frequently to get on with the serious business of 
guffawing.) Its core paradox – that insanity is sanity – burrows inside 
everything.

For Heller, delineating the foolishness of war – and perhaps of bureaucracies 
more generally – becomes an ecstatic project. Madness runs through every 
exchange; absurdity informs every character. He creates a whole universe of 
folly, one where Colonel Cathcart "had courage and never hesitated to volunteer 
his men for any target available". And where Doc Daneeka asserts: "It's not my 
business to save lives". And where Milo, an entrepreneurial officer, bombs his 
own airfield after striking a deal with the Germans.

It also manifests in Heller's gleeful use of repetition. Words and phrases are 
continually paired up so that everything plays snap with everything else. (For 
instance: "Dobbs and Captain Flume were so deeply disturbed by Hungry Joe's 
shrieking nightmares that they would begin to have shrieking nightmares of 
their own.") Nothing is allowed to reside in meaning something: instead, 
everything is mocked by its own echo. The effect, which accumulates over 
hundreds of pages, is a merciless, absurdist comedy which hints at the awful 
emptiness at the heart of things.

The power of Catch-22, for me, is the way in which it plunges into that 
emptiness at the end of the novel, when the source of its comedy is finally 
revealed. Throughout, the novel's comic surface has been punctured by shards of 
Yossarian's traumatic memories of a bombing raid in which a young, enlisted 
solider bled to death from flak wounds.

But it's only near the end, when Yossarian finally gives in and reflects fully 
on the episode – its gruesome details and savage lack of meaning – that the 
novel is transposed into a tragic key. Sure, it's been funny. But all along the 
comedy has been an expression of horror; it springs from outraged, stupefied 
humanity. There seems to be something up for grabs in Catch-22's circular logic 
– where madness begets laughter, and laughter begets madness – that makes me 
immediately go back and read it again; which is an impulse I think Heller, 
Yossarian and the rest of the gang would understand.
 