
Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> experiencing 
premenstrual syndrome should routinely be offered cognitive behavioural therapy 
to help them manage the symptoms, gynaecologists have said.

Around 40% of women experience symptoms of PMS with around 5%-8% having severe 
symptoms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/28/women-premenstrual-syndrome-pms-dysphoric-disorder>
. Physical symptoms can include swollen breasts and bloating, and the 
psychological symptoms are wide-ranging, including depression, irritability, 
suicidal thoughts and loss of confidence. The condition can be debilitating, 
disrupting school, social and work life.

Now the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists has released a set 
of guidelines reiterating the role of CBT in helping women manage their 
symptoms.

“There is a very, very marked and important psychological element of the 
problem,” said Shaughn O’Brien, professor of obstetrics and gynaecology at 
Keele University, chairman of the International Society for Premenstrual 
Disorders and lead author of the new guidelines.

Why is premenstrual syndrome still so badly understood? | Hannah Ewens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/28/women-premenstrual-syndrome-pms-dysphoric-disorder>
The publication, which updates previous guidance incorporating the latest 
evidence, recommends: “When treating women with severe PMS, CBT should be 
considered routinely as a treatment option,” with the authors adding that the 
use of CBT could avoid the need for PMS to be tackled with drugs and remove the 
possibility of potential side-effects.


While the guidelines emphasise the benefits of CBT, they also note that 
combined oral contraceptives, vitamin B6 and antidepressants known as SSRIs can 
be used to manage PMS symptoms in the first line of treatment. Oestrogen 
patches are included among the options for the second line of treatment while 
the third line includes the use of synthetic hormones known as 
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues – a treatment recommended only 
for women with the most severe symptoms.

But as O’Brien points out, only the removal of the womb and ovaries will 
resolve the issue permanently. “It is actually the only cure but it is very 
drastic,” he said.

The guidelines also advise of the limited evidence for the use of 
complementary medicines in managing PMS, adding that interactions with 
conventional medicines should also be flagged.

While PMS affects a large proportion of women, the exact mechanism behind the 
condition remains unclear. “We know that ovulation and the hormone cycle causes 
[PMS], but we don’t know why,” said O’Brien, pointing out that there appears to 
be little difference in the levels of the hormone progesterone between women 
who do experience PMS to those who do not.

“The difference must be in the way the body and particularly the brain 
responds to those normal progesterone levels,” he said.
 