
He was a mere mortal who ate too many potatoes, and she was a plain little 
woman with no social graces, but 165 years after a mutually disappointing 
encounter between William Makepeace Thackeray andCharlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte>, she has at least been 
cleared of the mortifying gaffe of wearing a completely unsuitable dress to a 
grand London dinner party.

The dress has usually been in store at the Brontë Parsonage Museum 
<https://www.bronte.org.uk/>, since it was donated to the museum in 1928, but 
is now about to travel on loan to the Morgan library and museum 
<http://www.themorgan.org/exhibitions/charlotte-bronte> in New York. It has 
traditionally been described as the one she wore to a dinner given by Thackeray 
in her honour, at his own home on 12 June 1850.

The dress is a pretty but plain blue and white print, severely buttoned up to 
the neck – and would have left Brontë painfully out of place among the other 
female guests in elaborate low-cut silks, velvet, lace, ribbons and copious 
jewellery.

Brontë worshipped Thackeray’s work and dedicated Jane Eyre to him; he was 
highly flattered and was fascinated to learn that its author, the mysterious 
Currer Bell, was actually an unmarried woman from an obscure corner ofYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire>.

The dinner, with other literary and artistic guests invited to meet the 
bestselling author, was an abject failure. Conversation faltered, and he later 
recalled her shocked look as he reached for another potato. One guest recalled 
it as “one of the dullest evenings she ever spent in her life”, and Thackeray’s 
daughter Anne remembered: “It was a gloomy and silent evening. Everyone waited 
for the brilliant conversation, which never began at all.”

One guest, desperate to break the silence, asked Brontë if she was enjoying 
London. After a long silence, she finally replied: “Yes; and no.”

Historian Eleanor Houghton, lead researcher at the University of Southampton, 
believes she was at least properly dressed – or at least less blatantly 
unsuitably than in the blue and white.

Houghton, who publishes her research in the journal Costume 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/05908876.2016.1165956>, says that 
Brontë would have been careful about what she wore to the dinner, having 
already got it wrong by wearing a plain day dress on another very public 
occasion two years earlier.

“We know Charlotte was embarrassed when she wore an inappropriate dress to the 
opera on her first visit to London, so with this in mind, I think we can be 
confident it is unlikely she made the same mistake twice by wearing a day dress 
to an auspicious evening occasion – particularly one of such personal and 
public significance.”

She has studied contemporary accounts of the evening, fashions and fabrics of 
the period, and every inch of the dress itself, including evidence that it was 
later altered for somebody taller and stouter than the tiny author. One woman 
who had been at the dinner recalled that Brontë wore a moss green dress. 
Houghton concludes that the date 1850 is right for a dress already slightly old 
fashioned, but the occasion wrong. The long association with Thackeray, she 
believes, is because Brontë probably wore it to another meeting with Thackeray, 
a private morning meeting.

“The white and blue delaine Thackeray dress would have been the right choice 
for such a meeting. Its high neck, long sleeves and mid-quality printed fabric 
point to pretty but unassuming morning attire.”


That meeting was scarcely less awkward: Thackeray was startled when the quiet, 
awkward young woman took him sharply to task over several aspects of his work.

When the dress was auctioned at Sotheby’s in 1916 it was described as made for 
Brontë’s honeymoon in 1854, but Houghton thinks that is also unlikely, as by 
then the fashion had changed from its plain tight sleeves to more voluminous 
pleated ones.

Professor Maria Hayward, a historian and textile expert at Southampton, said 
if the question marks remain, the dress remains invaluable.

“Charlotte’s blue and white dress is a fascinating piece of clothing that 
reveals many insights into the life of its owner,” she said. “Its size, the 
choice of materials and cut, and the quality, have all allowed Eleanor to piece 
together when it was worn, and what it reveals about the public life of this 
very private author.”
 