
I grew up in suburban Sheffield. Everywhere in Sheffield is an edge place. 
Everywhere everywhere’s an edge place, in fact, but in some places you can 
forget that for a while. That’s not an option in Sheffield. The streetlights 
ended at the top of our road. Wilderness crouched in the dark beyond and it 
would slink into my bedroom at night. As an edge person, perhaps I was bound to 
try to look over, or even ooze through, the porous boundary between our species 
and others. Certainly I was bound to write about the wilderness that creeps in 
and sleeps with and in everyone, and without which we die, and which will one 
day kill and eat us.

One day, there was a blackbird in our garden. It looked at me, and I looked at 
it. It plainly knew something about the garden that I didn’t know. That enraged 
and tantalised me. I wanted to know what it knew; I wanted to know what it saw 
when it looked at our privet hedges. I wanted to see our garden properly, and 
thought that the bird could help me to do it.

I tried all sorts of things to find out. I read everything I could find about 
blackbirds, and mapped their flight paths. I stuffed a dead blackbird, strung 
it on a thread over my bed and watched it circling as I went to sleep. I 
clutched a pot containing a formalinised blackbird brain, hoping that some of 
its knowledge would seep into me. This probably seems perverted. It would seem 
trite to any shamanic culture anywhere in the world. In any event it didn’t 
work.

Going underground: meet the man who lived as an animal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/23/going-underground-meet-man-lived-as-animal-charles-foster>
I grew up. I became ever more disastrously bipedal. The sensory receptors 
buried in my head became further and further from the ground, and further and 
further from the perspective that, as children, we share with our non-human 
cousins. But the question (“What did the bird know?”) didn’t go away. Indeed it 
spawned other questions. Can we really know anything other than the contents of 
our own heads? Are we always and forever alone – trapped in our own 
self-generated worlds?

Being a Beast is an attempt to reassure myself that there’s an objective world 
out there, and to use more data than is usually used to describe it.

We’ve got at least five senses. We usually use only one of them – vision. So 
at best we get 20% of the available information about, say, a tree. You’re 
unlikely to describe something accurately, or relate to it satisfactorily, if 
you have only a fifth of the information about it. It’s also commercially bad 
for a nature writer. I think of myself as a farmer, making my living from the 
land. I should try to farm efficiently. To use just 20% of the available facts 
is pretty pathetic. But actually it’s worse than that: our vision and our 
cognition are intimately linked. Just think how we talk. When we understand 
something we say: “I see!” We insist that seeing is believing. When I look at 
the tree, I’m barely even seeing it. When I describe it in a book, I’m actually 
describing my own thoughts about the tree. They’re a woefully inaccurate 
reflection of the tree: they’re far less lovely and interesting. We don’t do 
trees justice. And it’s terribly incompetent fact-farming.

Who could free me from the tyranny of vision, cognition and self-reference? 
Well, no one, as it turned out. But five animals loosened the bonds: badgers in 
a Welsh wood, foxes in the East End of London, otters in the rivers of Exmoor, 
red deer in the West Highlands of Scotland and on Exmoor, and finally, most 
ludicrously and hubristically, swifts in the air between Oxford and Central 
Africa. Between them they helped me to perceive slightly more than a fifth of a 
tree.

All my five species were animals my children liked and enjoyed emulating. The 
children were my great teachers, since all real knowledge is unforgetting and 
they’ve forgotten far less than I have. Most of the research was a rather 
strange family picnic.

Being a Beast by Charles Foster review – a true walk on the wild side
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/14/being-a-beast-charles-foster-review-living-wild-five-animals>
I tried for a while to be like these animals; to live in an olfactory 
landscape; to learn how a single sniff telescopes time so that you get in an 
instant a cocktail of scent particles from many millennia; to hear how water 
shrinks distance; to run from wolves that haven’t existed for a thousand years 
and to dip my head so that my antlers didn’t get caught on trees that were 
felled 500 years ago; to be entangled with the swifts in a weird ecstatic net 
whose twitching told me from miles away that they were about to arrive.

There were whole microseconds of arguable success. There were long and 
glorious years of wonderful failure. There were quiet epiphanies in the 
writing, when the form in which I found I had to frame an idea taught me 
something new about the substance.

My freaky zoological method acting was the most amazing fun. I wouldn’t want 
anyone to miss out. When no one is looking, drop to the ground in a wood: 
sniff, feel, and start to use a bit more of your neural hardware and software. 
Call it epistemological fieldwork if that makes you feel less embarrassed. The 
world and you are far more exciting than you’ve ever dreamed.

Extract

I lay at the mouth of the sett. It had a curtain of water, like those curtains 
of beads that fill the doors leading to the toilets in small Chinese 
restaurants. It was almost totally dark, except when lightning bled through the 
fault lines in the sky. The whole wood bent to the wind. We rocked in our 
cradle, the roots around us straining and creaking like the timbers of a 
rolling ship. A wood mouse, displaced from a flooded or crumbling tunnel, 
scrambled in and hunched, shivering, in the crook of Tom’s knee. The mouse 
reassured me. We were in the best place, a sanctuary accredited by the wild, so 
I snatched bits of queasy maritime sleep. Tom slept, which is what I expect 
badgers do in storms.

But Nova Scotia’s worst wasn’t so bad. Our sett wasn’t damaged at all but, out 
of gratitude to it, and with a new pride in having survived the worst, we set 
to that morning to make it even better. We excavated a new chamber, complete 
with shelves, reinforced the roof and built an imposing earth arch at the 
entrance. Then, as Tom was happily making his own purely recreational 
earthworks, I slipped into unbroken sleep.

Burt trundled back, not looking as solicitous as he should have been after 
leaving his supposed friend and a cub in a wood in an historic storm. This time 
it was lasagne.

Food worried me. I couldn’t duplicate the precariousness of the badger’s life. 
We did our best: we ate earthworms, both raw and cooked, and any other flotsam 
tossed up by the valley that we could keep down. We scraped a squirrel off the 
road and had it with wood sorrel and wild garlic. But there were Burt’s regular 
gifts, which we had neither the discipline nor the churlishness to refuse, and 
lying guiltily at the bottom of the backpack were sardines, tuna and beans. 
“It’s ridiculous to think you can know this wood like a badger,” Burt said a 
week or so later. “You can’t even know it like me. A man whose DNA has been 
sloshing round this wood for half a millennium knows more about a badger’s 
world than someone who sniffs and slithers for a few weeks.”

Read more from the extract. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/23/worm-fell-into-mouth-my-life-as-a-badger>

More about the book

Foster’s attempt to live like an urban fox – he forages in bins and sleeps in 
gardens – is superbly revealing, of modern people (“In a few generations we’ve 
turned into sclerosed super-specialists, each in a niche so tight that our 
limbs can’t stretch and our brains can’t turn”) and modernVulpes vulpes. Foster 
shows this most familiar of animals in a joyfully new light: consider that the 
urban fox we see slinking across the street almost certainly has fractured 
bones, fused joints and arthritis. “When they walk along fence tops like 
teenage Olympic Romanians on the beam, or blast from a hedge on to a wood 
pigeon, or seep like mercury up to a rabbit, they’re doing it with a back so 
bad that, were they office workers, it would have them signed permanently off 
work.”– Patrick Barkham, the Guardian. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/03/being-beast-charles-foster-review-man-whoate-worms-like-badger>

Buy the book

Being a Beast is published by Profile Books in the UK and Metropolitan Books 
in the US at £8.99and is available from the Guardian Bookshop for £7.37 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/being-a-beast-436980.html>. It was longlisted 
for the 2016 Baillie Gifford prize for nonfiction.
 