
Coneygree, last season’s Cheltenham Gold Cup winner, “schooled brilliantly” 
and “appears to be completely focused” for his return to action at Sandown this 
weekend, Sara Bradstock, the wife of the eight-year-old’s trainer Mark, said on 
Friday afternoon. “It’s one of the things about him,” Bradstock added. “He 
wants to go racing. Nothing else matters.”

And when Coneygree goes racing over fences, as he showed in four starts over 
them last year, he comes home a winner. He was the first novice to run in the 
Gold Cup for nine years when he lined up at Cheltenham in March andthe first 
for 41 years to win as his unrelenting gallop and bold, front-running style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/13/cheltenham-gold-cup-coneygree> 
took the field apart. The Future Stars Intermediate Chase at Sandown on Sunday 
might seem an unlikely place for a proven champion to start his campaign but it 
should put an edge on his fitness before the Hennessy Gold Cup at Newbury later 
this month.

Coneygree gives huge crowd heartwarming win in Cheltenham Gold Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/13/cheltenham-gold-cup-coneygree> 
“People have said to me that they will close that loophole of a Gold Cup 
winner being allowed into an intermediate chase. Everyone went on that he 
shouldn’t run in the Gold Cup because he was a novice. To me that was all a 
load of nonsense because he didn’t know that he was a novice.

“But what it did mean is that you go into your second year of chasing and, if 
we hadn’t found this race, we would have to go in against the top guys. So 
that’s what’s really nice about this – to be able to have a race that, fingers 
firmly crossed, will be a nice confidence booster. It would have been very hard 
to come back after only four chase starts and race straight away in the 
Hennessy or something.”

The Bradstocks have had eight months to get used to the idea of having a Gold 
Cup winner in their small yard near Wantage and also to their own new-found 
status as folk heroes with a big, old-fashioned steeplechaser who are sticking 
it to The Man. Or rather, men like Willie Mullins and Paul Nicholls, whose 
strength in depth and purchasing power has all but bludgeoned the winter game 
into submission.

“Having a Gold Cup horse in the yard doesn’t make any difference to me because 
I want all of them to be able to run to their very best and that’s what we do, 
try to make sure that we turn every corner and don’t leave anything untouched,” 
Sara Bradstock says. “It’s obviously a bit more of a worry and I ride him all 
the time, so every step he takes I worry about but he’s in good nick.

“Someone rightly said that Willie Mullins brought more horses to Cheltenham 
[in March] than we’ve got in the yard and each one of those would have been 
bought for more than all of ours together. So, the British love the underdog, 
don’t they?

“[But] the sad thing is that one would have hoped it would be a real shot in 
the arm for small trainers and that owners would realise that, rather than have 
their horses in the back yard of a big trainer, we can all do it and horses can 
get looked after better in a smaller yard. But it doesn’t make any difference. 
We haven’t got any more horses.”

Coneygree’s career has not gone entirely to plan since he returned from a long 
lay-off at the start of last season. He was withdrawn from his intended 
reappearance at Plumpton last November on the orders of the racecourse vet, 
much to the annoyance of his trainer, while a hacker managed to jock off his 
regular rider Nico de Boinville on racing’s main database before the Gold Cup, 
briefly replacing him with a little-known journeyman, Joe Cornwall.

Bradstock admits Coneygree left out of King George VI Chase by mistake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/05/bradstock-coneygree-left-out-king-george-chase-mistake>
Another “computer glitch” this week meant that Coneygree’s name did not appear 
among the entries for the King George VI Chase at Kempton on Boxing Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/05/bradstock-coneygree-left-out-king-george-chase-mistake>
, a race for which he could have been a leading contender after his 40-length 
romp in a Grade One event over the same course and distance last year. The 
unexpected seems to follow Coneygree around, which adds to his appeal for 
racegoers in an era of routine victories for the most powerful National Hunt 
yards.

“We had a bit of a glitch with the entries but we would go there if the ground 
was soft and he was back from the Hennessy,” Bradstock says. “We’ll have to go 
out with our begging bowl and try to get people to help us pay the supplement 
[but] he won’t run if he hasn’t got over his Hennessy [on 28 November].”

There are obvious similarities between Coneygree and Denman, the 2008 Gold Cup 
winner, who took the 2009 Hennessy Gold Cup under top weight, in terms of build 
and racing style.

“He’s a big, strong horse and he’ll love Newbury if the ground is right,” 
Bradstock said. “The way that they’ll beat us [this season] is if we get into a 
situation where stamina isn’t the most important thing. I’m quite sure that 
Vautour [the Gold Cup favourite] and horses like that have probably got another 
gear on us but that’s why the ground will need to be on the soft side of good, 
partly for safety but also because otherwise it would allow things to just 
sprint past him. Our hope for the season is that he continues to be the wonder 
horse that he has been so far.”
 