
“He can do things other horses can’t even dream of,” said Tom Scudamore, 
moments after dismounting from Thistlecrack, an easy winner on his first try 
over fences. It seems that punters and bookmakers are prepared to believe it, 
because Thistlecrack is now clear favourite for March’sCheltenham Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham-gold-cup> with every firm, on 
offer at no bigger than 5-1, the last of the 7-1 being wiped off the boards as 
he bolted past the post.

There were trainers here who openly doubted the wisdom of tackling fences with 
a horse so far clear of other staying hurdlers that he could probably mop up 
£300,000 in prize money this season if kept to that division. But Thistlecrack 
fully rewarded the buccaneering ambition of his connections with a near 
flawless round of jumping that suggests he will be a danger to any 
steeplechaser who lines up against him.

There were only four of those here and he was fully entitled to beat them, 
judging by hurdles form. Pleasingly, however, this was no cautious, 
safety-first spin, a careful negotiation of the obstacles followed by a sprint 
to the line. Thistlecrack’s mighty stride and remorseless gallop were in 
evidence from the outset and he flew at these fences with enthusiasm and 
confidence.

Brilliant Thistlecrack wins World Hurdle at the Cheltenham Festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/thistlecrack-wins-world-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
The Tizzard family made no effort to disguise their nerves as they sent their 
treasured eight-year-old out on this mission. Colin, the trainer, paced the 
paddock while his son and assistant, Joe, attached himself to a cigarette down 
by the rails. But there was only the merest hint of a fretful moment in the 
race, when a couple of rivals got surprisingly close to Thistlecrack in the 
straight, prompting Scudamore to crouch lower and push.

The moment passed and at the line Thistlecrack was an unhurried four lengths 
ahead, the third horse barely in sight. So encouraged were the Tizzards that 
there was a suggestion, in post-race interviews, that their horse might step 
out of novice company as early as Christmas.

“In two and a half weeks’ time, no doubt we’ll go to Cheltenham,” said Tizzard 
Sr. “He hasn’t had a hard race. He needs the practice, doesn’t he? This is just 
the start, a real good school round.

“After his next novice … he’s not a baby, is he? He’s not five or six. He 
could go in any race. He’d probably be good enough to run in any race.” The 
implication, not spelled out, was that Thistlecrack might skip the Feltham, 
Kempton’s influential novice chase on Boxing Day, and try his luck instead in 
the King George itself later on the same card, taking on veteran top-class 
chasers.

Then Tizzard smiled and said: “Better not tell Mrs Bishop that!” Mrs Bishop is 
the owner of the Tizzard-trained Cue Card, last year’s King George winner and 
second-favourite for this year’s race. Thistlecrack was cut to 12-1 for the 
race but those odds are likely to halve if his trainer commits him to that 
route.

Thistlecrack also features in the betting for the Betfair Chase, which would 
be only a marginally less ambitious target than the King George and a full 
month earlier. Tizzard alluded to that race but seemingly only to dismiss the 
possibility: “I don’t suppose we better go to Haydock, had we?” he said, before 
spelling out the significance of having such a talent in his Dorset yard. “He’s 
a beautiful horse. What have I milked cows, 25 years? And then got this horse 
job going. This is what we do it for, to end up with chaps like this. 
Brilliant.”

Scudamore added: “No matter what you do with them at home, it’s on the course 
that matters and I’ve ridden plenty of horses that have been naturals at home 
and you wouldn’t believe they’ve seen an obstacle when they get to the course.

“He was neat and nimble. He’s always been, since the word go, at home. It’s 
phenomenal and it’s wonderful to be associated with him.”
 