


The international chess world descended into chaos and bitter accusations of 
cheating today with the controversial re-election of the president of the World 
Chess Federation, who defeated the former world chess championAnatoly Karpov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anatoly-karpov>.

Amid tumultuous scenes that saw delegates shout abuse at each other in an 
overcrowded hall, the incumbent Russian candidate, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, won the 
clear backing of a majority of the world's 160 chess federations. He defeated 
Karpov, his fellow-Russian, by 95 votes to 65.

The ballot reconfirms Ilyumzhinov as the head of Fide, the world chess body. 
But speaking from the scene of the vote Karpov's supporters this afternoon 
described the ballot as a "farce", and said Ilyumzhinov had used "intimidation, 
bully-boy tactics" and even "blatant corruption" to steamroller his way to 
victory.

Karpov's wife, Natalia, speaking from Moscow today, described the result as 
"awful". "I haven't managed to get through to Anatoly. But his aides told me it 
was like fighting in enemy territory. It was very difficult to monitor the 
vote. The whole thing was a mess," she said.

Speaking from the Siberian city of Khanty-Mansiysk, where the ballot was held, 
CJ de Mooi, the president of the EnglishChess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> Federation, said: "It was 
unbelievable. This was a farce of a vote.

"You wouldn't believe the blatant breaking of rules and Fide's written 
statutes. It's amazing. There wasn't even a pretence of fairness and free 
speech."

De Mooi said Ilyumzhinov, Fide's president for 15 years, had refused to allow 
Karpov's supporters to address Fide's general assembly meeting. Instead, he 
turned off their microphones and carried on speaking himself. He also ignored 
legal points raised from the floor, eventually storming off stage with Fide's 
ruling board, de Mooi said.

The result is a bitter reversal for Karpov, who had pledged to clean up world 
chess amid long-standing accusations of corruption and malpractice under 
Ilyumzhinov's eccentric leadership. The English, French, German, Swiss, and US 
chess federations all backed Karpov – as did his one-time bitter chess rival, 
the world champion-turned-opposition politician Garry Kasparov. (It was 
Kasparov who in 1985 usurped Karpov's world chess crown.)

Karpov's supporters pointed to widespread irregularities in the vote, which 
saw up to 56 countries vote by proxy, with Zambia voting for Kenya, China for 
Burma, the UAE for Kuwait, and so on. They also allege that several delegates 
may have been improperly influenced.

The English delegation in Siberia includes the grandmaster Nigel Short, who 
was said to be stunned by Karpov's electoral rout. The vote took place 
alongside Fide's annual chess Olympiad. Short is a vociferous critic of 
Ilyumzhinov, a chess-loving millionaire and former leader of Russia's Kalmykia 
region, who claims to have been abducted by aliens.

In an interview this year with Russian state-run TV, Ilyumzhinov recalled how 
aliens wearing yellow spacesuits had appeared on his balcony. They invited him 
aboard their UFO and took him to the stars, he said. This encounter took place 
in September 1997, he went on, adding that three people, including his personal 
driver, had witnessed it.

One anxious MP then wrote to Russia's president, Dmitry Medvedev, inquiring 
whether Ilyumzhinov could have disclosed state secrets to his alien visitors. 
The next month Medvedev replaced Ilymuzhinov as leader of Kalmykia, a small, 
oil-rich Buddhist region on the shores of the Caspian Sea. Despite toppling him 
from political office the Kremlin has steadfastly backed Ilymuzhinov's bid to 
maintain his grip over chess's ruling body, an apparent consolation prize.

In May Russia's chess federation voted to support Karpov – 16 times world 
champion – as its Fide candidate. Ilyumzhinov accused Karpov of "clear deceit" 
in gaining that nomination. Arkady Dvorkovich, a senior presidential adviser, 
then overturned the decision and announced he was nominating Ilyumzhinov 
instead. The west has been in favour of Karpov, the Kremlin against him. It is 
a surreal inversion of cold war chess politics.

In an interview with the Guardian earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/may/24/anatoly-karpov-kremlin-world-chess>
 Karpov said he was mystified by the Kremlin's refusal to support him.
 