
Gone were the little red desktop flags with the Soviet hammer and sickle. But, 
as they fiddled nervously with their pieces, it was clear that the rivalry 
between Garry Kasparov andAnatoly Karpov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anatoly-karpov> was still there.

Karpov, 58, sweated slightly above the fat knot of his tie. Kasparov, 46, made 
sure his pieces were facing the right way.

"I didn't know whether my instincts would work," Kasparov admitted later, 
after scoring two early victories in a historic rematch between the veteran 
grand masters inSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>.

Nerves had seen both Russians complain about playing conditions before 
yesterday's much-awaited rematch. "They moaned about the lighting; but they're 
playing in the lecture theatre, not the main hall, so there is not a lot we can 
do," said one organiser at the Palau de les Arts, the opera house in the city 
of Valencia. "I guess they are just like any other divas."

With up to 10 million internet chess fans looking on, the old gladiators went 
into battle. Karpov, leaning forward in his seat, picked up a white piece and 
opened the game.

In their 1984 encounter the chisel-faced Karpov lost eight kilos. This time 
around he looked large enough to last a year or more. Both players, rumoured to 
being paid up to €100,000, were probably relieved that, unlike the epic, 
draining contests which made them famous, the two "semi-rapid" games last night 
would last just an hour each.

Pieces flew as they got off to a frantic start. With just over 25 minutes' 
playing time each in the game, there was limited contemplation. Even so, 
Kasparov was soon burying his face deep into his hands as he pondered his 
moves, while Karpov's eyes darted around the board.

Each soon regained their familiar tics. Kasparov rocked back on his chair, 
massaged his temples, squeezed his nose and pouted at his pieces. Karpov leant 
forward, chewed his lip and ran a thumb up and down his chin.

The website collapsed temporarily – presumably the server was unable to handle 
the numbers wanting to see them play. A gaggle of Russian journalists were a 
reminder of the chess giants' status at home. "Apart from the prime minister 
and the president, we are probably the most famous men in the country," Karpov 
joked in an interview with Spain's Super newspaper.

The epic battle that started in the Hall of Columns at Moscow's House of the 
Trade Unions in 1984 found a fitting home for its well-fed old age in the 
slick, clean spaces of architect Santiago Calatrava's soaring Palau de les 
Arts. Suspicious Soviet officialdom had been replaced by hostesses and security 
guards. Grit and global politics were gone. Luxury and Mediterranean cool were 
in. With its sun-tanned, besuited officials, in fact, the event had all the 
trappings of an international dentists' convention.

Some 25 years have gone by since the pair embarked on their first 
extraordinary, abortive five-month tussle for the world title. The game they 
started on 10 September 1984 was the first of 144 over the next six years.

Kasparov would have liked to have been back home for the anniversary rather 
than in Valencia, a city which claims to have invented the modern game of chess 
in the 15th century.

His political ambitions and opposition to Vladimir Putin meant, however, he 
was persona non grata. "We couldn't play in Moscow because that would have been 
publicity for Kasparov, and they don't want that," he told Valencia's Levante 
newspaper.

Kasparov once more got the better of his older opponent. As a precocious 
teenager he had denounced Karpov as "a player of no special talent". In the 
1984 title match he wore the reigning champion down psychologically, forcing 
world chess officials to call off the match – apparently to save the latter's 
reputation. At the next attempt Kasparov wrested the title from him.

Last night history looked set to repeat itself. Losing both games, Karpov paid 
the price for his age.Chess <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> players, 
he had admitted, slow down noticeably in their 50s. He did not visit the press 
afterwards, heading back instead to the hotel.

"I wouldn't make any predictions yet," said Kasparov. "Karpov was and still is 
a great opponent. I have to find out whether I will be able to keep my calm." 
Kasparov insisted he was not now considering a professional come-back after 
retiring four years ago. "For me it was about nostalgia," he said. "I wanted to 
find out whether I was still capable of playing a decent game."

By Thursday night, when they have played a dozen "semi-rapid" and super-fast 
"blitz" games, it will all be over.

Both will go home wealthier. Only one will go home happy.
 