
Football is strange. Chile are Copa América champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/chile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out>
 for the second time in their history ... and for the second time in the space 
of 12 months. And they beat Argentina in successive finals without scoring a 
goal. It was enough to force Lionel Messi’sshocking resignation from the 
national team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/lionel-messi-says-he-is-quitting-argentina-team-after-copa-america-final-defeat>
.

But while much of the focus will now turn to Messi’s decision to quit, we 
should acknowledge Chile’s achievements. Both finals showcased a team who 
imposed their pace on the game and deserved to win: the games in Santiago and 
in New Jersey were played exactly as Chile wanted – with hard-fought, extremely 
intense football with no open space and no chance for some of the world’s most 
dangerous strikers to play freely. More importantly, it’s Argentina who changed 
their style in order to face Chile, not the other way around. Argentina were 
still cautiousdespite the 2-1 win over Chile in the group stages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/07/argentina-top-chile-in-rematch-of-last-years-copa-america-final>
.

Lionel Messi says his Argentina career is over after Copa América final defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/lionel-messi-says-he-is-quitting-argentina-team-after-copa-america-final-defeat>
For Argentina, finals of major tournaments are clearly something of a problem: 
they’ve now lost seven consecutive finals: at the Copa América in 2004, 2007, 
2015 and 2016, the Confederations Cup in 1995 and 2005, andthe World Cup in 2014
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/13/germany-argentina-world-cup-final-2014-match-report>
. Messi alone, as he stated after the game, has lost four. Worse, Argentina’s 
last goal in a final was Pablo Aimar’s in 2005, and it was merely a consolation 
in a 4-1 loss, followed by a 0-3 to Brazil (2007), 0-1 to Germany (2014) and 
two 0-0s against Chile (2015 and 2016).

With Brazil’s ongoing crisis and Argentina’s mental block in crucial games, 
Chile have become South America’s most dangerous side. If Brazil (used to) have
jogo bonito, and Uruguay revered their garra (strength), Chile have become 
super-predators, acting like a pack of wolves rather than solo hunters. What 
starts as a tactical battle eventually becomes a mental one. AndChile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile> don’t know the meaning of fear.

This controlled chaos is all part of a golden generation for Chile: Claudio 
Bravo, Gary Medel, Arturo Vidal, Marcelo Díaz, Charles Aranguiz, Alexis Sanchez 
and Eduardo Vargas, among others, have created a compact and solid team that 
can overcome the greatest difficulties. That was never more clear than in 
Sunday’s final, when Diaz was sent off and Chile quickly readapted without 
losing grip. Chileans are at their strongest when they click as a unit.

This renaissance started with Marcelo Bielsa as coach and continued with 
Claudio Borghi, Jorge Sampaoli and now Juan Antonio Pizzi – all of them 
Argentinians. Despite having a different philosophy from his predecessors, 
Pizzi understood that his squad had already embraced an identity and opted not 
to change it. It was Pizzi who adapted to his players, rather than the other 
way around. Substituting Vargas and Sanchez was a brave decision in Sunday’s 
final – but showed that the team always comes first, a rule that Chilean 
players revere and respect.

Argentina and their manager Gerardo Martino are a different story. He wanted 
to drastically change the team’s identity, but after two years in charge has 
failed, leaving the players in a limbo.

Chile win Copa América once again as Argentina title drought continues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/chile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out>
“We have tried to impose a football idea since we arrived, but for a final, I 
would leave the ‘how’ out if it’s good enough to win”, Martino said before the 
final, a hint of what was to come. Argentina never really took control of the 
game, despite playing part of the first half against a 10-man Chile.

Unlike Chile’s reaction to Diaz’s dismissal, Martino made a tactical blunder 
when Marcos Rojo was sent off. Javier Mascherano was deployed as centre-back, 
and Ramiro Funes Mori as left-back and Lucas Biglia, Ever Banega and Angel Di 
Maria, all three carrying injuries, were left alone in midfield, unable to cope 
with Chile’s superior fitness.

When Matias Kranevitter replaced Di Maria, it became clear that the plan was 
to contain, rather than to hurt the opposition. Once again, Messi was left 
alone, an errant saint who needed to perform a miracle and win the game alone.

Martino will now be heavily criticised over the many controversial decisions 
he’s taken, like calling up injured players (Javier Pastore didn’t play a 
minute), choosing an excess of central midfielders without having enough 
variation on the flanks, and sticking to his policy of a sole striker that 
meant Ezequiel Lavezzi was picked ahead of Juventus’s revelation, Paulo Dybala. 
But critics of Martino are not confined to places like Twitter: it’s the squad 
that has lost faith in him too. Messi’s resignation could provoke a chain 
reaction from others that are equally fed-up: Mascherano, Aguero, Higuain, 
Lavezzi and Di Maria could follow him.

During this summer’s Copa, the team’s atmosphere was constantly disrupted. 
Messi and his best friend, Agüero, had publicly expressed their discomfort over 
organisational issues at the Argentinian Football Association. Used to the 
smooth running of European football, players were angry over the treatment they 
received from the Argentinian FA in the United States: time wasted in airports 
and hotel lobbies, the absence of board members, a lack of budget to hire 
private planes or even take Argentinian youngsters to act as sparring partners. 
A rumour that the team could be forced out of the competition over a political 
brawl within the AFA, forced Messi to declare via Instagram: “Once again 
waiting in a plane to reach our destination. What a disaster the AFA are, my 
God!”

It was his most shocking quote ever – until the early hours of Monday morning, 
at least.
 