
Theresa May’s government has been accused of diluting plans drawn up under 
David Cameron that were designed to cut Britain’s childhood obesity levels.

Restrictions on junk-food advertising and on unhealthy product placement in 
supermarkets were among measures cut from a draft of the government’s childhood 
obesity strategy when it was published in August, Channel 4’s Dispatches 
programme will say on Monday.

The programme says the draft, a copy of which it has seen, also contained a 
pledge to halve childhood obesity by 2026 to 800,000 cases. But when the full 
strategy was released that had been changed to a pledge to “significantly 
reduce” the number of chronically overweight children.


Childhood obesity: UK's 'inexcusable' strategy is wasted opportunity, say 
experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/18/childhood-obesity-strategy-wasted-opportunity-campaigners>
Criticising the watering down of the strategy, Jamie Oliver, the celebrity 
chef and healthy food campaigner, tells the programme: “Obesity is killing huge 
amounts of people, well before their time. This is a war. If you are worried 
about the thing that hurts British people the most, it ain’t Isis, right?”

He said of the published strategy: “This should go to the Trade Descriptions 
Act because that says an ‘action plan’ and there’s hardly any action in there. 
When you look at how the plan came out at midnight, next to the A-level 
results, while the whole of government’s on holiday, it absolutely screams out, 
‘we don’t care’. I’d say it’s never too late to say I’m sorry. And, just sort 
of, you know, start again.”

The leaked draft, thought to date from June, numbers 37 pages, while the 
strategy published in August ran to just 13 pages, according to the programme.

Proposals removed included forcing restaurants, cafes and takeaways to put 
calorie information on menus, Dispatches says. Other plans dropped include 
making supermarkets remove junk food from checkouts and ends of aisles, and 
limiting buy-one-get-one-free and other multi-buy discounts on unhealthy foods.


The published strategy is also missing proposals for restrictions to junk-food 
advertising, including commercial breaks in and around popular Saturday night 
television programmes such as The X Factor, which were included in the draft.


Instead, May’s version emphasised the role of exercise, despite the 
Cameron-era draft which stated exercise “will not in itself solve childhood 
obesity”.


Doctors, health campaigners and politicians criticised the strategy when it 
was published, for not going far enough. Key elements include cutting sugar by 
20% in food eaten by children and a tax on sugary drinks to raise money for 
school sports.


The health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, had previously said the strategy needed to 
be a “gamechanging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/07/childhood-obesity-national-emergency-jeremy-hunt-health-sugar-tax-jamie-oliver>
” moment to tackle a “national emergency”.


James Cracknell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/10/olympian-james-cracknell-backs-call-for-tax-on-sugary-drinks>
, double Olympic gold rowing medallist and healthy eating campaigner, said of 
the published strategy: “The terminology – it’s about hope, would, should. A 
lot of it is voluntary codes, and we know that doesn’t work.”


Graham MacGregor, professor of cardiovascular medicine at the Wolfson 
Institute of Preventive Medicine, and chairman of Action onSugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/sugar>, told the programme: “I was gutted. 
I mean it was a pathetic plan. It didn’t include any restrictions on marketing 
or promotion or advertising to children, which is scandalous. We’ve missed a 
huge opportunity. We would have been the first country in the world to have a 
comprehensive plan for preventing obesity. We could have done it, and very 
sadly and very disappointingly Theresa May – for reasons best known to herself 
– decided not to go ahead with it.”

Writing in the Sunday Times, Oliver said: “Cameron’s strategy is 37 pages long 
and bravely commits to halving England’s childhood obesity levels within 10 
years. May’s plan is only 13 pages long, and her voice and personal commitment 
do not ring true on a single one of those pages.”


He added: “After two years in the making, it took just 36 days for May to 
dismantle Cameron’s plan, and she has not replaced it with something better, 
bigger, bolder, braver or something that is even fit for purpose. What 
happened? Was it too big for her? Did parts of the food industry start to bite 
back? Nothing has changed to warrant milder action. Things have not got better, 
they have only got worse, especially in our most disadvantaged communities.”

A Department of Health spokesman said the government’s published strategy was 
groundbreaking. He said: “No other developed country has done anything as 
ambitious. The government has intentionally taken a careful and measured 
approach which will reduce obesity. We are taking bold action through the soft 
drinks industry levy to cut theamount of sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2016/mar/16/will-a-sugar-tax-actually-work-budget>
 consumed by young people.

“Alongside this, our restrictions on advertising and promotion are among the 
toughest in the world. These steps will make a real difference to help reverse 
a problem that has been decades in the making, but we have not ruled out 
further action if the right results are not seen.”


• Dispatches: The Secret Plan To Save Fat Britain, is on Channel 4 at 8pm on 
Monday
 