
Skipping breakfast and irregular sleep patterns have been identified as key 
reasons why children may become dangerously overweight in research that sheds 
new light on the obesity epidemic.

The study, led by academics from University College London, challenges the 
widely-held view that soaring childhood obesity rates are caused solely by 
overeating.

Lifestyle factors and the environment a child is brought up in play a 
significant role in their chances of becoming obese, the researchers found from 
examining records of the health and circumstances of children born into 19,244 
families across the UK between September 2000 and January 2002.

“This study shows that disrupted routines, exemplified by irregular sleeping 
patterns and skipping breakfast, could influence weight gain through increased 
appetite and the consumption of energy-dense foods,” said Prof Yvonne Kelly, 
from UCL’s department of epidemiology and public health, who led the research.

Her team’s analysis of data collected by the Millennium Cohort Study showed 
that children who do not have a regular bedtime or who get too little sleep are 
at risk of gaining excess weight. Being born to a mother who smokes is another 
important factor in predicting whether a child will become overweight or obese, 
they found.

The researchers also concluded that a child’s consumption of sugary drinks or 
the amount of television they watch are not strong predictors of who will gain 
an unhealthy amount of weight. The findings are published on Friday in the 
American medical journal Paediatrics.

Prof Neena Modi, the president of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child 
Health, said: “This paper not only highlights this point but also emphasises 
the multifactorial nature of obesity; put simply, it isn’t just caused by 
eating too much. This research points to the role of environmental pressures on 
children’s weight such as having an irregular bedtime or insufficient sleep; in 
other words children are very vulnerable to multiple influences.”

The study also confirms the already well-established increased risk of a child 
born to an overweight or obese mother ending up with excess weight themselves. 
But breastfeeding and the early introduction of solid food make no difference 
to their risk, the researchers found.

It found that 83.3% of children in the UK had a stable, non-overweight body 
mass index. Almost one in seven, or 13.1% and who are more likely to be girls 
than boys, have a moderately increasing BMI. Another 2.5% have a steeply 
increasing BMI. Pakistani, Black Caribbean and Black African children were more 
likely to belong to that group. A tiny number, 0.6%, were already obese by the 
age of three.

Modi backed the authors’ conclusion that greater intervention in a child’s 
early life is needed to try to alter their environment and reduce the chances 
of them becoming overweight.

“We have long drawn attention to the importance of early intervention in 
tackling childhood, and indeed adult, obesity. The earlier the action, the 
higher the chance of preventing obesity taking a hold and adversely affecting 
life-long health,” she said.

“To reduce the extremely worrying prevalence of child obesity and overweight, 
a combination of measures is required. These include support for parents 
before, during and after pregnancy, and education of families about the 
importance of leading healthy lives.

“As this paper shows, if children are set on the right trajectory early in 
life, they are much more likely to remain healthy as they move into adulthood. 
Focusing on getting it right for children will mean getting it right for adults 
too.”

Alison Tedstone, the chief nutritionist at Public Health England, said: 
“Skipping breakfast can be an indicator of a poor diet, which can predispose to 
weight gain. It’s important that families make health choices, including for 
breakfast. This is why we’re working with the food and drink industry to make 
the food children eat healthier, starting off with reducing some of the sugar 
content.”
 