
A major 7.6-magnitude earthquake hit southern Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> on Sunday, prompting thousands to 
evacuate coastal areas, but no fatalities or major damage were reported.

Chile’s national emergency office (Onemi) lifted both the evacuation order and 
a tsunami watch three hours after the Christmas Day quake struck and told 
nearly 5,000 people who had been evacuated they could return to their homes.

Onemi said one bridge in the area was impassible as crews worked to restore 
electricity to 21,000 homes without power.
chile earthquake locator 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/dec/2016-12-25T16:31:23.html> 
Officials had issued a tsunami warning earlier for areas within 620 miles 
(1,000km) of the epicentre of the quake 140 miles south-west of Puerto Montt, 
but the warning was downgraded to a tsunami watch. Eight mostly small ports in 
the area were closed, Chile’s navy said.

The quake was felt on the other side of the Andes mountains in Argentina, but 
structural damage in areas close to the epicentre was limited, witnesses said.

“There was a lot, a lot of movement here, but besides that nothing of note, 
there weren’t houses falling,” said Alamiro Vera, owner of the Cabanas hotel in 
the southern Chile fishing town of Quellon. “It was just scary, and some things 
inside fell.”

A Reuters witness said some roads and at least one bridge were damaged in 
Quellon, on Chiloe Island, a tourist destination in Chile’s Los Lagos region.

The quake’s depth was about 20 miles, the US Geological Survey (USGS) said. 
According to media reports, the quake was felt in the south-west Argentinian 
city of Bariloche.

The area hit by Sunday’s quake was south of Valdivia, Chile, where 1,655 
people died in a 1960 quake ranked by the USGS as the most powerful recorded in 
Chile.


The region is home to several industrial salmon farms and is a tourism hub. An 
official with Chile’s national fish and aquaculture service said several 
companies had evacuated employees and were evaluating their facilities for 
possible damage.

Chile’s state-run oil company, Enap, said its Bio Bio refinery in southern 
Chile was operating normally. The Puerto Montt airport was also operating 
normally, a spokesman said.

Chile has a long history of deadly quakes, including an 8.8-magnitude quake in 
2010 off the south-central coast, which triggered a tsunami that devastated 
coastal towns.
 