
His first venture into crime fiction – albeit with a fantastical edge – has 
won China Miéville the UK's most prestigious science fiction prize, theArthur C 
Clarke award <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward>, for an 
unprecedented third time.

The City and the City is set up as a straightforward crime novel: in the 
dilapidated city of Beszél in eastern Europe, Inspector Tyador Borlú of the 
Extreme Crime Squad is trying to solve what initially looks like a routine 
case. But as he looks deeper into the murder of a mysterious woman, he 
discovers that she has links to Ul Qoma, a city that exists in the same 
physical space as Beszél but whose inhabitants studiously ignore any sign of 
overlap.

The novel won the British Science Fiction Association prize for best novel 
earlier this month, when BSFA journal editor Niall Harrison predicted it was 
set to take a slew of further prizes. Miéville pronounced himself "absolutely 
gobsmacked" and "incredibly honoured" to win the Arthur C Clarke, an award 
originally established by Clarke himself to help promote science fiction in 
Britain. "It's very different from most of my other books," said Miéville, who 
has previously won the Arthur C Clarke with more traditional fantasy novels 
Perdido Street Station and Iron Council. "It was very much written in an effort 
to be absolutely faithful to works of crime fiction. Crime readers will 
denounce a book because it has 'cheated,' and I wanted to write a book that 
didn't cheat, that was faithful to crime rules and that if you'd never read any 
fantasy you could pick up."

Miéville triumphed over a shortlist also featuring former winner Gwyneth 
Jones, American author Kim Stanley Robinson, Adam Roberts, Chris Wooding and 
Marcel Theroux to take the prize, an engraved bookend and a cheque for £2,010, 
this evening. "It was particularly difficult for judges to pick a winner this 
year," said chair of judges Paul Billinger. "China eventually won because of 
the intricacy of the book and the way the whole of the concept expands from the 
initial premise into the different types of city. The way that was done was so 
clearly and cleverly written."

Billinger called The City and the City "superb" and "very different from 
China's other books – almost more restrained, in a good way. The judges have 
always been open to any type of book which comes within the realm of science 
fiction – the crime element doesn't exclude it – so we are really pleased it's 
won." The novel is also shortlisted for major American science fiction and 
fantasy awards the Nebulas.

Miéville said that some people had questioned whether The City and the City 
was really science fiction or fantasy. "I think these debates are silly – genre 
is a moveable feast, but some people do ask these questions," he said. "What I 
don't want to do is disavow the fantastic tradition I come from. This is a book 
from within the fantasy tradition, which hopefully can also be a perfectly 
faithful crime book – and a good book."

Previous winners of the Arthur C Clarke include Margaret Atwood, who won the 
inaugural award for The Handmaid's Tale in 1987, Christopher Priest, Geoff 
Ryman and Richard Morgan.
 