
The bright lights of London may seem appealing, but students soon notice 
they’re paying a price for the privilege. The cost of accommodation in the 
capital can seriously dent any loan, so it’s no wonder – according to 2014-15 
figures from the Higher Education Statistics Agency – almost a quarter of 
students choose to live at home with mum and dad.

The benefits of living in the parental home include a full fridge, dirty 
washing sorted, the comfort and support of your family, and debts increasing 
more slowly. Living in halls or a flat is a luxury some students simply can’t 
afford.

Jordanna Corbella wanted to study law at the University of Westminster but 
worried about the cost. However, after considering her options, she realised it 
was cheaper and easier to live at home in south London, even though it was not 
her preferred option.

“I definitely sacrificed a lot by living at home,” Corbella says. “It was a 
very different experience compared to my friends. I think I probably lost a few 
years of being really young. Instead, I grew up too quickly.

“On the positive side, I got to study a lot more and saved a lot of money, 
plus I was waitressing and doing bartending jobs. I was also freer to visit my 
friends because I had a little more money.

“And it turned out, the residence of some of the students was further away 
than where I lived at home. To find affordable rents in London, people were 
spread all over the place.

The fear is that students living at home may miss out on the total experience 
and lose the chance to become independent

“Given my time again I’d choose a different university, but having said that, 
the teaching was amazing. I loved it. It would have been great to have 
Westminster but in a place like Manchester!”

The fear is that students living at home may miss out on the total experience 
and lose the chance to become independent, gain life skills and the sense of 
freedom that comes with looking after yourself.

Freshers who live at home may find it takes a little longer to make friendship 
groups. While those living in halls of residence can immerse themselves in 
student life from day one, and everything is close at hand 24/7.

But many universities attempt to redress the balance by providing special 
events for students who live at home.Ben Lewis, director of student support and 
wellbeing at Cardiff University says: “We offer a range of events for new 
students through our students union, including non-alcoholic events pitched at 
people who have to travel home at the end of the day.

“Lots of students can feel isolated, but help is available. We suggest they 
use social media and actively engage with the union, societies and their 
academic department, field trips and so on. Stay proactive, and if it doesn’t 
work out at first, try a different group of friends.”

Case study: Louise Clare

How to choose between city chic or campus cool? Campus-based universities are 
proving immensely popular, not just for the courses, but for their safety, 
sociability and amenities. Although most are slightly out of town, they tend to 
be contained and self-sufficient. And their other attraction is self-evident: 
if lectures start at 9am, anyone waking up bleary-eyed half an hour beforehand 
can still be seated in time. There’s also no worry about having to catch a 
night bus home because drinking, eating, partying, and yes, even the library is 
on the doorstep.

City-based universities hold great appeal for students who want to integrate 
into the local culture and feel isolated by campus life.

I enjoy city life. I love the atmosphere and enjoy being part of the community
Louise Clare 
Louise Clare, 23, opted for a city university. In fact, she was so impressed 
by Sheffield, she applied to two universities in the city. “I’m doing LLB law, 
with a year abroad. I am now in my final year and it’s been great. I love 
Sheffield and was set upon studying here after coming along to a couple of open 
days.

“I’m from Brighton and enjoy city life. Sheffield provided all the things I 
wanted. I love the atmosphere and enjoy being part of the community. There are 
lots of student areas, and apart from the first year when I was in a hall of 
residence, I’ve always lived with other students in houses.

“I shop in Meadowhall, which is quick tram ride away where they gear a lot of 
stuff towards students. There’s a cinema, bars and restaurants. And there are 
food festivals which are really good, like the Peddler Night Market.

“I love going to the bars and clubs and when I get home from lectures I can go 
to the ballet club in the city.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> are very well accepted and 
there’s good collaboration between us and the locals.

“If you want to experience somewhere lively and vibrant and want to be part of 
the local community, then a non-campus university gives you the best of both 
worlds: you can explore the city’s culture and be close to student friends.”
 