
I've been going to the Arthur C Clarke awards ceremony at the Apollo cinema in 
London for four years now, and have always regarded it as a highlight on the 
literary calendar. It's somewhere people really care about books – and really 
enjoy them. It's a celebration: a moment of happy triumphalism for a genre that 
is growing in confidence and steadily gaining the respect it deserves.

That's the usual story, anyway. This year, however, the atmosphere was 
different. It was still friendly. It was still enthusiastic. But there was 
tension in the air, and not just the expectancy and nerves you get before any 
awards ceremony.

This was partly due to the fact that the award has recently suffered financial 
difficulties. Previously, it has always been free, but this year tickets had to 
be paid for. The crowd was consequently smaller and had more vested in the 
process.

Mainly, though, – as everyone who has followed the award's controversial 
progress this year will already have guessed –the added excitement came thanks 
to Christopher Priest 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/mar/29/arthur-c-clarke-award-christopher-priest>
.

To recap: shortly after the shortlist was announced this year, the writer 
(himself a previous winner, and renowned as the author of critically acclaimed 
bestsellers such as The Prestige)denounced the 2012 shortlist as "dreadful" 
<http://www.christopher-priest.co.uk/journal/1077/hull-0-scunthorpe-3/> and 
called for the resignation of the "incompetent" judges.

Priest's criticism of the panel was mild compared to the missiles he fired at 
the writers on the shortlist. Charlie Stross, for instance, he described as 
writing "like an internet puppy: energetically, egotistically, sometimes 
amusingly, sometimes affectingly, but always irritatingly, and goes on being 
energetic and egotistical and amusing for far too long. You wait nervously for 
the unattractive exhaustion which will lead to a piss-soaked carpet".

Stross took the criticism in his stride, and even started selling puppy 
T-shirts on his website 
<http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2012/03/buy-the-tee-shirt.html>, 
but from the judges' viewpoint the controversy can't have been much fun. In his 
pre-presentation speech, chair Andrew Butler joked: "It's been a quiet year"; 
there wasn't much laughter. He pointedly praised the "brilliant", 
"professional" people who had whittled down the 60 submitted novels to find a 
winner, and said: "I could not have asked for five better judges." Afterwards, 
he maintained that the argumentative nature of the process was "just as it 
should be". But he also confessed: "I'm relieved that it's over." He looked 
exhausted. I felt a pang of sympathy.

Naturally, though, from a journalistic perspective, it's Priest's comments 
that made this year's event so fascinating. They were not only funny, sharp and 
provocative, but also sparked a discussion about what constitutes a decent 
science fiction novel, how awards should be judged, and what one can and can't 
say about writers. It was compelling and brilliant and had an energy beyond 
even that generated byDame Stella Rimington's extraordinary speech at last 
year's Booker 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2011/oct/19/stella-rimington-booker-diatribe-kgb>
. Tom Hunter, the Clarke award's chief organiser, told me the debate generated 
at least one tweet every minute for six days. The prize was doing just what it 
should do: stimulating conversation, controversy and interest.

Bravely (especially considering some of the comments directed at him after his 
swashbuckling blogpost 
<http://damiengwalter.com/2012/03/29/understanding-christopher-priest/>), 
Priest himself put in an appearance at the Apollo cinema. When I spoke to him 
after the ceremony, he seemed far from the ogre portrayed in the furious 
response to his blogposts. He even struck me as rather gentle; possibly nervous 
to be there, but apparently determined to prove he didn't bear the Clarkes any 
malice. He also seemed hurt by the idea he had launched his broadside against 
the judges because his own book, The Islanders, had been left off the 
shortlist. "I actually saw that as a liberation," he said. "I thought I wasn't 
bound by politeness then … So I just went for it."

Characteristically, he remained unrepentant. "The judges vindicated themselves 
after an extremely dodgy process," he said. "The right book won. The only novel 
that shows real literary ability."

As for that novel, there's no doubting it's an interesting choice. Jane Rogers 
is better known for writing historical and literary fiction (such asMr Wroe's 
Virgins <http://www.janerogers.org/mr_wroes_virgins.html>) than SF, and her 
publisher isn't very well known at all. Sandstone Press is a small operation 
based in the highlands of Scotland to whom Rogers turned after the book was 
rejected by nearly every publisher in London. "Nobody wanted it," she told me 
when she had the award safely in her hands. "So this feels fantastic."

The award also vindicated her decision to "move into the future", and the 
multi-dimensional possibilities of science fiction. "You can deal with the big 
ideas. It's a clean slate. When you get rid of contemporary clutter and 
politics, it allows you to see both the wood and the trees. I love the future," 
she said.

Happily, her own future now looks more assured than ever. As for the Clarke 
awards themselves, it's probably too early to comment – but, once the smoke has 
cleared, I have a feeling this will be remembered as a classic year. Thanks to 
the controversy, and the reams of newsprint it generated, the award feels more 
important than ever. In its 26th year, it has properly come of age.
 