
Heading for a First… Chuka Umunna

Almost as soon as conference season was over, Ed Miliband wasted no time in 
shuffling his pack, bringing some fresh faces to the Labour front bench. 
Perhaps the most meteoric rise was granted to the impressive Chuka Umunna, part 
of the 2010 intake and MP for Streatham, who replaced John Denham as the shadow 
secretary of state for business, innovation and skills. Given that jobs and 
economic growth are going to be vital between now and the next general 
election, this is a sizeable job to give to a relative novice. But Umunna has 
received notable plaudits both inside and out of the Labour party since his 
selection as the candidate to fight for Streatham in March 2008, and should 
provide added energy and vigour as Labour look to step up the competition with 
the coalition government.

While most of the political interest in his department will inevitably 
concentrate on economic growth and job creation, the role of higher education, 
also in his department, should not be overlooked. The OECD evidence is 
compelling; where there is state investment in a strong higher education system 
this more than pays itself back through growth, innovation and job creation. 
Given the absence of any obvious growth strategy from the coalition, Umunna 
would do well to look to the universities section of his shadow department when 
preparing to take the case to Cable, Osborne et al.

In the more medium term, he will also need to consider the broader position 
Labour will take on higher education funding before the next general election. 
The stopgap announcement just before party conference, for a fee level of 
£6,000, was met with a mixed reaction. Some party members, and the National 
Union of Students, are still holding out for a graduate tax – but the results 
of the Liam Byrne's policy review will be instrumental in determining whether 
the party will stick with the policy Ed Miliband pushed so hard on in his 
leadership campaign or not.

The job of helping to rebuild Labour's reputation on the economy, and further 
exposing the government's increasingly desperate recovery plan, is a 
considerable challengeand responsibility. My gut reaction is that Umunna has 
the essential ingredients to make a real success of it.

Heading for a Fail… University of Wales

No, it's not just a repeat of last week, but sadly in the past seven days 
things appear to have become even more desperate for the University of the 
Wales. After the public concerns about their external degrees outside of Wales 
were aired just over a week ago, the past few days have seen yet more bad news.

Now, a European-funded scholarship programme, the Prince of Wales Innovation 
Scheme (Powis) has been withdrawn. According to the Welsh Assembly Enterprise 
Minister, Edwina Hart AM, a review into the programme found that it was not in 
fact eligible for EU funding. Although the overall budget for the programme was 
due to be £11m, with £5m coming from the European funding and the rest from 
universities and business, up to this point only £0.4m of the EU funding had 
been put in.

In separate news, it was also reported that the University of Wales Institute, 
Cardiff (UWIC) was to change its name to distance itself from the University of 
Wales. The new name will be Cardiff Metropolitan University, and it will 
utilise its own awarding powers, rather than awarding degrees from the 
University of Wales.

So another tough seven days for the University of Wales. I sincerely hope I 
can write about something else next week.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 