
At a lunch at a smart London restaurant earlier this month to launch Channel 
4's monopoly on terrestrial coverage of horse racing, Jamie Aitchison, the 
station's sports editor, stressed one point several times.

The line which Aitchison was so eager to hammer home was that Channel 4 "have 
spent a great deal of money" to add marquee events like the Grand National, the 
Derby and Royal Ascot to their existing portfolio of racing coverage. He was 
trying to make it plain that Channel 4 is serious about racing, and will do 
whatever it takes to get the coverage right. The New Year's Day programme with
Clare Balding <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/clare-balding> and Mick 
Fitzgerald at Nicky Henderson's yard along with four races live from 
Musselburgh on Tuesday will be the first test.

Regular viewers will notice changes immediately, with a fresh title sequence 
and Balding, the station's high-profile new recruit, regularly anchoring the 
coverage. They will notice who is missing, too. John McCririck will be the most 
significant absentee fromChannel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> 
Racing from 1 January, although Derek Thompson, another veteran of nearly 30 
years' standing, is among the other casualties of Channel 4's decision to hire 
IMG Sports Media to replace Highflyer Productions as the producer of its racing 
coverage. Alastair Down and Mike Cattermole also failed to make the new 
presenting roster, while John Francome did not even apply, due to his personal 
loyalty to Highflyer.

In addition to Balding, new recruits to the Channel 4 lineup include Balding's 
former BBC colleagues Fitzgerald and Rishi Persad, while Graham Cunningham, an 
incisive and perceptive analyst on Racing UK for several years, gets a long 
overdue chance to raise his profile.

Replacing veterans with young, or at any rate younger, talent is an easy and 
cost-effective way to refresh the look of any long-running show. It works for 
Blue Peter, and will presumably work for Channel 4 Racing too. Whether this 
also leads to significant changes to the substance of the programming as well 
as the style may determine whether C4R can retain and expand its current 
audience.

Racing is an unusual sport to broadcast, in that the action is concentrated 
into bursts of no more than five minutes. Channel 4's Saturday programme has 
now expanded to two-and-a-half hours, so even with, say, seven jumps races, the 
actual racing will account for less than a quarter of the running time.

This has advantages for a commercial broadcaster, since it allows many more 
opportunities for ad breaks than, say, a football match. But it also brings the 
problem of how to fill the extended gaps in between races, and since the horses 
can't talk, it is easy to fall into a lazy routine of betting shows, tipping 
and banter.

The line at the London lunch was that betting may receive slightly less 
prominence in C4's new regime, in favour of teasing out the human stories from 
owners, trainers and jockeys. Race and split times, an integral part of 
analysis in many major racing countries, will also feature much more 
prominently, even over jumps where times are often held to have less 
significance.

Yet since Channel 4's "great deal of money" – about £20m over four years – has 
been invested in the expectation of making a healthy profit from bookmakers' 
advertising revenue, it makes little commercial sense to reduce the coverage of 
betting. The huge variation in tracks and going conditions in British racing, 
meanwhile, means that race times have little more than novelty value without 
in-depth analysis, which may well cause the eyes of many viewers to glaze over.

Ultimately Channel 4's racing coverage under monopoly conditions is unlikely 
to differ radically from its coverage when it could be compared with the BBC. 
The recruitment of Balding is a significant coup, and the new faces on the team 
will refresh the look, but there is only so much that can be done, or needs to 
be done, to the basic format.

For racing as a whole the new deal looks like a good one, in the short term at 
least. The sport's place in the terrestrial schedules is guaranteed for the 
next four years, with a willing partner in Channel 4 replacing what often 
seemed an unwilling one in the BBC at several major events

And Channel 4 is paying for the rights, rather than being subsidised as was 
previously the case, so the sport is richer to the tune of £5m a year. Follow 
the money, though, and some potential problems for racing in the longer term 
begin to appear. The money is going to the big tracks, rather than being 
generated via the Levy agreement, whereby a percentage of profits from 
off-course bookmakers is paid to contribute to the funding of the sport. 
Indeed, almost every one of the bookmakers who will be queueing up to spend 
large amounts of money advertising in C4R's commercial breaks is based 
offshore, and so pay no Levy on their profits. One result of this deal, then, 
will be another subtle but distinct shift in racing's power structure, away 
from the British Horseracing Authority, which has a role in the Levy process, 
and towards the major racecourses.

Initially at least, viewing figures will also go down, with the Grand National 
in particular likely to experience a sharp drop. And at the end of the 
four-year contract, when those who negotiated it on racing's behalf have 
probably banked their bonuses and gone, will there be a bidding war for the 
next one? Or will Channel 4 be able to drive down the price, because the BBC 
are out of the game, Sky can't have exclusive rights to the Grand National, and 
ITV are not interested?

Channel 4 will get full value from its monopoly on racing, as bookmakers are 
falling over themselves to buy advertising slots. Whether racing is also 
getting full value will become clear only in a little over three years' time, 
when the deal is done for 2017 and beyond.
 