
The Alan Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> Diaries 
pulled in 840,000 viewers for BBC4 last night, giving the digital channel its 
biggest ever audience.

BBC4's ratings triumph could not come at a better time for the corporation, 
which this week came under fire in the press for allegedly wasting licence fee 
payers' money on its digital channels, which only half the population can watch.

Last night's first episode of The Alan Clark Diaries, which stars John Hurt as 
the rogue Tory MP and Jenny Agutter as his long suffering wife Jane, was 
watched by 846,000 viewers and attracted a 7.2% share of digital viewing, 
according to unofficial overnights.

This confounds the prediction in today's Daily Mail that the show would get no 
more than 170,000 viewers and will come as a massive relief toBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> bosses, who have been criticised for 
spending £1m plus on marketing the series.

Hurt himself had condemned the decision to screen the series on BBC4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc4> and he complained of "ludicrous budget 
constraints" and said BBC2 should have been the programme's natural home.

"We're very proud of The Alan Clark Diaries and it's fantastic that so many 
people came to it on its first episode. This is a real milestone for BBC4, and 
further proof that digital television is coming of age with great, intelligent, 
homegrown programming," said Roly Keating, the controller of BBC4.

During the period when the show was on air, between 10pm and 10.30pm, only 
BBC1 and ITV1 had more viewers in multichannel homes.

It proved more popular than the first episode of a new series of ER on E4, 
which attracted 720,000 viewers.

The show was helped by a major promotional campaign and generally positive 
previews from critics although one, the Daily Telegraph's James Walton, said 
"the experience of enjoying yourself was often accompanied by one frustrating 
question: how much more fun might I now be having if only this series had been 
made on a bigger budget?"

However, the BBC4 controller, Roly Keating, will feel vindicated and may well 
have his channel's first standalone hit on his hands.

Last night's first episode of The Alan Clark Diaries was the top rating show 
so far for BBC4, which launched nearly two years ago.

BBC4's previous ratings high came last year, with an episode premiere of BBC1 
political thriller State of Play last June, which attracted 560,000 viewers.

But The Alan Clark Diaries is also the most popular ever original commission 
for any of the corporation's digital channels.

BBC4's previous best was 350,000 viewers for an instalment of documentary The 
National Trust last year, while BBC3's Fame Academy Finale spin-off show 
attracted 840,000 viewers in October.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 