
Chris Mullin was on BBC Radio 4's Today programme this morning plugging his 
diaries, A View from the Foothills (which Michael White reviewed on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/07/politics-biography-chris-mullin>
). Mullin was explaining his theory that the best political diaries are written 
by those who never quite make it near the top, but I felt he was upstaged by 
Gyles Brandreth, the former Tory MP, who explained that he and Alan Clark once 
came up with the four vital ingredients of a great political diary.

I sat down once with Alan Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> in the tea rooms of the House 
of Commons and he said to me: "Do make sure that you note down that we are 
having tea cakes, because that does add a little detail to it," and we worked 
out that the four rules for a good political diarist were the four "I"s.

You need to make your diary immediate; write it on the day, because even on 
the day after you begin to think, "I can improve history a bit." Be indiscreet; 
as Chips Channon said, there's nothing more dull than a discreet diary; you 
might as well have a dull or discreet soul. Be intimate; those intimate details 
are very important. And make your diary indecipherable, so that if somebody 
chances upon it, they cannot quite read what you have said.

As examples of relatively obscure figures who have written great political 
diaries, Mullin mentioned Clark, Jock Colville (Churchill's private secretary), 
Chips Channon, and Lord Moran (Churchill's doctor). But, strangely, he did not 
mention Brandreth himself. Brandreth spent time as a whip during the 1992-97 
parliament and his diary about that period, Breaking the Code, is a gem. Clark 
is normally credited with having written the best political diary of modern 
times, but – for my money – Brandreth is better by a mile.

Brandreth never seemed to receive as much recognition as he should have done 
for the book, perhaps because his pre-parliament career as a daytime TV 
presenter with a fondness for silly jumpers meant that he never had the 
political kudos of Clark. But, if you haven't read Breaking the Code, do. I've 
been looking for it on our shelves so that I can give you a flavour of it. 
Sadly, the office copy has gone missing. Someone must have pinched it. It's 
that good.
 