
Claudio Pavone, who has died aged 95, was the leading historian of the Italian 
resistance during the second world war. His fame was largely due to his 
monumental work Una Guerra Civile: Saggio Storico sulla Moralità nella 
Resistenza (1991), translated into English asA Civil War: A History of the 
Italian Resistance 
<http://www.counterfire.org/articles/book-reviews/16985-a-civil-war-a-history-of-the-italian-resistance>
 (2013).

Using the term “civil war” to characterise the Italian resistance acknowledged 
that the traditional depiction within Italy of the conflict as one of national 
liberation of all Italians against the Nazis and their fascist allies was 
reductive and one-sided. Perhaps only a historian such as Pavone, with 
unmistakably anti-fascist credentials, could remind Italians that many of their 
countrymen, even in the final years of the war, had been genuine fascists, 
ready to die forBenito Mussolini 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/mussolini_benito.shtml>, the 
leader they knew as Il Duce, and his “social republic 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Italian_Social_Republic>”.

Born in Rome, two years before the appointment of Mussolini as prime minister, 
Pavone grew up in a prosperous middle-class family; his father was a lawyer who 
worked for theConfindustria 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Confederation_of_Italian_Industry>, the 
employers’ association. Early in 1943, Pavone graduated in law from the 
University of Rome and was immediately drafted. However, that April he was 
granted extended leave because of the sudden death of his father.

The following months were crucial ones in Italian history: on 25 July 
Mussolini was arrested by King Victor Emmanuel, only to be liberated soon after 
by the Germans and thus able to rally his troops in northernItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> to continue the fight against the 
allies. As for the king, having signed an armistice on 3 September with the 
Anglo-American forces under General Dwight Eisenhower (effectively switching 
sides), he was able to escape to the south on 8 September – an ignominious 
flight that left the Italian people and army in disarray.

Pavone, then only 22, was one of the many young Italians who, having witnessed 
the crumbling of a spineless and corrupt ruling class, decided to join the 
resistance. On 22 October, he was distributing anti-fascist material in the 
streets of Rome when, realising that the curfew was imminent, in a panic he 
threw the leaflets into a large car parked nearby, and ran away. As he recalled 
in his memoirs, he had chosen the “wrong” car, since that one belonged, of all 
people, to the head of the fascist secret police. Pavone was quickly arrested 
and jailed.

Freed on 20 August 1944, he continued to work on behalf of the resistance in 
Milan. After the war Pavone, although a sympathiser of the moderate left, 
eschewed active politics to work as an archivist in the state archives. Only in 
1975, when he was in his 50s, did he achieve an academic position, as a history 
professor at the University of Pisa.

Many of his earlier scattered essays, written when he was an archivist, were 
collected in 1995 in a volume called La Continuità dello Stato, which dealt 
with the issue of continuity between the fascist regime and democratic Italy, 
both in terms of institutions and personnel. This is something that must have 
particularly struck him since Guido Leto, the head of the fascist secret police 
who had arrested him in 1943, continued to be gainfully employed by the secret 
services even in post-fascist Italy.

Pavone’s fame rests almost entirely on A Civil War: A History 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/history> of the Italian Resistance. As is 
often the case, the title dominated the reception of the book, so that many who 
had not read it registered their disapproval, believing that Pavone, by 
adopting such a title, had capitulated before neofascist historical revisionism 
attributing to both sides (fascists and anti-fascists) equal dignity. The title 
(though an excellent marketing tool) was unfortunate (as the British historian 
of the Italian resistance Philip Cooke has pointed out), since the book offered 
a more complex, nuanced vision.

According to Pavone there were three aspects to the resistance. It was 
certainly a patriotic war of national liberation fought by those who wanted to 
free the country from German occupation; but it was also a class war fought 
mainly but not exclusively by communists, who looked forward to a socialist 
society; and finally, it was also a civil war between partisans (monarchists, 
communists, liberals and socialists) and the fascists who had rallied round 
Mussolini. Many objected, preferring to see the fascists as simply tools of the 
Nazis, but eventually most of the scholarship came round to Pavone, even though 
some on the right tried to exploit the debate to denigrate the partisans.

Pavone also distinguished between the military resistance of the few 
partisans, and a wider resistance of hearts and minds, which involved all those 
who supported anti-fascism and looked forward to a democratic Italy. For them, 
the resistance was a great moral quest, a way of redeeming Italy from the 
stigma of having allowed the establishment of fascism. This moral and 
psychological dimension enabled a whole people, not just the few who actively 
resisted, to claim that they were not passive objects of history, first 
enslaved by the Nazis and fascists then liberated by others, but that they 
deserved their freedom because they had fought for it.

Pavone is survived by his second wife, the historian Anna Rossi Doria, and 
three daughters, Liberiana, Flaminia and Sabina, from his first marriage, which 
ended in divorce.

• Claudio Pavone, historian, born 30 November 1920; died 29 November 2016
 