
Colin Tizzard <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-tizzard>, like one of 
his dairy cows swishing away blowflies, dismissed all the questions here on 
Friday about his running plans at Christmas, and he did so with the amiable 
forbearance of a man who knows he has been dealt the best hand in the game.

He will either go to Kempton on Boxing Day with the first and second favourite 
for theKing George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> or turn up instead 
with the hot favourite in two Grade Ones. Why jump either way before he needs 
to?

Native River and Thistlecrack are Colin Tizzard’s Newbury playmates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/native-river-thistlecrack-colin-tizzard-newbury-hennessy-toys-horse-racing>
Thistlecrack <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/thistlecrack>, the best 
staying hurdler by a distance last season and the favourite for the Gold Cup, 
is the horse at the centre of all the speculation.

Cue Card, last year’s King George winner, will be one step away from a 
million-pound bonus if he can land the race again but the continuing question 
is whether Thistlecrack, a novice, will join him in the big-race field or run 
instead in the Kauto Star Novice Chase on the same card.

The value of some certainty on Tizzard’s plan for Thistlecrack is summed up in 
the gelding’s price for the King George: 4-1 if one accepts the risk that he 
might not line up, or 15-8 with a run. But there is a value in keeping options 
open too and after seeing Theatre Guide take the feature handicap chase in the 
Cue Card colours here on Friday, Tizzard was giving little away.

“The thought process is that if [the front-running] Coneygree [the 2015 Gold 
Cup winner] is in there, it is a flat-out gallop at Kempton. People try and say 
it is an easy three miles but it isn’t because they go so fast. There’s nothing 
given or taken and the stayers win.

“Thistlecrack might be able to do that easily and so might Cue Card but we 
haven’t quite decided which one he’s going to go for. We’re just trying to 
guide Thistlecrack into the Gold Cup and, if it’s the King George en route, 
that’s fine but like a lot of these decisions, the later you leave them, the 
more often you get them right.”

Theatre Guide is now likely to be added to Tizzard’s exceptional team for the 
Christmas programme by lining up alongside his stable companion Native River in 
the Welsh National at Chepstow on 27 December. “I’d say that’s his next race. 
It’s the obvious one for him as he’s a thorough stayer,” Tizzard said. “This is 
only a fortnight since his last run [in the Hennessy Gold Cup at Newbury] and 
he’s a better horse today for racing. We’ve left four in [the Welsh National], 
so we’ve got all the options covered.”

The gloom was beginning to descend a few minutes before four o’clock as the 
field set out for the final race on the card, a novice hurdle that could also 
prove to be the most significant event of the day with an eye to the future.

And again it was a Tizzard-trained horse that emerged in front, as Pingshou, 
one of 15 to join the yard this season to run in the colours of Alan and Ann 
Potts following the retirement of their previous trainer, Colm Murphy.

Pingshou had shown considerable promise when fourth in a maiden hurdle at 
Newbury at the Hennessy meeting but still needed to improve sharply to see off 
a field full of potentially useful performers. Though only a Class Three event, 
this is a race with several subsequent Grade One winners on its roll of honour, 
including Tidal Bay, Noland and Darlan, and this year’s renewal looked well up 
to standard.

Patches of firm ground on the cross-country course meant that only seven 
runners went to post for the Glenfarclas Cross-Country Chase, the first race on 
the infield track this season.

Only five completed the course behind the winner Cantlow, as James Best was 
unseated from Bertie Boru following the fall of Delight My Fire, but both 
horses and their riders were unhurt.

Ryan Hatch, however, was taken to Bristol Royal Infirmary for tests following 
his fall from Cogry in the Unicoin Group Handicap Chase.

As a result he will miss the ride on The New One in the stanjames.com 
International Hurdle atCheltenham <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham>
 on Saturday, with Richard Johnson stepping in to replace him.

“At the moment they are looking at possible damage to his sternum,” Carl 
Llewellyn, assistant to The New One’s trainer, Nigel Twiston-Davies, said.

“He was originally going to Gloucestershire Royal Hospital but he’s now on his 
way to Bristol. I don’t know much more than that, whether it is bruising or 
something else.”
 