
Collective energy-switching schemes promise to save consumers hundreds of 
pounds as well as taking the stress and confusion out of changing providers. 
But do they find you the best deal?


The idea behind collective energy switching is simple: a large group of people 
use their bulk-buying power to negotiate unique deals from energy suppliers. 
The more the merrier, as better deals are likely to be offered to big groups of 
customers.


Each collective scheme is marketed by a third party – these include a range of 
organisations from local authorities to newspapers. Many collective switches 
target groups that might not have changed energy supplier before.


Stephen Murray, energy expert at Moneysupermarket.com, says: “Analysis and 
insight shows that the collective switch vehicle helps customers feel part of a 
group and to engage in a market, where previously they were reluctant to or had 
become disengaged.”


How does it work?

Behind the scenes, the calculations, negotiation and switching is normally 
done by a price comparison site.Energyhelpline 
<https://www.energyhelpline.com/fri/> runs a lot of collective switches and 
pools all the households registered with separate schemes around the country 
into one big pot, then uses the group’s bulk-buying power to its advantage. Its 
last three collectives have saved consumers an average of £327 against standard 
tariffs, it says.

Another big name is iChoosr <http://ichoosr.co.uk/>, which works with more 
than 150 local councils. It is behind The Big London Energy Switch scheme, as 
well as a collective switch promoted by UKPower.


One attraction of collectives is that the winning supplier is often one of the 
big six, such as British Gas or E.ON, which might reassure people who are 
nervous about moving to a new deal with a firm they haven’t heard of. Usually 
the best-buy tables are dominated by challenger brands, such as Iresa, Avro 
Energy and Affect Energy, which first-time switchers may be hesitant to choose.

Energy suppliers like collective switches as they gain a large number of new 
customers in a short span of time. As with individual switches, they pay price 
comparison sites a commission of £25-£30 per fuel, which is normally split with 
the organisation marketing the scheme.


What savings are available?


MoneySavingExpert and Moneysupermarket both run their own collective switches. 
The former has just completed its fifth Big Energy Switch event, which resulted 
in readers being offered a dual-fuel deal by British Gas, fixed until October 
2017. The website claims the deal will save a typical household on a big six 
standard tariff £300 a year.

Moneysupermarket (which owns MoneySavingExpert) runs a monthly collective 
switch called the Energy Bill Buster. Last year, the site negotiated British 
Gas’s cheapest tariff in four years, saving customers on standard rates an 
average of £357.

“Collective switches operated by Moneysupermarket directly or on behalf of 
MoneySavingExpert have delivered tariffs that are either market-leading or 
among the cheapest deals available at that time,” says Murray. In May, the 
group organised a market-leading one-year fixed-rate tariff from EDF through a 
collective switch.


Although collective tariffs can be the cheapest deals on offer, this is not 
guaranteed. When collective switching schemes talk about savings of £300 or 
more it’s important to note that this is in relation to the average price of 
the standard tariffs offered by the big six energy providers (British Gas, 
nPower, EON, Scottish and Southern, Scottish Power and EDF), not the cheapest 
deals on the market.


Mark Todd, co-founder of Energyhelpline, admits the savings offered by 
collectives versus best buys are modest. “Our winter collective winners beat 
the cheapest comparable (one-year fixed-price tariff) by £20 a year. They cost 
£732 a year and the cheapest open-market fixed tariff then was £752 a year,” he 
says.


How do you switch?


There are typically four key stages: registration, auction, personal offer and 
acceptance.


In the registration phase, the switch organiser will ask for some basic 
details – typically your name, address and details of your current gas and 
electricity tariffs.


Next, the switch organiser invites energy companies to take place in a 
“reverse auction”, where firms bid to supply energy to the group. Collective 
switches tend to use a one-year fixed-rate tariff as their headline deal, but 
they offer other rates too, such as two-year fixed rates, green tariffs, paper 
bills, prepayment deals and regional offers.


The winning tariffs are advertised to registered members and a personal offer 
made. Customers aren’t obliged to accept the offer. To be sure of getting the 
best deal you should compare the collective tariff to the cheapest on the 
market, factoring any exit fees on yout current deal into your calculations.


Are there any downsides?

One potential issue is the timescale involved. The process can take a couple 
of months before the switch begins. It’s quicker to change suppliers using a 
price comparison site as the process starts straight away – a couple of months 
languishing on your supplier’s standard tariff could cost you dear.


Claire Osborne, energy expert at uSwitch.com, says: “Consumers looking to 
switch through a collective should first make sure they have fully assessed 
their individual situation because their personal circumstances could mean they 
find a better deal on their own, rather than in a group. In many cases it may 
be easier or cheaper for a consumer to switch individually.”

 