
David Ospina dived to his left, and Peru’s Miguel Trauco sent his penalty kick 
down the middle, a yard above the ground. The 27-year-old Colombian goalkeeper 
kicked out his trailing right leg, and saved it with his feet.Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colombia> had the advantage in the 
shootout.

About two minutes later, Christian Cueva stood over the ball, looked skyward, 
exhaled deeply and skied La Blanquirroja’s final attempt over the crossbar.

Peru 0-0 Colombia (Colombia win 4-2 on penalties): Copa América – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/17/peru-colombia-copa-america-live>
With a 4-2 penalty-kicks victory after a 0-0 tie Friday night, Colombia 
reached the Copa America semi-finals for the first time since 2004.

“We goalkeepers have the advantage that we can use any part of the body,” said 
Ospina, Petr Cech’s backup at Arsenal. “What matters is to stop the ball – with 
the ears, the nose, whatever. We goalkeepers have many resources.”

Third-ranked Colombia, which won their only Copa title at home in 2001, play 
Wednesday in Chicago against the winner of Saturday night’s quarter-final 
between Mexico and defending champion Chile. The United States face Argentina 
or Venezuela at Houston on Tuesday in the first semi-final of the expanded 
tournament, played with 16 nations from throughout the Americas to celebrate 
the event’s 100th anniversary.

“We came into this match feeling a greater obligation,” Colombia coach Jose 
Peckerman said.

After Cueva’s miss, Colombian players ran out to celebrate with Ospina, who 
pumped both arms three times. Cueva turned and contorted his face in pain and 
covered it with both hands. Ospina walked over to join Peruvian players in 
consoling the 24-year-old midfielder.

“Being eliminated on penalties hurts even more,” said Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peru> coach Ricardo Gareca, who 
overhauled his team, and used a mostly young squad in the tournament. “It was 
the least pretty game of all we played.”

Rodriguez, Juan Cuadrado and Dayro Moreno converted the first three penalty 
kicks for Colombia, beating goalkeeper Pedro Gallese. Raul Ruidiaz, Renato 
Tapia had made the first two for Peru.

Ospina played just four Premier League matches for the Gunners last season and 
a few others in the Champions League, FA Cup and League Cup. His sister, 
Daniela, is married to Colombia star attacker James Rodriguez.

“David is a great player,” Rodriguez said. “I wish he stays on the national 
team for many years. I love David, and today he was great.”

Before a sellout crowd of 79,194 at MetLife Stadium, most wearing yellow in 
support of Colombia, Ospina also made an outstanding save in the second minute 
of second-half stoppage time. Cueva took just the second corner kick for Peru 
of the night and Ospina leaped to tip Christian Ramos’ header over the crossbar.

“We felt like we were the home team every time we played here,” Ospina said.

Ranked 48th, Peru had advanced from the group stage with a controversial 
Ruidiaz handball goal that knocked out Brazil.

James Rodriguez had the best chance of the first half, taking a layoff from 
Edwin Cardona in the 22nd minute, dribbling through the midfield and curling a 
23-yard right-footed shot that bounced off the inside of a post and bounded 
out. Carlos Bacca sent the rebound into the side netting.

Neither nation managed a shot on target in the first half, and each had just 
one on the second. Play became more open in the last 15 minutes as teams tried 
to avoid a shootout. Under the tournament’s rules, extra time is used only for 
the final, so the teams went straight to penalty kicks.

“We know that we can do better,” Pekerman said.
 