
Coneygree’s immediate future may be clarified on Thursday night but hope 
remains that a leg injury discovered on Wednesday may not be the end of his 
season. Initial reports suggested he had sustained slab fractures to both hocks 
but that possibility was doubted by connections ofthe Gold Cup winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/13/coneygree-wins-gold-cup-cheltenham-festival>
 as he awaited assessment last night.

Talking Horses: Wednesday’s best bets plus all the latest racing news
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/16/talking-horses-wednesday-best-bets-racing-news-coneygree>
“There’s no definite diagnosis yet,” said Sara Bradstock, one half of the 
husband and wife training team behind Coneygree. “There were some very 
exaggerated reports early this morning.

“We know he has damaged a hock,” Bradstock added, as she drove the horse to a 
specialist vet in Newmarket. “He’s not even that lame, just a bit stiff, but we 
always monitor back legs very carefully.

“They will look at him, take lots of scans and eventually make a proper 
diagnosis and a prognosis.” Bradstock hoped to have a clearer idea of what had 
gone wrong by Thursday night.

“He had a little stress fracture that kept him off the track before [in 2012] 
and I think everyone overreacts because of that. There may be another fracture 
but it’s definitely nothing very serious or displaced. He will come back, it’s 
just a question of when.”

The injury means Coneygree will miss the chance to run in either the King VI 
Chase at Kempton or Leopardstown’s Lexus Chase, the Christmas races between 
which the Bradstocks had yet to make a choice when the news broke. They are not 
ready to say he will also be prevented from attempting a second Gold Cup win in 
March, although a hock injury of any gravity would make that a doubtful 
proposition.

“It’s annoying because he worked so well the other day,” Bradstock said. “He’s 
worked and schooled brilliantly in the last few days.” She added she did not 
know what could have caused the injury, which appears unrelated to the soreness 
in a hind foot that led to her horsemissing the Hennessy last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/24/coneygree-will-miss-hennessy-gold-cup-newbury>
.

Coneygree had been a 7-1 shot for the King George and the Gold Cup. Don 
Cossack is 5-2 favourite for the Kempton race from 11-4, half a point shorter 
than Vautour. Djakadam is the 5-1 favourite for the Gold Cup from 6-1, while 
Coneygree was trading at over 60-1 on Betfair’s exchange for the Cheltenham 
race.

Willie Mullins, trainer of Vautour and Djakadam, expressed his sympathy for 
the Bradstocks as he hosted a pre-King George media event at his yard near 
Carlow. “We’re all only one gallop away from the same position, something going 
wrong,” the Irishman said. “I cross my fingers every morning I come out my back 
door that one of them’s not walking round for me to have to check.

“That’s the big dread, that your stable stars get a knock, because if you get 
a knock now it’s very hard to get them back. Never mind Kempton, getting them 
ready for the springtime, if you have to take a month off, I don’t know if you 
can get them back, really.

“The small yard with a big horse which consumes every waking moment, I know 
what it’s like. When we were small and had only one horse, to have that horse 
go out is a huge disappointment. We’re in a lucky position, we have one or two 
more. It’s very tough for a small yard and we feel for them.”

Mullins expressed satisfaction with Vautour’s King George preparation and said 
the horse had shown the benefit of his seasonal reappearance at Ascot last 
time. Regarding Faugheen, the odds-on favourite for Kempton’s Christmas Hurdle, 
Mullins does not expect a repeat of the awkward hanging he showed in defeat 
last month, which the trainer took to be a symptom of fatigue on his first run 
for six months.
 