
I am in my mid-40s and have been married for 16 years. Our sexual life has 
been very underwhelming. I have tried everything I know but my wife seems to 
have little or no interest in sex. I do know that she was circumcised as a 
child. Could that have affected her sexuality?

A person’s sexuality is created through a complex combination of physical, 
psychological and physiological factors as well as the messages about sex they 
received from childhood onwards – religious beliefs, parental warnings, 
societal judgment and formative experiences. You have told me little, but the 
fact that she was circumcised suggests that she may have been raised in a 
society where the notion of female sexuality was not exactly appreciated. In 
many of the world’s societies – including our own – it is judged by some as 
inappropriate, and even feared, suppressed, or punished.

I cannot even try to guess your wife’s experience, or the motives of those who 
performed it, but I am sure it has had some effect on her conceptualisation of 
sex and her ability to experience pleasure. This would be particularly true if 
her clitoris was removed. Gently ask her if she could try to express what the 
circumcision was like for her, and how it might have affected her ability to 
enjoy sex. A gynaecologist could shed some light on how nerve loss or damage 
might have affected her ability to orgasm or even become aroused, and a 
psychosexual counsellor could suggest alternative sexual approaches. After 16 
years, your wife and you deserve some understanding and hope.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 