 In his diaries, Alan Clark called them the coven. Yesterday, the mother and 
two daughters with whom the former Tory minister went to bed collected 
substantial damages for a false claim that they had demanded money to keep 
quiet about it.
Mr Clark, an unrepentant philanderer now gone to the knocking shop in the sky, 
recorded for posterity his liaisons with Valerie, Josephine and Alison Harkess. 
Ten years ago, with the secret out, they and South African judge James Harkess 
arrived back in London, with the husband/father saying he wanted to have Mr 
Clark horsewhipped.

Yesterday the Mail on Sunday paid undisclosed damages to the family after 
claiming that they had tried to demand money from Mr Clark in return for not 
revealing the affair.

Their solicitor, Laura Baglow, told Mr Justice Gray at the high court that the 
tabloid had suggested there had been an attempt to blackmail Mr Clark by 
demanding £80,000 to keep silent about his sexual relationships with Valerie 
Harkess and her daughters. There was no truth whatsoever in this allegation and 
the family were hurt and upset by the article, the court heard.

Associated Newspapers, publisher of the paper, had agreed to apologise and to 
pay a substantial sum in damages and costs.

Counsel for the paper, Ian Felstead, said it offered its "sincere apologies". 

The offending article appeared on January 18 under the heading "A rogue and a 
shyster, but we could do with a few more Alan Clarks".

Several entries by Mr Clark in his diaries, first published in 1993, on the 
Harkesses laid the clues. The minister had once been friends with Mr Harkess, a 
London barrister who emigrated to South Africa in 1977.

In 1994 Valerie Harkess sold her story to the News of the World, telling of 
her 14-year affair with Mr Clark. Josephine said that she was seduced in 1983, 
and her sister Alison was said to have previously succumbed in 1979.

The former minister's long-suffering wife, Jane, reacted to the news by 
saying: "Quite frankly, if you bed people that I call 'below-stairs class', 
they go to the papers, don't they?"

It was a story of the English class system, politics, sex and a dysfunctional 
family. The media lapped it up.

Mr Harkess said at the time that he would have horse-whipped Mr Clark if he 
had known how comprehensively he had violated his honour and called Mr Clark 
"sick". His retort was: "I hope the girls got a good price for their story."

The Harkesses were represented by Max Clifford. Speaking from his holiday home 
in Spain, the media guru remembered them fondly: "The Harkesses were pure, pure 
panto, they were wonderful. It was an entertaining three months, andAlan Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> loved every minute of it. 
They genuinely felt betrayed. He swore that it [the affairs] would not come 
out. They went back to South Africa a lot happier, fulfilled and wealthier than 
when they arrived."

Even Mr Clark sensed his libido might have caused him to overstep the mark: "I 
deserve to be horsewhipped. It all happened a very long time ago, and I am 
trying to keep a low profile. I probably have a different sense of morality 
from most people."

The family were estimated to have made £250,000 from interviews and in 1995 Mr 
Harkess converted to Catholicism. Asked in 1998 by the Guardian how he would 
react if he met Mr Clark (who died in 1999), the judge replied: "I would greet 
him as a fellow Christian. I forgave him some time ago."

Can we go to Ritz? Why? To go to bed...

 October 13 1973
 Went on television for Points West BBC and hope did some good, though not 
plugging the party line. Valerie there plus usual accoutrements of regularised 
intimacy which make me so jealous (in this case a geriatric Great-Uncle in Holy 
Orders who is presumably being cultivated for a hand-out). Really, too much. If 
one could paraphrase Haig's epigram on Derby ... "she is like a feather 
cushion, carrying the imprint of the last person to roll on her"

 June 13 1983
 In London I collected the coven and off we went to Brooks's for dinner. At 
intervals Joei said, "Gosh, Al, are you really a minister, zowee." Valerie was 
less forthcoming. Ali sulked and sneered. Driving away, we went past the Ritz 
and Joei said, "Gosh, is that the Ritz? I wish we could go in there." "Why?" 
"To go to bed, of course." I was thoughtful. I have always been culpably weak 
in such matters

 July 6 1983
 ... that evening I had been to Joei's party, and felt old and passé. Very 
handsome young men everywhere. Joei lounged and struck attitudes; she's going 
through a stage when she thinks she's Nancy Cunard. Ali, though friendly, was 
for some reason tearful
 