
Craig Sager, one of America’s best-loved sports broadcasters, has died. He was 
65.

Sager, who worked for Turner Sports for more than 30 years and was best known 
as an accomplishedNBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> sideline 
reporter, had been battling cancer. In March, Sager announced he had three to 
six months to live after doctors told him the leukaemia he has fought for two 
years was no longer in remission.

Turner Sports president David Levy said in a statement: “Craig Sager was a 
beloved member of the Turner family for more than three decades and he has been 
a true inspiration to all of us. His incredible talent, tireless work ethic and 
commitment to his craft took him all over the world covering sports.

“While he will be fondly remembered for his colorful attire and the TNT 
sideline interviews he conducted with NBA coaches and players, it’s the 
determination, grace and will to live he displayed during his battle with 
cancer that will be his lasting impact. Our thoughts and prayers are with 
Sager’s wife Stacy and the entire Sager family during this difficult time. We 
will be forever Sager Strong.”

Levy’s statement did not say when or where Sager died.

Sager’s son, also Craig, wrote on Twitter: “We packed a lifetime and then some 
into these 28 years together.”

Sager died just days after being inducted into the Sports Broadcasting Hall of 
Fame.

The Illinois-born Sager was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia in 2014. He 
underwent multiple rounds of chemotherapy and was re-admitted to hospital in 
late November 2016.

In June, Sager worked his very first NBA finals game, sideline reporting for 
Game 6 between the Cavaliers and the Warriors.

“First of all, let me ask you a question,” LeBron James said after the game. 
“How in the hell do you go 30-plus years without getting a finals game? That 
don’t make no sense. But I’m happy to see you, man. Much love and respect. I’m 
happy I was able to witness it in front of these fans. We really appreciate 
you.”

The National Basketball Players Association issued a statement on Thursday 
praising Sager’s contributions to the sport.

“Craig Sager was a one-of-a-kind reporter who embodied the spirit of the game 
of basketball in a truly colorful fashion,” it read. “Through his work, he was 
able to connect players, coaches and fans to the game we all love. The passion 
and fight he displayed during his battle with cancer is an inspiration to us 
all. Our thoughts and prayers go out to the Sager family at this extremely 
difficult time.”
 