
Always Outnumbered Always Outgunned, by Walter Mosley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/waltermosley> (Serpent's Tail, £5.99)

At first glance, Socrates Fortlow, 'somewhere in his fifties' with 'darkly 
stained teeth' (though 'all his own and healthy') and a bald head, aside from 
some 'tufts of wiry white' which 'hovered behind his ears', doesn't make an 
altogether convincing hero.

 But he turns out to be a Robin Hood for our times, who has sworn to 'himself 
that he'd never hurt another person - except if he had to do it in 
self-preservation'. The evil thing that Socrates did do was to kill a man and 
rape his woman. As a result, he spent 27 years in jail and lost everything. Now 
he is trying to right the balance. The book consists of 14 stories, each one a 
separate entity but linked. One of the most moving is called 'Letter To 
Theresa'. Another victim of Socrates' crime and subsequent jail term was 
Theresa, the woman he loved and would otherwise have married. Sick in bed with 
flu he dreams Theresa is standing at the foot of the bed. When he recovers, he 
sits down and writes to Theresa, putting into the letter all his sorrow, guilt 
and remorse, as well as his hope that she is well and happy. She doesn't answer 
and he finds he can't stop dreaming about her. In fact, the dreams, or the fear 
of the dreams, are so bad that he can't sleep. Eventually he is going so crazy 
that he calls a number for phone sex and asks for 'Theresa'. It is only when he 
begins to get aroused that he knows he 'couldn't pretend no more'. He tells his 
friend, Right Burke, 'The woman I wanted was gone. Gone'. But the bleakness is 
always lightened by little flashes of beauty, sentences such as: 'A cricket was 
calling out for love from somewhere in the wall.' Mosley is a writer whoknows 
that we are all calling out for love.

 New Orleans Mourning, by Julie Smith (Slow Dancer Press, £7.99) What better 
setting for a mystery than New Orleans: sexy, sleazy, hot, corrupt, beautiful, 
violent, French, black - what more do you need? It's taken seven years for 
Julie Smith's Edgar-winning novel (America's Golden Dagger) to reach Britain, 
but better late than never.

 When a masked assassin strikes in the middle of Mardi Gras (literally 'fat 
Tuesday', the day before Ash Wednesday), Skip Langdon, one of New Orleans's 
finest and, as a result, a disgrace and a puzzle to her old Southern family, is 
forced to use all her social connections to track down the killer. We always 
knew that the South was a nest of vipers; throw in carnival confusion, and 
you've got something really poisonous.
 