
Don't, please, put any money on the political longevity of Crispin Blunt, the 
minister in charge of prisons. Last week he was soundly ticked off by Downing 
Street over his plan – now withdrawn – to allow comedy workshops and parties in 
jails. Now he has further enraged the flogging tendency among his fellow
Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> by 
suggesting offenders might get reduced sentences if they apologise to their 
victims.

Blunt clearly agrees with justice secretary Ken Clarke that something must be 
done to cut Britain's bloated prison population of nearly 85,000. He also 
subscribes to the trendy notion of "restorative justice". It embraces the idea 
of a so-called community payback: compensation for victims from a fund of money 
earned by criminals. The justice ministry also has plans to reduce the prison 
roll-call by putting thousands of mentally ill or drug-addicted inmates into 
secure treatment centres. No fewer than 13,000 people are in prison for 
drug-related offences.

All of this is anathema to those Tory MPs who believe that the government 
should be favouring the ideas of the tabloid-reading public, rather than those 
of the people who know what they are talking about. Douglas Carswell MP, for 
example, believes that there is a conflict between restorative justice and 
plain justice: "Some people tend to think that rehabilitation should take 
primacy over punishment. I don't think most people agree with that."

It's war on weapons… 

The defence secretary, Liam Fox, has put the wind up service chiefs and 
contractors by declaring that his current level of spending is "entirely 
unaffordable".

His department is carrying out an urgent strategic review of spending 
priorities. The consequent cuts are likely to be savage. The ministry of 
defence, which gobbles up money in prodigious amounts, not least on the absurd 
conflict in Afghanistan, has three ongoing capital-hungry projects: the Typhoon 
strike aircraft for the RAF, two replacement aircraft carriers for the Royal 
Navy, and the renewal of the Trident nuclear-armed submarine flotilla.

Fox has tried to ringfence the last item by suggesting that the bill should be 
footed by the Treasury, because Trident is vital to national defence. If he 
loses that argument, the conventional forces will suffer even more. What is 
more, the Liberal Democrats have long argued for Trident to be scrapped, while 
the Conservatives want it retained.

… but not if for sale 

Our men and women in embassies and high commissions around the world have been 
told to give priority to promoting trade, business and investment links. David 
Cameron and the foreign secretary, William Hague, have underlined the message 
by installing Simon Fraser, a top trade expert, as the permanent secretary 
(chief) of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

Hague has pledged to "inject a new commercialism into the work of our Foreign 
Office and into the definition ... of international objectives; ensuring that 
we develop the strong political relationships which will help British business 
to thrive overseas".

A key to the new diplomacy will be to pursue contracts for weapons and other 
defence equipment. It was announced at the Farnborough Air Show last week that 
British defence sales last year were worth £7.2bn ($11bn), a 70% increase on 
the previous year.

Bowdlerised Blyton 

Is nothing sacred? Certainly not the Famous Five books by Enid Blyton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/enid-blyton>. They are to be given a 
makeover – bowdlerised as we used to say in English – to bring them up to date 
for today's children. Out will go exclamations like "mercy me!" to be replaced 
by the anodyne "oh no!" "Housemistress" will be replaced by "teacher" and 
"school tunic" will become "uniform" and "awful swotter" will be rendered down 
into "bookworm". Some words, like "tinker", are way beyond today's pale. It 
will be replaced by "traveller". Curiously, the characters called Dick and 
Fanny will survive.

Publisher Hodder says it will continue to issue the books in their original 
language alongside the new series. That is smart thinking, because in spite of 
constant assaults by librarians, feminists and the politically correct, Blyton 
has notched up sales of 500m books. That surely calls for lashings of ginger 
beer.

Fish like our seaside 

The British seaside is enjoying something of a revival as a holiday 
destination, boosted by economic and exchange rate worries. Now comes welcome 
news from the Department of the Environment: the seas around Britain, it says, 
are getting cleaner, fish stocks are growing and the species diversity is 
increasing.

But although the department talks of "significant improvements" since its last 
report in 2005, it also underlines another less benign change. The seas, it 
says, are higher, warmer and more acid, and coastal litter levels are at a 
record high.

The warming has had an impact on fish stocks. Cold water species such as cod 
are in retreat, while warm water fish such as sea bass and John Dory are 
spreading quickly.

The Infamous Five? 

Richard Desmond <https://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond>, owner of 
the Daily Express and Star newspapers and a string of smutty magazines, has 
dipped into his loose change to buy the Five television channel for £103.5m. 
The publisher of Asian Babes, Horny Housewives and Spunk Loving Sluts insists 
he will not take his new toy downmarket.

Nor will he be able to use Five to promote his newspapers. That would go 
against the terms of its broadcasting licence. The papers, however, will be 
free to plug Five programmes for all they're worth.

Five is by far the smallest of Britain's terrestrial broadcasters, with a 
share of just 10% of the TV advertising market. Desmond is said to be eyeing 
further acquisitions.

Bare-legged cheek 

Time was when any self-respecting British bloke kept his ankles covered. He 
might, as an extreme concession to casualness, wear sandals, but he would jolly 
well wear them with sensible socks. In our present state of wanton dissolution 
even this once-sacred standard is slipping. We – no, dammit, they – are not 
only wearing sandals without socks, but also shoes without socks. Shoes!

What is more, our shorts are getting longer, and our longs are getting 
shorter. The inevitable consequence is that not only ankles, but shins and 
calves, are increasingly on public display. Thus does a once-proud nation go 
bare-legged to the dogs.

Hurricane's last cue

Alex Higgins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-higgins>, known as 
"Hurricane Higgins", has died at the age of 61, and the world is a poorer 
place. He was prodigiously gifted with the snooker cue, winning two world 
championships in the 70s and 80s in a style never seen before. Where more 
experienced players pondered their shots with sometimes tedious care, the 
Hurricane would rush from one ball to the next, potting them like a machine gun.

But his table talent was matched by an instinct for self-destruction. He took 
to drink and drugs, and chain-smoked. He was embroiled in domestic scandals and 
bar-room brawls. A £4m fortune evaporated.

At the end, Higgins was a pathetic wreck, toothless and riddled with cancer. 
He died alone in his Belfast flat. But for those who watched him in his prime, 
he was a genius.
 