
When Victoria Pendleton turned up at Cheltenham on Gold Cup day last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/13/coneygree-wins-gold-cup-cheltenham-festival>
, few in a crowd of nearly 70,000 even knew that she was there. And by the time 
they streamed away a few hours later, most thoughts had already turned to the 
2016 Gold Cup, which already seemed sure to be a vintage renewal after a series 
of brilliant performances by novice chasers throughout the week.

Twelve months later, Gold Cup day is finally here, with the added interest 
that Cue Card, one of the most popular chasers in training, will land a £1m 
bonus for victory, yetPendleton’s ride in the Foxhunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/victoria-pendleton-racing-cheltenham-festival-jockey>
 has attracted at least as much attention as the big race itself in the weeks 
leading up to the Festival.

Nobody saw that coming a year ago. Then again, not many people saw Cue Card 
coming either, as a serious Gold Cup contender at least. This year’s race was 
expected to be all about the 2015 class of novices, ushering an earlier 
generation into retirement. Cue Card, a prominent member of that generation 
ever since his win in the Bumper here in 2010, has not been to the Festival 
since 2013, when he won the less prestigious Ryanair Chase. His chance to claim 
the most valuable and prestigious race at the meeting had apparently been and 
gone.

Yet on Friday Cue Card stands to win more money for his owners in a single 
race than any jumper in history. Victory in the Gold Cup would complete the new 
Chasing Triple Crown, which was launched last autumn by Jockey Club 
Racecourses, and earn that £1m bonus. With the first prize now raised to 
£327,463 in the first year of Timico’s sponsorship, the total haul would be 
nearly £100,000 more than Kauto Star earned when he completed the same treble – 
Betfair Chase, King George and Gold Cup – in 2007.

Not that the money is really what matters to those closest to Cue Card or his 
many thousands of fans. It is the horse and his background. Like Coneygree, who 
graduated top of the class among the novices when he won the Gold Cup last 
year, Cue Card has the feel of a traditional, “proper” jumping horse about him.

While the big jumping owners were scouring the French provinces for ready-made 
hurdlers and chasers with six-figure price tags, Cue Card, like almost all of 
his trainer Colin Tizzard’s horses, was a “store”, bought on little more than 
the evidence of Tizzard’s eyes and instincts. Tizzard himself still runs a 
large dairy farm as well as training racehorses, a dual role that recalls 
Sirrell Griffiths, the Welsh farmer who floored everyone when Norton’s Coin won 
here a quarter of a century ago. And while his thriving Dorset training stable 
is smart, modern and upwardly mobile, it does not have the near-corporate feel 
of some high-profile yards.

Cue Card wins King George VI Chase at the fourth attempt after thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/26/cue-card-wins-king-george-vi-chase>
“These horses find you,” Tizzard said here on Thursday. “You can have all the 
money in the world, and not find one like that. For some reason, they arrive on 
your doorstep.

“A lot of people have grown up around Cue Card. He’s been strutting his stuff 
for six years now and coming here, and there’s been all the stories about not 
making it to Cheltenham Festivals and now he’s come back as good as he’s ever 
been. I think that’s National Hunt racing for you, and the longevity of him, 
that’s what I’m proud of.”

A wind operation a year ago has played a large part in Cue Card’s revival this 
season, but so too has a change of running style since Paddy Brennan took over 
as his regular jockey following the retirement of Joe Tizzard, the trainer’s 
son. The enthusiasm that marked some bold front-running victories earlier in 
his career is still there, but it has been moulded to fit a stayer, who got up 
to beat Vautour in the King George only in the shadow of the post.

“It shows you should never give up,” Tizzard says. “Never give up on these 
horses. They could have retired Sprinter Sacre [Wednesday’s Queen Mother 
Champion Chase winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/sprinter-sacre-champion-chase-cheltenham-festival>
] but he’s still there.”

Coneygree, sadly, will not be at Cheltenham to defend the Gold Cup, while 
Vautour, another of last year’s brilliant novice winners, was a last-minute 
switch to Thursday’s Ryanair Chase, which he won with ease.

Don Poli, last year’s RSA Chase winner, will line up against Cue Card, 
however, along with Djakadam, last year’s runner-up, and Don Cossack, who was 
closing rapidly on the leaders in the King George when he fell two out. Smad 
Place, the Hennessy winner, also adds lustre to a race that remains an 
unusually deep and competitive renewal.

Willie Mullins, who has dominated the Festival so far but has yet to win a 
Gold Cup, has two chances to do so with Don Poli and Djakadam, and a win for 
either would send their trainer past Paul Nicholls in the trainers’ 
championship too.

But Cue Card is the story horse, the one that would send the sellout crowd 
home satisfied regardless of whether he carried their money. For Tizzard, 
meanwhile, it would surpass eventhe victory of Thistlecrack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/thistlecrack-wins-world-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
 in Thursday’s World Hurdle as an advertisement for his way of doing things.

“They weren’t cheap,” Tizzard said. “They were bought as unbroken 
three-year-olds, one was 50 grand and the other was 40 grand, which is good 
money for a store, because you don’t know how good they’re going to be.

“It’s not like buying something that won on the Flat or a bumper, or a 
point-to-point by 10 lengths. Then you know pretty well what you’ve got. Before 
we could get on with these horses, we had to break them in.”
 