
It was trailed beforehand as youth against experience, as Great Britain versus 
Ireland and also as one of the best races for theKing George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> for many years. In the 
end, it was all of that and more. Vautour turned for home in front and 
apparently poised to record an impressive success, but he faltered in the final 
furlong as Cue Card, three years his senior, chased him down from the last to 
win by a head.

It was as thrilling and hard-fought a finish as this race has seen, and kept 
Cue Card alive in pursuit of a £1m bonus for winning the Betfair Chase, King 
George and Gold Cup. Cue Card’s narrow success also extended the blank of Irish 
stables in the King George to a decade, and denied Rich Ricci andWillie Mullins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins>, the owner and trainer of 
Vautour, a third Grade One victory in the space of 40 minutes. The stewards 
were also involved afterwards, banning Paddy Brennan, Cue Card’s jockey, for 11 
days and also fining the rider £4,200 for hitting the winner with the whip at 
least 15 times.

Colin Tizzard feels Cue Card can finally win Kempton’s King George VI Chase
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/25/colin-tizzard-cue-card-king-george-vi-chase-kempton>
Mullins and Ricci took the Grade One hurdle here with Faugheen and then 
watched Douvan, another of their heavy hitters, win the Racing Post Novice 
Chase, also a Grade One, at Leopardstown. The treble was trading at short odds 
as Vautour straightened up for the second-last, still going easily forRuby Walsh
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ruby-walsh> and with only Don Cossack, the 
favourite, and Cue Card, second in this race two years ago, still close enough 
to mount a challenge.

Don Cossack jumped the second-last in second place but fell heavily, leaving 
Cue Card as Vautour’s sole pursuer. Colin Tizzard’s nine-year-old then made a 
mistake of his own at the last, but with Brennan urging him on, a horse who 
recorded his first Grade One victory almost six years ago started to eat into 
the lead. Cue Card, so often a front-runner in the past, finally pushed his 
head in front a stride from the post.

“Nowadays he’s completely different,” Tizzard said. “He lobs around in fifth 
or sixth and looks as if he’s not going very well, but then he’s got that bit 
left at the end. He’s been brilliant for five or six seasons now. If he’d met 
the last on a good stride, he’d have won by a length and a half. When he won 
the Champion Bumper [in March 2010] everyone thought I’d trained him too hard 
as a four-year-old, but it just shows that they do come back. It was a really 
hot race, and to win it is brilliant. We thought that if he came third or 
fourth, he’d have run a brilliant race.

“I think I’m a bit more careful with them these days. I used to try to get 
them super, super fit, now we just stick to routine and it seems to be working.”

Tizzard said before this race that he felt the new Chase Triple Crown bonus 
had been offered this season because “it’s near enough impossible” to win. Far 
from being impossible, Cue Card is now top-priced at 6-1 to claim the bonus, 
two points behind Djakadam, the runner-up in last year’s Gold Cup and another 
horse that represents the Ricci-Mullins axis.

“He looks like a Gold Cup horse now,” Tizzard said. “Whether he races before 
then, I wouldn’t have a clue. At this moment, I’d probably say he wouldn’t, 
because he has had a hard race today.”

Brennan will miss the rearranged Welsh National, postponed from its scheduled 
slot on Sunday due to waterlogging, as a result of his ban, but felt that the 
race and its outcome were a match for anything in his career to date.

“It’s the best feeling of my career,” Brennan said. “I’ve beaten one of the 
best horses in training and one of the best jockeys I’ve ever ridden against.

“It was a tight one. The last time I was in [a close photo] with Ruby it was 
Imperial Commander against Kauto Star [in the 2009 Betfair Chase], I thought 
I’d got there then, but I hadn’t. But today, he said to me I’d won.

“I’m not going to lie and say there was loads there– I got to the bottom of 
the tank. But if any man is going to get him back in that sort of form for the 
Gold Cup, it’sColin Tizzard <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-tizzard>. 
People say that he doesn’t stay, but he stayed right to the line to get there.”

Vautour also remains prominent in the Gold Cup betting, but his performance 
here suggested that the Festival’s Ryanair Chase over two miles and five 
furlongs could be an alternative target. William Hill offer him at 6-4 
favourite (from 5-2) for that race, while he is available at 12-1 for the Gold 
Cup. Al Ferof, who came home 13 lengths behind Vautour in third, is also 
expected to run in the Ryanair in March, while Don Cossack, who appeared to be 
staying on when he fell two out, is a 7-1 chance to make amends in the Gold Cup.

Earlier, Faugheen made it back-to-back successes in the Christmas Hurdle, 
adopting the same front-running tactics that served him well in winning the 
Champion Hurdle in March.

Although flicking through the top of the odd hurdle on his way to victory, the 
Mullins-trained 1-4 favourite was pretty flawless in the jumping department 
with Walsh doing the steering and cutting a confident figure throughout.
 