
The culture secretary, Karen Bradley, has said she will talk to newspaper 
editors about how they can tackle a rise in hate crime and improve social 
cohesion.

A report released by the National Police Chiefs Council on Thursday revealed a 
major increase in hate crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/hate-surged-after-eu-referendum-police-figures-show>
 since the EU referendum, in which both politicians and the press focused 
heavily on immigration.

During parliamentary questions, the Labour MP Paul Blomfield cited the role of 
the press in creating a charged atmosphere that could contribute to hate crimes 
and asked Bradley to raise the issue with newspaper editors.

He said: “Sections of the press share a responsibility for creating the 
climate in which that is happening, and all of them have an opportunity to 
change it.”

Bradley replied that she would bring the issue up in the course of planned 
meetings with editors. She said: “I am, of course, meeting editors and others 
to discuss many points, and I assure the honourable gentleman that I will raise 
this one.”

Bradley was the Home Office minister responsible for tackling hate crime prior 
to being appointed culture secretary in Theresa May’s new government.

Blomfield later issued a statement welcoming Bradley’s commitment, saying he 
would follow the issue closely.

He said: “The media plays a big part in shaping public attitudes. They have a 
particular responsibility to reflect on the consequences of headlines and 
stories in provoking fear and anger between different groups.

“Inflammatory, divisive and misleading reporting, especially on immigration 
and asylum, can encourage the sort of violence that has shocked the country.

“It’s important that newspaper editors recognise how influential they can be 
and take steps to ensure they don’t contribute to the appalling rise in hate 
crimes we’ve witnessed since the EU referendum.”

Research published earlier this month by the former Sunday Times journalist 
Liz Gerard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/sep/05/newspapers-publish-anti-immigration-stories-but-what-is-to-be-done>
found that large sections of the press, led by the Daily Mail and Daily 
Express, had since the 2010 general election regularly lead with negative 
stories about refugees and asylum seekers.
 