
Mr Tam Dalyell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tam-dalyell>, the Labour 
MP who has claimed that British intelligence was involved in the mysterious 
death of Miss Hilda Murrell , aged 78, was accused yesterday by a senior police 
officer of hampering the investigation into her murder.

The accusation was made by Mr Robert Cozens, the chief constable of West 
Mercia, whose force has been conducting the murder inquiry for the past 10 
months.

The body of Miss Murrell, a peace campaigner and anti-nuclear activist, was 
found in woodland where she had been driven from her home in Shrewsbury last 
March. She had been stabbed repeatedly and left to die.

In the House of Commons last month Mr Dalyell, the MP for Linlithgow, alleged 
that she had died after a violent encounter with British intelligence officers 
she disturbed searching her home for sensitive documents concerning the 
Belgrano affair.

The connection, Mr Dalyell suggested, was that Miss Murrell's nephew, Mr Rob 
Green, had been a naval intelligence officer during the Falklands conflict.

But at a press conference yesterday Mr Cozens said his officers still believe 
that the woman's death was the result of a burglary which went tragically wrong.

The chief constable said the MP's allegations had hindered the murder inquiry 
because senior officers had had to spend time investigating matters which 
proved to have no substance.

'We would like to know from where Mr Dalyell's information came so those 
witnesses can come forward and assist us.'

Mr Cozens said that the MP would be questioned at the Commons on Tuesday by 
Detective Chief Superintendent David Cole, the head of West Mercia CID, and 
another officer. But, he added yesterday, nothing had come to them notice to 
support the claim, which Mr Dalyell says has come from a 'well-placed source,' 
that an outside agency was involved in the murder. Mr Cozens also denied that 
his force had been asked to take part in a cover-up.

He confirmed that Special Branch officers had been involved in the murder 
inquiry on a 'routine' basis because of manpower demands. Asked if M15, M16 and 
the Ministry of Defence had been questioned, Mr Cozens said: 'I am satisfied 
that there is no basis for that on the information given to me from any source 
at all.'

Mr Dalyell also came under attack from Mr Derek Conway, the Conservative MP 
for Shrewsbury and Atcham, who said in the Commons yesterday that the House 
should urge Mr Dalyell 'to cease impeding the police inquiry.'
 