
Martin Pipe sent out just one winner in his first season with a licence and 
needed 14 years more to claim his first National Hunt trainers’ championship. 
It tookPaul Nicholls <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paul-nicholls> three 
years to reach 50 winners and 15 seasons in all to unseat Pipe from the top of 
the mountain. By those two measures alone Dan Skelton’s progress since striking 
out on his own after eight years as Nicholls’s assistant has been almost 
indecent.

Skelton is in his third season with a licence and could well pass last year’s 
total of £714,164 in prize money before the end of December. He sits third in 
the trainers’ championship, behind only Nicholls and Philip Hobbs, and seems as 
likely to make further progress up the ladder this season as he is to drop a 
rung or two. Famous names whose earnings trail well behind Skelton’s total 
include Jonjo O’Neill, Nigel Twiston-Davies and Nicky Henderson, who was the 
champion trainer in 2012-13, the season before Skelton took out his licence.

All that is really missing from Skelton’s record at this stage is a Grade One 
success and a winner at Cheltenham in March. It can be only a matter of time 
before he crosses off both and his juvenile hurdler Kasakh Noir, a likely 
runner at Kempton on Sunday, is among the favourites for the Triumph Hurdle 
next spring. There could be no better way to announce his arrival among the 
sport’s biggest players, however, than victory with Al Ferof in Saturday’sKing 
George VI Chase <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase>.

Al Ferof’s class is not in doubt. He won the Supreme Novice Hurdle at 
Cheltenham in 2011 and finished fourth behind the brilliant Sprinter Sacre in 
the Arkle Trophy a year later. He has also finished third behind Nicholls’s 
Silviniaco Conti in the King George for the last two seasons. But the fact that 
Al Ferof raced 21 times for Nicholls before joining Skelton less than three 
months ago would add particular significance if the former assistant could 
unseat his mentor in one of the season’s most prestigious events.

Godolphin merges racing and breeding operations under John Ferguson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/22/godolphin-merges-racing-breeding-john-ferguson>
Al Ferof’s first trip to the track for Skelton could not have gone much 
better, as he came home clear in the Peterborough Chase at Huntingdon, after 
Nicholls’s Ptit Zig was a faller at the last. The gelding’s new trainer was 
generous in his praise for Nicholls afterwards, stressing that his former boss 
had been involved in the decision to move Al Ferof.

“It’s very nice of John [Hales, the grey’s owner] to send him to me and it 
says volumes about the type of man Paul Nicholls is that he suggested he send 
him to me,” Skelton said. “As he is an older horse John wanted to try something 
different, so he spent about six weeks on a water treadmill. It was a different 
route to Rome this time but ultimately he showed what a class horse he is. It’s 
humbling to have such a good horse in the yard.”

Hales confirmed on Wednesday that it was “all very amicable” when the decision 
was made to switch stables. “What’s happened is that we’ve changed his training 
routine and as such he seems to be a much happier horse,” Hales said.

“He’s much closer to home now and I’ve got a chiropractor who specialises in 
horses, a guy called Mark Windsor, he’s looking after him to make sure he’s got 
no aches and pains. There’s another very good trainer called Claire Dyson, just 
down the road from Dan, who had him for quite a few weeks on the water 
treadmill. It seems to have transformed him. He seems to be a completely new 
horse with a new lease of life. The Peterborough Chase speaks volumes and, if 
the same horse goes into the King George, we’re hopeful of a good run.”

Skelton’s lofty position in the trainer’s table is no surprise to Hales, one 
of the longest-standing owners at the Nicholls yard. “How many trainers have 
ever done that in the past?” Hales said. “Paul’s been a very good teacher. He’s 
probably regretting it now but Dan’s got a long way to go to catch Paul, 
because his ammunition is very extensive.

“I’m really looking forward to the race. I’m going to stick my neck out and 
say that it will be the strongest National Hunt race of the year. They’re 
talking the Gold Cup up but I don’t think the Gold Cup will have six horses 
with ratings to match the top six in the King George. It’s going to be a 
tremendous race and I don’t think you can pick the winner. It’s all about what 
happens on the day.”
 