
Amid all the celebration of Grand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> success as the winning 
connections reflected on their great good fortune was one line indicative of 
some distress elsewhere. “Bryan changed his mind, twice,” reported the winning 
jockey, David Mullins, referring to his colleague and rival Bryan Cooper, who 
had first choice of several runners here and finally jumped the wrong way.

When the “final” round of jockey bookings were published on Thursday, Cooper’s 
name was next to that of Rule The World. But within an hour he had moved 
himself on to First Lieutenant, switching with Mullins. Lingering hope of a 
drying surface may have informed Cooper’s choice but when the rain came 
overnight and all through the National buildup, he may have guessed that the 
low-weighted Rule The World was the one to be on.

Many Clouds’ bid to win back-to-back Grand Nationals falls flat at Aintree
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/many-clouds-aintree-grand-national-oliver-sherwood-nina-carberry-katie-walsh>
First Lieutenant, who walked through the first two fences in last year’s 
National, did no better this time and crashed out at the second, taking Cooper 
with him. Around 10 minutes later, it was the supposed back-up jockey who was 
in the winner’s enclosure.

And just to emphasise Mullins’s junior status, he immediately had to go and 
get on another horse for the final race of the day. The race in question was 
restricted to amateur and conditional (for which read “apprentice”) jockeys – 
scheduling that was deliberately intended to avoid a need for the 
National-winning jockey to go back out again minutes after achieving his moment 
of greatest glory.

Emotional trainer Mouse Morris wins the Grand National after year of tragedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/grand-national-rule-the-world-mouse-morris-aintree>
But the 19-year-old Mullins is still a conditional and not even an especially 
experienced one, at that. He rode his first winner over fences just a year ago 
and even now has only 17 to his name, the Grand National being the first chase 
winner he has had outside Ireland.

Hopefully, the big race brought him legions of new followers. If so, they got 
a quick reward because, 55 minutes after the National, he cruised to the lead 
once more aboard Ivan Grozny, a 16-1 shot who came home 16 lengths clear of the 
field.

Ivan Grozny’s trainer is the jockey’s uncle, Willie Mullins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins>, a man you may have heard 
of. He is the dominant jumps trainer in Ireland and, now, if we are being 
entirely honest with ourselves, Britain as well. For any young jockey, riding a 
winner for Willie at a major racing festival is a tremendously good idea and 
Mullins Jr was clearly aware of that. It was one of the first things he 
mentioned when finally hauled in front of the Channel 4 cameras, ostensibly to 
discuss the Grand National.

Thistlecrack brilliant winner of Stayers’ Hurdle on Grand National day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/thistlecrack-brilliant-stayers-hurdle-grand-national-day>
Mullins Sr was understandably brimming with praise for his nephew, pleasure in 
an unexpected final success to close a big week mingling with familial pride. 
“He gets horses jumping, he keeps them so well balanced,” the trainer said.

“Horses really relax with him, jumping. Because that horse, Ivan Grozny, he 
takes an awful hold and I was amazed the way he settled him in midfield and 
just came through, very relaxed. He’s quite a hard horse to ride but David just 
gets him relaxed.”

Of the jockey’s character, Mullins Sr added: “He’s very quiet, takes in 
everything. He’s really just committed to his riding, he loves race-riding. I 
don’t think there was much else in his head [as a child], race-riding was what 
he always wanted to do. He’s very cool.”

The younger man was already getting plenty of quiet mentions as a jockey to 
watch back in November, when he was given the ride aboard Nichols Canyon in a 
top-class race in Ireland and somehow got him to beat Faugheen, the reigning 
champion hurdler. It remains the only time Faugheen has been beaten on a 
racecourse.

Willie, who trains both Faugheen and Nichols Canyon, did not appear entirely 
pleased to be reminded of that moment here, when it was suggested that was an 
early sign of the jockey’s skill. “That’s all dead now,” the trainer eventually 
managed, smiling. Perhaps even in victory, no trainer likes to be reminded of 
the defeat of one of his champions.

Aintree Grand National meeting – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/apr/09/aintree-grand-national-meeting-in-pictures>
Meanwhile, David was cheerily giving interviews to anyone who asked, carrying 
himself as if in a trance, wearing a blissful grin. “You dream of things like 
that, to happen,” he said. “Everything went to plan. I couldn’t ask for much 
more.”

Well, not quite everything. Rule The World rocked the fourth-last fence and 
his jockey rolled around in the saddle in consequence. But Mullins shrugged 
that off with a sportsman’s insouciance: “It was the only thing that went wrong 
all the way through the race. You’re always going to get one little thing and 
thankfully that was it.”

“He’s an old head on young shoulders, great racing brain,” said Rule The 
World’s trainer, Mouse Morris. “And he didn’t panic. He could have got anxious 
and gone on, he could have done anything bar win the thing. But he was cool out 
there, for a young fella.”

“There’s this endless line of Mullinses,” added the winning owner, Michael 
O’Leary. “If they’re not producing Grade One horses, they’re producing 
top-class jockeys.

“Today is David’s day but it would be remiss not to say also that Bryan Cooper 
is our retained jockey. He’s had a brilliant week this week. David was 
fortunate today, particularly when the rain came, to be on the lower-weighted 
horse. Bryan unfortunately was on the higher-weighted horse but that’s the way 
it crumbles.”

There will certainly be other days for Cooper. Grand National-winning jockeys, 
meanwhile, do not always enjoy continued success, but the future could not look 
much brighter for David Mullins, the laid-back jockey who takes second-string 
rides and grabs the glory.
 