 The British revisionist historian and Nazi apologist David Irving was today 
sentenced to three years in prison after he admitted denying the Holocaust.
An eight-member jury at a court in Vienna convicted Irving, 68, a few hours 
after it began its deliberations on the first day of his trial.

Irving had pleaded guilty to denying the Holocaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust> in two speeches on a visit to 
Austria in 1989, but said at the trial that he had later changed his views.

The speeches included a call for an end to the "gas chambers fairy tale", and 
claims that Adolf Hitler had helped Europe's Jews and that the Holocaust was a 
myth.

Irving told the court today he had revised his opinion after seeing the 
personal files of Adolf Eichmann. Speaking in German, he told the court he now 
accepted that the Nazis had killed millions of Jews.

At one stage, while giving evidence, he expressed sorrow for "all the innocent 
people" who died during the war. "I made a mistake when I said there were no 
gas chambers at Auschwitz," he said.

Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> has the world's stiffest 
laws against denying the Holocaust and Irving could have faced a maximum of 10 
years in prison.

The defence had called for leniency, citing his admission and his claims that 
he had changed his viewpoint.

The prosecution, however, had accused Irving of changing his position as a 
"tactic" to escape a harsh sentence, and said the historian was an icon for 
neo-Nazis and revisionists around the world.

Irving appeared shocked as the sentence was read out. Moments later, an 
elderly man who identified himself only as a family friend called out: "Stay 
strong, David - stay strong," before he was escorted from the courtroom.

Irving's lawyer Elmar Kresbach immediately announced he would appeal the 
sentence. "I consider the verdict a little too stringent. I would say it's a 
bit of a message trial".

This morning, when he arrived at court, Irving told reporters: "History is a 
constantly growing tree - the more you know, the more documents become 
available, the more you learn. And I have learned a lot since 1989.

"Yes, there were gas chambers. Millions of Jews died. There is no question. I 
don't know the figures. I'm not an expert on the Holocaust."

Irving, who has written around 30 books, said he considered it "ridiculous" 
that he was standing trial for remarks made 17 years ago.

Handcuffed and wearing a navy blue suit, he arrived at the court carrying a 
copy of one of his most controversial books, Hitler's War, which challenges the 
extent of the Holocaust.

Later in court he said he had never written a book about the Holocaust, which 
he called "just a fragment of my area of interest".

The controversial historian has been in custody since he was arrested in 
November while driving in southern Austria, despite being barred from the 
country. He had been on his way to address an extreme-right student fraternity 
in Vienna.

In 2000, Irving sued the US Holocaust scholar Deborah Lipstadt for libel at 
the British high court and lost. The presiding judge in that case, Charles 
Gray, wrote that Irving was "an active Holocaust denier ... anti-Semitic and 
racist".

He was fined several thousand pounds in 1992 in Germany for saying the 
Auschwitz gas chambers were a hoax.

He is said to have spent recent months in prison awaiting trial after he was 
denied bail writing his memoirs, under the working title Irving's War. His 
lawyer said last month Irving was getting up to 300 fan letters a week from 
supporters around the world.

Irving has contended in the past that most of the people who died at 
concentration camps such as Auschwitz were not murdered but rather succumbed to 
typhus and other diseases.
 