
You’ve looked after them for 18 years through the good times and the bad. 
You’ve been a teacher, mentor, confidant, taxi service, chief cook and bottle 
washer and now they have gone. There’s a strange stillness around the home as 
you take down the to-do list.

You miss them, of course, but university terms are short and the holidays long 
so, you can get the best of both worlds. There’s more time to spend on 
yourself, your partner and friends and, before long, the children are back for 
reading week or Christmas as young adults with a new appreciation of home 
comforts.

Though in rare cases it could lead to depression or marital conflict, “empty 
nest syndrome”, the sense of loss which most parents feel, is normal. But it’s 
a chance to see more of friends, make more friends and take up new interests or 
challenges at work.

After about three weeks I realised I felt better. I thought: actually, this 
isn’t too bad
Patrick Mulrenan, lecturer and parent 
It can be hard at first, but you get used to it, says lecturer Patrick 
Mulrenan from south-east London. “Our twin sons left at the same time, one to 
Sussex and the other to Sheffield. It was terrible. I thought my life was over 
and I would never recover,” he says. “One minute you are a parent, the next 
minute you’re back to an empty house with all their stuff gone. I missed them 
dreadfully and I missed their friends coming round, too.”

Mulrenan and his wife went out more for a while, but then things settled back. 
“After about three weeks I realised I felt better. I thought: actually, this 
isn’t too bad. It’s strange that once they are away at university, you stop 
worrying about them so much. While they were at home I would be worrying if 
they weren’t back at two o’clock in the morning, but now I don’t know what they 
are doing. I just trust them to be sensible.”

Mobile phones and the internet make it much easier nowadays to keep in touch 
with your children at university, says Naomi Smith, whose daughter Eleanor is 
studying maths with business management at the University of Birmingham. “My 
husband, Ian, was particularly sad when we dropped her off. I felt OK with it 
because I was so excited for her to be going to such a great university. It 
wasn’t until afterwards that I realised how much the dynamics of the family had 
changed.”

But don’t get too used to it. In three years they could boomerang back, given 
the price of housing. “All three of our daughters have left home,” says Robert 
Triffitt from Kent. “But we are a very close family and still see a lot of 
them. One even lives next door.”
 