
My company seems to have forgotten the promises it made about a pension

I work full-time for a small business – an architecture practice with 10 staff 
including the three directors. They let the office manager go during the 
recession and now a freelance accountant looks after anything financial.

She comes in for a few hours every week and does not answer emails. I have 
been working for them for 15 months and have not been able to join the staff 
pension scheme, even though it was in my contract that I could join after three 
months. When I ask the freelance accountant she says she has to find out what 
the latest rules are. When I ask the directors they say they will ask her – but 
I have not heard anything.

I took the job because, although it is not well paid, it is a permanent 
position with (supposedly) a pension! As I am the main wage earner in the 
family I feel like I have to stay in this job, and I don’t want to threaten to 
leave over something like this. But I am desperate to have some security in the 
future. What should I do?

Jeremy says

I very much doubt if this inexcusable incompetence on the part of your firm is 
deliberate, or motivated by meanness. Having dispensed with an office manager 
it has taken on a freelancer who, not being a member of staff herself, probably 
concentrates mainly on financial matters and certainly wouldn’t see herself in 
an HR role. The three directors are presumably all working architects who may 
find all forms of internal administration a tiresome distraction from 
fee-earning activity.

None of this is to excuse their behaviour but, if I’m right, it means you’re 
dealing with a vacuum: there is no single person who feels responsible for 
personnel matters, and there is no one you can go to for support. I would have 
thought that one of those three directors would have been designated as a 
managing partner, but it seems not.

You certainly can’t let this situation continue, but I don’t think you need to 
threaten resignation. I think you should write a reasoned letter (and I suggest 
a real letter, not an email) to all three directors and the freelance 
accountant. It should contain a copy of the clause in your contract that 
granted you membership of the pension scheme after three months, and a reminder 
that you have raised the matter on several occasions (be date specific) but to 
no effect.

State that a full year has passed since your admission to membership was 
promised. In the absence of an office manager you badly feel the lack of 
someone to make the case on your behalf so they should know that, with some 
reluctance, you plan to join a union. Be careful to state this as an intention 
rather than an implied threat.

As you may know, every employee is entitled to join a union, whether or not it 
is recognised by their employer – and there is little doubt that, with a union 
acting on your behalf, that clause in your contract is far more likely to be 
swiftly honoured and any past loss of benefit corrected.

It is entirely possible that the mere mention of union involvement will be 
enough to jolt your firm into long overdue action. If so, you may decide to 
postpone applying for membership. On the other hand, given the slightly 
unorthodox structure of your firm, you might think that union membership will 
have a continuing value for you.

Readers say 

• Ask the other staff about the pension scheme. With such a small firm it’s 
possible it was something they meant to set up and never got round to.Pavanne

• Send an email to both so they can’t fob you off, stating that you have asked 
several times and are exercising your rights in the employment contract. If 
that doesn’t do it, send a letter stating they are in breach of contract.AgentC

• You could do it yourself. Open a Sipp and give the directors the direct 
debit form for them to put in £X a month, where X is 4% of your income, or 
whatever. You could become your firm’s pensions executive.SergeantFunKiller

What can I do about a colleague who does his own projects in work time?

A colleague spends his time working on personal projects in the firm’s time 
rather than getting on with the work he should be doing.

We work in two-month cycles and throughout this time he can spend anything 
from 30 minutes to several hours a day doing his own projects. 

Our team leader has left so we are down one person in a small operation with a 
lot of work coming up. The outgoing team leader, with whom I am friendly, 
mentioned that he regarded the colleague as lazy and didn’t trust him with 
important work. I am not sure what the new team leader thinks, but I believe 
the colleague manages perceptions of himself very well. He has even put the 
company logo on his personal work so that it looks like he is working.

We all have to work harder, which is causing additional stress. It annoys me 
because he is getting an easy ride at our expense, and also because he’s 
spending his time learning new technologies which we’d all like to be doing. 
This is experimentation we have to do outside work, so I can see his motivation.

I am not sure how to handle this. I feel as if telling on him is bad form, but 
I get really annoyed with him doing it. What should I do?

Jeremy says

Your irritation is entirely understandable but you must try not to let it 
obsess you. Harbouring a build-up of envy and resentment can make life even 
more unpleasant than simply knowing that a colleague isn’t shouldering his fair 
share of the workload.

Since you’re on good terms with the outgoing team leader, and since you 
already know that he has serious doubts about this colleague, perhaps you 
should suggest that the outgoing team leader has a hand-over briefing session 
with the new leader in which those doubts could be shared. (You’d think such a 
meeting was scheduled anyway.)

The arrival of a fresh pair of eyes, with no baggage from the past, would seem 
to be an excellent opportunity for your colleague’s behaviour to be carefully 
scrutinised – and any necessary corrective warnings issued.

Readers say 

• Had a very similar experience in my office and brought it up in a meeting, 
“As others obviously do, I just wanted to make sure: is it OK to focus on 
personal projects once the company’s projects are completed?” That was met with 
a “What?”. Game changer. Be more Machiavellian than those who try it on, but 
only if you have to be. usasoneiaswe

• He may think he is doing his share of the work in less time than it takes 
you, and then keeping his skill base up to date with the rest of the time. I 
would analyse your own shortcomings before trying to bring up his, you are then 
capable of having a discussion without thinking you are being attacked.
scissorkickliz

• If he’s behind on the work he is tasked with, bring that up to your team 
leader. If he’s causing you problems because you need his code to work with 
yours, pester him to finish faster. If he’s doing all he’s asked and still has 
spare time, that’s a team leader’s issue not yours. You don’t have to “tell on 
him”, but you can highlight the effects his actions are having.ID732779

Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a 
brief email todear.jeremy@theguardian.com <mailto:dear.jeremy@theguardian.com>. 
Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply 
personally.
 