
My boss is bullying me and undermining my confidence – but what can I do about 
it?

My boss doesn’t like me. I’m not sure why and have given up trying to figure 
it out, but it’s making my working life miserable. She undermines me in front 
of the rest of the team, interrupts with irrelevant asides when I’m trying to 
lead meetings, leaves me out of meetings I should be included in, and makes 
threats that I might lose my job or someone else more junior might lose theirs 
if I don’t do some often irrelevant task. 

I am desperate to leave but feel so undermined by her bullying, favouritism 
and passive aggressive behaviour that I feel worthless, useless and 
unemployable. She likes to remind me that I am lucky to have a job. I have 
worked here for 15 years but now feel trapped in a vicious circle. What should 
I do?

Jeremy says

You don’t know why your boss doesn’t like you – and I’d be fairly certain she 
doesn’t either. She’s a bully, and bullies are irrational, unhappy creatures 
who derive strange pleasure from humiliating others, particularly in front of 
an audience. Some bullies achieve their ascendancy through force of 
personality. Your boss does it by abusing her seniority. In saying this, I’m 
not asking you to understand her, let alone forgive her; I’m saying something 
more important.

It’s the ultimate aim of bullies to intimidate their victims to such an extent 
that they begin to believe they somehow deserve to be bullied, that they are 
inferior, worthless beings – and that’s exactly what’s happening to you. You 
say you feel worthless, useless and unemployable, and yet you must know you’re 
none of those things. In the 15 years you’ve worked in this place – presumably 
before the arrival of this monster – you will have been a confident, competent, 
contented person. That is, at heart, who you still are – so you must fight very 
hard not to succumb. If she senses you have, it will give her still further 
pleasure and she’ll even see it as in some way justifying her behaviour.

I would hope that those in authority will soon recognise the malign influence 
this person is having and will take steps to remove her. But you can’t wait for 
that. You need to be deliberately, consciously defiant. Defy your boss by 
looking at yourself in the mirror and promising yourself that you won’t let her 
win. Then with all the old confidence that you can muster, go out there and 
find yourself another job.

Readers say 

• Keep a detailed log of all incidents, and keep all relevant documents, even 
post-it notes. My lawyer advised me this when I was in a similar situation. It 
didn’t stop me from having to leave, but I got a much better deal because I had 
proof of everything.Aranzazu

• The only solution is to get out – sad and unfair, but sometimes life is like 
that. But you can look for other jobs up hill and down dale with no time 
pressure. As an aside, once you start looking you will probably find the stress 
flows away – you will have control of the situation.CaptainGrey

• I was in this situation with a boss who continually described me as 
“difficult to like”, “a cold person”, “impossible to get along with”, and I 
really sympathise. In the end, feeling I was on the verge of a nervous 
breakdown, I simply quit. I didn’t have anything to go to but felt I had to for 
the sake of my health. I had savings I could live on for six months (with big 
lifestyle changes), a plan for low-paid work if I couldn’t find something else, 
and an alternative plan for retraining in the longer term. The day I walked out 
was one of the happiest of my life – the relief was incredible and I felt much 
better about myself almost immediately. In the end I got a job within a month. 
It’s only in hindsight that I recognise just what a bad mental state I’d got 
myself into, and I dread to think of the damage if I had stayed. I know it is a 
risk, and for some is financially impossible, but if there is any way at all 
you can do it, then get out.room32

• Join a union if you haven’t already, and wait until you are entitled to 
representation. Keep a log, including details of possible witnesses. With the 
help of your union, submit a grievance detailing what you are complaining about 
and what you would like your employer to do about it.intermax 

My secondment is failing as I’m being denied the IT training I desperately need

I have recently been promoted to team leader– the second rung of the in-house 
managerial ladder. I had been working towards this for a year before I finally 
got my opportunity – it’s on secondment for two months and will get made 
permanent if it goes well.

I explained in my interview that although I have a basic knowledge of the 
in-house computer systems, I don’t have the knowledge that the other team 
leader or the manager has. Since I have been promoted I have had to text or 
ring one of them each shift in order for help. I explained that I wanted 
training and needed it to be able to do my job, but have been told it’s going 
to be difficult to find the time. Now things are going wrong and I am unable to 
fix them. There have been occasions where they haven’t answered the phone and 
I’ve been completely stuck, and been reprimanded for it on the next shift.

If this continues I can’t see the secondment being made permanent, from either 
side, as I don’t want to take the job permanently if this is what is to come.

Jeremy says

I suspect you’re being just a little too polite and hesitant. Because you 
don’t want to make a fuss or seem to be looking for excuses when things go 
wrong, you haven’t been nearly firm enough in your request for training. This 
could lead to exactly the outcome you fear, with your secondment failing to be 
made permanent and you, rather than your workplace, being held responsible. You 
might, as you suggest, be relieved – but that would be unfair and unnecessary.

You need to write a cool, considered note to your manager, copied to HR (if 
you have such a department). Avoid sounding either plaintive or apologetic; 
stick strictly to the facts. Say that you are grateful to both your manager and 
the other team leader for the time they spend helping you deal with in-house 
system issues. Now that you’ve been doing the job for some time it’s become 
even more apparent that you shouldn’t have to rely on such ad hoc help but need 
formal computer system training. Can they please arrange a programme for you as 
soon as possible, because only then will you feel able to fulfil the role with 
which you’ve been entrusted.

This will hopefully prompt the training you need. At worst, being on the 
record when your performance is eventually evaluated, it should ensure you’re 
not unfairly penalised.

Readers say 

• Cover your back: write a report to your manager requesting a specialised 
minion on short-contract, adding that training would be cheaper. And bite the 
bullet and self-study and network like crazy.RodMcLeod

• Pick up the phone and talk to IT guys, experts on connecting systems, your 
own staff. People are usually happy to help as long you show that you’re 
looking to develop your own knowledge rather than simply asking them to solve 
your problems for you.Sandeman83

• Aside from in-house documentation, one can often find other IT 
documentation, examples and user forums online. You can also ask the IT people 
if they have any documentation – often they have put considerable effort into 
it, which can often go largely unused. This will not only help you to do your 
job, but help you if/when you look for another.jgbg

Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a 
brief email todear.jeremy@theguardian.com <mailto:dear.jeremy@theguardian.com>. 
Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply 
personally.
 