
It was a rotten time, aggressive and cynical. The Task Force was back from the 
South Atlantic, the cruise missiles were coming into Greenham Common, they were 
shooting to kill in Belfast, they were banning unions at GCHQ and trampling 
down strikers in the coal fields. It was a time of ruthlessness in government 
and of the crushing of enemies. And everywhere, there was the shadow of the 
secret state, arrogant and apparently omnipotent.

Trade unionists, peace activists and almost anyone else who disapproved of the 
Government watched for signs of the security services tapping their phones or 
reading their letters or bugging their meetings and, while ministers sneered at 
their anxiety, hard evidence trickled out from the hidden corners of the 
corridors of power to confirm the worst of their fears.

West Midlands Special Branch were caught spying on a housewife whose only 
offence was to have written to a newspaper about nuclear weapons. The European 
Court accused London of tapping phones illegally. Devon and Cornwall Special 
Branch were ordered to weed their files when the new Chief Constable discovered 
the extent of their surveillance. The Government tried to suppress the evidence 
of Peter Wright and Cathy Massiter, but both of them emerged to disclose how 
their former colleagues in MI5 had bugged and burgled and opened files on 'the 
enemy within'.

It was during this rotten time that Hilda Murrell died. She was a 78-year-old 
spinster from Shrewsbury, an amiable old English lady who could have walked 
straight out of a gentle comedy from Ealing Studios. She liked to welcome good 
news by chirping 'hear, hear' and had spent her life growing roses and 
supporting interesting causes. She was last seen alive just before mid-day on 
March 21, 1984 - exactly ten years ago - as she returned from a shopping trip 
and walked into her home in the suburbs of Shrewsbury.

Somebody broke into her home that day. He kicked Miss Murrell in the head and 
shoulders, stabbed her half a dozen times in the belly and once again in the 
arm with such force that the blade came right through her bicep, he masturbated 
on her underwear, stole her cash and drove her out to the countryside in her 
own car, where he dumped her half-alive, naked from the waist down, and left 
her in a lightly wooded field to die slowly from the cold. This person has 
never been caught.

This ugly but apparently straightforward crime became the subject of an 
extraordinary controversy. In the two years after her death, it was explored by 
three television documentaries, two books, several stage plays, two 
Parliamentary debates and endless columns of newsprint. The British Council of 
Churches, the former Chief Constable of Devon and Cornwall police, Paddy 
Ashdown, Neil Kinnock and numerous others joined the debate. They were all 
drawn to one central thesis: this elderly horticulturalist had been murdered by 
the secret state.

Ten years later, it looks very different. The conspiracy theories seem 
outlandish and crazed, the evidence from which they were built looks like a 
swamp of error and, even though the heavy-booted blunderings of the security 
services were real enough, it seems most likely that we were seduced by the 
anxiety of that era into believing a version of events that was, at best, 
simply a fairy story for the 1980s. Go back to the beginning and see how the 
story grew.

It started in the New Statesman, on November 9, 1984, when the freelance 
writer Judith Cook suggested that there might be a political motive for the 
murder. She listed a series of discrepancies in the police account, disclosed 
that Miss Murrell had been an active member of several anti-nuclear groups and 
speculated that she had been killed by an intruder who was looking for a paper 
which she was due to present at the public inquiry into the construction of the 
Sizewell B nuclear power station. Other newspapers began to wonder out loud 
whether this was the British version of the death of Karen Silkwood, who died 
mysteriously as she was about to blow the whistle on the American nuclear 
industry.

In the House of Commons, on December 19, 1984, the Labour MP Tam Dalyell 
produced an entirely different theory. Listing the same discrepancies which had 
been noted by the New Statesman, he declared that there was nothing at all in 
the Sizewell theory since Miss Murrell's paper was 'elegantly expressed but 
unoriginal'. The answer, he said, was that Miss Murrell had been killed by 'men 
of the British intelligence' who were looking for documents concerning the 
Belgrano, the Argentinian cruiser whose sinking had been turned by Dalyell into 
a devastating political attack on the Prime Minister.

Dalyell said he had a source who had told him that Miss Murrell's nephew, 
Commander Robert Green, had been working as an intelligence officer with the 
Royal Navy during the Falklands war and had personally sent the signal which 
ordered the sinking of the Belgrano. According to this source, Green had been 
appalled by the sinking and had taken early retirement, making him a suspect 
for the security services when they started hunting around to see if anyone had 
removed any paperwork about the incident.

This was when the story really took off, as journalists and politicians joined 
the hunt for evidence which would finally nail the security services. They were 
unworried by the fact that the New Statesman and Dalyell were generating 
conflicting theories. And they remained unworried when Commander Green joined 
the fray and rejected both accounts.

Green said Judith Cook was unreliable and Tam Dalyell had been misled but, 
with the help of some of Miss Murrell's friends, he began to develop several 
new theories. It was the nuclear industry, he said, which was behind the crime 
but they were not involved in a burglary which went wrong. They had set out to 
abduct his aunt in order to interrogate her. They had drugged her - and stabbed 
her through the arm in order to disguise the puncture mark - and then taken her 
to a safe house for questioning before murdering her in a way which suggested 
she had been attacked by a sex maniac. The commander found a tumbledown wooden 
stable near the field where Miss Murrell's body was found and decided this must 
be the safe house. He filled several sacks with old soil and manure from the 
floor in case it contained clues.

And that was not all. The nuclear industry, he decided, had not acted alone. 
After months of inquiry, the retired naval intelligence officer listed his 
conclusions: 'I used to think that only MI5 and their private detective 
stooges, over laid by the CIA and Westinghouse thugs, were likely to be 
involved. But now British Telecom, the Post Office, the Fire Service and the 
police themselves seem to be up to their necks in it . . . I can think of only 
one secret, all-pervasive organisation which could pull all these strings and 
which might have the motive to do so: the Freemasons.' Masonic symbols had been 
sketched in the pebbles in his aunt's drive, he surmised, to warn off the 
police.

But there was more than that. He recorded in his log a warning 'that the 
psychic element in the case had now come into play and that this was indeed a 
major struggle between the forces of good and evil.' It was significant, he 
suggested, that his aunt had been abducted on March 21, the Vernal equinox. 
This indicated occult practices. And the field where her body was dumped had 
been chosen through ancient Ley lines. There was a strong hint of Satanism in 
the crime, he said. He set off for Blackpool to find a local Romany woman 
supposed to know about witchcraft in the area but Gypsy Rosalee told him she 
was dead, so he went home. 'My hypothesis rests,' he wrote. 'Now all I have to 
do is prove it.'

This should have been enough to warn us off. It was not simply the daftness of 
Rob Green's theories but that they were the only logical way to explain how the 
security services were supposed to have behaved. Green is a decent, honest and 
intelligent man and he saw very quickly that the New Statesman and Tam Dalyell 
must be wrong.

No intelligence agency would burgle a house without checking that it was empty 
and ensuring that they had look-outs to warn them if the householder returned. 
So, if these people had confronted his aunt, it had to be because they wanted 
to. Hence the theory of abduction and interrogation. That meant that the 
killing had to have been premeditated. But why do it in such a macabre and 
vicious way? There was no explanation unless you assumed that there were very 
dark forces involved. But if that was the case, why was there no evidence of 
them? A massive, masonic-satanic cover-up was the only answer.

Why did anybody believe any of these theories? The simple answer ought to be 
that there was evidence to support them, evidence that was so strong that we 
were compelled to accept the conspiracy theories, no matter how weird they 
seemed. But go back and look at the evidence.

These theories were launched on a series of discrepancies in the police 
version of the case, originally listed by Judith Cook in the New Statesman. She 
complained, for example, that the police had said Miss Murrell was sexually 
assaulted. Tam Dalyell asked the House of Commons: 'Why did you say that when 
it turned out on their own evidence to be untrue? What is the purpose of that 
kind of inaccuracy other than to sweep uncomfortable suspicions under the 
carpet?' This whole line of criticism subsequently collapsed when the police 
disclosed that Miss Murrell's attacker had stripped her from the waist down and 
masturbated over her petticoat.

Judith Cook went on to suggest that Miss Murrell's telephone had been cut off 
in such a way that anybody calling her would have thought the phone was ringing 
when it was, in fact, silent. She said the police agreed this was 
'sophisticated'. This line of thought also collapsed when the police produced 
their video of the scene of the crime to prove that the phone line had been 
simply ripped from its socket. They said they had never told anyone it was 
sophisticated. There was, in any event, no clear reason why MI5 or any other 
intruder would want to silence Miss Murrell's phone since they had dumped her 
dying in a field and knew very well that she was not in the house to hear it.

Some of the discrepancies were tiny, like the complaint that the police had 
described the house as 'ransacked' when the truth was that it had been 
'carefully searched'. Others flowed from ignorance of police work, like the 
complaint that they refused to release the post-mortem report and kept delaying 
the date of the inquest. Others were hyperbole: when the FBI were asked to help 
with a psychological profile of the likely offender, this was seized as 
evidence of an international intelligence link. Some were just wrong, like the 
claim that the police had found Miss Murrell's car but failed to identify her 
as the owner because they had fed the wrong registration number into their 
computer. It never happened. But the story took off, gathering more fuel from 
more discrepancies which seemed significant at the time.

Rob Green disclosed that the final draft of his aunt's paper on Sizewell had 
been stolen from her house. That looked significant, until the police proved he 
was wrong by producing it on television. There was a fire at Miss Murrell's 
country cottage. Her friends said this was caused by a sophisticated incendiary 
device. That looked significant until forensic experts said it had been caused 
by setting fire to damp newspaper in a box of logs outside the back door. They 
said police had approached a local psychotherapist and asked about men who 
might molest old women and this must be significant because it had happened 24 
hours before the police said they knew anything about the attack on Miss 
Murrell. The police explained that they had approached the counsellor for help 
over another, entirely separate indecent assault in their area.

The whole affair leaped forward when the Observer ran a front-page news story 
revealing that private detectives had been hired to spy on objectors at the 
Sizewell inquiry and suggested that West Mercia police should investigate the 
possibility that Hilda Murrell was one of their targets. Everyone involved in 
the Murrell saga thought that was significant until it became clear that the 
private detectives had stopped work in February 1983, a clear six months before 
Miss Murrell had first registered any objection to Sizewell. There was no 
connection between Hilda Murrell 's murder and the Observer story (I know. I 
wrote it.)

Three of Miss Murrell's friends reported that she had been frightened in the 
weeks before her death. One was an 83-year-old woman, Con Purser, who took 
nearly two years to produce this information and volunteered that she had 
recently seen Miss Murrell in a cloud over her garden, smiling at her. Another 
was a Shrewsbury peace campaigner, Laurens Otter, who took more than a year to 
produce the information his latest theory is that Miss Murrell was not only 
under surveillance before her murder but that on the day of the crime she 
attracted two different hit squads who turned up to kill her and ended up 
squabbling about who should do the job. The third witness, Gerard 
Morgan-Grenville, has always maintained that Miss Murrell rang him in fear one 
night. Maybe she was frightened. Everyone else was.

It was not only the details of the conspiracy theories which collapsed on 
closer inspection. The foundations crumbled, too. No one who examined Hilda 
Murrell 's work on Sizewell could ever point to any fact or argument which she 
had uncovered which could conceivably justify spying on her. When Rob Green 
later read her paper to the inquiry, it created no controversy. There was no 
Sizewell motive. And Tam Dalyell's source, who had launched the Belgrano 
conspiracy theory, turned out to be wrong. He was wrong, for example, in 
believing that Green had sent the signal ordering the cruiser's sinking and 
wrong, too, about the circumstances of his leaving the navy. He was never able 
to deliver any detail to corroborate the story. If the Belgrano theory is true, 
no one has ever been able to produce a single slither of evidence to support it.

The most striking feature of all this is that the people who generated these 
theories and all the thousands of others who took them seriously were all 
honest, honourable people who were doing their best to make sense of a mystery. 
We were dragged off course by a common fear - that the security services were 
ready to break the law to beat the 'enemy within'. The fear was real and 
justified, but there is still no evidence that Miss Murrell's murder had 
anything to do with it.

West Mercia police continue to say that she died at the hands of a most 
vicious burglar. In the evidence room at Shrewsbury police station, detectives 
still hold the evidence which may identify him - unmatched finger prints from 
the car and from the inside of her house, casts of a footprint, hair, semen, an 
artits's imressions of the suspect. But they have not found him. And they have 
not stopped the conspiracy theories.

Last year a private detective from Surrey named Gary Murray, who claims to be 
a former MI5 agent, published a book in which he reviewed the Murrell mystery. 
He reworked all the old discrepancies in the police account and then disclosed 
that a prisoner serving 15 years for armed robbery had admitted that he had 
killed Hilda Murrell along with four other criminals, all of them working for 
the security services. On closer inspection, it turned out that two of the 
other criminals had never heard of this theory, the third was dead and the 
fourth was confined in a mental hospital with psychotic delusions, while the 
prisoner who had produced the original claim confessed that he had concocted 
the whole thing from a story in the Independent magazine in November 1989, in 
the hope that it might help him appeal against his conviction for armed 
robbery. Murray now says that he never claimed to know whether the story was 
true. It was just another rotten tale from a very rotten time.
 