
We have entered the November international break, the dull yet dizzying period 
where football's managerial merry-go-round cranks up and chairmen are more 
inclined to make heavy-fingered chord changes to their coaching staff. Usually 
the new men coming in get vast licence – not just with first-team matters but 
throughout the club – even though there is a reasonable chance that before too 
long they will be gone and the carousel will have started up again.

Some will think that is how it should be. Last season 43 managers across the 
92 league clubs were sacked and the average job expectancy has shrunk to little 
more than a year. Yet there is an increasing sense that clubs should invest 
some of a manager's responsibilities elsewhere. On Saturday Crystal Palace 
appointed Iain Moody as their sporting director with the task of improving 
their infrastructure and addressing the weaknesses in player recruitment. It is 
a path one expects others to take.

After all, a manager cannot do it all any more. He cannot be worried about, 
say, the club's under-15s when first-team results could dictate whether he is 
out on his ear at the end of the month. And as James Smith, head of performance 
analysis at Everton, points out, it is not just about a manager's time but his 
skill-set too. They are theoretically responsible for recruitment, staff, the 
academy, sports medicine and analytics departments and a whole lot else 
besides. But as Swansea's manager, Michael Laudrup, put it recently, the Uefa 
Pro Licence equipped him to be a coach but not necessarily an English-style 
manager.

Smith, an intelligent and engaging thinker, is a firm believer that having a 
director of football is the way forward. "The job of a Premier League manager 
in the old-fashioned sense, where you are theoretically in control of 
everything, is too big for one man," he said at a sports analytics summit last 
week. "The weekly cycle of training and matches is all-consuming."

Smith has worked with David Moyes and Roberto Martínez who, he says, are 
excellent at juggling the different elements of the job and delegating when 
required. But that is rare in football.

So why is the idea of a sporting director so maligned? Partly it is because 
what we understand about the role veers into wild caricature: the ageing 
manager as vulture, resting on a club owner's shoulder, expecting an imminent 
kill; or the interfering Moneyball obsessive – part Billy Beane-worshipper, 
part bean-counter. Joe Kinnear's prattlings about Shola Ameobi as "Amanobi" and 
Jonás Gutiérrez as "Gaultierez" – or the recent allegations that he expressed 
an interest in Shane Ferguson without realising he was on loan at Birmingham 
from Newcastle – have hardly helped.

So what should a director of football do? Two things: set up an excellent 
recruitment department to monitor and chase targets across the globe; and 
ensure a consistent philosophy and approach across the club – from the academy 
to analytics to sports science – by appointing the best staff in every position.

The hierarchy also needs to be correct, not confused: chairman, then director 
of football, then head coach/manager. The director of football should hire and 
fire the manager but he should never replace him. When Pep Guardiola left 
Barcelona there was never any suggestion that the club's sporting director, 
Andoni Zubizarreta, would take over. It was his job to find a new head coach. 
Yet when Chelsea sacked José Mourinho they turned toAvram Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/avram-grant>.

English managers sometimes moan that a director of football signs players they 
do not want. But at the best clubs it does not work like that. Instead the 
cat's cradle of chairman, director of football, coach and head performance 
analyst should work closely to identify targets based on an agreed budget.And, 
contrary to popular belief, it can work in English football. Watching West 
Bromwich's performance at Chelsea at the weekend was another reminder of the 
strides they have made in the past decade.

Last week the club's former sporting and technical director, Dan Ashworth – 
who is now the FA's director of elite development – explained how, whenever the 
Baggies were interviewing for a new manager, that person was told he had to 
work closely with the technical director, who had independent powers and 
responsibilities. "The West Brom chairman, Jeremy Peace, stayed strong to his 
beliefs," said Ashworth last week. "Structure was non-negotiable."

If a potential manager was not happy, then he was told his services would not 
be needed. It is somewhat of a mystery why other chairmen do not follow the 
same path.

Such a sea change in English football will not happen overnight. In fact it 
should not happen overnight. It is almost certainly unwise to change the 
structure and appoint a director of football when a manager is in situ.

Just look at what happened at Newcastle with Kevin Keegan and Dennis Wise or 
at West Ham when Gianluca Nani was brought in over Alan Curbishley. The 
managers felt their responsibilities were diminished so they felt diminished 
too. Yet over time one would expect that prevailing culture would have to give 
way to common sense. And that every club would have a director of football, or 
something similar.

But in English football things are rarely that simple or certain.
 