
Rory Carroll and Jonathan Watts have offered a rather sour assessment of Fidel 
Castro’s legacy (Castro’s legacy: how the revolutionary inspired and appalled 
the world <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-legacy>, 
26 November) which mostly ignores Cuba’s enormous contribution as an inspiring 
model of development. Yes, Cuba is materially poor, but it is socially rich and 
has shared that wealth internally and internationally. Under his leadership, 
illiteracy and tuberculosis in Cuba were quickly eradicated and unprecedented 
models of healthcare and education created that are the envy of the world.

A small island nation of 11 million people, blockaded by the world’s last 
superpower, has punched well above its weight in terms of humanitarianism. The 
Cuban Henry Reeve contingent has intervened in disasters and emergencies around 
the world to save 80,000 lives in 20 countries where 7,000 Cuban health 
specialists have offered their services. Cuba helped break the back of apartheid
South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>. More recently, 
Cuba has helped broker the peace agreement in Colombia, thus ending one of the 
longest-running conflicts in the hemisphere. Fidel taught the world an 
important lesson: that the real wealth of any country is its people and 
material resources are best applied to addressing social need. In the so-called 
“developed world” still grappling with recession and austerity post-2008, we 
could perhaps follow Cuba’s lead and prioritise social justice and compassion 
over profit and greed.
Stephen McCloskey
Director, Centre for Global Education

• Many on the left of politics have been paying tribute to Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> because of the socialist 
aspects of Cuba under his rule. But given that Castro’s Cuba is also strongly 
associated with abuses of human rights and restrictions on liberal values, it 
doesn’t make sense for the political left to sympathise with, and praise him. 
Either such abuses of human rights are necessary for establishing that kind of 
socialist state or they are not. If they are necessary then the example of Cuba 
has shown that such a socialist state is unacceptable as a social system. If 
they are not necessary, then by committing such human rights abuses in Cuba, so 
that they become associated with the idea of a socialist state, Castro has 
unnecessarily caused significant damage to that idea. But either way, Castro 
hasn’t helped the socialist cause and shouldn’t be lauded as one of its 
champions.
David Wall
Northampton

• The vitriol surrounding the death of Fidel Castro is only possible because 
of the rewriting of history and forgetting that every time a progressive 
government emerged in Latin America the US – by direct or covert means – sought 
its destruction.

Currently Cuba’s under-five mortality rate is 1,204 per million, which is the 
lowest in Latin America and half the rate of seven other countries. Unlike 
Cuba, the US did not meet the UN Millennium goals of reducing child deaths 
(0-4) and currently Cuba’s rate is 15% lower than the US rate at 1,384pm. If, 
in this century, the US had had the same child death rate asCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> there would on average have been 5,539 
fewer dead American children. For the average child it’s better to be born a 
Cuban than in the US.
Prof Colin Pritchard
Southampton

• While many of us admire the Cuban revolution and the changes it brought by 
overthrowing the US-backed brutal dictator Batista, and the wonderful health 
and education systems, I’m not sure that many Cubans wanted to replace one 
dictator with another or even that Che Guevara ever thought that he fought so 
that Castro could cede power to his brother as if Cuba were a monarchy. Many 
leftists still support brutal dictators like Assad. It is time for a democratic 
left that stands for the people.
Mohammed Samaana
Belfast

• Without presenting myself as an apologist for Castro, let’s get a little 
perspective here. Despite history being rewritten by the bitter dispossessed 
mafia-type businessmen who were thrown out of Cuba, Castro’s revolution deposed 
the worst dictator in Latin America who was hellbent on turning Cuba into the 
world’s leading supplier of prostitutes (11,500 in Havana alone), drugs and 
gambling opportunities. Neither the police force nor government officials would 
do anything without a bribe, and Batista (who himself came to power in a 
violent coup) made the mafiosi families immensely rich while the people starved.

Ejected from the country and their mansions and assets confiscated, they 
finished up in Florida from where they have conducted a 58-year-long propaganda 
war, brokered over 500 failed assassination attempts, attempted a pathetic 
invasion, stole the Barcadi and Tropicana brands from Cuba and generally 
ensured that its fruit and sugar rotted in the fields.

On the plus side, education was among the best in the region, exceeding even 
the US for literacy rates. There was healthcare for everyone, more doctors were 
trained than anywhere else, and sent to help in disasters and epidemics 
worldwide. Everyone in Cuba was fed, at least up to the standards of wartime 
rationed Britain. There was little they could not have achieved in economic 
terms had it not been for the blockade.
Dorian Kelly
Colchester

• Castro leaves a mixed legacy. It was Cuban military support of Angola, in 
particular the role played by Cuban-piloted MiG fighter planes, that halted the 
advance of the South African apartheid regime’s military into Angola at the 
battle of Cuito Cuanavale in 1988. This military and psychological defeat 
helped lead to the independence of Namibia, hence Nelson Mandela’s comment that 
the battle “marked an important step in the struggle to free the continent and 
our country of the scourge of apartheid”.
Paul Brannen MEP
Labour

• Perfect timing for the Xmas shopping frenzy: “The consumer society is the 
expression of a completely irrational mode of life and consumption, and it will 
never serve as a model for the 10 billion people who will supposedly inhabit 
the planet when the dreadful oil age is over. That economic order and those 
models of consumption are incompatible with the world’s limited and 
non-renewable essential resources ... They also clash with the elementary 
principles of ethics, culture and moral values.”

– Fidel Castro: My Life
Mike Bor
London

• These dreadful Cubans putting people in prison on that island without trial. 
Our American allies would never do that.
Eric Clyne
Arbroath

• Fidel Castro must have had the last laugh when he saw that the United States 
had chosenDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> as 
their new president.
Ivor Yeloff
Norwich

• The question is: did Castro Fidel while Raul learned?
Dave Shields
Rugby

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 