
The operational readiness of the UK’s armed forces is at risk because the 
country’s military bases and infrastructure have become too dilapidated to use 
effectively, Whitehall’s independent auditor has found. The National Audit 
Office has examined properties and land controlled by the Ministry of Defence, 
which cover nearly 2% of the UK’s landmass, and found that they need £8.5bn of 
investment so that they can be used efficiently to react to any military 
threats.

“There is a significant risk that the poor condition of the estate will affect 
the department’s ability to provide the defence capability needed,” the NAO 
report, published on Tuesday, said. “As the estate’s condition deteriorates, 
some parts may wholly or partially close. This will exacerbate other risks and 
could reduce operational readiness.”

Financial pressures have meant that since 2009, the MoD has been forced to 
abandon its programme of improvement works, auditors explained. This has 
reduced service levels to those needed to keep the estate “safe and legal”, 
resulting in a “general deterioration” in the overall condition. Auditors said 
the extent of the deterioration could now jeopardise the delivery of new and 
existing military capabilities.


Problems include a lack of funding at Portsmouth naval base, which could 
threaten the ability ofthe Royal Navy’s two new aircraft carriers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/23/strategic-defence-review-cameron-6bn-aircraft-carriers>
 to operate. Cables that are supposed to provide energy to the Queen Elizabeth 
and the Prince of Wales – the largest ships to be built for the Royal Navy – 
have not been replaced, the report disclosed.

“This may jeopardise the carriers’ ability to operate. For example, the cables 
that supply power to the base and carriers are more than 80 years old. They 
need replacing, but there is no funding available to do this,” it said.

The report also found that the army’s main vehicle support and storage site at 
Ashworth in Gloucestershire lacked the capability to keep vehicles at high 
levels of readiness for deployments.


Fuelling facilities at RAF Brize Norton also had to be shut down for safety 
reasons and a temporary facility installed because of lack of maintenance, 
auditors said. Meanwhile, a failure to fix a leaking roof at the medical centre 
at RAF Valley in Anglesey caused the building to deteriorate so badly that it 
had to be demolished, they added.

Auditors concluded that the overall model for managing the estate had failed, 
and indicated that the Capita, the outsourcing firm contracted to manage the 
estate, was in part to blame for its failures. They criticisedCapita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> for failing to manage the 
estate after being given a £90m contract by the then defence secretaryPhilip 
Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>. 

Hammond signed a 10-year contract with Capita in 2014 to run the defence 
infrastructure programme (DIO), despitewidespread criticism of a contract with 
thefirm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jan/14/ministry-of-defence-failed-computer-system>
 to deliver the IT systems some months earlier. However, auditors said there 
had been “fundamental weaknesses” in the contracting process and that Capita 
had not “performed adequately against agreed key performance indicators”.


“Although there have been some improvements, the strategic business partner’s 
performance has not met all expectations and has not made a notable difference 
in transforming DIO to better meet the needs of the commands,” the report said.

The government spends £4.8bn on the estate, which – at 424,000 hectares – 
accounts for 1.8% of the total UK land mass.

Nia Griffith MP, the shadow defence secretary, said the report paints a 
“shocking picture” of mismanagement and underinvestment. “Amongst the most 
alarming findings is that a failure to invest in the estate may jeopardise the 
ability of the UK’s two new aircraft carriers to operate.

“This represents an outrageous failure to plan for the future, and the 
government must urgently ensure that it makes funds available so that these 
carriers can enter service without delay,” she said.


Responding to the report, an MoD spokesperson said it was aiming to deliver a 
better defence estate. “That’s why we’ve outlined a long-term, military-led 
strategy, to invest £4bn in training facilities fit for our strong and modern 
armed forces and better accommodation to deliver more stability for military 
families,” he said.

A Royal Navy <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/royal-navy> spokesman said of 
fears about the operational capabilities of aircraft carriers: “Portsmouth 
naval base will be ready for the arrival of HMS Queen Elizabeth in 2017. The 
power delivery infrastructure required to support the arrival of the aircraft 
carrier has been fully assessed and, where necessary, upgraded.”
 