
One widely overlooked impending cut is missing from Amelia Gentleman’s list of 
problematic changes to benefits (Sanctions, caps and bedroom tax: IDS’s war on 
benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/20/ids-victorian-morality-reforming-zeal-gross-incompetence>
, 20 March). Reporting has focused on claimants of working age – but the 
government also proposes to axe the already meagre benefits for pensioners who 
become disabled.

While existing claimants of personal independence payments (PIP) who reach 
pension age may continue to receive them, you cannot make a first claim once 
you reach 65. The only benefit available to those who become disabled after 
turning 65 is attendance allowance (AA). Payable at either £82 or £55 weekly, 
it goes only to those needing personal care or supervision to stay safe. Unlike 
PIP, it has no mobility component. (Become unable to walk at 64, you can get 
PIP at £57 a week; suffer the same fate a year later, you get nothing.) The 
government is contemplating abolishing AA for new claimants from April 2018. 
Savings from this measure would go, non-ringfenced, to local authorities.

Not all pensioners are rolling in clover: about one person in seven aged over 
65 lives in poverty. These people cannot afford paid help or equipment. Given 
the cuts in care provision that local authorities are currently having to 
implement, the outlook for these pensioners if they become ill or disabled is 
bleak indeed.
Patricia de Wolfe
London

• With PIP in the spotlight, it is a good time to point out the very unfair 
change the government made to the PIP assessment, without consultation, three 
years ago, meaning that thousands of disabled working-age claimants, who are 
only now being reassessed, have lost eligibility for their Motability car. 
These cars, some heavily adapted, are a lifeline for many disabled people, 
particularly those in rural areas. When the DWP belatedly carried out a 
consultation, over a thousand people responded, the vast majority urging it to 
restore the 50 metre walking test which had been altered at the last minute to 
20 metres.

To date, almost 17,000 claimants have lost their eligibility for these cars, 
and many thousands will join them as the reassessments gather pace. And, though 
many appeals are successful, this is an expensive and time-consuming exercise.

I hope the new secretary of state for work and pensions will support a move to 
change the test back to 50 metres, not least because of the importance of a car 
to many working-age disabled people who are hoping to get into work.
Celia Thomas
Liberal Democrat, House of Lords 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 