
In the past three months the Government has unveiled two new forms of pension 
saving - the stakeholder pension and Lisa, the lifetime individual savings 
account. Should you defer starting up a pension to take advantage of these new 
schemes when they come in to force?

What if I ditch my company scheme?

The first thing to remember is never, ever, opt out of, or delay entry into, a 
company pension scheme. The £11 billion pensions mis-selling saga came about 
largely because employees ditched their company scheme and bought a personal 
pension instead. In almost no circumstances is it better to have a personal 
pension than a company scheme, as your employer will make contributions into a 
company scheme but will not pay into an individual personal pension.

Stakeholder schemes and Lisas will offer very little to somebody who has the 
chance of taking out a company scheme, and have not been designed to replace 
them.

What are the attractions of stakeholder schemes?

Stakeholder pensions were unveiled in December as a new retirement savings 
vehicle aimed at people earning between £9,000 and £18,500 who cannot join a 
company scheme. They mean to encourage those who might otherwise have to depend 
on the paltry £65 single weekly state pension to boost their retirement income 
through stakeholder savings.

People will be lured into the schemes with the promise of bigger National 
Insurance rebates if they opt out of the existing state earnings-related scheme 
(Serps) and into the stakeholder pension. Serps, which offers an extra state 
pension linked to earnings over a working life, will be scrapped.

Charges will be controlled using benchmarks in a bid to keep costs down, 
possibly with annual charges as low as 1 per cent, cheaper than existing 
personal pensions.

Payments will be flexible, allowing the contributor to stop and start payments 
at will. Various organisations will be able to offer stakeholder schemes, such 
as unions and employers' associations.

The schemes will be most attractive to low-to-middle income earners on £9,000- 
£18,000, such as self-employed plumbers or electricians, who can currently only 
take out a personal pension.

I earn less than £9,000 a year. What are my options? 

People on lower earnings - the five million Britons who earn less than £9,000 
a year - will be offered the State Second Pension. This will also gradually 
replace Serps and will be worth around £46 per week for someone whose average 
earnings were £6,000 per year. To qualify, all that will be needed is a record 
of National Insurance contributions. Tom Ross, a pensions consultant at Aon, 
points out the new State Second Pension will pay a flat rate, which should 
offer a better deal to those on less than £9,000 than they currently obtain 
through Serps. The lowest paid could therefore feel they have less incentive to 
take out any form of private pension than they have now.

What are the attractions of Lisa?

The Lisa (Lifetime Individual Savings Account), as it is dubbed by all but its 
creators in the Government, is positioned at the other end of the pensions 
scale, aimed at self-employed people on higher earnings who currently take out 
a personal pension with a life insurance company.

It is a tax-efficient wrapper for pooled funds, such as unit and investment 
trusts, offering stock market-linked growth with income tax relief. Charges 
will probably be similar to those offered in Peps but savers are not expected 
to be able to dip into funds until they are at least 50 years old. Details on 
the Lisa are still sketchy, as it was only revealed this February, but more 
information could be given in the Budget on March 9.

The Lisa is likely to be offered as part of existing company and personal 
pension schemes, as well as stakeholder pensions.

Fund managers with specialist knowledge in the stock market will be muscling 
in on traditional life insurance providers, so we can expect Lisas to be sold 
from a bigger variety of pension sellers than we have at present.

So do I wait to take out a stakeholder or a Lisa scheme?

Graham Bates, an independent financial adviser at Bates Investment Services, 
warns it is a mistake to delay putting money away for old age just because 
stakeholders and Lisas will be available in the future.

He says: 'Delaying saving for the next couple of years would be unwise because 
we do not know the full details of the new pensions yet. The one thing we do 
know is that early contributions matter the most.

'If you are already in a pension plan this is no reason to change. If you have 
an option to join a company pension scheme then take it. But those thinking 
about personal pensions should look for more flexibility.'

But Axa Sun Life marketing manager Steve Muir warns that the history of 
pensions legislation does not bode well for stakeholder schemes. 'Whenever 
there has been new pensions legislation, the new benefits are almost never 
better than the previous benefits.

'Personal pensions, for example, were in many ways inferior to the Section 226 
pensions that preceded them.'

I have a personal pension. Should I swap it for a stakeholder or Lisa scheme?

Finding a pension that can be cheaply transferred into another plan, or easily 
paid up, could be a good idea because the stakeholder could end up being more 
attractive than some personal pensions and worth taking out.

Savers should therefore look for personal pensions which do not have high 
up-front charges but take out set-up fees and management costs gradually over 
time. Current providers who offer such pensions include Friends Provident, 
Scottish Life and Standard Life, says Mr Bates.

You might prefer to pay up your personal pension and keep it aside until 
retirement, allowing the option to join a stakeholder. This will be cheaper 
than transferring the pension in some cases.

Axa Sun Life's Mr Muir adds: 'Choose a personal pension that allows you to 
have it paid up with low charges that do not eat into the fund and lets you 
pick up contributions again if the stakeholder scheme becomes inappropriate.'

It might also be worth seeing if you can take out a fee-based pension if 
buying from an adviser or sales rep, rather than pay commission, as this can 
work out cheaper.

Steve Bee, assistant general manager at Scottish Life, says: 'Consider a 
single premium personal pension which allows you to put in a lump sum and 
allows you to escape making long-term commitments.'

It would be a good idea to look for personal pension providers who expect to 
offer the stakeholder as they should offer smoother, possibly free, transfers.

Can a personal pension make more sense than a stakeholder pension?

The stakeholder and Lisas will certainly not be the best option for all. 
Richard Leigh, a pensions lawyer for Eversheds, points out that stakeholder 
schemes are expected to have an annual contribution limit of only £3,600 a 
year, meaning higher earners are likely to be better off with a personal 
pension.

Personal pensions have limits of between 17.5 per cent and 40 per cent of net 
earnings a year, depending on your age, allowing up to £87,600 a year to 
benefit from pension income tax breaks.

Government restrictions on stakeholder charges could encourage providers to 
use tracker funds linked to the stock market, which are generally cheaper to 
run than actively managed pension funds.

This could mean that, as with Lisas, they could do particularly well if the 
stock market is booming, but do badly when stocks and shares fall. Those 
concerned about risk may feel safer with personal pensions which offer 
with-profits funds.

There is also a fear that stakeholder providers might find it hard keeping the 
lid on benchmarked charges if the Government's guidelines prove unrealistic.
 