
Despite being on the air since 1997, Midsomer Murders has remained a 
profoundly one-sided endeavour. The only way that viewers could play along with 
the show until now has been to locate a chubby countryside millionaire, engage 
him in a convoluted dispute over illegal birds’ eggs, then decapitate him in a 
needlessly elaborate manner. Which, in all fairness, hardly seemed worth the 
bother.

But no longer! Under official license from Hasbro, an official Midsomer 
Murders Cluedo set is about to be released. Finally, thanks to the combination 
of the two whitest-hot, cuttingest-edge technologies in the known world – 
broadcast television and 70-year-old board games – fans of the TV series will 
at last get to solve a murder of their own, over the course of a long, sad, 
numb-legged afternoon with elderly relatives.

Hopefully, Midsomer Murders Cluedo will be a success, because frankly the 
world is crying out for more TV/board game crossovers. Here are five that 
deserve to be made immediately.


Jeremy Kyle Trivial Pursuit

At long last, relive the immortal moments of this long-running daytime talk 
show with an adaptation of the best-selling general knowledge game. Answer 
tricky brain-teasers such as: ‘Are you the baby’s father?’ ‘Did you sleep with 
your crack-addicted cousin while your wife was pregnant with triplets?’ ‘You’re 
a scrounger, aren’t you?’ ‘You’re a no-good scrounger and you don’t deserve to 
live, do you?’ and the classic ‘Haven’t we, as a society, progressed beyond 
this yet?’

X Factor Snakes and Ladders

Mimic the uncertain trajectory of the life of a reality show contestant with 
this incredible new game. LADDER! You’ve been accepted into the X Factor 
audition. SNAKE! You realise this is only because you can’t sing, and a gang of 
dead-eyed millionaires want to humiliate you on television. LADDER! You prize 
public recognition over personal dignity and go ahead anyway. SNAKE! You become 
a walking punchline. LADDER! You’ve now got 150,000 Twitter followers. SNAKE! 
Everyone you ever loved has abandoned you for fear of being associated with 
you. LADDER! Your cover version of I Like to Move It by Reel 2 Real has reached 
number 47 in the charts.


Doctor Who Ludo

Travel time and space in an epic adaptation of the long-running BBC sci-fi 
series! NB: please be aware that you’ll feel duty-bound to complain about the 
game at length with every roll of the dice, stating that your current move is 
palpably worse than any the moves that preceded it, and that the game has 
either become too simplistic, too complex, too feminist or not feminist enough 
for your tastes. At some point, you will realise that you’re doing this and 
start to hate yourself.


A League of Their Own Bantzaroo

A much-needed remake of Buckaroo. Here is a plastic viewer. How many forced, 
pub-style larks can you pile on it before it starts to uncontrollably flap 
about in a fit of rage? Put a small “Woy-oy” on its lap. Nothing? Why not 
delicately drop a joke about the size of Freddie Flintoff’s genitals on its 
shoulder? Still nothing? Wait, here comes a great big spiritually empty James 
Corden cackle. Oh, that’s done it. Pieces everywhere. Bantz overload achieved.


Game of Thrones Chess

This is exactly like regular chess, except there are now 15 sets of pieces and 
they’re all the same identical grey colour, and it’s impossible to know what 
the state of any game is at any point without extensively consulting Wikipedia 
first. Plus, if you mention anything that has ever happened during any previous 
Game of Thrones Chess game you’ve ever played, a grown man will lose his mind 
with anger at you on the internet for spoiling his enjoyment of the game in an 
infinitesimally minor way.
 