
In March 2004, when he was 11 years old, Bryan Cooper was a groom who helped 
to lead up Total Enjoyment for his father, Tom, when she won the Champion 
Bumper. He looked around at the crowd that welcomed her back and knew 
immediately what he wanted to be. “That was the day when I said that I wanted 
to do it,” he said in the same winner’s enclosure on Friday, after riding Don 
Cossack to victory in the Gold Cup. “I’ve fulfilled my dream.”

Cooper is still just 23, but he has already endured enough miserable 
afternoons here to make this success all the sweeter. Two years ago he broke 
his leg in a fall in the Fred Winter, while on Wednesday he rode No More Heroes 
for Gordon Elliott, the trainer of Don Cossack, in the RSA Chase. The horse, 
seen as a possible Gold Cup winner next year, was put down after severing a 
tendon.

Like every top jockey, he has also faced occasional criticism for his riding, 
mostly from after-timers and pocket-talkers, but on one occasion recently from 
Elliott, who described Cooper’s ride on Don Cossack in last year’s Ryanair as 
diabolical.

Perhaps that was why he briefly touched a finger to his lips as he crossed the 
line, four-and-a-half lengths clear of Djakadam, the runner-up for the second 
consecutive year, and another 10 in front of Don Poli, in the same purple and 
white colours as the winner.

As the retained jockey to Michael O’Leary’s Gigginstown Stud operation, Cooper 
had the choice between Don Cossack and Don Poli, an impressive winner of the 
RSA Chase here last year. He never had a moment to doubt his judgment, as Don 
Cossack was soon settled and jumping in an ideal rhythm behind a solid pace set 
by Smad Place and O’Faolain’s Boy, and was still there at the third-last, where 
the race changed in a moment.

Cooper kicked into the lead here, just as Cue Card, the second-favourite, 
started to make his move. He was driven into the fence by Paddy Brennan, his 
jockey, but simply failed to take off and suffered a crashing fall.

As Cue Card, who was unhurt, got to his feet, Cooper set off for home and 
while Ruby Walsh did his best to chase him down on Djakadam, there was never a 
moment when he seemed likely to bridge the gap.

“It wasn’t [an] easy [choice], but it came down to the ground,” Cooper said. 
“I think when I made my decision people backed Don Poli more, because they 
thought I’d definitely picked the wrong one, but we proved that he was the best 
horse and the highest-rated horse for a reason and Gordon had him in tip-top 
shape.

“Everything went perfect. I didn’t want to get him crowded and we got into a 
lovely jumping rhythm. I knew turning in that there was only one winner bar a 
fall. He could have gone round again.”

There was further evidence of Cooper’s sensitivity to criticism, or perceived 
criticism. “There were a lot of press around saying that I couldn’t get on with 
the horse and I think I’ve proved you all wrong now, so I’m delighted,” he said.

He may be a little like an actor who only remembers the bad reviews, because 
Cooper has not had “a lot” of bad press, while far from abandoning Don Cossack 
after Cooper made his choice, the punters were very much on his side.

Four horses, including Cue Card, probably the most popular chaser in training 
in Britain, were potential favourites on Friday morning for one of the most 
competitive and eagerly awaited Gold Cups for years, but money came for Don 
Cossack throughout the day and he set off as the 9-4 favourite.

His victory completed an exceptional week for the punters, with nine winning 
favourites in the 28 races including most of the pre-Festival bankers. 
Estimates of the size of the hole in the betting industry’s accounts ranged 
from £60m to £80m.

For Elliott, who was 29 when he saddled Silver Birch to win the 2007 Grand 
National at 33-1, this was also a moment to savour. “I won the Grand National 
when I was very young and probably didn’t appreciate it,” he said, “but we’re 
all going to appreciate this.

“I always hoped he [Cooper] would ride him. He’s a big part of my team now. 
He’s there three days a week and we’re two young lads coming up who can 
hopefully keep it going.”

Elliott has emerged from the chasing pack to be a clear second to Willie 
Mullins in Ireland’s training championship and has now won a Gold Cup, beating 
horses from the Mullins yard into second and third place in a race that 
Ireland’s pre-eminent trainer has yet to win. Elliott left the Festival with 
three winners, the same number as Britain’s champion trainer, Paul Nicholls.

Don Cossack is the 6-1 favourite to win next year’s Gold Cup, in a market that 
also includes Thistlecrack and Vautour, both memorable winners on Thursday’s 
card, and Coneygree, last year’s Gold Cup winner, who missed this year’s race 
through injury. Djakadam, Cue Card and Don Poli could also be back for more.

We seem to say it every year as the Festival goes from strength to strength, 
but if this year’s race was good, the next promises to be even better.

Victoria Pendleton fifth in Foxhunter Chase at Cheltenham Festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/victoria-pendleton-fifth-foxhunter-chase-cheltenham-festival>
Cheltenham Festival 2016: Don Cossack wins the Gold Cup – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/18/cheltenham-festival-2016-gold-cup-day-live-victoria-pendleton> 