
A trove of leaked documents relating to offshore corporations with ties to the 
rich and famous has shed light on the extent to which the world’s financial and 
corporate centres are vulnerable to abuse by those seeking to hide their wealth.

The affair has unfairly come to be known as the Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, even though, as the 
documents show,tax evasion and financial crimes are global problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/12/panama-papers-global-tax-officials-inquiry-paris-meeting>
 to which no nation is immune.

The 11.5m documents revealed by the leak show that the majority of 
corporations formed byMossack Fonseca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/08/mossack-fonseca-law-firm-hide-money-panama-papers>
, a law firm headquartered in Panama and with affiliates around the world, are 
in reality incorporated in countries other than Panama.

Panama Papers: global tax officials to launch unprecedented inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/12/panama-papers-global-tax-officials-inquiry-paris-meeting>
While we must maintain a presumption of innocence, Panama recognises our role 
and responsibility to fully investigate and penalise any illegal activities in 
full accordance with our laws. Such investigations are currently being carried 
out through the proper institutions in our country, and are aided by the fact 
that in recent years, particularly the last 20 months under President Juan 
Carlos Varela,Panama <https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama> has 
strengthened its legal mechanisms relating to money laundering.

Yet we also know that this challenge not only goes beyond Panama, but beyond 
politics. The world must work together to fight the challenge of systemic tax 
evasion that deprives taxpayers across the world of as much as $200bn (£140bn) 
each year. That is why Panama is setting up an independent commission, 
co-chaired by the Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz, to evaluate our financial 
system, determine best practices, and recommend measures to strengthen global 
financial and legal transparency. We expect its findings within the next six 
months, and will share the results with the international community.

This step follows a series of reforms in Panama aimed at promoting greater 
financial transparency. Since assuming office in 2014, Varela implemented new 
“know your client” regulations and continues to develop a robust treaty network 
that allows the exchange of legal and corporate information.

We have also implemented legislation that allows the shareholders of all 
companies incorporated in Panama to be identified, and enacts stronger 
regulations for financial and corporate providers as well as key non-financial 
industries.

These reforms and others have been recognised and validated by the 
international community, including theFinancial Action Task Force on Money 
Laundering <http://www.fatf-gafi.org/>, which cited Panama’s “significant 
progress” when it removed us this year from its “grey list” of countries that 
lack sufficient anti-money laundering legislation. We also made positive 
progress in a peer review by the OECD’s Global Forum for Transparency and 
Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes.

The term “Panama Papers” is more than an unfair misnomer – it reflects a deep 
misunderstanding of Panama’s financial system. As an international business 
hub, Panama treats foreign and domestic corporations the same. The notion that 
Panama is a “tax haven” for international corporations comes from the fact that 
we only tax income derived from Panama, not from outside. All transactions in 
Panama are taxable in accordance with the laws of relevant jurisdictions. Our 
government has strengthened its laws, but they can still be manipulated for 
illicit purposes.

Even after recent reforms, Panama remains committed to adopting more changes 
in order to comply with international transparency standards. Our government 
has repeatedly made it clear that we are fully behind the implementation of 
bilateral automatic exchange of information consistent with the goals of the 
OECD’s common reporting standards. We are open and willing to engage in 
international dialogue to discuss how these standards are best implemented.

Additionally, we will continue to cooperate with the UK and other countries to 
prosecute offences that are outlawed in Panama, and continue to abide by the 
many international treaties we have ratified with our partners around the world.

Many forget that Panama is now a stable democracy after years of being ruled 
by a dictatorship. Our efforts to transform our country into a global economic 
hub have resulted in the establishment of the regional headquarters of over 100 
transnational corporations. It is our hope that through Panama’s reform efforts 
and increased international cooperation, our country will become even more 
attractive to multinational companies that seek to act as responsible global 
citizens.

Panama’s path to financial transparency is irreversible, but on a global scale 
the march must be a collective one. Panama stands ready to play our part.
 