
With its vast world, intricate plotting and bustling menagerie of weird, 
wonderful characters, the latest title in BioWare’s Dragon Age series has 
proved a critical hit since its release in November.

But how did Inquisition come about? What were the key aims of the team, and 
how such a massive role-playing adventure like this planned and executed?


In an exclusive interview, we speak to creative director Mike Laidlaw about 
the development process behind one of this year’s most ambitious titles.

How long was Dragon Age: Inquisition in development?
Production has been about three years, but taking in early concepting, it 
would be four years. As our studio general manager Aaryn Flynn kindly pointed 
out, that’s about 10% of my life.

How do you feel now it’s out?
There’s definitely a bit of exhaustion because when you’re finishing a game 
you go into overdrive: you’re finding those last bugs, playing the game over 
and over, and prioritising what gets fixed first.


But there’s also a sense of pride. We’ve hauled the game into an entirely new 
engine and one that is compatible with this generation of hardware. The engine 
is much more capable than Eclipse, but it required us to retool all of the 
content we’d been building up and give it a next-gen approach.


It was a monumental challenge supporting five platforms, but the team is proud 
of what we’ve accomplished and I’m incredibly proud of the team. This was not 
an easy road, but it has proved very satisfying.


With its open-world structure and redeveloped combat system, how much is the 
game a response to the criticisms levelled at Dragon Age II?
When Dragon Age II shipped, we did what was always do: internal post-mortems 
and looking at all the reviews. The production team have a massive Excel sheet 
listing the pros and cons, and we look for trends. You rarely go: “This one 
person didn’t like this thing, we should change everything!” That would be 
irresponsible. But you realise you used that cave a bunch of times and it was 
inappropriate. Fair call.


You also sit down as a team and decide where your focus should be. We know the 
party is critical, we’re seeing that backed up by reviews, so let’s bring back 
full armour customisation but still keep some degree of individualism for the 
party members; finding that balance is important. Tackle feedback but don’t let 
it dictate what you should do, let it dictate what you should discuss.


How tricky is it to develop a game simultaneously for PC and a bunch of 
consoles at the same time?
From the very beginning we were aware we’d be targeting from the 360 and PS3 
all the way up to the highest modernPC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc>. 


When you know that up front it’s a challenge, but a challenge with clearly 
defined boundaries. If the older hardware says you can’t have 100 guys on 
screen, you don’t design your combat fundamentally around it being 100 guy 
fights. Whatever the limitations are on memory or processor, you lock them down 
and ask how we make an incredibly cool experience within those constraints.


All design is at its best when there are constraints applied, be it manpower, 
time, or specific hardware. These things inspire a degree of creativity.


The game’s opening drops you into a high pressure situation with a lot going 
on: returning factions, characters, and a whole world of established lore, 
together with a big hole in the sky. How do you strike a balance between making 
the game accessible for newcomers and still making it satisfying for fans?
Openings are a very specific kind of gameplay. They have to hook you, teach 
you how to play and welcome you. So rather than take a stately pace that would 
introduce the world to newcomers – which would be alienating to folks who were 
returning – we went with a problem that has to be solved, which is priority one 
for the level and everybody you talk to. It’s all leading to that breach in the 
sky.


Then we open up the game up as quickly as possible and say it’s all on you 
player. If you want to engage with the lore then talk to Leliana and ask her if 
she used to know the warden from the first game; she’ll check if she did from 
Dragon Age Keep and respond accordingly. This lets you dig into things at your 
own pace instead of people firing it at you. Players who want to keep fighting 
demons or see the world can do so, before coming back and exploring the lore 
later.
Our opening can be disorientating and targeted in its purpose, but you 
understand the immediate danger and once you’ve completed it the game becomes a 
sandbox.


Isn’t it frustrating though that you have so many lines of dialogue that will 
never be heard by 90% of the people playing? 
In today’s world you have to look at the game as an ecosystem. That many 
people not playing still means tens of thousands are hearing those lines. Not 
bad. Also, for the water cooler experience of “I didn’t understand what was 
going on with the mages”, you need to make sure the game at least has that 
information there, so their friend can say “well I get it because I go through 
every line of dialogue and I can give you the summary”. Players who want to go 
digging, read the codex, talk to mages and get their take on things; it’s all 
there if they want it.


I look at games as an increasingly social experience where it’s okay if people 
don’t understand 100% of what’s going on. There’s a joy in sharing that 
experience with your friends and social circles.

Part two to follow next week.

 * Dragon Age: Inquisition review – a truly monumental game  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/14/dragon-age-inquisition-review> 