
As head of Disney's film division, Jeffrey Katzenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeffrey-katzenberg> scored a box office smash 
in 1992 with Aladdin, the tale of a plucky underdog who triumphs with the help 
of a genie in a magic lamp. The animated film swept awards and enchanted 
audiences.

Twenty years later Katzenberg, now head of DreamWorks Animation, hopes to 
score again although his hero, Barack Obama, is less of an underdog and the 
blockbuster drama is better known as the US presidential election.

The 61-year-old studio mogul has delivered millions of dollars and much 
celebrity power for the president's bid for a second term, conjuring energy 
from what had been a deflated constituency. If Obama wins it will to some 
extent be thanks to his Hollywood genie.

"Katzenberg recognised early that without the support of the entertainment 
industry's millionaires and billionaires, Obama would have a tough time getting 
re-elected," said Tina Daunt of the Hollywood Reporter. "He became Obama's top 
advocate in the industry – simply because others were not willing to go all out 
for the president."

Katzenberg has spent more than $3m (£1.85m) of his own fortune on the contest, 
making him Obama's top donor, followed by Irwin Jacobs, the founder of 
semiconductor maker Qualcomm, Fred Eychaner, a newspaper publisher, and Jon 
Stryker, heir to the equipment manufacturer Stryker Corp.

In addition to dipping into his personal fortune, estimated by Forbes at 
$800m, Katzenberg has almost single-handedly persuaded much of Hollywood to 
again back the president.

With the election expected to cost a record-breaking $2bn, and with Wall 
Street and conservative billionaires backing Mitt Romney, Katzenberg has helped 
level the field.

It was not easy. Hollywood's 2008 ardour for Obama cooled amid frustration 
over slow or absent progress on climate change, Guantánamo Bay, gay rights and 
other liberal causes. The White House's siding with Silicon Valley in a dispute 
over online piracy, which drains Hollywood profits, made things worse. "People 
here were disappointed and disillusioned," said Daunt. "They complained that he 
wasn't moving fast enough on their key concerns. Though he eventually came 
around on these issues, Hollywood didn't think he was showing enough passion 
and fight. Katzenberg stepped into the political void created by that 
disenchantment."

Skip Paul, a Hollywood media financier and neighbour of Katzenberg, told the 
Wall Street Journal that the studio boss phoned his targets directly. "He says: 
'I really want you to help me on something that's important to me.' And if he 
doesn't get you the first time, he calls and gets you the second time. It's 
very personal, and it's not phoney."

Katzenberg has been terse with the media over such activism – his office and 
Andy Spahn, his political consultant, did not respond to an interview request – 
but his interventions have been well documented. He helped two former White 
House staffers, Bill Burton and Sean Sweeney, set upPriorities USA 
<http://www.prioritiesusaaction.org/>, a political action committee (Super Pac) 
to counter multiplying, well-funded Republican Super Pacs.

He gave $2m in seed money and other entertainment figures such as Morgan 
Freeman and Bill Maher each donated $1m. He also organised a $40,000-per-head 
dinner at George Clooney's house which raised $15m.

Priorities USA raised $15.25m in September, its highest monthly total, boosted 
by an additional $1m from Katzenberg and $1m from Steven Spielberg, his 
DreamWorks partner. It helped fund an 11th-hour advertising blitz in swing 
states.

Obama took time out from hectic campaigning for a thank you luncheon with the 
former president Bill Clinton and a dozen donors at Katzenberg's Beverly Hills 
home on 7 October 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/barack-obama-bill-clinton-jeffrey-katzenberg-los-angeles-democrats-376968>
.

Later that evening Katzenberg co-hosted a $25,000 per ticket dinner for Obama 
at Wolfgang Puck's restaurant in the Ritz Carlton inLos Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles>.

In his speech the president singled out Katzenberg and his wife, Marilyn, for 
thanks. "They have been tireless and stalwart and have never wavered through 
good times and bad since my first presidential race, back when a lot of people 
still couldn't pronounce my name.I will always be grateful to them 
<http://www.deadline.com/2012/10/barack-obama-in-la-today-for-jeffrey-katzenberg-meeting-with-bill-clinton-nokia-theatre-concert-donor-dinner/>
."

Katzenberg is not noted for diplomacy. A hard-charging New Yorker who worked 
his way up from Paramount, where he revived the Star Trek franchise, he fell 
out with his mentor Michael Eisner at Disney before setting up DreamWorks with 
Spielberg and David Geffen, another Obama supporter. He was impressed enough by 
Obama's 2004 Democratic convention speech, and subsequent private meetings, to 
back the Illinois senator against Hillary Clinton, until then Hollywood's 
favourite candidate.

Katzenberg protected White House ties to Hollywood by encouraging Obama to 
phone studio heads ruffled by the piracy decision <http:>.

He reportedly said he expected nothing in return for his services, and few 
doubt he is motivated by political conviction. However it was noted the state 
department seated him near China's vice president, Xi Jinping, at a Washington 
lunch in February. Hollywood is keen to expand market share in China.

Democrats may no longer call Obama's presidency a fairytale but that does not 
stop them wishing for a happy ending on 6 November – thanks in part to the 
movie mogul behind Aladdin.

Flying the flag for Romney


Republicans may consider Hollywood enemy territory ruled by liberals but a 
slew of politically conservative films are attacking Obama and praising 
rightwing virtues in the runup to the election.

Dinesh D'Souza's documentary, 2016: Obama's America, has blazed the way by 
grossing $33m at the box office in past months, making it the most successful 
political documentary after Michael Moore's Fahrenheit 9/11. It recently became 
available on DVD.

Atlas Shrugged: Part II, the second part of a trilogy based on Ayn Rand's 
paean to plutocrats, limped into cinemas this month amid stinking reviews but 
Fox News gamely reported that "public interest remains high 
<http://www.foxnews.com/entertainment/2012/10/12/atlas-shrugged-part-ii-kept-from-mainstream-movie-critics-but-public-interest/>
".

Hating Breitbart, a biographical documentary by Andrew Marcus about the late 
conservative culture warrior Andrew Breitbart, hit screens last week.

Runaway Slave, a documentary about black conservatives, flopped when it opened 
in July but is to be re-released on the back of enthusiasm for 2016.

Obama may have Clooney and Scarlett Johansson but Romney boasts his own 
celebrity endorsements. Clint Eastwood has followed up the Republican 
convention's empty chair sketch with an ad which declares: "Obama's second term 
would be a rerun of the first and our country just couldn't survive that. 
<http://www.latimes.com/news/politics/la-na-pn-obama-romney-clint-eastwood-20121026,0,4478311.story>
"

Meat Loaf endorsed Romney at a rally in Ohio, saying: "There is one man who 
will stand tall in this country and fight the storm and bring the United States 
back to what it should be – Governor Mitt Romney."

Hollywood's conservatives raised $6m for the Republican candidate at a Beverly 
Hills fundraiser in September which drew, among others, the producer Jerry 
Bruckheimer and the actors Gary Sinise, of CSI: NY, and Patricia Heaton, of 
Everyone Loves Raymond.
 