
The news that Nic Coward, the chief executive of the British Horseracing 
Authority, can envisage racecourse closures if the sport's funding continues to 
decline does not make this outcome inevitable, but it does mark an acceptance 
that some grim choices may be close at hand.

A sharp drop in Levy revenue, in addition to the long-awaited moves to 
"premierise" racing and focus on the top-end product, could place several 
courses —perhaps even a dozen or more — in a double-bind. The threat seems 
clear: if the money is not there to justify saving them, then they will not be 
saved.

The simple economic reality is that the big tracks and the major events are 
the ones that generate the great bulk of Levy income. Many of the small venues 
do not pull their weight in cash flow terms, and if their Levy funding is cut 
off as a result, they will have to survive on gate money and race-day income.

At a track like beautiful Cartmel in the Lake District, which draws massive 
crowds for its handful of Bank Holiday meetings, the numbers should add up. At 
others — those situated on prime building land, for instance — they may not.

Many tracks have come and gone over the 260-year history of organised racing. 
There are still punters who talk wistfully of Alexandra Palace's "frying-pan 
circuit", where they raced up the "handle" and around the pan as many times as 
necessary.

Once a course closes, though, no amount of nostalgia is ever likely to bring 
it back. Even Aintree teetered on the brink about 30 years ago, and would now 
be covered in houses if the developers had had their way. Such is the fate that 
may await several venues that have been part of the fabric of the racing 
schedule for as long as anyone can remember.

You do not need to spend too long with a list of annual attendances to find at 
least a dozen that would struggle if Levy money is steered towards the premium 
product. Many are deeply cherished by loyal fans, but not by enough of them to 
guarantee their existence.

Can Yorkshire, for instance, really support all nine of its courses? Tracks 
like Catterick, Beverley and Thirsk are familiar names to punters, but how many 
would still miss them in five years' time? They are often lucky to get 1,500 
paying punters through the gate.

An economist considering the fact that just two new tracks have opened since 
the 1920s, one of which has already closed, might suggest that the pool of 
British tracks has been stagnating for the best part of a century. On the face 
of it, that is bad for business, and it might make sense to let the stragglers 
go to the wall. After all, there is no law that says 60 racecourses are needed 
to provide a full programme, particularly now all-weather circuits can stage 
three or four meetings a week.

Yet racing is a complicated industry with many inter-dependent sectors. Change 
to one can have significant, often unpredictable, effects on the others. 
Smaller tracks may not contribute much to racing's day-to-day income, and their 
precise benefits to the sport might be difficult to quantify, but that does not 
mean they do not have their benefits at all.

Cheltenham and Ascot are at the top of the pyramid, but even champion 
racehorses need to start somewhere, ideally a smaller, less demanding venue not 
too far from home.

It can also be argued that the sheer variety of tracks in Britain is one of 
the sport's major selling points to racehorse owners. They may not get the kind 
of return from their hobby that they might enjoy in countries where more of the 
betting revenue is returned to the sport in prize money, but if they want, they 
can have a racing experience that is different every time. Reducing the variety 
cuts down the fun. How can that represent progress in a leisure industry?

Racegoers too are used to the wide geographical spread of Britain's courses. 
Wherever you live, there is likely to be a track just down the road, and it is 
has been a feature of racing during the latest recession that attendance 
figures have held up surprisingly well. More than 5.5 million people went 
racing last year, putting the sport way in front of every competitor bar 
football.

The tracks that are likely to find themselves threatened with closure will, 
have low attendances, but if they vanish entirely, their catchment areas are 
likely to lose the race-going habit. Would Ludlow's fans go to Ascot instead? 
It seems unlikely.

If the money for some smaller tracks dries up and the sport, however 
reluctantly, stands aside and lets them die, the effect on racing, for better 
or worse, is likely to be profound and irreversible.

Greater concentration on the major events might push racing back towards the 
forefront of the nation's sporting consciousness, and capture a new generation 
of racegoers and punters. Or it might erode the foundations, and start a spiral 
of decline towards collapse. Those who love the turf can only hope that those 
responsible for making such decisions know what they are doing, and why.
 