
Five legal highs, including an alternative to cocaine that is one of the most 
common in Britain, are to be banned from midnight on Thursday, ministers have 
announced.

The drug minister, Lynne Featherstone, said she had accepted a recommendation 
from the government’s official drug advisers that the five legal highs should 
face a temporary ban of 12 months while a full assessment of the harm they 
posed was undertaken.

The Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/drugs> has said one of the five legal 
highs, ethylphenidate, which users inject and is widely marketed as a “research 
chemical” or as a component in branded products such as Gogaine, Nopaine, Burst 
and Banshee Dust, has been available over the internet in Britain for four 
years. They said it was one of the most commonly encountered new psychoactive 
substances (NPSs), as legal highs are officially known, in Britain and has 
emerged as an alternative to cocaine.

The hidden dangers of legal highs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/apr/26/hidden-dangers-of-legal-highs> 
The ACMD recommended the ban on ethylphenidate based on evidence that it had 
caused serious problems, particulary in Edinburgh and Taunton, Somerset. Four 
related compounds are to banned at the same time to prevent users switching.

Ethylphenidate is typically sold at £15 a gram for powder, £20 a gram in 
crystal form and £1 for a 50mg tablet. Professor Les Iversen, the chair of 
ACMD, said injecting users were putting themselves at risk of blood-borne 
disease and infections.

Police Scotland said Burst, as it is marketed in Edinburgh, was responsible 
for the majority of legal-high casualties seeking emergency hospital treatment 
in the city last summer.

Avon and Somerset police said an epidemic of injecting legal highs in public 
places in Taunton last summer had led to morethan 200 needles being recovered 
in one clean-up day. In December, the high street “head shop” selling the 
products was closed down.

The banned substances are closely related to methylphenidate, a licensed 
stimulant marketed under the brand name of Ritalin that is regularly prescribed 
to children for the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.



The temporary ban means anyone caught making, supplying or importing the drugs 
will face up to 14 years in prison and an unlimited fine. Possession is not 
illegal but police and border officials are allowed to search or detain anyone 
they suspect of having the drugs and seize, keep or dispose of the banned 
substance.

Drug law reform campaigners said such bans were simply trapping authorities in 
an “endless game of whack-a-mole” as they tried to play catch-up with drugs 
chemists. They said that while the government had responded to the frenzy over 
legal highs, drug misuse deaths overall had risen sharply.

The decision to ban methylphenidate-related substances while continuing to use 
the parent chemical as a medicine might raise questions over the safety of a 
drug often prescribed to children.

Ethylphenidate-based products are a growing issue and their use is associated 
with bizarre and violent behaviour
Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs 
“The methylphenidate-related materials being marketed as NPS have psychoactive 
effects so similar to the parent compound that they can be expected to present 
similar risks to users,” Iversen said in the letter.

Although it has been marketed as a party drug, the ACMD’s advice warns that 
some ethylphenidate users appear to have developed chronic problems, 
continually redosing the drug intravenously in binges.

The ACMD report says that in Edinburgh “there has recently been a report of an 
outbreak of Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes infections in this 
area associated with NPS injecting, which is believed to involve 
ethylphenidate.”

It added: “Ethylphenidate-based products are a growing issue in Edinburgh and 
their use is associated with bizarre and violent behaviour.”

Drugs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/drugs> reform campaigners said the 
government’s use of temporary bans on new substances had authorities constantly 
playing catch up with drugs chemists. The only answer was wholesale reform of 
drug policy, they said. Danny Kushlick, head of external affairs for Transform, 
said: “These substances have been brought out because of the success in 
enforcing the ban on ecstasy and cocaine in particular. Really we have to 
recognise that this is a self-inflicted trade.

Legal high drug deaths soar in UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/12/legal-high-drug-deaths-soar-uk>
“If we were to have a regulated trade in drugs these ones would not exist. You 
would not have ‘fake cocaine’ if you could get real cocaine. The whole NPS 
market is a product of prohibition.

“This is a never-ending game of whack-a-mole because even using the analogues 
legislation there are new analogues; they can churn these out by the hundreds. 
This is the opposite of control and regulation. It’s fuelling anarchy in the 
market and we need to look at regulating frameworks for more benign drugs.”

Niamh Eastwood, director of Release, said new bans on substances only served 
to push drug use further underground and spur the development of new chemicals 
with unknown risks to users.

She said: “Speaking more broadly, the government appears to have made NPS 
something of a cause célèbre in its fight against drugs, apparently in response 
to the media frenzy over what many unhelpfully term ‘legal highs’. While NPS 
are indeed a part of the modern debate on drugs, they form a comparatively 
small part of the market.

“At a time when the associated harms are increasing for other substances – 
drug misuse deaths rose 21% in 2013, 32% when focusing solely on 
heroin/morphine deaths – there is a real risk that the government is turning 
its attention away from addressing the failures of its drug policy holistically 
in order to pander to poorly-founded fears over this new phenomenon.”


Ethylphenidate is already banned in Denmark, Austria, Germany, Hungary, 
Portugal, Sweden, Jersey and Turkey. It is also classified under analogue 
scheduling in the US and Australia.


The other substances recommended for the temporary ban by the ACMD included 
3,4-dichloromethylphenidate, methylnaphthidate, isopropylphenidate and 
propylphenidate. It wasn’t clear how widespread their use was.

Methylphenidate, the drug from which ethylphenidate and its related compounds 
is derived, is currently controlled as a class B drug in Britain but also 
licensed as a medicine for conditions including ADHD and narcolepsy. It has 
also been widely used recreationally, and as a study aid. Research has found it 
can offer modest improvements in working memory and episodic memory.
 