
So far, 2013 has been Nintendo's annus horribilis. While the rest of the games 
industry has been working itself into a frenzy about the Christmas arrival of 
Sony's PlayStation 4 and Microsoft's Xbox One, gamers have shunned Nintendo's 
flagship console, theWii <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii> U and as 
a result, Nintendo's recent quarterly results have been well below target – 
which is a very big deal for a Japanese company. So, are Nintendo's wheels 
falling off, or does the company have a plan to stop the slide?

Who better to ask than the man who runs the company, president and CEO Satoru 
Iwata? We sat down with him for an interview at theE3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/e3> Show, in a room on the upstairs 
floor of Nintendo's stand. The interview was conducted via an interpreter – 
Iwata understands English perfectly, but isn't quite so confident about 
speaking it himself (although he came out with the odd English phrase). For 
such a captain of industry, he's surprisingly smiley, patient and approachable.

Understandably, Iwata is keen to talk up the Wii U games Nintendo has lined up 
for the latter half of 2013 – the likes of Mario Kart 8,Super Mario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/super-mario> 3D World, Donkey Kong 
Country Tropical Freeze, Pikmin 3 and Bayonetta 2 were well received, and 
Nintendo broke from tradition at the show by eschewing a press conference in 
favour of a hands-on session.

But will they be enough to turn the Wii U around? Iwata thinks so, but at 
least he is under no illusions about the console's poor performance to date: 
"I'm very happy about the reactions from the visitors: they looked very happy 
about being able to play those games. And especially becauseNintendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> could not supply the market 
with strong software titles, one after the other, in the first half of 2013 and 
as a result, since we launched the Wii U, we haven't been able to provide any 
strong titles."

But will those translate to decent Wii U hardware sales this Christmas? 
"That's what we are intending, and that will be the case by the end of this 
year. Now we are able to demonstrate so many strong software titles which will 
launch by the end of this year, starting from this summer and, after all, we 
really needed to energise the momentum of the Wii U, and that's what we are 
doing. Software sells hardware."

Getting third parties on board

But a console can't survive on first-party titles alone, and third-party 
publishers have been abandoning the Wii U in droves. What is Nintendo doing to 
get them back on board? "Now that Wii U has lost momentum in the first half of 
this year, it must be true that some of the third-party publishers and 
developers have made a weaker decision in terms of supporting it. However, now 
that we are offering to the world a strong software line-up, we are expecting 
Wii U hardware to regain its momentum. And regaining the Wii U's momentum must 
be the really big factor for us to encourage third-party publishers and 
developers to support it. At the same time, even though some of the developers 
and publishers are thinking twice about supporting the Wii U, it isn't 
everybody. The fact of the matter is that some of the third-party groups are 
strongly supporting it. And in addition to regaining the momentum of the Wii U 
hardware itself, what we really need to do is to establish successful examples 
of third-party Wii U titles."

He won't, though, speculate about how many third-party Wii U titles will be in 
the shops this Christmas: "I actually do not see the point of trying to boast 
about the number of third-party titles available this year, but at least I can 
say that it's more than a few. At the heart of the matter is that there are 
third-party publishers who have not announced their software titles for the Wii 
U. So once again, we really need to make an effort to create the conditions and 
the circumstances in which the third-party publishers feel like supporting the 
Wii U, so that they can volunteer to announce which software will be launched 
at what time."

Communicating the Wii U's appeal

He does, though, agree that Nintendo hasn't made a decent fist of getting the 
Wii U's appeal across to the general public: "Yes, exactly, just as you said. 
In the case of the Wii, for example, just by bundling Wii Sports, it was easily 
conveyed to the consumers that the Wii was a very unique and different system. 
But in the case of the Wii U, we have not come to that stage yet. We hoped that 
Nintendo Land would have been able to execute that kind of responsibility, but 
for those people who have only seen how other people are playing with the Wii U 
and Nintendo Land, they could not know how uniquely different the Wii U is from 
the Wii. As a result, Wii U is a machine for which the evaluation differs 
greatly depending on whether you own it at home or not. So, what we really need 
to do now is to launch software titles for the Wii U that can take advantage of 
its unique aspects, one after the other. So much so that a great number of 
people are able to touch the Wii U and feel how unique it is. We need to expand 
the number of such people. And once the number of people has reached critical 
mass, I think the public view of Nintendo will be changed."

The Nintendo faithful are also clamouring for a new, Wii U-specific Zelda game 
and on that front, Iwata has encouraging news: "It is true that Mr Aonuma's 
team has been working on a new Zelda title for the Wii U. But the only 
announcement we have at this time of software which will soon become available 
is WindWaker HD. But they are actually working on an exclusive new Wii U title 
in the Zelda franchise and I hope in the not-too-distant future, we will be 
able to make the relevant announcement."

3DS: a quiet hit

Amid all the doom and gloom surrounding the Wii U, Nintendo can at least draw 
consolation from the success (little remarked upon) of the 3DS handheld – 
achieved despite dire predictions at its launch that handheld games consoles 
would no longer be able to cope with the rise of mobile phones as gaming 
platforms: "Some indie developers have told us that when they offer the same 
software on iOS and Android, and in the eShop on Nintendo 3DS, the 3DS eShop 
version sells most. There are various theories that people often talk about, 
because there has been such an expansion of mobile devices, that handheld 
videogame devices won't sell any more. But the fact is, last year in Japan, 
approximately 5.5m unit sales were made for the Nintendo 3DS, and as you might 
expect in Japan, 2012 was a phenomenal year for smart devices. But when we look 
at any hit, popular handheld game devices, the only hardware which managed to 
sell more than 5m units in one year was the 3DS – that took the DS three years."

Globally, Iwata says that the 3DS is on track to sell 18m units this year, 
which is even more impressive – and one in the eye for those who contend that 
Nintendo's day is done, even if the Wii U remains something of a passenger. 
With Nintendo missing recent targets, there has been some speculation that 
Iwata might be in line for the sack. But he's confident that Nintendo will get 
back on track financially, and even jokes about his future prospects: "That's 
our goal – by regaining the Wii U momentum and reproducing what is happening in 
the Japanese market with the 3DS, into the rest of the world, including the US 
and Europe, we really want to make it happen. After seeing that kind of result, 
I'm hoping to be able to see you again next year."
 