
Eco gîtes, French Pyrenees

Explore the French Pyrenees from the eco-friendly La Bergerie near the village 
of Gaillagos, south of Lourdes in the Parc National des Pyrenees. These gîtes 
have earned the WWF's "panda gîte" eco label for conservation, hot water comes 
courtesy of solar panels, and you're provided with binoculars and guides to the 
flora and fauna of the stunning Val D'Azun.

· 0033 5 62 34 21 83, gites-france-pyrenees.fr 
<http://www.gites-france-pyrenees.fr>. From €510 per week (sleeps 4). Train 
from London to Tarbes (via Paris) from £97 pp rtn (0844 848 4070,
raileurope.co.uk <http://www.raileurope.co.uk>) then bus to Gaillagos from 
where it's a 2km walk.

Camping and canoeing, Denmark

Pitch and paddle your way across Denmark's lake district in Jutland, the 
location of some of the country's highest peaks. Silkeborg's tourist office 
organises three-day guided canoe trips along the Gudenå river or you can 
do-it-yourself by hiring canoes at the Gudenåens campsite, 150m from the 
water's edge and a 20-minute walk from Silkeborg.

· Three-day trip from around £130, including camping (silkeborg.com 
<http://www.silkeborg.com>). A pitch at Gudenåens (0045 86 82 22 01, 
indelukket.dk <http://www.indelukket.dk>) costs €9.70; cabins from €43 (sleep 
6). Train from London to Silkeborg via Brussels and Cologne then overnight 
train via Copenhagen and Skanderborg, costs from £295.

Cool pool, Austria

High up in the hills overlooking Lake Zeller near Salzburg, you can spend the 
morning walking up Schmittenhöhe mountain then return in the afternoon and cool 
off at the family-run Jaga Alm Hotel's natural swimming pool, enjoying views of 
the Hohe Tauern national park.

· 0043 6542 72969, jaga-alm.at <http://www.jaga-alm.at>. Doubles from €108 
B&B. Train from London to Zell am See (via Paris and Milan) from £256 rtn, from 
where you can get a transfer to the hotel.

Lake swimming, Austria

Below Mount Poelven at the edge of a pine forest, Schwoich's 2,000 sq m 
"banana lake" is the Tyrol's first public natural bathing pool, a lake that has 
been treated using plant filters to clean the water. It has wooden jetties, a 
pebble beach and is surrounded by forest and mountain slopes. Self-cater at 
Ferienwohnung Steinbacher, a farmhouse apartment in Schwoich, with organic eggs 
and milk from the farm and fresh bread from the baker.

· Apartment costs €40 a night for two (0043 5372 58810, kufstein.com). Train 
from London to Kufstein (Kufstein via Paris and Mannheim) costs from £274 rtn, 
then bus to Schwoich (€2.50).

Beach retreat, Italian Lakes

Relax on a private beach that's part of a protected shoreline by Lake 
Maggiore. Polidora is a converted farm in Cerro, just south of Laveno, where 
you'll stay in the restored hayloft and have access to the owner's 
19th-century, terraced botanical garden that leads down to the water's edge for 
views of the Borromeo Islands.

· 0039 349 78 26 474, polidora.com <http://www.polidora.com>. Room €120 B&B. 
Train from London to Milan from £119, then take the local train to Laveno from 
where it's a 10-minute taxi ride to Polidora.

Archaeology and activities, Northern Ireland

A three-day trip to the Corrolea Activity Centre northwest of Ireland, 
promoted under the country's Greenbox scheme, includes a guided bike tour of 
archaeological sites such as megolithic tombs, then canoeing back to your 
eco-friendly cottage (solar panels, wood stoves, recycling) across Lough 
Macnean, which straddles the counties of Leitrim, Cavan and Fermanagh.

· 028 6638 6123, tinyurl.com/6dbg6x <http://www.tinyurl.com/6dbg6x>. £120pp, 
Friday-Sunday. Ferry Stranraer to Belfast (stenaline.co.uk 
<http://www.stenaline.co.uk>) then bus, see greenbox.ie <http://www.greenbox.ie>
 for details.

Eifel national park, Germany

Circular, Crayola blue lakes in volcanic craters known locally as "blue eyes" 
form a network of swimming spots in the uplands of the Eifel mountains between 
Aachen, Cologne and Koblenz. Nearby you can stay at Eifel Camp, which is great 
for families thanks to its facilities, which include a skate park, playground 
and restaurant. The campsite is on the edge of Lake Freilingen, which isn't a 
crater lake, and is near to the Eifel national park, full of beech forests and 
gorges. Also in the area, you can visit the Ahr valley wineries, then rehydrate 
at one of the 500 mineral springs.

· eifel-camp.de <http://www.eifel-camp.de>. Train to Cologne. 

Farmstay, Czech Republic

The hosts at this 500-year-old restored inn in the Jeseníky mountain range 
200km east of Prague are "slow and quality food enthusiasts", but we don't 
think they mean they're stupid. They've certainly made a smart move letting 
guests decide what they want to eat from the organic garden each day, and 
they're also aiming for self-sufficiency. Recover from steep hikes - or days 
exploring villages - sipping Moravian wine beside the fire or under a cherry 
tree.

· Responsibletravel.com <http://www.responsibletravel.com>. There are two 
rustic bedrooms and an apartment in the stables, from £12 per room per night 
B&B, meals £3-6pp inc wine. Train to Prague via Cologne, then to Zabreh.

Mountain huts, Andorra

Adventurous skiers make use of tiny Andorra's 29 backcountry mountain huts or 
"refugis" in winter, but come summer trekkers walking the paths, including GR7, 
GR11 and GRP1, around Canillo, Encamp, Ordino and La Massana use them for 
scenic (but basic) stopovers at 2000m. Most are free but you can buy meals at 
some, and they're made from stone rather than wood.

· Train to l'Hospitalet via Paris then bus. 

Highland cabins, Norway

These turf-roofed cabins sit on a hillside overlooking the Gudbrandsdalen 
Valley, with views of Jotunheimen Mountain. Activities include pony trekking, 
fishing, mountain biking, canoeing, white-water rafting, guided walking and elk 
safaris. Guests have full use of the facilities of the nearby hotel, which has 
an EU Flower award in recognition of its green credentials and a restaurant, 
tennis courts and outdoor pool. Two- and four-bedroom cabins are available.

· One week's self-catering costs from £456pp, based on two sharing, with 
Inntravel (01653 617906,inntravel.co.uk <http://www.inntravel.co.uk>), 
including seven days' car hire. Fly to Oslo Gardermoen.
 