
Until recently, Michelle Darwin worked 68 hours a week as a care worker. She 
freely admits that she took on such long hours to get away from her 10-year-old 
son, Zane. He was a problem child who would throw a dozen tantrums a day if he 
didn't get his own way. Michelle preferred to leave Zane in the care of his 
father, househusband Allan, rather than face him after school each day.

"We called him Lord Zane, because he ruled the roost," says Michelle, 40, from 
Havant in Hampshire. "We weren't his family; we were his staff. He had to have 
everything his own way. It took two of us just to try to get him to take a 
shower and he'd scream the place down.

"Because Zane had been poorly as a child, we'd let him have his own way from 
day one, and it came back to bite us in the backside."

Zane's bad behaviour extended to school, where he regularly got into fights, 
disrupted lessons, refused to do homework and fell asleep in class because he 
would stay up playing on the computer until 3am. Tests for psychological 
problems and behavioural disorders came back negative.

Concerned about her son's behaviour and convinced she was "a shit mum", last 
summer Michelle signed the family up for a unique educational experiment. It 
was a four-week residential school led byStephen Drew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/nov/19/educating-essex-teaching-myths-stephen-drew>
, headteacher of Brentwood County high school in Essex and better known as the 
dedicated teacher from Channel 4's 2011 seriesEducating Essex 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/educating-essex/4od>.

Eleven boys with behavioural problems and their families were invited to a 
college in Essex for intensive work on the boys' conduct and their parents' 
skills at managing it, which has been filmed for a six-part Channel 4 series, 
Mr Drew's School for Boys.

The driving force behind the series comes from government statistics revealing 
that boys aged 12 and under are almost six times more likely than girls to be 
excluded from school.In the 2011-12 school year, the number of permanent 
exclusions of primary school pupils rose 13.9% in one year to 690 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/permanent-and-fixed-period-exclusions-from-schools-in-england-2011-to-2012-academic-year>
, with 60 three-to-five-year-olds excluded, all of them boys. While some blame 
the rise on cuts for early years support services, such as Sure Start, Drew 
points the finger at Ofsted and the Department for Education for promoting 
exclusion as a useful educational tool. "And the increasing pressure of league 
tables and Ofsted reports puts pressure on schools to kick more pupils out 
rather than work with them to improve their behaviour," he adds. Drew does not 
exclude pupils from his school, but removes them to an on-site Reintegration 
Centre for work on their conduct.

Exclusion can have a profound effect on boys' educational prospects. Drew's 
summer school offered a rare chance for teachers and experts to work with 
children and their families in a residential setting to try to break patterns 
of problematic behaviour. "In a normal school environment you don't have the 
opportunity to get under the skin of what goes on in their families," says 
Drew. "This was a full and joined-up approach to the problem."

Drew gathered a team that included teachers and a behavioural expert to run 
the summer school. Each day started with an assembly for pupils and families, 
after which the boys would attend lessons and the parents classes in parenting. 
In the afternoons, families would be reunited to enjoy PE or art lessons 
together.

The school's ethos was relentless positive reinforcement of good behaviour. 
Rewards included treats and certificates, while punishments involved the 
incremental removal of privileges, such as 10 minutes' docking of access to the 
games room. "Each new day would then start with a clean slate," says Drew. 
"Every morning we awarded six certificates for the English student of the day, 
the PE student of the day, and so on. You could even have a boy who'd behaved 
well in maths but missed out on rewards later that day, but the next morning 
would get a certificate for the previous day in maths.

"We were focusing on the positive, getting them to understand that the 
positive things they do are recognised and validated. The most effective stuff 
within schools is when you reassure misbehaving pupils that they are always 
part of that school community by saying, 'I will hold you to account, but I am 
still there for you.'"

At the same time, says Drew, youngsters must learn to respect authority. 
"Children need to be told, 'You're not in charge. You are a child, the adults 
are in charge.' Sometimes as parents we lose confidence in that. We have 
to listen to children but remember that we are the adults and act like it."

Teaching parents how to act is the key to improving their children's 
behaviour, says Drew, even if he is eager to avoid apportioning blame. "Nobody 
sets out to be the parent of a child who is having massive problems at school," 
he says. "But people get into that situation, and a lot of the problem is that 
the parents don't know how to make things better."

At summer school, parents were first made to understand how their behaviour 
affected their children's. "We had a group of parents who couldn't quite see 
how what they were doing and saying was undermining their ability to deliver," 
says Drew. "Swearing was a classic one – saying to parents that if you swear in 
front of your children, why is it any surprise that your children go into 
school and swear at teachers?
 'He’s still a cheeky little sod, but he’s definitely a nicer boy' … Allan and 
Michelle Darwin with their son Zane. Photograph: Richard Ansett 
"Children will naturally push at boundaries, but if those boundaries are so 
incredibly weak, and the solution their family has is to just say 'Yes', 
children learn to function within that environment. You put them within the 
regimented environment of a school, and funnily enough those children can't 
cope."

It was the job of behavioural consultant Tracey Campbell – who had been 
excluded from school six times herself and cites a teacher for helping her turn 
her life around – to teach the parents tactics for regaining appropriate charge 
of their children. Campbell introduced parents to approaches such as the "stuck 
record technique", a method for refusing to become embroiled in arguments at 
bedtime, for example: "No matter what they demand, you say to your child, 'I 
hear you, but it's time for you to go to bed,'" says Campbell, 39.

Both Drew and Campbell accentuated the importance of parents presenting 
a united front as the best way to manage their children's behaviour, and are 
clear that progress will be lower if parents are not on the same page. Campbell 
got the parents to play a simple game in which one team tried to flip some 
cones over one way and the other to flip them the other way – to illustrate the 
point that when parents are not united in their approach, children will feel 
like the cones being tossed about.

Allan Darwin admits that the classes made him examine his own behaviour. "It 
was hard for me and embarrassing to admit in front of the other parents, but I 
realised I needed to change," he says. "I used to give into Zane's demands a 
lot, because it was simpler, and I never used to back Michelle up."

The Darwins acted quickly on Campbell's advice. "What Tracey taught us was 
common sense," says Michelle. "Being in that environment and testing it out 
with Zane at the school and finding, 'Hang on, this is working,' was a 
brilliant opportunity. We felt empowered to be better parents."

It hasn't been quite the same success story for 11-year-old Clark Brettwood of 
Sunderland and his parents, Keith, 51, and Helen, 30. Clark is an intelligent 
boy diagnosed 18 months ago with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD), who since summer school has already been excluded once in his first 
term at secondary school and has faced about 20 after-school detentions for 
disruptive behaviour.

Keith and Helen are at odds over whether Clark can exercise more control over 
his behaviour. "At summer school, Helen and the teachers were on the same page 
that most of the trouble he's getting into is deliberate, rather than being 
possibly the condition, but I disagree," says Keith.

Helen says that while she and Keith remain at odds over the issue, she learned 
a lot at summer school. "Before, Clark and I were always at loggerheads and I 
didn't know how to handle him," she says. "I learned that I can walk away from 
confrontations instead of shouting back, and he will get himself out of moods." 
The biggest improvement to Clark's behaviour, she says, has come from 
reinstating his medication in mid-February.

So how can such a TV experiment help those struggling with misbehaving pupils 
without the luxury of an intensive course? Drew says it's partly about changing 
attitudes to so-called problem families. "Sometimes the message parents get 
from school and wider society is 'You are to blame. You're a bad parent.' What 
we need as a society is to recognise that parents in this situation suffer as 
much as their children do in school, but what they need is people to speak 
positively to them and engage with them.

"We also need a situation in which adults accept that they need to come second 
and that there is a sacrifice involved in parenting and that's just the way it 
is."

It's a message that got through clearly to Michelle and Allan, who say that 
Zane's behaviour has improved by 80% since summer school. "He's still a cheeky 
little sod, but he's definitely just a nicer, lovelier little boy and we're not 
walking on eggshells with him any more," says Michelle. "Zane was made a school 
prefect last term, and there were no words to say how proud we were. So were 
his teachers."

And Michelle is no longer desperate to get out of the house and has trimmed 
her work week to 48 hours. "I'm always in when Zane comes home from school," 
says Michelle. "We'll sit on the bed and watch TV together, and now it's me 
begging Zane for time."

Mr Drew's School for Boys begins on Channel 4 on 29 April at 9pm
 