
A year ago, the country was plunged into a weekend of murky uncertainty after 
a general election that nobody won. This time, there was no fog or confusion – 
only dazzling clarity. It illuminated a battlefield in which Alex Salmond stood 
tallest, master of all he surveyed, closely followed by a grinningDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, whose plan for dominating 
the decade took another step forward. Far, far behind, picking his way through 
the corpses of his mown-down troops, was a bloodied Nick Clegg. And, all around 
them, the landscape of a Britain that could be about to change drastically – 
even breaking in two.

The day brought three outcomes whose scale was breathtaking. Most expected the 
Scottish National party to triumph in Edinburgh, but few predicted it would 
crush its opponents so comprehensively, winning an overall majority under a PR 
system designed 12 years ago to thwart just such a possibility. Never let it be 
said again that PR produces indecisive outcomes, while first past the post 
guarantees certainty: in Scotland and Westminster it's the other way around.

The second knockout result came in the AV referendum, with a thorough 
walloping of the alternative vote. The unmistakable victims of that, and of the 
rest of the day's voting, were theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats>. The party was not just 
given a bloody nose by the electorate: it was slapped, punched, kicked and 
finally knifed before being left for dead. Flattened in Scotland, the Lib Dems 
lost half their councillors in England, their share of the vote reduced to 
numbers so meagre they were last seen back when the party was known as the SLD 
and mocked as "Salads".

Defeated politicians always talk of "lessons learned" in such circumstances, 
so here's one. Personalities matter, now more than ever. Voters may piously 
tell phone-in programmes they care only about the issues, but the last 24 hours 
have confirmed that that's bunk. The SNP swept the board largely because Scots 
saw Salmond as a natural first minister, while hisLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> opponent was anything but: Gray 
by name, grey by nature.

In the 21st century, candidates for the biggest jobs need vivid, stand-out 
personalities. Labour take note: they can have as many policy reviews as they 
like, but if the British public don't warm to Ed Miliband it will all be in 
vain. This personalisation of British politics cuts both ways. Few deny that 
the Lib Dem wipeout and the AV defeat were a repudiation of Clegg. The no 
campaign calculated that the mere sight of the Lib Dem leader's face on their 
leaflets would turn millions off voting reform – and their calculation paid off.

The immediate impact will be on the coalition. Lib Dems now understand exactly 
why the Tories were so eager to make that "comprehensive and generous offer" a 
year ago this weekend. It was not so much a power-sharing arrangement as a 
blame-taking one: the Lib Dems' role is to be the Conservatives' human shield 
and on Thursday they played the part perfectly. They took the heat while the 
Tories remained unscathed, their share of the vote unchanged since 2010, with 
even some council gains in England. For the senior partner, coalition is 
working out very nicely.

Conventional wisdom says Clegg will now demand a consolation prize or two, 
goodies to soothe his battered party and keep it content with coalition. But 
Cameron has no pressing reason to be emollient. For what leverage does Clegg 
have? He can't threaten to walk out, knowing that in an early general election 
only annihilation awaits. The Lib Dems are now hostages in this coalition, 
chained to the cabinet table, fated merely to hope that something turns up 
between now and 2015.

That is but one measure of Cameron's strength. His victory in the no campaign 
is another. Even Lord Mandelson praised him for his "bold leadership", 
conceding that it was the prime minister's eventual intervention on AV that 
made the difference. Above all, Cameron has now secured the long-term future of 
a first-past-the-post system that ensured virtual Tory hegemony for most of the 
last century. The shrivelling of the Lib Dems helps him further still, as 
onetime tactical Lib Dem voters head back to Labour – thereby splitting the 
anti-Tory vote and letting theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> win. That's how the Tories 
picked up seats yesterday.

But surely the most significant consequence of 5 May will be the SNP's ability 
to stage a referendum on Scottish independence, at a time of its choosing. 
Again, the received wisdom and polls say such a vote will be lost. But they 
said the same about the SNP – or any party – winning 65 seats in Holyrood. And 
now the SNP has 69. Besides, Salmond is probably the most accomplished 
political operator and performer in these islands. I would not bet against him.

And if he won a referendum and the union that has lasted three centuries were 
to break up? Obviously, the cultural and constitutional impact would 
reverberate for generations. But the narrower electoral consequences would 
endure too. An independent Scotland would deprive Labour of its most solid 
base, all but ensuring a permanent Tory majority in Westminster.

That is the sharpest lesson for Labour, on what was a tepid night for the 
party at best. It can no longer rely on Scotland; it has to be competitive in 
England. Otherwise, the future is clear, but it is definitely not orange. The 
future is blue.
 