
It is hardly surprising that the Liberal Democrats were hammered more than the 
Tories in the council elections. People who voted Tory in the general election 
were in favour of Tory policies (Lib Dems vent fury at Cameron as party suffers 
election rout 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/may/05/av-referendum-paddy-ashdown-david-cameron>
, 6 May). Lib Dem voters had expectations of very different policies. To vote 
Labour was to vote for quasi-Tory policies, given the record of the previous 
administrations; to vote Lib Dem or Green seemed the only hope of endorsing 
policies which would protect the welfare state and support growth in the 
economy.

Instead, the Lib Dems have connived in the most ferocious attack on the 
welfare state since its inception. It is as if the 1930s never happened and 
Keynes never wrote. Voters have a choice of parties offering varieties of the 
same neo-conservative fallacies, designed to pour tax-payers' money into the 
pockets of private companies and to transfer wealth from the poor to the rich. 
There is a desperate need for a party of the left. IfLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> would ditch the "New" bit we 
could have a two-party system that might work.

Hazel Davies

Notre Dame du Bec, France

• Mr Clegg, wake up! As a Lib Dem that has campaigned since the days of Paddy 
Ashdown, I believed the Lib Dems to be a party of honesty and integrity; that 
they could have been the answer to the countries' problems. Yet you have let us 
all down. You have become a mainstream politician with mainstream political 
views. We need a self-respecting man who stands by his promises and convictions 
– or give way to a better man. Ditch the Tories, stand for what you believe in 
and win back our votes.

Philip Chilvers

Thrapston, Northamptonshire
 Illustration: Gillian Blease <http://gillianblease.co.uk/> 
• The results make one thing clear to Liberal Democrats: we cannot rely on 
coalition success to provide the basis for our general election stance. The 
Micawber-like optimism of Danny Alexander and others only demonstrates the 
despair of this position. It is high time to put the party first. We must start 
work on developing radical, redistributive and left-leaning policies members 
truly believe in. Continue in coalition, certainly. But Lib Dem ministers 
should be seen holding their noses in distaste, explaining the sacrifices they 
are making for the sake of the nation. Like Labour in 1945, Lib Dems can emerge 
from coalition with an election-winning platform.

Jonathan Hunt 

Party First campaign 

• The election results confirm what most Lib Dems knew: although it was right 
to enter the coalition it was wrong to give ground on so much right-wing 
ideology. Sadly,David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has twisted Nick Clegg 
round his little finger and, as a result, Clegg has done more harm to 
centre-left politics than anyone since David Owen. What we need to do now is 
clear: 1) Plan for an orderly withdrawal from the coalition in about 12 months' 
time. 2) Then hold a leadership election – Clegg can stand again if he wants 
to. 3) Face a general election with some vestige of integrity restored.

Cllr Peter Balaam

Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire

• For the past few months Manchester has been singled out for crude and 
targeted attacks from coalition leaders and ministers. We had everything thrown 
at us, from made-up figures about our finances to imaginary posts in the town 
hall, like a "twitter tsar". We were accused of treating Manchester as a 
political laboratory so that we could force through political cuts to embarrass 
the government. Manchester has now spoken. In a historical sweep of candidates 
all Liberal Democrat councillors up for election were swept away for these 
deceits. Manchester is not just a Tory-free zone; we are now heading towards a 
Lib Dem-free zone.

Cllr Pat Karney 

Manchester Labour Group

• While some Lib Dems are questioning Clegg's leadership, the big issue for 
Labour is what to do about the directionless and passionless Labour leadership. 
How could Labour have fared so badly in the context of severe cuts and services 
and the plainly grim and incompetent Tories? Miliband has failed to offer a 
coherent challenge to the ConDems and he has done a very poor job in 
opposition. He and the Labour party have more to learn than anyone following 
the local elections. He is just not up to the job.

Norman Hanson

Bingham, Nottinghamshire

• Martin Kettle pinpoint's "Labour's infinitely stubborn tribalist tendency" (
Comment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/may/05/nick-clegg-pain-av-progressive>
, 6 May), a tendency to which I am proud to belong. The Labour movement's work 
is far from complete. The poor and the powerless are not only still with us, 
the agonies of many of their young – driven to drugs, alcohol, obesity by the 
demoralising culture in which they live – are dismissed by our Victorian 
government as being self-inflicted. Our stubborn tendency will not rest till we 
have made a society where the young don't turn to drugs for escape, where 
self-styled liberal democrats don't prop up brutalising ideologies out of 
vanity, and where irreversible changes make a better land. Only my No vote to 
AV could ensure we don't have to suck up to anyone for a second-place, diluting 
our courage, tenacity, hope and vision.

Dr Ian Flintoff

Oxford

• How appropriate that Paddy Ashdown laments it will "never again be glad 
confident morning". His quote is, of course, from that fine poem The Lost 
Leader in which Robert Browning decries Wordsworth's desertion of liberal 
causes and his selling-out to the Tory establishment and values ("Just for a 
handful of silver he left us,/ Just for a riband to stick in his coat..."). 
Those of us on the left would advise the Lib Dems to return to their radical 
roots and abandon the coalition before further damage is done to them and the 
majority of people in Britain.

George McLean

Manchester
 