
Twelve days after winning the Irish National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/28/rogue-angel-mouse-morris-irish-grand-national-fairyhouse-horse-racing>
, Mouse Morris sent out Rule The World to win the Grand National itself here on 
Saturday, and his thoughts turned immediately to the son who was not there to 
share the moment. “We got a bit of help from somewhere,” Morris said. “Tiffer 
was working overtime for me.”

Tragedy is a word that is used far too freely, not least in the context of 
horses running around a racecourse. It was the right word here, however, as 
Morris is still coming to terms with the loss of Christopher, his 30-year-old 
son, in June last year.

“Mouse lost his eldest son to carbon monoxide poisoning last year when he was 
on holiday in Argentina,” Michael O’Leary, the winner’s owner, said afterwards. 
“Tiffer was his nickname. Nothing can replace the loss of a son, but to win the 
Irish Grand National and now theGrand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational>, it shows that life goes on.”

Every trainer who leads in a Grand National winner has achieved something 
extraordinary, but Morris can feel particularly proud of himself for preparing 
Rule The World, a horse that had never previously won a race over fences, to 
take the most demanding race of all. Having now broken his duck, there is also 
a possibility, at least, that he will not race again, as O’Leary said 
afterwards that he “would hate to lose a Grand National winner”.

Rule The World has already suffered a fractured pelvis twice during his racing 
career, which makes the achievement of both horse and trainer all the more 
impressive. His lack of a previous win in a steeplechase may have contributed 
to his 33-1 starting price, but he had no trouble powering away from The Last 
Samuri, the 8-1 joint-favourite, after four-and-a-quarter miles on 
rain-softened ground.

The going at Aintree was heavy in places by the time the race set off at its 
new time of 5.15, and the conditions soon started to take a toll on the field. 
Holywell, one of the favourites, was an early casualty, while Silviniaco Conti, 
one of the best chasers in training, was pulled up before halfway.

Many Clouds, successful last year, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/11/grand-national-aintree> was soon 
settled and going well for Leighton Aspell in his attempt to become the first 
dual winner since Red Rum in 1974, but faded quickly after an uncharacteristic 
jumping error with about a mile to run. Rule The World, though, was travelling 
well throughout for David Mullins, his 19-year-old jockey, who was riding in 
the race for the first time.

Bryan Cooper, O’Leary’s retained jockey, had the choice between three runners 
in the race, but opted for First Lieutenant, also trained by Morris, who fell 
at the second fence. Mullins, a nephew of the leading trainer Willie, remained 
impressively composed as Rule The World worked his way into the race behind The 
Last Samuri, and as they returned towards the final two fences, Vics Canvas, a 
100-1 shot, also moved into contention.

The three horses were side-by-side as they reached the Elbow and a 
photo-finish seemed a likely outcome, but as soon as Mullins asked Rule The 
World for a final effort, he surged clear to win by six lengths.

Many Clouds finished last of the 16 horses to complete, from an initial field 
of 39, and for the fourth year running, there were no serious injuries to any 
of the runners and riders.

O’Leary, the driving force behind Ryanair and a man famous for sometimes 
letting his mouth run away with him, admitted after his latest big-race success 
that he was – almost – speechless.

“You could not win it with a nicer person or someone more deserving than 
Mouse,” O’Leary said. “He’s been an amazing horse, but what a trainer Mouse is. 
He doesn’t have a big number of horses but, when he gets them there on the day, 
they tend to perform extraordinarily well. I am delighted for Mouse, he has had 
a difficult year and I think this will be the cream on top.”

In contrast to Rule The World’s owner, Morris is a man of relatively few 
words, but the emotion attached to his horse’s success was clear. “I would have 
been delighted if he had finished third,” he said. “It’s just Disneyland, 
fairytale stuff.”

A mistake at the fourth-last was the only hiccup in an otherwise excellent 
round of jumping by the winner, whose failure to win a single one of his 12 
previous races over fences now seems more baffling than ever. He finished 
second in a Grade One at Leopardstown in December, and second in last season’s 
Irish National as well, so the class was there and Mullins performed 
brilliantly to harness it with so little previous experience at Aintree.

“What an aptly-named horse,” Mullins said. “I’ve never had a feeling like 
this. Everything just went to plan.

“Credit to Mouse, he told me before that this is probably one of the best 
horses he’s ever had, he’s just had small problems, so to get the call to ride 
this one was amazing. It’s his first win over fences, which is even more 
amazing than me having a first ride over them.”
 