
Professor Lesley Yellowlees, president-elect of the Royal Society of Chemistry 
(RSC), calls it –in the Observer news pages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/jun/17/macho-culture-chemistry-royal-society>
 – the "terrific waste" of women in our scientific workforce. Among other 
things, she'll be thinking of the number of girls who choose physics A-level – 
a mere 22% of candidates – and the numbers fall off steadily thereafter, to 
around 7% of professors.

Along the way, the choices women make may lead them in different directions 
from male colleagues.

Have they chosen to marry a slightly older man and put his career first? Have 
they opted to stay at home with the baby who has spent months kicking at their 
conscience as well as at their belly? Have they decided they have no desire to 
spend their lives in a frantic competition with aggressive men with one-track 
minds? Women frequently feel unable to make the choices they really want, but 
surely society can make better use of their talents, first by encouraging them 
and then facilitating their progression.

So what can and should be done? Undoubtedly, additional government resources 
would be helpful, but organisations can start by confronting their own 
cultures, which generally in universities is not good. In an RSC report, women 
told how they found their PhD experiences in chemistry an "ordeal filled with 
frustration, pressure and stress". Women who feel like that won't stick around. 
Organisations need to reflect on what is going on, check on supervisory 
practice and mentoring and make sure their policies are appropriately 
family-friendly. Such actions will benefit men as well as women, but typically 
women will benefit more.

Athena SWAN <http://www.athenaswan.org.uk/html/athena-swan/> awards, which 
recognise good employment practice for women working in science among other 
fields, act as benchmarks. These are successfully changing attitudes and 
culture in those departments that engage and win them. The funders of research 
recognise this, too. Last summer, Dame Sally Davies, the chief medical officer, 
said that the Department of Health would not expect to shortlist for future 
funding any NHS/university partnership where the academic partner had not 
achieved (at least) a silver award in this scheme, after seeing some 
"appalling" presentations of gender issues.

Other funders are talking of following suit. This focuses the mind and this 
stick should help to improve the climate for women throughout the university 
sector. My university, Cambridge, was already well on the case, including 
appointing me as gender equality champion in 2010 to push things forward.

Other aspects matter as well. More female scientists are now seen on our TV 
screens; women such asProfessor Alice Roberts <http://www.alice-roberts.co.uk/> 
andDr Helen Czerski <http://www.helenczerski.net/> are bringing science alive 
while also acting as role models for girls. Prizes such as theFor Women in 
Science <http://www.womeninscience.co.uk/> fellowships, run by L'Oréal and 
Unesco (for which I chair the jury), can also bring into the limelight the 
incredible talent that is out there.

We cannot afford, in a rather literal sense, to waste the talent of half the 
population by permitting the macho culture and negative subliminal messages 
permeating our society to deter so many smart young girls from starting science 
careers. Or indeed to spit them out prematurely without allowing them to fulfil 
their potential.

Athene Donald is professor of experimental physics at Cambridge University
 