
The countercultural magus, film-maker and tarot fetishist Alejandro Jodorowsky 
has found a terrific new surge of energy in his 80s with a richly enjoyable 
autobiographical movie trilogy, as crazy as a laudanum dream. This is the 
second part; the first wasThe Dance of Reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/20/the-dance-of-reality-review-my-father-the-hero>
 in 2013.


It doesn’t look like an old man’s film to me: there is gusto and energy, a 
need to excite, shock, bewilder. You can sense here something you rarely 
experience, even in the very best films: how much the director is simply 
enjoying himself. And it’s down to Jodorowsky’s fictional confrontation with 
his father, played by the director’s son, Brontis Jodorowsky. Alejandro himself 
is played as a young man by his younger son Adan.

This Freudian primal scene has detonated a new burst of creativity. The final 
reckoning has turned up every dial. You can tell how liberating and therapeutic 
it is for him – and Jodorowsky obviously loved his own cameo performances, 
intervening in the action, giving the characters, including his younger self, a 
piece of his mind. The final transformative encounter with his father, who 
shaves his head and moustache, before kissing his son on the lips, is 
compellingly weird.

Endless Poetry broadly covers the period in Jodorowsky’s life when he left 
home for a bohemian life in the Chilean capital of Santiago, dabbling in poetry 
and performance, before finally moving on to Paris in the 50s and bidding a 
painful final farewell to his father, who has now evolved from a stern 
communist to being just a fierce and closed-minded shopkeeper who doesn’t 
scruple to assault and humiliate shoplifters. His mother (Pamela Flores) only 
ever sings her lines in the manner of an opera diva: a bizarre convention that 
you cease to notice almost immediately.
 A real flight of fantasy … Endless Poetry 
The circuses, clowns and dwarves have understandably led many to compare this 
toFellini <https://www.theguardian.com/film/federico-fellini>; I would also 
suggest a bit ofKusturica <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001437/>. But the early 
scenes are very literary and interestingly Dickensian. Alejandro’s parents are 
larger than life in the right way – and so are his dodgy cousins and grandma 
who cheat at cards when Alejandro is dragged round for a get-together In a 
rage, Alejandro chops down a tree, which triggers his final showdown. He walks 
out and finds himself living in a raucous – and Dickensian – colony of artists, 
one of whom falls poignantly and unrequitedly in love with him.

Related: The Dance of Reality review – my father the hero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/20/the-dance-of-reality-review-my-father-the-hero>

And there are more Freudian fireworks. He has an affair with a bad-girl poet 
called Stella Díaz, who is played by Pamela Flores – that is, his mother. There 
is an extraordinary, erotic scene when they are naked, having agreed on a 
non-penetrative relationship, and she reveals herself to have a string of skull 
tattoos up her spine. There are moments of startling theatricality and 
fourth-wall high jinks as black-clad figures, like stagehand ninjas, stealthily 
creep on, handing props to the characters. Jodorowsky also has very funny 
deadpan lines of dialogue. Stella demands to know if the moody, aggressive 
Alejandro is carrying a knife: the answer is yes, but only to cut the quills he 
uses to write his poetry. Actually, the act of writing is more or less absent 
from the film; Alejandro improvises lines of poetry on the spot, in 
conversation.

Their relationship is a great romance, in its way: Stella finds him as 
innocent as a pierrot and makes him pose by a movie poster for Carné’sLes 
Enfants du Paradis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/10/les-enfants-du-paradis-film-review>
. Alejandro is to transfer his affections to his best friend, Enrique (Leandro 
Taub) but is also to betray him.

It’s a real flight of fancy. Enrique tells Alejandro that “poetry, like the 
shadow of a flying eagle, leaves no trace on land”. You can’t really say that 
about Endless Poetry, which leaves its own trace of enjoyment. Unlike a lot of 
flaccid and directionless magic realism, there is a narrative drive: the 
traditional drive towards getting on and getting laid of course, but also this 
impulse to go out and prove himself to his father but also to destroy his 
father, who kept calling him amaricón, a fag. As it happens, he isn’t. But 
being a poet is much worse in his homophobic father’s eyes anyway.

I can’t wait to see what happens in the third and final part: it could be 
Jodorowsky’s masterpiece.
 