
Canada’s commitment to fighting climate change has been questioned after the 
Liberal government, led byJustin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>, announced conditional 
approval for a C$36bn liquefied natural gas project in northern British 
Columbia.


The decision – the Trudeau government’s first on a major energy project – was 
announced late on Tuesday. “The government approved the Pacific NorthWest LNG 
project,” Catherine McKenna, the environment minister, told reporters in a 
Vancouver suburb.

Backed by Malaysia’s energy giant Petronas, the project would ship 19m tonnes 
a year of frozen, liquefied natural gas to markets in Asia. The government 
promised the project, one of Canada’s largest resource development projects, 
would create thousands of jobs – as many as 630 direct and spin-off jobs and 
4,500 construction jobs – and add nearly C$2.4bn per year to the country’s GDP.

The government’s approval was contingent on the project meeting 190 
conditions, including keeping greenhouse gas emissions capped at 4.3m tonnes 
per year, a drop of about 20% from the project’s initial proposal. Upstream 
emissions are not included in this cap and could add as much as 8.7m tonnes of 
carbon emissions to the project, according to estimates from a draft report 
released by the Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency in February.

McKenna said the decision had been informed by rigorous environmental 
assessment as well as meaningful consultations with First Nations groups. “The 
only way to get resources to market in the 21st century is if it is done in a 
responsible and sustainable manner. This decision reflects this objective.”

But despite claims by the British Columbia government that the exported fuel 
would offer an alternative to coal-fired plants in Asia, environmentalists 
warned the approval of the project would undermine Canada’s climate change 
commitments.

“How can Prime Minister Trudeau claim to be a climate leader on the 
international stage, while approving this new project that will become the 
single largest source of climate pollution in the country?” Karen Mahon of 
Stand Earth asked in a statement after the decision was announced. “Honestly we 
expected better.”

Since taking the reins of Canada’s government last year, Trudeau has sought to 
position himselfas a climate change leader on the world stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/08/barack-obama-and-justin-trudeau-to-join-forces-on-climate-change>
 while assuring Canadians that the government would strike a balance between 
caring for the environment and bolstering the country’s struggling energy 
industry.

The Pacific NorthWest LNG project, which includes a nearly 600-mile (900km) 
natural gas pipeline and an LNG facility near Prince Rupert in British 
Columbia, was widely seen as one of the government’s first tests of this 
commitment.

During last year’s federal election campaign, Trudeau courted 
environmentalists with promises to invest millions of dollars in clean tech and 
confront climate change.

Tuesday’s approval was a betrayal to the many who voted for action on climate 
change, said Caitlyn Vernon of the Sierra Club of British Columbia. “The 
Trudeau government’s lofty rhetoric on climate has been proven nothing more 
than sunny ways talking points.”

Canadian and US tribes band together to fight Alberta oil sands pipelines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/22/pipelines-alberta-oil-sands-aboriginal-tribes>
In May, 90 scientists and climate experts from Canada, the US and Australia 
urged Trudeau and his government to reject the Pacific NorthWest LNG projectin 
an open letter 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/314292821/Climate-Scientists-Letter-to-Federal-Government>
. The 190 conditions set out by the government provided a chance to 
meaningfully address some of the concerns, said Merran Smith of Clean Energy 
Canada. Instead, the bar was set too low. “What’s shocking about this approval 
is that other LNG projects are proposing much cleaner operations,” she said. 
“Ottawa should have required Pacific NorthWest to run on clean electricity and 
use available technology to reduce its carbon pollution by more than 40%.”

Even before the government announced its decision, six First Nations affected 
by the project said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/true-north/2016/mar/20/by-rejecting-1-billion-for-a-pipeline-a-first-nation-has-put-justin-trudeaus-climate-plan-on-trial>
 the project had so far failed to meet their expectations for respecting 
indigenous rights. “Providing a green light for this project at this time will 
only lead to protracted litigation which benefits no one,” the Skeena Corridor 
Nations said in a statement.

In the wake of Tuesday’s announcement, analysts pointed out there was little 
guarantee that the project would be built. The government’s decision comes amid 
weakening demand and oversupply in the global natural gas market. While those 
behind the project welcomed the approval and described it as a significant 
milestone, the company said a total review of the project would be carried out 
by the company and shareholders before any final decision is taken.
 