
James Hird has welcomed the AFL anti-doping tribunal’s decision  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/31/afl-essendon-players-cleared-anti-doping-tribunal>
as a vindication of Essendon’s position that their players were never given any 
banned substances.

An emotional Hird also issued an unreserved apology for any damage that had 
been caused to the club’s reputation after the “mistakes around governance” 
that were made in 2012.

“I am so sorry for anything that’s happened, for anything that’s been done 
wrong to our players or been done wrong to our football club,” Hird said on 
Tuesday.

“I, and we, would never do anything intentionally to harm this football club 
... to harm the game ofAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> football 
that’s given me so much and given so many people so much.

“I love the game, I love the club and I just can’t wait for the rest of the 
year to coach football and just get back into it again.”

Hird admitted he had come close to losing his position as senior coach “a few 
times” over the past two years.

The coach said 5 February 2013 – when the club self-reported to the league – 
was the lowest point of the entire saga.

“The day when basically the AFL suggested that we’d taken 
performance-enhancing drugs,” he said. “That was a very low period because for 
us.

“We thought we had a process whereby players ... there’s no way that would 
have happened and to be thrown into an investigation like that was probably the 
lowest point because it put our players’ careers in jeopardy and it put this 
club’s existence in jeopardy.

“The supporters ... the faith and the love that they have for the club it put 
that in jeopardy too.”

Hird said his overriding emotion when the tribunal’s verdict was one of sheer 
relief and joy that his players had been exonerated.

“This is all about those 34 players and whether they did or they didn’t 
receive performance-enhancing drugs and it’s been proven today by the tribunal 
that they didn’t receive performance-enhancing drugs,” he said.

“That is a fabulous relief for all of us. We thought that was the case and now 
it’s been shown to be the case after an investigation that has been enormous.

“It has been the biggest investigation, I believe, in sport around the world 
of this kind.”

While he admitted he still had reservations about the way the AFL-Asada 
investigation was handled, Hird expressed his desire to draw a line in the sand 
and move on.

He also paid tribute to the “incredible” players led by captain Jobe Watson, 
who were now champing at the bit to play against Sydney Swans in Saturday’s 
season opener at the ANZ Stadium.

“We feel today’s decision handed down by the AFL tribunal fully supports the 
players’ belief that they are innocent,” Watson told reporters on Tuesday.

“We want to go to bed at night and not have it the last thing we think of and 
the first thing we think of when we wake up.

“We want to be able to play this game that we loved playing when we were kids 
and we want our supporters to be proud of us.”

Watson said the players had bonded over the controversy and coped with the 
stress and uncertainty of the past 26 months as best as anyone could but they 
now wanted to resume playing.

“I got hit a few times by my teammates [at training] the other day and they 
were real punches, so I know they’re getting angry,” Watson said.

“They don’t want to play against each other anymore. They’re ready to play 
someone else.”
 