
Essendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> is an empire in ruins. 
The AFL’s most successful club was brought to its knees on Tuesday morning with 
the Court of Arbitration for Sport’s decision to overturn the AFL tribunal’s 
acquittal ruling regarding the use of performance enhancing substances at the 
club.

 It is the bleakest of days for the Bombers. The ruling rips to shreds the 
club’s plans for a fresh start in 2016 under new coach John Worsfold. Just as 
ominously, it may expose Essendon to an avalanche of legal proceedings from 
current and former players over workplace practices that could threaten the 
viability of the club.

Essendon drugs verdict: 34 players guilty of doping charges and banned for a 
year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/12/essendon-drugs-verdict-34-players-guilty-of-doping-charges-and-banned-for-a-year>
 Having already conceded its failing in a settlement with WorkSafe Victoria 
late last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/30/essendon-to-plead-guilty-to-worksafe-charges-over-supplements-program>
, it will be open season on Essendon from those whose careers have been 
blighted by their time in red and black.

 And this doesn’t end anytime soon. Somewhere down the line, it is entirely 
plausible that one of this cohort of players will present with an adverse 
health finding. When their doctor asks what they were given by the Essendon 
Football Club and could it be a factor in their current condition, they will 
have to answer that they don’t know.

 James Hird’s bold quest for success has brought down a generational curse on 
the club he served so brilliantly as a player. It’s a tragedy of Shakespearean 
proportions.

That said, it is a good day for the integrity of the fight against doping in 
world sport. The ruling is a victory for the principle of strict personal 
liability for athletes when it comes to what substances they imbibe. It’s a 
principle every athlete must adhere to.

 Too many Australian sports fans are quick to point the finger of blame at 
Russian sprinters or Chinese swimmers and just as quick to cry “those poor 
boys” when it is one of their favourite football stars in the cheat seat.

 That double standard ended on Tuesday. Following the exposure of systemic 
doping in world athletics, this decision reaffirms that cheating in all its 
various forms can and is being pursued and sanctioned.

 There can be no safe haven for athletes and clubs that want to pursue their 
goals by indulging in a “pharmacological experiment” in the hope that they can 
stay one step ahead of the testers.

After Essendon’s appalling management of the documentation of their infamous 
supplements program, the club tried to seek shelter in the information deficit 
it alone had created. It was using its own incompetence as its first line of 
defence.

 That said, the tortuous, messy and controversial process that has taken years 
to complete needs an overhaul. Justice delayed is justice denied and there 
simply must be a better way to conduct such proceedings

 Twelve of Essendon’s current players, including captain Jobe Watson and star 
midfielder Dyson Heppell, will miss the 2016 season. Once again the Bombers 
will have to go off broadway to the state leagues to find players as canon 
fodder for a lost campaign.

And the ramifications don’t end in Tullamarine. This decision has significant 
impact for a number of other clubs and theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl>. For Jake Carlisle at St Kilda, Paddy 
Ryder and Angus Monfries at Port Adelaide, Jake Melksham at Melbourne and 
Stewart Crameri at the Western Bulldogs, the season is also in tatters.

Reaction to Essendon doping verdict: 'a miscarriage of justice,' says James 
Hird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/12/reaction-to-essendon-doping-verdict-a-miscarriage-of-justice-says-james-hird>
 They haven’t been able to outrun their previous involvement with the Essendon 
Football Club.

 Carlisle, who was sanctioned by St Kilda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/06/st-kilda-recruit-jake-carlisle-accepts-first-strike-under-afl-illicit-drugs-code>
 for his snapchat snorting antics last year, may be the first and only player 
suspended twice before he’s even pulled on the boots for his club.

The AFL’s nightmare continues as it has to decide what it will do regarding 
Jobe Watson’s Brownlow medal. Watson won in 2012 in the midst of the 
supplements program and his suspension surely makes that award untenable.

 It will be a bitter blow to the club captain, who stepped away from the game 
late last year, worn down by the supplements saga. One wonders if this will 
drive him away for good.

 For thousands of Essendon fans that may well be the case. Their loyalty to 
their club is remarkable, but the inability of many to see where responsibility 
for this calamity lay has been astonishing.

 So let’s be clear once and for all. This disaster is Essendon’s and 
Essendon’s alone. “Whatever It Takes” was the Bombers’ now infamous slogan. It 
seems it’s going to take that and a whole more to restore Essendon to its 
former glory.
 