
Britain's ethnic minorities still face significant barriers to social mobility 
despite many having better qualifications than their white counterparts, 
according to researchers at the University of Manchester.

Chinese, Indian, Irish, Bangladeshi and black African students are now 
outperforming their white British peers in obtaining five or more GSCEs at 
grade A* to C, but increased attainment over the past 20 years has failed to 
translate into improved job outcomes, say academics from theCentre on Dynamics 
of Ethnicity <http://www.ethnicity.ac.uk/>.

About 43% of Chinese and 42% of Indian people had a degree-level qualification 
in 2011, compared with 26% of white British, while the most disadvantaged of 
the black and ethnic minority groups (BME) – Pakistani and Bangladeshi – had 
almost quadrupled their rates of degree-level qualifications since 1991.

Dr Laurence Brown, who contributed to the report, said: "It's clear that 
ethnic minorities in Britain are – in many cases – outperforming their white 
peers in both secondary and higher education. However, very few of these gains 
in education have translated into employment outcomes."

Black male unemployment has remained persistently double that of the white 
male population over the past two decades, and although self-employment is 
often seen as a promising route for ethnic economic advancement, for Pakistani 
men there is a disproportionate clustering in the transport sector - 53% of 
self-employed Pakistani men working in the transport industry compared to 8% of 
the rest of the population.

Bringing together some of Britain's largest longitudinal surveys, experts at 
the university defined rates of social mobility through finding the percentage 
who moved up or down from the occupational class of their father.

They found that 43% of white men and 45.6% white women moved up to a higher 
socio-economic class than their father and that in contrast, first generation 
black African, Indian and Pakistani and Bangladeshi groups had significantly 
lower upward mobility rates. Just 34.3% of first generation Pakistani and 
Bangladeshi men and 27.6% of Pakistani and Bangladeshi women moved up from the 
socio-economic class of their father.

The researchers also found that social mobility differed with gender. 
Researchers noted that this was especially pronounced in the second generation 
black Caribbean and Chinese groups, with black Caribbean men (39.3%) and 
Chinese women (46.8%) experiencing lower rates of upward mobility than black 
Caribbean women (67.3%) or Chinese men (56.9%). They also described how second 
generation south-Asian men have benefitted more from upward occupational 
mobility than women.

The authors say their study shows a "need for new routes to mobility is 
crucial" as traditional pathways such as public sector employment have 
significantly narrowed over the past 20 years.

"The need for new routes to mobility is crucial given the over-exposure of 
ethnic minorities to deprivation and poverty in Britain, " explains Brown. "A 
third of Pakistani and Bangladeshi groups in England and a fifth of its Black 
African, Black Caribbean, and Arab populations live in the country's most 
deprived neighbourhoods compared with 8% of the white British population. "That 
is why finding new ways of enabling social mobility is a fundamental issue 
which needs to be tackled by policy makers."

The report, which will be presented at the House of Lords on Thursday in a 
seminar sponsored by Baroness Prashar, brings together education and employment 
research based on census analysis of ethnic groups with a considerable number 
of longitudinal surveys of individual experiences of social mobility.

Omar Khan, acting director of the Runnymede Trust thinktank, said: "This and 
previous other research has looked at other suggested explanations for why 
these persistent inequalities exist, but these other factors only explain part 
of the difference we continue to see between ethnic minorities and white 
British people today. This is yet another study that shows we have a long way 
to go to show we are a fair and society where ethnic minorities are able to 
fulfil their aspirations."
 