
The chief executive of Rolls-Royce Motor Cars, which is owned by BMW, has 
written to all its workers in Britain to warn that exit from theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> would drive up costs and prices and 
could affect the company’s “employment base”.

The letter, leaked to the Guardian, is one of six sent by the bosses of each 
of BMW’s British companies, including MINI, to their staff each warning of the 
dangers of UK withdrawal. It comes after the government warned that car-makers 
would be among those badly hit by Brexit in a civil service report.

Torsten Muller-Otvos, chief executive of Rolls-Royce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> Motor Cars, told staff 
that the decision about whether to remain in the EU would be down to British 
voters.

But he added: “Free trade is important for international business. Rolls-Royce 
Motor Cars exports motor cars throughout the EU and imports a significant 
number of parts through the region.

“For BMW Group, more than half of MINIs built and virtually all the engines 
and components made in the UK are exported to the EU, with over 150,000 new 
cars and many hundreds of thousands of parts imported fromEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> each year.

“Tariff barriers would mean higher costs and higher prices and we cannot 
assume that the UK would be granted free trade with Europe from outside the EU. 
Our employment base could also be affected, with skilled men and women from 
most EU countries included in the 30 nationalities currently represented at the 
home of Rolls-Royce here at Goodwood.”

Out campaigners will be angry about this intervention by BMW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bmw>, asking why a German multinational 
is wading into the debate over Britain’s future in the EU.


Both Rolls-Royce and BMW admitted that emails and letters had been sent out to 
8,000 employees, including workers in Goodwood, West Sussex, and Oxford. The 
parent and its subsidiary insisted that they were not trying to influence their 
staff when it came to the June referendum.

All letters said that Britain would have to abide by EU regulation rules 
whatever the outcome of the referendum. “We believe it’s much better to be sat 
at the table when regulations are set and have a hand in their creation, rather 
than simply having to accept them.”


Richard Carter, director of communications at Rolls-Royce, said he believed 
the letter was justified, arguing that it was the company’s duty to outline its 
position to employees and tell them the risks of Brexit. “Once the British 
people have decided we will have to judge that decision from a business point 
of view,” he said, arguing that Brexit would have a huge impact on the company.

Graham Biggs, of BMW group, added that the bosses were simply setting out the 
company’s position because many staff had asked for it. BMW was among the 
signatories of a business letter – organised by government – in favour of EU 
membership.

Nick Herbert, the chairman of Conservative In – the party’s pro-EU campaign 
group – said that Rolls-Royce Motor Cars was one of the most important 
employers in West Sussex where he is an MP. “The calm and sober statements of 
the facts by companies like Rolls-Royce remind us of the advantages of being in 
the single market. The more I hear things like this, the more sure I am that 
Britain will be better off remaining in a reformed EU,” he said.

Paul Stephenson, a spokesman for Vote Leave, pointed out that a number of car 
companies – including Toyota, Vauxhall, Bentley and Nissan – had said they 
would continue to invest in the UK. He said the “personal views of chief 
executives” did not represent the opinions of employees or shareholders. “Big 
foreign, multinational companies like the EU because they spend millions 
lobbying it in order to stitch up the rules in their favour – forcing smaller 
players out of business.”

The Green party MP Caroline Lucas will make the “peace argument” against 
Brexit on Thursday, warning that EU membership is Britain’s best defence 
against the risk of Europe descending into war. “Europe is not, historically, a 
very peaceful place,” she will say, in a lecture at the London School of 
Economics. “It would be sheer folly to think that armed conflict cannot return. 
We cannot know what dangers lie ahead. But we can be sure that a strong and 
stable European Union, with Britain as an active and positive participant, 
provides the surest guarantee of our national security.”

Meanwhile Boris Johnson, a Tory MP and one of the most high-profile outers, 
will be taken on by his own brother. Jo Johnson, the science minister, will 
say: “In this referendum campaign, it is vital that we have an evidence-based 
debate and properly informed choice. The facts matter. And few value evidence 
more than scientists. That’s why we should take seriously the surveys showing 
nine out of 10 agree EU membership benefits UK science and engineering.” He 
said Britain could “survive and prosper” outside the EU but challenged those 
who want to leave to explain how the levels of investment will be maintained.

 * This article was amended on 3 March 2016 to correct a reference to Caroline 
Lucas as the Green party leader. Lucas is the party’s single MP, while Natalie 
Bennett is the leader of the party.  