
A group of England players, led by the manager, Roy Hodgson, have made an 
emotional visit to Auschwitz-Birkenau and paid their respects to the estimated 
1.3 million people murdered in the death camp by the Nazis during the second 
world war.

The group were accompanied by the former Chelsea manager, Avram Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/avram-grant>, who spoke individually with 
each of the party as they were guided around the site and then addressed the 
gathering outside the ovens used by the Nazis to burn the dead. "It's very 
important you are here," said Grant, whose own family lost 15 members at 
Auschwitz. "People will see you have come here, and then others will follow. 
It's important to talk about this and spread the message of what happened here."

The players – Wayne Rooney, Joe Hart, Phil Jagielka, Leighton Baines, Theo 
Walcott, Jack Butland and Andy Carroll – were visibly shaken as they were shown 
piles of children's shoes, medical prostheses, glasses and household items 
confiscated from prisoners on their arrival at the camp, and by heaps of the 
victims' hair.

They read the labels tagged to suitcases owned by Klara Fochtmann, Herman 
Pasternak, Benjamin Lazarus and a two-year-old Petr Eisler, and were left in 
quiet contemplation as they took in the scene. Grant, Hodgson and the FA 
chairman, David Bernstein, concluded the visit – organised in conjunction with 
the Holocaust Educational Trust – by lighting candles on the tracks leading 
into the camp.

Rooney said: "It's hard to understand, so tough. When you see the amount of 
children's clothes and shoes, it's such a sad experience. You have to see it 
first-hand to understand, and of course it puts football into perspective. It 
will never be forgotten. We know that kids nowadays are interested in 
footballers, and if a few more people understand what happened because we came 
here today then that has to be good."

A second group of England players, led by the captain, Steven Gerrard, spent 
time at the former enamelware and munitions factory set up by Oskar Schindler, 
who is credited with saving more than 1,100 Jews from the Krakow ghetto by 
employing them at the plant. "You tend to look back on days like this as much 
as the tournament itself in the years to come," said Joleon Lescott, one of the 
15 members of the squad to visit the factory. "It might take a while for it to 
sink in."
 