
David Moyes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes> has called for 
international associations to pay the wages of players they use during domestic 
seasons, as Everton prepare to lose Tim Cahill for up to six weeks to the Asian 
Cup.

Cahill is Everton's leading goalscorer with six already this season and their 
only attacking player to find form, but he could be absent from mid-December 
until late January due to Australia's involvement in the tournament in Qatar. 
While Moyes does not dispute the legitimacy or timing of the Asian Cup or the 
Africa Cup of Nations, he believes the growing expense of players' salaries 
should pass from clubs to countries during those international tournaments.

"We sign African players and we accept that they will be away," the Everton 
manager said. "But when we signed Tim Cahill, Australia were not in Asia's 
pool, they were in Oceania. So we didn't expect to be missingTim Cahill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tim-cahill>.

"When you sign African players you accept they will go to the Africa Cup of 
Nations. You cannot turn round and say to the African nations: 'Bring yourself 
in line with us', because their weather or their seasons are different from us. 
You can't say it about the J-League. You can't ask them to change, but maybe if 
you are going to take the player away in the middle of the season then 
shouldn't a club get reimbursed?"

Moyes said he will attempt to delay Cahill's departure for Australia's 
pre-tournament training camp for as long as possible. But he was forced to 
concede: "They are due to take him [in] mid to late December and depending how 
far they go in the tournament will determine how long he is away. Tim is 
massively important for us. He is going to be a really big miss. I cannot do 
anything about it. All I hope is that I get as much time with him before he 
goes away or, sadly, you start hoping they get knocked out of the tournament 
because you get them back quicker."

The Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> manager has refused 
to dismiss speculation that Johnny Heitinga is looking to leave in the January 
transfer window. Heitinga has struggled to hold down a first-team place this 
season, with his form dipping since returning from Holland's run to the World 
Cup final in the summer, and has been linked with a move to Bayern Munich.

Asked if the Dutch international could leave in January, Moyes said: "I don't 
know. We have had no offers, but you hear bits of rumours like everyone else. 
There has been no official contact from anybody regarding Johnny Heitinga.

"I think he is of the character and the type to battle for his place. I have 
no reason to think anything other than it is just speculation. I haven't heard 
from Johnny or any clubs. He has to get on with it. There is competition for 
places and he is involved in that."
 