
It was a cold, sunny December day when I set out for a run in Moab, Utah, with 
my dog, Taz. As a professional endurance athlete I often went for training runs 
by myself, and had done this particular route before. So what happened next was 
just bad luck.

About an hour into my run along a remote canyon trail, I hit a patch of black 
ice. I found myself slipping down the rock face, which became steeper and 
steeper until suddenly I was in free fall. I just remember thinking, “I’ve got 
to land this somehow.”

I fell 60 feet into the canyon, landing on a four-foot square ledge above a 
sheer drop; if I’d missed it there’s no way I would have survived. I could feel 
my legs, so knew I wasn’t paralysed, but I was in excruciating pain. Taz had 
managed to find his way back to me, so I knew there must be a way out of the 
canyon, but I couldn’t stand or even crawl. I later learned that I had 
shattered my pelvis.

Adrenaline kicked in, and I became focused on getting out of the canyon. I 
shouted for help, and was intent on dragging myself to the bottom of the 
ravine. Every inch was an effort. It took me five hours to go quarter of a mile.

Eventually it got so dark I couldn’t see where I was going, and I decided to 
stay where I was for the night, next to a puddle of water I could drink from. 
All I had on me were my jogging clothes, a water bottle, two Ibuprofen, a 
couple of energy gel packets, and a shower cap which adventure racers often 
wear to prevent heat loss. This one probably saved my life.

At night the temperature dropped below freezing. I couldn’t go to sleep or I 
would die of hypothermia, so I stayed awake doing mini-crunches – lifting my 
head a few inches, over and over. Taz stayed with me, providing some warmth. 
The next morning, I couldn’t move at all. I tried to stay positive. I was sure 
somebody would realise I was missing or hear me screaming for help. But there 
was nobody around; it was the middle of December, in the middle of nowhere.

Experience: I didn’t speak for 17 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/25/i-didnt-speak-for-17-years-experience-planetwalker>
The second night in the canyon seemed even longer and colder. My feet were 
frostbitten and my midsection was swollen from internal bleeding. The puddle 
turned to ice, and I had to crack through it in the morning to get water. I 
drank only a little, using my bottle cap as a cup, knowing if I drank too much 
I would pee on myself and then freeze to death.

On the third day, I felt myself growing weaker. I was coming to terms with the 
fact I might die. In a last-ditch effort, I called Taz over and told him to go 
and get help. I always talked to him like a human. Taz took off through the 
canyon and I lay there thinking about my family and friends. There was more 
that I wanted from life.

Taz returned, alone. Then I heard an engine in the distance. I started yelling 
for help, and that’s when I saw a man walking towards me. He told me his name 
was Bego, and that he’d come to find me. I cried with joy. It turned out my 
neighbour noticed I hadn’t come home, and Taz had found a search and rescue 
team. I was airlifted to hospital, where doctors found I had lost almost half 
the blood in my body. If the rescue team had arrived later, I wouldn’t have 
made it.

I was in surgery for six hours while the doctors put my pelvis back together. 
My sacrum was crumbled; there’s now a plate holding the bits of bone together, 
and a screw in the left side of my pelvis. My feet are sensitive to cold 
because of the frostbite, but I still have them.

After leaving hospital, I was in a wheelchair for three months. Gradually I 
was able to get around using a walker, then crutches, then a cane. Five months 
after my accident I took part in an adventure race. I had to walk, but I won it.

Ten years on, I still think about it every day. I don’t run like I used to, 
and cold weather brings back bad memories; but I’m married with two kids, and 
Taz is still alive – we’ll always have a special bond. Realising you have a 
second chance at life puts things into perspective.

• As told to Abigail Edge

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
 