
Who controls film censorship in the UK?

In theory, local councils - borough and county councils for the most part - 
have the power to allow any cinema to show any film. In practice, the councils 
almost always follow the classifications given to films by the British Board of 
Film Classification (formerly the British Board of Film Censorship).

Exceptions to this are rare enough to be notable. In 1996, Westminster Council 
refused a licence to David Cronenberg's Crash, though it played in the rest of 
the country, and in 1998 Camden Council granted a licence to The Texas Chain 
Saw Massacre, which was later classified as 18 by the BBFC.

What is the BBFC?

The BBFC is technically an autonomous industry body, which charges film 
distributors for the service it provides in classifying films.

It was set up in 1912 by the film industry as a self-regulatory body in an 
attempt to head off government interference. With a few exceptions, local 
councils gradually accepted its classifications as standard, establishing the 
BBFC as the UK's semi-official censor.

Since then, its relationship with government has been based largely on a 
gentlemen's understanding: the BBFC keeps its classifications within bounds 
deemed acceptable to government of the day (with a close eye on public 
opinion). In return, parliament makes no move to set up an official body.

In 1984, parliament made the BBFC the body responsible for video 
classification in Britain. This has brought the gentlemen's agreement within 
the law. It gave the BBFC official status at last, but has also left it more 
vulnerable to persuasion from central government.

How does the BBFC make its decisions? When does it cut films?

The board operates to a set of guidelines published on its website. It has 
traditionally observed a distinction between what it calls "manners" - flexible 
attitudes on the part of the public towards things such as nudity and obscene 
language, and "morals" - immutable codes of conduct. This conveniently allows 
it to change its classifications if it judges that public attitudes have 
changed.

The BBFC is keen to highlight the role that public consultation plays in its 
decision making, and organises "roadshows" to both canvas public opinion and to 
justify its decisions.

The board cuts films surprisingly rarely, and very openly: its website lists 
the length of any cut, and the reasons for it. Most cuts are made at the 
request of the distributor, to squeeze films into a lower age classification 
(generally speaking, lower age classifications means increased takings at the 
box office). Films classified 18 are rarely cut, and generally only to avoid 
prosecution under the Obscene Publications Act.

Who runs the BBFC?

Good question. In theory, it runs itself as a business. In practice, it is 
very susceptible to influence from government departments, partly through its 
fear of being made redundant by the creation of an official body. The clearest 
example of this is the nomination of its president. Since the authority to 
classify films for video release is granted to the president of the BBFC as a 
person, the board's continued survival would be in doubt if it failed to 
appoint someone with Home Office approval.

So the Home Office calls the shots?

Not any more. Since June 2001, responsibility for film and video 
classification has moved from the Home Office to the Department of Culture, 
Media and Sport. In part, this is because the DCMS is working on bringing 
regulation of broadcast media, film and video under the aegis of a single body, 
Ofcom.

What would this mean for film censorship?

One of the proposals is that Ofcom take over from the BBFC in its role as 
video censor. This would mean a substantial loss of revenue for the BBFC, and 
also raise the possibility of classification differences between the two 
bodies. The BBFC already has a stricter policy on video than cinema releases, 
but is at least consistent in itself. Ultimately, it is hard to imagine that a 
body created to regulate broadcast and video films would not eventually assume 
responsibility for cinema exhibition too.

The effect of having film censorship run directly by a government agency 
raises obvious concerns. Critics of the proposal predict many more knee-jerk 
responses to causes celebres, and less consistency over time as new governments 
are sworn in, bringing their own attitudes with them.

Aren't there laws about what can and can't be shown in films?

The Obscene Publications Act prohibits material which "tends to deprave or 
corrupt persons who are likely to read, see or hear it", and other laws apply 
specifically to video releases.

Though very vague, the law is generally held to apply to anything which might 
encourage criminal activity by those watching it, especially if it encourages 
violence or sexual violence. Interestingly, the BBFC last year consulted the 
police as to whether car theft scenes in Gone in Sixty Seconds were likely to 
assist would-be car thieves. The police thought not.

The perceived ban on images of the erect penis and sexual penetration is 
largely that: a perceived ban. In fact, the BBFC has recently classified two 
films, Romance and Intimacy, which feature precisely those images.
 