
Every seven or eight minutes another goal came ... and every goal was another 
hole in what I was writing; with each goal my piece was more irrelevant. One 
goal at a time it fell apart. As the end of the game approached, it was torn up 
completely and forgotten. Write something else. This was much bigger. Write 
about what had happened instead and what it meant.

But what had happened? And what did it mean? Even then, even straight after 
Spain lost 5-1 to Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/13/spain-holland-world-cup-2014-group-b-match-report>
, I was not really sure. Not yet. I was not even yet sure that it was the end 
but it was; Spain’s World Cup had pretty much finished before most countries’ 
tournament had even started. That generation, the most successful in football 
history, had gone – one goal at a time.

It had all happened so fast, yet oddly it had happened steadily too. Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> scored on 44, 53, 64, 72 and 80 
minutes. Even at half-time no one really anticipated what was to happen next. 
There was a sense of guilt, or perhaps weakness, at not having spoken out: we 
had all seen flaws before the tournament but we had all thought Spain would get 
it right. Here Spain had taken the lead and should have extended it. On 44 
minutes Robin van Persie had scored that incredible diving header. But it was 
still only 1-1; Spain might still win this. A draw was likely. What was not 
likely was what came next. From a writing point of view it was not time to 
abort mission yet.

I should clarify that I was not doing the match report that day; Paul Wilson 
was. I was to watch Diego Costa – the Brazilian playing for Spain at theWorld 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> in Brazil. I 
watched him run and call for the ball, watched him try to understand his 
team-mates, listened to the supporters have a go at him. I started to see him 
as symbolic to Spain’s struggles, a good player in the wrong team, for so many 
reasons. It had been a difficult day for him.

It ended up being so difficult for all of them that his personal battle was 
eclipsed by all of their misery. Costa became irrelevant, except that he was a 
portrait of them all. With each goal it was less about him. Paul chronicled the 
game and my story of Costa, designed to accompany his report, seemed 
increasingly redundant. So when Costa went off, the piece on him was filed. 
Soon it was filed away. It was time for a rethink, though even I was not sure
Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> were in crisis yet. I 
remember writing in that first piece that by coming second in the group Costa 
would most likely meet his compatriots in the next round. But by drawing away 
from him personally and trying to explain Spain’s collective collapse, a more 
dramatic conclusion dawned: there might not be a next round.

It had never quite seemed that bad, but by the end it could not have seemed 
worse. The Dutch were coming at Spain from everywhere and the Spanish looked 
helpless, completely at a loss to explain it and powerless to stop it. I tried 
to explain that disarray and, like Spain, was at a bit of a loss. But all those 
warning alarms from before the tournament were ringing louder now. We had heard 
them and noted them but Spain had not really acted on them. And we never 
expected this.

Afterwards there was quiet. Yet as the players departed, there also seemed to 
be a sense that this was a problem that could still be remedied easily enough. 
Maybe that was one of the reasons why it was not. They never recovered and 
perhaps they were never equipped to do so.

Something struck me sitting there in the stadium: at the World Cup, the PA 
announced the score at the end of each game. It felt pointless usually but not 
in Salvador. Did we hear that right? Did he really say “Spain 1 Holland 5”?
 