
A derelict, dipsomaniac addict, addled by breakfast-time, at the mercy of his 
rampant libido, driven by the hunt for the next free drink or drug, flogging 
his baby's milk for a lager. This is the life of benefits baron Vernon Francis 
Gallagher, useless single parent to six of his eight children by two women, 
resident of 2 Windsor Gardens on the fictional Chatsworth Estate, Manchester. 
Frank and his supporting cast of offspring, mates and mistresses were 
introduced to the British viewing public in January 2004. Nobody had seen 
anything quite likeShameless before and, initially at least, Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> audiences and critics alike 
couldn't get enough.

Created by the award-winning and gifted Paul Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/paul-abbott> (who wrote Clocking Off and 
State of Play), this was a portrait of an underclass with elan; a joyful 
celebration of free-spirited ne'er-do-wells whose every activity is a 
two-fingered salute to those who live plodding, respectable lives. Apart from 
Frank, beautifully played by David Threlfall, they were grafters all, looking 
out for each other and the long arm of the law, not to mention social workers, 
bailiffs and anyone resembling an employee of Jobcentre Plus.

The first series began with a view of a council estate, an abandoned car in 
flames and Frank's voice telling us: "Now nobody is saying the Chatsworth 
Estate is the Garden of Eden, least I don't think they are, but it's been good 
to us …" It's been a blast, but 10 years and 11 series later, the final episode 
ofShameless is broadcast next week.

During those 10 years, as Frank led a charmed life on the run from 
responsibility, the debate surrounding his real-life equivalents has hardened 
and soured – especially over the last three years, as austerity Britain turned 
on a supposed "benefits culture".

When the Conservative leadership looks to dismiss Labour as the "welfare 
party", it means to damn the opposition by association with the Frank 
Gallaghers of this world. The benefit cap has been introduced to prevent abuse 
of taxpayers' generosity. George Osborne's budget references to the curtains of 
the workshy, which remain closed as honest people go to work, has driven home a 
supposed distinction between "strivers" and "shirkers", or the deserving and 
the undeserving poor.

Frank once memorably mocked the audience – us – by chanting: "We are worth 
every penny for grinding your axes … We're off our 'eads but you pay the 
taxes." That no longer seems quite so funny or mischievous. Perhaps it's the 
right time forShameless to bow out as altogether harsher winds blow across the 
social landscape.

Some might say that reality has trumped the Chatsworth estate. What began in 
Shameless as the depiction of a unique non-working-class family – fallen angels 
or, depending upon your point of view, spirited experts in survival – has been 
outstripped by alleged real-life moral turpitude of a depressingly high order. 
When Frank abandons his children and moves in with agoraphobic Sheila so he can 
milk her benefits, then sleeps with her daughter,who also happens to be the 
girlfriend of Frank's son, it seems small beer compared to the antics of those 
who appear on the repugnantJeremy Kyle Show or, more cruelly, the rare cases of 
chaotic lives that end in violence and death. Nine-year-old Shannon Matthews 
was kidnapped and drugged by her mother for money and fame. Tia Sharp was 
murdered by Stuart Hazell, her grandmother's boyfriend. And, notoriously, Mick 
Philpott, an aggressive long-term sponger and father of 15, was assiduously 
courted by the media until he became a child killer.

The right points to the rise in cohabiting couples (3 million) and the growing 
numbers of lone parents (2 million) as indicators of breakdown. But changed 
family formation is not a vice. Dysfunctional families undoubtedly exist – as 
do those parked on benefits because work doesn't pay – but what's missing in 
this false analysis of a society-wide malaise promulgated by ministers such as 
Iain Duncan Smith is a sense of proportion; a healthy ministerial respect for 
statistics and policies that go to the root of the matter.

Shameless is not a prophetic vision of a large swath of society in imminent 
danger of collapse, but it does have at its roots a very personal truth – the 
exceptionally difficult upbringing of its creator, Abbott. Born in Burnley in 
1960, he was the seventh of eight children. Both parents abandoned the family 
by the time he was 11. They lived in an unheated house with no running water, 
guarded by the eldest, a 16-year-old girl. Abbott was raped at 13 and "went 
turtle", as he put it, and had a breakdown at 15. In an interview five years 
ago, he described how, at the same age, he won his first award for writing. A 
woman who ran a corner shop with "teeth like a graveyard" offered him the use 
of her electric typewriter and spare room. She smelled of boiled ham and nylon 
because after cutting the meat she would wipe her hands on her overall. He 
could smell her coming.

"She used to fuck the brains out of me to use her electric typewriter … Oh 
God, it was gruesome," he recalled. "But it was worth it … I couldn't go back 
to manual."

Abbott's intimate acquaintance with dystopian horror inspired Shameless. And 
as it found its way on to C4, the series had the perfect PR backdrop in the 
shape of New Labour's "social exclusion agenda". Even as the plots of cocaine 
dealing, gay prostitution, teenage pregnancy and lesbianism ducked and dived 
through one series after another, making stars of Maxine Peake, James McAvoy 
and Anne-Marie Duff among others, Tony Blair was launching New Labour's 
campaign to correct working-class behaviour.

Antisocial behaviour orders in 2005 were followed by the Respect Action Plan, 
offering carrots and sticks relating to housing, parenting, truancy and 
juvenile offending. Then came Think Family, supposedly identifying 140,000 
families – 2% of the 18 million total: hardly an epidemic – who were costing 
the public purse billions by behaving exactly like the Gallaghers.

Now, even as the TV family bid their last farewell, the hunt for their clones 
is still going on. Louise Casey is overseeing the reform of 120,000 "troubled 
families" by 2015. Each apparently costs the public £75,000 a year. A 
significant part of that sum is run up not by welfare dependency so much as by 
professionals duplicating each other's tasks and nobody really knowing what 
works or what doesn't. The government itself admits it's not clear how the 
figure of 120,000 was arrived at – and some local authorities are finding it 
difficult to actually identify their own cohort of dysfunctional Gallaghers. 
But the notion that our communities are divided between leeches and worker bees 
has taken root.

The result is that blame is increasingly directed at individuals who are, in 
many instances, handicapped by an economic system that can no longer deliver 
sufficient unskilled and semi-skilled jobs at a wage that works. Two-thirds of 
children in poverty, for instance, live in households where at least one person 
works. And those who claim thatShameless-style fecklessness has become a 
feature of our poorest estates should look at the work of academic David Gregg. 
He analysed some earlier intervention projects and discovered that many of the 
"feckless" were not exercising indulgent lifestyle choices but had chronic 
mental health, housing and disability problems that were not being addressed.

The rhetoric continues regardless. "When I took this job, I discovered there 
were some people who got £100,000 a year in housing benefit," Osborne said last 
month. A freedom of information request reveals that there are indeed families 
on benefits living in mansions and receiving almost £2,000 a week – a total of 
between five and 14 in the whole of the country.

The main issue is not moral depravity: a housing crisis is principally to 
blame for the soaring housing benefit bill. The welfare state needs 
remodelling, as Frank would be the first to advocate in his own way: "Make 
poverty history – cheaper drugs now!" But the current manipulation of 
statistics amounts to an unpleasant bullying of the poorest.

So farewell, Frank. He will live on, immortalised in all his manic glory on 
the internet. "Bringing up kiddies," he reflected once, "you can't remember 
their names." But as Abbott says of his fictional family: "No one should have 
to live like that." And that's the truth.
 