
Savers over the age of 55 who want to take money from their pension pot rather 
than buy an annuity will be given extra protection under rules set out by the 
City watchdog.


The Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> (FCA) said 
from 5 April, when the new pension freedoms begin that allow people unfettered 
access to their retirement pot, firms will have to provide consumers with “risk 
warnings” based on their individual circumstances.


Pension firms will have to raise a number of issues with their customers who 
want access to their cash including: discussing the state of a someone’s health 
(as this can impact on their retirement choices), the tax implications of 
accessing their money, the impact on means-tested benefits, and the danger of 
being targeted by investment scams.


These personalised “risk warnings” must be given to customers when they 
contact a firm to access their pension savings and are in addition to the 
guidance provided by the the government through its Pension Wise service.


“The pension reforms give those people who are nearing retirement greater 
choice on what to do with their pension pots,” said Christopher Woolard, 
director of strategy and competition at the FCA.

 “We want to ensure that they get the right information so they can make 
informed decisions about their future.”


Firms will need to keep records to show that consumers have received relevant 
warnings and whether they have taken regulated advice or guidance from Pension 
Wise, the FCA said.

Pension Wise 
<https://www.pensionwise.gov.uk/?gclid=CjwKEAiAyMCnBRDa0Pyex-qswB0SJADKNMKAT5O_5oy1htSChktKE1qPAyEWajYWSgkcvsDkc1t-ShoC8jHw_wcB>
 is the government scheme that will offer 45-minute guidance sessions to anyone 
over 55 who has a defined contribution (or money purchase) pension. The 
sessions will not give advice tailored to individuals, so the government is 
hoping that those who need this will pay for it from an independent financial 
adviser.


The FCA has not consulted on the rules that are considered the “second line of 
defence” against consumers making poor retirement decisions. But it has said 
that it will undertake a review of “at-retirement” rules in the summer and will 
consult then on whether any changes need to be made to the rules.
 