
The discovery of five remarkable new fossils has confirmed that birds evolved 
from dinosaurs, Chinese scientists said last night.

Because the fossils, unearthed in north-eastern China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, are older than previous discoveries 
of similar creatures, the find adds weight to the theory that birds descended 
from predatory dinosaurs.

The fossils all have feathers or feather-like structures. The clearest and 
most striking of the specimens can be seen to have four wings, extensive 
plumage and profusely feathered feet.

One of the scientists who made the discovery, Xu Xing, will reveal details of 
his find in Bristol at the annual meeting of the Society of Vertebrate 
Palaeontology.

"These exceptional fossils provide us with evidence that has been missing 
until now," Xu said. "Now it all fits neatly into place and we have tied up 
some of the loose ends."

The finds date back to between 151m and 164m years ago, which suggest they are 
older than archaeopteryx, previously thought to be the oldest undisputed bird.

Xu, who is based in Beijing, said: "The fossils provide confirmation that the 
bird-dinosaur hypothesis is correct, and supports the idea that birds descended 
from theropod dinosaurs (the group of predatory dinosaurs that includes 
allosaurus and velociraptor)."

The fossils were found in Liaoning province. Xu told the Guardian he was 
shocked when he first saw the best of the specimens. "This was really 
unexpected. One thing that would shock you is that this is covered with 
feathers everywhere except the beak and the claw," he said. "It is the first 
feathered species known so far; the earliest known feathered species."

There have been fakes before. A creature that came to be known as 
archaeoraptor, with the body of the bird and the tail of a dinosaur, sent the 
world of palaeontology into a flutter after apparently being found in China. It 
was later proved a fake, not unearthed by scientists, but bought at a rock show 
in the US. China is an increasingly important centre for palaeontology because 
so much of the country's rocks remain unexplored. A sizeable contingent from 
China is attending the conference in Bristol, one of the largest gatherings of 
palaeontologists ever.

Xu said: "The first question we wanted to know was is it fake or real? We 
checked in detail and convinced ourselves there was no problem. We are 100% 
sure we are looking at a real species, not a fake one. It's one of the most 
important for understanding the origin of birds."

Feathers cover the arms and tail, but also the feet, suggesting that a 
four-winged stage may have existed in the transition to birds. The fossils will 
also help scientists work out the mechanics of how early birds flew. The 
specimens have been identified as types of Anchiornis huxleyi. The details of 
the find will also be announced in Nature.
 