
With sombre speeches and a thunder of cannon, Havana held a mass eulogy for 
Fidel Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> on Tuesday night 
in a ceremony that underscored the polarising influence of the dead Cuban 
revolutionary.

President Raul Castro, dressed in his military uniform, led the memorial for 
his brother, who seized power in 1959 and turned the Caribbean island into a 
bastion of anti-imperialism and a focus of Cold War tensions with the United 
States.

Ideological allies, including Venezuela’s Nicholas Maduro, Bolivia’s Evo 
Morales, Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe and South Africa’s Jacob Zuma came in person 
to say farewell to Castro, who died on Friday aged 90, whilst nations on the 
other side of the political divide sent lower-ranking representatives.

'The dark era is over. I can see the light': Cuban Americans on Fidel Castro's 
death | Guardian readers and Sarah Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/29/fidel-castro-death-cuban-americans>
“We and our self-sacrificing, combative and heroic people say to you: Ever 
onward to victory,” Castro said in a tribute to his brother.

Castro embraced Maduro, his ideological ally, as the ceremony got underway. 

“They could overcome neither Fidel, nor the people of Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> nor the dreams and hopes of this great 
nation,” Maduro said in a tribute, chanting a refrain about the iconic 
revolutionary fending off imperialists that the crowd then finished.

“He fulfilled his mission on this earth,” he added. “Few lives have been so 
complete, so bright. He has left unconquered.”

As well as tens of thousands of Cubans, the great and the good of the nation’s 
cultural and sporting world were also in attendance. Among them was Ana Fidelia 
Quirot, a two-time world 800m champion, who arrived in the colours of the 
national athletics team.

She recalled how Castro had visited her bedside every day while she was 
recovering from a life-threatening accident. “In my toughest moments he was 
always there for me,” she said. “I have come to honour an exceptional humanist. 
He may not be here physically but he will stay in my heart.”

A group of elderly veterans paused on their way to the square to share 
reminiscences and sentiments as chants of “Viva Fidel!” resounded.

Eighty-year-old Armando Vasquez fought for Castro in the Sierra Maestra in the 
early days of the revolution. “He was like a father. When he gave an order you 
knew you could do it, because he had already showed that it could be done.”

Another pulled out his wallet and showed the Castro photograph he keeps 
inside. “Look at this. I don’t keep a picture of my wife or daughter. That’s 
how much Fidel means to me,” said Gilberto Gonzalez. “We Cubans have been 
privileged to have a leader like this.”

Sandra Calvo – a Cuban-Mexican resident – arrived with her sister Patricia, 
pushing her 11-month-old son who was holding a Cuba flag. “It’s the end of an 
era but something more than that,” she said.

“I am a graduate of political science and I can’t think of any case where the 
loss of a former president has generated so much genuine sadness. People aren’t 
forced to come here. They want to respect him and his achievements. There 
aren’t many countries where people can become doctors and philosophers 
regardless of their economic position.”

Raul Castro closed the rally with a speech thanking world leaders for their 
words of praise for his brother, who he called the leader of a revolution “for 
the humble, and by the humble.”

Earlier in the day, lines stretched for hours outside the Plaza of the 
Revolution, the heart of government power and the place where Castro delivered 
fiery speeches to mammoth crowds after he seized power.

Raúl Castro: where will Fidel's brother and successor take Cuba next?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/raul-castro-fidel-brother-successor-cuba-what-next>
In Havana and across the island people signed condolence books and an oath of 
loyalty to Castro’s sweeping May 2000 proclamation of the Cuban revolution as 
an unending battle for socialism, nationalism and an outsize role for the 
island on the world stage.

Tribute sites were set up in hundreds of places across the island as the 
government urged Cubans to reaffirm their belief in a socialist, single-party 
system that in recent years has struggled to maintain the fervour that was 
widespread at the triumph of the 1959 revolution.

Many mourners came on their own accord to Havana but thousands were sent in 
groups by the communist government, which still employs about 80% of the 
working people in Cuba despite the growth of the private sector under Raul.

Cuban state media reported that an urn containing Castro’s ashes was being 
kept in a room at the defence ministry where Raul Castro and top Communist 
party officials paid tribute the previous evening.

Inside the memorial thousands walked through three rooms with near-identical 
displays featuring the 1962 Alberto Korda photograph of the young Castro in the 
Sierra Maestra mountains, bouquets of white flowers and an array of Castro’s 
medals against a black backdrop, framed by honour guards of soldiers and 
children in school uniforms. The ashes of the 90-year-old former president did 
not appear to be on display.

Signs read: “The Cuban Communist party is the only legitimate heir of the 
legacy and authority of the commander in chief of the Cuban Revolution, comrade 
Fidel Castro.”

“Goodbye commander. Your ideas remain here with us,” 64-year-old retiree 
Etelbina Perez said between sobs, dabbing at her eyes with a brown 
handkerchief. “I feel great pain over his death. I owe my entire life to him. 
He brought me out of the mountains. I was able to study thanks to him.”

The White House announced on Tuesday that Obama would not send a presidential 
delegation. Instead, the United States will be represented by Jeffrey 
DeLaurentis, chief diplomat at the US embassy in Havana, and Ben Rhodes, an 
Obama aide who represented the United States in 18 months of secret talks that 
led to detente.

African leaders included Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe.

Mugabe, 92, himself a former Marxist guerrilla who has led Zimbabwe as prime 
minister or president since 1980 despite financial and health crises, praised 
Fidel Castro’s government for having trained thousands of Zimbabwean doctors 
and teachers.

“Fidel was not just your leader. He was our leader and the leader of all 
revolutionaries. We followed him, listened to him and tried to emulate him,” 
Mugabe told reporters as he arrived in Havana. “Farewell, dear brother. 
Farewell, revolutionary,” he said.




Associated Press and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report
 