
Here we go again. Typical British fudge, with a dash of paternalism. This 
time, the calculation appears to be that because those disadvantaged are the 
transgender community – a minority within a minority – the government can press 
on regardless and weather the resulting fuss.

How else to explain the extraordinary intransigence of the Department of Work 
and Pensions (DWP) in the case of MB, a trans woman who should have been 
eligible for a pension in 2008 but for her religious scruples. She and her 
partner refused to divorce, then a precondition of obtaining a gender 
recognition certificate (GRC) as same-sex marriage had not been introduced. 
Without it, she was forced towait a further five years before obtaining her 
pension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/10/supreme-court-transgender-woman-refused-uk-female-state-pension>
 because she was still, in the eyes of the DWP, “a man”.

With the supreme court unable to make up its mind on how to deal with this 
issue – MB, not unnaturally, wants her extra five years of pension back – the 
case is now on its way to Europe where, it is likely, the DWP will lose. But 
not before squandering a small fortune on defending the indefensible.

EU court to hear case of transgender woman refused female pension
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/10/supreme-court-transgender-woman-refused-uk-female-state-pension>
How did we get here? And why, despite its claim to have granted “equal 
marriage” to the LGBT community, is the institution on offer such a second-rate 
cousin to the “real thing”, heterosexual marriage?

There was obvious logic to making the granting of a GRC dependent on divorce 
back in 2004 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/7/contents>, when the 
Gender Recognition Act was passed. Not to do so would mean the creation, de 
facto, of a tranche of gay marriages, as trans people who stay happily married 
to their (now) same-sex spouse gained a new legal gender.

Ten years on, all has changed. Gay marriage is on the statute books. But not 
equal marriage 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/uk-politics/2013/07/why-our-new-same-sex-marriage-not-yet-equal-marriage>
. That is government rhetoric. In fact, what passed a couple of years back is 
mostly equal. But different. There are technical differences around what 
constitutes consummation and adultery, in part, it would appear, because 
government legal advisers had some difficulty with getting their heads around 
any definition of “having sex” that did not involve inserting a penis into a 
vagina.

This, though, is small fry compared to what the government has done on pension 
rights. They are not the same. Or rather, the rights of a surviving partner are 
not the same: in fact, they are often significantly less. Here is one further 
frustrating twist of the knife for the trans community.

Because while one may now transition while remaining married, the government 
has introduced the spousal veto, giving non-transitioning partners the right to 
say no to their other half obtaining a GRC. Why? Ostensibly to protect spousal 
rights, although there is little evidence any spouses were asking for this. Yet 
nonetheless, the government has given spouses both the means and the motive to 
block their partner’s GRC.

There needs to be more clarity in transgender healthcare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/29/transgender-healthcare-practice-hormones>
It all seems a vicious brew of spite, bloody-mindedness and a determination 
that equal should not mean equal: the same toxic concoction that meant 10 years 
back trans people had to choose GRC or marriage. And one last twist of the 
knife: those that did divorce back then cannot have their marriage back, must 
pay a second time to marry, in exchange for pension rights that will not be 
backdated.

As for MB, she must wait some years more for a victory I am quite sure will 
eventually be hers. For the DWP has a long and tawdry track record of fighting 
losing battles on trans rights in Europe to the bitter end. The roof will not 
fall in.

Any legal precedent will apply to individuals who transitioned from male to 
female between 2005 and 2013, were married, were eligible to retire then and 
refused to divorce. Factor in that MB also had an interim GRC and the one 
expert in this area estimates that the number of cases affected by an adverse 
ruling might not even reach double figures.

In other words, the DWP is being cruel: defensive for the sake of being 
defensive, likely spending far more on resisting this claim than it would ever 
pay out if all possible similar claims had to be paid. And the government 
wonders why many in the trans community do not trust them.
 