 As anyone who has seen any version of Anna Karenina knows, a great book does 
not necessarily make a great film. And while The Godfather was a great movie, 
was it a great novel? Probably not.
These and other debates went into deciding a longlist of what are deemed the 
50 best film adaptations of all time. Organised by the Guardian, a panel of 
experts has drawn up the list, which will be voted on by the public. The chains 
Waterstones and Borders are also involved and will promote the books in shops.

Andrew Pulver, the Guardian's film editor, who was on the panel, said: "There 
was some vigorous debate."

Among the issues under discussion was whether the film could be adapted from 
non-fiction. The answer was yes, but only in the case of Goodfellas, Martin 
Scorsese's mafia classic based on Nicholas Pileggi's account of the life of the 
gangster Henry Hill.

Short stories are allowed and Brokeback Mountain is there, based on Annie 
Proulx's piece originally published in New Yorker magazine.

Stephen King could have been in the list three times over for short stories 
from one collection. In Different Seasons, three out of four of the stories 
became films - The Shawshank Redemption, Stand By Me and Apt Pupil.

The films of Stanley Kubrick could also have been in there several times since 
most of his movies were adapted works. The two which made the list are his 
version of Anthony Burgess's A Clockwork Orange and Vladimir Nabokov's Lolita.

Jane Austen is included once, for Pride and Prejudice rather than Emma 
Thompson's Oscar-winning adaptation of Sense and Sensibility directed by Ang 
Lee.

And then there are the ones which are not there - no JK Rowling for Harry 
Potter or Tolkien for Lord of the Rings, nor EM Forster for Howards End, Room 
With a View or Maurice.

The Guardian, in association with the Book Marketing Group, will publish a 
supplement in the Film & Music section on May 5 when voting will begin. The 
winner will be revealed at the Guardian Hay literary festival at the end of May.

From words to pictures

1984
 Alice in Wonderland
 American Psycho
 Breakfast at Tiffany's
 Brighton Rock
 Catch 22
 Charlie & the Chocolate Factory
 A Clockwork Orange
 Close Range (inc Brokeback Mountain)
 The Day of the Triffids
 Devil in a Blue Dress
 Different Seasons (inc The Shawshank Redemption)
 Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (aka Bladerunner)
 Doctor Zhivago
 Empire of the Sun
 The English Patient
 Fight Club
 The French Lieutenant's Woman
 Get Shorty
 The Godfather
 Goldfinger
 Goodfellas
 Heart of Darkness (aka Apocalypse Now)
 The Hound of the Baskervilles
 Jaws
 The Jungle Book
 A Kestrel for a Knave (aka Kes)
 LA Confidential
 Les Liaisons Dangereuses
 Lolita
 Lord of the Flies
 The Maltese Falcon
 Oliver Twist
 One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest
 Orlando
 The Outsiders
 Pride and Prejudice
 The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie
 The Railway Children
 Rebecca
 The Remains of the Day
 Schindler's Ark (aka Schindler's List)
 Sin City
 The Spy Who Came in From the Cold
 The Talented Mr Ripley
 Tess of the D'Urbervilles
 To Kill a Mockingbird
 Trainspotting
 The Vanishing
 Watership Down

 