
Aaron Porter gives his verdict on who has had a good week (heading for a 
first) and who has had a bad week (heading for a fail).

Heading for a first: Higher Education Academy National Teaching Fellows 2011

There has been a lot of debate about the status of teaching in higher 
education. In far too many institutions, it comes a poor second to research, 
and even sometimes a lowly third behind administrative capability. While I 
disagreed with the ideology behind his report, Lord Browne was right to point 
out that there are currently lots of sharp incentives for institutions to focus 
on research, but very few for teaching. However my solution would be different 
to that put forward by Browne, and endorsed by the coalition. Rather than 
focusing on market forces and competition, which essentially set institutions, 
departments and staff in opposition with one another, I would like to see good 
practice and innovation rewarded on its own terms.

The National Teaching Fellowships organised by the Higher Education Academy is 
a perfect example of how good practice and innovation in teaching should be 
rewarded, rather than seeking to focus on the reductive unintended consequences 
of the market.

This week after submissions from staff were judged, the Academy announced 55 
staff from across England, Wales and Northern Ireland who have been recognised 
for their excellence in teaching and support for learning. At a time when there 
is now more focus on teaching, it is great to see some of higher education's 
fantastic staff rewarded for their contribution to the sector. I have no doubts 
that the list of 55 names recognised by the HEA will be full of staff who 
inspire and challenge students, change their lives and make going to university 
a pleasure and not a chore.

I'm still convinced that best practice and inspirational teachers should be 
recognised and rewarded through schemes like the National Teaching Fellowships 
and Student-led Teaching Awards, rather than boiled down to narrow metrics as 
an incentive to chase AAB students round the system.

Here is the list of the 2011 Higher Education Academy National Teaching Fellows
 
<http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/alldisplay?type=news&newid=2011/ntfs_awards&site=york>
.

Heading for a fail: Poorest students in the US

While recent international headlines have focused on the stand-off between 
Democrats and Republicans in order to agree the new debt ceiling and ensure the 
US does not default, the implications are far-reaching – and may affect higher 
education.

In the original budget put forward by Republicans, and fortunately defeated, 
Pell grants (support for the poorest students in the US) were for the chop. 
Fortunately the Democrat-negotiated concession which was finally successful 
managed not only to save current expenditure on Pell grants, but actually to 
see spending in this area increase – about the only budget line to see an 
increase in the new spending settlement.

However, given the Republicans have set their sights on cuts in this area, and 
a new committee has been set up to investigate further budget cuts, support for 
the poorest students in the US is now under pressure. Given how expensive US 
universities are, it is vital that the poorest students are given the support 
they require, and the national government continues to put its hand in its 
pocket to fund this, no matter how tough things get.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 