
Aaron Porter gives his verdict on who has had a good week (heading for a 
first) and who has had a bad week (heading for a fail).

Heading for a First… University of East London

With the Olympics exactly one year away, it's not just been a good week for 
sports fans excited about 16 days of wall-to-wall sport next summer, but 
located right in the heart of East London, this is fantastic news for the 
University of East London, its students and staff who are already gearing up 
for the games.

Already a university that has deep roots in the local community, it has played 
an instrumental role in helping to realise the regeneration of a part of London 
which had suffered since the recessions of the 1980s and 1990s. Arguably the 
legacy of the economic investment in East London, the new homes, the creation 
of more than 40,000 jobs, a new shopping centre and state of the art sporting 
facilities which will be converted for public use will be an even greater 
triumph than the games themselves

Academics from UEL have been supporting and analysing all aspects of the 
games, including research on how sustainable the games will be, through to 
interactive workshops on nutrition, fitness, strength and conditioning. Along 
with JISC, the university has also set up an East London Lives 2012 Olympic 
archive which will give an opportunity for East Londoners to share accounts of 
how the games are impacting on their lives which will be stored as an online 
archive.

The Olympic games have the potential to instigate a transformation across a 
whole host of areas particularly as a catalyst to get more young people taking 
up a range of sports. It's heartening to see a university realise the 
opportunity of the games for them too, and I suspect this could be the 
beginning of a truly special year for the University of East London.

Heading for a Fail… Theresa May

When David Cameron pronounced in the prime ministerial debates before the last 
general election that he would oversee "net immigration falling from the 
hundreds of thousands to the tens of thousands" he was attempting to appeal to 
the Daily Mail-reading voters he was chasing in order to win. Nick Clegg in 
stark contrast floated the idea of an immigration amnesty for those who had 
previously entered the country illegally. At that point, the thought of a 
chummy relationship between Cam and Clegg right into Downing Street couldn't 
have appeared more absurd.

But tie their political vows they did, and now the government's immigration 
policy is starting to become an issue of contention. Over the past few months, 
the Home Office has been consulting on how it could further "tighten up" 
immigration regulations, but what this really means is looking for how they can 
further restrict people coming into the country. At present, students are 
counted in the net immigration figures. The logic behind this is utterly 
unfathomable to me, not least because international students are a transient 
population who return to their country of origin, but while they are in the UK 
they contribute billions of pounds through fees, accommodation, transport and 
so much more. In fact international students bring in critical income to our 
universities, which cross-subsidise the provision for home students – whether 
institutions will admit this publicly or not, the figures don't really lie.

The idea that the home secretary is targeting international students by 
scaling back the provision of post-study work opportunities, and limiting the 
English language routes into higher education seem entirely counter-productive. 
There could be a huge cost to the local and national economy, and to the bank 
balances of universities if recruitment is hit. But the cultural loss to 
campuses will be enormous if home students are no longer able to find 
themselves in lecture theatres, sports fields and halls with students from 
across the globe which helps to make our society more tolerant, understanding 
and diverse.

This week the cross-party Home Affairs select committee warned that 
assumptions the home secretary has made on international student recruitment 
are, "optimistic" and an impact assessment now suggests the costs of the reform 
could be as much as £3.6bn. But perhaps most worryingly of all, the report goes 
onto suggest that the home secretary is ignoring the evidence, and simply 
ploughing ahead anyway. Sounds like the government are blindly chasing the 
Daily Mail readers again, and for this May definitely deserves a fail.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>
 