
Who has had a good week (heading for a first) and who has had a bad week 
(heading for a fail)?

Heading for a First … Vince Cable

It's been a rare week for Vince Cable: he hasn't broken a pledge or reneged on 
another manifesto promise. But this week, he actually managed to get through 
Universities UK conference without upsetting every single vice-chancellor in 
the room – a feat he has sadly managed in previous public speeches to 
vice-chancellors, most notably at the HEFCE conference in Birmingham where he 
turned up over an hour late, delivered a withering, finger-wagging speech 
before refusing to take questions (which had previously been agreed) and was 
then left to eat his sandwiches alone as the conference full of 
vice-chancellors either politely ignored him or simply didn't realise he'd 
stomped off alone.

But in a minor turnaround, the secretary of state managed to have a 
constructive dialogue with VCs at their annual conference at Royal Holloway. He 
will have been heartened further by news that, following the publication of the 
higher education white paper, a dozen or so as yet unnamed institutions have 
asked the Office for Fair Access about lowering their tuition fee. Although it 
still leaves the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills a long way 
short of its Treasury target – which erroneously predicted and budgeted for an 
average fee of £7,500 – it does at least provide the secretary of state with a 
shred of good news before the Liberal Democrat party conference in Birmingham 
later this month. Who knows, the Lib Dems could still reach double digits in 
the polls once again – but I'm not holding my breath.

Heading for a Fail … the UK economy

This week we heard news that the UK had slipped down yet another international 
league table. No, it wasn't George Osborne having to revise our growth figures 
down again, or further bad news that youth unemployment has risen once more – 
both of which also happened – but it was news from the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development. Its latest publication, Education at a 
Glance, showed that the UK has spent just 1.2% of its GDP on higher education, 
falling further behind the OCED average (1.5%).

Higher education spending may not have secured the same media coverage or 
political scrutiny as the growth figures or rising unemployment, but its link 
to both is significant. For a government so patently lacking a credible growth 
strategy, spending in higher education delivers more than £6 for every single 
£1 spent – but the problem for the coalition is the time lag before the return 
is realised. So, faced with long term growth, or the more immediate challenge 
of eliminating the deficit by the end of this Parliament, short-termism has 
triumphed once again.

It's not often you get Wendy Piatt and Sally Hunt singing the same tune, but 
the reaction to this news from the OECD was one of those rare occasions where 
the Russell Group and the University and College Union were united. The Russell 
Group rightly pointed out that such diminishing public investment in higher 
education risks jeopardising the international reputation of our leading, and I 
would argue our entire, higher education system. Sally Hunt rightly pointed out 
that we need to re-emphasise the relationship between education and skills and 
our economy.

David Cameron is increasingly being accused of making the same mistakes as the 
Thatcher government of the 1980s. Given we saw a decade of cuts to our 
universities under the Iron Lady, it appears, when it comes to higher education 
spending, that accusation certainly holds true.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist. He was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 