
Who has had a good week (heading for a first) and who has had a bad week 
(heading for a fail).

Heading for a first: BPP University College

With shrewd timing, as Scottish universities prepare to charge £9,000 a year 
to non-Scottish UK students from 2012, BPP University College – the UK's only 
for-profit private provider with degree awarding powers – has announced it will 
set fees at £5,000 a year for its three-year programmes, and £6,000 a year for 
two-year programmes.

The announcement wasn't only significant for the contrast with the Scottish 
universities, but more pertinently because it has deliberately moved to 
undercut all English universities with the exception of the Open University, 
which has set its fees at £5,000 for 120 credits (equivalent to a full year of 
study in a traditional university).

So with BPP aggressively positioning itself to undercut mainstream provision, 
and with a confident pitch of career-focused courses to deliver on the 
employability agenda, the foundations are surely set for an aggressive growth 
strategy to start snapping up increasing numbers of undergraduate students.

Of course critics will be quick to question how quality provision can really 
be provided at just £5,000 a year, suggesting that the for-profit sector must 
obviously be offering some kind of sub-standard qualification. But the truth 
is, I haven't seen any evidence to suggest these accusations have any 
substance. It's probably fair to say that BPP doesn't offer the rounded student 
experience of many other institutions – you won't find too many clubs or 
societies or even anything resembling a students' union – but they don't 
pretend otherwise and seem pretty confident there will be lots of students 
signing up come next September.

Heading for a fail: Edinburgh University

When the Scottish Nationalist party pledged, along with Labour and the Liberal 
Democrats, that they wouldn't introduce fees for Scottish students choosing to 
study in Scotland at the last Scottish election, it was a clever ploy. And it 
provided a noticeable contrast with the deeply unpopular tuition fee trebling 
that the Westminster coalition government squeezed through parliament in the 
face of unprecedented opposition.

But while pledging not to introduce fees for Scottish students was a vote 
winner in Scotland, or at least not a vote loser for any parties who didn't 
break ranks – only the Conservatives made it clear they would look to bring in 
fees – it was always going to cause a funding problem somewhere, unless an 
unpalatable solution was afforded to universities. But few had realised quite 
how unpalatable the solution would end up being.

A minor quirk in European law means that while a government can't legislate to 
discriminate between citizens of EU countries, they can discriminate within a 
country. And while the interpretation of this is being challenged, for the 
meanwhile at least it has opened the door for the poor souls from the rest of 
the UK, ie England, Wales and Northern Ireland, to be saddled with the 
unenviable task of trying to fill the funding shortfall Scottish universities 
feel that is opening up.

While Aberdeen and Heriot-Watt universities showed a modicum of restraint by 
limiting their £9,000-a-year fee to an overall of maximum of £27,000 even for 
those on four year courses, Edinburgh University showed no such restraint, 
unleashing the quite preposterous standard fee of £36,000 for a four-year 
course.

I'm not alone in being disgusted by the size of the fee that Edinburgh 
University has decided to charge. But I'm equally disgusted by a Scottish 
Nationalist party administration in Holyrood abusing the fact that Scotland is 
a part of the UK, and allowing the clear discrimination against students from 
England, Wales and Northern Ireland to prop up the finances of Scottish 
universities.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 