
Heading for a first … University Alliance

Higher education is infamous for producing reports that, while very worthy, 
end up only acting as doorstops or decoration on a bookshelf. So when a report 
is produced of real value and of important contemporary relevance to the key 
debate in politics right now – how to stimulate economic growth – it should be 
celebrated. This week, the publication of theUniversity Alliance 
<http://www.university-alliance.ac.uk/> report, Growing the future: 
universities leading, changing and creating the regional economy 
<http://www.university-alliance.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/UA_GROWING_THE_FUTURE_WEBVM.pdf>
 was a welcome contribution to both the higher education and economic debates 
being had right now.

Unashamedly, the report set out the role which universities already do, and 
need to continue to play in contributing to the regional economy. At a time 
when the coalition is obsessed with deficit reduction, which is unquestionably 
choking off growth, it has never been more important for universities to 
demonstrate their value in helping to stimulate growth. In the immediate term, 
they are a vital source for jobs and an important link with local businesses; 
in the medium term their research and knowledge transfer will equip the future 
workforce with the skills required to ensure the UK can remain internationally 
competitive.

With contributions from leading figures in higher education, industry, 
politics and even a chapter from the chancellor of Huddersfield University, Sir 
Patrick Stewart, the report is well worth reading. Hopefully the kind words in 
the foreword from Vince Cable will translate into real support and crucially 
adequate funding for universities from government to be able to deliver on the 
promise they undoubtedly have.

Heading for a fail … post-qualification applications

The pros and cons of a post-qualification application system have long been 
debated within higher education. Bill Rammell, during his time as higher 
education minister put forward the idea for consideration, but a mixture of 
resistance from the sector and political timing meant it wasn't realised.

So when the idea of moving A-level results forward and the university 
application process back was re-introduced by the coalition in the higher 
education white paper it was met with a mixed reaction once again. 
Instinctively, I continue to be drawn to the idea. Surely it makes more sense 
for university places to be awarded on the basis of your actual results, rather 
than on prediction. And while I accept that this may mean some shifting around 
of the school exam timetable and the university application process, it seems a 
price worth paying.

However, this week the Russell Group started to go public with their criticism 
of the idea, claiming that it's not clear how the benefits outweigh the 
disadvantages and raising concerns that a PQA system could hamper their efforts 
to recruit disadvantaged students. A public statement like this means the 
Russell Group will be lobbying behind the scenes to see the idea thrown out by 
the time the white paper comes back from parliamentary scrutiny.

I still wait to be ultimately convinced by the arguments on either side, but I 
can't help remain uncomfortable with an admissions system that relies so 
heavily on predictions, rather than a genuine attempt to measure attainment and 
more crucially potential.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
president of the National Union of Students 2010-11 and tweets@AaronPorter 
<http://twitter.com/#!/AaronPorter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 