
Aaron Porter gives his verdict on who has had a good week (heading for a 
first) and who has had a bad week (heading for a fail).

Heading for a First… Newcastle College Group and New College Durham

Both the Newcastle College Group (NCG) and New College Durham got the thumbs 
up from the Quality Assurance Agency this week to start awarding their own 
foundation degrees, which is just a step away from full taught degree awarding 
powers.

In an environment where increasingly discerning prospective students will be 
pickier than ever before, particularly toward the bulk of institutions that 
have raced to £9,000 per year, more competition at the lower end of the price 
spectrum will be welcomed by many students, and, of course, the treasury. 
Students now face greater competition for both the types of institution on 
offer, but also a broader range of prices. As for the treasury, it will 
desperately cling to the hope that new providers from the further education and 
private sectors will enter to offer degrees significantly below the current 
average price – otherwise the £1bn blackhole still looms ahead.

NCG's higher education tuition fees are set at £5,800 from 2012, which is 
likely to look appealing compared with many institutions that have headed 
straight for £9,000. Of course, the idea that some students may now feel forced 
to choose their higher education institution by price may be exactly what the 
government intended all along, but surely the choice of what and where to study 
should be based on academic content and the student experience, not a price tag.

Heading for a Fail… Carol Vorderman

She is no longer the numbers whiz on Countdown, or the face of much-maligned 
debt consolidation company First Plus. In fact, this week Carol Vorderman's 
taskforce on mathematics teaching, commissioned by the Conservatives, was 
greeted with little fanfare, and indeed criticism from some quarters. While 
other news this week understandably drowned most of the press coverage she may 
otherwise have anticipated, it was also a lack of credible solutions for 
improving maths standards in the UK.

Her main recommendations included the introduction of two new GCSEs; one to 
focus on basic numeracy, and a second to focus on more complex mathematics. She 
also wanted maths education to be compulsory through to age 18, and for higher 
education institutions to make greater demands on entry requirements for maths 
and other STEM subjects. While some in the maths community welcomed the report, 
those in other disciplines said it failed to make the case for why maths should 
be given precedence over literacy, IT skills or a language.

So far the recommendation to raise the age of compulsory maths education to 18 
has been dismissed by education secretary Michael Gove, but the other 
recommendations are still under consideration.

Sadly, like so many other commissions, I suspect this will be another that is 
kicked deep into the long grass. At least if Vorderman were a contestant on 
Countdown, she'd have got a consolation goodie prize.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 