
Heading for a First … Robert Gordon University graduates

This week saw the publication of the Higher Education Statistics Agency's 
destination survey of first-time full-time graduates (for 2009-10), with the 
not so snappy acronym DLHE. Somewhat to my surprise, the mainstream university 
with the best rate of graduate employment wasn't Oxford or Cambridge, but 
actually Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen, with a whopping 95.9% of its 
cohort headed into employment.

It's less surprising when you consider that the university has worked hard to 
secure research partnerships in engineering, computer science and the sub-sea 
industry, all of which have a real need for highly talented graduates.

Although I still have deep reservations about the quality and robustness of 
data collected just six months after graduation – I was deeply disappointed 
that the government didn't use the recent higher education white paper as an 
opportunity to commit to a more longitudinal survey of graduate destinations – 
this is still great news from for the students and alumni in Aberdeen.

Other mainstream universities that figured highly in the survey include the 
University of Surrey (94.8%), University of Edinburgh (94.8%) and Aberdeen 
University (94.4%).

Heading for a Fail … Charlie Gilmour

It was one of the images that defined the student protests at the end of last 
year. Charlie Gilmour, the adopted son of Pink Floyd guitarist David, swinging 
from a Union Jack hanging from the Cenotaph. A Cambridge University student, 
from a wealthy home, who appeared to be high on drugs running amok on the 
streets of London. It was right that this was criticised and, in my opinion, 
his actions and others like him did nothing to help the student cause and 
probably hindered it significantly – certainly in terms of trying to build 
broader public support through the media.

But whatever your opinion about the student protests, and the actions of a 
tiny minority which went beyond the law, the news this week that Charlie 
Gilmour has been sentenced to 16 months for jumping on the bonnet of a car 
which was part of the escort for the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall seems 
disproportionate, unfair and an attempt from the judicial system to make a 
scapegoat of him.

Probably the most controversial decision of my time as NUS president was to 
describe the scenes of violence and criminal damage on the students protests as 
"despicable". Now out of the eye of the storm and with the benefit of 
hindsight, I think the language I used was strong. And while I will never 
defend law- breaking, coupled with the belief that such actions were likely to 
lose our campaign support, I can't help feel that the courts need to take a 
wider perspective. Gilmour was in the wrong, few would contest that. But 
context is important, and an angry 21-year-old, who had been rejected by his 
biological father, had been subject to quite disgusting personal attacks on him 
and his family and had already volunteered to seek help from a psychotherapist 
has surely paid a hefty price already.

If the courts needed to punish him, on top of the punishment he has faced 
already, then prison seems like the least appropriate sanction, as far as I'm 
concerned. What Gilmour will face both in prison and beyond is a great deal 
more profound than a "fail". The real failure here is the verdict from our 
judicial system.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 