
Bus and rail business FirstGroup has cashed in on some of its US property, 
prompting analysts to suggest there could be further value across the county.

The company sold a terminal in San Jose belonging to its Greyhound division 
for £21.6m, and Shore Capital’s Martin Brown said:

Greyhound has large city centre terminals all over North America and while 
difficult to assess, we believe there is significant real estate value tied up 
with the Greyhound network, something that we believe the market continues to 
overlook. The £21.6m sale price compares favourably to our full year March 2017 
operating profit forecast of £37.1m for Greyhound.

The company pointed to a “significantly improved” cash performance in the six 
months to the end of September, but profits slipped by 2.2% to £21.9m as a good 
performance in the US was offset by difficult conditions in the UK.

And despite the improved cash position, analysts at Jefferies pointed to a 
growing pension deficit:

The big increase in pension deficit to £498m (excluding Rail) from £270m in 
March may initially be overlooked but should be seen as an offset to headline 
cash messages, in our view.

Overall the performance was in line with expectations, and the shares have 
added 1.8p to 111.5p. Chief executive Tim O’Toole said:

[There were] encouraging performances by our North American business partially 
offset by tough trading conditions for our UK bus and rail operations. In the 
second half we will benefit from our normal seasonal bias as well as our 
ongoing focus on executing our strategy...

We will likely benefit from currency tailwinds from our substantial North 
American operations but will also face uncertain economic conditions in the UK 
for the foreseeable future.

In a hold note analysts at Canaccord Genuity said:

We expect a lack of catalysts, combined with sluggish near-term profit 
expectations for UK Bus, Transit and Greyhound as well as declining UK rail 
earnings, to weigh on the share price. First Student should see margins move in 
excess of 9% but, in the absence of strong free cash generation and reducing 
net debt levels, dividends are unlikely to be reinstated soon.

Meanwhile the company expressed its condolences to those bereaved and injured 
in the recent accident on its Tramlink service.
 