
Aaron Porter gives his verdict on who has had a good week (heading for a 
first) and who has had a bad week (heading for a fail).

Heading for a first: a satisfied class of 2011

It's been a tough year for higher education. But some good news came out this 
week, as results for the 2011 National Student Survey were published. A survey 
of final-year undergraduates, with 22 questions covering a range of learning 
and teaching issues, showed that satisfaction scores by students were higher 
than ever before. In a bleak climate of graduate unemployment, that is no mean 
achievement and is a real testament to some of the fantastic teaching that goes 
on in our higher education institutions.

Even some of the areas of greatest concern, particularly assessment and 
feedback, saw an increase in satisfaction to 68%, up from 66%. Overall 
satisfaction across the UK is 83%, up one percentage point from 2010. While 
this is all pretty impressive, it does raise two important questions: With 
unprecedented cuts about to bite, and tuition fees about to treble, will 
universities have any chance of maintaining student satisfaction? And is 
satisfaction with your higher education experience best measured months before 
your final exams, or should we now be looking at a more longitudinal measure 
where graduates are asked to evaluate how beneficial their experience was four 
or five years after graduating? I suspect, in different ways, those two 
questions will be up for debate over the coming months.

Heading for a fail: 2011 school leavers

In the same week record student satisfaction scores were published, we 
received grim data about the world that graduates and school leavers are 
entering. The Office for National Statistics confirmed that youth unemployment 
was rising yet again. Those unfortunately named Neets (Not in education, 
employment or training) stand at an eye-watering 20.2% of all 18-25-year-olds 
on the scrap heap. To make matters worse, it seems that options for school 
leavers are limited wherever they may look. For the poorest students in college 
and sixth form, support in the form of the Education Maintenance Allowance has 
been scrapped, and there are concerns about whether the pot of money left in 
bursary funds will be able to ensure that students from the poorest backgrounds 
have enough money to travel to college and buy books.

For those looking to enter higher education, it's similarly tough. Competition 
to get a university place is the toughest it's ever been. Entry to higher 
education has always been a competitive process, and that's as it should be. 
But because of an arbitrary cap on student numbers, there will be somewhere in 
the region of 250,000 qualified applicants missing out on a place.

At a time when youth unemployment is so high, the idea that qualified students 
who want to study are being turned away from our universities because 
government won't fund the places is a self-inflicted wound. Critics will argue 
that the budget deficit means that the government can't afford to create 
university places, but my response is blunt: it's more expensive to pay job 
seekers' allowance and other benefits to a qualified young adult than it is to 
send them to university for three years. So economically and socially this is 
completely regressive. It's time the government started considering the other 
side of the deficit reduction equation, namely growth. And there can be no 
better answer than investing in education, skills and training of our school 
leavers. Sadly George Osborne doesn't just seem miles away from coming up with 
the right answer, he appears to still be asking the wrong question.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist. He was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11 and He tweets at@AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>
 