
It’s difficult to write a good sex scene. There’s the risk of wittering about 
vaginal frilliness as Updike did in his Memories of the Ford Administration or 
producing something like one of those complicated fist fights in Dashiell 
Hammett where you can’t quite work out which limb is putting whose windpipe in 
a chokehold. Here are five that do better.

Jeff in Venice, Death in Varanasi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/29/jeff-venice-geoff-dyer-review> 
by Geoff Dyer

“‘You’re the thinnest person I’ve ever slept with,’ she said. ‘It’s like 
making love to an ironing board.’” This postcoital remark may seem an odd thing 
to select to stand up my thesis (Ladies! Excuse me!), but Laura’s happy teasing 
of Jeff and his gallant response (he suggests there is probably a poor 
ex-Soviet republic where that is the greatest compliment a woman can pay a man 
and that’s where he plans to permanently live) typifies the winningly joyful 
vibe of Dyer’s description of a bit of slap and tickle at theVenice Biennale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/venice-biennale>. “She sat back 
twisting his nipples rubbing herself in his face. His face gleamed with her 
smell.” Can something gleam with smell? Sure, why not?

Dyer contrives a scene as unexpectedly erotic, if less glumly premised, as 
that in which Donald Sutherland and Julie Christie make love following their 
child’s death in Nicholas Roeg’sDon’t Look Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/22/dont-look-now-roeg-horror>. Maybe 
it’s something about Venice.

But then Dyer, wonderfully, clinches the spiritual significance of sex. “The 
word that insistently came to mind, afterwards, as they lay in each other’s 
arms was unusable, in a way that ‘cock’, ‘cunt’ and ‘fuck’ were: communion.” 
How lovely that, even if in our postmodern world in which clever people such as 
Jeff and Laura have talked words into meaninglessness, they can still get it on 
in a way that’s not about domination and possession.

À la Recherche du Temps Perdu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/nov/14/proust-a-la-recherche-novel-big-world>
 by Marcel Proust

Picture the scene. Albertine is asleep in bed and the narrator, Marcel, is 
masturbating against her side. “It seemed to me at those moments,” writes 
Marcel, “that I possessed her more completely, like an unconscious part of dumb 
nature.” Albertine becomes a mere plaything of the rich, sick aesthete – 
vegetable rather than lover. This scene, like so much of the bleak encounters 
in Proust’s great novel, is powerful for dramatising an inhumane vision of life 
and sex, one that denies the dream of communion in favour of sex as possession 
or destruction of the other.

Spring in Fialta by Vladimir Nabokov

Here’s my theory: just as the most effective horror movies leave the horror 
unvisualised (The Blair Witch Project, Paranormal Activity etc), the best sex 
scenes are ones that leave the sex undescribed, so you can do the imaginative 
work.

One morning, Nabokov’s narrator meets again the diverting woman in the grey 
suit in a Parisian hotel corridor. Every word is – if you’re in the mood for a 
bit of the other – sexual. She’s “waiting for the elevator to take her down, a 
key dangling from her fingers.” Her husband, she confides, has gone fencing. 
She leads him back to her room where “because of our sudden draft a wave of 
muslin embroidered with white dahlias got sucked in, with a shudder and a 
knock, between the responsive halves of the French window, and only when the 
door had been locked did they let go of that curtain with something like a 
blissful sigh; and a little later I stepped out on the diminutive cast-iron 
balcony beyond to inhale a combined smell of dry maple leaves and gasoline …”

The Line of Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/apr/10/fiction.alanhollinghurst> by 
Alan Hollinghurst

Just beyond the compost heap in some communal gardens in London, virgin Nick 
is getting kissed by Leo, a stranger he met in the personal ads (it’s the 80s, 
there is no Grindr). “He thought he saw the point of kissing, but also its 
limitations – it was an instinct, a means of expression, of mouthing a passion 
but not satisfying it. So his right hand, that was lightly clutching Leo’s 
waist, set off, still doubting its freedom, to dawdle over the plump buttocks 
and then squeeze them through the soft old denim.” I don’t think there’s a 
better scene in literature for dramatising the randy hero philosophically 
musing while in the throes of passion and then doing something practical to 
enhance his and his lover’s pleasures.

Nick and Leo’s sex, appealingly, isn’t just liberating, but funny: “[T]here 
was something hilarious in the shivers of pleasure that ran up his back and 
squeezed his neck, and ran down his arms to his fingers – he felt he’d been 
switched on for the first time, gently gripping Leo’s hips, and then reaching 
round him to help unbutton his shirt and get it off and hold his naked body 
against him. It was all so easy. He had worried the night before that there 
might be some awful knack to it …” In a world in which good sex is so often 
reduced to ungraspable technique (cf the 1965 film The Knack …and How to Get 
It), how pleasing to read a passage that depicts it otherwise.

Fingersmith <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/feb/02/fiction.sarahwaters>
 by Sarah Waters

“I had touched her before, to wash and dress her, but never like this,” 
narrates Sue, a lady’s maid. “So smooth she was! So warm! It was like I was 
calling the heat and shape of her out of the darkness – as if the darkness was 
turning solid and growing quick, under my hand.” What gives this passage such 
erotic power is how both Sue and Maud, her mistress, are blindsided by desire. 
At the start of the book, Sue has been lured to work as a lady’s maid by a 
swindler called Gentleman who aims to marry and ruin the heiress Maud, before 
dumping her in an asylum and making her fortune his own. Like you do. Sue will 
get a cut of the fortune if the plot is successful. In the above scene, Sue is 
ostensibly coaching naive Maud in what she must do on her wedding night after, 
as planned, marrying Gentleman. Instead, Sue forgets her role in the plot as 
she explores Maud’s body. She brings Maud to orgasm and then, against her 
scheming, falls sweetly for the woman she planned to help destroy:

“She began to shake. I supposed she was still afraid. Then I began to shake, 
too. I forgot to think of Gentleman, after that. I thought only of her. When 
her face grew wet with tears, I kissed them away.

“You pearl,” I said. So white she was! “You pearl, you pearl, you pearl.”

Well, it worked for me. 
 