
Zaha Hadid <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid> was a few 
years ahead of me at the Architectural Association (AA). I will never forget 
the day I sat outside the principal’s office hearing raised voices. Zaha 
appeared, tears streaming down her face, angry and shaking. Her work wasn’t 
considered good enough and she stormed out of that office determined to “show 
them”, and show them she did – winning the coveted AA Diploma prize in 1977; 
the Pritzker prize in 2004; the Royal Institute of British Architects’ Stirling 
prize in 2010 and 2011, and last year the Riba royal gold medal.

Zaha was an outsider and upfront about the unfair treatment she experienced as 
a woman, a foreigner and a designer ofexpensive, weird-looking buildings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/zaha-hadid-10-best-buildings-in-pictures>
 – a triple whammy. She did not fit the stereotypical white male profession of 
registered architects. Jealousy and prejudice failed to bar her way, but it 
took its toll. Very few people realise the misogynistic, racist and 
anti-architect environment she had to navigate in Britain. For Muslims, 
minorities and women, Zaha is a shining torch beaming into the dark minds for 
whom a few tiles falling off a building seemed a justification to dismiss her 
work.

Dame Zaha Hadid obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/01/zaha-hadid-obituary> 
She was not only an architect but a designer in every sense of the word. From 
childhood she was experimenting with space and form, fashion and furniture. Her 
drawings and paintings are like Le Corbusier, Scharoun and El Lissitzky on 
speed – full of colour and oscillating from earth-shattering shards to dynamic 
fluid space.

She was the first woman in her own right to be awarded Riba’s royal gold 
medal, almost 100 years after the suffragette Ruth Lowy forced the AA to accept 
female students. Zaha told the Architects’ Journal: “There is still a stigma 
against women. It’s changed – 30 years ago people thought women couldn’t make a 
building. There is still enormous prejudice though.”

When Zaha was at the AA about 6% of the profession were women. Today, 40-odd 
years later, they make up 24%. Alarmingly, many drop out after seven years’ 
training and a decade in practice, juggling families. Zaha was single and often 
worked all-nighters. But she had to fight the establishment at great personal 
cost. Her company employs more than 400 people and works on projects globally 
with a turnover of £44m a year. It’s been a long, hard road and a travesty that 
she had to pay the price of discrimination in a profession that should know 
better.

Yasmin Shariff is director of Dennis Sharp Architects
 