
When the sad news of Alan Rickman’s passing hit the internet on Thursday, his 
name quickly climbed Twitter’s trending topics, as did the names of several of 
his most famous characters. However, for those not steeped in the lore ofHarry 
Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter>, the film franchise that 
made Rickman familiar to millions of younger people since it began in 2001, one 
of those trending phrases would have seemed baffling: “#Always”.

It’s taken from the key moment for Rickman’s character, Professor Snape, the 
anti-hero of JK Rowling’s seven-book series on which the films are based, and 
the point that reduced many of us to floods of tears.

The motivation behind the character’s actions for the past seven books/eight 
films is finally revealed: he has been in love with Lily Evans, Harry Potter’s 
mother, since childhood, and since her death his life has been devoted to 
protecting her son, someone whose very existence – as the living embodiment of 
her rejection of him – causes him pain.

When Alan Rickman was a star at the bar | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/15/when-alan-rickman-was-a-star-at-the-bar>
Snape’s whole life has been conflict and pain and risk. When he’s asked in his 
final days whether he still cares for her “after all this time”, his answer is: 
“Always.” It’s among the last words he speaks in the series – revealed after 
his death – and is a totemic moment for his character.

For Potter fans, that one word became a meme all of its own, the key to 
Snape’s heroism. I’ve seen it on T-shirts, necklaces and tattoos, a reminder of 
the moment our hearts broke for Severus Snape.

For those for whom the world of Harry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> was a silly bit of froth 
happening in the background, it’s hard to understand how much Snape meant to a 
certain generation: kids who discovered the books or the films at school, and 
were in their 20s by the time the series was completed.

He was ever present in their lives, first as a menace, then as a threat – 
then, you realise, as a protector. The character developed as the viewers and 
readers did, and became more complex and divisive – just as the world of 
adulthood is all shades of grey, compared with the right and wrong certainties 
of childhood.

Harry himself starts the story seeing Snape as the ultimate villain, a man who 
treats him unfairly, glares at him for no reason, and might actually be trying 
to kill him. By the end of the series, he admits Snape was the “bravest man I 
ever knew”.

In between those two points we, and Harry, are constantly ambiguous about 
Snape’s loyalties, never letting go of the idea that he might be the viper in 
the nest. Hogwarts is a comforting retreat for readers, but Snape keeps us on 
our toes – he’s the villain, then he isn’t; then he’s pointlessly cruel, then 
he’s a victim; then a murderer and a traitor; and, ultimately, a tragic hero.

Once we establish that Snape wasn’t a killer, at the end of book one (“he does 
seem the type, doesn’t he?” says the actual villain, Quirril), he settles into 
the background as the most familiar of school tropes: the strict teacher. Snape 
becomes a sort of proxy for every stern blowhard who ever gave us lines or 
seemed overly harsh in the classroom.

In the case of Snape, it is all legitimate too: he is horrible to Harry, and 
our resentment grows with his. Snape is genuinely cruel, at one point refusing 
to acknowledge Hermione’s horribly overgrown teeth after a backfiring prank.

The breakthrough comes in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harry-potter-and-the-order-of-the-phoenix>, 
the fifth instalment. We are given a glimpse into Snape’s past, and see that he 
is horribly bullied by James Potter at school, the father figure Harry always 
idealised. It is our first crack in the world. Through Snape, we start to see 
that our heroes can be flawed – that things aren’t always what they seem, that 
our actions can have consequences. We start to understand Snape. Then he kills 
Dumbledore, and our world is ripped from under us again.

For Potter fans – and Harry Potter fandom is at the core of some Millenials’ 
formative years – Snape is the heart of the story. Harry is the everyman, the 
eyes of the audience. But Snape represents the key themes: the power of love as 
the ultimate driving force, and the importance of repentance and redemption. 
Ultimately, Snape gives his life not for revenge or hatred, but for love.

This is why the death of Alan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-rickman> has felt so jarring for the 
Potter generation. Rickmanwas Snape – the most perfect piece of casting in the 
whole series. His unique rhythm and sardonic baritone perfectly epitomised the 
potions master we had seen in our mind’s eye all along. When Snape gave his 
life for Harry, for Lily, our hearts broke. And with the passing of Rickman, a 
small but important piece of childhood died too.
 