
Pope Francis is 80 on Saturday – the age at which cardinals must retire from 
the electoral college, which will choose the next leader of the world’s 1.2bn 
Roman Catholics. Will Francis also go at 80? In the past, popes ignored the 
watershed. They went on until they died. But Benedict XVI changed things when 
he became thefirst leader of the Catholic church to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/21/pope-benedict-god-resign-mystical-experience>
 in more than 500 years. Francis has indicated that he might retire too. It is 
vital, not just for the church but the world, that he does not.

The two popes before Francis were conservatives. Between them, John Paul II 
and his successor, Benedict, set the public tone ofCatholicism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism> for more than three decades. In 
just three years, Francis has gone some way to hauling the church back towards 
the centre. But the ideological right is increasingly fighting back. Their 
private criticism of the first pope from the global south is turning to public 
dissent. Now is not the time for Francis to have innovative thoughts about 
institutionalising papal retirement by stepping down.

Francis is not the liberal the secular media sometimes paint him. He takes the 
traditional Catholic line onabortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/can-catholic-church-earn-womens-forgiveness-pope-francis-abortion>
, contraception, gay marriage andwomen priests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/pope-francis-women-never-roman-catholic-priests-church>
. And yet his positions can be more nuanced than the right can tolerate. Gay 
people have felt welcomed by his famous“who am I to judge?” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/29/pope-francis-openness-gay-priests>
 remark. He has invited transgender people into the Vatican and physically 
embraced them. He has opened the path to fuller inclusion of divorced and 
remarried Catholics with the church. He has set up a commission to investigate 
the possibility of women deacons, which many see as the first step to female 
priests. And, at the recent 500th anniversary of the Reformation, he 
acknowledged that Martin Luther had a point about spiritual corruption within 
the Catholic church.

All this – together with his sweeping reforms of Vatican finances, his work to 
remodel thebureaucracy known as the Curia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/22/pope-francis-scathing-critique-vatican-officials-curia-speech>
, and his moves to empower the wider church and rid the papacy of its 
monarchical status – have gone down badly with traditionalists.

Some of the men who became bishops during the previous 35-year conservative 
ascendancy have reacted with sullen silence, in what one Vatican veteran 
described as “passive-aggressive non-compliance”. But others have been publicly 
hostile or disdainful – and some are now openly resisting him. Just a month 
ago, four ultra-traditionalist cardinals issued a public challenge to the pope. 
They said that his ruling that, in certain circumstances, remarried Catholics 
might take communion could require a “formal act of correction” from the 
College of Cardinals. They published five dubia – doubts – virtually accusing 
the sitting pope of heresy: something without precedent in recent Catholic 
history. Those who rely on the internet for their information might be forgiven 
for supposing a civil war is raging inside the Catholic church. That is 
certainly what the “culture warriors” in the US – which is where many of the 
most ideological hardliners are to be found – want the world to believe.

They paint a picture of a Catholic majority, loyal to the unchanging 
traditions and teachings of the church, locked in combat with a progressive 
pope who is diluting doctrine and capitulating to the moral relativism of 
contemporary secularism.

Such nonsense flies in the teeth of opinion polls, which show that 85% of US 
Catholics approve of this pope. Talk to Catholics in the pews in the United 
States and you encounter a less rigid, more generous, more pastoral mood than 
is evident among some of their bishops. In Europe and the UK, too, the vast 
majority of Catholics love this pope.

The church has always married aspirational ideals with a pragmatic pastoral 
compassion. Francis enshrined this subterranean pragmatism in official teaching 
when he issued his document Amoris Laetitia (The Joy of Love) in April, after a 
two-year synod process. His critics accuse him of being wilfully vague in the 
document and deliberately avoiding doctrinal clarity; the pope’s response is 
that people are more important than dogma.

Will the Catholic church ever earn women’s forgiveness? | Joanna Moorhead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/can-catholic-church-earn-womens-forgiveness-pope-francis-abortion>
Mercy is the prime gospel value for Francis. It has been the dominant theme of 
his time as pope. During his Year of Mercy, which ended last month, Francis 
made that concrete with a series of private visits to vulnerable and 
marginalised groups. He ended with an encounter – to the discomfit of 
traditionalists – with men who left the priesthood to marry, and with their 
wives and children, too.“We have to meet people where they are,” he has said. 
This pope is playing a long game. He has refused to reply to the four cardinal 
critics but has indirectly attacked them for rigidity, legalism, psychological 
inadequacy and generallybehaving like the Pharisees who tried to trap Jesus 
with trick questions in the gospels. Publicly, he has declared himself 
unworried by a vociferous minority. “I’m not losing sleep over it,” he told an 
interviewer recently, adding that he would continue to follow the path of the 
second Vatican council, which turned the church away from sacramental 
introspection towards engagement with the wider world – a reform that many 
conservatives have spent the past four decades trying to undo.

Instead, the Pope has been quietly moving to restore a more moderate tone to 
the church. He has just sacked all the conservatives from the body that governs 
Catholic worship. He bypassed the three leading rightwing US archbishops who 
expected red hats when he created 19 new cardinals last month. And the head of 
the Vatican’s main working court this week declared that the four cardinal 
critics could be stripped of their red hats.

Francis may not go that far but he is steadily filling the College of 
Cardinals with moderate pastors rather than doctrinal ideologues. For the first 
time in history, Europeans are outnumbered by the rest of the world in the body 
that will elect the next pope. Cardinals have been appointed from 11 countries 
that have never before been represented.Almost half the electors are now from 
the poor world.

But Francis has named only 44 of those electors, compared with 76 created by 
previous conservative popes. If he wants to secure his legacy he must not 
retire yet.
 