
Sir Alan Duncan will on Monday become the first Foreign Office minister to 
visit Argentina since the Conservatives came to power in 2010 in the strongest 
sign yet that Anglo-Argentinian relations are recovering despite the continuing 
dispute over theFalkland Islands <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/falklands>.


Duncan will focus on improving business links, but will also hold a bilateral 
meeting with Argentinian officials on the Falklands. The UK wants to extend 
direct flights from the Falklands to South America beyond the current weekly 
flight from Chile. The flights are limited by Argentinian controls over its 
airspace.Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> want any new 
flights from the Falklands to be focused primarily on journeys to Buenos Aires.

The two sides are also likely to discuss rights to explore for hydrocarbons in 
the waters off the Falklands, including ideas for joint exploration raised by 
Susana Malcorra, the Argentinian foreign minister. At present Argentina imposes 
sanctions against companies seeking to cooperate with any British exploration.


Malcorra told the Guardian last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/08/argentina-promises-respectful-cooperation-over-falklands>
 that she wanted to end the very confrontational approach of the previous 
administration of Cristina Kira Fernández de Kirchner.


She said the two countries agreed on 80% of issues, and co-operating on those 
should not be blocked by those over which they differed.

The Argentinian claim to the islands, described as the Malvinas by Argentina 
in the country’s constitution, will not be revoked.

The UK Foreign Office said Duncan’s visit followed “an improvement in 
relations between the UK and Argentina since the election of President Mauricio 
Macri last year. It marks an important step forward following more than a 
decade of difficulties under the isolationist approach of Argentina’s previous 
government.

 “This is important for Britain, because having a better relationship with 
Argentina also means we can get a better deal for the Falkland islanders.”

 During the two-day visit Duncan will attend a business and investment forum 
hosted by Macri in Buenos Aires and hold meetings with senior government 
ministers, including Malcorra and the deputy foreign minister Carlos Foradori.

The Argentinian economy is heavily dependent on the ailing Brazilian economy.

Duncan said: “This is a positive time for the relationship between the UK and 
Argentina. Our countries have many deep links, including in culture and 
language, and I hope my visit will help us take a step forward together.”

 