
"Suddenly we think our lives are going to be different," exclaims Farshid 
Moussavi with genuine excitement. "There is a Sainsbury's opening nearby, just 
around the corner. And a Starbucks."

Alejandro Zaera-Polo, her husband and partner in Foreign Office Architects, 
smiles in amused agreement. FOA have a reputation as the most formidably 
glamorous young architects around, so it's refreshing to learn that they are 
interested in banal activities such as shopping and nipping out for a latte.

They're also interested in turning established architectural practice upside 
down: they're not particularly interested in beauty, they don't have a 
recognisable style and they don't do sketches. Instead, they use raw data and 
mathematical formulae to help them design buildings.

But perhaps the most remarkable thing about FOA is their youth: in a 
profession in which most architects under 40 are still designing house 
extensions, Moussavi, 38, and Zaera-Polo, 39, are building their extraordinary 
projects around the world. They are considered one of the most important 
practices of their generation, representing a decisive break with the older 
generation of "signature" architects such as Frank Gehry, Santiago Calatrava, 
Zaha Hadid and Richard Meier.

Their office, in an immaculate, white stucco terrace on Belgrave Road, west 
London, looks like an embassy for a tiny republic, or a pied-à-terre for 
moderately wealthy foreigners with pretensions. The porticoed entrance is 
unmarked save for three small glazed Spanish tiles that spell out the initials 
FOA.

The building is in the heart of Pimlico, a rich but dull area sandwiched 
between Victoria station and Chelsea, and not the kind of place you'd expect to 
find a couple of avant-garde architects. They live in another elegant stucco 
house a few doors away. "I have to say, I do like the idea of not being in 
Hoxton [the fashionably gritty east-London quarter] or an area where you are 
supposed to be an up-and-coming architect," says Moussavi.

FOA enjoy being different, and the name of their company plays on their 
foreignness: Moussavi, an Iranian, met Spaniard Zaera-Polo while they were both 
studying architecture at Harvard. They then worked for Dutch megastar Rem 
Koolhaas before coming to London to teach at the Architectural Association 
school.

It is an appealing package, and the photogenic couple (Zaera-Polo is quietly 
but jovially intellectual; Moussavi has a stern elegance) cut a dash in a 
profession not generally known for being media-savvy. Yet they insist their 
success is not a result of smart branding: "We are not so calculating," says 
Moussavi. "We cannot deny that we have been very, very lucky," says Zaera-Polo.

The name FOA also refers to their interest in foreignness as an architectural 
approach. "We were always interested in the idea of foreignness as a condition 
that could be exploited in a creative way," explains Zaera-Polo, who, like 
Moussavi, speaks with a pronounced accent yet is able to express complex ideas 
with more elegance than most native English-speakers. "Usually, to be a 
foreigner means you don't understand very much, but there's also a naivety and 
a kind of freshness. It's like when you're a tourist: your eye is more 
sensitive. You're more eager to understand."

During their formative years studying in America and working in the 
Netherlands, they were surrounded by people from all corners of the globe. "It 
is interesting to be working on something and a Japanese guy comes by, and 
maybe where you were stuck he doesn't see any obstacles and tells you this is 
very easy," says Zaera-Polo. "It's a condition in which you are liberated from 
any luggage that may have come from your education - the sensibilities you 
picked up wherever you grew up."

This was over a decade ago, when globalisation was a relatively new concept. 
The ensuing years provided rich pickings for the signature architects, as 
clients around the world rushed to commission trophy buildings to put their 
city or corporation on the map. But with iconic architecture now cropping up in 
every city, these buildings are starting to cancel each other out: Gehry is 
peppering the world with Bilbao Guggenheim lookalikes and if you've seen one 
building by Calatrava or Meier, you've seen them all. "Nobody is interested in 
having a Richard Meier [building] or a Gehry again and again, no matter where," 
says Zaera-Polo. "You've seen it before, it doesn't really make sense."

Globalisation is now seen as an insipid force, and smart multinationals - and 
architects such as FOA - are interested in strategies that are more sensitive 
to locality. "The difference between our generation and the previous generation 
is that they were probably the first generation that had to deal head on with 
this internationalisation of architectural culture," says Zaera-Polo. "What did 
they do? The same thing that Mercedes or BMW or Coca-Cola did, which is to 
create a recognisable brand, some kind of signature that is recognisable no 
matter where it is deployed. Now we think this is no longer interesting."

"And nor do Nike or Coca-Cola find it interesting any more," says Moussavi. 
"You can create diversity of styles within the same branding strategy; it can 
have many facets. The idea of an architect being a global brand, of selling a 
utopian vision, is perhaps not relevant today."

FOA are not the only young architects exploring such ideas, but they are among 
the first of their generation to convert the theorising into significant built 
form. The breakthrough was the vast Yokohama ferry terminal in Japan, which 
they won through a competition in 1994 and completed last year. It was 
extraordinary that so young a practice with so few built projects should be 
entrusted with such a key project; and even more extraordinary that FOA's 
proposal, which defied numerous architectural conventions, should be selected 
from an international field of 600 entries. The terminal, a landmark project to 
mark Japan's co-hosting of the football world cup last year, blurs the 
boundaries between architecture, landscape and infrastructure. Jutting into the 
bay, it consists of numerous overlapping, rippling surfaces clad in asphalt, 
timber and grass, which are designed to channel vehicles and pedestrians around 
the multi-levelled superstructure while also serving as a public park.

Thus, the form of the building is derived from the way people use it: there is 
no attempt to resolve the building into something more conventionally beautiful 
or formally spectacular. Indeed, FOA have been quoted as saying that aesthetics 
and beauty are not important. "It's not that aesthetics and beauty are not 
important," counters Zaera-Polo. "Obviously things have to look good. But what 
we try to question is that usually we have been taught as architects to be 
mainly concerned with aesthetics. There are architects who sketch, and for them 
the sketch is where they start out from; we are not interested in that."

Instead, FOA "breed" buildings by feeding "ingredients" - data about the site, 
the building's technical requirements, the client's specifications and so on - 
into their computers and seeing what happens. Zaera-Polo explains: "We hope 
that by looking at those ingredients, almost trying to forget that you are 
trying to achieve a building, by trying to free your mind and look in a state 
as empty of preconceptions as possible, you will be able to generate something 
different."

Moussavi adds that FAO's working method "is so extreme that it sometimes 
produces forms that you are not sure if you like. It happens very often, and it 
takes us time to get used to them. You don't know if it's beautiful or ugly."

Yet the strategy clearly works: since Yokohama, clients appear to be falling 
over themselves to commission them. As part of United Architects, they were 
shortlisted for the Ground Zero competition in New York, and they have a gamut 
of projects in Spain, including a police station at La Vila Joiosa near 
Alicante (which is nearly complete), a park in Barcelona, an office tower in 
Tenerife and a hi-tech campus in La Rioja.

Like many globally feted London architects, they still have not built anything 
significant in the UK, but that will change. They are working on the Olympic 
masterplan for the Lea Valley in east London, alongside architects Allies and 
Morrison, and they are in the frame for the new BBC music centre in White City 
(the decision will be announced this week), a major development in Hastings and 
an extension to the Whitechapel Gallery in London. They have also been working 
on a new Selfridges for Bristol.

If these high-profile public projects come off, isn't there a danger that FOA 
will cease being outsiders and become part of the establishment? "No," snaps 
Moussavi indignantly. "The proposition of FOA is you should be a foreigner in 
your own land. So if the UK is our base and our home, the challenge is to 
remain somehow a foreigner when we work here."

"I don't mind becoming the establishment," says Zaera-Polo. "I don't want to 
be 50 and still be an emerging architect."

· Foreign Office Architects: Breeding Architecture is at the ICA, London SW1, 
from November 29 to February 29.http://www.ica.org.uk <http://www.ica.org.uk>. 
This is an edited version of an article that appears in this month's icon 
magazine.
 