
The disgraced former Radio 1 DJ Chris Denning has been jailed for 13 years for 
child sex abuse and even “offered” one boy to another BBC presenter.


Denning, 75, used his fame to groom and sexually assault dozens of young 
victims in the 1960s, 70s and 80s. He took some of the boys to London on 
several occasions and introduced them to other celebrities, including Gary 
Glitter.

Denning, one of Radio 1’s founding presenters, was sentenced to 13 years in 
prison at Southwark crown court in London for abusing 11 boys, some as young as 
eight.

Judge Alistair McCreath said the impact on the victims was “devastating”. He 
described the offences as “utterly depraved”, adding: “It is not to be 
forgotten that all of this suffering was inflicted by you for nothing other 
than your own selfish pleasure.”

Denning previously pleaded guilty to 21 sexual offences, including indecent 
assault and inciting boys to commit acts of gross indecency. He is already 
serving a 13-year jail sentence for a catalogue of sexual assaults against 24 
victims, including one allegedly at Jimmy Savile’s house.

McCreath said the latest sentence would start from Friday. He told the 
defendant: “You groomed all of these boys. They were for the most part in their 
early teens, although some were younger. You used your own fame, your 
acquaintance with others who were famous, your familiarity with the music 
industry … to win their trust and misplaced admiration.”

Denning lured boys into his house and plied them with records, alcohol and 
cigarettes. He showed them pornography before forcing them to perform sex acts 
on him and photographed them naked. He also took one of the victims to the 
Walton Hop Disco, which ran from 1958 until 2001.

Jonathan Polnay, prosecuting, said: “Denning would take one of his victims out 
for pizza. He also took him on holiday, on tours of radio stations and let him 
stay at his bungalow.

“On one of those occasions, in the bungalow, another well-known Radio 1 DJ was 
present and Denning offered the victim to him. The other DJ replied he didn’t 
do that sort of thing.”

He promised another boy that he could use his connections to get him into the 
music industry and convinced him to pose naked for a photo shoot, the 
prosecutor said.

He offered one of his victims a job at a disco and repeatedly had the boy 
sleep at his house afterwards, where he would abuse him. Polnay said: “Denning 
took him to London, where he introduced him as ‘one of my friends’ to Gary 
Glitter.”

The defendant showed no emotion as two of his victims, now in their 50s, spoke 
of how the abuse continued to affect them.

David Burgess, defending, said Denning suffered from “various ailments” and 
could die before the end of his sentence. “His past has caught up with him, we 
are talking about events over 40 years ago. He is very sorry, he has expressed 
that before,” he said.

Denning did not react as the sentence was imposed.
 