
Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox> is expected to table a 
formal offer for Sky as soon as Thursday.

Murdoch is not thought to have raised his £10.75 a share offer, which values 
Sky at more than £18bn, despite the protests from a number of Sky’s smaller 
shareholders.

Sky’s independent directors, led by deputy chairman Martin Gilbert, the chief 
executive of Sky shareholder Aberdeen Asset Management, has been assessing the 
merits of the Fox bid.

Sky’s independent directors had already recommended that shareholders accept 
Fox’s offer, tabled on Friday at a 40% premium to Sky’s share price before the 
bid was announced.

City analysts have called the bid offer opportunistic, cashing in on the 
post-Brexit fall in the value of the pound, but with Fox’s 39% shareholding and 
little chance of an alternative suitor it was expected to be accepted.

Sky will cost Rupert Murdoch $2.5bn less after Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/sky-rupert-murdoch-brexit-vote-21st-century-fox-eu-referendum>
The formal bid will trigger a regulatory process starting with the culture 
secretary, Karen Bradley, deciding if there is a media plurality issue with the 
takeover of Sky.

Fox, which owns Fox News and the Hollywood film studio, will own Sky which has 
pay-TV operations in the UK, Germany, Austria and Italy.

In addition Murdoch controls the Times, Sunday Times, Sun and news and sport 
station TalkSport through separate company News Corp.

Bradley has 10 working days to decide whether to launch a public interest 
intervention calling on media regulator Ofcom to conduct an investigation to 
see if the deal results in too much of a reduction in media plurality.

With the aborted deal in 2011, which Murdoch abandoned due to the 
phone-hacking scandal at his UK newspapers,Sky News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> was offered to be spun off as a 
separate company to counter plurality issues.

Fox is not thought to believe this is necessary six years on due to the 
decline in newspaper sales and rise of digital readership including Google and 
Facebook as news distributors and new outlets such as Vice, Buzzfeed and 
Huffington Post.

The European commission will also examine the deal on completion grounds. 
However, it cleared Murdoch’s original attempted takeover in 2010, as well as 
Sky’s £7bn move in 2014 to take control of sister pay-TV companies in Germany 
and Italy.
 