
More good news in Afaan Oromo, Amharic, Gujarati, Igbo, Korean, Marathi, 
Pidgin, Punjabi, Telugu, Tigrinya, and Yoruba … theBBC World Service is 
expanding again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/bbc-world-service-to-broadcast-news-programmes-in-north-korea>
, boosting its reach to 40 different languages, adding 11 extra nations to its 
listening list – and spending the £289m, spread over the next few years, that 
HMG tossed its way before the great Cameron clearances.

But scratch heads as well as applaud. In 2010, amid mounting economic crisis, 
a Tory-led government shunted the bill for the whole World Service onto the 
BBC’s tab. The licence-fee payer would – and now must – keep the World Service 
in funds. The Foreign Office couldn’t stump up any longer.

Natural bureaucratic things happened thereafter: not just the closure of five 
national services and a round of sweeping cuts, but the eventual integration of 
this hitherto separate world with the great maw ofBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> News in one cavernous newsroom. After 
all, why should the UK licence-fee payer make what was in effect an annual 
charitable donation to listeners in countries far away, funding programmes he 
or she couldn’t get at home? That wasn’t either fair or sensible. Pooling 
expertise and resource was a natural response.

Throw in this £289m dollop of Foreign Office money, though, and the scenery 
changes again. There’s a complete infrastructure for the service sustained by 
the licence fee: but on top of that – for North Korea, say, or with greater 
emphasis for Russia – there’s a new layer of listeners who depend on Whitehall 
beneficence.

Does that make what they get seem as independent and free from political taint 
as the BBC would wish? Not exactly. The BBC makes choices with the licence-fee 
cash it receives: that’s independence. But what it does with the extra HMG 
funding is subject to FO agreement, of course; and presumably vulnerable to FO 
disagreement when priorities change, as they have over Russia. Money has a 
nasty habit of talking, even in the most pristine spots.

• A cheery outcome in a glum world: October’s audited national paper sales 
figures show one paper up 3.3% month-on-month, and only down a mere 0.2% 
year-on-year, while its main Sunday rivals fall 5.8% and 6.2% respectively. 
Good news for theObserver.
 