
The company behind Frankie & Benny’s, Chiquito, Coast to Coast and Garfunkel’s 
is closing 33 restaurants after reporting falling sales and profits.

Restaurant Group blamed its poor performance on unpopular new menus, higher 
prices and poor customer service, and said it would listen more to its 
customers in the future.

It runs more than 500 restaurants across the UK and Frankie & Benny’s is its 
biggest brand. The company posted a 3.9% fall in like-for-like sales and a 4.4% 
fall in operating profits to £37.5m in the 27 weeks to 3 July. It took a 
one-off charge of nearly £60m for the 33 site closures and writedown of 29 
other outlets.

The group has ousted its chief executive and chief financial officer in recent 
months and appointed two new non-executive directors to its board to chair the 
remuneration and audit committees, aftersuffering a damaging shareholder revolt 
over boardroom pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/restaurant-group-shareholders-fail-to-back-boardroom-pay-deals>
 in May. Barry Nightingale was appointed as finance chief in June along with a 
new managing director for Frankie and Benny’s, and the former Paddy Power boss 
Andy McCue will join as chief executive in mid-September.

His predecessor, Danny Breithaupt, had blamed increased competition for 
Frankie and Benny’s worsening performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/29/restaurant-group-warns-profit-decline-customer-numbers-frankie-bennys>
, but the new chair, Debbie Hewitt, who took over from Alan Jackson in March, 
admitted it was not the main factor.

“Disappointingly our issues have been the result of our own making,” she said. 
“It’s been a business that’s been run very instinctively … But customers will 
tell you ‘it’s too expensive, we are not as keen on the menu and service is 
inconsistent’.”

She said prices had been pushed up too high in the past three years and that 
fixed-price lunches and many popular dishes had been taken off when new menus 
were introduced without being trialled first. For example, chicken parmigiana 
made way for chicken saltimbocca, which proved less popular and is also more 
complex to make, resulting in longer waiting times.

Hewitt said the “issues are fixable” and pledged urgent action to appeal more 
to families, Frankie’s main customers, by testing new value offers and putting 
popular dishes back on the menu. About £6m is being ploughed into technology to 
update “antiquated” tills, ordering and operating systems, she said.

The drop in the value of the pound following the Brexit vote will push up the 
price of imported food next year, but the group cannot afford to pass this on 
to customers, she added.

The company has scaled back new restaurant openings to 24-28 this year, from 
44 in 2015. It is happy with its focus on retail parks, away from the high 
street.
 