
Jim Crowley is back at his home in Sussex having escaped with just a broken 
nose after an appalling pile-up atKempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> on Monday afternoon. The newly 
crowned champion of British Flat racing was one of two jockeys rushed to 
hospital after the incident with suspected spinal injuries, the other being 
Freddy Tylicki, who remains at St George’s Hospital in Tooting.

Crowley’s agent, Tony Hind, told the Press Association on Tuesday morning: 
“Jim had a scan - no broken bones, all clear. All he has done is broken his 
nose. It’s a massive relief.

“I’ll speak to him later. His wife rang me this morning and he was still 
asleep. He’ll call me back in his own time and we’ll take it from there. He 
feels like he’s had six rounds in the ring with Anthony Joshua at the moment.

“We were going to carry on [riding on the all-weather] for a bit, but I’ll 
wait until he speaks to me.”

Such news about Crowley did not seem possible in the immediate aftermath of 
Kempton’s third race, when both men were treated on the track for more than an 
hour before being placed on spinal boards and transferred to the major trauma 
unit at St George’s, Crowley by road and Tylicki by air ambulance.


A hospital spokesman confirmed on Tuesday morning that Tylicki remained in 
intensive care.

Tylicki appeared to bear the brunt of the incident, which occurred at about 
the halfway point of a mile-long race, as the tightly packed 12-runner field 
rounded the bend out of the back straight. His mount, Nellie Deen, collided 
with the leader and eventual winner, Madame Butterfly, and fell, landing across 
her jockey and bringing down Crowley’s mount, Electrify.

Skara Mae, ridden by Steve Drowne, was also brought down, while Ted Durcan was 
unseated from Sovrano Dolce in the resulting mêlée. Drowne was unhurt but 
Durcan has confirmed that he has suffered an ankle injury.

He said: “I fractured by right ankle, but it could have been a lot worse. I 
kind of suspected I’d fractured it straight away, but because the doctors were 
obviously looking after the other two lads I was happy enough to hobble back 
into the weighing room and make my own way to Addenbrooke’s [Hospital].

“I don’t know how long I’ll be out, but it’s not the end of the world and I 
just hope Freddy is okay.”

Drowne recalled the incident ahead of making a swift return at Wolverhampton. 

“Basically, Freddy’s horse clipped heels. It happens a few times in a race and 
he was unlucky he didn’t find a leg and went down,” Drowne told At The Races. 
“On the all-weather it’s tight so when one goes down a few go down. 
Unfortunately he was at the front of the pack and a few horses went over him.

“Freddy never moved from the fall and Jim was in a bit of pain and was worried 
about his neck. Lucky enough, me and Ted were walking wounded. The doctors were 
quite concerned when they got to Freddy and called for the air ambulance really 
quick and did everything right. They were on to us straight away.

“I’m fine, a bit sore as you’d expect. I got away very lightly, especially 
when you compare it to Freddy. The lads knew it was bad. It was very quiet in 
the jockeys’ room, very subdued. I’d left by the time they’d called off the 
rest of the meeting. It didn’t surprise me.

“It was certainly the worst atmosphere I’d been in. The lads suspected Freddy 
was badly hurt. I reckon every 500 rides you are due a fall. It was one of 
those things and it was unfortunate it turned out as bad as it did.”

Barney Clifford, a former jockey who now works as racing director at Kempton, 
was visibly shaken as he spoke on Racing UK about what had happened. Referring 
to Crowley and Tylicki, he said: “They both give their consent to me and the 
doctor to update their next of kin, family members et cetera. I can’t say any 
more than that at this stage.

“The reality is, Flat or National Hunt racing, it’s a dangerous sport. I guess 
you don’t expect those things to happen on the Flat and, when they do clip 
heels, if that was the cause of the problem, it can be a concertina effect. I 
just hope and pray that both Freddy and Jim are OK.”

At the subsequent inquiry the stewards interviewed Graham Gibbons, who rode 
Madame Butterfly, and Pat Cosgrave, who rode the eventual runner-up, Cutty 
Sark, and was just outside Tylicki when he fell. Having watched footage of the 
race, including some that was not publicly available, the stewards concluded 
the incident was “accidental” and took no further action.

While there was no suggestion that the track itself was unsafe, the remaining 
four races were abandoned because, in the words of the stewards, “the 
overwhelming feeling of the jockeys was that racing should not continue as a 
mark of respect to those injured”. The horses involved reportedly suffered no 
serious injuries.

Crowley is a former jump jockey who switched to Flat racing a decade ago, 
having discovered he was light enough to get plenty of opportunities in that 
sphere. He grafted his way to a first championship this year, his title chance 
having been assessed at 66-1 by bookmakers in the spring.

The 30-year-old Tylicki was champion apprentice in 2009 but his career lost 
some momentum the following year when he broke a shoulder in a fall at 
Musselburgh and was out of action for six months. He raised his profile afresh 
this year through his association with the filly Speedy Boarding, partnering 
her to two Group One victories in France.

While falls in Flat racing are much less common than in jump racing, the risk 
of injury is high when they do occur, because the horses move faster and there 
is generally less cushion in the racing surface than would be required for a 
jump race. High-profile Flat jockeys like Frankie Dettori, Kieren Fallon and 
Hayley Turner have all spent significant lengths of time on the sidelines 
because of mid-race tumbles.
 