
As last year’s freshers packed up and went home for the summer, student unions 
across the country were putting the final touches to their 2016 freshers’ weeks 
agendas.


Covering everything from the obligatory pub crawls and freshers’ balls to 
community events, advice and freshers’ fairs – not to mention all the goody 
bags – the mission is to deliver something for everyone.

Expect a bundle of daytime events courting you to sign up to sports clubs and 
societies; then, when the sun goes down, it’s all about themed parties, pub 
quizzes, outdoor cinema, light shows, quiz nights, karaoke and comedy events. 
Some of the larger universities even book celebrities or famous DJs.

Scott Mills, who presents the afternoon show on Radio 1, has been DJing at 
student gigs for more than 10 years. “There’s nothing like freshers’ week. It’s 
a fantastic experience. I might visit 20 or 25 in a month and it’s always a 
good time because the students are all genuinely excited to be there,” he says.

“I’ll be doing a lot of student gigs this year, and we’re definitely planning 
on representing the student community as part of the show. A lot of students 
say we’re their breakfast show because they don’t get out of bed until one 
o’clock!”

Simon Gerry, chief executive of Newcastle students union, says it’s not all 
about partying: “The evening events and big-name acts get the headlines, but 
more than 80% of our events are teetotal – and surveys tell us this is where 
students really forge friendships that will last a lifetime.”

Look beyond the university


Many universities will also be taking advantage of what is happening in their 
towns and cities in a bid to get students to engage with their communities.

Students at the University of Hull, for example, can look forward to a year of 
events that are tied in with theUK City of Culture 2017  
<https://www.hull2017.co.uk/>celebrations. As a principal partner, the 
university is able to offer students not only cultural experiences, but also 
opportunities to expand their CVs with volunteering.

Most universities offer something more like a fortnight for freshers, with 
events running from mid-September into October, although the University of 
Dundee kicks off even earlier, on 30 August, with an event to welcome local 
students. That’s followed there by more events to help arrivals get to grips 
with the community, such as supermarket tours and help registering with dental 
and GP services. Evening events include a Taste of Scotland welcome party and a 
nightly Conversation Cafe and appearances from Radio 1 DJs Nick Grimshaw and 
Daniel P Carter.

The University of Nottingham promises “foam cannons, bouncy castles, fire 
breathers, giant ball pits, UV face-painting and more”, while the University of 
Leeds boasts “the biggest freshers event in the UK”, complete with 
glow-in-the-dark robots.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> at the University of 
Gloucestershire are promised the “biggest freshers in history” with a 
moving-in-day garden party and barbecue, an international food festival and a 
5k run.
 