
First Serial <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial>, then The Jinx, 
and now Making a Murderer: we officially have a new genre on our hands, the 
long-form, deep-immersion, true-crime documentary that works itself into the 
courts – perhaps liberating an innocent from jail, or putting the accused there 
at long last. The ambition here is not to earn Emmys, but to achieve justice.

The decision to overturn Brendan Dassey’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/12/making-a-murderer-brendan-dassey-retrial-release>
 2007 conviction marks the third time in 18 months that a TV series or a 
podcast has played a decisive role in a major murder case. Dassey was convicted 
at age 17, on the basis of a confession browbeaten out of him by cynical 
detectives – a key scene in Laura Ricciardi and Moira Demos’s Making A Murderer 
– despite his learning disabilities (IQ 70) and the unpardonable absence of an 
adult adviser during questioning.

Guilty pleasure: how Making a Murderer tapped into our weakness for true crime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/11/how-making-murderer-tapped-our-weakness-true-crime-steven-avery>
After the broadcast of Sarah Koenig’s podcast Serial, Adnan Syed – serving 
life for the 1999 murder of his 18-year-old ex-girlfriend Hae Min Lee – was
granted a retrial, following questionable cellphone evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/30/adnan-syed-judge-grants-new-trial-serial-podcast-baltimore-murder-case>
 in the initial case, in June. With HBO’s The Jinx, the real estate heir Robert 
Durst, long held in suspicion after the 1982 disappearance of his wife and the 
2000 murder of his friend Susan Berman – and acquitted for the 2001 murder of a 
neighbor – wasarrested on the eve of the documentary’s final episode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/15/real-estate-heir-robert-durst-arrested-in-new-orleans-report>
, in which he was caught muttering in the bathroom: “What the hell did I do? 
Killed them all, of course.”

The innocent-man documentary has a vintage stretching back at least as far as 
Errol Morris’s 1988 documentary The Thin Blue Line , which secured the release 
of its wrongly convicted protagonist, Randall Dale Adams, after 12 years in a 
Texas jail. But this newer variety partakes of two other major influences: The 
Innocence Project and In Cold Blood. The Innocence Project, originally founded 
in 1992 after a study found that 70% of wrongful convictions were based on 
faulty eyewitness testimony, has greatly expanded with the advent of 
sophisticated DNA testing in the last 20 years. It has freed343 people 
<http://www.innocenceproject.org/dna-exonerations-in-the-united-states/>, 
including 20 who served on death row, and done much to undermine confidence in 
certain verdicts. Each of the three documentaries relies on a deep sense of 
legal nuance and a knowledge of procedural crime-solving (and its shortcomings).

What they share with In Cold Blood is Truman Capote’s determination to burrow 
deep into the communities and mindsets of the accused and the deceased, as well 
as the courts and the police that chew them up. ForMaking a Murderer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/making-a-murderer>, the film-makers spent 
almost 10 years travelling back and forth to the tiny Wisconsin town where the 
story unfolded over three decades. In that time, we see legal reversals and 
defeats, the waxing and waning of relatives’ confidence in their loved ones, 
and a deep understanding of the ramshackle, wrong-side-of-the-tracks, 
white-working-class universe of the accused – “Dickensian” is the word most 
critics used. The documentary is not just an autopsy of a criminal case, but 
also a long sojourn in the Other America, usually invisible to film, television 
and those on the coasts.

There is great virtue in taking one’s time as a film-maker – and outletssuch 
as premium cable and Netflix can go long, free of the confines of TV ads and 
primetime schedules. This freedom has also proven an advantage amid attempts to 
understand an old case anew, through the ESPN documentary OJ: Made in America 
and the FX mini-series American Crime: The People versus OJ Simpson. Both 
clocked in at close to 10 enthralling, horrifying hours; both were critical 
smashes.

The OJ case, as it unfolded, was one of the most confounding, complex 
touchstones of American history in the last 30 years: a referendum on race, 
policing, the media and celebrity, far more than a single trial of a terrible 
case. As the circus unfolded for two years in Los Angeles, it felt 
incomprehensible, overwhelming; two decades later, in drama and in documentary, 
sustained immersion seems the only way to dig out every last nuance of a story 
of decades-long racial animosity and mistrust, and of the perils of American 
celebrity and wealth. No one was released from jail this time, but that wasn’t 
the point: together these two meditations on justice amounted to an act of 
public service.

Perhaps the oldest antecedent to these shows is a British true-crime book by 
the journalist and broadcaster Ludovic Kennedy, 10 Rillington Place, whose 
publication in 1961 led both to the superb 1970 film of the same name, and to 
the posthumous pardoning of 25-year-old Timothy Evans, who had been hanged in 
1950 for murders most likely committed by the serial killer John Reginald 
Christie, himself hanged in 1953. Nothing could bring Evans back from the dead, 
but the case and the book had a decisive impact on Britain’s decision to 
abolish the death penalty in 1964. Is it too much to hope that such an 
achievement might one day be replicated in the United States, this time due to 
a series, film or podcast?
 