
It is too early to know if the second Kennedy assassination has precipitated 
any fundamental change in the political sentiment of the voters.

There is a vast amount of preachment and amateur psycho-analysis going on, and 
yesterday even a humbled President Johnson wondered aloud if he had 
"contributed to the divisiveness in the nation, I hoped I didn't contribute 
anything. I never tried to say any mean or hateful things. But I felt in the 
atmosphere that if I indicated I had no personal ambitions whatever, that it 
might somehow contribute to improving the political atmosphere and the 
divisions among us."

But the avowed Presidential candidates cannot sit down like Job and brood 
about their lot. They must now pick up the broken pieces of their old campaigns 
and try to reassemble them to cheer the people and advance their own claims to 
leadership.

Raising money

Only Mr Richard Nixon has so far stayed in seclusion. Senator McCarthy picked 
up again with a press conference in Washington today and will make a campaign 
speech here tomorrow before a Quaker audience. Former Governor George Wallace 
of Alabama, after a longer pause than anyone in honour of his dead wife, today 
began a tour of eight Southern States in which he hopes to raise money for his 
third party.

Most conspicuously, Governor Nelson Rockefeller of New York has made a virtue 
of a tragedy be recasting his own role as that of a national healer and binder 
up of wounds. "The death ofRobert Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/robert-kennedy>," wrote James Reston in 
the "New York Times" today, "seems to have startled Nelson Rockefeller out of 
his trance. Like a flash of lightening in the dark, it has suddenly shown him 
where he must go and what he must do in his last adventure in American elective 
politics."

In a full page campaign advertisement printed this morning in the "New York 
Times" and also in the "Wall Street Journal," the Governor has put out what 
amounts to a proclamation of a new faith. It begins: "America cries out for a 
leader. Events overwhelm us. Change outruns us. Headlines deliver us our daily 
jolt. Things are in the saddle and ride mankind' — this warning we have let 
come true. I run for President because I do not believe this must happen to us. 
I believe we can recapture control of things.

"I believe we can end the drift, the doubt, the division. I intend to say how, 
here, in this newspaper … my beliefs will not be tailored to please the voters 
of this region or that … I do not take my case to Republicans alone. It is a 
nation and not just a party which needs leading, healing, uniting."

This is evidently the preamble to a series of articles or broadsides the 
Governor will publish from day to day. Tomorrow he promises the first, on riots.

Governor Rockefeller's campaign, there was no doubt about it, was almost 
snuffed out before the murder in Los Angeles. In the face of crushing evidence 
from the primaries, he was forced to pretend that somehow Mr Nixon would mislay 
his winning streak in November and he, Rockefeller, would find and appropriate 
it.

Looking back

Today Rockefeller is ransacking the Nixon record to try to prove, before the 
Republican convention meets in Miami Beach in August, that Nixon is a born 
loser and will surely go down before Vice-President Humphrey. At the moment, 
this is at best a sporting thesis. A new Gallup poll shows Humphrey beating 
both Nixon and Rockefeller (by 42 percent to 36 percent and 39 percent to 36 
percent respectively).

Governor Rockefeller's new slogan is "an end to the old politics." a blanket 
stigma that is meant to embrace the Johnson-Humphrey Administration and the 
entire political career of Richard Nixon. Rockefeller himself is not noticeably 
a product of revolution. But if the country remains sufficiently distracted, or 
is alarmed again by summer violence, it is possible that of a the present 
contenders Rockefeller, three times re-elected as Governor of "the 
ungovernable' State of New York, might appear to offer the best promise of a 
break with the Kennedy-Johnson years.
 