
LOS ANGELES, JUNE 6

The body of Robert Francis Kennedy was gently lifted aboard the plane sent 
here this morning by President Johnson, and Los Angeles added its name to the 
list of cities whose previous history has been defaced, for the time being, by 
all too memorable acts of violence: Dallas, Detroit, Memphis.

By a contrary dispensation of the time zones, it was the Californians who were 
abed when the Senator succumbed this morning at 1.44 as it had been the 
Easterners who slumbered at three in the morning during the midnight horror of 
last Tuesday. The Angelenos, as glum as any of their critics, were back at work 
today and the two palatial hotels that surged with life two nights ago were as 
quiet as the Egyptian kings. The Hotel Ambassador's ballroom was being got 
ready for a high school dance and the waiters flitted through that kitchen 
pantry which will forever bear the same kind of stigma as the School Depository 
Buildings in Dallas and the balcony of the Lorraine Motel in Memphis, Tennessee.

The Kennedy family waited at the Good Samaritan hospital for the post-mortem 
examination; then the body was put into its coffin and the small cortege left 
for the airport. The silver plane, bearing the bold red letters "United States 
of America," landed at 9.30 in a remote corner of the Los Angeles International 
Airport. The network commentators had been asked to suggest that television was 
a better place to watch the hearse and its company of mourners than the scene 
itself.

The Presidential jet and an accompanying press plane roared into high cumulus 
clouds and with them the melancholy story moved on first to New York and then 
to Washington.

A little over five hours later the body landed, sadly and inevitably, at New 
York's John F. Kennedy International Airport, so rechristened from "Idlewild" 
after the bad day in Dallas four and a half years ago. The Senator will lie in 
state in St Patrick's Catholic Cathedral of the New York archdiocese throughout 
tomorrow and on Saturday.

On Sunday a funeral train will take the body to Washington and on across the 
Potomac to Arlington, the national military cemetery, where it will be buried 
alongside the Senator's brother, over whose grave there still flickers the 
light that Mrs John Kennedy and the dead Senator had decreed should burn in 
perpetuity.

The grief

In the first torpor, Senator McCarthy and many other national leaders mused 
aloud about grief and guilt and the whole circus air of an American campaign 
which exposes all seekers of elective office to more physical contact with the 
people than star football players in other countries.

In the interval of wondering how to preserve the open system and yet to fence 
it around with better protections, President Johnson today asked the Senate to 
authorise as law what he had already ordered on his own executive 
responsibility: To provide Secret Service protection, hitherto restricted to 
the President and the Vice-President and their families, to all declared 
Presidential candidates. The Senate broke its tradition of recess on the day of 
a member's death and promptly complied.

The first political act that must be done is to fill Senator Kennedy's seat in 
the Senate. The New York State laws, for various complex but good reasons, 
require that no successor can be elected in the hurried interval, between a 
death and a general election. In this case no man can be elected until 1970 and 
it is Governor Rockefeller's duty to appoint an interim successor.

Before these rituals are performed, in view of a disheartened nation, there is 
being observed a pained moratorium on the Presidential campaign and the large 
political questions the assassination raises. But grief, however overwhelming, 
must have a stop. And when the weekend is over, Vice-President Humphrey, Mr 
Nixon, Senator McCarthy, Governor Rockefeller and all the convention delegates, 
pledged, elected, or still unwooed, will have to face the hard fact that 1968, 
notwithstanding this shocking blight on the democratic process, is a 
Presidential election year. The papers at last could move the final result of 
the California primary out of the inside pages to three column spreads on the 
front:

Kennedy … 1,402,911 — 46% 
McCarthy … 1,267,608 — 42% , 
Lynch (formerly pledged to LBJ) … 366,150 — 12% 

The cynicism 

The progress of the Presidential campaign is obviously a much touchier 
subject. For the time being everyone is relieved at the general moratorium. But 
the despair and the cynicism will pass and so will many rash suggestions (such 
as McCarthy's "maybe we should adopt the English system and have the party 
appoint the President") that are impossible to reconcile with a Federal party 
system largely independent of the legislative branch.

By comparison with the distracted Democrats, the Republicans are calm and 
grateful. They have the opportunity, and ample popular sanction, to unite 
behind Nixon without encouraging contention from the two failing aspirants, 
Rockefeller and Reagan. It is the Democrats who must arrange some sensible 
order out of the present chaos.

On the face of it, a weary surrender to Hubert Humphrey might seem the easy 
way out. For he, too, has been collecting hundreds of delegates in private 
while McCarthy battled for them and Kennedy died for them, in public. But 
Senator McCarthy will not repent of his belief that it is time for a change and 
a break with the whole LBJ regime.

It has been persuasively suggested that Senator Edward Kennedy is likely to 
become the unwilling beneficiary (as a Vice Presidential running mate) of his 
family's legacy of grief. All that can be said for sure is that the old 
American campaigning style the demagogue stirring thousands to ecstasy in the 
open air and clutching the hand of every passer by, is due to fade. Television 
and the phalanx of bodyguards could replace the whistle-stop and the baying 
multitudes.

Alistair Cooke

[Robert Kennedy was shot in the early morning hours of 5 June 1968, shortly 
after securing the California presidential primary. Sirhan Sirhan was convicted 
of his assassination and is still in prison today.]
 