
On this hot and sobering weekend, in the wake of the second Kennedy 
assassination, the American people are asking, as the Europeans are, why there 
should have been three political assassinations in the United States and such 
frequent eruptions of public violence in the past few years.

Unlike the Europeans, they cannot afford merely to regret or pray for America 
and pass on. They are as eager as the victims of violence to know its causes 
and cure them.

But they are no less critical of the climate of American society: they blame 
"our complex society; the fact that the country has waited too long to tackle 
the basic causes of racial, ethnic, and religious prejudice; poor discipline in 
the home; a lack of respect for authority among youth; a disregard for God and 
religion." (It came out from Israel today that Sirhan Sirhan frequently 
complained to his father that the Israelis "knew nothing of God.")

Remedies 

Although on the face of it this view appears to reflect the judgement and 
prejudices of middle-aged, middle-class America, it is a true consensus of 
majority opinion, according to a Gallup Poll taken on Wednesday night, barely 
24 hours after Senator Robert F. Kennedy was mortally wounded in Los Angeles.

The proposed remedies include a ban on violent television shows, stricter 
parental control, and a return to courses in ethics in the public schools. But 
the important stress is laid on much stricter gun laws than the Congress is 
disposed to pass; on a sterner enforcement of the law by police and the courts 
than the Supreme court is, in its present liberal mood, likely to sanction; and 
more physical security for political candidates.

Many of the people who think "security" would secure candidates against such 
as last Tuesday's outrage feel that the wide-open exposure inherent in American 
political campaigning will and should come to an end.

An actual majority of the Gallup sample said they would favour campaigns that 
were mainly restricted to television and radio appearances. It could probably 
be shown, however, that most American politicians are deeply devoted to the 
barnstorming system, probably because they have known no other.

On one point there is almost universal agreement: on the need to emulate 
Europe by requiring the registration of all guns, the banning of mail-order 
weapons, and very tight restrictions on the use of guns for any purpose by 
minors.

The curious and disheartening thing about this general desire is that a vast 
majority of the people have held it for 30 years or more.

In 1938, in the earliest days of scientific polling, Dr Gallup found that 84 
percent of all American adults wanted to see Government registration of all 
pistols and revolvers. Today, 85 percent urged the same precaution on a 
Congress which is inexplicably bamboozled by the National Rifle Association and 
its Washington lobby.

Strange conviction 

It is their strange conviction that the constitutional "right to keep and bear 
arms," which was the Founding Fathers' interim formula for mustering local 
militia at a time when there was no standing army, must be invoked in behalf of 
criminals or half-wits who have a grudge against society, the Presidency, the 
Negro, the white man, the Kennedys, or the Jews.

The social scientists, too, have been busy probing into the causes of 
violence. And a few prominent ones are agreed that assassination, at any rate, 
is a fashion that will rise and abruptly end. A "contagion phenomenon" is the 
phrase used by a psychiatrist at the famous Menninger Foundation in Topeka, 
Kansas. "The more people see of these things," he says, "the more they tend to 
increase."

Pattern studied

He is supported by a Columbia University sociologist who has been studying the 
"pattern" of "highly publicised and dramatic acts of defiant behaviour" and who 
foresees more assassination attempts here in the next few years.

From Berkeley comes a substantiating study, "A Theory of Collective 
Behaviour," by a professor who notes that the 18-year-old Arizonan who killed 
five women in a beauty parlour did so, on his own confession, after watching 
the televised coverage of the murder of eight student nurses in Chicago and of 
14 people killed by a sniper in Texas.
 