
By the accident of the Los Angeles outrage the Presidential election campaign 
of 1968, which through the winter and spring had seemed like such a fascinating 
puzzle, now appears to have unravelled itself in the most obvious way.

As in one of those "all along" thrillers which drop false clues like confetti, 
the recognisable protagonists are emerging in their original roles at the end. 
And the last bout in November seems inevitably to be between Richard Nixon and 
Hubert Humphrey. This, at least, is the conviction of an overwhelming mass of 
professional politicians, and it is borne out today by a survey of the 
Democratic convention delegates made since the Kennedy assassination by the 
"New York Times."

There is plainly no discernible change in the Republican camp. Mr Nixon has 
stood by through the last dreadful days holding his embarrassed but well 
disciplined army, waiting to know who the opposing leader is to be. Neither he 
nor any other Republican leader has had the bad taste to say what is obvious to 
all of them: that all the events of the past week have played into the hands of 
the most powerful national opponent of the Administration, and especially one 
who has campaigned since the start for a new leadership pledged to the firm 
restoration of law and order in the country.

A bridge 

Nothing, it appears, is now so foregone as the nomination of the first ballot 
at Miami Beach of Nixon as the Republican candidate; although Governor 
Rockefeller, of New York, the first Presidential aspirant to make a public 
speech since Los Angeles, today said at Allegheny College, Pennsylvania, that
Robert Kennedy <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/robert-kennedy> had been "a 
bridge between the generations and different groups within the nation." The 
strong implication of his tribute was that Rockefeller himself might, in all 
humility, be a worthy successor.

But most of the speculation and surmise is about the Democrats, in the hour of 
their appalling and appalled disarray. And here there could be a division, not 
yet perceptible, between the politicians who will meet at Chicago in August and 
the great body of Democratic voters.

Assured 

The newspaper survey is the most authoritative of the attempts to canvass the 
sentiment of the party and guess at its probable nominee. Mr Humphrey, it says, 
"stands to inherit such a large share of the national convention delegates left 
unattached by the death of Senator Kennedy that his nomination for the 
Presidency seems assured."

Of the 500 or more Democratic delegates who after the California primary were 
committed to vote at the convention for Robert Kennedy or were leaning towards 
him about 400 have indicated that they will throw in their lot with Humphrey. 
Only 75 are expected to go over to Senator McCarthy.

Mr Humphrey had already conservatively claimed about 1,200 delegates. Another 
400 would obviously carry him handsomely beyond the 1,312 required for 
nomination. This total does not include the 190 delegates of New York State, 
who are to be chosen next Tuesday. Not much had been made of the coming New 
York primary, because it had been assumed that a victory for Senator Kennedy in 
California would exert an irresistible claim on the delegates from his own 
State, two-thirds of whom are elected by popular vote, one-third appointed by 
the State committee. Today a private poll of the 62 New York counties showed 
that an overwhelming majority of the New York delegates will, after "a decent 
interval," also declare for Humphrey.

Second thoughts 

In the days of mourning it was thought to be an act of magnanimity to suggest 
that Senator Edward Kennedy, of Massachusetts, should be chosen by the 
Democratic nominee as his Vice-Presidential running mate. The McCarthy men were 
the first to propose this gallant ticket, and soon afterwards Humphrey's men 
took up the same cry. Today, the Chicago "Daily News" urged the gesture on the 
Democratic nominee, whoever he is to be.

But on second thoughts this gallantry borders on crassness. The Kennedy clan 
and many of its friends and political advisers have been begging Edward Kennedy 
over the weekend to retire from politics altogether. The family's concern was 
mentioned today by Archbishop Philip Hannan, of New Orleans, who conducted the 
graveside service at Arlington. "We must all bear in mind," he said, "that 
Teddy is the final legatee of a great American political tradition."

Sinister 

Quite apart from the implied slight to the memory of a brother who opposed the 
war in Vietnam, the act of promoting him as the chief aide to the 
Administration's leading supporter could have other more sinister consequences. 
Edward Kennedy is the last surviving son of a family dogged by tragedy. He has 
three children and is now the foster-father to 16 more.

Neither temperament nor family pride would be likely to persuade him to go 
into a retreat. But, by the same token, he must hesitate to walk into the 
national limelight, where some ambitious maniac could be tempted to put an end 
once and for all to the Kennedy political dynasty.
 