
The Seven Madmen by Roberto Arlt trans Nick Caistor 256pp, Serpent's Tail, 
£9.99.
 The Peron Novel by Tomas Eloy Martinez, trans Helen Lane 464pp, Anchor, £6.99

 One day someone will write a book explaining why settler societies produce 
such wonderful, ground-breaking fiction, Australia, Canada, South Africa, the 
United States - and Latin America - continuously contributing a stream of 
novels that far outpace the contemporary creations of Europe. My own hunch is 
that many of these countries still retain some of the elements of 19th- century 
European society and consequently provide a sympathetic culture in which the 
novel - that pre-eminently 19th-century European creation - can survive and 
thrive.

 Argentina is a European settler society that has always lived about 50 years 
behind the rest of the world. So it is not surprising that Roberto Arlt's 
famous book Los Siete Locos, first published in Buenos Aires in 1929 and now 
available from Serpent's Tail as The Seven Madmen, in an excellent English 
translation by Nick Caistor, has long been compared with the writings of 
Dostoievsky. Yet any reader today would observe that the striking aspect of 
Arlt's book is not so much that it looks back to earlier European models, but 
that it casts a long shadow forward over the subsequent 50 years. So firmly 
rooted was Arlt in the explosive urban society and political culture of his 
time that his book is able to illuminate what was actually to happen during the 
first Peronist era in the 1940s and in the country's later descent into 
violence in the 1970s after Juan Peron had returned as President for the last 
time. It is one of the great books of the 20th century.

 Roberto Arlt, born in 1900 in Buenos Aires with an immigrant father from the 
Polish-German borderlands, was a journalist who, in the relay-race of 
Argentinian fiction-writing, received the baton from Ricardo Guiraldes, author 
of Don Segundo Sombra, an iconic novel that idealised the old world, then 
passing, of the gaucho and the pampas. Arlt was briefly Guiraldes's secretary, 
but soon abandoned the old rural world to become one of the first to describe 
the angst of a new generation of settlers in the harsh environment of the 
ever-expanding and increasingly unfamiliar city. His depiction of the anguished 
lower middle class of Buenos Aires, their futurist fantasies endlessly coming 
to grief on the rocks of the sordid and hopeless present, provides the perfect 
guide to the development of fascismo criollo, the indigenous fascist culture 
that was later to provide General Peron with much of his popular support.

 The anti-hero, Augusto Remo Erdosain, is a small-time swindler and 
brothel-frequenter with a rich fantasy life, a man who has been waiting forever 
for fortune to smile on him. Seeking to raise money to pay off his debts, he 
teams up with The Astrologer, the first of the seven madmen, who has a 
brilliant scheme to organise a Secret Society, financed by the profits from 
brothels, that will seek to overthrow the state. To this end, The Astrologer 
has joined forces with The Melancholy Thug, a wealthy and guilt-free pimp who 
will run the organisation's brothels. The Thug justifies his trade on the 
grounds that his exploitation of women is no worse than the capitalists' 
exploitation of workers. Other assistance comes from The Major, who will take 
care of the armed forces, and The Gold Prospector, who has already surveyed 
possible sites in the country where the secret society will set up its training 
camps.

 The plotters need seedcorn of 20,000 pesos to set up the brothels and the 
training camps, and they plan to obtain this by murdering a rich cousin of 
Erdosain's wife. The murder itself is to be left in the hands of The Man Who 
Saw The Midwife. These fictional creations all have their own tales to tell, 
but it is the fantasies of The Astrologer and The Major that become transferred 
from fiction to fact and give Arlt's novel its transcendental charge. The 
Major's vision of a fictitious revolutionary force, specialising in terrorist 
attacks that would create a state of revolutionary agitation, was to become the 
model for a later Argentina. Arlt even foresaw what would happen next.

 'We military people' will then step in, says The Major. 'We will say that in 
view of the government's evident inability to defend the institutions of the 
fatherland, business or the family, we are taking over the state, and declaring 
a temporary dictatorship.' The Argentine military did indeed 'step in' in 1930, 
the year after the novel was published, and they never ceased to do so over the 
following decades, their last and most vicious intervention occurring in 1976.

 The Peron Novel, by Tomas Eloy Martinez, deals with the years immediately 
before that final apocalypse, and in doing so, it turns Roberto Arlt upside 
down. Fiction that became fact is now historical fact turned into surrealist 
fiction. The Peron Novel is an entertaining and largely accurate account of the 
extraordinary last years of the Argentinian caudillo before his death in 1974. 
Arlt's Astrologer has been transmogrified into the real life figure of Jose 
Lopez Rega, the secretary of Peron's wife Isabel, a man who believed that he 
was the reincarnation of the Prophet Daniel and succeeded in casting an evil 
spell over the entire country. Much of the novel revolves around the incident 
during Peron's famous return to the Buenos Aires airport at Ezeiza in 1973, 
when a fatal shoot-out occurs between the rival wings of his movement.

 Although amusing, and fascinating for anyone caught up in the excitements of 
that time, the huge cast of characters in The Peron Novel will probably only 
make sense to those familiar with the real story. Martinez was a journalist at 
the time, and knew them all, including Peron, but his amorphous story does not 
really hold together as a novel.

 His publisher had clearly hoped to capitalise on the success of an earlier 
book (actually written later), Santa Evita, which dealt in a similar way with 
the bizarre story of the wanderings of the corpse of Eva Peron. Yet in Latin 
America the truth is almost invariably stranger than fiction - witness the 
magic realism of a Chilean dictator languishing in the captive luxury of the 
Wentworth estate - and few novelists have been able to compete successfully 
with the real thing.
 