
It has been a very effective week for journalism; the prime minister of 
Iceland has gone, David Cameron has been forced into an embarrassing volte face 
on how he benefited from offshore tax shelters, and China had to block parts of 
the internet it was not already blocking in case citizens read about the 
corruption of business leaders and officials who were involved in the same 
scandal. The political and financial fallout from what has become known as the
Panama <https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama> Papers is continuing to 
dominate the global news agenda.

For news nerds the dynamics of the story proved equally fascinating. The leak 
of information from a law firm called Mossack Fonseca first came to German news 
organisation Suddeutsche Zeitung from an anonymous whistleblower but was 
subsequently dispersed via the ICIJ (International Consortium of Investigative 
Journalists), into the hands of over 100 journalists in different organisations 
(including the Guardian, which took a leading role in the reporting). This new 
model of networked, data-driven investigation is a model journalism as a field 
can feel exceptionally proud of having developed. It is the correct reportorial 
response to the kind of globalised bamboozlement Mossack Fonseca and others 
practise, and demonstrates enormous potential for impact, if and when 
publishers work together.

And this point is a crucial one for more than just complex investigations. 
Since the WikiLeaks cables arrived in assorted newsrooms in 2010, and even 
through the incredibly sensitive material in the NSA leaks, news organisations 
now have to collaborate if they are going to participate in some of the largest 
stories they will ever cover. It is endemic in the DNA of most newsrooms to be 
as uncooperative as possible. Indeed after the Panama Papers broke as news, the 
lack of material response from some major news outlets such as the Washington 
Post and New York Times was ascribed to their annoyance at not being included 
in the reporting. Although those organisations suggested it was actually more 
about verification of someone else’s scoop, the assumption of a competitive 
gene is still embedded in news culture.

However this is likely to change quickly, in areas besides newsgathering. This 
is also an important time for journalism organisations in terms of news 
distribution. In San Francisco, theFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> developer conference F8 will 
take two days this week to talk about new developments at the social network, 
many of which will be of acute interest to news publishers. Facebook’s Instant 
Article access is being opened to all journalists and not just selected 
publishers. Its CEO Mark Zuckerberg took to his own live video channel last 
week (hosted by BuzzFeed) to talk about the expansion of access to the 
streaming service and what its strengths are.

For the first time, a technology developer conference will have more bearing 
on how we do journalism than at any point since the launch of the iPhone (in 
that case journalists observed and admired without having much conception of 
how radically the device would affect their work). “Journalism” is just one not 
particularly commercial segment within the broadening communications ecosystem.

Newsrooms might privately share some information about their experiences with 
Facebook or Google or other publishers, but only on an ad hoc and informal 
basis. Now we are facing a real test of what this new relationship actually 
means, and it puts journalism organisations in the uncomfortable position of 
disclosing perhaps more than they would like to.

After Zuckerberg’s live appearance 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/mathonan/why-facebook-and-mark-zuckerberg-went-all-in-on-live-video#.fwkoVMdBbR>
 on BuzzFeed last week to talk about his new product, technology site Re/Code 
reported that BuzzFeed and other publishers were being paid by Facebook to 
promote live video - a story confirmed by BuzzFeed at the bottom of a lengthy 
article about the same product. There are other broadcasters and news 
organisations who have not disclosed similar relationships.

This is nothing new, or intrinsically wrong. Publishers (including the 
Guardian) have in the past struck advertising search deals with companies like 
Yahoo and Google, they often negotiate exclusive deals which give them access 
to new products (like the Apple App store). If competitive advantage now rests 
in a close co-operation with platforms and technologies, and it looks as though 
it does, then as journalists we need to be more open about disclosing those 
terms of engagement. Facebook articles and the Panama Papers are conceptually 
quite a long way apart, but in terms of how we work together co-operatively, 
and the benefit of transparency applied to transactions, they are maybe much 
closer than we might think.
 