
The Home Secretary has been asked to ban the entry of Alice Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alicecooper>, the rock musician and 
millionaire, to this country. Mr Leo Abse MP, who wants to spare Britain from 
Cooper's "culture of the concentration camp," said yesterday that "his 
incitement to infanticide and his commercial exploitation of masochism is 
evidently an attempt to teach our children to find their destiny in hate, not 
in love."

These are severe charges, likely to gain credibility from the campaign last 
year of Mrs Whitehouse against the Cooper single, "School's Out." Like that 
other record which so aroused Mrs Whitehouse, Chuck Berry's "Ding-a-Ling," 
"Schools Out" reached the top of the charts.

It is, however, the Cooper stage show which arouses alarm. I saw him perform 
in his home town of Detroit last month and although the thick clouds of 
marijuana rolling through the theatre probably preserved me from too sadistic a 
reaction, wax babies were smashed and impaled on guitars. Alice was beheaded 
and his bleeding neck and the bodies of shop-window mannequins were nuzzled and 
gnawed to the accompaniment of a throbbing, relentless tide of menacing rock 
music.

But it was not very convincing. We knew Alice was not beheaded, we knew these 
savaged things were wax and even though rock music can spur emotions on to 
frenzy, it does not suspend disbelief.

There was a neediness about the show and the presentation - especially dyed 
urine stains on Alice's long johns, clumsy musicianship, spitting on girls in 
the audience - which defuses most of its threats. The American tour may gross 
five million dollars, the package may be run by the most able public relations 
magicians in the business, but the Cooper show is a not very good blend of 
simplistic rock and clumsy grand guignol.

In defence of Alice, one could point to his lectures on music to a New York 
music school, to his celebration by Salvador Dali as the new source of the 
surreal, and indeed, to his personal wit and charm. But the point remains, if 
Alice Cooper does represent any kind of threat to British virtue, then the 
source of our concern should be in British society, and not in the crude 
excesses of a not particularly gifted superstar.
 