
Despite conflicting influences, leading shares started brightly and managed to 
keep in the black for the rest of the day.

Even the inability of Greece and the rest of the eurozone to settle their 
differences after late night talks on Wednesday failed to dent the mood, with 
investors hopeful a solution to the country’s financial troubles could be found 
before the cash runs out. The European Central Bank also soothed some nerves by 
extending its emergency liquidity assistance for Greek banks by €5bn to €65bn.

News of a ceasefire in Ukraine helped sentiment, as did Sweden cutting 
interest rates and starting a programme of quantitative easing.

On the negative side, US retail sales were weak and jobless claims came in 
higher than expected, while the Bank of England suggested interest rates would 
rise despite falling inflation.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished up 9.94 points at 6828.11, having climbed as 
high as 6854 at one point.

Rio Tinto rose 68p to 3039.5p as it unveiled plans for a $2bn share buyback, 
whileShire added 221p to £49.97 after a positive update from the 
pharmaceuticals group. The company, which is buying rare disease specialist NPS 
Pharma for $5.2bn, said it expected good growth in 2015, helped by the approval 
of its treatment for binge-eating disorder. Its fourth quarter earnings per 
share were just below forecasts but revenues rose 19% to a better than expected 
$1.58bn. In a buy note Jefferies said:

Fourth quarter sales and earnings before interest and tax are as expected but 
earnings per share were 2% shy on finance/tax. Importantly the initial 2015 
outlook is broadly similar to our estimates, with margin fears into the quarter 
likely overdone. Consensus earnings per share may need trimming slightly but 
this is largely confounded by a mix of pre- and post- NPS. Key pipeline 
programmes are on-track and the maribavir CMV Phase II update is positive.

Coca-Cola Hellenic Bottling climbed 68p to £11.59 after news of the Ukraine 
ceasefire from Sunday after peace talks with Russia in Minsk. Russia is the 
biggest market for the bottling company, which has been under pressure since 
Western sanctions on the country over the situation in Ukraine.


But Royal Dutch Shell B shares fell 41p to 2203.5p as they went ex-dividend, 
whileSage was 6.5p lower at 474.7p for the same reason.

BT dropped 10p to 450p as it placed 222m shares at 455p each to raise around 
£1bn towards funding its £12.5bn purchase of mobile group EE.

Among the mid-caps AO World, the online retailer of domestic appliances, lost 
19.3p to 304.6p as Panmure Gordon began coverage with a sell rating, saying the 
company’s profits were boosted by insurance plans. Analyst Michael Stewart said:

At a price of 330p per share we initiate coverage on AO World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ao-world> with a sell recommendation, 
urging investors to capitalize on the unjustified level of price appreciation 
over the last quarter. This is a high quality E-commerce business but the 
intrinsic worth of its stock is just 152p, half the prevailing market price.

Our analysis shows that product protection plans significantly boost the 
company’s earnings potential. We calculate that the net earnings generated from 
protection plans formed around 51% of reported adjusted operating profit in 
2014. A change in legislation or accounting policies could significantly reduce 
profit margins.

Finally Mariana Resources surged 85% to 2.125p after positive results from the 
exploration group’s latest drilling programme in Turkey. Analysts at RFC 
Ambrian said:

With the completion of this initial drilling programme, [Turkish partner] 
Lydian has satisfied the year one spending commitment of $0.5m to acquire a 20% 
interest in the project. Nevertheless, we continue to believe the presence of a 
well-funded local partner will prove helpful in accelerating the development of 
the project without any dilution to Mariana at the corporate level.
 