
Leading shares rose for the fourth day in a row as oil prices hit their 
highest level since early October in volatile trading.

With Brent crude currently up more than 1% at $52 a barrel as US oil stocks 
dropped by more than was forecast and Nigerian production continued to be hit 
by militant attacks, commodity companies were among the major gainers.Anglo 
American added 32p to 697.5p, while Glencore was up 5.7p at 145.70p amid a 
Bloomberg report it was close to selling a10% stake in its agricultural 
business.

Royal Dutch Shell A shares rose 44p to £18 and BP was 3.3p better at 376.55p. 
But transport groups fell back on concerns about higher fuel costs, witheasyJet 
down 31p at £14.90.

Overall the FTSE 100 ended 16.99 points higher at 6301.52, despite 
disappointing Chinese trade data. Positive UK economic news in the shape of 
better than expected industrial production figures and a pick up in GDP 
forecast by economists at NIESR helped support the market.

Joshua Mahony, market analyst at IG, said:

 A topsy turvy day for UK stocks has seen initial losses turn to gains for the 
FTSE as a bullish open for the US pushed the Dow and S&P 500 closer to all-time 
highs.

 Rising commodity prices have provided a boost to the FTSE, which has 
outperformed its European counterparts owing to the disproportionately large 
number of energy and mining firms in the index.

 US crude inventories fell once more last week, as the effects of fading US 
production continues to impact the stockpiles that are slowly coming down to 
more normal levels.

Marks & Spencer added 12p to 375.5p as Morgan Stanley said the demise of BHS 
should benefit the business, adding 2% to 3% to its like for like sales over 
the next year. Putting an overweight rating and 460p price target on Marks, 
analyst Geoff Ruddell said:

 Last week’s announcement that BHS is to be wound down should ease pressure on 
its competitors. We expect M&S to be the biggest beneficiary. While it is 
unlikely to change M&S’s longer-term prospects, it increases our conviction 
that the nearer-term risk reward is now very favourable.

Coca-Cola Hellenic Bottling rose 46p to £14.56 in further reaction to Monday’s 
investor day. Citigroup said:

Coca-Cola Hellenic hosted an investor day in London, which focused on mid-term 
revenue and margin drivers, and brought to focus [its] compelling margin 
recovery story, which seems to be underappreciated by investors. Management’s 
confident tone reinforced our view that mid-term fundamentals are improving.

Societe Generale said:

The company gave an EBIT margin target of 11% by 2020, which is back to its 
pre-crisis level (10.9% in 2007). There is no consensus available for 2020, but 
prior to the presentation, we forecast a margin of 9%, and the 2018 Vuma 
[independent website] consensus margin is 8.3%. So the target is well above 
where investors currently expect Coca-Cola Hellenic to get its margins. The 
company’s medium-term organic sales growth target of 4-5% is close to consensus 
of 4%, so is less controversial.

Elsewhere 3i Infrastructure rose 9.5p to 176.5p as the group, which invests in 
projects such as Cross London Trains and Wireless Infrastructure Group, 
successfully raised £385m from new and existing shareholders, £35m more than 
originally planned.


Domino’s Pizza was 31p higher at £10.98 after it paid £24m to buy significant 
minority interests in a number of the brand’s overseas franchises. The company 
added that its trading was in line with expectations. Analysts at Peel Hunt 
said:

Domino’s has shown its appetite for acquisitions, with a £24m acquisition in 
the master franchises in Iceland, Norway and Sweden. The acquisition will give 
it a significant minority interest and the ability to appoint a director to the 
board of the three territories. It is a positive announcement and gives the 
group access to territories with a strong potential in Norway and Sweden.

But AO World was down 9.1p at 158p after the online domestic appliance 
retailer revealed a full year operating loss of £10.6m after investment in 
European expansion.
 