
With a mixed bag of October manufacturing data - US and UK good, eurozone and 
China disappointing - leading shares have fallen back after recent gains.

Utility shares in particular have come under selling pressure as investors 
moved away from defensive stocks. British Gas-ownerCentrica, which announced 
further boardroom changes on Friday, fell 7p to 295.5p, whileSSE lost 32p to 
£15.67.

Water companies slipped back in the wake of a negative note from Investec, 
which said:

The rules of the game between the government, regulators, consumers, and 
investors are threatened by changing behaviours of all agents. Equity is 
leaving the sector through a combination of dividends, leverage and 
consolidation. On the current path, alternative funding models may find their 
footing, including Thames Tideway Tunnel clones, or even state owned/no 
shareholder structures, such as Scottish Water/Welsh Water.

The assumptions that have underpinned high premiums to regulatory capital 
value in valuations can no longer be relied upon. We are initiating coverage on
United Utilities (sell, target price 730p), Severn Trent (sell, target price 
1735p), andPennon (hold, target price 835p). Pennon’s relative strength is 
predicated on its differentiated financing structure and potential upside from 
Viridor. Our discounted cashflow-based targets do not integrate any potential 
premiums that might arise from further M&A activity, although we suspect that, 
even here, the heady premiums witnessed in the past may not be seen in future, 
given the new risk/reward outlook.

United Utilities <https://www.theguardian.com/business/unitedutilities> ended 
down 17.5p at 837p, Severn Trent slid 32p to £19.64 and Pennon dipped 0.5p to 
833p.

Overall the FTSE 100 fell 58o.50 points to 6487.97, as concerns about global 
economic growth returned, prompting investors to cash in some of their recent 
gains.

Banks fell back after Friday’s surge on less onerous than expected new rules 
on how much capital they must hold as a proportion of their outstanding loans.

Royal Bank of Scotland dropped 7.8p to 380.2p with Investec downgrading from 
hold to sell. HSBC lost 11.6p to 627.9p following its figures.

But airlines moved higher after a better than expected update from Ryanair, up 
more than 7% at €8.151.EasyJet added 40p to £15.40 while British Airways owner 
International Airlines Group was 5.1p better at 414.3p.

Smith & Nephew slipped 9p to £10.48 as analysts at Societe Generale issued a 
hold note but cut their target price from £11 to £10.75. They said:

Third quarter reported earnings per share were 3% above consensus due to 
non-operating items. Revenues of $1.1bn (3% underlying growth) and a trading 
margin of 21.4% (down 20 basis points year on year) were both in line with the 
market’s expectations. We are however trimming our 2015- 2020 earnings per 
share forecasts by 2-3% purely to reflect adverse currency movements.

Although we recently upgraded the shares to hold, a more constructive view on 
the shares isn’t warranted for four reasons: 1) given the share rerating since 
the first half of 2013, the valuation isn’t particularly attractive; 2) given 
the needed financial deleveraging, the dividend is unlikely to go through a 
second inflection point; 3) in our best case scenario, upcoming catalysts imply 
only high single potential upside to our 2020 earnings per share estimate; 4) 
we believe other segments of the EU Medtech sector are fundamentally more 
attractive (e.g. radiotherapy dialysis).

Smith & Nephew will host an analyst meeting focused on Sports Medicine. We 
identify five instances where there may be upside risk to our earnings per 
share forecasts and hence our target price: 1) the company could execute well 
on its new “low touch” orthopaedic selling model Syncera; 2) the top-line 
synergies from the ArthroCare acquisition could exceed guidance of $50m; 3) the 
second (ex US) phase III trial for HP802- 247 could report positive phase III 
data; 4) share gains in Wound Care could exceed our expectations ; 5) the “mid 
tier” orthopaedic selling model in Emerging Markets could surprise on the 
upside. Downside risks: a major acquisition could strain the group both 
financially and operationally.

Online retailers were in demand, on hopes for an improving outlook and amid 
continuing talk of possible takeovers.Ocado ended 25.6p higher at 274.3p, while 
AO World added 14.3p to 180.2p and Asos climbed 91p to £27.47.

Finally Range Resources rose more than 4% to 0.83p on news than Chinese-based 
investment group Core Capital Management would subscribe up to $50m for a 
mixture of shares and convertible bonds. The total number of shares is yet to 
be determined but Core will not exceed a 30% threshold set by Australian 
authorities. The funding will be used to accelerate oil production targets and 
fund acquisitions. Emily Ashford at Cantor Fitzgerald said:


This funding is another positive step for Range to progress maintenance of 
their rig fleet, and to move forward with the next phase of implementation of 
the waterflood projects.
 