
Leading shares continue to decline as the volatility following the vote for 
the UK to leave the European Union.

Early reassurance following comments from chancellor George Osborne appears to 
be wearing off, and theFTSE 100 has now fallen 88.50 points or 1.45% to 
6050.19. The FTSE 250 mid-cap index, which is more exposed to the UK economy, 
is down 3.6%.

Joe Rundle, head of trading at ETX Capital, said:

The chancellor didn’t say an awful lot, but it does look like Article 50 will 
definitely be delayed until a new PM is appointed – probably November - and can 
lead the renegotiations. In this regard he has the backing of Angela Merkel, 
who has been a lot softer than some of her European counterparts.

The longer the delay, the greater chance of a fudge to backtrack on the 
referendum. This is the kind of uncertainty that might offer a flicker of hope 
to nervous investors. A second vote is not off the table, especially with 
immense pressure coming from Scotland and Northern Ireland, not to mention the 
500 or so MPs who supported Remain.

Any sense of calm is very fragile and the situation could change rapidly. High 
levels of market volatility is expected over the coming days and weeks.

The same companies that suffered in the immediate aftermath of the referendum 
result continue to decline. A profit warning fromeasyJet has sent its shares 
down 216p to £10.97, with British Airways ownerInternational Airline Group down 
37.5p at 371.5p in its wake.

Banks are also being hit, with Royal Bank of Scotland down 28.8p at 176.5p, 
while housebuilders continue to subside.Taylor Wimpey is 15.7p lower at 120.4p 
andBarratt Developments has fallen 46p to 393.8p.

Back with banks and Societe Generale has cut its rating on RBS to sell, saying:

After a surprise Brexit vote, we adjust our UK bank forecasts and 
recommendations. We lower RBS from hold to sell, given that its lower level of 
profitability gives it less scope to absorb bumps in the road. But we retain 
our buy recommendations on Lloyds, Barclays and HSBC, albeit with target prices 
significantly lower, and retain our hold rating and 575p target price on 
Standard Chartered.

But with investors seeking havens, precious metal miners are in demand. 
Mexico’sFresnillo is up 100p at £14.86 and Randgold Resources has risen 520p.

Defensive companies, with overseas earnings ensuring they benefit from a 
falling pound or which provide necessary services, also gained ground. These 
includedAstraZeneca, up 79.5p at £41.11 and utility firms such as National Grid
, up 16.1p at 1000.5p.

ITV continues to fall on worries about falling consumer spending hitting 
advertising, losing 13.9p to 160.5p. But Ian Whittaker of Liberum, a long time 
fan of the broadcaster, said:

ITV’s share price fell around 20% on Friday post-the Brexit vote. Yet nothing 
has changed with the fundamentals and, even if we did assume an advertising 
decline of post-Lehman’s proportions,ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> would still look cheap with a very 
attractive dividend yield. The decline in the share price and the fall in 
sterling also potentially increases the chances of M&A activity.
 