
On the last trading day before Christmas - and a curtailed one at that - 
markets are struggling to find direction.

But one sector is in the spotlight and that is of course the banks, following 
news thatDeutsche Bank had agreed a much lower than threatened $7.2bn (£5.9bn) 
fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/23/deutsche-bank-credit-suisse-us-mortgage-securities-barclays>
 to the US Department of Justice over mis-selling toxic bonds. Credit Suisse 
has also settled butBarclays, down 2.9p at 224.1p, has refused and faces legal 
action.HSBC has fallen 7.5p to 647.7p.

Royal Bank of Scotland, which could face a bill of up to £9bn according to 
analysts, has risen 1.5p to 229.5p on hopes that Deutsche will provide a 
precedent and the fine will be lower than feared. Investec analyst Ian Gordon 
said:

We note that Deutsche Bank’s $7.2bn settlement is substantially lower than the 
US DOJ’s “initial demand” for around $14bn. Although RBS... is not yet in 
formal negotiations with the DOJ – it has yet to agree [a] settlement.. – we do 
see the quantum of the Deutsche Bank settlement as offering positive 
“read-across” for RBS.

On Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay>, Gordon said:

The civil claim alleges mail and wire fraud, but does not quantify the 
monetary penalties sought. Media reports (Bloomberg) suggest that Barclays was 
unwilling to settle for more than $2.0bn. Barclays says that it will now 
“vigorously defend” the Complaint.

Barclays has not yet taken a provision in relation to any possible.. 
settlement with the DOJ, and at this stage it remains unclear whether it is 
likely to do so in the fourth quarter of 2016. If, given obvious litigation 
uncertainties, it were to determine that is still unable to quantify the likely 
outcome and therefore elects not to take a provision then (perhaps 
counterintuitively) this should support upgrades to 2016 consensus expectations 
for total net asset value .. and core tier 1 ratio.. However, we anticipate 
that the market may now price in the risk of a higher settlement cost in 2017.

Although we judge Barclays’ decision not to settle as a net negative, there 
are a number of theoretical upside risks. Members of the UK Parliamentary 
Treasury Select Committee have repeatedly called for UK Government intervention 
to support/defend the position of UK banks vis-à-vis the US DOJ. Moreover, with 
the impending change of regime in the US, it is possible (albeit not certain) 
that there could be an improvement in UK/US co-operation under President-Elect 
Trump. Barclays (and others) could yet enjoy collateral benefit from such 
developments.

Meanwhile Italy’s Monte dei Paschi has been bailed out by the government after 
the failure of its proposed fundraising. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/22/italy-bail-out-monte-dei-paschi-di-siena-rescue-matteo-renzi>

Overall the FTSE 100 has dipped 5.05p to 7058.63, despite better than expected 
third quarter GDP figures for the UK.

AstraZeneca has added 1% to £43.87 as it completed the sale of its small 
molecule antibiotics business to Pfizer.AstraZeneca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> has received an initial 
$550m, and will get another $175m in January 2019 and up to $850m depending on 
performance as well as certain royalty payments.

Among the mid-caps PayPoint has put on 16.5p to 962.5p after it sold its 
mobile payments business to Volkswagen Financial from £26.5m. Analyst David 
McCann at Numis said:

PayPoint has announced that it has agreed to sell its mobile business to VW 
financial services for £26.5m cash or 38.9p a share. This is materially higher 
than the £2.2m or 3p the business had been impaired to by management in the 
last accounts. The gross proceeds (38.9p) will be paid out as a special 
dividend on 11th Jan. This compares to our expectation of a special dividend 
related to its sale of 3p in the current half.

Whilst it is positive to see that PayPoint has finally achieved a sale and the 
price is much higher than management concluded it was worth in the accounts a 
few weeks ago, it should be remembered that this is lower than the price paid 
for the business in 2010 (£29m+£4m contingent) and it has been unprofitable 
during this holding period. Nonetheless, we believe shareholders have received 
an early Christmas present today in the form of an unexpectedly positive 
special dividend of 38.9p: around 36p more than we and most thought would be 
the case. It is also good that another line has been drawn under a long running 
issue for the company, that will allow management to now focus on the core 
business.
 