
As leading shares slide back after Wednesday’s gains, with Brexit fears, 
falling oil prices and concerns about the latest Bank of Japan and Federal 
Reserve actions, there are a few bright spots.

With investors seeking havens for their cash, gold and silver are in demand, 
which has helped push up precious metal miners.Randgold Resources has risen 
255p to £68.65, whileFresnillo is up 45p at £12.57.

Berkeley Group, which has been undermined like other housebuilders by Brexit 
concerns and also fell back on Wednesday after its latest update, has climbed 
47p to £30.01 despite Credit Suisse issuing an underperform rating. The bank 
said:

Whilst we believe Berkeley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/berkeleygroupholdings> remains a very 
well managed business, we do not believe the business is immune to the 
weakening conditions that are being experienced in the inner London new build 
housing market.

But Credit Suisse did raise its 2017 earnings per share forecasts by 2% and 
lifted its target price from £23.72 to £26.48.

Overall the FTSE 100 has fallen 38.48 points to 5928.32, even though UK retail 
sales came in better than expected. Investors are unsettled, not only by the 
number of polls showing the Leave campaign ahead in the EU referendum, but also 
by the yen soaring as the Bank of Japan kept monetary policy unchanged and the 
Fed becoming more cautious on the global economy. Connor Campbell, financial 
analyst at Spreadex, said:

With a rather negative Federal Reserve holding off on a June rate-hike, and 
stating that it expects a ‘slower path’ for any future rise, the markets had 
little reason for cheer this Thursday, the European markets returning to the 
red after yesterday’s dead cat bounce...

The usual Brexit fears are to blame for the resumption of the index’s decline, 
with Brent Crude’s dive below $48.50 per barrel failing to help matters 
either...

The FTSE could well see its losses intensify as the day goes on with the Bank 
of England set to stoke those Brexit-fearing fires later this morning with a 
firmer warning against leaving the EU (the central bank is also expected to 
unsurprisingly keep interest rates on hold). Mark Carney faced a lot of 
criticism last time he expressed an opinion on the referendum, so expect an 
apoplectic reaction from Vote Leave (and perhaps another fall from the pound) 
as Thursday continues.

 Understandably the Eurozone shared the same fate as its UK cousin this 
morning, the DAX and CAC dropping by 1.2% and 0.9% respectively. It appears 
that the Eurozone indices and the FTSE are trading in lock-step at the moment, 
any region-specific nuance lost in the face of the looming referendum.

A number of companies went ex-dividend including 3i, down 18p at 504.5p, 
Mediclinic, 25.5p lower at 860p, and Severn Trent, off 52p at £21.39.

Banks have also fallen back on concerns about Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/bank-shares-would-fall-sharply-after-brexit-city-analysts-warn>
, withBarclays down 3.85p at 157.10p.


 <http://www.spreadex.com/>
 <http://www.spreadex.com/>

 