
European shares have made a mixed start to the day, with the FTSE 100 edging 
higher but Germany’s Dax dipping slightly.

But outsourcing firm Capita has continued its slide after issuing its second 
profit warning in three months on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/capita-shares-profit-warning-brexit-vote>
. After a 14% decline following the announcement, its shares are down another 
6% to 453.9p, the lowest level since July 2006.

Shore Capital issued a sell note, with analyst Robin Speakman saying:

Following yesterday’s full year trading update (effectively a further profits 
warning, in our view) ...we cut our 2017 adjusted earnings per share forecast 
from 63p to 50p, so a 20% downgrade. We focus upon the strategy from the 
company which we believe prioritises maintaining the dividend - through selling 
assets to reduce debt and build balance sheet reserves. However, our model 
suggests that free cash flow available for strategic development and debt 
reduction post the dividend payment is set to remain under pressure. We retain 
a negative view on Capita therefore and would use any recovery in the share 
price to exit the stock. We note that from a technical position,Capita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> may now be looking at an 
exit from its FTSE100 status at the current share price.

Analysts at Barclays slashed their target price from £11 to 525p, saying:

So another outsourcer bites the bullet in order to delever. Is it just 
unfortunate coincidence that nearly all the big UK outsourcers have suffered 
the indignity of having their accounting policies scrutinised, a string of 
contract disputes or issues resulting in multiple profit warnings, or is there 
a systemic issue across the sector? The latter is a function of contract 
complexity and risk - both of which have increased over the years, at a time 
when competitive tension has increased forcing the major players to offer more 
for less. What is also very clear is that big is not beautiful in this market. 
Both Capita and Serco increased their scale and scope through aggressive M&A in 
order to access broader market opportunities in adjacent market areas away from 
their historical core. That strategy is now in reverse.

Sadly for Capita, they are selling the wrong bit, in our view. Post material 
downgrades, Capita trades on around 9.2 times 2018 (post disposal) PE with an 
around 8.1% 2017 free cash flow yield. This is the cheapest Capita has ever 
been in PE terms both relative (now 50% discount to FTSE-Allshare) and 
absolute. On an enterprise value/ EBITDA basis around 7 times seems low, but 
the average across the outsourcing peer group is just 7.5 times (on which our 
revised 525p price target is based). A near term re-rating is unlikely until 
growth stabilises and the strategic fog clears - but neither is likely for 
another 6-months in our view.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently up 9.09 points at 6940.64, as investors 
tried to digest the news from the European Central Bank which extended its bond 
buying programme until the end of next year but reduced the montly amount it 
would buy. Analysts are also cautious ahead of next week’s Federal Reserve 
meeting, which is widely expected to increase US interest rates. David 
Morrison, senior market strategist at Spread Co, said:

European stock indices have had a mixed start this morning. This is despite 
the US majors posting a clutch of fresh record closes last night. Yesterday the 
ECB managed to suggest that a tapering in its bond purchase programme was in 
the offing despite increasing monetary stimulus by slightly more than expected. 
Mario Draghi also made it clear that further stimulus could be forthcoming if 
inflation and growth showed signs of faltering in the future. There was a 
positive market reaction to this (and a sell-off in the euro) as the ECB 
President also emphasised that risks to Euro zone growth were still tilted to 
the downside.

 Meanwhile the post-Trump surge from early November is now turning into a 
Christmas rally. The major US indices really look overbought at current levels 
and many analysts are warning that a correction is long-overdue. But there’s no 
doubt that short-sellers have had a torrid time of late as even the shallowest 
of sell-offs has been met with a barrage of buying. But what happens to bond 
yields is key now. A 25 basis point rate hike next week from the Fed is 
completely priced in. But what is uncertain is the outlook for future monetary 
tightening. If the FOMC’s “dot plot” is as hawkish as it was this time last 
year when it indicated four rate hikes in 2016, then we can expect a jump in 
yields and sharp downward correction in equities.

Elsewhere defensive healthcare stocks were in demand, with Mediclinic up 19.5p 
at 724p,Smith & Nephew 31p better at £11.61 and Hikma 29p higher at £17.30.

Paddy Power Betfair is 155p better at £83.35 after analysts At Berenberg 
raised their recommendation from sell to hold and their target price from £75 
to £83.
 