
It was a grim end to the week as fears of a Greek exit from the eurozone grew 
stronger, with the country and its partners seemingly as far apart as ever 
despite the promise of yet more talks.

Investors were already unnerved by Thursday’s news that the International 
Monetary Fund - one of the beleaguered country’s creditors - had left the 
negotiating table. But market falls accelerated following reports that EU 
officials had discussed the prospects of a Greek default on Thursday for the 
first time.

A little hope was provided later, on talk that another meeting between Greece 
and its creditors would take place in Brussels on Saturday, but time is running 
out for a deal before Greece faces a cash crunch and possible default at the 
end of the month. With any deal needing approval, an agreement really needs to 
be locked down by next week.

Meanwhile stronger than expected US consumer confidence figures revived talk 
of a September rate rise from the Federal Reserve, with possible hints of its 
plans coming at the central bank’s meeting next week.

So overall the FTSE 100 finished 61.82 points at 6784.92 while the Greek 
market dropped 5.9%, and on Wall Street, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was 
down 120 points or 0.7% by the time London closed.

Again after the market closed, ratings agency S&P cut the UK’s outlook from 
stable to negative on the basis on the forthcoming EU referendum.

Elsewhere news that Saudi Arabia had said it was ready to raise oil output if 
necessary sent crude lower, with Brent down 1.24% at $64.3 a barrel.Royal Dutch 
Shell B shares ended down 41p at £18.84 and BP fell 9.2p at 437.6p.

But Royal Mail rose 13.7p to 507p, recovering from a decline in the wake of 
the UK government’s sale of £750m worth of shares in the business. A report 
that it could sell its Nine Elms site to Ballymore helped matters, while it 
emerged that Woodford Investment Management had raised its holding to 5.2% by 
buying another 2m or so shares.

Imperial Tobacco edged up 1p to £32.68 after it completed the purchase of a 
number of brands from the merged Reynolds America and Lorillard companies. 
Morgan Stanley was positive on the deal and raised its price target from £35 to 
£36.

BT was 6.65p better at 453.5p despite watchdog Ofcom proposing controlling the 
prices the company can charge for some of its high speed business lines. 
Investors have been buoyed in recent days for the prospects of BT’s television 
service, following the launch of its Champions League plans.

Supermarkets slipped back following their recent gains thanks to better than 
expected figures fromSainsbury. Sainsbury itself was down 2.2p at 261.8p while 
Morrisons was 3.3p lower at 178.3p.

In the downbeat market Whitbread was down 25p at £50.80 despite a positive 
note from Canaccord Genuity. Analyst Nigel Parson said:

Whitbread’s market leading positions via Premier Inn and Costa Coffee in 
fragmented but growing UK markets leaves it well placed to achieve its new 2020 
milestones of 85,000 UK hotel rooms and £2.5bn of Costa system sales. Indeed, 
we believe both divisions could grow strongly for at least a decade before 
investors need to worry about hitting market saturation. This should be more 
than enough time forWhitbread <https://www.theguardian.com/business/whitbread> 
to build out its international bridgeheads into significant growth drivers. We 
are upgrading our recommendation to buy from hold and hiking our target price 
to 6000p [from 4300p], implying 20% potential upside.

Among the mid-caps Petra Diamonds lost 11.7p to 158.7p after its revenue 
forecast came in at $430m compared to $471.8m last year and concensus estimates 
of around $447m.

AO World dipped 3p to 150p after Generation Investment, co-founded by Al Gore, 
sold just over 5m shares to take its stake to 3.97%. The company’s shares 
continue to languish well below its 285p a share flotation price.

Card Factory fell 15p to 352p as analysts at Nomura moved from buy to neutral:

The stock has risen 30% in the year to date (relative to a 10% increase in the 
FTSE 350 general retail index), and no longer offers compelling value given 
that we estimate it is generating a free cash flow yield of 4.8% for adjusted 
EBITDA compound annual growth rate of 6% over the next 3 years, with some 
margin pressure likely from dollar appreciation. For income investors this 
might be a solid holding given the relative comfort of the return of the free 
cash flow to shareholders, with the company announcing that it will return cash 
later this year (with the quantum to be announced at the interim results), but 
we find better value elsewhere on a total shareholder return basis. In the 
mid-cap UK retail space, for example, we prefer B&M and Pets at Home.

Bwin.partydigital dropped 7.4p to 97.6p as trustees of two shareholders, 
Emerald Bay and Stinson Ridge, said they would place up to 50m shares. Bwin 
said it was not party to the placing arrangements, but they were consistent 
with the trustees’ obligations to sell down their holdings before the end of 
October.

Bwin is currently at the centre of a takeover battle between rival 888 and a 
partnership between GVC and Canada’s Amaya.
 