
Leading shares are slipping back again after disappointing UK construction 
figures, falls in Asia overnight and a decline in oil prices.

Coca-Cola HBC, one of the drinks group’s bottlers, is among the biggest 
losers, down 55p at £13.42 following news that first quarter revenues had 
fallen by 2.7%. The company was hit by weak emerging market currencies and the 
strength of the euro. Analyst Phil Carroll at Shore Capital said:

Overall, a slight miss from a forecasts perspective but the underlying 
performance was slightly stronger than the figures suggest due to one less 
trading day. We continue to see forecast risk as we move towards the seasonally 
more important summer trading months from both foreign exchange especially in 
relation to Nigeria and the beneficial trading conditions from the warmer 
summer weather in a number of European markets last year. Therefore, on a 2016 
forecast valuation of 19.1 times and an enterprise value/EBITDA ratio of 9.0 
times, we retain our sell recommendation.

Overall the FTSE 100 has fallen 35.14 points to 6069.05, with Brent crude 
dipping 0.85% to $47.67 as the dollar strengthened following comments from US 
Federal Reserve members suggesting a June rate rise was still possible. Tony 
Cross at Trustnet Direct said:

A weak finish on Wall Street combined with a disappointing Asian session has 
once again set the pace for London equities as Friday’s trade gets underway. A 
break below the 6,000 level is certainly something that cannot be overlooked 
and that would be the first time in almost three months that we’ve been down 
here.

Looking ahead, US advance retail sales figures will be under close scrutiny 
later in the session as investors desperately need something to cheer. 
Yesterday’s surprise jump in weekly jobless claims across the Atlantic added 
more misery into markets globally so it could be that even mild disappointment 
here is all it will take to lead London’s blue chip territory to within a 
whisker of the 6,000 mark.

Inmarsat, which has been under pressure since the satellite communications 
group cut its full year revenue guidance last week, is down 43.5p to 750.5p. 
The latest decline follows a downbeat update from peer Eutelsat. Morgan Stanley 
said:

The Eutelsat profits warning has significant implications and can be expected 
to be read through to other industry players.

With gold and silver moving higher as investors seek havens in a volatile 
market, Mexican precious metals minerFresnillo is up 22p at £10.97 while 
Randgold Resources has risen 25p to £61.95.

 