
With the Remain campaign regaining some ground ahead of this week’s referendum 
on whether the UK stays in the European Union, leading shares and sterling have 
bounced decisively back from recent lows.

But as investors move once more into riskier assets, gold and silver miners 
are being left out in the cold.Randgold Resources is down 135p or 2% at £64.75 
whileFresnillo has fallen 6p to £12.21, the only two losers in the leading 
index.

Overall though the FTSE 100 has jumped more than 2% or 132.22 points to 
6153.31 with financial groups and housebuilders - which had been hit hard by 
fears of Brexit - among the leading risers. Mike van Dulken, head of research 
at Accendo Markets, said:

UK financials and property are outperforming this morning on the back of 
weekend Brexit polls showing a shift back in favour of Remain. This has 
resulted in a surge in buying interest for the pound sterling and a relief 
rally for battered financials (banks, insurance) and housebuilders as investors 
price in a lower probability of event-risk attached to a UK exit from the 
European Union. Polls last week suggested the Leave camp taking an increasing 
lead which sent the currency and UK equities significantly lower given the more 
uncertain outlook

The weekend news has thus served as a starting pistol for investors to wade in 
and start bargain hunting, re-fuelling hopes that the status quo will prevail. 
And while last Thursday’s tragic murder of Jo Cox look is being singled out as 
a turning point in the campaign, note some of the aforementioned poll data was 
taken before the MPs death. This suggests the swing in opinion may not simply 
be one of sympathy. It could be a combination of this and voter fatigue with 
the electorate tiring of an increasingly ugly debate.

Royal Bank of Scotland is 15.4p higher at 237.5p and Lloyds Banking Group has 
been lifted 3.51p to 68.56p.Hargreaves Lansdown has added 86p to 313.15.

Taylor Wimpey has climbed 11p to 187p while Barratt Developments is 32.5p 
better at 564p.

 Elsewhere GlaxoSmithKline has risen 23.5p to £14.11 after it said its 
combination treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease had met its 
goals in a late stage study.

But biotech group Circassia Pharmaceuticals has collapsed 64% to 95.55p after 
its experimental cat allergy treatment failed in a phase 3 study. Numis said:

This result is both surprising and hugely disappointing given the consistency 
of response on top of placebo in previous Phase 2 studies. Circassia has taken 
immediate steps to reduce investment in the allergy portfolio and will focus on 
continuing the strong growth of the NIOX asthma management franchise and 
establishing its specialty commercial infrastructure in the US and Europe. 
Additional data will be presented on the conference call, with a business 
update due in the coming weeks. Our target price and recommendation is now 
under review.
 