
Leading shares lost early gains as Wall Street opened sharply lower, hit by 
the continuing slide in the oil price.

With Goldman Sachs predicting crude could hit $42 a barrel this year and 
slashing its average forecast for the year from $83 to $50, Brent crude fell 
more than 4% to $47.8 and put energy shares under renewed pressure.

So with the Dow Jones Industrial Average down around 70 points by the time 
London closed, theFTSE 100 finished up just 0.28 points at 6501.42. Before US 
markets opened, the FTSE had climbed as high as 6542. European markets managed 
to hold onto most of their gains, but still closed well off the day’s peaks.

In the UK energy groups were also hit by Labour’s threat to force price cuts 
if the party gained power in the forthcoming election.SSE slid 92p to £15.03 and
Centrica closed 7.8p lower at 261p. Among the oil companies Royal Dutch Shell B 
shares lost 33.5p to 2126.5p,BP dipped 2.1p to 396.55p and BG dropped 30.1p to 
800p, while pump makerWeir, which supplies the oil industry, was down 44p to 
£17.23.

But travel businesses benefited on the hopes of cheaper fuel costs, with 
Carnival <https://www.theguardian.com/business/carnival> cruising 47p higher to 
£30.63 and British Airways ownerInternational Airlines Group adding 3.9p to 
469.3p.

ITV dipped 1p to 212.5p after analysts at Berenberg moved from hold to sell, 
with a target price of 184p. The bank saidITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> faced a number of significant 
challenges in 2015, which have not been well anticipated by the market:

● Online video is eating US broadcast: We have written at length about this in 
the past, and proved too early in our prediction that online video will begin 
to cannibalise TV advertising revenues. However, US broadcasters are (finally) 
feeling that pain, and admitting that it’s only going to get worse from here. 
We do not think Europe will be any different, other than in terms of timing. We 
do not expect downgrades for the UK right now, but we do think investors will 
de-rate European broadcasters as they anticipate the same trends crossing the 
pond.

● ITV’s audience share in 2014 was poor: Not only was ITV1 down, the digital 
channels also lost share of commercial audience, despite the fact that total UK 
multi-channel gained share, and that ITV launched two new digital channels. 
This is a poor result, and one that ITV needs to fix, particularly as it faces 
potentially stronger competition from Five (now owned by Viacom), and from 
online video in general.

● Regional advertising potentially threatened: While Sky’s Adsmart is still 
small-scale in nature (it has run around 500 campaigns), it is growing. With 
P&G looking to buy more of its media programmatically, and other advertisers 
pursuing a similar tech strategy, Adsmart is in a sweet spot. The launch of 
regional advertising, when rolled out at scale, could potentially threaten 
ITV’s monopoly on regional advertising.

● Football rights pressures: With such weak audience share despite the World 
Cup, ITV needs to find something to replace Champions League. It has been 
widely reported that ITV plans to bid for Premier League highlights (currently 
held by the BBC). However, these rights cost around £60m per annum today, 
versus £50m for Champions League, and we expect substantial cost inflation. 
This suggests to us that content costs will rise.

● We also believe that there is a strong likelihood that ITV senior management 
may leave in the course of this year. With structural challenges ahead, we 
believe that the company requires substantial reinvestment in the business, and 
that current management’s cost-cutting approach will not play well with that 
requirement.

Standard Chartered dropped 23.9p to 921.2p as Credit Suisse said the bank’s 
exposure to weak commodity prices could mean it might have to make extra 
provisions of up to $4.4bn, and raise up to $6.9bn by the end of the year to 
improve its capital ratios. Either that, or cut shareholder payouts. Credit 
Suisse said:

We do not see this as an attractive valuation, unless accompanied by a more 
convincing and decisive change of strategy addressing profitability issues. We 
reiterate our underperform (target price 880p) and believe asset quality 
pressures will warrant capital measures such as further equity raising and/or 
imminent dividend reductions.

But GKN accelerated 10.7p to 348.5p after a positive note from the same bank, 
whileRandgold Resources rose 89p to £50.20 as gold edged higher on its 
attraction as a haven in the current volatility..

Shire slipped 40p to £47.01 as it unveiled its planned $5.2bn purchase of US 
group NPS Pharmaceuticals.

Among the mid-caps, AO World added 15.4p to 262.5p following an upbeat 
quarterly trading statement which took in the key Black Friday and Christmas 
periods.

Lower down the market UTV Media added 3.75p to 188.5p after Friday’s late 
announcement it was considering the sale of some of its UK independent radio 
stations (not including talkSport). In a buy note, Peel Hunt said:

A surprise [announcement] on Friday suggests UTV Media may be eyeing an exit 
from UK local commercial radio (not to include talkSport). We suggest a 
valuation of around £30m, although near-term dilution is still likely. But a 
sale would improve group focus, and usefully lower leverage at time of 
ambitious launch ofUTV <https://www.theguardian.com/media/utv> Ireland.

Finally Earthport was unchanged at 45.25p despite a deal to supply some of its 
international payments services to Santander UK.

 