
The chair of the UK’s leading charity that aims to minimise gambling addiction 
also lobbied on behalf of Britain’s bookmakers and warned his corporate peers 
of the threat posed by “a vociferous anti-gambling lobby”, according to 
industry documents seen by the Guardian.

 In a paper drawn up in January 2013 for the gambling industry, Neil Goulden, 
who chaired both theResponsible Gambling Trust 
<http://www.responsiblegamblingtrust.org.uk/> (RGT) and the Association of 
British Bookmakers <http://www.abb.uk.com/> (ABB), identified “a large degree 
of righteous paternalism” which would see the public mood “swinging away from 
smoking, heavy drinking, gambling, non-contributors and tax avoiders”.

The paper came as the non-profit organisation that Goulden oversaw launched 
the largest ever study of high-speed, high-stakes betting machines, which are 
thought to be particularly addictive.


The 2013 strategy, written by Goulden and Richard Glynn, then chief executive 
of Britain’s biggest bookmaker,Ladbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes>, says gambling firms needed to 
learn from the car industry which “is not blamed for road accidents or for 
building cars that exceed the maximum speed limit”.

The paper calls for research “which helps to position gambling as an 
economically valuable and socially responsible leisure pursuit”.

A few months earlier the RGT, which describes itself as the leading charity in 
the UK committed to minimising gambling-related harm, had announced it had 
begun research into betting machines. This culminated in studies that showed it 
was possible to identify patterns of play that distinguish problem gamblers 
from non-problem players.

The RGT had commissioned a team of researchers to plough through 6.7bn 
individual bets at fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs), one of the most 
controversial aspects of UK gambling that provide bookmakers with substantial 
profits from their shops.

Last year FOBTs, which are disproportionately found in poorer parts of 
Britain, generated £1.7bn of revenues for bookmakers.Campaigners label the 
machines the “crack cocaine of gambling” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/02/gambling-addiction-fixed-odds-betting-terminals>
 because they allow stakes of £100 to be laid every 20 seconds on casino games.

Politicians of every party have been alarmed by the rise of the machines. In 
April the government forced bookmakers to put checks in place so that punters 
who wanted to bet more than £50 at a time would need to set up gambling 
accounts.

Critics say the way the RGT is funded – through donations from the gambling 
industry – already raises questions about the independence of its research 
programme.

A Goldsmiths University report in 2014 argued that “gambling research is 
heavily dependent on industry support” and warned “the idea of ‘problem 
gambling’ is politically useful … It focuses attention on individual gamblers, 
rather than relationships between the industry, the state, products and 
policies.”

The Campaign for Fairer Gambling <http://fairergambling.org/> said that it had 
been long concerned about why the “RGT refused to address the key question of 
whether FOBTs cause gambling related harm due to their addictive 
characteristics”.

A spokesman said: “We are worried that the chair of the trust was busy 
devising lobbying strategies for the bookmakers to improve their image when 
this research was first announced. This needs to be looked at.”

The RGT denied there was any conflict of interest in its research agenda or 
that it shied away from asking tough questions to industry. It said it had “put 
in place a clear structure to protect the independence of the research it funds 
from any industry influence”, adding that a separate board made up of academics 
and chaired by a former civil servant set the research agenda.

“We welcome the increased use of our research by those on all sides in an 
evidence-led debate about responsible gambling, and believe the track record of 
that research now speaks for itself in support of its independence,” it said.

Earlier this month Britain’s bookmakers promised to install software on gaming 
machines that would flag up addicted customers.

Such moves have not silenced critics. In December MSPs in Scotland called for 
FOBTs to be banned, and in England and Wales local authorities have forced 
ministers into talks over an attempt to cut stakes on the machines to just £2.

However, it is clear that the bookmakers were well aware of the effects of bad 
publicity with the Goulden/Glynn paper warning that a “negative perception will 
spread like a virulent virus”. It called for the issue of problem gambling to 
be “put in context”, saying it was “dwarfed by problems with drug use, alcohol 
abuse and obesity”.


The strategy went on to say “all products (from cars through to high-fat foods 
to pet dogs) potentially create harm. What society has to decide is what is an 
acceptable level of harm, how do you educate the consumer as to risks in the 
products and how do you minimise the level of harm.”

When contacted by the Guardian, Goulden said: “I had no involvement in setting 
the research questions (the minister and RGSB and the [Gambling Commission] did 
that) nor did I have any involvement in the choice of researcher, the 
commissioning of the research, the presentation or the interpretation of the 
findings.”


He said that in the paper he had been merely urging “the industry to take 
consumer product protection more seriously or face more bad press and a loss of 
government and consumer confidence”.


Goulden is one of the public faces of British bookmaking; he became chair of 
the industry lobbyist ABB in 2012. He had previously been on the board at 
Ladbrokes and was chairman of bookmaker and bingo group Gala Coral until 2014.


He also defended the idea of having an industry executive being chair of a 
charity which tackled the problems encountered by those who used the industry’s 
products. “[Bookmakers] would not have released data or have taken the actions 
it continues to take in prevention of harm without my personal influence and 
urging,” he said.


“I have continually urged the industry to do more to protect at-risk customers 
and to share best practice and to better communicate what they are doing and 
its effect. True harm minimisation can only be fully effective if it engages 
with the industry and that the 100,000 people employed in the industry take 
their social responsibilities seriously. The recent RGT research has given 
clear pointers to anyone committed to reducing harm and the subsequent actions 
taken by the government, the regulator and the industry have significantly 
reduced volumes from the group of at-risk customers.”

In a statement Ladbrokes said it was “proud to support and fund the RGT but 
have not and will not seek to influence the findings of its independent 
research projects”.

The ABB said the research by the RGT was important as the “ability to pinpoint 
problem gambling behaviours and those people that may be at risk of problem 
gambling is a potentially significant step forward, especially when combined 
with other responsible gambling initiatives on the part of the industry”.
 