
Tourists and Gambians are scrambling to leave the west African country after 
the Senegalese army said its forces will cross the border if long-time 
president Yahya Jammeh does not stand down.

As tourists were evacuated amid scenes of chaos at Banjul airport, Col Abdou 
Ndiaye, a spokesman for the Senegalese army, said troops were already at the 
Gambian border and would enter the country at midnight if the deadline for a 
transfer of power passed. “If no political solution is found, we will step in,” 
hetold Reuters <http://in.reuters.com/article/gambia-politics-idINKBN1520OQ>.

Soldiers from Nigeria, Mali, Togo, Ghana and Senegal make up the regional 
force, but it is being headed by a Senegalese general and has the backing of 
the 15-nation Economic Community of West African States (Ecowas), which has 
repeatedly called on Jammeh to stand down.


Related: Are you being affected by the political situation in The Gambia? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/18/are-you-being-affected-by-gambias-state-of-emergency>

The Gambia has been in a state of political uncertainty since Jammeh, who lost 
the December election to coalition leaderAdama Barrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/adama-barrow-gambia-president-argos-security-guard-london>
, said hewould not step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/gambia-president-yahya-jammeh-will-not-step-down>
. He has so far refused to cede power, using the courts and parliament to try 
to extend his 22-year rule.

In a last-ditch attempt to persuade Jammeh to accept a deal and leave the 
country, the president of Mauritania flew in, was met by the justice minister, 
one of the few members of Jammeh’s government who has not resigned and fled the 
country, and went straight to State House.

Jammeh’s official mandate ends at midnight on Wednesday, but members of the 
opposition remained hopeful that he would go peacefully, with Mauritanian 
president Mohamed Abdul Aziz, rather than face war.


 “He’s been calling their (Ecowas’s) bluff but I don’t think he wants to die,” 
said James Gomez, a senior member of the coalition that is poised to govern the 
country.


On Tuesday Jammeh announced a national state of emergency, prompting the 
Foreign Office to change its travel advice and warn against all but essential 
travel to the Gambia.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Gambians flee capital as state of emergency is declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2017/jan/18/gambians-flee-capital-as-state-of-emergency-is-declared-video>
On Wednesday British tourists were repacking their bags and boarding buses 
from resorts across the country,as tour operators decided to evacuate their 
customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/18/thomas-cook-to-fly-almost-1000-brits-out-of-the-gambia>
.


Thomas Cook said a programme of additional flights into Banjul airport would 
bring home 1,000 package holidaymakers it had in the Gambia, followed by up to 
2,500 more at the “earliest possible flight availability”.

The Association of British Travel Agents (Abta) estimated there were around 
2,000 people on package holidays in the country, and more than 1,500 others 
travelling independently on flight-only trips. Abta advised British tourists on 
package holidays to contact their tour operator to arrange return flights. 
Independent travellers should speak to their airline.

Barrow, who is currently in Senegal, will return to the Gambia on Thursday to 
be sworn in as presidentregardless of whether or not Jammeh leaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/adama-barrow-says-inauguration-as-gambia-president-to-go-ahead-thursday-yahya-jammeh>
.

But James Gomez, head of the inauguration committee and a senior member of the 
opposition coalition, said Barrow’s swearing-in as president would not be held 
in the national stadium as planned, but at a secret location.

“We cannot risk bringing people to the stadium. It’s not in our hands; it’s in 
Ecowas’s hands,” he said. “They want us to follow the constitution, which 
states that the president’s term ends at midnight.”

In recent days fears of violence have prompted tens of thousands of people, 
many of them children, to flee the Gambia through its land borders. 
Neighbouring Senegal on Wednesday presented a draft resolution to the UN 
security council seeking support for Ecowas’s efforts to press Jammeh to step 
down.
 See the full visual 
Whether the military will continue its support of Jammeh is unclear. There was 
an increased military presence in the capital, Banjul, on Wednesday, with 
soldiers building walls of sandbags and putting up extra checkpoints.

“This never happened before,” said Robert Gwynne, a tourist from Swindon who 
has been coming to the Gambia for 11 years and who had to leave two days into 
his two-week holiday. “I don’t understand what’s going on. The government 
shouldn’t have let it go this far. This place is going to be dead. I feel sorry 
for everybody here. It’s going to take years for tourism to pick up again. I’ll 
make the effort, but only if I’m 110% sure it’s safe.”

Local hotel staff were worried that their livelihoods were at risk. “I’m very 
sad. We don’t want our guests to go,” said a porter at one of the hotels. “And 
us Gambians have to stay. It’s our country and there’s nowhere to go. It’s 
dangerous. But in three days it will be over.”

Banjul airport was in chaos, full of tourists trying to manoeuvre their 
luggage to the few check-in desks, many not knowing whether they would get on a 
flight. Few were appraised of the political situation.

“We had a rough idea, but the guy who was supposed to have left hasn’t left, 
has he?” said Phil Denton, from Southampton, who was sunbathing shirtless 
outside the airport. “I’m more worried about the airport, to be honest. It’s 
the ideal situation for a terrorist attack.”


Charlotte Burril tried to navigate her bags through one of the snaking queues 
of bronzed and concerned-looking tourists, having learned just a few hours 
earlier that she would have to get on a plane out. She had not anticipated that 
being on holiday at the same time as the planned handover of power would be a 
problem. “We didn’t think it was much of a risk, really. The sad thing is the 
impact on the staff. As long as nothing actually happens, as long as it blows 
over, I’d come back,” she said.
 A group of British tourists wait for their bags to be unloaded from a coach 
at Banjul airport. Photograph: The Guardian 
Nevertheless, the impact of the unrest on Gambian tourism will be 
long-lasting, according to Sheikh Tejan Nyang, vice-chair of a tourism 
association in the Gambia.

“It’s too late. If he [Jammeh] doesn’t leave by today we’ll have to get these 
guys to get him out. I am sure that won’t take long, but the damage has already 
been done. There is panic,” he said. “With all the tour operators withdrawing 
clients, it’s going to be a big blow. Most of the hotels will close, people 
will lose their jobs and be living in hardship.”

Tourism accounts for 18-20% of the country’s revenue. Nyang said he thought it 
would drop to less than half that and would have to be rebuilt just as it was 
after the coup in which Jammeh took power in 1994.


Jammeh was personally to blame, he said. “He is the biggest culprit. He is the 
worst enemy of this country, and he has disappointed the country. People have 
changed their minds. They have had 22 years of dictatorship and they say 
enough.”

Outside the terminal, Jammeh’s plane sat on the tarmac, as it has done for the 
past two weeks, according to airport officials. The president, who could face 
prosecution for the arrests and disappearances that happened during his tenure,
has received several offers of asylum from other countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/west-african-leaders-banjul-end-gambian-crisis-president-yahya-jammeh-elections>
, in particular Morocco, but has so far not taken them up.

Diplomatic sources said Jammeh had agreed to take the Morocco option if he 
lost his court case challenging the election result, but as there are no judges 
currently sitting in the supreme court that will not be resolved until May. On 
Tuesday parliament approved the motion for a state of emergency, which Jammeh 
argues extends his mandate for 90 days.
 President Yahya Jammeh’s plane at the airport in Banjul, where it has been 
parked for two weeks. Photograph: The Guardian 
Negotiations were taking place up to the last minute, according to Nigeria’s 
foreign minister, Geoffrey Onyeama, who told the Guardian that the presidents 
of Guinea and Mauritania had been tasked with calling Jammeh and were offering 
him a “soft landing” – asylum – in their countries.

“We really want to exhaust the diplomatic options,” he said. “The deadline is 
fast approaching, but at the same time contingency plans are being drawn up and 
anything could happen. We really just have to assess the situation on its 
merits at any given time, weigh the costs and the benefits and then [make] a 
political decision as to what steps to take.”

He compared the situation with that in Ivory Coast, where former president 
Laurent Gbagbo refused to accept the 2010 election result and was later arrested
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/31/ivory-coast-brink-civil-war>.

“What’s different about this [situation] is that right from the very beginning 
Ecowas heads of state have taken responsibility for negotiating and finding a 
solution – they’ve been engaged from the get-go,” Onyeama said.

Regional defence chiefs met a few days ago and discussed political, military 
and humanitarian scenarios.

Gomez said that later, when the situation had calmed down, the opposition 
coalition would “invite all Gambians to a proper inauguration” to celebrate.

“We’ve won these elections free and fair and we must protect those votes. It 
is [Jammeh’s] right to go to court, but it does not stop the inauguration of 
the elected president,” he said.
 