
The Gambia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gambia> will rejoin all of the 
international organisations from which its autocratic leader has withdrawn it, 
the country’s president-elect has pledged.

The small west African nation has left the Commonwealth, made moves to leave 
the international criminal court and been declared an Islamic republic under 
Yahya Jammeh, who has ruled the country for 22 years and had vowed to rule it 
for a “billion more”.

But Adama Barrow said he would reverse all of these moves. “We want to 
expedite everything. Gambia lost a lot, so we wanted to make sure we join all 
international organisations. Gambia will be back again,” the incoming president 
said in a wide-ranging interview.

He said Jammeh’s idea of turning the Gambia – a country that is 95% Muslim and 
5% Christian – into an Islamic republic had been cooked up to satisfy hardline 
supporters. “The Islamic state is a non-starter in this country,” he said. 
“It’s a stable country.”

Barrow, a former security guard at Argos and a father of five, used his lack 
of political baggage to woo voters desperate for change, claiming 45.5% of the
vote last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
 to Jammeh’s 36.7%. If Jammeh gives way in mid-January, Barrow will become only 
the third Gambian head of state since independence in 1965.

Barrow said relations between the Gambia and its former colonial ruler Britain 
would be much improved under his government. He spoke fondly of his time in 
Britain, where he worked as a security guard at various high-street shops, 
including the shoe shop Office.

Each year thousands of Gambians leave in search of work in Europe, and Barrow 
said he could identify with them as he thought of himself partly as an economic 
migrant.


He said there had been “a lot of things” that had taken him to London, and the 
move had helped him to establish a business. “I wanted to change environment, I 
wanted to learn and I wanted to establish a business – I needed capital to 
establish that business,” he said.


“I was able to get experience, and it also changed my attitude towards work. 
It made me more hardworking when I came back to the Gambia. I learned a lot in 
England.”


He travelled by bus all over London and was never harassed, he said. “Everyone 
was friendly. People liked me because I was very, very hardworking. In my own 
humble self, I’m down to earth in my own life.”

When Barrow returned to the Gambia to his wife and children, who had stayed at 
home, he established an estate agency and he now owns more than 50 properties, 
according to his nephew. He also married a second woman, meaning the Gambia 
will have two first ladies.

The interview was briefly interrupted by a call “from the Commonwealth”. When 
he emerged, Barrow looked happy. “The secretary general tells me he’s looking 
forward to meeting me later in the new year, and if he’s coming here he’ll have 
his application form [for the Commonwealth] in his back pocket. We welcome that 
idea,” he said.

Barrow said his plan now was to focus on building the Gambia’s small economy, 
which is mainly based on groundnuts and tourism. “The economy will be our 
priority, but everything’s a priority in the Gambia – infrastructure, the 
judiciary, the media, everything,” he said. “But the economy is very important 
because in that aspect, Gambians will feel the change.”

He called on the large Gambian diaspora to “come home and develop this nation” 
by sharing their skills and experience. “There’ll be a big party,” he said.

Although many Gambians speak of their country as “the New Gambia”, Jammeh is 
still in charge until the handover. Barrow has not met or talked to the 
outgoing president since Jammeh accepted defeat in a video broadcast to the 
nation a week ago.

Barrow, who was speaking from a hotel heavily guarded by Senegalese security 
guards, said there would definitely be a truth and reconciliation commission 
like the one chaired by Desmond Tutu in SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> after the end of apartheid, to find 
out what happened during the 22 years of Jammeh’s rule.

“When you get to the bottom of the truth, that’s the time you can effect this 
reconciliation. It’s something very important for us, so we’re working on 
that,” he said.

Gambian president Yahya Jammeh rejects election result
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/gambian-president-rejects-election-results-yahya-jammeh-adama-barrow>
Asked whether his government would prosecute Jammeh for the imprisonment, 
rape, torture and killing of dissidents, he said: “It’s not a personal thing 
against anybody. It’s not personal – it’s on principle that we’ve come to 
government. When we get there, there’ll be a lot of inquiries.”

He confirmed there would be an inquiry into whether Jammeh had stolen the 
Gambia’s assets while he was president.

“We are thinking of a complete overhaul of the whole system, so that will be 
part of it – you name it, land or whatever,” he said. “There will be a complete 
overhaul. We need to correct the system, and when you correct the system you 
need to look into all avenues.

“We don’t want to base our things on rumours, we want to get the real 
information, and based on that we’ll decide what to do.”

 