
At the final whistle, after Hungary had won 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/15/hungary-norway-euro-2016-playoff>
 to reach their first major tournament since 1986, their players gathered in 
front of the goal they had been attacking the second half, behind which the 
most vociferous of the home support was gathered. The ground, momentarily fell 
silent, then players and fans joined in singing the national anthem. Two lines, 
perhaps, had particular significance: “Long torn by ill fate, Bring upon it a 
time of relief.”

There was relief and a measure of glee but there was a restraint to the 
celebrations, the whole occasion shaped by the sombreness of the mood before 
kick-off. There was a minute’s applause for the victims of Parisbut also for 
the former Sunderland and Ipswich goalkeeper Marton Fulop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/12/marton-fulop-dies-cancer-sunderland>
 and for Pal Varhidi, a legend as both a player and a coach at Ujpest and a 
fringe member of the great national team of the 50s, both of whom died last 
Thursday.

Martin O’Neill backs Jon Walters to shine for Ireland against Bosnia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/15/republic-of-ireland-martin-oneill-jon-walters-bosnia>
Bernd Storck, technically still Hungary’s temporary manager, had made three 
huge gambles and had won. There will be a press conference at 2pm UK time on 
Monday afternoon at which he is expected to be confirmed as the full-time 
manager. Storck, the German who had been Hungary’s technical director, had 
replaced Pal Dardai as coach in July, largely because it was felt Dardai could 
not continue managing Hertha Berlin and theHungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hungary> national team.

At that point relations between Storck and Dardai were largely cordial but 
they soured in October when Storck sacked all but two of Dardai’s backroom 
staff and brought in the former Dortmund midfielder Andreas Möller as his 
assistant. Storck said then that as the staff were part-time they could not be 
professional, but there was a sense that, surrounded by Hungarians, he felt 
isolated.

That was the first gamble. Had Hungary lost to Norway, it is hard to see how 
he could have carried on, not as coach, not as technical director. His second 
was to selectthe 21-year-old Laszlo Kleinheisler in Oslo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/12/norway-hungary-euro-2016-play-off-match-report>
. He is 21, had never made an appearance for the national side before, and 
plays in the Hungarian third division for Videoton’s reserve side. He scored 
the only goal.

Kleinheisler is not as much of an unknown as he sounds. He is the favourite 
player of Hungary’s prime minister, Victor Orban, who has invested heavily in 
football, and would walk into Videoton’s first team were it not for a contract 
dispute. He is gifted and energetic with an easy charm but a history of 
behavioural issues. He came through the Puskas Academy in Felcsut, Orban’s pet 
project – and will doubtless be used to justify the state’s expenditure. Still, 
he’s an improbable hero. His goal, turning sharply in the corner of the box and 
hitting a shot far earlier than seemed plausible to catch theNorway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/norway> goalkeeper Orjan Nyland unawares, 
transformed the tie.

Trailing, Norway felt the need, their coach Per-Mathias Hogmo said, to be 
“offensively minded” for the second leg. That seemed to mean playing with an 
extremely high line, which given their central defenders’ lack of pace, left 
them vulnerable to simple balls in behind the back four. Tamas Priskin, the 
third gamble, took advantage after 14 minutes, outpacing Vegard Forren – the 
pair were outpaced by a passing glacier – checked back inside and hit a 
brilliant shot into the top corner. It was Priskin’s first start for the 
national side under Storck and his first goal for 14 months. “When I take 
responsibility,” Storck said, “I take it my way.”

Storck admitted that one of the reasons he had picked Priskin was that he is 
good in the air at the back. As in the first leg, Norway dominated possession, 
but they did not create the sort of chances they had in Oslo. There were nine 
corners, taking their total over the two legs to 25, and numerous crosses and 
free-kicks whipped in from wide, but there was little in the way of 
penetration. “I’m pleased with the qualifying campaign,” said Hogmo, “But 
disappointed we didn’t come to a better level in the play-off.” Only once the 
game was already lost did Markus Henriksen break Hungary’s resistance – four 
minutes earlier he had effectively settled the tie by turning a Daniel Bode 
flick into his own net from a Hungary corner – only their fifth of the game.

“We have a lot of players who don’t play very often in their clubs,” said 
Storck, who played forBorussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> in the 80s and made his 
name as a manager in Kazakhstan. “I told them to play without fear and you will 
have success.”

It will take rather more than that at the Euros. This remains a largely 
average side without a single player who plays regularly in one of Europe’s 
top-five leagues. But a little bit of organisation and inspiration can go a 
long way at international level and, for now, the important thing is simply 
that Hungary will be in France next summer.
 