
Gary Barlow <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gary-barlow> has said his new 
BBC show, Let It Shine, will avoid any of the nasty or cutthroat and negative 
elements of TV talent contests and put a kinder face on Saturday night 
entertainment.

The series will follow Barlow and a panel of judges, including Danni Minogue 
and Spandau Ballet’s Martin Kemp, as they search for a boy band to take part in 
a musical based around the songs ofTake That 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/take-that>.

The show is the BBC’s latest attempt to win the battle for Saturday night 
ratings. Let It Shine will be in direct competition with The Voice, the talent 
show that began life on theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> but was 
poached by ITV in 2015 for an estimated £50m. Both shows will air on 7 January 
and overlap by 25 minutes.

Barlow emphasised that the ethos of Let It Shine was positive, and not about 
making it a humiliating experience for those who did not make it through 
auditions, a common criticism levelled at talent shows such as Britain’s Got 
Talent and X Factor. Most of the auditions in the first episode of Let It 
Shine, which were all in front of the judges and a live studio audience, saw 
contestants successfully it make through to the next round.

“Very early in the conversation around making this show I wanted it to be 
really family oriented and very warm,” said Barlow. “When this idea came about 
of casting people in front of a big audience, which is very hard and very 
brutal anyway, I wanted everyone who was on that stage to go away having learnt 
something.

“All of us judges talked about this before we went out there, that if we 
didn’t necessarily like what they were doing, at least tell them why we didn’t 
like it and how we think they could make it better.”

Minogue, who has previously been an X Factor judge, agreed. “There was nothing 
nasty in there,” she said. “I think it’s attracting a completely different 
person who wants to audition for this.”

While all eyes will be on the rating figures to see whether Let It Shine can 
trump the revamped ITV version of The Voice – whose judging panel will see Tom 
Jones now joined by Jennifer Hudson and Gavin Rossdale – Barlow said he was 
unconcerned about the competition.

“Everyone’s going to be talking about it, I’m aware of it but I think The 
Voice will be the same as us,” said Barlow. “You put your head down and 
concentrate on your TV show and make it as good as you can. It’s the same when 
you’re making records, if you’re looking left to see what Coldplay and One 
Direction are doing, you’re not focusing on your own project. You’ve got to be 
head and shoulders in this. Though I might be checking [ratings] the day after.”

He also emphasised that because judges were searching of a group who would be 
performing in a theatre show for a whole year, the series differed from other 
talent contests. The musical theatre element of Let It Shine is made evident 
particularly in the lengthy opening sequence, which sees Barlow performing a 
musical number he wrote especially for the show, and which features brief 
cameos from the show’s presenters Graham Norton and Mel Giedroyc.

Barlow said: “This is for a job, it’s not someone waving a contract. The 
record industry is very hard now, I can’t ever predict what’s going to be 
successful or not. But with this, I was able to say ‘listen everyone, the 
reason you’re here today is because this audition is for a job. We are going to 
give you an opportunity to be out on the road, round the UK, playing eight 
shows a week to audiences from every city’.”

Barlow gave away few details of what the musical would look like once the 
final five are selected, but said it would be a world away from the standard 
jukebox musicals which he said had become “predictable … people have stopped 
thinking outside the box”.

He added: “It’s a brand new story but with the music of Take That and within 
this show is a boy band. The one thing we were asking people to bring in the 
audition was kind of the 1992 version of us. Not looking like us, or having the 
same names as us, but having the same energy.”

Kemp said that being on the panel had made him consider making a musical 
around the songs of Spandau Ballet, but admitted that recurring tensions 
between the band made it a challenge.

“It’s something that we’ve spoken about a few times but getting the ball 
rolling is a difficult thing,” said Kemp. “We all get along for periods of time 
when we’re away and then we land at Heathrow, pick up our bags on the conveyor 
belt and then fall out. Then we don’t talk to each other for a few years.”

Barlow also addressed diversity criticism levelled at the show, which will 
only be looking for male performers, and said he was open to the idea of doing 
a follow-up version for a girl band.

“Teenagers these days often live a very solitary existence, with their phone 
and their games,” he said. “What this show, and the interaction between the 
groups, does is it teaches people the positives and the challenges of working 
as a team. As an underlying message, I really like that, so I’d love to do 
something again with bands and this show in the future.”
 