
After a broadly-drawn shortlist which featured mainstream literary fiction and 
a novel for young adults, theArthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward> returned to its roots 
with last night's award of the 2008 prize to Richard Morgan.

Morgan's fifth novel, Black Man, is a science fiction thriller, which follows 
a black, genetically-modified assassin, or Variant Thirteen, in pursuit of a 
serial killer. Thirteens are both feared and reviled by normal humans, allowing 
this dystopian vision of the near future to examine issues of human genetic 
modification and prejudice through a violent, tightly-plotted adventure.

The author was thrilled at the award, greeting the winner's £2008 cheque with 
the words "holy shit".

Speaking this morning, a little groggy after a night of celebration, Morgan 
pronounced himself "absolutely delighted" to be awarded what he considers the 
"highest accolade in British SF" only five years after his first book was 
published.

He was particularly pleased to have triumphed over a shortlist with so much 
mainstream fiction on it.

"There has been a lot of controversy about this year's shortlist," he said. 
"It's nice to have won against the mainstream contenders because it shows the 
genre has tremendous self-confidence."

The award searches for the best in science fiction, a task which obliges the 
judges to examine not only the literary quality of entries, but also their 
"intellectual underpinning", according to the chair of the judges, Paul 
Billinger. The panel is looking for an "extra dimension", with the technology 
imagined by the authors, the worlds they create and their skill at 
extrapolating into the future are as much under scrutiny as their prose style.

"Judges woudn't go for ideas over literary merit, or for literary merit over 
ideas," he explained. "It's got to be a combination of the two."

According to Morgan, science fiction's rise is set to continue.

"We live in science-fictional times more than any other time in the past," he 
said. "The technology we see around us now is out of the world of science 
fiction, even science fiction of 10 or 15 years ago. Therefore the science 
fiction genre is ideally placed to take on the 21st century."

Billinger praised Morgan's "passionate exploration of prejudice and identity".

"It is bold and risk-taking yet compelling and coherent," he said, "and a 
proud addition to the winners of the award."

The prize was established with a grant from Clarke himself in 1987, when it 
went to Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale. Other previous winners of the 
award include Geoff Ryman, China Miéville and Amitav Ghosh, which went to Nova 
Swing by M John Harrison last year.

Billinger also paid tribute to Arthur C Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarke>, who died earlier this year, 
calling him a "towering figure in science fiction".

"He was the last remaining of the world's three greatest science fiction 
writers," he said, citing Robert Heinlein and Isaac Asimov alongside Clarke. 
"Hopefully the award will be an ongoing memorial for Arthur."

Also shortlisted for the award were Matthew de Albuitia with The Red Men, 
Stephen Baxter with The H-Bomb Girl, Sarah Hall with The Carhullan Army, 
Stephen Hall with The Raw Shark Texts and Ken MacLeod with The Execution 
Channel.

The other judges were Niall Harrison and Claire Weaver for the British Science 
Fiction Association, Pat Cadigan and Francis Spufford for the Science Fiction 
Foundation and Pauline Morgan for SF Crowsnest.
 