
PG Wodehouse might have steered clear of curse words – "by Jove" was probably 
his limit – butGeoff Dyer <https://www.theguardian.com/books/geoff-dyer> has 
won the prize which bears his name with Jeff in Venice, Death in Varanasi, a 
raucous novel full of profanities that was hailed by the judges as summoning up 
the "spirit of Wodehouse".

A pair of twinned novellas, the book tells of two 40-something men, both 
looking for love and existential meaning – one at the Venice Art Biennale, one 
on the banks of the Ganges in Varanasi. It was named winner of theBollinger 
Everyman Wodehouse prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/bollingereverymanwodehouseprize> for comic 
fiction this evening at the Guardian Hay festival, where Dyer received the 
traditional prize of vintage champagne and a set of Wodehouse novels, as well 
as the honour of a locally-bred Gloucestershire Old Spot pig being named after 
his winning novel. Restrictions on animal movements meant that for the second 
year running, the winner wasn't able to meet the newly christened pig, though 
there was no repeat of last year's early announcement, when Will Self was 
described as winner in the 2008 festival programme.

"Geoff Dyer is a naturally funny writer," said one of the judges, the 
broadcaster James Naughtie. "It's a curious book in a way – it has two 
locations, one in Venice and the second in India. It's a book of two halves and 
it actually becomes a rather serious book – at least it takes on the serious 
subject of our spiritual journey in the world."

"But the whole spirit of the book is naturally comic," he continued, "and what 
is quite clear about Dyer is that he's got a real feel for the absurd. That's 
why we thought the should win this year."

The great thing about judging the prize, Naughtie said, "is looking for the 
spirit of Wodehouse" in the contenders. "Wodehouse didn't say fuck very often 
on the page – in fact I don't think he ever did, and [this year's winner] is in 
a very contemporary idiom." (A quick scan of its pages reveals 12 "fucks", 27 
"shits" and eight "cunts"). But "it's nonetheless extremely funny," said 
Naughtie. "The hero's adventures at the Venice Biennale do make you laugh out 
loud and in the end that's the test. You can admire very clever intellectual 
fireworks but in the end you also need the odd belly laugh and Dyer gives you 
that. We all felt it was genuinely funny, even though it's serious at the end."

Dyer was selected by judges – who also included Everyman publisher David 
Campbell and director of the festival Peter Florence – from a shortlist of six, 
which also featured former winner Christopher Brookmyre's A Snowball in Hell 
and Steve Toltz's Booker-shortlisted A Fraction of the Whole. He joins a roster 
of former winners that includes Marina Lewycka, DBC Pierre and Howard Jacobson.
 