
In my first year as an undergraduate at Oxford - this was 1977-78 - I lived on 
the ground floor of the Corpus Christi New Building, just across the road from 
the venerable old college itself. During Michaelmas term, at about two in the 
morning, I was woken up by a gang of people singing Bob Dylan's Rainy Day Women 
outside my window. They kept going up and down the narrow lane, singing 
"Everybody must get stoned." It went on for ages and eventually I got dressed 
and went out to confront them. As I did so I met my friend Paul, an American 
who lived along the corridor. We were both furious. Seeing each other like this 
meant our fury turned into bravado and made us more furiously brave. "Let's get 
those guys," he said.

On the way out of the new building we armed ourselves with empty milk bottles 
from the crate inside the gate. By the time we got outside into the lane the 
stoners were gone but we could still hear them, more faintly now. We followed 
the sound, crossed over to the college. From a first floor window we could hear 
them singing the same chorus, the same song. If we had been back in our rooms 
we would not have heard them and could have slept soundly but we were outside 
on the street, wide awake, furious and excited. Paul looked at me and said, 
"Shall we?"

Without another word we threw our four milk bottles through the window. The 
crash of glass was unbelievable. We tore back into the new building. As we 
separated, Paul shouted, "Night, Geoff!", as though we had just done something 
exciting and mischievous.

As soon as I got back to my room the awful gravity of what we had done came 
crashing in on me. Four bottles exploding through a window: what physical harm 
would this have done to a room full of people?

In the morning, after an almost entirely sleepless night, I went out to look 
at the scene of the crime. The glass had all been cleared up. The windows were 
unbroken. Miraculously all four bottles had shattered either against the walls 
or the metal diamonds framing the small windows. Not a single bottle had made 
it through. It was like a nightmare where you dream that you have done 
something terrible and then wake up, bathed in sweat, relieved to find that you 
have not done it in real life.

In the autumn of 1997 I went to Durham, North Carolina, to write about the 
photographer William Gedney, whose archive had ended up at Duke University. 
Durham itself is tiny, part of the Triangle Area that also comprises Raleigh 
and Chapel Hill. In the course of my two-month stay I regularly drove 15 or 20 
miles to go to a cinema in the suburbs of one of these affiliated towns. I say 
suburbs but, at night, it felt like driving in the open country, along deserted 
roads in complete darkness. I rarely drive in England so the problem of driving 
on the "wrong" side of the road never came up. Then, on my way back from seeing 
The Ice Storm, I did exactly that: drove up a totally dark lane on the wrong 
side of the road. I had no idea I was doing this until a car screamed towards 
me and, at the last moment, swerved past. There wasn't even time for the driver 
to sound the horn. The car swerved around me and was gone and I was unscathed.

Two years later I travelled to the Bahamas with my then girlfriend to write a 
piece for an American magazine. We had to change in Miami, entering the US 
before boarding the connecting flight to Nassau and taking a boat to Harbour 
Island.

After a few days on Harbour Island we started sniffing around, trying to buy 
grass. The Bahamas is not like Jamaica, where every few minutes someone is 
asking - to put it mildly - if you would like to buy sensei. There were quite a 
few dreadlocked young guys with whom we exchanged glances but we never quite 
approached anyone. Bahamians are big drinkers but Harbour Island didn't seem 
like a stoner scene and my policy in these matters is to be cautious to the 
point of paranoia.

We had been on the island three days. As I was putting on a pair of trousers - 
cargo pants, to use the correct sartorial term - I had not worn since the 
flight, I felt something bulky in my pocket: a large bag of skunk complete with 
pipe. Accidentally I had taken this through what is probably the most 
drug-alert airport in the world - Miami. There were sniffer dogs everywhere. I 
had walked though emigration in UK, sauntered through immigration in the US, 
strolled through US emigration, boarded a plane to Nassau, and entered the 
Bahamas. And nothing had happened.

This occurred during a phase when I was smoking a lot of the skunk that was in 
the process of gaining complete market domination in the UK. The immediate 
cause for my unwitting bit of smuggling was that on the Saturday night before 
flying out I had worn these trousers to a Return to the Source party.

My girlfriend was understandably furious. How could I have been so stupid, 
forgetful? Because I was smoking lots of skunk. It was doing to me what it is 
apparently doing to teenagers up and down the country: rotting the brain. Her 
anger was understandable and not entirely convincing. My forgetfulness meant 
that we now had exactly what we wanted: grass. We could get stoned. In fact we 
had to get stoned because I did not want to repeat, in reverse order, the 
process of smuggling, especially now that I would be doing so consciously (ie, 
conspicuously).

What would have been the consequences of each of these episodes turning out 
not as they did but as, in all probability, they should have done?

In the case of the Oxford incident, apart from the injuries I might have 
caused, I would almost certainly have been caught due to Paul's calling out my 
name. (In the morning the woman who cleaned my room said that whoever had 
thrown the bottles had run back in to New Building.) I would have been sent 
down, expelled. If there had been injuries, presumably some kind of criminal 
prosecution would have followed. So I would have been sent down and I would 
have been in more trouble with the police (I had actually gone up to Oxford on 
bail, for criminal damage, but that is another story). Now, students get sent 
down from Oxford all the time and go on to lead interesting lives. But if I had 
been sent down I would not have travelled abroad or done anything adventurous; 
I would have gone back to my home town and reapplied for the boring job in the 
Mercantile & General Reinsurance Company that I was doing during the nine 
months between school and university.

In North Carolina the consequences would have been straightforward. I would 
have been killed, paralysed, brain-damaged or injured. I might have killed, 
paralysed, brain damaged or injured the other driver. I would have wrecked two 
cars. If I had survived I would, presumably, have faced some kind of massive 
lawsuit.

If I had been caught with that big bag of grass in Miami then, most 
immediately, we would not have had our trip in the Bahamas. I would not have 
been able to complete my assignment for a prestigious American magazine and so 
would have forsaken my fee. All small beer compared with what would, surely, 
have been the eventual outcome: being jailed in the US.

None of these things happened. I didn't get sent down from Oxford, I didn't 
die in North Carolina, and I didn't go to jail in Florida. I completed my 
degree, as a result of which my life options expanded to the extent that I 
ended up becoming a writer who was invited to Durham and sent for a luxurious, 
all-expenses-paid trip with my girlfriend to the Bahamas. Life turned out 
extremely nicely, thank you.

When he was considering promoting one of his soldiers, Napoleon famously 
asked, "And does he have luck?" I have got into the habit of thinking of myself 
as an extremely unlucky person. I could compile a huge list of all the ways in 
which my luck has been bad. I mean, how many times has it started raining 
within minutes of my beginning a tennis match? But these three incidents are 
examples, obviously, of good luck. They are incidents that you would expect to 
have quite terrible, life-shattering or life-ending consequences. It's not just 
that I was given a second chance, I was given a third and a fourth as well. If 
I were a cat, each of these incidents would have used up a life: three down, 
six to go.

As far as I can remember, these are the three luckiest things that have ever 
happened to me - more exactly, the three luckiest things that have not happened 
to me. Thinking of any of them now fills me retrospective dread. I have never 
done anything where the immediate and expected consequences could have been 
anything like as bad. I had a certain amount of random, unprotected 
heterosexual sex in the 1980s and 90s, but the chances of getting Aids was 
minimal compared with the chances of facing the consequences of these actions. 
Put it this way: given the limited extent of my sexual adventures I would have 
been extremely unlucky to have contracted HIV. These three incidents, on the 
other hand, would be the equivalent of having unprotected sex with a 
promiscuous homosexual IV drug-user - the kind of thing, I guess, that might 
well befall someone who ends up in prison in Miami.

I would estimate that it was about 99% certain that I would pay the price for 
my actions. But I didn't. I got away with all three of them, scot-free, without 
a scratch. Did I learn anything from them? I don't think I did. Or at least I 
didn't learn anything that I didn't already know: not to throw bottles through 
people's windows, not to drive on the wrong side of the road, not to carry 
smelly, illegal drugs into the US; in sum, not to be stupid.

So I ask myself the Dirty Harry question: do I feel lucky? "Well do ya, punk?" 
Not particularly, no.

And what about fate? Or destiny? Can one draw a larger conclusion? Only that 
most people reading this could put together their own list of three similar 
episodes. There are a few others who, even by cat standards, have been 
super-lucky, have not used up even one of their nine lives. And there are some 
who are not reading this precisely because they could not put a similar list 
together, because they did not have my kind of luck. Irrespective of whether 
these things had anything to do with my volition they have turned out to be my 
three enduring achievements.

• Taken from the Fire volume of Ox-Tales, one of four anthologies by leading 
contemporary writers to be published by Profile Books on 4 July, price £5. 
Published to coincide with Oxfam Bookfest (4-18 July), every copy sold raises 
at least 50p for Oxfam.
 