
Simon Hatson had been working in health and safety in the offshore industry 
for 10 years when he decided to stretch himself a little further and enrol on 
the distance learning MSc course in occupational health and safety management 
at Portsmouth University.

It was a wise decision. Hatson, who finished the MSc last year and has since 
become head of QHSE (quality, health, safety and the environment) and business 
improvement at Aquaterra Energy, says he feels “like a very different person” 
after doing the course. As well as improving his technical skills, it allowed 
him to reflect on his own decision-making, and he describes the work-based 
project that formed part of the course as the best thing he has ever done.

Industry-led accreditation courses lead not just to a degree, but to industry 
certification and, usually, graduate membership of the relevant body, such as 
the Institution of Occupational Safety and Health (IOSH) in Hatson’s case.

Courses are available for a wide range of industries. Universities now offer 
degrees leading to accreditation in areas as varied as surveying, accountancy, 
public relations, banking and human resource management. Many students will 
prefer the postgraduate course leading either to a diploma or a master’s 
qualification, but undergraduate degrees – such as a bachelor’s degree in 
construction management, leading to membership of the Chartered Institute of 
Builders certification – are also available. Industry-led courses have a strong 
practical element and typically include work placements with an industry 
employer.

Many courses, such as the Portsmouth MSc, enable people to study while in 
full-time employment and offer flexibility about when they do their work – past 
students have been based on submarines and in Siberia, says Portsmouth’s 
programme leader Michelle Juchau.

A number of courses take relevant work experience and qualifications into 
account, allowing for a shorter degree: both Glasgow Caledonian University and 
Middlesex University offer two-year, part-time bachelor’s degrees in 
occupational safety, health and environment. (Middlesex also offers the degree 
on a one-year full-time basis.)

Course content is agreed between the university, the accrediting body and 
employers. Ross McKillop, programme leader of the Glasgow Caledonian BSc, says 
it has an industry advisory group made up of senior health and safety 
professionals, including people from construction, manufacturing, nuclear and 
legal backgrounds to reflect the mix of students on the course. The portfolio 
of work experience required during the course enables students to apply for 
chartered membership of IOSH, not just graduate membership.

The curriculum will change over time in line with industry requirements – 
health and safety degrees, for example, now tend to reflect the increasing 
demand for practitioners to have skills in environmental management. There has 
been a move, says Maeve O’Loughlin, programme leader of the Middlesex course, 
to “get rid of the clipboard mentality” – these days, health and safety 
requires understanding of topics as diverse as law, toxicology and risk 
management.

But industry-accredited courses aren’t just for those who have already spent 
years in the sector. Bournemouth University’s BA in international hospitality 
management, for example, is a four-year full-time degree covering finance, 
marketing and HR, in the context of the sector. The course, accredited by the 
Institute of Travel and Tourism, has close links with industry employers, and 
students undertake a placement year at an employer such as the Hilton, Nando’s 
or restaurant and pub operator Mitchells & Butlers – about 40% of students are 
offered a job with their placement provider after graduating.

Applicants are expected to have some industry experience – students who don’t 
are often surprised to find that hospitality is a “tough gig”, says programme 
leader Crispin Farbrother. Stephanie Banfield, a final-year student on the 
course, worked for a pub company in the budget sector, but the degree has given 
her a platform to “make that leap into five-star hospitality”. Her placement 
year was spent at the upmarket Goring Hotel in London, and she has been offered 
a finance role at the Ritz on graduation.

The beauty of an industry-accredited degree is that it provides a career 
boost, either leading to a first job in the field or improving your prospects 
in the field you’re already in. But it can provide unexpected benefits too. 
Hatson loved the opportunity it gave him for reflecting on his professional 
decisions: “No boss would ever ask you to go away and find two or three 
justifications for your opinion – it just wouldn’t happen.”

A seal of approval: industry-led accreditation

• Industry-led accreditation means the content of the course has been approved 
by a professional body.

• Courses generally lead to membership of a professional body as well as to a 
degree.

• In some professions, you are not legally allowed to practise unless you have 
studied an industry-accredited course and registered with the professional body.

• Courses usually include a strong practical element, often in the workplace.

• Shorter, one or two-year degree courses are available for people with 
relevant qualifications and experience.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter
 