
Avram Grant has faced enough hostile press conferences in his career to know 
that he got away lightly. The Ghanaian media was clearly disappointed bythe 2-1 
defeat to Senegal on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/19/ghana-senegal-africa-cup-nations-match-report>
 but it was relatively restrained in the way it dealt with Grant, who sat in 
familiarly morose pose as a bat fluttered back and forth above his head. 
Perhaps the gentle approach was born of a recognition that this was Grant’s 
first competitive game in charge, or perhaps it was simply that the poor 
performance wasn’t unexpected.

Not since 2010 have Ghana played well at a Cup of Nations. They may have 
reached the semi-finals in2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africa-cup-of-nations-2012> and 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africa-cup-of-nations-2013> but both 
times they ground their way there, helped by kind draws and occasionally 
generous refereeing decisions. This time the draw couldn’t have been harsher 
and despite taking the lead from yet another penalty – no doubts that it was 
the correct decision this time but the fourth spot-kick Ghana have been awarded 
in their past six Cup of Nations games – they were thoroughly outplayed by a 
stronger, better-organised Senegal side.

It didn’t help that Asamoah Gyan was out with what’s been described as “a mild 
dose” of malaria. Without his ability to hold the ball up, not to mention his 
goal threat,Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> found themselves 
being forced deeper and deeper: long clearances didn’t stick, with the result 
that the pressure mounted and mounted until the winner, although it came with 
the last kick of the game, seemed inevitable.

Gyan is up and about and able to wander around but he remains under 
observation and a major doubt for Friday’s game against Algeria, who put an 
indifferent first hour behind them tobeat South Africa 3-1 in their opening game
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/19/algeria-south-africa-cup-of-nations-match-report>
. Defeat would not necessarily put Ghana out but they would need South Africa 
to beat Senegal in the later game still to have a chance of progressing. To 
have a realistic hope of keeping qualification in their own hands, they need at 
least a draw.

Without the injured Kwadwo Asamoah, usually a left wing-back with Juventus but 
a central creator for his country, Grant has been playing a 3-4-2-1. That was 
always a gamble given how little time he has had to work with his squad, and it 
was a little surprise that that decision drew criticism. “For the moment, it’s 
a good system for us but we will not play only this system,” Grant said. 
“Senegal started against us with this formation so you need to be intelligent 
and you need to strengthen your system.”

In practical terms, neither Abdul Rahman Baba nor Harrison Afful offered much 
in the way of attacking support from wing-back, although whether that was cause 
or effect as Senegal overwhelmed Ghana, particularly in the second half, is 
hard to say. André Ayew and Christian Atsu flickered at the front of midfield 
but Jordan Ayew looked lightweight as the lone forward, too often wandering off 
down blind alleys. It’s true that had Atsu not dragged a chance, created by 
Jordan Ayew, wide with the score at 1-0 it might have been different but, from 
the moment Kara Mbodj hit the bar, Senegal were in control.

Particularly concerning was the way Grant seemed unable to react after 
Senegal, having begun with a back three, switched to a back four at half-time. 
The only substitution he made before the 80th minute was to bring on Mubarak 
Wakaso to replace Atsu: the shape remained essentially the same even though 
Senegal were dominating the ball and creating chances, something that added to 
the sense of Ghanaian passivity.

Grant spoke of how his side had shown “good spirit, fighting spirit” and spoke 
of Senegal’s “experience” and “power”, which in itself is worrying. It’s true 
that neither Algeria nor South Africa will pose such a physical test: of 
Senegal’s starting outfielders, only three were under 6ft and five were over 
6ft 3in – but that can hardly have come as a surprise: teams have overcome more 
robust opposition before – it’s Grant’s job to find a way. Equally, it’s not as 
though Ghana are exactly inexperienced. His suggestion that Ghana had done well 
given the “conditions” made no sense whatsoever.

They sounded like the words of a coach who hasn’t yet adapted to the realities 
of his job which, in a sense, is unsurprising. After all, Grant’s only been in 
charge for a little over a month. Up to a point, that’s to do with the 
structure of qualifying, which only finished in November, but it’s also to do 
with the lack of long-term thinking within the Ghanaian federation. After two 
disappointing tournaments under Kwesi Appiah, that Ghana were poor in 
qualifying can’t have been entirely unexpected.

So Ghana face a game they cannot lose against Algeria and Grant is already 
under pressure. Getting out of this group was always going to be difficult but 
they need at the very least an improved performance. Going home in the first 
round is no disgrace; going home having played as they did on Monday would be 
and would raise serious questions about the long-term viability of Grant’s 
position.
 