
Most babies should start eating peanut-containing foods well before their 
first birthdays, according to new guidelines that aim to protect high-risk tots 
and other youngsters from developing the dangerous food allergy.

The guidelines from the US National Institutes of Health <https://www.nih.gov/>
 mark a shift in dietary advice, based on landmark research that found early 
exposure dramatically lowers a baby’s chances of becoming allergic.

The recommendations released on Thursday spell out exactly how to introduce 
infants topeanut-based foods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/24/nut-allergies-peanuts-legumes-react>
 and when – for some, as early as four to six months of age – depending on 
whether they’re at high, moderate or low risk of developing one of the most 
troublesome food allergies.

Peanut allergy researchers say they may have found key to a cure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/28/peanut-allergy-researchers-say-they-may-have-found-key-to-a-cure>
“We’re on the cusp of hopefully being able to prevent a large number of cases 
of peanut allergy,” said Dr Matthew Greenhawt of the American College of 
Allergy, Asthma and Immunology, a member of the NIH-appointed panel that wrote 
the guidelines.

Babies at high risk – because they have a severe form of the skin rash eczema 
or egg allergies – need a checkup before any peanut exposure, and might get 
their first taste in the doctor’s office.

For other children, most parents can start adding peanut-containing foods to 
the diet muchas they already introduced oatmeal or mushed peas.

Instead of whole peanuts, which are choking hazards, the guidelines suggest 
options like watered-down peanut butter or easy-to-gum peanut-flavored “puff” 
snacks.

“It’s an important step forward,” said Dr Anthony Fauci, director of NIH’s 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which appointed experts 
to turn the research findings into user-friendly guidelines. “When you do 
desensitize them from an early age, you have a very positive effect.”

Peanut allergy is a growing problem, affecting about 2% of US children who 
must avoid the wide array of peanut-containing foods or risk severe, even 
life-threatening, reactions.

For years, pediatricians advised avoiding peanuts until age three for children 
thought to be at risk. But the delay didn’t help, and that recommendation was 
dropped in 2008 – although parent wariness of peanuts persists.

“It’s old news, wrong old news, to wait,” said Dr Scott Sicherer, who 
represented the American Academy of Pediatrics on the guidelines panel.

Thursday’s guidelines make that clear, urging parents and doctors to 
proactively introduce peanut-based foods early.

“Just because your uncle, aunt and sibling have an allergy, that’s even more 
reason to give your baby the food now” – even if they’re already older than six 
months, added Sicherer, a pediatric allergist at Mount Sinai Hospital in New 
York.

In Columbus, Ohio, one doctor told Carrie Stevenson to avoid peanuts after her 
daughter was diagnosed with egg allergy. Then Stevenson found an allergy 
specialist who insisted that was the wrong advice – and offered baby Estelle a 
taste test of peanut butter in his office when she was seven months old.

“I was really nervous,” Stevenson recalled, unsure which doctor to believe. 
But “we didn’t want her to have any more allergies”.

Now 18 months old, Estelle has eaten peanut butter or peanut-flavored puffs at 
least three times a week since then and so far seems healthy. Stevenson, 
pregnant again, plans early exposure for her next child, too.

The guidelines recommend:

 * All babies should try other solid foods before peanut-containing ones, to 
be sure they’re developmentally ready.

 * High-risk babies should have peanut-containing foods introduced as early as 
four to six months after a checkup to tell if they should have the first taste 
in the doctor’s office, or if it’s OK to try at home with a parent watching for 
any reactions.

 * Moderate-risk babies have milder eczema, typically treated with 
over-the-counter creams. They should start peanut-based foods around six 
months, at home.

 * Most babies are low-risk, and parents can introduce peanut-based foods 
along with other solids, usually around six months.

 * Building tolerance requires making peanut-based foods part of the regular 
diet, about three times a week. 
Researchers noticed a tenfold higher rate of peanut allergy among Jewish 
children in Britain, who aren’t fed peanut products during infancy, compared to 
those in Israel, where peanut-based foods are common starting around age seven 
months.

Then in 2015, an NIH-funded study of 600 babies put that theory to the test, 
assigning them either to avoid or regularly eat age-appropriate peanut 
products. By age five, only 2% of peanut eaters – and 11% of those at highest 
risk – had become allergic. Among peanut avoiders, 14% had become allergic, and 
35% of those at highest risk.

Whether the dietary change will spur a drop in US peanut allergies depends on 
how many parents heed the new advice – and if a parent seems skeptical, the 
guidelines urge doctors to follow up.
 