
Sir Michael Wilshaw’s comments attacking headteachers for bad pupil behaviour 
are not conducive to finding solutions (Headteachers too soft on unruly pupils 
– Ofsted chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/sep/25/headteachers-too-soft-unruly-pupils-ofsted-chief-sir-michael-wilshaw>
, 25 September. It echoes his highly critical comments two years ago about 
teachers who say they are stressed.

We agree that low-level disruption in class is a real problem which must be 
addressed to help improve education standards, but what is the government doing 
to support teachers dealing with a range of abilities, ballooning class sizes 
and longer hours? The application of consistent behaviour policy, and teachers 
working with parents, is key to tackling this issue, but what teachers really 
need is sufficient continual professional development and the support of their 
headteachers, who in turn need to be backed up by properly trained governors.

How helpful is it to keep telling our teachers they are not good enough? 
Pointing the finger of blame is not the same as providing resources to improve 
practices. It is time to celebrate all education staff and ensure they have 
sufficient ongoing training to help them do their jobs effectively.
Julian Stanley
Chief executive, Teacher Support Network <http://www.teachersupport.info/> 
Group

• It’s interesting to see that none of the educational experts quoted in 
response to Ofsted’s report on low-level disruption in schools has anything to 
say about why children may be doing this. They seem to be taking it for granted 
that children just naturally behave badly whenever they can.

Maybe we could look at this in a different way? I’ve observed many lessons, 
most of them brilliant, but I have also seen lessons where the only thing that 
puzzled me was why the kids were only indulging in low-level disruption, when 
their time was being outrageously wasted by a boring teacher and often – sad to 
say – tedious curricular content as well.

Some schools already successfully involve children in the evaluation of 
teaching. Since this has a hugely positive effect on children’s sense of 
self-worth and personal responsibility (and hence on behaviour), why doesn’t
Ofsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> encourage it on a larger 
scale? Doesn’t it make sense to get feedback on quality from the people best 
placed to provide it – ie the customers? Sorry, I meant the pupils.
Cary Bazalgette
Former head of education, British Film Institute

• Sir Michael Wilshaw has advocated an increasingly assertive stance towards 
low-level persistent disruptive behaviour in schools. This will undoubtedly 
lead to a rise in the rate of children being excluded from school.

The UK ADHD Partnership is committed to improving the future of children with 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. We know that 11% of excluded children 
have ADHD, which is a treatable condition. We have campaigned for children 
experiencing a second fixed-term exclusion to be screened for ADHD and other 
underlying mental health conditions.

We believe this intervention might be more effective in achieving Sir Michael 
Wilshaw’s aims than asking headteachers to get “out of the office and into the 
corridors”. Furthermore, this would provide an opportunity to benefit 
“disruptive children” and those who learn alongside them.
Dr Susan Young
President, UK ADHD Partnership <http://www.ukadhd.com/what-is-ukap.htm>

• What a joy to read about a head who obviously likes the young people she 
teaches (Once every pupil here ended up in prison. Now, without any rules, they 
have a future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/sep/26/school-no-rules-teaches-unteachable-ian-mikardo>
, 27 September). Claire Lillis knows that what they wear has no impact on their 
achievements. She knows that coercion and fear are immediately intuited by 
children and young people. And the results at Ian Mikardo high school bear out 
her faith in the 40 needy boys who attend. Ms Lillis, who is unconcerned that 
children know her first name (often a classified secret) has an enabling and 
coherent educational philosophy. Would that it were replicated – though, sadly, 
far too many couldn’t and wouldn’t risk this today.
Anne Reyersbach
London

• Ian Mikardo high school sounds excellent. Strong but flexible and 
imaginative teachers, and small classes. In some important ways, a bit like 
Eton. It’s all the places in between that I worry about. If you have the 
possibility of what the head of Ian Mikardo calls serious incidents constantly 
in mind, Sir Michael Wilshaw’s concerns about humming and fidgeting may indeed 
seem trivial. Continuous low-level disruption, though, can be peculiarly 
insidious and destructive. Claire Lillis wants to promote “oracy” (chatting), 
which I agree is vitally important, particularly in these times of long-term 
screen-gazing. But the ability to be silent in class when others are 
concentrating, and to enjoy and use silence well oneself, should never be 
underrated.
Louise Summers
Oxford
 