
Nasa released data earlier this year showing that global surface temperatures 
across land and ocean in February were a whopping 1.35C warmer than the average 
temperature for that same month from 1951 to 1980. As the COP22 comes to a 
close, it’s time we think hard, and think creatively, about the way forward and 
start preparing for new initiatives. Building on the impressive successof COP21 
in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
, many political and business leaders as well as representatives of civil 
society seem eager to engage. That is a good thing, but it is not enough.

For better and, increasingly, for worse, our global system of governance rests 
overwhelmingly on territorial nation-states. In this system, each country’s 
government represents its own national interest. No one represents humanity as 
a whole. Such devotion to narrow interests leads to a host of profound 
problems, well known to economists and students of human behaviour. In various 
contexts they are known as “the tragedy of the commons”, “the prisoner’s 
dilemma”, “exporting externalities”, and “free riding”. When asked to act for 
the common good, nation-states are predisposed to echo Cain’s notorious 
response: “Am I my brother’s keeper?”

These decision makers, mostly middle-aged and older people, need to recognise 
that young people have a special role in representing mankind’s interest in our 
collective future. Most of the people currently deciding how ambitious we 
should be in reducing carbon emissions and adopting other environmentally 
sensible measures and policies won’t be around in 30 years. It is unacceptable 
that those with the biggest stake in the future be marginalised. We need new 
blood – and we need it on the playing field, not on the sidelines. Once a 
welcome and effective showcase, the COYs (Conferences of Youth), sponsored by 
the UN one month prior to COPs (Conference of the Parties), run the risk of 
becoming the symbol of the patronising way young people’s views and aspirations 
are treated.

It has been said that democracy is the worst form of government to the 
exception of all others. For many years, the democracy (once removed) of 
nations appeared to be the best available alternative. Today, globe-spanning, 
individual-empowering technologies open new opportunities.Young people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/youngpeople> are ready for a global system 
in which democracy remains a guiding principle, but where other entities, such 
as a symbolic country representing global youth, join actual nation-states in 
the decision-making. Like the characters in the Star Wars series, this 
generation does not care so much about where you are from or what colour your 
skin is. Instead it wants to know what your values are and where you are 
heading.

The time has come for a symbolic new country to take part in COPs and other 
key international gatherings, to represent the interests of those still under 
30 worldwide – just like refugees were finally, deservedly,allowed to compete 
under their own banner in the Rio Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/03/olympic-chiefs-give-go-ahead-for-refugee-team-to-take-part-in-rio-games>
. A mix of scientists, entrepreneurs, activists, heads of NGOs and, yes, 
professional politicians would form the delegation. This “country” could have 
the rights and responsibilities that come with the turf, and play a 
commensurate role in debates and negotiations. While lacking in hard power, 
this country could presumably make use of reserves of soft power unavailable to 
most nation-states.

Inertia and cynicism are powerful forces, so this idea won’t be an easy sell. 
Luckily, young people have some formidable allies: some enlightened 
governments, like that ofJustin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> in Canada, and some of the 
world’s leading corporations have convincingly expressed their deep sense of 
responsibility to the future.

The future is ours. All of ours. Starting next year, let’s give millennials an 
actual seat at the table of negotiations of our annual Conference of Parties.

Frank Wilczek Nobel prize laureate in physics
Victoria Barrett High school student suing the US government for ignoring 
climate change
Paul Polman CEO, Unilever
Natalie Samarasinghe Executive director, UN Association UK
Stuart McClure President and CEO of Cylance
Sigurlína Ingvarsdóttir Senior producer, Star Wars Battlefront
Oscar Isaac Golden Globe-winning actor starring in Star Wars: The Force Awakens
Camille Eddy Nasa microgravity undergraduate
Parag Khanna Senior fellow at Lee Kuan Yew School and author, Connectography
Kazi Ateea High school student and climate education activist
Xavier Niel Founder of school 42 for coders 
José Ramos-Horta Nobel peace prize laureate and former president of Timor-Leste
Gunter Pauli Author of The Blue Economy 
Kristin Scott Thomas Actress
Jan Philipp Albrecht Spokesperson for justice and home affairs of the Greens 
in the European parliament
Emmanuelle Duez Founder of the Boson Project
Idriss Aberkane Entrepreneur and author 
Claire Nouvian Founder of Bloom
Olov Amelin Director of the Nobel Museum in Stockholm
Mathilde Imer Co-founder CliMates and Warn
Tim O’Reilly Founder of O’Reilly Media 
Jill Filipovic Lawyer and author 
Felix Marquardt Founder of thinktank Youthonomics

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 