
When Ken Livingstone made his infamous comment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/livingstone+world/gay-rights> about the 
Tory party being "riddled" with gay men back in February, he ignited a row over 
his choice of words. But funnily enough, I don't remember anyone taking him to 
task on the basic fact. They couldn't really, as it is a fact: the Conservative 
party does have a large number of gay members and supporters.

Guy Black <https://www.theguardian.com/media/guy-black>, the first openly gay 
Tory in the House of Lords, put it most eloquently. He's quoted inTory Pride 
And Prejudice 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781849540797>
, a recent history of the Conservatives and homosexuality: "It was one of those 
strange phenomena that when the Conservative party appeared nationally to be at 
is most homophobic, at the very heart of the organisation were all these 
influential gay men."

This phenomenon is seen as one of the enduring mysteries of minority politics: 
why do so many gay men support a party they may think doesn't (or once didn't) 
support them? (Another mystery, incidentally, is why a Liberal Democrat party 
keenly supportive of gay rights should have suffered so many high-profile 
embarrassments over closeted MPs, but that is for another day.)

The "mystery" was driven home to me when I was recently invited to speak at 
ParliOut, anLGBT <http://www.lgbt.co.uk/> group for people working in the 
houses of parliament. I happily turned up for a meeting in front of a friendly, 
substantially male audience of maybe 40 staff. With the formalities over, we 
retreated to the bar where, to my surprise, it became obvious that this 
cross-party gay group was about 80% Tory.

I spoke to Ben Furnival, chairman of the group at the time, as to why this 
might be, and he seemed no clearer about the answer than me. And it got me 
thinking: what exactly is going on here?

In trying to answer that question, it's worth saying at the outset that one 
has to be ready for complexities, contradictions and surprises. For example, I 
remember spending a day at the home ofLord Tebbit 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/norman_tebbit/profile.html> to record a 
feature for theToday programme <http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/default.stm>. We 
chatted about many issues, including social liberalism, homosexuality andAlan 
Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan> (the first serving 
Tory MP to make a decision to come out). Lord Tebbit has famously robust views 
on sodomy, and once suggested that gays shouldn't be allowed to hold top 
government jobs such as home secretary. Would he be beastly to me? Not a bit of 
it. He couldn't have been more civil or full of respect for gay individuals, 
including Alan Duncan.

So the Conservative party, while sometimes negative about homosexuality in the 
abstract, is perhaps generally well-mannered at the level of the individual. It 
certainly did not get where it is today by excluding people. And maybe that 
kind of personal open-mindedness has made it easier than you would think to be 
a gay Tory.

Matthew Sephton, who runs LGBTory <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LGBTory>, the 
Conservative LGBT group, told me he has never experienced hostility as an out 
gay man at a local party level in his 10 years as a member. In the same vein, 
Furnival speculates that the Tory party's acceptance of eccentricity might have 
made it appealing to many a gay man. It is, after all, a party that believes in 
individuals making decisions for themselves. Or does it?

As I say, complexities and contradictions abound. I quickly find that the more 
people I talk to about the gay Tories, the less clear I get. Is it the polite 
party or the rude one? The tolerant or intolerant? You find bits of everything 
in different accounts.

Duncan – who does indeed enjoy a friendship with Tebbit – thinks local parties 
did have some unpleasantness about them: it was impossible to be an openly gay 
candidate in the early 90s. "The people like the area agents felt it was their 
duty to flush out those risks," he says. He came out only once he'd established 
sufficient seniority to be known not only for his sexuality.

So, why then do gay men join the Tories?

The least satisfactory account is what I would call the cognitive dissonance 
theory. Some people harbour an awkward clash of feelings – homosexual 
attraction on the one hand and shame or embarrassment about that attraction on 
the other. It is well known that the mind struggles to sustain conflicting 
views. So the theory goes that, in this case, the tendency is either to drop 
the shame or to bury the homosexual feelings.

The shameless will naturally tend to gravitate to the left, because that is a 
political choice that validates their self-perception and reduces the mental 
discomfort of the internal conflict. And for the self-loathing, the choice goes 
the other way – a neat way to be less homosexual is to join the party that 
doesn't like homosexuals.

It sounds plausible, and maybe this does explain why certain homosexual men 
drift towards a career in the mid-ranks of the Catholic church; but I find 
myself unconvinced by it in regard to the gay members of the Conservative 
party, who are gay with a capital G, not "men with homosexual tendencies". They 
are not, by and large (or are no longer), the kind who get married to women and 
occasionally succumb to the temptation of a furtive encounter in a public 
toilet. Those members of ParliOut, for example, looked as comfortably gay as 
anyone I know on the left. So bang goes that account.

A second interesting theory puts it down to the aesthetic charm of the 
Conservative party; or, to put it more bluntly, the fact that the party is 
sometimes a bit camp. Certainly it shares a taste for theatricality with many 
in the gay community. And you can detect a hint of gay sensibility in other 
ways the Tories project themselves, too.

For example, gay culture holds a special place for those who put on an 
extravagantly brave front (think Hyacinth Bucket); or for those who maintain 
strength against the odds, or who face rejection or adversity (or their own 
demons) with style. Take the classic gay icons – Judy Garland, Liza Minelli and 
Barbra Streisand. I wouldn't put Margaret Thatcher into the same family as 
them, but her struggle against the conventions of her time perhaps makes her a 
distant cousin.

As I write this, I can almost persuade myself there is something in it, but 
unfortunately I suspect it's a theory for the wrong kind of gays. Those 
programmed with the relevant emotional response are not, by and large, the ones 
you encounter in Conservative circles. The Tory ones fail to live up to the 
camp stereotype, they don't know the words to great songs from the musicals and 
they aren't particularly artistic. They're just ordinary political folk with 
ordinary political interests.

Which brings us to theory number three: class. All socio-political phenomena 
in the UK come laden with the baggage of a class-based theory or two attached 
to them. In the case of gay Tories, there is one particularly silly variant of 
the category, which asserts that gayness is bred in public schools and thus 
fits with Conservatism like hand in glove.

Alas, there is strong evidence that gayness is not bred in any kind of 
schooling at all, but in the mother's womb. And anyway, theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> can't realistically be 
portrayed as the party of public schools given that it consistently attracts 
a 30-40% share of the vote.

While that version fails, there is a more general class-based hypothesis that 
gayness, like the Conservative party, is a middle to upper-class tendency. 
This, in fact, can't be dismissed out of hand. A study published in 2002 of 
incomes of gay couples and comparable straight ones found that the gay men 
were, on average, slightly better paid (9%) and somewhat better educated. In 
fact, the authors' research suggested that, given their skill levels, the gay 
men should have been earning 15% more. A sign perhaps that we are a cut above 
average?

I'd love to believe so. But whether that pay differential is 9% or 15%, it is 
hardly the difference between a middle-class professional and a working-class 
labourer; it's a small difference in a wide distribution. So, for me, the 
class-based theory doesn't get far. The best that can be said of it was 
summarised by Furnival. In comparing the "gentleman's club and working men's 
club, one is arguably more approachable for a gay man". That's about as far as 
I would stretch it.

All in all, it doesn't sound as though I'm doing much to explain the strange 
phenomenon of the gay Tories at all. So what message might we draw? After a few 
days' thought, several conversations, a bit of reading, some writing and 
rewriting, the conclusion turns out to be remarkably simple. Both gay men and 
Conservatives come in many different varieties, you can make only the loosest 
of generalisations about either, and it is thus not surprising that there is 
some intersection between the two. Because gay men are not all self-loathing, 
camp or middle class, or any of the above, you don't need a theory that draws 
on any specific characteristics at all. And the Tories? AsAlan Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan> reminded me, there is more 
than one Tory party. There is an economically liberal one and a socially 
conservative one. You can join one enthusiastically and simply tolerate the 
other, just as people joining Old Labour have to tolerate New. This isn't a 
strange phenomenon; it is politics as everybody has always played it.

In short, when you stop reducing all the players in this political drama to 
stereotypes, the strangeness of the phenomenon of the gay Tories evaporates. 
Gay men have bills to pay, aspirations to fulfil and beliefs about the shape of 
society that drive their party affiliation. The results vary. Even the gay 
Tories themselves are not all one and the same. They, too, come with different 
motives and beliefs. Er, that's it.

It is still interesting to reflect on the mindset of those who stuck with the 
Conservatives in the 1980s; but for most of them tribally loyal to the party at 
that stage, I suspect its negativity towards homosexuality was mostly seen as 
an aberration. Gay supporters just had to recognise it as such, and fight 
against it as best they could while upholding support for the rest of the 
Conservative platform.

The judgment that Clause 28 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/homeaffairs/page/0,11026,875944,00.html> was a 
temporary fault and that normal service would soon be resumed did eventually 
come to be vindicated with the rise of a new generation and a relatively 
socially liberal leader in the form of David Cameron.

If there is a lesson, it simply that the Conservative party and the gay 
community are perhaps more diverse coalitions than most political and social 
caricature allows. The same is undoubtedly true of any group, be it the Labour 
party, the trade unions or company executives. I suppose we must just get over 
it.

• This article was amended on 21 April 2012. In the original, Ben Furnival was 
misnamed. This has been corrected.

• The following correction was published on 26 April 2012:
In an article about the numbers of gay members of the Conservative Party, Evan 
Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/evandavis>, the author, referred to 
remarks by Ben Fenton, the FT journalist. This was an error; Davis had intended 
to quote Ben Furnival, the former chairman of the Lesbian, Bisexual, Gay and 
transgender group ParliOut. We are happy to point out that Fenton made no 
contribution to this article and that Davis would have had no reason to include 
him as Fenton is neither gay nor has he ever given any public indication of his 
political leanings. The Guardian regrets the error (Glad to be Tory, 21 April, 
pages 38 and 41, Weekend).
 