
The official recognition of Impress <https://www.theguardian.com/media/impress>
 as a regulator moves us one step closer to yet another confrontation between 
press and parliament.

By itself, the decision by the Press Recognition Panel (PRP) doesn’t mean 
much. But should this government, or any government in the future, decide to 
implement section 40 of the crime and courts act, it will become hugely 
significant.

Even so, in advance of that law kicking in, newspaper publishers are anything 
but delighted by the recognition of Impress under the terms of the royal 
charter.

They have created their own regulator, the Independent Press Standards 
Organisation (Ipso), which they are determined will not seek recognition 
because they view the charter as an instrument of the state and therefore 
inimical to press freedom.


Now, with Ipso and Impress, we have two press regulators that, on the face of 
it, look hopelessly unequal.Ipso <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> 
regulates a massive slice of the newspaper and magazine industry, including the 
majority of national titles, the overwhelming number of regional and local 
titles and the bulk of the magazine publishers.

Impress, by contrast, is regulating 26 small online news websites, with a 
further 24 awaiting compliance checks. David is pitched against Goliath?

What Goliath fears, however, is David’s sling: charter recognition is a 
threatening weapon that has the potential to hurt all publishers who are 
outside Impress, whether or not they have joined Ipso (such as the Guardian,
Financial Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes> and Private 
Eye).

Impress’s very existence means that should the government bring about the 
introduction of the section 40 provision at any stage, then non-Impress 
publications face the possibility of paying the legal costs of people who sue 
them for libel or breaches of privacy, even if they win the case.

Impress members, by contrast, will enjoy protection from costs if people use 
its low-cost arbitration arm.

At present, if government leaks are to be believed 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/government-backs-down-over-threat-to-press-freedom-bw2r3ckr5>
, section 40 has been shelved for the time being. But the threat remains, as 
culture secretary Karen Bradley, suggested on Monday in addressing members of 
the Commons culture, media and sport committee.

She said: “I have made no decision on the timing of a decision on section 40. 
I don’t rule it out at some point in the future”.

So it appears as if the founder of Impress, chief executive Jonathan Heawood, 
and its funder, Max Mosley, will have to wait to achieve the full effect of 
their initiative.

Nevertheless, recognition represents a big step along the path to the kind of 
press regulation favoured by Lord Justice Leveson in the report that followed 
his eponymous inquiry.

Clearly, the upper house agrees with Sir Brian. The House of Lords voted for 
an amendment to the investigatory powers bill, which was aimed at forcing the 
government to introduce section 40.

That gave heart to Impress and its supporters, notably the press victims’ 
body, Hacked Off, while upsetting publishers and the Ipso chairman,Sir Alan 
Moses <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-alan-moses>.

Several papers carried hyperbolic leading articles attacking the possibility 
of section 40 being triggered. The Sunday Times went so far as call it “state 
regulation of the press”.

Like so much of the newspaper comment on the subject, at both national and 
local level, this was way over the top. Even though I think the use of a royal 
charter, set up through the privy council, was misconceived, I cannot see how 
it amounts to state regulation.

Do publishers really think broadcast news is state-regulated because outlets 
are monitored by Ofcom? Is Sky News’s output subject to state regulation?

And while we’re on the subject of News Corporation, I hope no-one imagines 
that prime minister Theresa May and Rupert Murdoch sorted out the section 40 
business when they met recently in New York. That would be too far-fetched, 
would it not?
 