
It's rare to feel unalloyed pleasure at reading an obituary. There's a spasm 
of joy when one's enemy gets a bad review. But, at closing time, nil nisi 
bonum. If you can't come up with something good, say nothing. None the less, I 
rejoiced to read in last Thursday's paper that Willy Pierce (Dr William Luther 
Pierce to his co-fascists) had gone (prematurely I also rejoice to say) to his 
reward. Ding-dong, the witch is dead.

As "Andrew MacDonald", Pierce wrote the underground bestseller, The Turner 
Diaries (1976). This novel-cum-tract became what the FBI called the "bible of 
the racist right". Pierce impudently used the FBI warning as a shoutline on 
reprints of his epic tale of Earl Turner, the martyr who crowns a career of 
race violence with a suicide bombing assault on the "Jewish capital", 
Washington DC (Tom Clancy wasn't the first to anticipate 9/11 in fiction, as 
Pierce indignantly claimed, after the outrage).

There were many reprints of The Turner Diaries. Skinheads pored laboriously 
over its pages, their lips moving as they struggled with the occasional 
polysyllable such as"Hebrew" or "miscegenation". It has sold, over the years, 
around 500,000 copies: mainly through non-bookstore outlets.

Famously, Timothy McVeigh (who sold the Diaries, cut-price, at gun shows) had 
seven, strategically highlighted pages of the novel in his getaway car from the 
Murrah building bombing.

Even more poisonous was the follow-up, Hunter (1989). Pierce's second novel 
rips off Brian Garfield's Death Wish - a pulp thriller which achieved 
super-fame with the Michael Winner film adaptations. In Garfield's original 
novel, the vigilante who goes on a one-man rampage against New York's street 
criminals is a Jewish accountant, whose wife and daughter have been raped and 
mugged. Woody Allen would have been an appropriate casting choice. Winner went, 
profitably, for the Slavonic hunk, Charles Bronson. The rest is box-office 
history. In Hunter, the vigilante is Oscar Yeager, a tall, blond Aryan. He's an 
ex-Vietnam fighter pilot (why, I've wondered, didn't Chuck Yeager, he of The 
Right Stuff, sue Pierce?). Oscar has a PhD in physics from the University of 
Colorado, as did his creator, Dr Pierce. Viscerally disgusted by "race mixing" 
and the "mud mongrels" it spawns, Yeager assassinates inter-racial couples: by 
rifle, knife, garotte and bomb. Why? He just don't like 'em. Street cleaning.

Two mentors observe Oscar's work and like the cut of his jib. One is a rogue 
FBI operative, William Ryan (Pierce, incidentally, rates the Irish as little 
higher on the racial scale than Jews, mulattos, and blacks). He turns out to be 
a false guide. Oscar liquidates him. The true guide is a Nietzschean, Harry 
Keller (Germans, unsurprisingly, top Pierce's scale).

Oscar goes to racist school with Harry. The blacks are, of course, scum. Mud 
people. But the real enemy is the Jew. They control the media: The New York 
Times, the Washington Post, the Wall Street Journal are their tools - as are 
the film studios and TV networks. Jews (Keller uses blunter terms) are cunning 
and parasitic. They are not, of course, "white". As Keller explains: "Some of 
them may look White, but no racially conscious Jew thinks of himself as White." 
A lighter shade of mud.

To cut a long (and appalling) story short, Harry (the brains) and Oscar (the 
muscle) start a racist revolution with their neo-Nazi organisation, the 
National League (a wish-fulfilling version of Pierce's National Alliance 
movement).

Last week, a couple of louts were found guilty of shouting "Nigger!" at an 
off-duty policeman of colour. They face serious penalties. Why, then, can 
Amazon.com (which will sell Hunter and The Turner Diaries to any British 
purchaser) shout "Hebe!", "Yid!" and "Kike!" in the public's face? Shame on 
you, Jeff Bezos [Amazon's founder]: I hope your shares sink lower than 
World.com's.
 