
Picture this: you’ve been working really hard at school for what feels like a 
lifetime and, finally, your Ucas results are in. Not only have you got an 
offer, you’ve got an unconditional one. You’ve seen the campus and you know 
what the course is about. This is your chance to go back to the life you led in 
the summer holidays, flopping into the comfy sofa and catching up on Netflix. 
Stuff your exams because the struggle is over, right?

The vast majority of university offers are conditional on applicants getting 
the grades required by the institution.The latest Ucas figures show 
<https://www.ucas.com/sites/default/files/eoc-report-2015.pdf> that 
unconditional offers made to 18-year-olds yet to complete their exams in 2015 
amounted to just 2.5% of all offers, however the number of these offers being 
made is rising. There were 12,100 such offers made in 2014; and almost double 
that in 2015 (23,400).

One explanation for the rise is that, due to the removal of the cap on numbers 
at English universities, institutions are keen to fill spaces early. It’s also 
possible that universities are trying to poach good students who might 
otherwise go to better universities.

Lorien Pettit, is a second year student at Wyke sixth-form college in Kingston 
Upon Hull. In December, she received unconditional offers from York St John 
University, Sheffield Hallam University and Leeds Beckett University, (the 
latter if she selected them as her firm choice). She says she’s going to try 
and achieve the entry requirements that have been set by Sheffield Hallam, her 
first choice, but admits that this offer has taken the pressure off. “I have 
struggled with the stress of my exams and perhaps this means that I don’t have 
to work so hard,” she says.

“I am more confident as I know that the university that I have worked so hard 
to try and achieve the grades for feel that I am a suitable candidate for their 
course.”

Truthful university applications: our favourites so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/25/truthful-university-applications-our-favourites-so-far>
So, if you do find yourself with an unconditional offer, like Pettit, should 
you really kick back and enjoy the easy life? Lynsey Hopkins, head of 
admissions at the University of Sheffield, says students need to be cautious. 
“We no longer make unconditional offers to students who haven’t yet sat their 
exams because we like our potential students to be able to demonstrate that 
they thrive at exam time, as they will face similar pressures when they are 
studying for their degrees,” she says.


Despite the temptation to take your foot off the pedal, Hopkins thinks 
students should think very carefully about their options.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> shouldn’t let short-term 
considerations influence them unduly, especially if there are conditions 
attached to the unconditional offer (such as making that university their firm 
choice).

“If students aren’t certain that the place they’ve got an unconditional from 
is the place they want, they shouldn’t let the appeal of reduced exam pressure 
make the decision for them. It’s very appealing to think that grades don’t 
matter and that you can relax. But you’ll be spending at least three years at 
university and it’s vital to pick the course and university that suit you best. 
Don’t be tempted by things being less pressured in the short term,” she says. 
“A more challenging Year 13 is worth it if it gets you to your preferred choice 
at the end.”

Even if you get an unconditional offer from your first choice university, 
Hopkins still thinks you shouldn’t slack off. Instead, carry on aiming for the 
best results you’re capable of. “Partly, this is practical - some graduate 
recruiters still look at results or tariff points, and it would be a shame to 
count yourself out of a future job because you didn’t do as well as you could 
at 18. And it’s also a good discipline that will stand you in good stead when 
you actually get to university and have to take more responsibility for your 
own learning and motivation.”

Is campus life really right for you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/21/is-campus-life-really-right-for-you>
Liam O’Dell, who studied at Redborne Upper school in Bedford, was in a similar 
situation last year, having received an unconditional offer to study journalism 
at the University of Lincoln in December 2014. “At the time I was considering 
the offer, I was looking at what opportunities the university provided, the 
local area, the accommodation, and the course itself. I had another university 
on my shortlist and was able to use these to compare the two.”

O’Dell thinks that an unconditional offer can mean the best of both worlds - 
the security of having a guaranteed place at university and the chance to 
achieve the best you can in your exams. After receiving the offer he was still 
determined to do well in his A-levels and he went on to get one A*, two A 
grades and a distinction. “While I appreciate more emphasis is placed on a 
degree, A-levels are still important and can be looked at by a potential 
employer. The guarantee of a place through the unconditional offer certainly 
didn’t stop me from putting the effort in.”


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 