
The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) will spend £15m 
on natural flood management projects, the environment secretary has announced.

On Thursday, Andrea Leadsom confirmed to parliament that, although flood 
defences such as concrete barriers are “very important”, natural flood 
management is “vital” as well.


In response to a question from former environment minister Richard Benyon, who 
took a keen interest in water management issues during his time in office, 
Leadsom said Defra would invest £15m to further its natural flood management 
approaches.

The money was allocated as part of the Autumn Statement on 23 November.

Natural flood management had already been promised as a major part of 
England’s catchment management plans, including measures such as tree planting, 
blanket bog restoration, allowing rivers to meander and bank management, as 
well as high street pumps and highways engineers looking at drainage.

But critics have repeatedly called for proper funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/21/uk-government-not-funding-natural-flood-prevention-methods>
 and a more holistic approach. During its ongoing national flood resilience 
review, Defra received a range of evidence including on theimportance of 
natural approaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/natural-measures-must-be-key-to-uk-flood-protection-mps-urge>
.

More recently the environment, farming and rural affairs committee asked Defra 
to commission a large trial to gauge theeffectiveness of natural flood risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/natural-flood-protection-defends-homes-against-storm-angus>
 management approaches such as the instillation of leaky dams, tree planting 
and improved soil management.

Defra said details of how and when the funding will be used will come “in due 
course ... but it is worth noting already many of our flood defence investment 
covers projects using natural flood management measures”.

Friends of the Earth climate campaigner Guy Shrubsole said it was “fantastic 
news”, which communities, scientists and campaigners have been asking for for 
years.

“It is of course only just the start – the prospect of dangerous climate 
change demands we urgently slash the carbon emissions driving up flooding, as 
well as radically rethinking our relationship to the land. Next, the government 
must drastically reform farm subsidies; ending hand-outs to landowners who keep 
our uplands bare of trees, and instead pay farmers to provide public goods, 
like reducing flooding.”

Angela Francis, senior economist at Green Alliance, said the new money should 
used as an innovation fund to support catchment-scale trials of natural 
management approaches. “This is the only way we can understand how cost 
effective it could be in preventing and managing floods.”
 