
On 1 November 1911, during Italy’s campaign to capture Libya from the 
Ottomans, Giulio Gavotti, an Italian aviator, decided, apparently on his own 
initiative, to drop a bomb on Arab fighters at an oasis close to Tripoli. On31 
October 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/31/nato-ends-libya-rasmussen>, Nato 
ended its bombing campaign against Gaddafi by dropping bombs on the same oasis. 
Thus the French philosopher and historian Thomas Hippler neatly bookends his 
century-long story (nicely translated by David Fernbach) of the theory and 
practice of aerial warfare.

Related: Guns for hire in Hereford: inside England's unlikely global security 
hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/10/hereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict>

The prescient HG Wells got there a couple of years before Gavotti. The War in 
the Air, his 1908 novel, foresaw destructive air power dominating a coming 
world war. When Blériot made his pioneering cross-channel flight from Calais to 
Dover, Wells wrote to the Daily Mail lamenting that the invulnerability of 
Britain as an island nation was lost. As a youngster besotted with Wells’s 
science fiction, I preferred his more utopianThe Shape of Things to Come 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/shape-of-things-to-come.html>, which 
envisioned a world government policed by the air power of a benevolent 
dictatorship. Either way, Wells did better than most other futurologists, as 
Hippler’s history makes clear.

At the beginning of the first world war, planes were used for reconnaissance 
over enemy lines, but it wasn’t long before their potential as bombers was 
recognised. The response to bombers was the development of fighter planes, 
whose pilots rapidly achieved a romantic aura, their personal skills and 
bravery so different from the anonymous mud and slaughter of the trenches – 
think of the “Red Baron” Manfred von Richthofen. Futurists such as Marinetti 
embraced the fighter pilots as modern knights of the air, with their own codes 
of chivalry – an aura that continues even today to surround the Spitfire and 
Hurricane pilots as the Few who won the 1940 battle of Britain.

The reality for most was far from chivalrous, though. Between the two world 
wars, the leading colonial powers, notably Britain and France, used air power 
principally to suppress colonial insurgencies. In the 1920s the RAF, with the 
enthusiastic support of Churchill, bombed and gassed Kurdish rebels in Iraq, 
and the French bombed Damascus. In 1921 the British even bombed the Irish 
republicans. This was asymmetric warfare; the air warriors of the 
technologically advanced colonial forces were almost invulnerable to the 
weaponry available to the colonised. Imperial control, the military strategists 
argued in the 30s, could be achieved from the air without need for boots on the 
ground. Sound familiar?

Air power soon came home from the colonised to the colonialists. It was above 
all the bombers that made 1939‑45 a people’s war, for Germany as for Britain. 
How to use the bombers most effectively was the subject of much debate among 
the tacticians on both sides. Military theorists argued that massive bombing 
campaigns could destroy the enemy’s infrastructure and demoralise the 
population. Hippler considers the role of Arthur “Bomber” Harris with his 
insistence on the destruction of German cities, but misses the political fight 
that led up to the decision on where to focus. The mathematical modellers who 
were developing the infant science of Operations Research argued that targeting 
railways and communication hubs was the most effective use of the bombers, but 
Harris had the ear of Churchill’s adviser Lord Cherwell and won the day. 
Saturation bombing of Cologne, Hamburg and then Dresden followed. And if 
100-bomber raids didn’t achieve their goal, then a thousand bombers might. The 
resulting firestorms killed more than did the atom bomb at Hiroshima. But 
Harris was wrong: far from demoralising the population, mass bombing only 
strengthened solidarity. The OR specialists were wrong, too – bombing was so 
imprecise that only a small fraction came anywhere near their intended targets. 
Those of us old enough to recall the scattered bomb sites of postwar London can 
testify to that.

By transforming the nature of war, Hippler argues, using the terminology of 
Michel Foucault, air power made possible a new form of governance. Where once 
wars were fought between armies, sparing most non-combatants, now, with the 
bombers, everyone had become vulnerable. When the general population rather 
than just the troops are targeted, war changes from one between states to one 
between the peoples of those states. Across the century of air war, although 
the exact figures are hard to calculate and much disputed, the ratio of 
non-combatant civilians to military killed has dramatically shifted.

Where once wars were fought between armies, now, with the bombers, everyone 
had become vulnerable

For many years after 1945, air power reverted to its earlier use in asymmetric 
warfare, above all in the US strategy of carpet bombing and defoliation of 
Vietnam. The 6,800kg “daisy cutter” bombs could flatten the forest within a 
radius of 1,700 metres. But only in 1982 were bombs once again dropped on a 
modern city – by the Israelis on Beirut. When I was there soon after, the 
vulnerability of steel-framed high-rise buildings to the new weaponry was 
obvious; the concrete floors collapsed, one on top of another, forming a 
multilayered sandwich. Such damage is now seen every day on our TV screens as 
Russian bombers target Aleppo and British-supplied Saudi planes pulverise Yemen.

Bombs have got smarter over the last decades, offering pilots sitting 
invulnerably, tens of thousand feet above the enemy, hitherto undreamed of 
precision in their targeting, as in the US’s “shock and awe” campaign in Iraq. 
But despite the confident predictions of the politicians, even the smartest air 
power alone has not proved sufficient. American, French, British and Russian 
boots are once more on the ground in the war-torn Middle East.

The newest manifestation of air power is the drone, the epitome of asymmetric 
war. Hippler describes Obama’s weekly White House meetings, known as “Bloody 
Thursday” at which the president personally approves the list of targets and 
people to kill in the following week – though it is the CIA that runs most of 
the US drones. There is no romantic role for the pilots in this profoundly 
alienated form of warfare, as they are comfortably seated thousands of miles 
away from the combat zone – although apparently they suffer from a high rate of 
stress and burn-out.

The drones have a twofold function: as well as their hunter-killer role in a 
global counter-insurgency campaign, they offer unparalleled powers of 
surveillance, a modern panopticon in which our every action is visible to the 
eyes in the sky: governance, literally from above. Wells’s shape of things to 
come has become our everyday life, though not quite in the form he envisioned. 
Rather than the benevolent dictatorship of a world government, our governance 
is in the hands of a far from benevolent global superpower and its allies among 
the world’s 1%. Hippler’s book tells an important part of the story of how we 
have arrived at this dystopia.

• Governing from the Skies is published by Verso. To order a copy for £12.74 
(RRP £14.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/governing-from-the-skies.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99. To order Governing from the Skies for £12.74 go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846.
 