
The government is to rush through legislation to close the “iPlayer loophole”, 
which allows people to watchBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> shows 
on catchup services without having a TV licence.

In a speech on Wednesday, culture secretary John Whittingdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-whittingdale> also asked whether 
popular BBC1 programmes such as Strictly Come Dancing were “distinctive” enough 
and launched a new initiative on the devastating impact of adblockers on the 
newspaper industry.

After the speech at the Oxford Media Convention, Whittingdale said closing the 
loophole could not wait for legislation was passed to renew the BBC’s royal 
charter by the end of the year. Instead, it would be done “as soon as 
practicable” through secondary legislation that could be put before parliament 
as early as this summer.

Report urges end to 94 years of BBC self-regulation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/bbc-regulation-ofcom-trust-david-clementi>
“The BBC works on the basis that all who watch it pay for it. Giving a free 
ride to those who enjoy Sherlock or Bake Off an hour, a day or a week after 
they are broadcast was never intended and is wrong,” he told the Oxford Media 
Convention.

The offer to close the loophole, which already costs the BBC some £150m a year 
– a figure that is likely to increase – was made during negotiations with the 
BBC last summer that also saw the corporation agree to shoulder the £750m 
burden of free licence fees for the over-75s.

The white paper outlining the government’s views on charter renewal is due to 
be published this spring, but Whittingdale made little reference to its timing 
on Wednesday.

He also indicated that the white paper would welcome any attempts to make BBC 
programming more distinctive.


“On distinctiveness, there is no doubt that at its best the BBC makes 
programmes which no one else would do,” he said, citing programmes such as 
BBC1’s The Night Manager and the forthcoming new Ben Elton comedy about 
Shakespeare: Upstart Crow.


“But I also agree with the director general’s aim “to create a BBC that is 
more distinctive than ever – and clearly distinguishable from the market”.

Having previously been criticised for questioning whether the BBC should be 
showing The Voice or Strictly Come Dancing, Whittingdale said it was up to the 
BBC and future regulators to decide which programmes were distinctive enough.

Speaking afterwards he said: “Whether or not Strictly or Bake Off or other 
programmes are too removed or absolutely distinctive, that is for the judgment 
of whoever will have the task of assessing BBC programming.”

His remarks follow a report on the market impact of the BBC produced by Oliver 
& Ohlbaum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/bbc1-radio-1-radio-2-bbc-dcms> 
and commissioned by the Department for Culture, Media & Sport that suggested 
entertainment shows were costing commercial rivals some £115m a year in 
revenues.

Whittingdale kept Channel 4 in limbo but indicated that any plans to sell off 
the state-owned commercially funded broadcaster would need to continue its 
public service remit, telling the audience: “We are looking at the future of C4 
particularly with a view to ensuring that its remit continues.”

Responding to Whittingdale’s speech, the shadow secretary of state for 
culture, media and sport, Maria Eagle, said: “The secretary of state seems more 
concerned about helping the BBC’s commercial rivals than in helping the 
corporation satisfy its audiences and meet its public service obligations.”

She added: “What the culture secretary has called for today jars completely 
with what the British public want from the BBC. He must stop lecturing the BBC 
about what content it should and should not be producing.


“The results of consultation on the future of the BBC have again shown how 
highly the public value the corporation’s distinctive programming, and that 
they want to see it remain funded by the licence fee and independent of 
government.

“So the culture secretary must stop acting simply as a cheerleader for the 
BBC’s commercial rivals and start standing up for audiences who want to see the 
BBC continue to produce high-quality content.”
 