
Primark, Tesco and Marks & Spencer were among 20 retailers summoned to a UK 
government summit as ministers sought steps to prevent a repeat of theRana Plaza
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rana-plaza> factory collapse in Bangladesh 
that killed over 1,000 people.

The government wants to use its muscle to help drive up standards in factories 
supplying UK retailers after the disaster at a complex that supplied clothing 
bought by British shoppers.

About 20 retailers, including Primark, which bought clothing from a factory 
within Rana Plaza, Tesco, Marks & Spencer and Topshop's owner, Arcadia, were 
called into theDepartment for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 on Wednesday to discuss how to avoid another catastrophe in future.

Justine Greening <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening>, the 
secretary of state for international development, and the cabinet minister Alan 
Duncan hosted a "frank" and "robust" discussion about how clothing could be 
produced responsibly.

Greening said: "Bangladesh's tragic factory collapse earlier this year was a 
wake-up call about the urgent need to improve safety standards for employees in 
developing countries."

One idea raised at the meeting was a quality assurance scheme similar to the 
Kitemark, which would help shoppers identify products made with the best 
ethical standards. The DfID also offered to help provide social, political and 
economic insight for retailers to help them invest responsibly in developing 
countries, which could work alongside government aid projects.

The UK has donated £18m towards safety and skills training for Bangladeshi 
factory workers and the government is also offering technical support and 
advice on standards. Greening said Wednesday's meeting was the "beginning of a 
process" to encourage retailers to use their influence to help bring about 
change.

The pressure group Labour Behind the Label welcomed government involvement in 
the debate on how to improve labour conditions in factories supplying goods to 
Britain.

But Anna McMullen, a campaigner, said any guarantee of ethical standards, such 
as a Kitemark, would be difficult to implement in the short term because of the 
prevalence of poor conditions in factories producing clothing in developing 
countries. She said suggesting that some factories were good was not giving an 
accurate picture to shoppers because these benchmarks were only likely to 
relate to a generally poor standard.

McMullen added: "Government does have a role to play in laying down standards 
for British businesses but this needs to be done in consultation with workers, 
unions and people who have an interest in human rights."

Retailers have already begun to make changes to the way they monitor clothing 
factories that supply them in the wake of several factory fires inBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> and the Rana Plaza disaster in 
April. The building collapsed after the owners built two additional floors 
without permission, while inspectors continued to allow the business to operate.

The incident involved manufacturers working for up to 40 companies, including 
Primark <https://www.theguardian.com/business/primark> and the British 
retailers Matalan and Bonmarché. Before the collapse of Rana Plaza, no retailer 
was checking the structural integrity of their suppliers' buildings. Now, more 
than 50 brands have signed up to a legally binding building safety agreement 
backed by the international trade union IndustriALL and the Bangladeshi 
government.

Under the deal, brands including H&M and Marks & Spencer, as well as Primark, 
have each agreed to contribute up to $500,000 (£325,000) a year towards 
rigorous independent factory inspections and the installation of fire safety 
measures.

Andrew Opie, the director of food and sustainability policy for the industry 
trade association the British Retail Consortium, who attended the meeting at 
the DfID, said: "It was a very positive meeting and a great opportunity to see 
how we can harness the best of international aid together with investment from 
retailers around the rights of workers but also on issues of development and 
job creation in developing countries."
 