
Graham Gibbons, the leading jockey on the all-weather circuit this winter, has 
agreed to stand himself down “with immediate, indefinite effect” pending an 
inquiry into an incident at Kempton Park on Wednesday evening when he is 
alleged to have swapped a urine sample with one provided by a fellow jockey, 
Callum Shepherd.

Gibbons, who has a record of offences and suspensions related to alcohol, and 
Shepherd, an apprentice rider, were among at least 10 jockeys randomly selected 
to provide a sample by aBritish Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority> drug-testing 
team.

The local stewards subsequently inquired into “a report from the clerk of the 
scales that Graham Gibbons had substituted the urine sample he was required to 
produce with that of another rider, Callum Shepherd”, and sent a report to the 
BHA’s head office in London for further consideration.

Graham Gibbons is back on Hoof It and in search of Group One redemption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/02/graham-gibbons-hoof-it> 
A statement on the incident issued by the Professional Jockeys’ Association 
(PJA) on Thursday afternoon suggests Shepherd initially agreed to exchange 
samples with Gibbons, but then assisted the racecourse officials in holding an 
inquiry into the “sampling irregularity”.

“Callum made a serious error of judgment,” Paul Struthers, the PJA chief 
executive, said, “but to his credit very quickly took steps to correct that 
error, which ultimately led to the stewards’ inquiry into the matter, to which 
he gave candid evidence.

“The PJA can also confirm Graham Gibbons has stood himself down with 
immediate, indefinite effect. The PJA is in touch with both jockeys and will 
provide all the necessary support. They have been assigned legal representation 
and will co-operate fully with the investigation.”

Gibbons has been a leading rider on the northern circuit in particular for 
more than a decade and was on course to record his best season in the saddle 
with 93 winners so far in 2016, only five short of his total in 2013. He was 
leading the all-weather jockeys’ championship this winter. His big-race winners 
include Ajaya, in the Group Two Gimcrack Stakes at York in 2015, and Always 
Hopeful in the Group Two Richmond Stakes at Glorious Goodwood in 2005.

However, he was the first jockey to record a positive breath test for alcohol 
which exceeded the legal drink-drive limit when he failed a breathalyser before 
a meeting at Hamilton Park in 2007. He was banned for 35 days as a result.

Gibbons was also banned from driving for four years in 2011 after being found 
asleep in his car outside his house, having been reported to the police for 
appearing drunk after leaving a pub and driving away. In April 2013 he was 
arrested at Wolverhampton racecourse by officers from West Midlands police 
after he failed to attend Scarborough magistrates court three days earlier to 
answer a charge of being drunk and disorderly.

Had Gibbons not decided to stand down, it seems likely the BHA would have 
suspended his jockey’s licence pending a hearing. A decision on whether he 
would be allowed to continue riding had been expected before Friday’s 
all-weather meeting at Newcastle, where Gibbons had booked rides in seven of 
the eight races on the card.

“The BHA cannot comment further regarding the incident at present as it is an 
ongoing investigation,” Robin Mounsey, the BHA’s media manager, said on 
Thursday. “However, this is clearly an issue that we are taking very seriously 
and we will be taking the necessary steps to progress this matter.”

The BHA has significantly increased the number of jockeys selected for breath 
and urine tests for alcohol in 2016, with the total expected to rise to 2,000 
breath tests and up to 450 urine samples this year from about 1,000 and 300 
respectively in 2015.

When a BHA testing team attend a meeting, they require a breath test from 
every jockey due to ride on the card, while 10 riders are also randomly 
selected and asked to provide urine samples.
 