
Rule The World, last month’s Grand National winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/grand-national-rule-the-world-mouse-morris-aintree>
, has been retired at the unusually young age of nine. The gelding is reported 
to be in excellent health but his owner, Michael O’Leary of Ryanair fame, has 
decided he has earned an early retirement.

“He’s perfectly sound, which is the main thing,” reported Eddie O’Leary, 
Michael’s brother, who manages his Gigginstown racing operation. “Because of 
his previous pelvic injuries, we didn’t want to send him back to Aintree with a 
big weight, that wouldn’t have been fair on him. He provided us with our first
Grand National <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> and we’ll 
never forget him. Now he can go back to Gigginstown House and have a happy 
retirement.”

Emotional trainer Mouse Morris wins the Grand National after year of tragedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/grand-national-rule-the-world-mouse-morris-aintree>
Michael O’Leary had indicated in the press conference immediately after the 
National that retirement was a possibility for Rule The World. “He has done 
everything he can for Gigginstown,” the owner said at the time. The horse was 
tried in a Grade One contest at the Punchestown festival a fortnight after 
Aintree and fared respectably before tiring into sixth place of nine.

The Mouse Morris-trained Rule The World was an unheralded 33-1 shot when 
achieving his moment of glory in Liverpool. He had never won a race over 
steeplechase fences and may be the only Grand National winner never to win 
another chase. He was the first novice chaser to take the Aintree prize since 
1958.

Almost any other racehorse owner, having the good fortune to own a National 
winner, would wish to press on in pursuit of other big days. But it has been 
hard, in recent years, for National heroes to win other races, partly because 
they are given so much extra weight to carry in handicaps. O’Leary is blessed 
with dozens of talented jump racers and is therefore in a position to retire a 
horse such as Rule The World without significantly depleting his stock of 
talent for the next jumps season. His other horses include the Irish National 
winner, Rogue Angel, and Apple’s Jade, who won by 41 lengths at Aintree. 
However, his Gold Cup winner, Don Cossack, will be sidelined for the next year 
by a tendon injury and may also have run his last race.
 