
Aintree is on edge before Saturday’s Grand National after two horses suffered 
fatal injuries at Becher’s Brook. These were only the second and third deaths 
in three years resulting from a fall over theGrand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> course.

Gullinbursti, trained by Emma Lavelle and ridden by Gavin Sheehan, was killed 
during the Topham Steeple Chase. Minella Reception was also treated by vets 
after a fall at the same fence and was taken to the racecourse stables for 
further assessment and had to be put down.

These are the first horses to die at this meeting when falling in a race over 
the National fences since the obstacles were extensively remodelled before the 
2013-14 season. The changes were made in response to welfare concerns aftertwo 
horses, including the Gold Cup winner Synchronised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/apr/14/synchronised-grand-national>, 
died during the 2012 Grand National.

There were also two fatal injuries to runners in the 2011 Grand National, but 
since the fences were redesigned a total of 119 horses have lined up for three 
renewals of the big race without any further fatalities. Last year’s Grand 
National marked the first time since the early 1990s that three consecutive 
runnings of the race passed without a fatal injury to any of the runners.

The deaths of Gullinbursti and Minella Reception will sharpen the focus on 
welfare issues before Saturday’s Grand National, however, not leastbecause two 
horses died in Thursday’s Fox Hunters’ Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/marasonnien-clonbanan-lad-deaths-foxhunters-chase-on-the-fringe>
, the first event at the meeting over the Grand National fences. Neither 
fatality was as the result of a fall but both Marasonnien and Clonbanan Lad 
were put down having collapsed after being pulled up by their riders during 
the race.

Before Friday’s fatal injuries, the only horse to die as a result of a fall on 
the Grand National course following its redesign was Plein Pouvoir, who fell 
four out in the Grand Sefton Chase in December 2013. The Grand Sefton is run 
over the same trip of two miles and five furlongs as the Topham and Fox 
Hunters’ Chases.

Twenty-nine runners lined up for Friday’s Topham Chase and 19 completed the 
course. Of those that did not, four were fallers, three more unseated their 
riders, and three were pulled up when out of contention.

The British Horseracing Authority said on Friday evening that one horse had 
been fatally injured in five previous runnings of the Topham Chase. It also 
said that from about 90,000 runners each year, British racing has a fatality 
rate of less than 0.2%, down from 0.3% in the last 15 years, although that 
figure includes runners in Flat races, which have a much lower rate of serious 
injuries than races over jumps.

The 16 fences on the Grand National course, all but two of which are jumped 
twice during the National itself, are still dressed with spruce and look 
identical to the obstacles on the course before 2013.

However, wooden stakes which previously formed the core of the fences have 
been replaced by plastic “birch”, which is designed to offer less resistance 
when a horse makes a mistake, and cause falls which are less likely to prove 
fatal.

Deaths of Marasonnien and Clonbanan Lad mar chase win for On The Fringe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/marasonnien-clonbanan-lad-deaths-foxhunters-chase-on-the-fringe> 