
For the fourth year running at Liverpool the only hangovers on the morning 
after theGrand National <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> were 
the ones being nursed by racegoers and punters. A sell-out crowd of 70,000 
enjoyed a dramatic race, the peak viewing figure on Channel 4 jumped from 8.5m 
to 10m and the relative handful of people who backed Rule The World, the 33-1 
winner, will cherish the memory. Above all there were no serious injuries to 
any of the 39 horses and jockeys, the longest run without a fatal injury to a 
National runner for almost a quarter of a century.

There will never be any cause for complacency over the National. Even after 
the very sensible and necessary modifications to the course and race conditions 
following the 2012 renewal – the second in a row when two horses lost their 
lives – there is still more risk attached to this race than any other British 
steeplechase. In a different year Sir Des Champs, who lay still for several 
seconds after a terrible fall at The Chair, might not have got up.

If Aintree <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aintree> has perhaps been a 
little fortunate to stage four straight runnings of the National with no fatal 
injuries, the track could argue that it has made its own luck. And while there 
are still a handful of traditionalists who insist the modifications have 
neutered the National, would anyone seriously consider a return to the old days 
now?

Four years is no time at all in statistical terms but the National’s recent 
resurgence can also be seen as the final stages of a process that has been 
going on since two horses were killed at Becher’s in 1989. The decision to fill 
in the brook to stop horses rolling back into it was far more controversial in 
its time than the introduction of plastic cores for the fences in 2013. That 
too proved the right thing to do for the future of the race.

Emotional trainer Mouse Morris wins the Grand National after year of tragedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/grand-national-rule-the-world-mouse-morris-aintree>
It has taken nearly 30 years and there were times when it felt as though the 
National was simply lurching from one existential crisis to the next. Now, 
though, it can be seen that the race has been not just preserved but improved. 
As a result an event that was conceived as a spectacle in the mid-19th century 
remains just as fascinating and compelling for a very different audience almost 
200 years later.

One reason for that is that the National is now a more competitive race than 
at any time in its history. Twenty years ago no-hopers outnumbered realistic 
contenders by about three to one and more than half the field often raced from 
out of the handicap. Many of the once-a-year punters who drew a horse in their 
office sweep had little or no chance of a serious run for their money, barring 
a freak occurrence like the pile-up which gave us Foinavon.

Now it is foolish to write off any more than a handful of the 40 runners. The 
last four winners have set off at 66-1, 25-1 twice and now 33-1 but all four 
had some form in the book that gave them a chance. Finding the winner is more 
of a challenge than ever before, which is the way it should be.

It is impossible to please everyone, though, and there were suggestions in the 
run-up to this year’s race that further changes are required to the entry 
procedures to improve the line-up.

The failure of Pineau De Re, the 2014 winner, to make it into the field 
prompted Richard Newland, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/04/grand-national-2016-pineau-de-re-richard-newland-trainer-jim-best-disqualified-four-years-bha>
 his trainer, to call for National winners to be given an automatic place in 
the final 40 in subsequent seasons. Punters who had backed Bishop’s Road also 
felt aggrieved when he missed out as the first reserve. Instead he ran in 
Friday’s Topham (and unseated his rider at the first).

The idea of an exemption for former winners seems unlikely to go much further. 
This is the National, not the Masters. If an ageing former winner no longer has 
a handicap mark worthy of a place in the field, he deserves to be considered 
for retirement, as seems likely forRule The World, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/david-mullins-grand-national-willie-mullins-michael-oleary-rule-the-world>
 below, rather than a vain tilt at another National.

The scenario is different for Bishop’s Road, a young horse on the way up, and 
his narrow failure to get into the field prompted calls for “Win And You’re In” 
qualifiers for the National. The Becher Chase, which is staged over the big 
fences earlier in the year, was floated as a possible qualifier, along with the 
Grand National Trial at Haydock, which Bishop’s Road won convincingly in 
February.

“Win and You’re In” status would certainly raise the profile of both races. 
Whether it would do much for the National, however, is another question. In 
some years it could be a positive but sooner or later – and probably sooner – 
it would achieve the opposite of what is intended and bump out a horse with a 
decent chance, replacing it with an outsider.

John Baker, the man in charge at both Aintree and Haydock, is rumoured to be 
considering Win And You’re Ins, but that may be with his Haydock hat on. The 
current system has stood the test of time and already produces the best and 
most competitive fields the National has ever seen. We should just enjoy it and 
leave it at that.
 