
Food is not the high point of our stay at Palmyra, the oasis in Syria's 
northeastern desert. This is one of the world's most amazing historical sites, 
with grand, colonnaded Roman streets rising out of the desert sands; temples 
and tombs uncovered for centuries after the city fell into ruin following Queen 
Zenobia's capture.

We travel from Aleppo by car, stopping briefly in the city of Hama, lush and 
green along the banks of the Orontes, with ancient waterwheels rising above the 
city's houses and shops. And then it's into the desert, a barren moonscape 
speckled with Bedouin tents and animals, with a single road winding through it. 
We pass signs for Baghdad, a solitary petrol station, and - bizarrely - a 
mountain with "Welcome" carved into its top, which our driver points out to us, 
chuckling all the while.

It's quite possible to travel to Palmyra from Aleppo on public transport - but 
a mixture of train fatigue and chronic over-packing meant the plan to negotiate 
two minibuses (you have to change at Homs) doesn't survive for long. And after 
the bustle of the city, and its non-stop noise, the quiet of the desert and the 
cab is lovely - well if you discount the ancient tape of Arabic pop provided by 
the driver, and the happy sucking of sticky caramels as we bump along.

Palmyra, when we arrive, is overwhelming. It seems the one bit of Syria 
"properly" geared up for tourism (ie expensive hotels, rubbish food, lots of 
people trying to sell you tat), but you forgive all gripes once you step into 
the ruins, stretching across the sands, almost deserted save for the odd local 
roaring down the main Roman street by motorbike - although in the glaring 
afternoon sun and unrelenting wind, there's probably good reason for that. 
Returning to the hotel to shower away the dust, which is even stuck to my 
teeth, we admit defeat. Even in May, the heat is too much; like being stuck in 
a hairdryer on full blast for an afternoon.

It is 4.30am when we step back out into the ruins in jackets and scarves. Dawn 
is beginning to creep across the sky, the old stones taking on a rosy hue as 
the light begins to hit them. It is silent. We stand alone and in awe of the 
towering columns, picking our way over piles of now broken walls and arches, 
each rich with carvings - but here casually scattered across the ground in 
great piles. It's as if we are alone in history.

Tomorrow ... to Damascus by coach.

Read part one: Istanbul to Aleppo by train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2008/jul/01/railtravel.syria.istanbul>

Getting there

Transport: Aleppo – Palmyra

We hired a car to take us across the desert for about $100 (£50) through our 
hotel – and felt it was money well spent. But you can do it for a fraction of 
the price by public transport. By car, the journey takes just over three hours.

Accommodation

Syria's only high-end hotel chain, Cham Palace, runs the Hotel Zenobia 
<http://www.chamhotels.com/palmyra_palace.html>, which is literally in the 
ruins. A room with views over the ruins costs around $110 (£55) and if you're 
determined to get up at dawn and see the place at its best, you can't get more 
convenient. There's a decent bathroom, aircon etc but it has none of the charm 
of Aleppo's hotels, and it's more expensive.
 