
For the Brontës of Haworth, west Yorkshire, 1847 was a big year. In October, 
Charlotte Brontë's novel Jane Eyre was published. "We can cordially recommend 
Jane Eyre to our readers," ran one enthusiastic review. "It is sure to be in 
demand." The reviewer was right. Two months later, both younger Brontë sisters 
also published novels: Emily's Wuthering Heights, and Anne's Agnes Grey. 
Wuthering Heights was an instant bestseller. The Brontës – under their male 
pseudonyms, Currer, Ellis and Acton Bell – had achieved what they had always 
sought. Fame.

Everyone now has heard of the Brontë sisters, of course – the "three weird 
sisters", Ted Hughes called them. They have been memorialised in films and 
biographies, and their work is drummed into students at school and university. 
There are academic conferences, Penguin classics, box sets and leather-bound 
collectors' editions. Isabelle Huppert plays Anne in André Téchiné's Les Soeurs 
Brontë. Olivia de Havilland played Charlotte in the 1946 biopic Devotion. A 
1992 adaptation of Wuthering Heights starred Juliette Binoche. Brontëana 
available at the Brontë Parsonage Museum in Haworth includes jewellery, mugs 
and cross-stitch kits. But what of the fourth Brontë sibling, the only 
brother, Branwell? He was the fourth of the six Brontë children – two older 
sisters died young. As he was the only son, expectations were high.

The Brontës' father, the Reverend Patrick Brontë, had come a long way from a 
two-room cottage in Drumballyroney in County Down to study theology at St 
John's College, Cambridge, and then be appointed to a perpetual curacy in 
Haworth. Branwell was not expected to fail. Elizabeth Gaskell, in her biography 
of Charlotte, claimed that Branwell was "a boy of remarkable promise, and, in 
some ways, of extraordinary precocity of talent". Douglas A Martin, in his 
novel based on the brother Brontë's life, Branwell (2006), writes that 
"Childhood was Branwell's kingdom to rule over." It was: he and Charlotte 
collaborated as children in the invention of a complex fictional world they 
called Angria. It proved an ominous name.

As the sisters began to achieve recognition – a joint collection of their 
poems was published to critical acclaim in 1846 – Branwell sank deeper into 
depression and despair. He began drinking heavily, and taking laudanum. He had 
failed to gain admission to the Royal Academy, failed as a portrait painter, 
and had begun working variously as a tutor, and as a clerk at a railway 
station, posts from which he was dismissed for incompetence, or worse – in one 
case for conducting an affair with the mother of one of his pupils. Daphne du 
Maurier, in The Infernal World of Branwell Brontë (1960), her brilliant and 
bizarre biography of Branwell, hints darkly at Branwell leading one of his 
young charges astray. Emily described her brother at this stage of his life as 
a "hopeless being".

Branwell's one and only famous painting is the only known portrait of the 
three sisters together: see left, now at the National Portrait Gallery. He had 
originally painted himself in the centre, but obliterated his image. The paint 
has faded, so that his ghostly presence now hovers ominously beside his sisters.

After Branwell's death in 1848, aged only 31, Charlotte wrote to her friend 
William Smith Williams: "I do not weep from a sense of bereavement – there is 
no prop withdrawn, no consolation torn away, no dear companion lost – but for 
the wreck of talent, the ruin of promise, the untimely, dreary extinction of 
what might have been a burning and a shining light."

The current exhibition on Branwell at the Brontë Parsonage Museum is titled 
Sex, Drugs and Literature.
 