
It must be an extremely odd life, perched behind the counter of a tiny train 
station kiosk in central Turkey. Quiet, quiet, quiet … then a bedraggled 
looking crowd of ravenous passengers rushing towards you at top speed, jumping 
down from gently aging carriages and legging it across the platform to load up 
with bread, sausage and hard-boiled eggs. Then 15 minutes later … quiet, quiet, 
quiet again.

Every Sunday morning the optimistically named Toros Express leaves Istanbul's 
magnificent Hydrapasa station for Aleppo in northern Syria, where it's due to 
arrive 30 hours later. Not a journey for those in a rush, admittedly — but as 
we sat happily picnicking on our kiosk spoils on the cabin sofa, watching the 
olive groves, pistachio trees and herds of cattle whizz past the window, there 
was a certain romance to proceedings; although not a sniff of a buffet car, 
despite a rather hopeful knife and fork sign at the end of the carriage. Beyond 
it? The snake of train track leading back to Europe.
 A local man plays the oud (an Arabic lute) in the old city of Aleppo  As the 
sun set, we stuck our heads out of the window like dogs in a hot car, peering 
at the front of the train as it wound through the Turkish countryside. Farmers 
waved from their fields, the light began to fade, and I began to think that the 
train is a remarkably civilised way to travel (not to mention, of course, 
cheap. Even including the Istanbul travel agents' booking fee, tickets were 
only £60 each). We cracked open our bottle of raki, lay out our super-clean, 
starched bed linen, and settled in for the night.
Five hours late, the train rolled into Aleppo. We rolled into a cab, and, 
finally, into our hotel. The city has been gradually renovating its beautiful 
17th-century houses, transforming them into boutique hotels and restaurants. 
Our room at the Mandaloun (mandalounhotel.com <http://www.mandalounhotel.com/>, 
doubles around $100pn) opened out on to a central courtyard and a fountain, the 
richly tiled floors were cool beneath our heavy, train-lagged feet, and – most 
importantly of all — nothing was actually moving. And we didn't have to sleep 
in (albeit ingeniously designed) bunk beds.

Tell people you are visiting Syria and most first reactions are: Why? And 
then: Isn't it a bit dangerous? I am certainly not going to try and excuse the 
ruling regime — and if you view visiting Syria as endorsing that, you may wish 
to travel elsewhere. But — and this does not change the first point — Syria is 
not a dangerous place for travellers; it is surprisingly secular, the people 
are enormously welcoming, and, as a woman, I experienced little of the hassle 
of Turkey.

The country is also home to what is an almost embarrassing number of historic 
sights: Aleppo's imposing citadel rises above the centre, giving views beyond 
the old city to the suburbs and industry beyond. Essentially, the ethos here 
seems to be — here's the sight, have a look around. No barriers, no roped-off 
areas, no handrails, and, frankly, no safety. But adventure; lots of that. And 
space. With visitor numbers low, you can stand alone in the citadel's 
13th-century great mosque, or sit high up next to its domed roof and gaze over 
the ruins with only the occasional figure emerging from arched doorways or 
behind crumbling walls to break the spell.

Altogether less restful was Aleppo's souq; rammed with city dwellers doing 
their shopping, and stalls selling just about anything you could need — and 
lots you don't. A quick mint-lemonade from a juice stand later and we were 
pushing through a lane of haberdashery merchants, en route to a silver shop run 
by a former Mr Universe runner up. Out came the goods, alongside photos of him 
painted a deep mahogany and in alarmingly small Speedos. We joked, he showed us 
a picture of his little girl, I tried a necklace on. It was not quite what I 
wanted. No problem — we could always come back. Or, you know, just nice to meet 
you.

After the hard-sell of Istanbul's Grand Bazaar, the chance to just wander 
shoulder to jostling shoulder with Aleppo's residents, was a relief — and Mr 
Would-Be Universe's charm was in evidence throughout the city; "Welcome, 
welcome," became the refrain for our trip. A tour of the Museum of Popular 
Tradition, housed in the incredible Beit Ajiqbash in the al-Jdeida district, 
became a very personal (and hilarious) experience as we were literally run 
round the exhibits by the museum's keeper — his top-speed commentary never 
faltering for a second as we skipped round rooms containing everything from 
agricultural machinery to intricately embroidered clothes and inlaid furniture.

Al-Jdeida is also home to Aleppo's — and perhaps Syria's — finest restaurants. 
We wandered through an unassuming wooden door and down one of the area's 
narrow, winding lanes into Beit as-Sissi (+963 21 212 4362,sissihouse.com 
<http://www.sissihouse.com>), walking out of the shimmering heat into the 
restaurant's cool stone courtyard strewn with greenery and packed with tables. 
Food followed the inescapable mezze-then-kebab format, but there was plenty of 
choice: tabbouleh, hummus and baba ghanoush, of course, but also roasted red 
pepper dips, warm kibbeh (like scotch eggs made from minced lamb and bulgar 
wheat filled with a variety of (non-eggy) fillings), borek, and fattoush — a 
green salad with tomatoes, toasted bread and a citrussy dressing.

At which point — because you're obviously not full enough — the kebabs came 
out, with cherries, or a spicy tomato sauce; or chicken fresh from the grill. 
Chuck in a few glasses of arak (the local aniseedy spirit — just add water) and 
you'll still struggle to spend more than £20 on a long, delicious, dinner for 
two. And if you're pushed for cash? Shwarma (kebab) and falafel stalls are 
cheap and plentiful.

Tomorrow … into Syria's northeast desert

Getting there

EasyJet <http://www.easyjet.com> fly Luton-Istanbul from £51.98 inc all taxes. 
The Toros Express leaves Istanbul's Haydarpasa station early on Sunday 
mornings, due to arrive on Monday afternoon, but invariably rolling up around 
eight in the evening. Book via the Tur-ista agency in Istanbul (
erdemir@tur-ista.com <mailto:erdemir@tur-ista.com>).
 