
One described it as “like the first day at school”, while another told of 
“having some pretty crazy dreams about cakes chasing me”.

The Great British Bake Off 2016: here's everything we're allowed to tell you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/23/great-british-bake-off-2016-everything-you-need-to-know>
And so it was that 12 fresh amateur bakers were introduced to the nation as 
the BBC’s Great British Bake Off returned to television screens – billed this 
year as something of a return to basics.

Hot out of the traps as a potential frontrunner on the popular reality show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/06/genius-of-great-british-bake-off>
 were Jane Beedle, 61, a garden designer from Beckenham who earned this 
season’s first star baker accolade. Others included banker Selasi Gbormittah, 
30, and teaching assistant Benjamina Ebuehi, 23.

For the Rev Lee Banfield, a 67-year-old pastor and former builder from Bolton, 
this season’s first technical challenge – to produce a plate of jaffa cakes – 
proved to be a bridge too far, however, and he became the first contestant to 
be eliminated.

“I won’t show the congregation how to make a jaffa cake. I am not going to 
repeat that experience: I’ll buy them a pack instead,” he said after the 
episode, which also saw contestants being required to construct a perfect 
Genoise sponge with a mirror glaze for their final bakes, known as “the 
showstopper”.

Banfield struggled early on, with his sponge turning into clumps while 
preparing an orange-and-lemon drizzle cake, which he based on the bells of St 
Clements. Paul Hollywood, one of the show’s two judges, praised the flavour of 
his bake but criticised the texture as “awful”.

Banfield’s jaffa cakes in the technical challenge were uneven and had lumps of 
chocolate in the middle, instead of being smooth and uniform.

This year’s group – who also include a PE teacher, a banker and an aerospace 
engineer – have been “slower to bond this year than they were in the past,” 
according to Mary Berry, Hollywood’s fellow judge.
 