
Monica Lanman is a semi-retired psychotherapist from Finchley, London. She is 
a branch secretary in her local constituency Labour party.

I went to the event because I feel the left is in crisis and am troubled by it.
What came out of the meeting was a consensus that all parties on the left need 
to work together.

I thought Caroline Lucas, in particular, was articulate. I liked what she said 
about the need for agreements between candidates to decide who should stand in 
local elections rather than standing against each other. But this must be 
transparent – perhaps through open public hustings where candidates work out 
what they agree on and where they differ.

 Guardian member Monica Lanman Photograph: Monica Lanman 
Paddy Ashdown said he thought everyone should stand and advocated tactical 
voting but, for me, that’s a waste of resources and doesn’t seem to be the best 
tactic.If candidates have opposing views they should clearly all stand but they 
should also look to see what they agree on.


I think Dr Philipa Whitford was right when she said we need to focus on 
Westminster. Labour has turned its nose up at collaborating at parliament. We 
share a lot of ideas with other parties and we need to work together more.


People hinted that the elephant in the room was the Liberal Democrats’ history 
of working with the Tories, but I think the real elephant is what’s happening 
with the Labour party, with Corbyn and Momentum. We seemed to pussyfoot around 
it and I think there’s a feeling that, if anyone says anything critical, they 
get torrents of abuse.


I voted for Corbyn last year because of his ideas but you have to be 
interested in parliamentary effectiveness.The panelists did make a few hints 
about the internal conflict. Lisa Nandy said there was no point having a great 
idea unless a person can achieve power. Vince Cable said sometimes you had to 
compromise in order to get power. For me, that was the underlying point of the 
meeting.


Related: Crisis on the left: what's the future of progressive politics? – 
Guardian Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/audio/2016/sep/15/crisis-on-the-left-whats-the-future-of-progressive-politics-guardian-live>

The Greens believe – as do I – that many of the Parliamentary Labour party 
(PLP) do hold leftwing viewsand could be galvanised by Corbyn’s leadership if 
he was interested in working with a range of colleagues, including the SNP. 
We’re missing someone to lead but, at the same time, we shouldn’t depend on 
finding an ideal leader too much.


There’s a need for someone to scoop up the thinking left and get them together.
I’m not sure if that means a movement or a new party but what was going on at 
the event definitely felt like the start of something.


Sam Thomas is a final-year student reading history at University College 
London.

I’m interested in politics and a member of the Labour party and the Fabian 
Society.I’m keen to go to lots of political events at the moment as, with 
Corbyn in the Labour party, there’s lots of change.

I agree with Caroline Lucas that it’s going to be tough to unite all the 
parties on the left and all their supporters. I think Vince Cable made the 
standout point for me when he said we should learn from the New Labour 
government and its three election wins rather than, as some Corbyn supporters 
have a habit of doing, dismissing it out of hand.
 Guardian member Sam Thomas is studying history at UCL. Photograph: Sam Thomas 
In my opinion, the main problem is rhetoric. For too long, the Conservative 
party has dominated with a clear voice. The agenda has been set by the 
Conservatives, allowing them to dictate what’s discussed. For example, in the 
EU referendum the leave campaign had the patriotic vote when, in fact, if we 
leave the EU, the UK’s more likely to break up. We need to have a strong, clear 
message.


It’s difficult to know what will happen with the Labour party until we know 
whether Corbyn will remain leader. I think it’s likely he will. I think one 
thing not mentioned was the fact he doesn’t have the support of the PLP. I find 
it hard to see how he can get support from other parties, particularly when the 
Lib Dems are even further to the centre.


I’m unsure what Corbyn can offer a progressive alliance and if he’s electable 
and capable of working with other MPs.Some panelists said a key issue was 
changing the electoral system but we still have to win under the current one, 
and with thechanging of the boundaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boundary-changes> that’s going to be 
harder than ever.

This event 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/crisis-on-the-left-the-future-of-progressive-politics-27069651055>
 took place atIslington Academy, London, on 13 September. To find out about 
upcoming Guardian Live events, sign up to become a Guardian Member.
 