Name the silhouetted figure in this photo.  Ryan Lochte  Michael Phelps Phelps' 
death stare during the warm-up before his 200m butterfly semi-final showdown 
with Chad le Clos became one of the memes of the Olympics.  Ryan Murphy  
Anthony Ervin Name the silhouetted figure in this photo.  Stephen Curry  
Draymond Green  Andre Iguodala LeBron James' block of Iguodala's shot late in 
Game 7 of the finals will go down in NBA lore.  Kevin Durant Name the 
silhouetted figure in this photo.  Ryan Arcidiacono  Buddy Hield  Ben Simmons  
Kris JenkinsJenkins' buzzer-beating three lifted the Catholic school from 
outside Philadelphia to an incredible win over North Carolina in the national 
championship game. Name the silhouetted figure in this photo.  DeMarcus Ware  
Von MillerMiller was named Most Valuable Player of Super Bowl 50 after he 
recorded two and a half sacks and two forced fumbles.  Champ Bailey  John Elway 
Name the silhouetted figure in this photo.  David Ortiz  David Wright  David 
Ross  Bartolo Colon The New York Mets' pudgy quadragenarian hurler went deep 
off San Diego's James Shields in a May game at Petco Park, becoming the oldest 
player in major league history to hit his first career home run. Name the 
silhouetted figure in this photo.  Milos Raonic  Novak Djokovic  Andy Murray  
Stan WawrinkaThe late-blooming Swiss bagged his third career grand slam title 
with a surprise win over then-No1 Novak Djokovic in the US Open final. Name the 
silhouetted figure in this photo.  Katie Ledecky When Ledecky touched the wall 
to win the women 800m freestyle and complete the first 200-400-800 treble in 48 
years, an entire 11.38 seconds would pass before Great Britain’s Jazz Carlin 
came in for the silver.  Lilly King  Missy Franklin  Simone Manuel Name the 
silhouetted figure in this photo.  Francisco Lindor  Rajai Davis  Michael 
MartinezWhen Martinez hit a chopper to third baseman Kris Bryant who fired it 
to Anthony Rizzo for the final out of the World Series, the Chicago Cubs 
finally hit reset on the most storied title drought in America's sporting 
folklore.  Jason Kipnis Name the silhouetted figure in this photo.  Deontay 
Wilder  Dereck Chisora The British heavyweight landed one of the more 
photogenic blows of the year early in his grudge match with Dillian Whyte, but 
it was Whyte who got the last laugh in winning a split decision.  Anthony Joshua
 Gennady Golovkin Name the silhouetted figure in this photo.  Zach LaVine  
Andre Drummond  Aaron Gordon Gordon and LaVine faced off in a Slam Dunk Contest 
for the ages during All-Star Weekend in February.  Will Barton Name the 
silhouetted figure in this photo.  Jacob deGrom  Simone Biles  Laurie Hernandez 
The New Jersey teenager celebrated her Olympic medals by throwing out the 
ceremonial first pitch at a New York Mets game upon her return from Rio.  
DeMarcus Cousins Name the silhouetted figure in this photo.  Amanda Nunes 
Nunes' defended the UFC women's bantamweight title once considered Ronda 
Rousey's birthright with a punishing victory over the Olympic bronze medalist 
in December.  Miesha Tate  Holly Holm  Michelle Rodriguez  You got…  Poorly 
done!  Pretty good!  Not ideal!  OK, well done  You nailed it!  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  