

Guardian Members Polly Jackson, Joe Allen, Vivienne Windle and Sarah Kemp all 
attended an event with the actor and screenwriterBryan Cranston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bryan-cranston>, who starred as 
Walter White in the AMC crime drama series Breaking Bad.

‘Bryan was an awesome speaker’
 Polly Jackson 
Polly: When you like and respect someone famous, it can be disappointing when 
you see them in real life, but this wasn’t the case here. Bryan was very funny 
and charming.

Joe: I’m an enormous fan, and have been for years. I travelled down from 
Newcastle specially, and I wasn’t disappointed. It was a once-in-a-lifetime 
opportunity. He was so passionate about acting that at times it felt as though 
I was at a motivational speech!

Vivienne: What really impressed me was how much he made everyone feel 
included. He stood up from his chair and almost acted the anecdotes as he told 
them. It was a a packed theatre and this drew everyone in.

Sarah: It was amazing! I am considering retraining as an actor and this was 
incredibly interesting and useful.

‘He gave a lot of advice to aspiring artists’
 Joe Allen 
JA: I wasn’t expecting him to give advice, but it was fantastic to hear what 
he had to say.

PJ: The story of how he got to where he is now is applicable to lots of 
industries. He spoke about not having an end goal but just focusing on the 
present. This is something that is even relevant for me in the legal profession.

VW: It was fascinating to hear about how his father’s drinking and violence 
fuelled his determination not just to be an actor but a star. Bryan said his 
greatest achievement was that he was a working actor at 25, and felt he had 
achieved his dream by focusing more on the here and now.

SK: It was interesting to hear him discuss the glitz and glam that lots of 
people perceive to be a part of the industry, and to emphasise that it’s not a 
good reason to consider a career in acting. This kind of event gives you a real 
insight into life in the film industry, straight from the horse’s mouth.

‘Breaking Bad was only part of his story’
 Vivienne Windle 
VW: The venue was packed, and there were lots of Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> fans in attendance. But 
he managed to cater to them without making it the focus of the whole evening. I 
loved his anecdote about how he used to adopt an English accent for auditions, 
and would love to have asked him more about his parents and how they influenced 
his career, mainly because my parents were in theatre, too.

JA: I first came across him via Breaking Bad, but I wasn’t expecting how much 
more there was to him as an actor. He was very vocal about the frame of mind he 
got into for certain scenes. I would liked to have asked him specifics about 
certain scenes in Breaking Bad and how he prepared for them.

PJ: I’d love to see him in some historical dramas. He is an incredible 
character actor. I was interested to know if there was anyone from history he’d 
like to play, or any untold stories he’d like to tell. He spoke a lot about his 
characters and I bet there are some interesting people he could depict.
 Sarah Kemp 
‘He has got a lot of his bigger parts later in life’

SK: Cranston is 60 now and got a lot of his bigger parts later in life. It’s 
something that a few male actors have experienced and I’m interested to know 
whether it’s something women encounter, too. A lot of leading ladies seem to be 
younger than their male counterparts!

Polly Jackson, 23, works at a law firm in London. Joe Allen is 21, lives in 
Newcastle, and is and a media journalism student. Vivienne Windle, 61, lives in 
Southampton and recently retired from a job in Westminster. Sarah Kemp is 29, 
lives in Bermondsey, south London, and is the senior comms manager at Page 
Group. She is also an aspiring actor.

This event 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/an-evening-with-bryan-cranston-27774619635>
 took place on 24 October at the Piccadilly Theatre in London. To find out 
about upcoming eventssign up to become a Guardian Member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/>.
 