
Guardian Media Group <https://www.theguardian.com/media/guardianmediagroup> is 
planning to cut 250 jobs – including 100 in editorial – and to restructure the 
less profitable parts of the company in a bid to break even within three years.

As part of plans to cut operating losses, which amounted to £58.6m in the year 
to the end of March, the Guardian and Observer publisher is to give up its 
ambitions to turn the Midlands Goods Shed, a former train depot, into a large 
events space and will restructure the less profitable parts of the business.

In total, the UK workforce is expected to be cut by 18%, or 310 jobs, as about 
60 positions in both commercial and editorial remain unfilled. The company 
hopes all cuts will be made by voluntary redundancies.

Guardian News & Media to cut costs by 20%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/25/guardian-news-media-to-cut-running-costs>
In a joint email to staff, editor-in-chief Katharine Viner and chief executive 
David Pemsel said the “volatile media environment” had led to an “urgent need 
for radical action”.

“Our plan of action has one goal: to secure the journalistic integrity and 
financial independence of the Guardian in perpetuity,” they wrote, before 
adding they hoped the cuts would all be voluntary and that compulsory 
redundancies would only be considered only “if necessary”.

Brian Williams, Guardian father of the chapel for the National Union of 
Journalists, said: “We are encouraged by the fact the company is seeking 
voluntary redundancies and is looking to mitigate potential job losses by 
finding other cost-cutting measures.”

Michelle Stanistreet, NUJ general secretary, said: “We will oppose any 
compulsory redundancies. This news, together with the loss of jobs as the 
Independent newspapers fold, presents a very worrying situation for the future 
of newspapers.”

The announcement comes after a difficult year for the newspaper industry as 
huge digital firms such as Google and Facebook take the lion’s share of 
advertising budgets while the growth of mobile proves harder to monetise than 
print for news organisations. The final edition of the Independent newspaper is 
to be published next week, and other newspaper groups are making significant 
job cuts.

In total at GMG, some 100 jobs are earmarked to be cut from the 725-strong 
editorial workforce and 150 from commercial departments, support functions such 
as finance and human resources and other parts of the business.

A spokeswoman for the company said there are no plans to close the Observer, 
the Guardian’s Sunday sister title.

Half of all GMG costs relate to staff with the current global headcount of 
1,960 understood to have grown by 479 since the last round of redundancies in 
2012. The 210 people employed outside the UK are not expected to be affected by 
the latest round of cuts.

All proposals were presented to staff representatives on Thursday, with the 
consultation exercise set to last for eight weeks. Voluntary redundancy terms 
are set to be agreed with unions in the coming weeks.

In January, the Guardian unveiled a three-year plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/25/guardian-news-media-to-cut-running-costs>
 that aimed to break even at an operating level by 2018/19 by focusing on new 
revenue streams and a new membership proposal as well as a 20% overall 
reduction in the cost base.

Print advertising fell sharply in the year by an estimated 25%, and although 
the Guardian beat this market average, the decline was not offset by digital 
revenues. The business spent almost £80m in cash in the year to the end of 
March although the cash and investment fund, boosted by the sale of various 
assets including its stake in Trader Media Group in 2014, stood at £740m in 
January, down from £838.3m last July.

In January, Pemsel said: “Against the backdrop of a volatile market, we are 
taking immediate action to boost revenues and reduce our cost-base in order to 
safeguard Guardian journalism in perpetuity.

“This plan will ensure our business is increasingly adaptable and better able 
to respond quickly to the pace of change in the digital world.”
 