 The commander of the Eighth Division of the Bolivian Army at Valle Grande 
region reported today that Ernesto Che Guevara, the Cuban revolutionary leader 
was killed in an armed clash there yesterday. The body will be embalmed and 
brought here said the report.
The Eighth Division (writes Richard Gott from Santa Cruz) had been fighting in 
the Andean foothills, near Valle-grande, halfway between Santa Cruz and Sucre. 
Guevara was earlier reported to have been wounded in a battle which began 
yesterday morning and was still continuing late last night. The company 
commander had sent a message to his headquarters urgently requesting a 
helicopter to bring out Guevara alive.

In La Paz, General Alfredo Ovando, the Chief of the Armed Forces, was reported 
to have said that army officials were on their way to identify the three dead 
guerrillas and two others captured. The ranger battalion had lost four men, 
with five injured.

Rallying guerrillas

Our Foreign Staff writes:

Guevara, who was one of Castro's chief lieutenants in the Cuban revolution and 
for a time became Minister for Industries in Castro's Government disappeared 
about two and a half years ago and he was variously reported to be dead and 
rallying guerrillas in several Latin-American countries.

Regis Debray, the French writer now on trial in Bolivia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bolivia>, claimed to have interviewed him at 
his headquarters and three weeks ago evidence that he had been directing the 
Bolivian guerrillas was submitted to the council of the Organisation of 
American States in Washington.

Less than a fortnight ago Guevara was reported to have been seen at the head 
of a guerrilla group in a Bolivian village. He was said to be ill, but the 
illness may have been the asthma from which he had suffered for several years.

Guevara, as well as being an active guerrilla leader in the field, was 
regarded in Latin America as the chief theoretician of Marxism in the 
subcontinent. His aim in Bolivia was believed to have been so to solidify the 
guerrilla movement that the Government would have to call for United States 
military help. Foreign intervention would then give the guerrilla campaign the 
overtones of a war of liberation.
 