
As the vicious debate over gun control continues unabated in the United States 
and the NRA distinguishes itself by constantly coming up with new ways to be 
terrible, there’s an interesting trend cropping up here and there. I’m noting 
more and more rhetoric suggesting thatgun ownership is a human right 
<http://bearingarms.com/bob-o/2016/08/17/heres-president-hillary-will-destroy-gun-rights-without-repealing-second-amendment/>
, and that people like Secretary Clinton are violating human rights by 
expressing a desire to put checks on gun ownership and curtail some of its 
worst abuses.

It’s a creative new argument, and also one that’s very wrong. I can see why 
people are doing it: there’s a growing sensitivity to human rights, and 
suggesting that something is an inalienable entitlement makes it seem ironclad. 
It’s an example of how the right attempts to use the language and tools of the 
left against it, often highly effectively. After all, the logic goes, if 
marrying anyone you want is a human right and we frown upon any attempts to 
abridge or interfere with that right, then surely if gun ownership is declared 
a human right, then the left will be forced to defend that “right”.

The thing is … well, I’m not going to play the dictionary game here, but 
suffice it to say that gun ownership doesn’t really meet any of the standards 
we use to define a human right. It’s not even a civil right, even though a 
section of the constitution appears to suggest that the founders intended to 
protect gun ownership as part of the civil rights of citizens in their new 
nation. (Spoiler: they pretty clearly meant it in the context of militias, and 
also, they favoured pretty aggressive gun control.)

A human right has to do with something intrinsic to who you are as a human 
being, and your most basic needs. Healthcare, food, housing, and water are 
human rights. They are all critical things that human beings need to stay 
alive. Access to reproductive health services is a human right. The ability to 
participate freely in society regardless of race, religion, ethnicity, gender, 
sexuality, or disability status is a human right. These are things society is 
supposed to guarantee to us because we are part of society, and these things 
are integral to our very identities.

Owning a gun does not place one in a protected class of society. It’s not 
integral to the inextricable identity of a human being. You can put a gun down 
and no longer be a person holding a gun. You cannot become unMuslim for an 
afternoon, or take off your black skin to walk through the streets. While a gun 
owner may participate in gun culture, may enjoy interacting with guns and 
fellow gun owners as a recreational activity, may even integrate that activity 
heavily into daily life, gun ownership still isn’t about identity.

And a gun is not a basic necessity for survival. Some guns can be useful for 
hunting food, but not most, and there are alternatives to hunting for most 
people. They can sometimes be helpful for self-defense, but not nearly as often 
as people like to claim. More commonly, they are used to inflict violence, 
which is an abridgment of other people’s human right to remain alive. Nothing 
about a gun is intrinsic to identity or survival. Comparing a gun to something 
like the right to maternity care is patently absurd, and that’s just one 
example of a basic human right.
Gun Nation 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/docs-gun-nation-circular/embed.html>
Checks on gun ownership, to varying degrees, are perfectly acceptable because, 
again, owning a gun isn’t a human right, and it’s not a civil right either when 
its ownership infringes upon the enjoyment of life for other people. It’s just 
not. Gun ownership is something else: a privilege. And privileges are 
contingent on meeting reasonable standards. People are not entitled to 
privileges. They are accorded on the basis of fitness to have them.

Gun ownership could better be compared to driving a car. Everyone has the 
potential to drive a car, but not everyone knows how to drive. Fewer people can 
operate a vehicle safely. Requiring people to understand how to safely drive a 
car is viewed as a reasonable requirement for issuing a driver’s license. 
Similarly, drivers are expected to maintain their cars in good working order 
and carry insurance, to reduce the risk of problems and have a measure in place 
in the event something bad happens. It is understood that when you fail to obey 
the law, there will be penalties, up to and including losing your license.

While some drivers seem to think otherwise, driving a car is not a right. A 
car is an external object that you own (lease, borrow, rent) in order to use it 
for a variety of purposes. A car is not integral to your identity, although it 
can facilitate things like getting to work, traveling, or being able to leave 
your home in a remote area without public transit. Some people are super into 
their cars and get fancy ones. Some people race their cars and engage in 
recreational driving. But at the end of the day, they do eventually get out of 
the driver’s seat and walk away. The car is not bound to the driver. Losing a 
license is a pain, and sometimes it is unjust, as when people are profiled by 
law enforcement, but it is not an infringement on basic rights.

The right wants to cheapen the notion of human rights with this kind of 
rhetoric, while also trying to score points. It’s a pretty pathetic line of 
logic, and hopefully they’ll figure that out sooner rather than later.
 