
As they neared the door it was flung open, and Mr Toad, arrayed in goggles, 
cap, gaiters, and enormous overcoat, came swaggering down the steps, drawing on 
his gauntleted gloves. 'Hullo! Come on, you fellows!' he cried cheerfully on 
catching sight of them. 'You're just in time to come with me for a jolly - to 
come for a jolly - for a - er - jolly - ' How Kenneth Grahame managed so 
precisely 90 years ago to get our very own Richard Branson to a T in The Wind 
In The Willows is a matter of wonder. Yet, with Branson ditching his balloon in 
the Pacific at Christmas as surely as Toad piled his car regularly into 
ditches, the Toad/Branson congruity was never plainer.

 Just as everyone on the riverbank was agreed that of all the simply splendid 
fellows in the world, Mr Toad was the most splendid of all - friendly, generous 
to a fault, gregarious, and the very best of company - everyone in Britain is 
similarly agreed about Branson.

 But, in the same way as Toad's inexhaustible taste for adventure developed 
from being a source of constant amusement to the other animals into something 
frankly tedious, so too have Branson's continual misadventures become a 
terminal bore to the nation.

 A very long time ago, Virgin was a moderately rude and risque word whispered 
by nerdy public schoolboys - like Branson R, come to think of it - as a way of 
getting into moderate disciplinary situations and thereby looking cool.

 Branson, however, did not grow out of the joke at 16 or so, and now, as he 
likes to remind us on a several-times daily basis, has turned that naughty old 
word into a global brand, for everything from pleasant aeroplanes to crappy 
trains to boring pensions.

 It takes an inimitable brand of chutzpah bordering on lunacy, to be fair, to 
launch yourself in balloons that always crash as a way of publicising an 
airline which, thank heavens, never has. Yet Toad/Branson manages to do just 
that, and still come out of it a media hero rather than a total twit.

 T/B's latest escapade was a nerd-fest from its berkish launch with 400 rented 
nomads in attendance on camel-back, to its daft-as-a-brush skirting round the 
latest Gulf war, to its preposterous attempt to overfly China without its 
permission. Tony Blair, Edward Heath and Bill Clinton were all involved in 
mopping up after that one.

 'Poop poop!' T/B seemed to shout as he careered from crisis to crisis on the 
flight. The point at which the balloon looked, still more farcically, as if it 
was going to drift over North Korea (it didn't) began to raise the suspicion, 
however, that all the derring-do was, in fact, slightly contrived, and that T/B 
was in considerably less danger than met the eye. When one of his staff at 
Mission Control, Uxbridge, announced with gleam-in-eye that he was allowing for 
'2.6 crises per day', the feeling grew that the whole shebang was more stunt 
than true adventure.

 'Poop, Poop!' As T/B headed out over the Pacific on Christmas Eve, the 
prospect began to be raised that he would almost certainly end up being 
deposited in it, thereafter, presumably, to be eaten by sharks. These would 
have been adopted, one fancies, as the logo of the Rail Users' Consultative 
Council.

 It has, in all humanity, to be conceded that the non-appearance of such 
sharks constituted good news, but it did also have a certain inevitability 
about it. T/B ended up being fished out of the water by the US Coastguard.

 He now says he 'might' try again, and we must all hope heartily, for our own 
sakes rather than his, that he does not. But Mr Toad, Wind In The Willows 
readers will remember, was never long without a new enthusiasm. We can only 
shudder in anticipation of what Toad/Branson's next will turn out to be.

 <
 