
Transport is one of the biggest beneficiaries of a new commitment to 
“high-value” investment in the British economy announced by the chancellor,
Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, in his 
autumn statement. Traffic-clogged roads and a new hi-tech railway system are 
among the projects to receive an additional £2.6bn in funds.


The chancellor’s focus in the autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/autumn-statement-2016> was for small-scale 
schemes that will directly contribute to raising Britain’s productivity. The 
extra transport investment will be drawn from the newly created £23bn National 
Productivity Investment Fund. Philip Hammond said £1.1bn will be spent on 
English local transport networks, “where small investments can offer big wins”. 
Another £220m has been allocated to address traffic pinch points on strategic 
roads.

Hammond also committed £27m of funding to develop plans for an 
Oxford-Cambridge expressway road, along with £110m of funding for work on a 
rail link between the two cities. Major road schemes to be upgraded include the 
M60 aroundManchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> and turning 
the A66 into a dual carriageway across the northern Pennines.

Further road schemes to benefit from new funding will be announced in the 
coming weeks by the transport secretary, Chris Grayling.

But as well as the “shovel-ready” projects, where work can start immediately, 
Hammond pledged more long-term investment in infrastructure. He said that 
infrastructure spending would rise from 0.8% of GDP to between 1% and 1.2% of 
GDP, and that he had instructed the National Infrastructure Commission – an 
independent advisory body – to make recommendations for future work based on 
the assumption of that continuing investment.

Hammond backed the commission’s most recent recommendation by giving the 
go-ahead for twin road and rail schemes linkingOxford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/oxford> and Cambridge. Hammond said: “This 
project can be more than just a transport link. It can become a 
transformational tech-corridor, drawing on the world-class research strengths 
of our two best-known universities.”

Stressing that “reliable transport networks are essential to growth and 
productivity”, Hammond announced a further £450m for a trial of digital 
signalling on the railways. Bringing forward the so-called digital railway has 
been a major objective of Network Rail’s chief executive, Mark Carne, who 
argues transformed signalling could allow far more trains to run. Hammond said 
that the trial would help “to achieve a step-change in reliability and squeeze 
more capacity out of our existing rail infrastructure”.

Another £80m will be spent on speeding up the rollout of smart ticketing in 
rail, including season tickets for commuters in the UK’s major cities – a 
long-stated ambition of the Department forTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport>, although impetus has dragged since 
early trials.

Meanwhile, a £5m feasibility study was announced as the first step in 
overhauling transport links in the Midlands.

Hammond also committed a further £390m “to build on our competitive advantage 
in low emission vehicles and the development of connected autonomous vehicles”. 
Of that money, £80m will be spend building charging points for electric cars.

Industry observers gave a lukewarm welcome to the commitments. Plans for the 
east-west rail linking Oxford and Cambridge were praised by Stephen Joseph, 
chief executive of the Campaign for Better Transport. But, he said: “While the 
government has rightly committed to focusing on smaller local projects which 
can deliver better value, it is still wasting too much on big road building 
schemes. Schemes such as the Oxford-Cambridge Expressway and dualling the A66 
across the Pennines will only increase traffic – what’s needed instead is more 
support for alternatives to driving, including rail and bus infrastructure.”

Richard Threlfall, head of infrastructure at KPMG UK, said that although the 
chancellor had boasted of a future increase in infrastructure spending to 1.2%, 
that was still low by international standards. He added: “The continued focus 
on economic infrastructure in isolation, ignoring both social infrastructure 
and housing, is another missed opportunity to grasp the bigger picture. 
Overall, the UK spends about 2.7% of GDP on infrastructure today. Canada spends 
more than 4% and China at least double that.”

PwC’s UK infrastructure head, Neil Broadhead, said the chancellor had 
recognised the need for not only multibillion pound mega-projects for decades 
to come, “but also a plethora of smaller schemes dispersed around the country 
which can be completed and deliver benefits to the general public much more 
quickly”. But, he added: “This represents only one stage on the UK’s long 
journey to achieve an infrastructure base fit for the 21st century.”

Liz Jenkins, infrastructure partner at law firm Clyde & Co, warned: “A 
pipeline of projects is just a pipe dream until construction takes place. The 
government needs to speed up decision-making if it is serious about driving 
forward the UK’s infrastructure.”

• This article was amended on 25 November 2016 to clarify details of the 
funding approved for the Oxford-Cambridge expressway road.
 