
The second episode of US political drama The West Wing is entitled Post Hoc, 
Ergo Propter Hoc – in which smarty-pants President Josiah Bartlet educates his 
minions on the meaning of the Latin phrase after his unpopularity in Texas is 
blamed on one of his gags. “After it, therefore because of it,” he puffs. “It 
means one thing follows the other, therefore it was caused by the other. But 
it’s not always true. In fact, it’s hardly ever true. We did not lose Texas 
because of the hat joke.”

The dialogue’s wonderfully self-satisfied, of course, but we could perhaps do 
with a touch of this kind of rebuttal in real-life politics here. When it comes 
to Brexit, each side seems to be indulging in the same kind of confirmation 
bias as Bartlet’s advisers, with each week bringing new economic data that 
convinces both campaigns they were right.

Last week the economy was shown to be either in rude health or about to crash 
following June’s vote. Prepare for more of this self-justification this week 
after the CBI’s “mixed picture” on the economy is published on Sunday, the 
thinktank NIESR issues an economic update on Wednesday, and theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has a big 
statistics day on Thursday.

The numbers will all show that everybody who opined on the referendum was 
right all along. There will be no exceptions.

Chasing the odds on Ladbrokes and Hill’s

Perhaps the only section of the UK that cannot now claim to have been right 
about the referendum is the bookmaking industry, which heroically managed to 
call events even more incorrectly than our opinion pollsters.

No matter, they will be out in force this week, with both Ladbrokes and bitter 
rivalWilliam Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/business/williamhill> announcing 
results – which should be buoyed by decent returns at Euro 2016.

Still, unusually for a bookie, William Hill is in the middle of an unlucky 
streak that has involved it losing (a) at the Cheltenham festival; (b) its tag 
as the UK’s best run bookie; and (c) its chief executive, following the 
departure of James Henderson earlier this month. Hills is also now possibly the 
subject of a takeover deal involving online gambling group 888 Holdings and 
bingo hall operator Rank Group – which is a bit humbling: last year William 
Hill was bidding for 888.

Also up is Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes>, which 
is about to merge with rival Coral – assuming the pair can sell between 350 and 
400 betting shops to get the deal through competition regulators.

The market reckons the likely buyers will be Betfred or, possibly, Boyle 
Sports. Developing.

Borrowing? The drinks are on NatWest …

The doyen of City journalism, Christopher Fildes, has always been fond of 
quoting Sibley’s law. Giving capital to a bank (said the worldly banker, 
Nicholas Sibley) is like giving a gallon of beer to a drunk. You know what will 
become of it, but you don’t know which wall he will choose.

The financial crisis, of course, proved Sibley’s maxim yet again, but just 
because his words keep reflecting reality, please don’t think these things are 
achieved effortlessly: the challenge for bankers is to continue to find new 
ways of losing other people’s money – and last week they alighted on a gem.

Without a hint of irony, NatWest, part of the bailed-out-by-the-taxpayer Royal 
Bank of Scotland, paved the way for the introduction of negative interest rates 
for the first time in Britain. The warning could mean that an account holder 
with £1,000 in a NatWest account might see that shrink to £999 or less the 
following year.

Obviously NatWest is blaming extremely low global interest rates for this 
idea, but expect plenty more questions on the plan during the week, as RBS and 
rival HSBC report results – while the Bank of England’s monetary policy 
committee also meets to set interest rates. First question to NatWest: if you 
charge savers, how much will you pay borrowers?
 