
One of you complained on the Guardian blog recently that this column always 
follows a similar formula – personal anecdote, a little bit about sport on TV, 
finishing with a reference back to the anecdote – and why do I not consider 
shaking it up a bit? My natural instinct is to reply that if you want to 
influence the future of journalism, buy a flipping newspaper. Also, I am 
reluctant to tinker with a winning line-up but in this exciting new interactive 
world in which we live in (as my friend Paul McCartney might say), I feel duty 
bound to take notice.

It occurs to me, however, that my reacting to criticism on the blog may 
actually count as a personal anecdote in itself. So, in a radical change to 
normal procedure, let us begin with a second personal anecdote.

I do not feel comfortable on bank holiday weekends, which in Britain seem to 
be little more than four-day drinking opportunities. By early Saturday evening 
Leeds was positively Hogarthian, and seeking directions to a pub where I was 
due to meet some friends, I was inclined to adapt the war reporter Edward 
Behr's famous question, and ask: "Anybody here sober, and speak English?"

As a moderate drinker, I find it hard to fit in when the nation is in its 
cups, so in a futile attempt to catch up, I drank two bottles of Newcastle 
Brown in what for me was quick succession. As a result I felt queasy when I 
retired to bed, which brings me to what might count as personal anecdote number 
three.

I find it difficult to refund, as it were, when the stomach clearly craves a 
clear-out. Billy Connolly had a brilliant routine about the "casual vomit" 
favoured by Glasgow dock-workers on their way back to work after a skinful at 
lunchtime. That is not me, I am afraid. There is nothing casual – and 
apologies, United Kingdom, if you are essaying a little light breakfast in the 
face of a powerful hangover – about my regurgitation. In fact, after lengthy 
and noisy travails, I found myself unable to do it.

Fortunately, I have no such difficulty when it comes to the column – as many 
of you are kind enough to point out – and feel quite happy giving another 
outing to a PG Wodehouse quote that has appeared here before. "It is never 
difficult," the great man wrote, "to distinguish between a Scotsman with a 
grievance and a ray of sunshine." Which, for some reason, often comes to mind 
in relation toSir Alex Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sir-alex-ferguson>.

Interviewed on Sky after Manchester United's victory over Everton, the manager 
was moaning about the visitors' time-wasting. His argument was that the five 
minutes' added time benefited Everton, who were looking for an equaliser, 
meaning the offenders – in his eyes – would benefit from their transgression.

Immediately before Javier Hernández's late winner, however, it was Ferguson 
who was pointing to his watch demanding the officials take note of any delays 
and add time on. Either he wants additional time to be calculated accurately or 
he does not.

Occasionally, Sir Alex, I fear the unworthy will get rewards to which they are 
not entitled. Look at the number of times Two Pints of Lager and a Packet 
of Crisps has been recommissioned.

Sir Alex's polar opposite, in league position and much else, Avram Grant, 
could also be observed at close quarters on Saturday as he led West Ham United 
– if that is the word I am looking for – to defeat at Chelsea. "You wonder 
about his powers of motivation," said ESPN's commentator Jon Champion over the 
obligatory close-up of relegation‑threatened manager. "He cuts a hangdog figure 
on the touchline, moreClement Freud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/clement-freud> than Alex Ferguson."

This was an exciting new take on Grant's mien, which is usually likened to 
Larry Grayson trying to cope with a deep personal tragedy. I assume Champers' 
reference is to a dog food commercial in which Freud sat next to a bloodhound 
called Henry wearing an identical expression to the dog.

Well, if we are using the entire history of popular culture as our 
pick 'n' mix counter, I should like to compare Grant to the deadpan comedian 
Robb Wilton, whose best-known routine began: "The day war broke out, my wife 
said: 'What good are you?'" – prefacing a tale of vaguely endearing 
incompetence.

Grant is somewhat similar, adrift in a sea of troubles not entirely of his 
making, but blithely trying to muddle through. The other irresistible point of 
reference for him is Buster Keaton when the house falls down around him. You 
can see why he looks especially rueful at present, though, facing his last four 
games as a Premier League manager. I think it unlikely he will manage there 
again after the end of this season. I may be wrong, but I should say there is 
more chance of Frankie Boyle being named the new Blue Peter presenter.
 