How many sisters did Charlotte Brontë have?  Two  Three  Four There were five 
daughters in the Brontë family: Charlotte, Anne, Emily, Elizabeth and Maria.  
Five As children, Charlotte and her brother Branwell wrote stories set in a 
fantasy world. What was the name of that world?  Narnia  Angria  Rodania  
Eldasia Under what male pseudonym did Charlotte Brontë publish Jane Eyre?  
Currer Bell  Charles Brontë  Christian Brown  Cole Boseley In Jane Eyre, Jane's 
friend Helen dies from tuberculosis. Which of Charlotte's sisters is this based 
on?  Maria  Elizabeth  Both Eldest Brontë sisters Maria and Elizabeth 
contracted tuberculosis and were sent home from school, where they both died in 
1825. Which previously male name did Charlotte popularise as a female name in 
one of her novels?  Lyndall  Carol  Lindesay  Shirley The main character in 
Charlotte's 1849 novel was given the name that her father had intended to give 
a son. One of Charlotte's author friends described her as "underdeveloped, thin 
and more than half a head shorter than I ... [with] a reddish face, large mouth 
and many teeth gone; altogether plain" (ouch). Who was it?  William Thackeray  
Elizabeth Gaskell  Charles Dickens  George Eliot "It is her finest novel. All 
her force, and it is the more tremendous for being constricted, goes into the 
assertion, 'I love. I hate. I suffer.'" About which Charlotte Brontë work did 
Virginia Woolf say this?  Shirley  Tales of Angria  Jane Eyre  Villette 
Charlotte died the oldest of the Brontë sisters. What age was she when she died?
 26  30  38  41 How many of Charlotte's novels were published in her lifetime?  
One  Two  Three Jane Eyre (1847), Shirley (1849), Villette (1853) were 
published when Charlotte was alive; The Professor (1857) and the unfinished 
Emma came after her death.  Four Elizabeth Gaskell wrote The Life of Charlotte 
Brontë in 1857. What scandalous gossip did she deliberately omit from the 
biography?  That Charlotte's brother Branwell was a suspected opium eater.  
That Charlotte had fallen in love and written letters to a married man.
Charlotte met Constantin Héger in Brussels when she taught English at his 
school. Héger showed Gaskell the letters in 1856, but later ripped them up.  
That Charlotte had known William Thackeray's wife was in an asylum when she 
dedicated Jane Eyre to him.  That Charlotte's former school master attempted to 
sue her because he thought the abusive Mr. Brocklehurst in Jane Eyre was based 
on him.  You got…  How many moors have you plodded around? How many Byronic 
brooders have you romanced? You sly dog.  “I would always rather be happy than 
dignified.” And you can be pretty happy about that score!  As Jane Eyre said: 
“You are human and fallible.” Try again!  This quiz was about Charlotte! It 
wasn't even about Anne! How did you get such a low score? Try again.  This quiz 
was about Charlotte! It wasn't even about Anne! How did you get such a low 
score? Try again.  Challenge your friends Submit answers  