
It's cheesy, it's overblown, it's got Robert Carlyle smothered in glitter 
playing Rumpelstiltskin – what's not to love about ABC's Once Upon a Time? 
Ginnifer Goodwin (she who plays the bit-part best friend in every other 
Hollywood romcom) stars as Snow White in a small town called Storybrooke, home 
to multiple fairytale characters going about their everyday, humdrum lives.

It's a simple premise – transport a bunch of folk from the Enchanted Forest 
and plonk them into regular day jobs, with regular(ish) dramas. Add very glossy 
production values and a Disneyfied sparkle to proceedings, and it's pretty much 
the best Sunday night comfort viewing this side of Antiques Roadshow. So what's 
happened so far?

First, they're all there because the Evil Queen Regina cast "The Curse" to 
make Storybrookers suffer forever by giving them cushy lives in small-town 
America. Snow White's torment is being separated from her true love, Prince 
Charming (because he's in a coma – yes, there is something of the daytime soap 
opera about this show), but as she has no memories of ever having met him, it 
doesn't seem too harsh. She does wear a lot of pastel mohair, though. Maybe 
that's the real punishment.

At the end of season one, The Curse was lifted by Snow White and Prince 
Charming's daughter Emma (who grew up in the real world, and is the same age as 
her parents – because of, er, reasons) and her son Henry, who also happens to 
be the adopted son of Regina. In season two, it all goes switcheroo: Emma and 
Snow are trapped back in the Enchanted Forest withMulan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mulan>, Aurora 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aurora_%28Disney%29> and Captain Hook (a heavily 
eyelinered bad boy who is perhaps the most oestrogen-baiting character 
television has produced).

Meanwhile, Robert Carlyle's Rumpelstiltskin continues to be smothered in 
glitter. Yes, Robert Carlyle. Present, compelling and calling everyone "dearie".

Because the show is made by Disney-owned ABC, these aren't any old fairytale 
characters. They are, specifically, the Disney versions: from Emilie de Ravin's 
Belle (from Beauty and the Beast) in that iconic yellow dress, to the seven 
dwarves. The Disney references are hammered home clumsily, but that's often 
part of the appeal: this is not a subtle show. And, because the show is made by 
Adam 'Lost' Horowitz and his buddy Edward Kitsis, it's also full of throwaway 
Lost references (see: the Apollo bars and Ajira Airways).

While Lost had more of an alpha-male bent, this show is refreshingly heavy on 
mothers and daughters and female characters in general. The main protagonists 
are two female best friends – who happen to be mother and daughter – fighting a 
female villain (that's Regina; do keep up).

Season one did well in US ratings, meaning there was more cash to splash in 
season two. Cash that has been splashed predominantly on more ridiculous CGI 
than ever, the philosophy being that if it can be rendered in eye-bleeding CGI, 
it will be. If you found Storybrooke's Wonderland migraine-inducing the first 
time round, wait for what they find at the top of the beanstalk this Sunday 
(spoiler alert: more CGI landscapes, dearie).

This is a feel-good, cuddly show. Despite high stakes, no one is really evil. 
Every baddie, no matter how many people's hearts they have ripped out, is 
really just a misunderstood woobie whose mummy never gave them a cuddle. (Oh, 
the mother issues.) Plus, no one really dies. Think of it as the anti-Game of 
Thrones, or like True Blood; a supernatural soap opera.

It's brilliant if you're a fairytale fan (but not a purist) or if you dig a 
show manned by women – even if they come with sniggersome names, dressed as 
burlesque ringmasters. Here's looking at you, Evil Queen Regina.

• Once Upon a Time is on Channel 5 on Sundays at 9pm.
 