
The Guardian last night called on the Director of Public Prosecutions to 
prosecute Jonathan Aitken for perjury and conspiracy to pervert the course of 
justice after the dramatic collapse yesterday of his libel trial.

Aitken, the former cabinet minister, discontinued his libel action against the 
Guardian and Granada Television after new evidence proved he had lied to the 
High Court. He now faces public disgrace and a legal bill for pounds 1.8 
million.

Aitken, who lost his Thanet South seat at the election, failed to turn up for 
yesterday's two-minute hearing, in which his counsel, Charles Gray QC, agreed 
Aitken would pay almost all of the defendants' legal bill.

Aitken's action collapsed after the Guardian produced new evidence in the High 
Court on Wednesday: British Airways flight coupons and Budget car hire 
documents showed the ex-MP committed perjury about the payment of a bill for 
his controversial stay at the Paris Ritz in September 1993.

The documents proved that his wife, Lolicia, and his daughter, Victoria, then 
14, had flown directly to Geneva, and had never visited Paris as he had told 
the High Court. His wife had flown back from Geneva, while her daughter went on 
to boarding school.

That meant Mrs Aitken could never - as he insisted - have paid the bill for 
the Ritz, where the then minister for defence procurement spent time with Saudi 
businessmen. The Guardian said the bill had been paid by an Arab associate, in 
contravention of ministerial rules.

On Tuesday, Aitken had filed a signed witness statement from his daughter, now 
17, in which she told how she had travelled to Paris that weekend by ferry and 
train.

Her story backed up her father's version, but was exploded by the Guardian's 
discovery of the BA documents. Aitken had intended to produce his daughter as a 
witness on Thursday, where, had she stuck by her statement, she would have been 
required to lie on oath. But because of the Guardian's evidence, Mr Gray on 
Thursday asked Mr Justice Popplewell for an adjournment.

Aitken announced later that night his marriage was over, and by then his 
lawyers had already negotiated the humilating settlement.

Aitken faces the prospect of a criminal trial and an immediate custodial 
sentence if convicted of perjury.

The Guardian's editor, Alan Rusbridger, last night wrote to Paul Condon, the 
Commissioner of Metropolitan Police, and the Director of Public Prosecutions, 
Dame Barbara Mills, to investigate what he described as 'a well-laid and 
carefully co-ordinated conspiracy to pervert the course of justice'.

Mr Rusbridger said yesterday: 'Jonathan Aitken seems to have impaled himself 
on the simple sword of truth. For three years he has lied to newspapers, lied 
to the Cabinet Secretary, lied to the Prime Minister and lied to his 
colleagues. Now he has made the fatal mistake of lying on oath to the High 
Court.

'Worse than that, Aitken - a former cabinet minister and a Privy Counsellor - 
intended to put his teenage daughter in the witness box to tell further lies to 
save his skin. This was the man who promised to use the trusty shield of 
British fair play.' He added: 'The case demonstrated how ineffective official 
procedures are in exposing dishonesty at the heart of public life.

'That role has almost exclusively been performed by the media in the past five 
years. But the libel laws make such reporting a dangerous and potentially 
prohibitive exercise. The Lord Chancellor should move urgently to reform the 
laws which make London the libel capital of the world.' Aitken also faced other 
allegations that he: * Procured prostitutes for Arab guests at a Berkshire 
health farm, Inglewood.

* Falsely passed himself off as Inglewood's owner to conceal the identity of 
the hydro's Arab purchasers.

* Lied while a director of TV-am, and covered up a plan to give Arab investors 
control of the channel.

* Concealed his links, while minister for defence procurement, with a Lebanese 
arms dealer involved in an arms contract between a British firm and the 
Lebanese government.

* Became financially dependent on his Arab contacts, including Prince 
Mohammed, the son of King Fahd of Saudi Arabia.

Aitken always denied an Arab associate had paid his Ritz bill. He claimed he 
arranged to meet his wife and daughter at the hotel during the weekend of 
September 17-19, 1993.

But they flew directly from London to Geneva on an 8.30am BA flight from 
Heathrow, an internal BA investigation revealed. Mrs Aitken then hired a car at 
Geneva airport at 12.02pm, Budget rent-a-car records showed.

The former Conservative MP maintained his wife returned to the Ritz on the 
Sunday from Switzerland and paid his hotel bill that afternoon using Dollars 
3,000 dollars he had given her.

But Budget records show the car she hired was returned in Geneva at 6.35pm on 
Sunday night - she could not have paid his hotel bill in Paris two hours 
earlier.

In April 1995, Aitken - then chief secretary to the Treasury - made his 
infamous 'sword of truth' speech. He resigned from the cabinet three months 
later.
 