
Fit and healthy people who worry about developing an illness may be increasing 
their risk of heart disease by unnecessarily fretting over their health, 
research suggests.

A study of more than 7,000 people over 12 years found that those with health 
anxiety at the start of the study were about 70% more likely to develop heart 
disease than those without that state of mind. Additionally, the researchers 
found that the higher the reported anxiety, the higher the risk of heart 
disease.

Anxiety <https://www.theguardian.com/society/anxiety> is a known risk factor 
for heart disease but the Norwegian authors of the paper believe it is the 
first to look specifically at health anxiety, which is characterised by a 
persistent preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious illness and seeking 
medical help, despite the absence of any physical disease.

The findings, published in BMJ Open on Thursday 
<http://bmjopen.bmj.com/lookup/doi/10.1136/bjopen-2016-012914>, suggest that 
far from health anxiety protecting people from heart disease through increased 
monitoring and frequency of checkups, it may have the opposite effect.

The lead author, Dr Line Iden Berge, from the division of psychiatry at 
Sandviken University hospital in Bergen, Norway, said: “We hypothesised that 
people with health anxiety would have reduced risk because they would take 
better care of themselves.

“The results suggest it’s better, instead of worrying about what’s going on 
with your body and running to the doctor for any physical health problem, to 
seek a proper diagnosis and help for the anxiety disorder.”

The study analysed 7,052 participants in the long-term collaborative research 
projectNorwegian Hordaland health study <http://husk-en.b.uib.no/>, all of whom 
were born between 1953 and 1957.


They filled in questionnaires about their health, lifestyle and educational 
attainment and had a physical checkup between 1997 and 1999.

Levels of health anxiety were assessed using a validated scale and the top 10% 
of the sample – 710 people – were considered to have health anxiety.

The heart health of all the participants was tracked up to the end of 2009. 
Anyone who received treatment for, or whose death was linked to, coronary 
artery disease occurring within a year of entering the study, was excluded on 
the grounds that they might already have been ill.

Loneliness linked to 30% increase in heart disease and stroke risk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/19/loneliness-linked-to-30-increase-in-heart-disease-and-stroke-risk>
In all, 234 (3.3%) of the entire sample had an ischaemic event – a heart 
attack or bout of acute angina – during the monitoring period. But the 
proportion of those succumbing to heart disease was twice as high (just over 
6%) among those who displayed health anxiety compared with those who did not 
(3%).

After taking account of other potentially influential factors, those with 
health anxiety at the start of the study were found to be 73% more likely to 
develop heart disease than those who did not have anxiety at the outset.

As it was an observational study, no firm conclusions can be drawn about cause 
and effect. Limitations include the frequent co-existence of health anxiety 
with other mental health issues, making it hard to differentiate, and the fact 
that the health anxiety index relies on self-reported symptoms and does not 
discern between imagined illness and more legitimate reasons for concern.

Emily Reeve, senior cardiac nurse at the British Heart Foundation 
<https://www.bhf.org.uk/>, said: “It’s natural for people to worry if they feel 
they might be unwell. But anxiety and stress can trigger unhealthy habits, such 
as smoking or eating badly, which put you at greater risk of heart disease.

 “While we don’t know if the worried well are directly putting themselves at 
risk of a heart attack, it’s clear that reducing unnecessary anxiety can have 
health benefits. If you are experiencing health anxiety, speak to your doctor.”
 