
'I was living with this constant fear that I would be dead in three months," 
says Mark. The 32-year-old from Manchester had a pain in his lungs and 
immediately suspected advanced lung cancer. It became, he says, "an obsession". 
His GP was certain it wasn't cancer, but Mark couldn't stop thinking about it. 
He returned to his doctor several times, eventually persuading him to arrange a 
scan at the hospital. This too showed he didn't have the disease. Eventually 
Mark realised what he was suffering from was not lung cancer, but health 
anxiety.

Catherine O'Neill, services manager at the helpline charity Anxiety UK, says 
the disorder "is one of the things we get most calls about. The common fears 
are HIV, cancer and illnesses at the more severe end of the spectrum. Quite 
often, we get people who nursed someone through cancer and they become 
preoccupied with the thought that they have the disease too, or it develops 
because they have heard or read about someone with the illness."

Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> anxiety is characterised 
by the excessive seeking of reassurance, from doctors or from family members. 
"What we always tell people on our helpline is that reassurance doesn't work," 
says O'Neill. "I have seen people who have convinced themselves they have a 
brain tumour – they go to their GP, they go for scans. When they are reassured 
they don't have a tumour, they still think what if they missed it? What if it 
was too small to see? What if this is one of those NHS mistakes? Because the 
media highlights it so much when things do go wrong, it feeds the feeling in 
people with health anxiety that 'I could be the one that it goes wrong for'. 
People ring up and ask, 'Do you think I've got cancer?' I can't offer that 
reassurance because how would I know? But we do know that reassurance only 
works in the short term. It isn't long before those fears return."

Another problem, O'Neill says, is that health anxiety – which used to be 
called hypochondria – is not taken seriously. "It can be seen as a bit of a 
joke, but it can have a serious impact on someone's life."

Mark agrees. "When you're in the grip of it, it can be terrifying. It affects 
all aspects of your life – your work, your relationships – because you can't 
think about anything else, and you're living with this expectation of impending 
death."

According to Professor Peter Tyrer, head of the centre for mental health at 
Imperial College London, "about 1-2% of the population have pathological health 
anxiety", and in people who have already had treatment for a condition, it can 
be around 10%. He thinks the number of people affected is rising.

The internet, he says, is one reason. "Everyone looks up their symptoms, but 
the internet tells you everything and nothing." O'Neill agrees: "Type in flu 
symptoms and you will be able to find a huge range of diseases from a common 
cold to the early stages of an HIV infection."

Several studies have shown that cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), which 
aims to change thought patterns and behaviour, can reduce the symptoms and 
hospital appointments. But waiting lists on the NHS can be long in some areas, 
and the therapy is not widespread. Tyrer is now leading a study of 448 people 
with health anxiety who are being treated in five hospitals. Treatment takes 
place in hospital clinics that deal with the illness the sufferer feels they 
have - such as cardiology or neurology clinics. "If you say, 'We want you to 
see a psychologist or psychiatrist' they say, 'I'm physically ill, not mentally 
ill'. So they are treated by general nurses who have been trained in this 
technique."

The study will finish in 2012, but early results look promising. "We have had 
dozen of letters from the patients saying how their lives have been turned 
around," says Tyrer. He describes a patient who had been treated for heart 
disease who had not been out of his house for a year because he was so 
terrified of having a heart attack; after a course of CBT, he was able to go on 
holiday. Tyrer is aiming to prove such treatment will eventually save the NHS 
money by reducing the need for tests and emergency hospital admissions.

One CBT technique involves getting patients who believe their headaches are a 
sign of a brain tumour to create a pie chart where they imagine all the people 
who woke up that day with a headache, and list the causes for it according to 
probability: dehydration, a cold, migraine, tiredness, too much caffeine.

"Sometimes this is a complete revelation to them," says Dr Helen Seivewright, 
clinical research fellow at Imperial College, who is also working on the study. 
"It opens up this world where not every symptom means the worst diagnosis."
 