
If you want to stave off death for as long as possible, you might want to 
reach for a tennis racket.

Scientists attempting to tease apart the benefits of different sports have 
found that regularly taking part in sports such as badminton or tennis reduces 
your risk of death at any given age by almost 50%, with swimming and aerobics 
also proving protective.

By contrast, running and football appeared to have little effect, although the 
authors caution that this could be down to the nature of the study itself.


“It is the first big scale population study to say ‘is participation in sport 
protective in terms of your long-term mortality?’The answer is yes, it does 
appear to be,” said Charlie Foster, co-author of the study from the University 
of Oxford. However, which sport you choose may make a difference.

Published in the British Journal of Sports Medicine 
<http://bjsm.bmj.com/lookup/doi/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096822> by an 
international team of researchers, the study incorporated responses from 80,306 
adults aged 30 and over in England and Scotland who were quizzed on their 
health and exercise through national surveys conducted at various points 
between 1994 and 2008.

Each participant was asked a series of questions about their lifestyle and 
exercise, including which sports they had taken part in during the previous 
four weeks and how frequently they did so, as well as the intensity of the 
exercise and its duration.

The survival of the participants was surveyed, on average, nine years later, 
during which time 8,790 participants had died, with 1,909 deaths down to 
cardiovascular disease.

The results reveal that fewer than half of the participants, just over 44%, 
met the national guidelines for the recommended levels of exercise of 150 
minutes of moderate physical activity a week.

The researchers then compared the risk of death among those who took part in a 
sport to those who did not participate in that particular activity, taking into 
account factors such as age, sex, whether they smoked, BMI, other exercise and 
education.


The results revealed that cycling, for example, was associated with a 15% 
reduced risk of death. “We can tease out specifically that little extra 
difference between those who do cycle and those who don’t,” said Foster.

When applied to the other five categories of sport explored, it was found that 
swimming was linked to a 28% reduced risk of death, while the figure was 47% 
for racket sports and 27% for aerobic exercise such as keep fit or dance. 
Neither running nor football – a category that encompassed both football and 
rugby – was linked to a reduced risk of death.

When the team looked just at the risk of death from cardiovascular disease, 
they found that swimming reduced the risk by 41%, racket sports by 56% and 
aerobics by 36%. Running, cycling and football showed no protective effect.

The reasons behind the differences, says Foster, are complex. “They all have 
different physiological demands, and they all have different physical, social 
and mental benefits,” he said.

But those who run or enjoy football shouldn’t hang up their trainers, he adds. 
“We are 100% certain that we know participation in these sports is good for 
you, that is very clear, but what we haven’t seen yet is how well those 
benefits translate over the long-term into preventing death,” said Foster, 
pointing out that a number of factors relating to the study could be behind the 
apparent lack of protective effect.

Among them, he says, there were very few deaths among runners and footballers, 
the number of footballers was small and it was possible that runners 
over-reported the time they spent pounding the road.

Ulf Ekelund, a physical activity epidemiologist at the University of Cambridge 
andprofessor in physical activity and health 
<http://www.nih.no/om-nih/organisasjon/ansatte/ekelund-ulf/> at the Norwegian 
School of Sport Sciences, in Oslo, said the key message from the research was 
not that one activity was more likely to stave off death than another, but that 
sport in general is beneficial.

“There is so much evidence that physical activity, including sports 
participation and all kinds of exercises, are associated with a reduced risk of 
both non-communicable diseases and the risk of death,” he said.


“The take home message is that if [you] do sport, [you] should continue doing 
sport. If [you] don’t like to do sport [you] should try to find some other kind 
of exercise,” he added. “You shouldn’t stop running if you are running and 
start playing tennis – I don’t think that would be any better. I think you 
should continue doing what you are doing and what you enjoy doing.”

 