
Hennessy has confirmed that it will no longer sponsor the Newbury race which 
bears its name and which has become such a familiar landmark in each jumps 
season.The 60th Hennessy Gold Cup, won by Native River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/native-river-thistlecrack-colin-tizzard-newbury-hennessy-toys-horse-racing>
 just 10 days ago, will be the last, as was widely predicted, bringing to an 
end one of the longest running sponsorships in all of sport.

Speculation continues to centre on Ladbrokes as the expected successor sponsor 
for the race, a handicap chase over 3¼ miles. That would be a controversial 
deal, sinceLadbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> is not an 
authorised betting partner under the terms of racing’s year-old policy and 
racecourses are not supposed to sign new deals with non-ABP firms.

Native River and Thistlecrack are Colin Tizzard’s Newbury playmates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/native-river-thistlecrack-colin-tizzard-newbury-hennessy-toys-horse-racing>
Newbury, however, is one of several major tracks that has not committed to the 
ABP policy. Ladbrokes recently merged with Coral but the expectation is that 
the race will carry only the Ladbrokes name. Course officials confined 
themselves to saying: “Once there is any further significant news regarding 
sponsorship at this race meeting, Newbury racecourse will issue another news 
release.”

The Hennessy, which offered total prize money of almost £200,000 this year, 
was founded in 1957 and staged at Cheltenham until 1960. The inaugural running 
was won by Mandarin, owned by a member of the Hennessy family.

Arkle won the race twice, despite being burdened with 12st 7lb on each 
occasion, while Burrough Hill Lad and Denman have also achieved notable 
weight-carrying successes in the race. One Man, Teeton Mill and Bobs Worth all 
won the Hennessy on their way to greater glory in the King George or the 
Cheltenham Gold Cup. Many Clouds became the first horse to win both the 
Hennessy and the Grand National in the 2014‑15 season.

Jo Thornton, managing director of Moet Hennessy, said: “We are enormously 
grateful to the directors and team at Newbury racecourse, who have always 
delivered racing of the highest quality, at one of the UK’s most iconic 
racecourses. Hennessy are proud to have worked with Newbury in creating such an 
important and enjoyable day in the racing calendar. We wish them every 
continued success.”

Dominic Burke, Newbury’s chairman, expressed reciprocal thanks, saying: 
“Everything comes to an end at some point and it is fitting that the 
sponsorship is drawing to a close after such a thrilling race to mark the 60th 
Hennessy Gold Cup.”
 