
As the Trumpton town clock ticked, Captain Flack, in his marvellous helmet and 
matching, equally marvellous moustache, sounded the alarm.

 His men slid down the greasy pole and assembled before him. Captain Flack 
blew his whistle and began his roll call: 'Hugh, Pugh, Barney Macgrew, 
Cuthbert, Dibble, Grubb.' Each week it was the same: each fireman snapped 
smartly to attention as Flack called his name. Then the crew climbed aboard the 
fire engine and rode through town ringing the bell proudly, bent on rectifying 
some minor mishap. Cat in the belfry, bonfire out of control. That kind of 
thing. But if one of Captain Flack's men had been missing, society would have 
collapsed and the clockwork order of Trumpton would have ended.

 Captain Flack's roll call still remains one of the most memorably rhythmic 
pieces of poetry I know, all the more potent for having been sung into my ears 
when I was a little boy in the late sixties. I was young and impressionable 
then, and weekly repetition lodged a memory deep in my heart. There it joined 
lots of others: the parallel palm trees that parted gently to allow Thunderbird 
2 to go down the runway; Basil Brush boom-booming his snout into Mr Roy's 
chest; Bill and Ben shambling out of their pots; Andy Pandy and Teddy, 
unbearably, unbearably, waving goodbye.

 When these memories were unlocked during Are You Sitting Comfortably? (BBC1), 
an insultingly brief history of children's TV, it was as painful as when I 
learned that Petra (John Noakes's dog on Blue Peter) had died, or that the Blue 
Peter garden had been vandalised. Somebody had trampled over my memories, just 
as some unfeeling lump had crushed Percy Thrower's flowers - someone without a 
heart, without a soul.

 To see the clips from some of my favourite childhood shows was painful enough 
- it has been nearly 30 years since Bill and Ben climbed out of their 
flowerpots and into my life. Their reappearance was more than disturbing. Once 
the Flowerpot Men were my friends; now they are ancient history, and all that 
remains is the dust of their earlier significance.

 But pain became revulsion when these tender memories were traduced in this 
lazy programme, which took the cherished stuff of childhood, chopped it roughly 
and threw it into the same old celebrity soup that slops around our screens, 
offering us too little, too often. Between clips of children's programmes from 
Muffin The Mule to Teletubbies, mere celebrities said things that were banal, 
false or ludicrous. But this is the way bad film-makers do their TV history: 
grab the usual suspects - Anthea Turner, Gaby Roslin, Gary Lineker - with 
nothing to say and get them to say it again and again. Now I know what happened 
to those cabbages they used to give to the loser in Crackerjack - they became 
the talking heads in this show.

 How much more interesting it would have been to have the programme-makers 
themselves talking about their work, rather than some unendurable lemon saying 
nothing in particular. How much more intelligent to have an argument about the 
role of children's TV in our cultural memory, rather than Vanessa Feltz and her 
ilk saying something stupid.

 Angela Rippon, the former newsreader, recalled: 'I might be sitting reading 
stories - a terrible train crash, loss of life, political scandal, economic 
crises - but somehow you knew that if you cast your mind back just a few 
minutes before the Six O'Clock News and thought about Dougall, and Brian the 
Snail, and Zebedee and Ermintrude the Cow, you thought that really everything 
was all right.' Ludicrous: childhood TV never made the adult world of crashes, 
crises and horror all right; rather, it heightened the horror. When the Magic 
Roundabout ended with a boing from Zebedee and the title sequence, millions of 
children realised what Rippon did not - that the long night of adult 
seriousness was descending.

 False: the Magic Roundabout preceded the 5.45pm news.

 Banal: this was the simulacrum of nostalgia, squeezing memories into 
soundbite-sized chunks. It wasn't as messy or as poignant as real memories of 
things that mean a lot. It would have been better if Rippon had kept her 
counsel.

 There is a better programme to be made about children's TV, which would 
tackle nostalgia, the evolution of children's TV and its role in shaping our 
society. Consider Trumpton again. Why was this town so orderly? Why did the 
drama end each week with the fire brigade playing a clockwork waltz in the park 
bandstand while puppets strolled around as though they too were wound up? I'll 
tell you why.

 This programme was made in 1968, while London swung uncontrollably, while 
Paris revolted noisily and all bourgeois society seemed poised to crumble. The 
Trumpton-Camberwick-Green-Chigley military-industrial complex was clearly the 
BBC's answer to this looming anarchy. It portrayed order as desirable, 
restraint as necessary, some dimly-remembered pseudo-Edwardian England as the 
model of a well-ordered society, and uniformed men (the troops of Pippin Fort, 
or Trumpton's firemen) as the guardians of civilisation. Obviously in this 
regard, Captain Flack was a lackey of the counter-revolution.
 