
Alex Higgins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-higgins> will play his 
first professional match for five years on October 23, just after publication 
of a compelling unauthorised biography and before a one-man play with songs, 
based on his turbulent life, is staged at the Millennium Point Theatre, Derry.

Higgins has entered the Benson & Hedges Championship at the Towers Snooker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/snooker> Club, Mansfield. The winner will 
qualify for the Benson & Hedges Masters at Wembley in February, an event the 
53-year-old Irishman has twice won.

His last tournament appearance was in Plymouth in August 1997. He was escorted 
from the venue by police and discovered at 4am sprawled outside a nightclub, 
victim of an assault with an iron bar. Discharging himself from hospital, he 
pitched up at the house of Holly Hayse, a girlfriend who was allowing him to 
live in a caravan in her garden.

The last of a series of incidents ended with Hayse - as she confirmed- 
stabbing him several times with a knife. "I still love him deeply. I want to 
marry him and put his life back on the rails," she said on being acquitted, 
Higgins having declined to give evidence.

But this was not a task which lay within either her or anyone else's 
capacities as Bill Borrows in The Hurricane (Atlantic Books; published on 
October 10) demonstrates. Higgins repeatedly wore out his welcome, treating 
strangers like lackeys and friends like slaves.

He has had two brushes with cancer - of the throat and the palate - and three 
years ago was lining up a Dublin law firm in a mass action against tobacco 
companies, including the sponsors of his comeback tournament. Looking better 
than when his waist was a mere 26 inches he is again flirting 
characteristically with self-destruction in his resumption of his drinking and 
smoking habits.

He has often been seen since, hustling pool or snooker for £10 a game in 
Ireland and Manchester and was seen in the Red Lion, Gatley topping up his 
glass with left-over beer.

One regular told a familiar story: "Everyone round here has tried to help Alex 
at some point and you just get it all thrown back in your face. We've all felt 
sorry for him, bought him beers, given him a few bob, even given him somewhere 
to get his head down. But he always ends up abusing your good deeds and we've 
all given up on him."

He blames the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association for his 
troubles. There were alleged irregularities in the governing body's conduct of 
two disciplinary hearings in 1992 and 1994 and he was granted legal aid to 
issue a high court writ but preferred to nourish a sense of grievance.

His solicitor also filed 17 complaints against the WPBSA which the governing 
body has declined to deal with, but a backlog of complaints against him from 
referees appears to have been written off.

From two world titles in 1972 and 1982 he had sunk to 156th by the time of the 
Plymouth tournament. Higgins had sent his company bankrupt in 1991 owing a 
total of £461,000 and he became insolvent.

The 10am session at Mansfield on October 23 (admission £3) will be well 
attended. The opponent is Lee Spick, who is 22. "I'm not really looking forward 
to it," said Spick. "He used to be a great player and someone I really 
respected but I don't think it will be a nice atmosphere - if he turns up at 
all."

Those who remember him at his peak may hope he does not, preferring to replay 
memories - and videotapes - of Higgins at his best.
 