
Slavery is an open wound: it will never heal. As such it has provided an 
endless reserve of material for storytellers, a bottomless well of tragic arcs, 
epic betrayals, unexpected dimensions and uncharted secrets. What of the black 
slave owners of Virginia, asked Edward P Jones inThe Known World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jul/31/history.pulitzerprize>. What of 
the slaves who killed their children in order to set them free, askedToni 
Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/13/toni-morrison-home-son-love> in 
Beloved. What if, say, blacks had enslaved whites, asked Bernardine Evaristo in 
Blonde Roots. It is into the murky waters of this same well that first-time 
Ghanaian-American novelist Yaa Gyasi delved for the creation ofHomegoing, a 
hugely empathic, unflinching portrayal of west Africa’s role in the 
transatlantic slave trade.

The tale begins in the late 18th century in an Asante village, part of the 
Gold Coast which eventually became Ghana. A young girl, Effia Otcher, is sold 
by her father to a British slavetrader named James – as a bride, not as a slave 
– and taken to live with him in Cape Coast Castle, a fort overlooking the sea. 
The slaves are in dungeons underneath the castle, awaiting transit to the 
Americas and the Caribbean via the Middle Passage. Among them are ex-house 
servants, overflow prisoners of tribal and regional wars and unlucky captives 
sold to the Europeans for money and goods, such as 15-year-old Esi Asare, 
Effia’s half-sister. Esi was seized during a raid on her own village and 
brought to the castle by “bomboys”, local boys who worked for the British 
transporting cargo. In a series of subsequent interconnected stories, the 
bloodlines of these two women are followed through seven generations covering 
the associated histories of the US and Ghana up to the turn of the 21st century.

It is an enormous feat for a new writer, but Gyasi rises to the challenge. At 
the centre of each well-crafted, well-researched narrative episode there is a 
clearly defined and complex protagonist who we come to care deeply about, 
largely because of the extent of their suffering. As the generations unfold, 
each is powerless in the face of their history. Esi’s experience of the castle 
is harrowing: “There was no sunlight. Darkness was day and night and everything 
in between. Sometimes there were so many bodies stacked into the women’s 
dungeon that they all had to lie, stomach down, so that women could be stacked 
on top of them.”

Then there is Quey, Effia and James’s mixed-race son, unwilling to partake in 
the cruel family business of trading slaves and faced with the resulting loss 
of wealth, home and identity. Esi’s child, Ness, is born into slavery in the 
American south. She withstands the full atrocity of a life in which whippings 
were rife and random, and a five-minute break every three hours when picking 
cotton was a sign of “a good master”, and where attempts to escape were harshly 
punished, as Ness’s Yoruba husband, Sam, discovers.

As the generations unfold, each is powerless in the face of their history

Love is the glue that binds these life stories together, the chapters a series 
of couplings and begettings making way for the next in line. Gyasi’s portrayal 
of physical love between men and women makes for some of the novel’s most 
powerful scenes. This is Sam and Ness one night in their hut after they are 
married: “He runs his hands along her scabby back, and she does the same along 
his, and as they work together, clutching each other, some scars reopen. They 
are both bleeding now, both bride and bridegroom, in this unholy holy union. 
Breath leaves his mouth and enters hers, and they lie together until the 
roosters crow, until it’s time to return to the fields.” Later, Ness and Sam’s 
son Kojo, a “free black” in 1850s Baltimore, finds his own true love, Anna, by 
following “the sway of her butt”, and Gyasi bigheartedly describes his glee at 
grabbing on to it during lovemaking. What a gift it is to him, despite the 
injustice of the world around them, where even their freedom is still not sure 
of itself, “to fill his hands with the weight of her flesh”.

If there must be a purpose to the creation of yet another slave narrative 
other than to show how cruel, unfair, debased and horrific slavery was, it 
should be to convey the impact of it on modern life.Homegoing loses some of its 
urgency in the later segments, perhaps because there are fewer rapes, no 
bleeding love scenes, no sudden thefts of freedom. There is also too vast an 
array of lives and emotional interiors to take in; the book becomes overloaded, 
lacking a central thread, and we begin to forget. But this idea also seems 
significant, one thread of the intricate lace of the book. We may forget, or 
may want to forget, yet we cannot, because – as with Marcus and Marjorie, the 
novel’s contemporary, closing characters – slavery is a source of our confusion 
and discomfort, regardless of which side of the colour divide we descend from. 
So here is a book to help us remember. It is well worth its weight.

• Diana Evans’s The Wonder is published by Vintage. Homegoing 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/homegoing.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Penguin. To order a copy for £9.99 (RRP £12.99) go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online 
orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
 