
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> University is to give a 
former student an honorary degree, 46 years after it expelled him for 
protesting against apartheid.

Pete Cresswell was forced to leave in 1970 after taking part in the occupation 
of Liverpool University’s Senate House, alongside the future Channel 4 
newsreader, Jon Snow.

They were unhappy at the university’s investments in South Africa and the 
views of the then chancellor, Lord Salisbury, a known supporter of apartheid. 
AmongSalisbury’s pronouncements was 
<https://senatehouseoccupation.wordpress.com/documents/senate-house-occupation-papers/racialism-and-our-university-leaflet/>
: “Is it not a fact that one of the reasons for the present bloodbath in 
Nigeria is that the white government ceased to obtain and was succeeded by an 
entirely black government?”

Birmingham-born Cresswell, then a third year politics student, was the only 
one of the protesters to be expelled, after the university found him guilty of 
“conduct detrimental to the discharge of the university”. Snow was suspended 
for a year and never returned to complete his law degree. They, along with 
eight others, found themselves on the Economic League’s list of people not to 
be employed.

Cresswell, now 68, found himself “with the CV from hell” and ended up getting 
a job as a bus conductor and then a hospital porter “wheeling dead bodies 
about”. It took him many years to get a professional job; he became a social 
worker.

Divided cities: South Africa's apartheid legacy photographed by drone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/jun/23/south-africa-divided-cities-apartheid-photographed-drone>
The sit-in at Senate House lasted for 10 days and was attended by 300 
students. They argued that the duties of a university were to stand committed 
against “racialism”, secrecy, germ warfare research and oligarchy, according to 
a blog about the occupation by Gerry Cordon. By occupying Senate House, they 
were not impeding those duties but attempting to implement them, they claimed.

Others saw the protest differently. “So the latest epidemic of student protest 
finally infects Liverpool University and the outsider may be pardoned his 
bewilderment at the confusing developments over the past two or three days,” 
the Liverpool Daily Post wrote. “What is happening in our academic institutions 
is part of the same challenge to traditional authority that is taking place 
over the western world.”

Cresswell told the Guardian he was delighted to receive his honorary degree. 
He was the first person in his family to go to university and his parents were 
“devastated” at his expulsion. “I’m not necessarily proud of what I did. Pride 
is the wrong word. But I would stick by my political principles. In the end we 
were proved right, weren’t we?”
 