
The Swedish football season is dragging itself towards the finishing line and, 
when the league finally ends on 7 November, maybe the violence will stop too. 
Or perhaps it will just move on to the ice hockey.

It has been a long season. AIK, last year's double winners, are involved in a 
relegation battle. The standard of the top flight is incredibly poor. All the 
Swedish teams were out of European competition before September. And just to 
complete the misery, one well-known player is standing trial for rape.

But the saddest thing about the whole situation is the violence. Sweden 
appears to be where England was 30 years ago. There are fights before games, 
fights after games and fights during games. There are missiles. Anything goes.

AIK's fans are deemed by many to be the worst. In August a group of AIK fans 
threw stones and bottles at the visiting Levski Sofia team bus and clashed with 
police following a Europa League qualifier. The Bulgarian club's media officer 
and a masseur were hit by stones while two players suffered cuts.

The Levski president, Todor Batkov, was hit by a bottle. "It's shocking," he 
said. "Sweden is a civilised country and such scenes are completely 
inadmissible. I've been to so many countries and I've never seen such things." 
The Stockholm club were fined €60,000 (£52,750) but were probably expecting a 
more severe punishment as there had been incidents during a Champions League 
qualifier against Norwegian side Rosenborg just a few weeks earlier.

AIK, who are coached by the former Rangers player Alex Miller, are not the 
only club in trouble. In the second division, Hammarby (also a Stockholm team) 
have been involved in unsavoury scenes this season and, during one away game 
against IFK Norrkoping, the family section of Parken had to be evacuated after 
fighting broke out.

Hammarby were in the news last month when one of their co-managers, Michael 
Borgqvist, resigned after being threatened by the club's own fans. It is 
believed some of the texts sent to Borgqvist – a former AIK player – contained 
death threats. "The threats are criminal acts and we can't accept that so we 
have contacted the police," Hammarby's chief executive, Asa Sanemyr, said.

Borgqvist's co-manager, the former Manchester United winger Jesper Blomqvist, 
said: "Michael and I have talked about everything this season so I knew there 
were threats. I haven't received any threats myself but you start to think 
about what kind of environment you are working in. Who wants to be a coach 
under these conditions? It is extremely sad."

The problems are prevalent in the big cities, such as Gothenburg and 
Stockholm. AIK have had several managers in the past decade, such as Olle 
Nordin and Peter Larsson, who have had to leave after supporters put pressure 
on the board to sack them. This season the club appeared to bow to pressure 
from supporters to drop the player Walid Atta (although they claim he was left 
out of the team because he would not sign a new contract). After Atta had been 
dropped, AIK fans vandalised his car.

Earlier this year, AIK fans approached players and the coach at the club's 
training ground 
<http://www.aftonbladet.se/sportbladet/fotboll/sverige/allsvenskan/aik/article6973763.ab>
 to have "a chat" with the top people at the club, who then said: "What is said 
in such a meeting stays with the people at the meeting." It is a sign of how 
far things have gone.

At the same time, attendances are dwindling. The most recent Stockholm derby 
between AIK and Djurgarden was watched by 18,500 spectators; a few years ago 
that number would have been well above 30,000.

A recent survey, reported by the daily Svenska Dagbladet, showed that one in 
five Allsvenskan [the Swedish top flight] players have been threatened or 
bullied by fans. One in five! And for club officials the number was even 
higher: 31%.

Tore Brännberg, a social psychology researcher at Gothenburg University, told 
Svenska Dagbladet: "The main thing today is not the fighting between fans but 
fans turning against their own clubs. The fans [we are seeing today] think 
differently and see this as their religion, where AIK, IFK Gothenburg, Malmo or 
whatever team it is, is the most important thing in their life. And when things 
go badly they feel that they have to act."

Will next season be better? I doubt it. No one is prepared to take 
responsibility – neither the clubs nor the authorities. Fans who are caught 
vandalising or fighting are not given tough enough punishments. There is no 
deterrent.

Sepp Blatter this week congratulated England on how the country has dealt with 
the hooligan problem 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2010/oct/13/sepp-blatter-england-world-cup-2018>
. The Fifa president was, for once, right. In Sweden, meanwhile, everyone is 
wondering when and where the next act of hooliganism is going to take place.
 