 Peruvian commandos last night ended the four-month siege of the Japanese 
embassy compound in Lima in a surprise attack.
Peru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru> 's president, Alberto Fujimori, 
said one of the hostages, supreme court judge Carlos Giusti, had died in the 
operation. He was wounded and suffered a heart attack, the president said. He 
added that two government soldiers had been killed, and said that all 14 rebels 
in the compound were dead.

An explosion rocked the diplomatic suburb and flames and smoke poured from the 
embassy roof. Gunshots, scurrying soldiers and the fires suggested that the 
armed rebels offered some resistance. A report on local television said they 
were surprised while playing their daily game of football.

Ambulances rushed to the scene as military helicopters clattered overhead, and 
soldiers picked their way carefully through the mines and boobytraps laid by 
the guerrillas during 126 days of occupation.

Among the hostages was Peru 's foreign minister, Francisco Tudela, who was 
carried out on a stretcher. Morihisa Aoki, the Japanese ambassador, was also 
wounded but waved from an ambulance.

Freed hostages hugged and kissed one another and Peruvian forces jubilantly 
pulled down the Tupac Amaru flag.

President Fujimori later walked, looking victorious, into the compound, 
escorted by troops. He wore a bullet-proof vest.

The Japanese prime minister, Ryutaro Hashimoto, thanked Peru for the release 
of the hostages but expressed regret thatJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> had not been informed in advance of 
the decision to use force. Peru had earlier assured Tokyo that there would be 
no move to end the siege by force unless there was evidence the hostages were 
being harmed.

Arrangements had been far advanced with the Cuban government for Havana to 
offer refuge to the guerrillas in return for the peaceful release of all 
hostages.

Mr Fujimori had refused to give in to rebel demands that 400 of their jailed 
comrades be freed. The president, who built his popularity on his successes 
against terrorism, will see the outcome as a vindication of his tough stance.

A team of six British SAS anti-terrorist troops had flown to Peru before 
Christmas. It is understood their job had been to advise the authorities but 
their role, if any, in last night's events was unclear.

The embassy was seized by the Tupac Amaru rebels on December 17 during a 
reception to celebrate the Japanese emperor's birthday. More than 400 diplomats 
and Peruvian dignitaries were initially held. They included senior police and 
security officials. Most diplomats were released shortly afterwards.
 