
I’ve just got back from a week’s filming in Haworth and its environs – its 
bleak, freezing, inhospitable, endlessly compelling environs – for a 
documentary about … yes, you guessed it: the Brontës. There were three of us 
presenting, each going in to bat for a different member of the family.

The novelist Helen Oyeyemi was Emily’s champion, the BBC stalwart Martha 
Kearney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/04/martha-kearney-bbc-women-politics>
 was Charlotte’s, and I was there to represent Anne. She’s the only Brontë 
sister I can really cope with. The others, with their Wuthering Heights and 
their Jane Eyres, are just … too much. T’Sturm und t’Drang are not my way, in 
life or in reading. Give me the quiet, forensic scrutiny of Agnes Grey, the 
eponymous heroine of Anne’s first book, based on her miserable experiences as a 
governess for two rich families full of semi-feral children. Or the slow, 
pitiless anatomising of the effects of alcoholism on a Victorian family, so 
accurate that The Tenant of Wildfell Hall could have been written yesterday.

No madwomen in the attic. No ghosts. No blinded, Byronic heroes. Anne’s 
protagonists are ordinary women coming to extraordinary decisions, and they end 
up with good men: farmers, curates – with working eyes but no grand estates – 
who must stand by until her heroines have rescued themselves.

But a curious thing happened as the week went on. I found myself increasingly 
in sympathy with Charlotte and Emily, that hitherto emotionally exhausting 
pair. It is impossible to walk across the open moors for long without starting 
to feel the stir of wild imaginings, a longing to fill it with stories big and 
bold enough for the job, and to people it with characters strong enough to 
infuse its unforgiving acres with life. It is impossible to sit in the 
parsonage for long – looking down on a rapidly industrialising mill town in one 
direction, eternally unchanging landscape to the other – and not feel your 
imagination whetted between the past and future.

By the end, the wonder really was that Anne managed to put all those 
temptations to melodrama and gothic insanity to one side and steer her own 
course. Or maybe we’ve got her all wrong; maybe Charlotte and Emily were the 
realists, writing what they knew, and she was the fantasist, wildly imagining 
ordinary houses, pretty gardens and emotions that can fill only a human heart 
and not the gaping maw of theYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> moors.

Me and Ms Jones



How doctors ‘empowered’ my dad | Lucy Mangan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/01/nhs-collaborative-care-plans>
There is a lot of love for the new Netflix series Jessica Jones, based on the 
female Marvel superhero, among my friends and on a wider scale. What tempers 
the usual delight in a common enjoyment, however, is that this one mostly 
depends on how the programme’s depiction of the experience and after-effects of 
rape, domestic violence and abusive relationships rings true for so many. 
Superman is loved for saving the world; Jessica Jones is loved for saving women 
from feeling that they are alone.

I think I’ve seen the light

What, precisely, do you do when faced with the news that a town in North 
Carolina has rejected the establishment of a solar farm in the area because – 
to quote one resident at a planning meeting –“it would suck up all the energy 
from the sun”? 
<http://www.news.com.au/world/north-america/us-town-rejects-solar-farm-because-locals-fear-panels-will-suck-up-all-the-energy-from-the-sun/news-story/2d87e4dee3c159abaa998e49ba91120b>
 Another worried that it would stop photosynthesis taking place and all the 
plants would die. I have decided to find it comforting. To let it draw the 
sting of, Parisian deals notwithstanding, the coming global apocalypse. When 
humanity is wiped out, and Earth is a spinning ball of dust, we won’t have lost 
quite so much after all.
 