
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/money/series/dearjeremy> advice column in the 
Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. 
We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.

I became disabled nearly five years ago, losing the use of my hands gradually 
over 12 months, with my general mobility becoming more impaired. I’m now 
transitioning into a wheelchair. Prior to this, I had been employed for seven 
years in middle management with the same employer and was doing well in my 
career. I had never had any issues or performance concerns, and I was 
considered to be a high achiever.

I was made redundant 14 months after becoming disabled, but with a good 
package I accepted it and moved on. I interview well and had a good CV.

I was offered a new job quite quickly, but when I declared my disability the 
role disappeared. I decided after that not to declare my disabilities until I 
had my foot in the door, so to speak. I did just that, declaring my disability 
on day one of a new job and was made “redundant” 11 months later.

Evidence of discrimination was gathered along the way and I was offered a 
payout. Cue next job, same thing, and same outcome. Now I’m 13 months into job 
four and in same position. I know the signs and am manoeuvring before what I 
now believe to be the inevitable happens.

I know the law is on my side regarding discrimination, but taking a 
legal/official complaint route is both distressing and unpleasant and I would 
hate to go through that again. I don’t want to be in a position where I have to 
keep on fighting.

So how can I get off this merry-go-round? Now that I am a wheelchair user, at 
least I don’t have the dilemma of whether or not to declare my disability.

I don’t think my support needs are great: lightweight equipment (laptop, phone 
etc.), dictation software (£80) and now I need wheelchair-accessible premises. 
Above everything, I need a manager who will support me, but how can I assess 
that in the job interview process?

What do I need to do differently to not just get a job but keep it? I don’t 
know how to get my career back on track.

Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a 
brief email todear.jeremy@theguardian.com <mailto:dear.jeremy@theguardian.com>. 
Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply 
personally.
 