
After USA beat Ecuador and Argentina swept past Venezuela, the two teams will 
meet in the Copa America semi-finals on Tuesday night, with Argentina firm 
favorites to advance to the final (and indeed win the whole tournament.) But 
what can Jürgen Klinsmann do to stop them? And just as importantly can they do 
anything to causeArgentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> 
problems? Here are a few tactics that could lead to an upset over Lionel Messi 
and Co.

Plug the holes wisely

We already know that three starters will be out for the semi-final — part of 
the collateral damage from the victory over Ecuador. Bobby Wood, Alejandro 
Bedoya and, of course, the red-carded Jermaine Jones all miss out.

Argentina's Ramiro Funes Mori returns to his boyhood in Texas to play USA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/21/ramiro-funes-mori-copa-america-usa-argentina>
There aren’t a lot of silver linings in this scenario, but the good news 
largely center around the back-line getting stronger thanks to DeAndre Yedlin’s 
return after suspension. Fabian Johnson should revert to the left, the Geoff 
Cameron/John Brooks partnership - which has flourished in these championships - 
should remain untouched at the center, and with Brad Guzan in solid 
goal-keeping form, at the very least the defensive foundations of the team 
should be as solid as can be expected.

As for the three missing starters, let’s start with Jones. Klinsmann will 
probably bring Kyle Beckerman in to replace him — the Real Salt Lake man won’t 
cover as much ground, but he’s smart, and always aware of the defenders 
immediately behind him. If he can help cut out some of the passing lanes to 
Sergio Agüero or Gonzalo Higuain he can do a lot of good. If he could actually 
tackle Messi at the start of the forward’s runs from deep that would also 
be...an added bonus.

The nearest to a style-for-style replacement for Bedoya would be the 
hard-working Graham Zusi. The wrinkle here might be if Klinsmann is convinced 
of the virtues of Matt Besler at left-back. In that case he could push Johnson 
into Bedoya’s usual position — it puts Johnson where he is most comfortable but 
he would have to provide support for Besler.

As for Wood, well, it’s possible we see Gyasi Zardes and Clint Dempsey up top 
with Darlington Nagbe and Zusi played as wide men in a four-man midfield. But a 
4-2-3-1 with the midfield anchored by Beckerman and Bradley, may be the most 
likely, with the question then being who becomes the ill-fitting spearhead up 
top.

You really want Dempsey arriving late in the box or creating chances outside 
it, and if you want to keep Bradley deeper, then it’s just possible that Chris 
Wondolowski’s movement up top can allow Dempsey, Zusi/Nagbe, and Zardes to do 
the work behind him. It’s a more lightweight attacking formation than US fans 
would hope for, but when you lose three starters, you’re going to be weaker. 
Klinsmann may as well try and make the best of his remaining assets in their 
best positions.

Argentina's great tactical dilemma: where should Lionel Messi play?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/argentina-copa-america-lionel-messi-tactics>
“Get after it”

One of the criticisms of Klinsmann’s reign by fans – and indeed some current 
and former players – is that the promised attacking style never materialized. 
There have been particular games that have illustrated the frustration and this 
has the potential to be one of them.

After the World Cup, Landon Donovan - who admittedly had something of a vested 
interest in the ideal of transformative attacking players - spoke of the 
frustration of watching USA’s belated attempts to force a comeback against 
Belgium when they were already 2-0 down. Donovan said he wished the shackles 
had come off sooner against a talented Belgium team who nonetheless were 
vulnerable to being put off their game by spirited opposition. What he, and 
numerous other national team players feel is that the team is at their best 
when they “get after it.”

And foolish as it might seem to attack Argentina, it will be equally foolish 
to sit back and hope for penalties. There will be a point in a tight 90-minute 
game where America might be well advised to gamble on attack, but it’s not when 
the whistle blows for kick-off.

There’s a cue in how Chile took the game to Argentina in their opening match 
of the tournament. Chile lost, but ran Argentina close with their high energy 
press, and some version of the same from Klinsmann’s men might at least keep 
Messi and Co. honest enough to not be able to fully commit their full-backs in 
offensive scenarios. This, however, requires guts. To give an example from two 
other teams in the tournament, on the odd occasion when Mexico tried to go 
toe-to toe with Chile on Saturday night,being second best on every front hurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/chile-humiliate-mexico-7-0-quarter-final>
. Their own full-backs were pinned down, Chile were hungrier to force 
turnovers, close passing lanes and were faster in transition. And as the game 
slipped away, Mexico’s midfielders were overwhelmed.

Which is just to say that the US could lose heavily whatever approach they 
try, but the choice does not have to be about choosing your flavor of heroic 
failure. At this point of the tournament they need to send out a team to try 
and win the game and not just avoid defeat.


Pricey tickets and low TV ratings: has Copa América missed a trick in the US?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/20/copa-america-expensive-tickets-television-ratings>
Use substitutes well

The format tweaks of the knockout rounds mean that with penalties immediately 
following 90 minutes, the use of subs is a chance for Klinsmann to be proactive 
early, and without fear of playing his hand too soon with extra-time still to 
come.

It can be a marginal advantage, but again thinking about a positive approach, 
there’s the potential to bring Christian Pulisic off the bench to stretch 
Argentina, especially in a tight game where the favorites start to worry about 
the clock and a possible penalty shoot-out.

There won’t be many areas of the game where the USA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/usfootballteam> can set the agenda, but 
judicious subs that aren’t so much like-for-like swaps as shifts of emphasis 
that have the potential to alter the rhythm of the game in the Americans’ 
favor. And the more uncertainty they can create, the bigger chance they have of 
Argentina tightening up as the final whistle approaches.
 