
How do you feel when bad things happen? Do you bounce back from adversity or 
sob indefinitely? Emotional resilience, the ability that some people have to 
withstand stress, was once thought to be a genetic gift. You were either lucky 
and had it, or you didn’t and struggled. Studies show that teenagers who fail 
exams have an increased risk of depression as adults, while athletes who lose 
can feel long-term guilt and humiliation. But recent psychological research 
suggests that emotional resilience can be developed.A systematic review of what 
makes people able to deal with failure 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27918887> looked at results from 46 
studies.

The solution

The study found that having higher levels of self-esteem, a more positive way 
of explaining why things happen, and avoiding perfectionist thinking were 
strongly linked to bouncing back when things go wrong. Dr Judith Johnson,a 
clinical psychologist at the University of Leeds 
<http://medhealth.leeds.ac.uk/profile/1300/1271/judith_Johnson> and lead author 
of the review, says we can build resilience. “Self-esteem was shown to be 
significant in two thirds of the studies we looked at in mediating the link 
between failure and distress,” she says.

Johnson adds that there are proven cognitive behavioural methods 
<http://www.psychreg.org/two-techniques-enhancing-self-esteem/> that raise 
self-esteem. You don’t have to believe you are wonderful to have emotional 
resilience, just that you are adequate. All you need to do is write a list of 
your positive qualities and examples of when you have shown them.

How you explain things also matters: if you attribute personal success to 
fluke rather than your own work and talent, then you are less able to use 
success to boost your self-esteem. If, however, you can brush off a 
disappointment by attributing it to external factors, such as not getting a job 
because they wanted a different skill mix, then you have the equivalent of 
emotional armour.

Finally, if you have perfectionist tendencies, lower them. Perfectionists hold 
rigid standards that don’t bend in the stormy weather of life. Johnson says we 
need to set more realistic standards. ‘‘Encourage people to be the best they 
can be,” she says. “If that doesn’t work out, then they should be assured there 
is a plan B. Being happy doesn’t depend on passing an exam. Flexible thinking 
is very important, especially in the young.”

She also advises self-awareness and noticing when you are stressed. “Negative 
emotions tap into the basic instinct of fear, so they narrow your life. If you 
feel stuck, do something that cheers you up. You need to plan these things into 
a schedule – doing them will chip away at your negative mood, even if you do 
enjoy them a bit less than usual.”Other research shows 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4185137/> that the support of 
friends or family also helps emotional resilience, as does being physically 
active.
 