
The extraordinary but unverified documents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
 published on Tuesday on Donald Trump’s ties with Moscow began life as a piece 
of opposition research, which has become as much a part of US politics as yard 
signs and coloured balloons.


There is a small industry of research and investigative firms in Washington, 
typically staffed by a mix of former journalists and security officials, adept 
at finding information about politicians that the politicians would rather stay 
hidden. The firms often do not know who exactly is hiring them; the request 
could come from a law firm acting on behalf of a client from one of the parties.

In this case, the request for opposition research on Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> came from one of his 
Republican opponents in the primary campaign. The research firm then hired one 
of its sub-contractors who it used regularly on all things Russian: a retired 
western European former counter-intelligence official, with a long history of 
dealing with the shadow world of Moscow’s spooks andsiloviki (securocrats).

Explainer: what is in the Trump-Russia dossier John McCain passed to the FBI?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-dossier-explainer-details>
By the time the contractor had started his research, however, the Republican 
primary was over. The original client had dropped out, but the firm that had 
hired him had found a new, Democratic client. This was not necessarily the 
Hillary Clinton campaign or the Democratic National Committee. Opposition 
research is frequently financed by wealthy individuals who have donated all 
they can and are looking for other ways to help.

By July, the counter-intelligence contractor had collected a significant 
amount of material based on Russian sources who he had grown to trust over the 
years – not just in Moscow, but also among oligarchs living in the west. He 
delivered his reports, but the gravity of their contents weighed on him. If the 
allegations were real, their implications were overwhelming.

He delivered a set to former colleagues in the FBI, whose counter-intelligence 
division would be the appropriate body to investigate. It is believed he also 
passed a copy to his own country’s intelligence service, but it felt 
constrained in what action it could take and left it up to the Americans to do 
their own investigation and draw their own conclusions.

As summer turned to autumn, the investigator was asked for more information by 
the FBI but heard nothing back about any investigation. The bureau seemed 
obsessed instead with classified material that flowed through a private email 
server set up by Clinton’s aides. The FBI’s director, James Comey, threw the 
election into a spin 11 days before the vote by announcing his investigators 
were examining newly discovered material.

The former intelligence official grew concerned that there was a cover-up in 
progress. On a trip to New York in October, he was persuaded to tell his story 
to David Corn, the Washington editor of Mother Jones, whofirst reported  
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/10/veteran-spy-gave-fbi-info-alleging-russian-operation-cultivate-donald-trump>
the existence of the material on 31 October.

The FBI however continued to refuse to comment on the issue, despite reports 
that it hadrequested and perhaps acquired a warrant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
 for further investigation from the Foreign intelligence surveillance (Fisa) 
court. The silence was not altogether surprising. The FBI counter-intelligence 
division, headquartered in Washington, is extremely secretive, much more so 
than the New York field office, which had strong links to former prosecutor and 
mayorRudy Giuliani <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rudygiuliani>, who was 
by then working for Trump. The threat of leaks from New York about Clinton 
emails had reportedly pushed Comey into making his October surprise 
announcement.

Donald Trump press conference: Russia allegations something 'Nazi Germany' 
would have done – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2017/jan/11/trump-dossier-russia-has-compromising-material-on-president-elect-live-updates>
In mid-November, the documents took another route into Washington that 
ultimately led to them being mentioned in the joint intelligence report on 
Russian interference that was delivered to President Obama and President-elect 
Trump. On 18 November, the annual Halifax International Security Forum opened 
in the Canadian city, bringing together serving and former security and foreign 
policy officials from around the world.

Senator John McCain, a hawkish Republican, was there and was introduced to a 
former senior western diplomat who had seen the documents, knew their source 
and thought him highly reliable. McCain decided the implications were 
sufficiently alarming to dispatch a trusted emissary, a former US official, to 
meet the source and find out more.

The emissary hastily arranged a transatlantic flight and met the source at the 
airport as arranged. (The Guardian has agreed not to specify the city or 
country where the meeting took place.) The meeting had a certain cold war 
tradecraft to it, as he was told to look for a man with a copy of the Financial 
Times. Having found each other, the retired counter-intelligence officer drove 
the emissary to his house, where they discussed the documents and their 
background.

The emissary flew back within 24 hours and showed McCain the documents, saying 
it was hard to impossible to verify them without a proper investigation. McCain 
said he was reluctant to get involved, lest it be perceived as payback for 
insulting remarks Trump had made about him during his rambunctious campaign.

However, on 9 December, McCain arranged a one-on-one meeting with Comey, with 
no aides present, and handed them over.

BuzzFeed publishes unsubstantiated Trump report, raising ethics questions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/buzzfeed-publishes-donald-trump-russia-documents-ethics-questions>
“Upon examination of the contents, and unable to make a judgment about their 
accuracy, I delivered the information to the Director of the FBI. That has been 
the extent of my contact with the FBI or any other government agency regarding 
this issue,” the senator said in a statement on Wednesday morning.

It is not clear what underpinned the FBI’s decision to include a summary of 
the documents in its highly classified briefing to the president and 
president-elect and their top staff, before the bureau had completed its 
investigation. It may have been as a defensive measure, to prove for posterity 
that it was not involved in a cover-up, or because its investigators believed 
them to be credible.

Whatever the motive, it was quickly leaked – first to CNN, which reported on 
the material on Wednesday. That triggereda controversial decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/buzzfeed-publishes-donald-trump-russia-documents-ethics-questions>
 by BuzzFeed to publish an unredacted version of the documents on its website. 
It is unclear where the BuzzFeed version came from. The author of the reports 
had been insistent on blotting out references to his Russian sources in the 
copies he gave to the press, out of fear for their safety. The unredacted 
version could have come from the original client, who commissioned the 
research, or from intermediaries between the counter-intelligence contractor 
and the client.

 * This article was amended on 13 January 2017. An editing error in a previous 
version incorrectly stated that the source had passed the dossier directly to 
the Guardian.  