
Osso buco, as Elizabeth David tartly observes, means "bones with holes, or 
hollow bones" – which is probably why it is never translated on menus. 
Slow-braised veal would sound both more appetising and accurate, yet those 
bones (not in fact hollow at all, but full of rich, delicious marrow) are the 
dish's crowning glory – anyone who sends the plate back to the kitchen without 
investigating their interior has missed out on the best bit.

The best-known version hails from Milan, where it is generally served with a 
vivid yellow saffron risotto, 
<http://www.saveur.com/article/Recipes/Classic-Risotto-Milanese> also made with 
bone marrow. Most of the recipes I try claim to be for ossibuchi alla milanese, 
yet they vary wildly – Anna Del Conte prefaces her take with the somewhat 
prickly claim that "as a loyal Milanese who strives to defend our highly 
sophisticated cuisine from the intrusion of foreign flavour, I can do no better 
than quote from the great 19th-century writer, Artusi: 'This is a dish that 
should be left to the Milanese.'" Well, here goes.

Meat
 Angela Hartnett's osso buco. 
There is no debate here: osso buco must be made from veal shin and, preferably,
as Marcella Hazan 
<http://bewitchingkitchen.com/2009/12/08/ossobuco-milanese-an-italian-classic/> 
observes, that "from a calf's hind shank … the ring of meat that circles it is 
the sweetest and most tender on the entire animal". It is also vital to leave 
the skin on, or the shanks will fall apart during cooking – Hazan reckons "its 
creamy consistency makes a delectable contribution to the final flavour of the 
dish".

As you're likely to have to order this from the butcher, it shouldn't be too 
hard to make sure you get what you want. Ask for the pieces to be cut 4-5cm 
thick: any larger, and they won't cook down to the requisite melting tenderness 
in time; any thinner, and you risk them drying out. (Although beef shin is 
considerably easier to get hold of in this country, the pieces will be too 
large, and the flavour too strong, to substitute really satisfactorily – I'd 
stronglysuggest hunting down British rose veal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/may/27/rose-veal-jimmy-doherty>).

It is essential to start by browning it well in flour; though this should be a 
delicately meaty dish, a little caramelisation is rarely unwelcome, and Angela 
Hartnett's mere "light colouring" seems a wasted opportunity. Why Hazan does 
this in a separate pan is unclear; not only does it multiply the washing up, 
but you risk losing some of that flavour when you transfer the meat.

Vegetables
 Anna del Conte's osso buco. 
Few surprises here: like many Italian dishes, this starts with a sofrito – the 
slow-cooked holy trinity of onions, celery and carrot also known as a mirepoix 
or simply a soup base.Del Conte leaves out the carrot 
<http://www.countrylife.co.uk/countryside/article/505667/Greatest-Recipes-Ever-Anna-Del-Conte-s-ossobuco-alla-Milanese.html>
, possibly because it disrupts the "bianco" nature of her recipe, but I like 
the sweetness it adds, so I'm going for the lot, though the red onionin the 
River Café Classic Italian Cookbook 
<http://www.oneforthetable.com/Beef-and-Lamb-Entrees/osso-buco-alla-milanese-from-the-river-cafe.html>
 proves a little too much.

Interestingly, Lindsey Bareham and Simon Hopkinson's recipe in the Prawn 
Cocktail Years eschews vegetable matter altogether, in favour of a pared-back 
osso buco which is just a little too simple for my liking. Along with their 
intense, syrupy sauce, it's more like meat with a jus than the almost stew-like 
results produced by the other recipes.

Hartnett also adds leeks, which end up a little bit slimy after three hours of 
cooking, plus a whole head of garlic. Hazan uses a mere finely chopped 
teaspoon, and everyone else rejects garlic entirely, but because Hartnett uses 
it whole, essentially braising it in its skin, it lends a wonderful caramelised 
sweetness to the dish. It may not be canonical, but it's going into my osso 
buco nevertheless.

Sauce
 Lindsey Bareham and Simon Hopkinson's osso buco. 
White wine is a must in an osso buco. You can reduce it entirely, as the 
Silver Spoon suggests 
<http://www.recipefoodrevolution.com/recipe-book-challenge/milanese-osso-buco-ossibuchi-alla-milanese-from-the-silver-spoon-made-by-jacque-24-02-2011>
, but leaving some in the sauce, as most other recipes do, gives a far lighter, 
zingier result. Bareham and Hopkinson leave it at that, with just the juice of 
a lemon as seasoning. I find their version too acidic – though it must be said, 
it does cut through the richness of the marrow nicely, if you happen to think 
it needs cutting through.

Everyone else uses stock of some kind. Meat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/meat> stock, made from beef and veal, 
is the most common, although Hartnett goes for chicken. If you're not going to 
go to the trouble of making your own (and, let's be realistic here, you'll need 
to source the bones and start a day ahead), Hartnett's is a much better choice 
than bought beef stock – however good the quality, it's overpoweringly beefy. 
Chicken stock tastes more elegant.

The great tomato debate
 Marcella Hazan's osso buco. 
Del Conte, who, as we've established, feels strongly about the preservation of 
the "authentic milanese osso buco" (as she calls her version), reckons one of 
the defining characteristics is that "it is cooked in bianco, without tomato". 
(She explains that "the flavour of a gremolata would be swamped by a 
tomato-based sauce … and [a] delicate saffron-based risotto could not survive 
alongside an osso buco with a strong tomato flavour.") Her recipe, then, 
contains no tomato whatsoever – and neither does Bareham and Hopkinson's, 
though they make no claims for its Milanese credentials.

Everyone else sticks in tomatoes: fresh in Hartnett's case, puree in the 
Silver Spoon recipe and tinned for Hazan. The tomato puree, plus meat stock, 
makes the Silver Spoon's version too intensely savoury; a risotto would stand 
no chance against its thick gravy. The fresh and tinned varieties are more 
successful; in fact, both dishes are delicious, but lack the delicately meaty, 
buttery flavour of Del Conte's triumph of a recipe. Whatever the true history 
of the matter, there are enough tomato-based dishes in the Italian repertoire; 
this one doesn't need them.

Flavourings
 Silver Spoon's osso buco. 
It is also not a dish that demands much in the way of herbs and spices. Hazan 
and Hartnett use thyme, which I find a bit strident, and Hazan's parsley 
disappears without trace. Bareham and Hopkinson are very laissez-fare – 
"rosemary or sage or marjoram – please yourself", so I do, and find that sage 
works very well indeed with the buttery sauce. Del Conte writes that an 
authentic Milanese ossobuco is flavoured with lemon rind, by which she seems to 
mean the accompanying gremolata. I like Hazan's idea of adding a couple of 
strips to the dish as it cooks, though; it adds a delicate zestiness to 
proceedings.

Cooking

The Silver Spoon simmers its osso buco for a mere half hour, while Hartnett 
recommends two to threee. I find my veal has slightly dried out by the third 
hour; depending on the thickness of your pieces, an hour and a half to two 
should be quite sufficient. Hazan bakes her version, rather than simmering it 
on the hob. I've often found this to be easier for long, slow cooking, but as 
she puts it in at 180C, I'm not quite sure why she bothers.

Del Conte finishes her dish with a little butter, "to give the sauce a glossy 
shine and a delicate taste". Though it doesn't need the extra fat, as with so 
much else in life, it certainly doesn't hurt. Last of all, I'd like to pass on 
Hartnett's wise words: "I like to encourage people to eat this with their 
fingers – so much easier than fiddling about with a knife and fork!". Napkins 
advisable.

The perfect osso buco
 Felicity Cloake's perfect osso buco. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
(Serves 4)
2 tbsp olive oil
25g flour, to dust
4 pieces of veal shin, about 4cm thick
50g butter
1 onion, finely chopped
1 carrot, finely chopped
1 celery stick, finely chopped
1 head of garlic, cut horizontally
2 strips of lemon zest
4 sage leaves
200ml white wine
200ml good chicken stock
For the gremolata
1 unwaxed lemon, zest finely grated
1 garlic clove, very finely chopped
3 tbsp flat-leaf parsley, finely chopped
Pinch of sea salt

Set a casserole dish wide enough to hold the meat in one layer over a high 
heat, and add the oil. Put the flour on to a small plate and season generously, 
then use to coat the meat. When the oil is hot, add the meat to the pan and 
brown well on both sides until golden and crusted. Set aside on a plate.

Turn the heat down and add three quarters of the butter to the pan. When 
melted, add the onion, carrot and celery, plus a sprinkle of salt, and cook 
until soft. Add the garlic halves, lemon zest and sage to the pan and cook for 
a few minutes more.

Turn up the heat then add the wine to the pan. Return the meat, standing it on 
top of the vegetables, and bubble until the wine has reduced by half. Pour in 
the stock and bring to a simmer.

Turn the heat right down, cover and simmer for one and a half to two hours, 
carefully turning the meat over every 30 minutes, until it is tender enough to 
cut with a spoon. Meanwhile, mix together the gremolata ingredients.

Dot with the remaining butter and allow to melt into the sauce, then serve 
with the gremolata and risotto alla milanese or wet polenta.

Osso buco: is it really all about the bones, and where do you stand on the 
great tomato debate? And, if osso buco alla milanese doesn't float your boat, 
which other versions would you recommend?
 