
Attacks on the upper middle class composition and presumed (right wing) 
political leanings of the judiciary used to be the preserve of the left.

Now the attacks on the mono-social class of senior judges and their presumed 
(pro-European Union) political leanings are being waged from the right.

The Daily Mail, in particular, has worked itself up into a fury about the 
matter, which means, of course, that its editor-in-chief,Paul Dacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre>, has done so.

One of his key complaints is that judges are unelected, as is the other major 
group of Brexit oppositionists, members of the House of Lords.

I don’t recall Dacre - or his employer, Viscount Rothermere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/viscount-rothermere> - standing for 
election. They rely instead on pointing to the fact that their large newspaper 
audience gives them a mandate, and that they speak for them.

In fact, according to the latest National Readership Survey 
<http://www.nrs.co.uk/latest-results/titles-at-a-glance/topline-results/>, the 
Mail is read by about 3.35m adults every day. Given that the current UK 
population is 64m, the Mail’s reach is barely 5%.

But the paper’s influence is far greater than those figures suggest. Why? 
Partly, because its audience contains a sizeable chunk of society’s major 
opinion-formers. And partly, maybe mainly, because we, the competing media, 
help to publicise it.

Media is obsessed with media. And, before you click to make the obvious point, 
I am, by the nature of my media commentating role, one of the guilty parties.

We police each other and, in so doing, we promote each other. Broadcasters, 
whether on TV or radio, live off newspaper content. Social media is the most 
promiscuous of press parasites.

It means that the Mail carries weight out of all proportion to its audience 
(and don’t be fooled by the Mail Online numbers: people don’t read that website 
for the paper’s political output).

The point is that the Mail’s views are known far beyond its regular 
readership. It is also influential because, like it or not, and Guardian 
readers generally do not, the Mail is good at what it does. Good, you might 
say, at being bad.

It long ago eclipsed the Sun as the major Fleet Streeet agenda-setter. It is 
the outstanding paper of this generation and other right-of-centre papers - the 
Sun,Daily Telegraph <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> and 
Daily Express - acknowledge that fact by singing from its hymn book.

Whether consciously or unconsciously, they pick up on its general approach to 
the politics of the day, echoing its opinions and offering tacit support to its 
campaigns of vilification.


I am sure a larger number of Sun readers voted for Brexit than Mail readers. 
Sun editorTony Gallagher <https://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-gallagher> has 
no time for the European Union and his paper campaigned unrelentingly for leave 
during the EU referendum campaign

But the whole tone of the media’s anti-Brexit crusade was forged in the 
Kensington headquarters of the Mail. And its chief architect was therefore 
Dacre.

Now, as fears of a possible Brexit breakdown loom, he is leading the assault 
on the judiciary. In Monday’s Mail, he ran a spread decryingthe “secret” way in 
which the 11 judges are selected for Britain’s supreme court 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3999994/Quagocrats-choose-judges-secret-puts-British-shame.html>
, comparing it unfavourably with the public selection of their US equivalents.

He also carried a leading article 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-4000236/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Heat-fury-political-judgement.html>
, in which it was argued that it is “utterly impossible” for the judges “to 
deliberate in a vacuum.”

Many people, and including many on the left, would have some sympathy for the 
view that the judicial selection process is too secretive.

I’m not sure, however, if we would benefit from adopting the US system of 
public grillings in the senate, which the Mail concedes to be a sometimes “ugly 
spectacle.”

Greater transparency about how the supreme court members are chosen would not 
be unwelcome, but do we want to select them on the basis of their political 
views?

That would surely lead to what happens in the States: the loading of the court 
to suit the politicians of the day, most notably the sitting president.

I suspect that that is exactly what the Mail wants, as its editorial polemic 
implies. Ever since the high court ruled that parliament had the right (and 
duty) to vote on Britain leaving the EU, the paper has ignored the reality of 
that decision having been made on a legal, not a political, basis.

So it now believes the supreme court will follow suit, contending that the 11 
judges cannot possibly “be guided only by intellectual legalistic principles, 
divorcing themselves from the consequences of their decision.”

Then comes a wonderful example of tortured Mail logic. The judges cannot, says 
the paper, be “impervious to the political heat and fury surrounding their 
ruling.”

Which begs the question: who is responsible for generating most of “the 
political heat and fury”? And will the judges remain impervious to that?
 