
The personal statement is the part of the application form where students can 
“sell” themselves to admission tutors. Applicants must write up to 4,000 
characters, or 47 lines, to convince universities to offer them a place. But 
finding the right tone is tricky. Boasting is out, modesty is self-defeating 
and trying to be funny can be dangerous. No wonder that applicants turn to 
family and teachers for advice. But are they getting the right guidance?

A study by the Sutton Trust 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/researcharchive/making-a-statement/> found that the 
academic focus of the personal statement is not always understood by teachers, 
who tended to praise general passages about subjects. The tutors liked to see 
more detailed discussion and analysis of particular aspects of the subject that 
had caught the student’s interest and made them think.

Universities don’t want banalities, cliches or flattery. They want to see 
concrete, recent, relevant examples that demonstrate the student’s interest and 
understanding of the chosen discipline. It’s not enough to have wanted to do 
something all your life or to be fascinated by history or passionate about 
politics.

Writing about yourself is stressful, but once you get your ideas down on 
paper, then it’s not so bad, says Adam Mawardi, 20, a second-year law student 
at Keele University. “I did my first draft and thought: good, job done. Then I 
read it through and realised it was incoherent in places and lacked structure. 
It took a lot of revisions to get it right. It’s like a job interview: you have 
to say why you want it, what you like about it, the qualities you would bring 
and then, at the end, perhaps something you have done that makes you unique.”

Why have you chosen the course?

A good personal statement focuses on the course and why the applicant wants to 
do it, says Kelly Boulton, undergraduate admissions manager at the University 
of Nottingham. “We want to see that you are passionate about your chosen 
subject and find out what you have done beyond your exam studies that 
demonstrates that interest.

We want to hear what they do to pursue their interests outside the curriculum
Kelly Boulton, admissions manager, University of Nottingham 
“Applicants should explain why they have chosen the course and what in 
particular interests them about the subject,” she says. “We get a lot of people 
saying things such as ‘ever since I sprained my knee at the age of five I have 
wanted to be a doctor’, when something that they have experienced or noticed 
over the last couple of years would be just as powerful.

“Sometimes applicants go into a lot of detail about what they are studying for 
A-level, wasting valuable space, because we want to hear what they do to pursue 
their interests outside the curriculum. It might be further reading for English 
or visiting ancient sites for history or exploring the relevance of an economic 
theory to what is going on in the world today.”

Extracurricular pursuits, positions of responsibility and part-time work help 
to give a rounded picture. But don’t just list them, Boulton says: point out 
the qualities they have developed that you can bring to the course.

Parents can help by making sure the applicant checks grammar, spelling and 
punctuation, and does not use colloquialisms or text-speak. But it can be a 
time to hold back. Personal coach Linda Smith admits her son knew best: “He did 
his earlier this year. I made it more personal; he reverted to the original. It 
seems he was right: he got an unconditional offer to read English and drama. 
There’s definitely a technique to this and he seemed to have acquired it.”

The Ucas process: how it works

 * Ucas Stands for Universities and Colleges Admissions Service, the 
centralised system to match applicants with places.

 * Apply Students apply for up to five university courses through the online 
system.

 * Track Ucas sends the application forms to the five universities. Unis can 
offer a firm place, a conditional one on meeting set grades, or a rejection.

 * Choices Applicants can accept two offers: firm and insurance. The insurance 
choice should be a safety net, offering lower grades.

 * Extra choices Those with no offers can apply for other courses through 
Track.

 * Results When exam results are published, candidates get confirmed places 
for either their firm or insurance choice or are put into clearing.

 * Clearing The process that matches unsuccessful applicants with available 
places. Applicants seek universities themselves through the search tool and 
apply to each individually.

 * Adjustment Applicants whose exam results meet and exceed their firm offer 
have a limited period to apply to different universities or courses.
 