
In the new movie Sleepless, Jamie Foxx’s son gets kidnapped. If the trailer is 
any indication, Jamie Foxx then spends the remainder of the film engaged in a 
series of car chases, fistfights and shootouts that presumably result in the 
retrieval of his missing son.

Related: Kidnap trailer: Halle Berry causes multiple deaths in search for son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/aug/24/kidnap-trailer-halle-berry-oscar-winner>

It’s difficult to say, but perhaps Jamie Foxx struck upon this course of 
action because he’s watched lots of other films where famous people’s children 
get kidnapped. Hollywood has already laid out a concrete set of rules for 
dealing with abduction, and I for one have committed them all to memory. If you 
don’t have time to watch every kidnapping movie, here’s a handy guide.

Be more capable than the kidnapper 
 Photograph: Magali Bragard/AP 
So, your child has gone missing. Little does their kidnapper know that they’re 
messing with the wrong parent. You’re a former intelligence agent with years of 
hard-fought field experience and contacts spread across the globe. Your job is 
simple: you will find the people who took your child, and you will kill them. 
What’s that? You’re not a former intelligence agent, and you wouldn’t even know 
where to start looking for your missing child? Well, this is awkward.

Don’t ask the police for help

Going to the authorities is absolutely the worst thing you can do. There is a 
scene in Halle Berry’s new movie, Kidnap, in which, following the disappearance 
of her child, Berry goes to a police station. She sees all the posters for 
missing children behind the desk and thinks: “Wait a minute, if the police were 
any good at their job, then they’d have found all these kids by now.” Realizing 
that police officers must all be lazy and negligent child-haters, she instead 
embarks on a madcap vigilante mission to get her son back by herself. And if 
police aren’t negligent, Sleepless teaches us that all officers are corrupt, 
working for the person who kidnapped your child, and pretty much exclusively 
out to kill you.

Track down Morgan Freeman 

If your child goes missing for even a second, even if you temporarily misplace 
them in a supermarket, the first thing you should do is call Morgan Freeman. If 
you’ve seen Kiss the Girls, you’ll know that he’s a master detective who can 
track down and kill most kidnappers. Failing that, if you’ve seen Gone Baby 
Gone, you’ll know that he might actually have kidnapped your offspring himself 
in order to give them a better life than you ever could. Either way, you’ll get 
your answer.

If you’ve got the money, pay the ransom 
 Photograph: Channel 5 
The 1996 Mel Gibson movie Ransom is over two hours long. If the millionaire 
character Gibson plays had just handed over the money that the kidnapper wanted 
in return for his child, it would have been a good 90 minutes shorter and 
everyone would have got to spend that time doing something more constructive.

Kidnap the kidnapper 
 Photograph: Wilson Webb/AP 
Following on from point two, if the police won’t help you, why not do what 
Hugh Jackman did in Prisoners, by kidnapping and torturing the person who you 
think kidnapped your children? It doesn’t matter if they didn’t do it, or if 
they have a mental age of 10, or if they cannot speak coherently about 
anything, because the torture will make you feel better. Also, it helps if you 
live in a town full of cartoonish would-be kidnappers, but it isn’t essential.

Just copy everything Liam Neeson did in Taken

That’s essentially what Nicolas Cage did in the film Stolen, and that worked 
out OK. At least I assume it did. I fell asleep two-thirds of the way through 
Stolen.

Don’t marry Famke Janssen
 Photograph: Magali Bragard/REX/Shutterstock 
In Taken, her child was kidnapped. In Don’t Say a Word, her child was 
kidnapped. In Taken 2, she was kidnapped. In Taken 3, she was murdered by 
kidnappers. Honestly, she just seems like more trouble than she’s worth.
 