
We live surrounded by anxiety. New research published in the journal Brain and 
Behaviour found that <http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/brb3.497> in 2013 there were an 
estimated8.2m cases <http://jop.sagepub.com/content/27/9/761> of anxiety in the 
UK. Women are nearly twice as likely to experience anxiety as men. So how can 
you help a loved one who experiences it?

We recently ran a piece asking people who live with anxiety to tell us what not
 to say to them. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/20/how-not-to-talk-to-someone-with-anxiety>
This time we asked what peopleshould say or do to make their condition more 
bearable.

Elizabeth Yarlott, 24, London: Sometimes the best thing is just a cuddle

Supporting someone who has anxiety means treading a fine line between being 
patronising and sympathetic. It is easy to feel misunderstood when you show no 
obvious physical symptoms and yet your entire body feels wrong. I have often 
snapped at people out of frustration, feeling that they couldn’t possibly 
understand.

It can be helpful to remind someone of what is happening to their body – that 
it is scary, but not dangerous, and will pass. For example, I find it soothing 
to be reassured that the loss of vision I experience is due to the tunnel 
vision involved in the fight or flight response and that the numbness and 
tingling I feel is due to my blood flooding to my vital organs. I was first 
told this by a psychiatrist, and I find it immensely helpful to talk it through 
with someone when I am in the grips of anxiety.

My boyfriend Charlie continues to help me every day. When my low-level 
symptoms still bother me, he has an amazing ability to make me laugh, which 
feels like the ultimate victory over my condition. In small ways he has helped 
me see that anxiety is not something that defines me. I used to complain to him 
about my chronic dizziness, desperately trying to explain what it felt like. 
One day he told me I had the “collywobbles”, which made me laugh, and gave me a 
funny way of referring to it. It is difficult to feel frightened of something 
if it sounds ridiculous. However, responding to anxiety with humour is a risky 
approach, and I would only recommend it if you are very close to the person and 
have given them the time and space to complain when they need to. Sometimes the 
best thing is just a cuddle.

In all, I would have to say that patience and understanding are key , and 
their value cannot be underestimated. Gentle reminders that anxiety will pass 
and can be managed can be very helpful – as I say to myself on a daily basis, 
“worse things happen at sea”.

Peggy Turner, 28, Michigan, US: Giving me time alone allows me to process what 
is going on

I rate my anxiety on a scale of one to 10: one being when I am not feeling 
anxious and 10 being panic attack level. When it’s this bad I go to hospital 
for breathing treatments because I’ve hyperventilated for too long. If I am 
feeling above level seven then I take my medicine. One to six and I will get a 
hug from my husband, or go for a walk with my dog. My husband used to work in a 
mental health clinic and is very sensitive and supportive.

On a level seven or above day, I get sharp pain in my chest, under the sternum 
in my heart. My breathing is shallow and it hurts to take deep breaths. It 
feels like I have been held under water for too long, but I can’t catch my 
breath to recover.

What helps me the most when I feel like this is space and understanding. 
Someone asking “Can I get you anything?” is much better than them asking “What 
is wrong?”. There isn’t anything “wrong” most of the time. Give me the 
opportunity to vocalise exactly what I may need (which varies depending on what 
triggered my panic attack) prevents me from feeling suffocated. Sometimes I’ll 
ask for a hug and other times I’ll simply ask for a glass of water. Giving me 
time alone allows me to process what is going on quicker (and without pressure) 
so I can get back to being the person you recognise and love.

I think many confuse anxiety with discomfort. You can be worried about a 
future scenario without actually being diagnosed with anxiety. It’s not just 
being uncomfortable or awkward in social situations. It’s illogical and outside 
of your control.


Paul Culshaw, 32, Liverpool: You don’t have to understand it, but just the 
fact that you’re trying is beyond helpful

What’s the best way to help someone who is experiencing anxiety? Listen. Their 
brain is probably communicating to them lots of irrational thoughts – many they 
might be scared of sharing for fear of sounding like they’re going mad. You 
don’t even have to understand what they are experiencing but just the fact that 
you’re trying is beyond helpful.

Be their calm in their storm. Remind them they are in a safe space or if they 
don’t feel they are perhaps take them somewhere where they feel more so. Tell 
them you are with them and even though they might feel trapped frightened or 
very alone remind them you are in this together.

Don’t look for patterns; sometimes an attack can make me claustrophobic and I 
need to get out and get some fresh air. Other times I can feel agoraphobic and 
want to stay indoors. There isn’t really a consistency you can predict.

What really used to help was when my good friend who I lived with came to 
understand my erratic behaviours. If I needed to leave a cinema, she knew. If I 
needed to pace up and down the living room, she let me get on with it. If I 
needed to go and lie down and be on my own for a while she was fine with that. 
At times like this you can feel like your behaviour makes you look a bit mad 
but she never made me feel that way and that’s amazing.


Anna Muller, 21, Cape Town: My mother helped me hugely by being supportive 
about my decision to take medication

It’s helpful when someone shows you they know the anxiety you experience is 
serious and can be debilitating.Anxiety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/anxiety> disorders are internal struggles, 
being able to recognise that (despite not being able to see any physical 
symptoms), it’s serious is vital. Don’t say, “Oh, I get stressed too” but 
rather say, “I am sorry to hear that you struggle with anxiety. I hear that it 
isn’t easy to live with.”

Seeking professional help has been the biggest step forward for me Talk to 
your doctor about how you feel and see if they can recommend a psychologist.
Before I started therapy I was very mindful of my anxiety which made it worse. 
Accepting that you have a problem is the first step to recovery. The second is 
talking to someone about it. My boyfriend knew I had severe anxiety. I was 
diagnosed when I went to a doctor thinking I had thyroid problems. After 
numerous tests my symptoms turned out to be anxiety driven. The next step was 
making a plan with my doctor to see a psychologist and get some medication.


It’s important to let your friends and family know what you’re going through 
so that they can help by giving support when you need it. If you know someone 
who is seeking medical help for an anxiety disorder, don’t act surprised 
because you think that they seem fine. You don’t know how they feel. It’s 
important for your friends and family to be supportive of your choices to see a 
therapist or doctor, otherwise it takes a negative toll on you.

My mother and boyfriend have helped me hugely by being supportive regarding my 
decision to take medication for the disorder. And my therapist and doctor have 
too, because they both made me feel positive that I could one day get over the 
disorder.

Jamie Christopher, 39, Leicestershire: Get the person to separate what is real 
from what it has snowballed into

The best things you can say involve getting the person to separate what is 
real from what it has snowballed into. It is good to rationalise things, for 
example a person in the midst of a panic attack may well feel that they will 
die, you need to get them to see the reality of what is happening. Help them 
realise that they aren’t going to die, and that they never died in previous 
panic attacks no matter how intense their feelings got.
 