
Snooker was still very much on the ascendancy as the 1983 World Championships 
approached. TV viewing figures were healthy and Riley Leisure, who had 51 clubs 
open in the UK at the time, posted a profit of £1.4m for the 17 months up to 
December 1982. According to newspaper reports,Steve Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steve-davis> had recently become the first 
man to earn £1m from playing the sport, which was all well and good, but Davis 
really wanted to add a second world title to his CV.

After winning the 1981 championship, Davis had experienced an inconsistent 
season in 1982. He won the UK Championship and the Masters, but the dreaded 
Crucible Curse saw him humiliated 10-1 by Tony Knowles in the first round and, 
as the 1983 season progressed, Davis was starting to show signs that he was in 
fact human.

Defeat in the quarter-finals at both the UK Championship and the Masters left 
many of the press to wonder whether the world No4 had lost his mojo, although 
the bookies – who, let's face it, normally know a thing or two – had installed 
him as pre-tournament favourite at a best price of 11/8.

After sitting down and sorting out his mind and his game with his dad, Bill, 
manager Barry Hearn, and coach Frank Callan, Davis sent out a warning to the 
rest of the field by winning the Irish Masters the week before the World 
Championships.

His main threat in the top half of the draw was undoubtedly defending champion 
Alex Higgins, the two scheduled for a mouthwatering clash in the semi-finals. 
Naturally Higgins was filling column inches before the start of the tournament, 
and would fill more throughout the course of the 17 days of competition, his 
form a concern to him as he looked to defend the title he hadwon so thrillingly 
in 1982 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nbxbyoc4C4A>.

Higgins' wife Lyn had been in hospital for three weeks before the championship 
due to complications during the birth of their second child, Jordan, and 
although mother and child were now fine, Higgins' preparations had been 
disturbed. That his trusted cue had been broken in the build-up to the 
tournament did not help either. A lack of practice time, coupled with the early 
Crucible starts that Higgins disliked, led him to dismiss his own chances. Many 
observers pointed out that his form had stuttered during the run-up to the 1982 
tournament and a player with his natural gifts was always a threat on the 
biggest stage.

The bottom half of the draw looked a lot more open. Ray Reardon had his 
backers, the world No2 tipped to win by the Mirror's Terry Smith and labelled 
as "an outstanding challenger in the bottom half of the draw" by Sydney Friskin 
of the Times. Reardon's compatriot Terry Griffiths had won the UK Championship 
in November, beating Davis and Higgins in the process, and was one of the many 
contenders for a final berth in a half of the draw that also included 1982 
semi-finalistJimmy White <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jimmy-white>, 
Canada's Kirk Stevens, 1981 finalist Doug Mountjoy, Tony Knowles and 1980 
winner Cliff Thorburn.

For Thorburn the 1983 World Championship would be a rollercoaster of emotions 
and experiences, ranging from elation to utter despair, taking in huge 
quantities of fatigue along the way. In all, he would play over 50 hours of 
snooker, face three final-frame deciders – all of which ended at an ungodly 
hour – and would compete in 120 of the 589 frames that were played at the 
Crucible, just over 20% of the total. And, of course, along the way he would 
becomethe first man to score a maximum 147 break at the Crucible 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PE0n_7i_VLE>, before he eventually hit a wall 
in the final, and was hit by personal tragedy that put everything else into 
perspective.

The first round was a mere appetiser for what was to follow. Of the 16 seeds, 
only Jimmy White went out, losing 10-8 to qualifier and old south London 
schoolmate Tony Meo, before both players promptly burst into tears over the 
emotion of the occasion. Terry Griffiths was pushed close by Mark Wildman, 
coming back from 8-7 down to win 10-8, in a painstaking finale (the crucial 
16th frame lasting 49 minutes and including a period of play where the pair 
took 17 minutes to pot the brown). John Spencer admitted he was lucky to beat 
Mike Hallett 10-7, with Ray Reardon also unhappy regarding his form, labelling 
himself "a beginner" during his 10-7 win over Eugene Hughes.

Davis and Higgins had fewer concerns. After taking an early 6-0 lead, Davis 
thrashed Rex Williams 10-4, sending out an ominous sign to the rest of the 
field. Higgins managed to brush off the dangerous Dean Reynolds, a player that 
he had only just scraped past at the UK Championships earlier on in the season. 
The Canadians enjoyed a comfortable cruise into the second round, a flu-ridden 
Thorburn defeating Australia's John Campbell 10-5, with pin-up boy Kirk 
Stevens, who had recently produced his first pop record, hammering Mick Fisher 
10-2.

If the tournament was warming up in the early matches, then it truly came to 
life in a dramatic second round. Higgins was at the centre of attention, but 
not necessarily for the right reasons. In the second frame of his match with 
Willie Thorne – who had beaten John Virgo 10-3 in the previous round – Higgins 
accused his opponent of deliberately missing a red, although referee John 
Williams disagreed. Thorne alleged that Higgins called him a cheat, an 
accusation Higgins refuted: "I didn't call him a cheat, but I told him I don't 
like people who would sell their own grandmother for two bob." The uneasy 
tension was not helped when Thorne levelled the same accusation at Higgins in 
the seventh frame. There was not much love lost between the pair.

Ultimately Higgins won 13-8 and both players kissed and made up, but the 
controversy that seemed to dog the reigning champion showed no signs of 
disappearing. "Willie and I are the best of pals again. It's just because I'm
Alex Higgins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-higgins> that it is blown 
up into a nuclear explosion," said Higgins. But this would not be the last time 
he would have to plead his innocence during the tournament. His behaviour was 
becoming so irritating to some that Tony Knowles would later say that Higgins 
needed "a good thump between the eyes", although the young Englishman later 
apologised for his rather frank comments.

In what would be his biggest test of the tournament, Davis sneaked through 
13-11 against a rejuvenated Dennis Taylor. Taylor's improved form had seen him 
gain revenge for his first-round defeat to Silvino Francisco the year before, 
when he beat the same player 10-9. Taylor attributed his change in fortunes to 
a new pair of £67 glasses that made him look like "a cross between Elton John 
and Joe 90" and "the front end of a Ford Cortina" according to onlookers.

Davis felt the full force of Taylor's new confidence, admitting that he was 
relieved to stay in the match at certain points. Although Taylor led 4-3, 8-7 
and 9-8, Davis looked to have shrugged off his opponent when he won four frames 
on the bounce to take a 12-9 lead, and despite a fightback from Taylor, Davis 
finished the job. Taylor must have been sick of the sight of Davis when he lost 
to the Englishman in the 1984 semi-final too, yet as we all know, he would 
certainly have his share of glory in their 1985 epic.

Two other matches went to the penultimate frame; Eddie Charlton beating John 
Spencer, with Tony Meo winning four of the last five frames to end Mountjoy's 
hopes. Afterwinning the world doubles championship with Davis 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013/07/sporting-partnerships.html>, 
Meo was beginning to find some success on his own, still using the trusty cue 
he had bought from a friend for £3 six years previously. Meo met Knowles in the 
quarter-finals, the latter having come through a final-frame decider against 
Ray Reardon. "I threw it away and did not do myself justice," bemoaned a gutted 
Reardon, who had high hopes on arriving in Sheffield after his wins in the 
Professional Players' Tournament, Welsh Professional Championship and the 
Yamaha Organs International in the 1982-83 season.

David Taylor's path to the quarter-finals was blocked by the large figure of 
Canada's Bill Werbeniuk. A feature in the Mirror detailed Big Bill's drinking 
regime, a necessity for Werbeniuk in order to combat an hereditary nervous 
tremor. Breakfast would be washed down with a pint of lager, followed by 
another six or seven before the match. "I don't usually start that early but 
I've got to with the match kicking off at 11am," Werbeniuk said. Despite the 
fuss surrounding his preparations, Werbeniuk was enjoying a fine season, 
reaching two finals and helping Canada win the State Express World Team Classic.

Taylor's comfortable first-round win over Jim Meadowcroft had been 
overshadowed slightly when Taylor moved to the opposite end of the arena due to 
excessive cigarette smoke (created by Meadowcroft) getting in the eyes of his 
opponent. "By the end of the second frame I couldn't see the end of the table," 
complained Taylor, who would have to endure Werbeniuk's chain-smoking during 
their second-round match. Werbeniuk won 13-10 after trailing 10-6, but along 
the way both players would take a unscheduled break to witness a slice of 
sporting history.

Cliff Thorburn's 147 is probably worthy of a blog on its own. And to think it 
all started with a fluke <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PE0n_7i_VLE&t=3m0s>. 
Leading 2-1 against Terry Griffiths, Thorburn luckily got his break underway 
when a red rattled in one pocket and rolled along the top cushion to knock 
another in. It was a lucky break that started an historic break, as the balls 
sat perfectly on the table for what was to follow.

As the break progressed, there were a few squeaky bum moments, and some fine 
shots were required with the rest, as Thorburn managed to keep the chances of a 
147 alive. It was after the eighth black had disappeared that Rex Williams 
began to mention the chance of a big break for Thorburn, with fellow 
commentator Jack Karnehm declaring that he did not even want to bring up the 
subject of a maximum for superstitious reasons. But it soon became apparent 
just what was happening, as all eyes began to focus on Thorburn, including 
those of Werbeniuk and Taylor playing on the other table.

The tension was filling the arena as Thorburn opted to take a small rest after 
14 reds and 13 blacks had been potted. "I had this terrible vision of making 
history with a runny nose," Thorburn admitted later, his ability to think 
logically under such pressure so admirable. After sinking a very missable 
yellow, everything was in place for his moment of glory. "Good luck mate," 
uttered Karnehm famously –one of my favourite commentary moments of the 1980s 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/08/1980s-commentary-moments.html>
 – as Thorburnfinished the break 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PE0n_7i_VLE&t=18m21s> that would earn him 
£13,000.

"I'm still in shock. It's simply mindboggling," said Thorburn, although after 
a couple of glasses of champagne he was back at the table, trying somehow to 
come down from that enormous high, and continue with the remaining frames of 
the match.

And what a match it turned out to be. Griffiths fought back from 12-9 down to 
take the match into a final frame, as a seven hour final session spilled into 
Monday morning. Approximately 200 hardy souls remained in the Crucible at 
3.51am, as Thorburn finally edged out his opponent after 13 hours and three 
minutes of mentally draining snooker. "I have certainly been through the mill 
and if I have to go through this all over again I shall end up insane," said 
Thorburn. Oh dear.

Thorburn's opponent in the quarter-finals would be fellow countryman Stevens, 
who had experienced his own health concerns during his 13-3 destruction of 
South Africa's Perrie Mans. Suffering from glandular fever, Stevens was given a 
separate dressing room and allowed to play his second-round match without a 
tie. Both Canadians would be tested physically and mentally as Thorburn was 
again involved in a gruelling match that went the distance. Initially all 
seemed to be going well for Thorburn, as he took an early 4-0 lead, but at the 
1983 championship, he rarely did things the easy way.

Stevens hit back to lead 12-10, with Thorburn looking beaten. But the next 
frame was Thorburn's and, when he levelled the match after a 53-minute 24th 
frame, Thorburn was back in familiar territory. The final frame was just as 
nervewracking, stretching on for 61 minutes as Thorburn took it to win a match 
that has lasted 12 hours and 32 minutes and did not finish until 2.12am. "It's 
nice to finish so early," joked Thorburn, who must have wanted to sleep for a 
week.

Thorburn may well have been centre of attention for a few days, but soon 
Higgins was making headlines once more. After being called for a foul in the 
third frame of his quarter-final with Werbeniuk, Higgins appeared to flick a 
V-sign towards referee John Williams, something Higgins vehemently denied. What 
was clear, however, was that Higgins was adamant that Williams should be 
removed from refereeing duties, storming out of the arena muttering: "I want 
the referee changed – he's not doing a good job."

Play was held up for five minutes as Higgins argued his case with tournament 
promoter Mike Watterson – two days later Watterson discovered that his services 
were no longer needed as the WPBSA were taking over from 1984 onwards – before 
Higgins' request was turned down and play resumed.

Trailing 9-7, Higgins looked in trouble, but he recovered to move into a 10-9 
lead. Frame 20 was peculiar to say the least: Werbeniuk established a huge 
lead, leaving Higgins requiring 10 snookers but the Hurricane refused to 
concede, prompting the Canadian to play three shots one-handed. At 11-11 the 
match was up for grabs, but Higgins won the next two frames to keep his title 
defence rolling on. Afterwards a tearful Higgins broke down as wife Lyn and 
daughter Lauren arrived in Sheffield, although the ongoing drama surrounding 
all of his matches seemed to be getting on top of him too.

The other two quarter-finals were less eventful. Meo never recovered from a 
poor start against Knowles, falling 5-0 behind and eventually losing 13-9. And 
the Steve Davis bandwagon continued, a 13-5 thrashing of Eddie Charlton notable 
only for an excellent serving of sour grapes from the Australian, who declared: 
"Nobody ever appreciates the luck Steve gets until you play him. He's a great 
player and beat me fair and square but, by God, nothing ever goes bad for him."

"No disrespect to the other semi-finalists, but this is like the final," said 
Higgins regarding his eagerly awaited clash with Davis. Unfortunately for 
Higgins, he would suffer the same fate as eventual finalist Thorburn, Davis 
reeling off seven frames in a row to lead 9-2. Not even a telephoned death 
threat could slow the Davis charge, with the Crucible sealed off by the police 
and play delayed for 35 minutes as spectators were body-searched and the venue 
checked – someone had called to say that Davis would be shot if he won 10 
frames.

Luckily Davis was not made aware of this threat until after the match but it 
probably would not have blocked his progress anyhow, such were the new heights 
his game was reaching. Higgins may have had a stomach upset – throughout the 
match he survived on a diet of lager and honey – but he would have had to be at 
his very best to even compete against Davis in this form. Five frames in a row 
put Davis into the final, his 16-5 victory meaning that he could put his feet 
up for a bit – or more likely practice for a few hours - while Thorburn would 
once again slug it out to the bitter end in his semi-final with Knowles.

At least Thorburn's matches were gradually finishing earlier, his deciding 
frame win over Knowles concluding at a far more reasonable 1.06am. For a while 
it looked as if Thorburn's marathon run was over, Knowles leading 15-13 and 
just needing the pink for a place in his first world final. But a nervy miss 
let Thorburn in, leaving a tearful Knowles distraught: "I'll keep seeing that 
pink over and over again. I was so tensed up. If only I'd stepped back for a 
second".

Sadly Thorburn would leave the Crucible in tears too, but for vastly more 
tragic reasons. During the semi-final, he discovered that his wife Barbara had 
suffered a miscarriage on the day of his 147, news that had been kept from him 
by his family, but told to him accidentally by a visiting friend from Canada. 
It was a heartbreaking episode for a man already exhausted by his experiences 
during the championships.

Unsurprisingly Thorburn had nothing left in the tank for the final, his body 
and mind simply not able to respond anymore, especially against the relentless 
pressure exerted by Davis. At 2-2 the match was a contest for the last time, as 
Davis won seven frames in a row, before taking a 12-5 lead into the Monday.

Any hope of a staggering comeback was put to bed the next day after another 
Davis surge, this time five frames on the bounce including a break of 131 in 
the last of the sequence, putting him one frame away from his second world 
title. Thorburn would win one more frame before Davis became the first man to 
win two world championships at the Crucible, celebrating with aback-breaking 
leap <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k8_HIcklYQ4&t=13m46s> as he potted the 
re-spotted black at the end of the 24th frame.

"This is more important than the first title," remarked Davis, who admitted to 
shedding a tear or two in his dressing room afterwards. Not only did Davis have 
£30,000 to go with his world title, but he also returned to the number one spot 
in the world rankings. Davis' period of world domination had truly begun.

"I'm bitterly disappointed. Now I know what it's like to go through 
purgatory," said Thorburn about his last few days. "I tried like hell but when 
I woke up after my semi-final win over Tony Knowles the final was 
anti-climatic. I just felt numb". Certainly the Canadian could be excused for 
his lacklustre performance in the final, the energy-sapping slog he had been 
through, coupled with his devastating news, finally catching up with him.

The final had been watched by 9.9 million viewers on BBC2, proof that the 
sport was still popular in the UK, and showing no signs of reaching saturation 
point as yet (compilations like this highlight the great names involved in 
snooker at the time <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kyZfWQjOXRQ>). Through 
these peak years, Davis would remain at the top of the tree, his 1983 win a 
microcosm of his legendary career of greatness, which saw him claim six world 
championships, and set the standards upon which future players were measured 
against.

• This blog first appeared on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
• Follow Guardian Sport on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiansport>
 