
Andorra has matured. It has been 12 years since I visited the Pyrenean 
princess of the duty-free pub-crawl, where generations of British novices have 
lost their ski virginity, and I was interested to see if much had changed.

It's not just a question of fancy new hotels and fast ski lifts - this season 
Andorra wants to be treated like the grown-up resorts in the Alps. So runs the 
hype, but can it be true?

I have to admit that I was sceptical. My strongest memory from my previous 
visit was of a night out organised by the reps. At one of the stops on the pub 
crawl there was a contest with a prize (a whole pint of lager) for the person 
who could sink a half-pint fastest through someone else's dirty sock. The lads 
didn't miss a beat: all the glasses were emptied in seconds.

So, what's changed since? For one thing, Andorra is even more popular. Last 
season it won its biggest-ever slice of the UK tour operator market, 14.1 per 
cent. That's nearly one in every seven skiers and snowboarders, more than went 
to Switzerland, the United States and Canada combined. Only France, Austria and 
Italy attract more Brits.

One reason for the popularity of this principality between France and Spain 
has been the snow, which has been reliably good, even in recent years when the 
Alps have suffered poor falls; another is its widely praised ski-school system, 
with a high proportion of native English speakers among the instructors.

For the first time this season the two biggest ski areas have a joint lift 
pass. Pas de la Casa/Grau Roig and Soldeu/El Tarter have been physically linked 
for the past four seasons, but any skier or rider straying from one area to the 
other had to buy a new ticket to get home - or face a lengthy hike or bus ride 
- all because, locals say, of an ancient feud between the communities.

This season, one pass covers 192km (119 miles) of runs, from the bleak, 
treeless bowl above Pas de la Casa, to the wooded runs of Grau Roig over the 
pass and the wide open pistes of Soldeu/El Tarter beyond. The integrated area, 
christened Grand Valira, is now one of the largest in Europe - among the top 20 
or 25, depending on who you talk to. Compared by length of piste, lift capacity 
and number of passes sold, Grand Valira claims to rank roughly between 
Mayrhofen in Austria, and Les Deux Alpes in France.

Hit the slopes and you quickly realise how much the ski area has benefited 
from new lifts. These include a cable car that since January 2000 has spanned 
the ravine separating the resorts of Pal and Arinsal, joining them into one 
extended ski area.

More dramatic still is the €24 million (£16.8m) Funicamp railway, built five 
seasons ago. With a 6km short cut over the mountains, it has saved skiers 
heading to Pas de la Casa/Grau Roig area an 18km road journey. Now they glide 
in 24-passenger bubbles suspended between twin, parallel cables. In the past 
five seasons, the resorts have invested more than €100m on snowmaking, 
piste-grooming machinery and powerful new lifts.

I was also impressed with the mountain facilities: not what you'd expect of a 
country determined to stay in the bargain basement of European skiing. Prices 
on the ground are still often low, especially when it comes to buying duty-free 
booze. In Pas de la Casa - still the rowdiest of the resorts, close to the 
French border, bursting with discount electronics and duty-free sportswear 
shops - the Supermercat Petit Preu was selling a litre of Gordon's gin for £4 
and a litre of Spanish vodka for £1.25.

As well as several all-day bars aimed at Brits ('Beans on toast, €2.95'), a 
line of cafe-restaurants overlooking the mountainside are more geared towards 
the Continental market. The window of La Braza, for example, was filled with a 
lavish display of gateaux and glazed fruit tarts; here a plate of moules-frites 
costs £4.35 and a three-course meal £6.50.

In more upmarket Soldeu, at the restaurant above the top station of the main 
cable car, the three-course menu, served by waiters on the sun terrace, cost 
£10.40. The choices included a foie gras starter and hake in batter; still 
inexpensive by Alpine standards.

What about the price of ski passes? Grand Valira's, at £123 for six days, 
costs a fraction more than one at Les Deux Alpes, for example. But when you 
consider that the French resort has more than double Grand Valira's 930m 
vertical drop, as well as glacier skiing, the Grand Valira pass isn't a steal.

However, the package holiday prices present a different picture. I compared 
Inghams' brochure prices for this season, looking at the cheapest week (the 
second one in January) and the most expensive (the third in February, which is 
half-term in much of Britain). In the Grand Valira ski area, the most upmarket 
accommodation area is Soldeu/El Tarter (little more than four clusters of 
hotels strung out along 4km of mountain road, although the newer hotels are 
attractively finished in wood and local stone).

At Soldeu, the flagship hotel is the three-year-old Sporthotel Village, which 
has an enormous bar/ atrium area next to the restaurant with dozens of huge 
sofas over looking the mountainside and spacious rooms. A week's half-board 
costs £552/£996.

The same dates at Inghams's only four-star property in Les Deux Alpes, La 
Bérangère, said to be the best in the resort, costs £709/ £1,322. Ski school, 
incidentally, booked through the operator, works out about 25 per cent cheaper 
in Soldeu.

You can, of course, do it more cheaply. You could ski the same area staying at 
rowdier Pas de la Casa. Half-board at the two-star Hotel Confort, for example, 
would cost £358/£645 half-board; Inghams's cheapest option in Les Deux Alpes is 
a two-star for £345/£644 B&B.

If you're happy with a ski area just a third the size, prices are lower in 
Arinsal. The funnel-like bowl is rather bleak, but all runs end at the same 
spot, an advantage for beginners and mixed-ability groups. Those with more 
confidence can take the cable car link to the tree-lined pistes in Pal. For 
example, a holiday at the flagship property in Arinsal, the four-star Princesa 
Park, with its acres of marble, large basement spa, bowling alley and internet 
cafe, costs £407/£733, half-board.

So, what's the verdict? Andorra is not as cheap as it was, but can be good 
value, especially once you are in the resort. As long as the place gets 
reliable snow and prices don't rise much more, there will be plenty of Brits 
willing to go.

As for the pub games - I went to a Seventies night at a pub in Arinsal, where 
from 9pm until 10pm drinks were selling 'at Seventies prices' - a pint of beer 
for €1 instead of €3. There was to be an end-of-season show by the reps later 
on but, curious as I was, I couldn't stop yawning and went back to the hotel to 
crash.

So, has Andorra grown up? Maybe. And its old fans? They've grown older still.

Factfile

Further information: Ski Andorra (00 376 864389). Individual resorts (
www.pasgrau.com <http://www.pasgrau.com>; www.soldeu.ad <http://www.soldeu.ad>; 
www.palarinsal.com <http://www.palarinsal.com>; and www.vallordino.ad 
<http://www.vallordino.ad>). Andorra Tourist Delegation (020 8874 4806). 

Inghams <http://www.inghams.co.uk> (020 8780 4433) has seven nights' 
half-board at the Sporthotel Village, Soldeu, including flights from Gatwick 
and transfers, from £552. Regional flights are also available.
 