
University is a large, long-term investment for both students and parents. 
Good reason, then, for some judicious shopping around universities, courses and 
accommodations to obtain best value for money.

Annual tuition fees up to £9,000 for state-funded institutions get paid direct 
to universities in the form of a loan, which students start to repay monthly 
after graduation once they earn over £21,000.

Accommodation and living expenses, which most students pay for with a 
separate, means-tested maintenance loan provided by the state-runStudent Loans 
Company <http://www.slc.co.uk/>, determine how much you as a parent or guardian 
need to financially support your children. Unless you are facing severe 
economic hardship and are eligible for state support, the shortfall you need to 
pay to make up the full loan amount is dictated by your total annual household 
income.

Is it cheaper to live in university or private rented accommodation – by far 
the biggest budget item? There is no simple answer. If a student shares with 
others in private accommodation, it can be cheaper, but few first-years 
consider that an option, according to one student adviser.

One of the big issues for students is that they have no idea what their living 
costs will be
Lee Farman, IT consultant and parent 
Chris Oakes-Monger, a maths teacher in Hampshire, says he pays £100 a month to 
each of his two daughters to make up his household’s annual means-tested 
contribution of around £2,500 towards their living expenses. Each daughter may 
then take out a maintenance loan – after subtracting the parental contribution 
of £1,250 – of up to a maximum of £8,200 (living away from home, outside 
London); £10,702 (living away from home, in London); or £6,904 (living at 
home). If Oakes-Monger had only one child at university, he would still have to 
pay £2,500, so it is worth having more than one child studying at the same time.

Add in two £25-a-month mobile phone contracts, insurance (check if you can use 
your home insurance), tax and breakdown cover on a car they share during 
vacations plus other expenses, and Oakes-Monger’s annual outlay is around 
£3,000. Despite that, both daughters also have part-time jobs to get by.

Hazel Farman, a medical student at UEA and renting accommodation in Norwich, 
gets the minimum loan, with her parents making up the shortfall. The intensive 
course prevents her from taking a job but she spends much of her spare time 
volunteering for St John Ambulance at music gigs so gets in free.

“In her first year she tracked what her outgoings were,” says Hazel’s father, 
Lee, an IT consultant. “One of the big issues is that they have no idea what 
their living costs will be. It depends on how they react to things, what’s 
expected of them, how well they manage their budget. If Hazel had any problems, 
she’d come to me.”

Farman considers Hazel’s five-year course as sound value for money. “Medics 
have one of the highest teacher/lecturer contact times at over 30 hours a week. 
Their degree costs a lot more than £9,000 a year.”

Extra funding for certain courses

Some universities offer grants for specific courses. Maddie Thomas, a 
first-year fashion design student at Southampton Solent University, 
successfully applied for a £200 grant to help pay for expensive fabric needed 
for a course project. She says she gets around £250 a month during term-time 
from her parents, which makes up the shortfall on a means-tested loan that pays 
for her hall rent in a mixed flat of 10 students. Her course is too demanding 
for her to take up part-time paid work during term-time, but she and her 
flatmates tend to go out during the week rather than at weekends when they get 
drinks in and hold boardgame evenings. But she’s just landed a summer job in a 
clothing chain.

People should understand it as a student tax for the future, and not just see 
it as a financial burden
Lee Farman 
What about individual items such as council tax, household insurance, 
broadband and utility bills? University hall fees cushion first-year students, 
but student budgeting needs to be much sharper when renting privately, as these 
items tend to be separate from the rent.

Above all, parents should not fear their children applying for a loan. “It’s a 
good deal when you look at what they have to earn before they repay it, and how 
long they have to pay it back,” says Lee. “Certain low earners may never have 
to repay the full amount. At the moment, it’s probably the cheapest way of 
funding university. If people understand they should easily be able to cover 
what is effectively a student tax for the future, it gives them a different 
mindset to just seeing it as a burden.”

Checks and balances: Tips for making ends meet 

 * Food Buy supermarket own brands, much cheaper than their branded 
equivalents. Head for the reduced price counters, consider meal deals.

 * Grants Apply for internal university grants early: first come, first served.

 * Loans They are based on nine not 12 months’ minimum living expenses, so get 
part-time work.

 * Jobs Holiday working for a national chain may mean you can transfer to a 
branch near your university.

 * Budgeting Check for hidden course costs: field trips, CRB checks etc. Put 
something by each week for contingencies. Check out studentcalculator.org, 
levitatestudent.blogspot.com and moneysavingexpert.com for online budgeting and 
best deals.

 * Banks Seek student accounts with interest-free overdrafts – very useful 
when loan payments are delayed.

 * Computers There’s free use on campus. Laptop owners should beware the cost 
of printer ink; buy it much cheaper online.

 * Books Buy basic texts, not the full course list, and use the library.
 