
In June 2002, during a budget crisis in Illinois, a state senator from 
Chicago's West Side,Rickey Hendon 
<http://www.ilga.gov/senate/senator.asp?MemberID=988>, made a desperate plea 
for a child-welfare facility in his constituency to be spared the axe. A junior 
senator from Chicago's South Side, Barack Obama, voted against him, insisting 
hard times call for hard choices.

Ten minutes later Obama rose, calling for a similar project in his own 
constituency to be spared, and for compassion and understanding. Hendon was 
livid and challenged Obama on his double standards from the senate floor. Obama 
became livid too. As Hendon has told it, Obama approached him, "stuck his 
jagged, strained face into my space 
<http://advanceindiana.blogspot.com/2008/12/state-senator-rickey-hendon-is-african.html>
", and said: "You embarrassed me on the senate floor and if you ever do it 
again I will kick your ass."

"What?" said an incredulous Hendon.

"You heard me," Obama said. "And if you come back here by the telephones where 
the press can't see it, I will kick your ass right now."

The two men vacated the senate floor and, depending on whom you believe, 
either traded blows or came close to it.

This is a rare tale of Obama both directly facing down an opponent and losing 
his cool. But during the past year many of his supporters have wished he would 
show such flashes of anger, urgency and passion more often (if perhaps a bit 
more focused and less macho and juvenile). He campaigned on the promise to 
transcend the bipartisan divide; many of his supporters would like to see him 
stand his ground against his Republican opponents. Having praised his 
calm-headed eloquence, some would now like to see more passion.

The presidency is not just the highest office in the land. It is in no small 
part a performance. To some extent Americans look to their president to 
articulate the mood and embody the aspirations of the nation, or at the very 
least that part of it that elected them. Presidents are not just judged on what 
they say and do but how they say and do it. It's not just what they achieve but 
how they are perceived, to the point where image trumps reality. Ronald Reagan 
raised the debt ceiling 17 times, ballooned the deficit, reduced tax loopholes 
and tax breaks. But he remains the darling of the Tea Party movement because he 
talked their talk, even if he didn't walk their walk.

With his soaring rhetoric and impassioned oratory Obama performed brilliantly 
as a candidate. But in office he has come across as aloof at a time of acute 
economic pain and insufficiently combative when faced with an increasingly 
polarised political culture. The former academic is regularly accused of taking 
too professorial a tone: talking down to the public rather than to them.

"Americans would like their president to be sick and needy," explains James 
Zogby <http://www.aaiusa.org/pages/about-dr-zogby>, head of the Arab American 
Institute and executive member of the Democratic Executive Committee. "Bill 
Clinton would shake literally tens of thousands of hands every Christmas. Each 
person he'd meet would say: 'I think he remembered me.' Obama doesn't like to 
do it. No real person would like to do it. And therefore he doesn't do it. And 
people resent that. They want their president to really need them. He doesn't. 
He's OK, he's relaxed, cool, calm. I'd love him to call me up like Clinton 
would … people like that, he doesn't need it."

But come election day next year he will need them. And with his approval 
ratings languishing in the low 40s, it looks as though they might not be there 
for him.

There are two particular areas where most commentators and the public feel 
that Obama has fallen short. The first is the economy. Poverty and 
repossessions are at a record high, the Dow keeps tanking, the deficit keeps 
growing and unemployment remains stuck at around 9%. Yet the man who recalled 
Martin Luther King's evocation of "the fierce urgency of now 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7CIquPCHiY0>" on the campaign trail has struck 
few as being either fierce or urgent as the nation teeters on the brink of 
another recession.

"You get the sense that this president, while intellectually engaged, is not 
emotionally engaged with what the American people are going through," says
Michael Fletcher 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/michael-a-fletcher/2011/03/04/AB5zqwN_page.html>
, the Washington Post's economics correspondent. "People want to feel there's 
someone out there fighting their corner even if that person doesn't win."

Charlie Cook <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charlie_Cook>, one of Washington's 
premier political analysts, believes there's only so much Obama can do at this 
stage. "I think the problems are more objective," he says. "Yes, he tends to 
lecture and tends to be professorial. I think that's a problem, but I don't 
think it'sthe problem. I think eloquence only gets you so far. I think the 
emphasis was on going on television and trying to explain his agenda, to the 
point now where I think if the American people haven't hit the mute button 
their finger is very close to that button where they just don't listen any 
more. If things get better, we'll re-evaluate, but right now – we're not 
listening."

Drew Westen, academic and author of The Political Brain 
<http://www.thepoliticalbrain.com/videos.php>, thinks they would listen if 
Obama changed the pitch. "What Americans really needed to hear from Barack 
Obama was not only I feel your pain, but also I feel your anger. And he's a 
person who just doesn't do anger. And if you can't be angry when Wall Street 
speculators just gambled away the livelihoods of eight million of your fellow 
citizens then there's something wrong with you."
 Man of action: George Bush. Photograph: AP 
The other area is that the Tea Party leads the opposition that is now calling 
the shots within the Republican party. Here, whether on negotiations about the 
debt ceiling or the budget, Obama generally starts talking tough only to draw a 
line in the sand, erase it and then keep conceding ground to his opponents 
until they get most of what they want. Westen believes the end result is to 
give a sense of a man of little conviction. "Like most Americans, at this 
point, I have no idea whatBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> – and by extension, the 
party he leads – believes on virtually any issue."

Since his jobs speech 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/richard-adams-blog/2011/sep/08/obama-jobs-speech-congress-live>
 in early September, he has taken to confronting Republicans more directly and 
using the bully pulpit to go over the head of Congress to rally the public 
behind tax hikes on the wealthy as part of a second wave of economic stimulus. 
It is unlikely he can have much effect on the economy between now and election 
day apart from persuading people that it was not his fault, but that of the 
intransigent Republicans. But Bush showed that, on some levels, intransigence 
works – even if nothing else did.

"From the Bush White House you got a more consistent message," says Fletcher, 
who covered both administrations. "Maybe there was less intellectual honesty, 
but you got a consistent, firm, very clear message. When Obama speaks, the 
other side always has a point, both sides are to blame. It's almost as if he's 
observing his presidency from outside of his presidency."

In 2008 this was to Obama's advantage. The fact that he was intellectual, 
consensual and measured contrasted well with the shortcomings of his 
predecessor. "One of the things that made Obama attractive to many Americans 
was a Bush hangover," explainsBruce Riedel 
<http://www.brookings.edu/experts/riedelb.aspx>, a senior foreign policy fellow 
at the Brookings Institution who has advised the last three presidents on 
issues relating to the Middle East and south Asia. "There was a sense we'd had 
too much shoot from the hip, or shoot from the lip, that that had got us into 
two wars and the economic depression that we're in. They wanted a more cerebral 
president who thought ahead rather than plunged in. Two years ago, that 
cerebral look seemed cool to many Americans. Two years later it seems cold. I 
think there are moments when Americans want a very black and white situation, 
and they want to cut to the chase, and Obama needs to reach beyond his natural 
personality to get there."
 Cold and calculating: Obama directs the assassination of Osama bin Laden. 
Photograph: Pete Souza 
Salim Muwakkil, a Chicago-based journalist, thinks in times of crisis 
Americans value impulsiveness in a leader. "Isn't that part of the American 
myth?" he asks. "We don't get stuck in the paralysis of analysis. We strike out 
when we see the wrong. Bush embodied that, Reagan had a bit of that. These 
times are calling even more for that kind of quality."

This might be easier said than done. Not only does Obama have to perform the 
role of president, but also that of the first black one. Whatever detractors 
thought of Clinton or Bush Jr, they never accused them of not being born in the 
United States or secretly belonging to another faith. Part of his ostensible 
"post-racial" appeal as a candidate was the paradoxical claim that he did not 
scare white voters too much. Before the election Senate leader Harry Reid 
privately said his chances were good because he was a"light-skinned" 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/8450402.stm> African American "with no Negro 
dialect, unless he wanted to have one".

If these were the criteria for success, would the US really want an angry 
black man with the codes to the nation's nuclear arsenal? Muwakkil, who has 
known Obama for several years, believes the president may have overcompensated. 
"I think he's brought an element of calm serenity to the office in a way that 
others have not done. In some ways it's the epitome of the cool style. Almost 
ironically it's a stereotype. It's like the pimp fromIceberg Slim 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iceberg_Slim>. The guy who was not perturbed by 
anything. Murders would happen in his vicinity and he'd carry on as if nothing 
happened."

At certain moments this style has paid off. When Osama bin Laden was 
assassinated 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/may/02/osama-bin-laden-dead-obama>, for 
example, Obama performed the commander-in-chief role in a manner that most 
Americans thought was pitch perfect. "You wanted cold, calculating; you got 
cold, calculating," says Riedel. "He coldly calculated the odds of whether 
Osama bin Laden would be in that villa – they were about 50/50. He coldly 
calculated that we would probably never get odds as good as 50/50 and so he 
went forward. It was a careful assessment of risk and opportunity."

After a gunman opened fire in Tucson, Arizona, earlier this year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/jan/08/gabrielle-giffords-shot-tucson-arizona>
, killing six and injuring several others, including congresswoman Gabrielle 
Giffords, he managed to weave a more hopeful tapestry of the US's political 
future from the tragedy, leaving his detractors looking petty and insubstantial.

Nevertheless, while he has mostly sung on the stump, he has stuttered in 
power. This inability to connect was exemplified last September during a 
televised town hall meeting whenVelma Hart 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/velma-hart>, a black woman – the demographic 
bedrock of Obama's electoral base – expressed her frustration with his 
presidency. "I'm exhausted. I'm exhausted of defending you, defending your 
administration, defending the mantle of change that I voted for, and deeply 
disappointed with where we are right now."

Obama acknowledged hard times but went on to answer with a laundry list of 
achievements that failed to address the underlying tone of disillusionment in 
the question. A few months later Hart lost her job. "Here's the thing," she 
told me recently. "I didn't engage my president to hug and kiss me. But what I 
did think I'd be able to appreciate is the change he was talking about during 
the campaign. I want leadership and decisiveness and action that helps this 
country get better. That's what I want, because that benefits me, that benefits 
my circle, and that benefits my children."

"Do you think he's decisive?" I asked her.

"Ummm, sometimes … not always, no."
 