
There’s no better time to try and quit booze than in January. Following weeks 
of festive over-indulgence, at least some of the people around you are also 
likely to bethinking about cutting down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jan/06/should-stop-drinking-alcohol-january>
. Requesting a lime and soda rather than your usual gin and tonic when someone 
gets a round often elicits an understanding nod. “Dry January, is it?” The best 
option in this scenario is to simply smile in agreement. The alternative, as I 
learned the hard way, is awkwardly attempting to explainwhy you’re hoping to 
make it a permanent thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/05/government-drink-less-alcohol-dry-january-new-guidelines>
, as your conversational partner decides whether to feel pitying or judged.

Perhaps we should be encouraged to talk about the issue more openly. As things 
are, though, telling people on a boozy night out that you think you were 
developing an unhealthy relationship with alcohol tends to go down like a lead 
balloon. Though it never became the kind of dependency that requires 
professional intervention, over the past year or so I found myself relying on 
booze to lift my mood. The combination of Brexit, Trump, Labour politics and 
personal issues left me feeling hopeless and depressed. I began to fixate on 
the issue of climate change and the details ofa potential future apocalypse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/17/time-to-join-preppers-survive-climate-change-apocalypse>
. Only when I had a few drinks inside me did I feel capable of switching off.

It doesn't help that my friends are used to me being the first to suggest a 
round of shots or a third bottle of wine

Over Christmas I came down with flu and spent a couple of weeks laid up in 
bed. I realised that increased drinking probably hadn’t left me in peak 
physical condition, and by the time I felt well again I was determined to keep 
it that way. The idea of risking a hangover filled me with dread. I also 
figured out that my political despair was exacerbated because I also felt I’d 
lost control over my own life, and that alcohol was part of the problem. It was 
a vicious circle I was determined to break and new year seemed like an obvious 
time to start.

I quickly stopped trying to explain my reasoning to enquiring acquaintances. 
Thepopularity of dry January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/feb/08/abstinence-campaigns-charities-dry-january-stoptober-fundraising>
 has definitely made it easier to decline booze without awkwardness, but there 
have been a couple of incidents where I’ve had to stand my ground. It doesn’t 
help that so many of my friends are relatively heavy drinkers – nor that 
they’re used to me being the first to suggest a round of shots or a third 
bottle of wine.

I’ve discovered that the best option is to be proactive. If I’m going 
somewhere where people are drinking, I’ll mentally prepare for being pressured 
to participate and think about how to avoid temptation. It’s only been a couple 
of weeks so far, but I’ve found a few tactics that might be helpful for others:

1. Make sure you’ve always got a (soft) drink in your hand

This is simple but effective. It’s not just because of the alcohol that 
drinking works as a social lubricant – taking a sip is also an effective way to 
fill any awkward gaps in conversation, and going to the bar provides a handy 
exit strategy if you’re feeling trapped. Holding a drink also gives you 
something to do with your hands, which is more useful than I’d previously 
appreciated. What’s more, when someone’s getting a round in you can simply to 
point to your almost full glass. No awkward explanation required.

2. Realise you can still have fun

At the age of 26 I’ve made a miraculous discovery: I don’t actually have to be 
drunk to dance in public. When everyone around you is feeling happy and 
unselfconscious, it’s surprisingly easy to catch their good mood. (Especially 
when you remember that you’re the only one who’s not going to wake up with a 
headache.) If you’re heading to an event where people will be drinking, go with 
the expectation that you’ll enjoy yourself. Otherwise, what’s the point?

3. If you’re not going to have fun, don’t bother going out

If you’re feeling tired, anxious or stressed, step two might not work. 
Sometimes I’m just not in the mood to socialise. My previous approach to this 
situation involved quickly downing a couple of drinks in an attempt to get in 
the mood, but I’ve realised I’m far better off making my excuses and curling up 
at home with Netflix and a takeaway. If you get somewhere and realise you’re 
not feeling it, it’s fine to prioritise your own wellbeing and slip off early.

Give up giving up: why I hate Dry January | Eva Wiseman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jan/19/giving-up-dry-january-eva-wiseman>
4. Find social activities that don’t involve drinking

If, like me, your social life tends to mainly revolve around the pub, consider 
having a go at something else. Your friends might drag their feet a little, but 
if you’re prepared to do most of the organising, most people can be roped in. 
Art galleries and museums, the cinema, rollerskating, bowling – going out for 
food also makes alcohol less of a focus. Along with a couple of female friends, 
I’ve started regularly visiting the local Turkish baths.

5. Come up with alternative ways to reward yourself

Overexcited by various “new year, new you” guides, I originally considered 
cutting out sugar at the same time as quitting alcohol. This was a terrible 
idea. Whenever I had a difficult day and wanted to treat myself for getting 
through it, my usual solution was to reach for the bottle. Failing that, I’d 
opt for a bar of chocolate or a slice of cake. If I tried to drop both at once 
I’d be setting myself up to fail. Whether it’s sugar, video games or watching 
Ryan Gosling films, it helps to find alternate ways to give yourself a dopamine 
hit.
 