
Hungary booked their return to major tournament football after 30 years with a 
victory over Norway in theirEuro 2016 qualifying 
<http://www.uefa.com/uefaeuro/finals/news/newsid=2293579.html> play-off.

Hungary led through the debutant Laszlo Kleinheisler’s first-leg goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/12/norway-hungary-euro-2016-play-off-match-report>
 and Tamas Priskin struck early in the first half of the second leg before 
Norway’s Markus Henriksen scored at both ends late on in the hosts’ win.

Only five of their squad were even born when Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hungary> played at the 1986 Mexico World 
Cup and, of those, only the veteran goalkeeper Gabor Kiraly was in the starting 
line-up for this game. The 39-year-old was inspired in the second leg, making a 
series of fine saves.

“Congratulations to the team for a huge performance throughout the qualifying 
series,” said Hungary’s German coach Bernd Storck. “This is huge success for 
the football team and the country. Now I’m Hungarian.

“I’m thankful for the confidence of the Hungarian Football Federation and 
president Sandor Csanyi, who helped develop Hungarian football. Having come 
back down to earth we are now celebrating. We’ll see how to proceed but we are 
well prepared for the tournament.”

Missed chances in the first leg cost Norway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/norway> and they came up short in front 
of goal again in Budapest. But what really cost them was conceding the 
all-important second goal of the tie in the 14th minute.

For all Hungary’s historic footballing pedigree it came via a route-one ball 
out of defence aimed at Priskin in the inside-left channel. The clearance 
appeared to catch Norway half-asleep and the Slovan Bratislava and former 
Watford striker cut inside Even Hovland and the back-tracking Vegard Forren to 
fire right-footed into the far top corner for his 17th goal in 54 matches for 
his country.

Now with a two-goal cushion Hungary’s anxiety eased but Kiraly still had to be 
alert to save with his legs from Haitam Aleesami after Mohamed Elyounoussi had 
miskicked in front of goal.

Gergo Lovrencsics had the chance to put the match beyond doubt but failed to 
hit the target with a far-post header whereas Hovland’s header against the foot 
of the upright on the stroke of half-time, from the 16-year-old Martin 
Odegaard’s corner, suggested fortune was not favouring Norway.

After the break the Hungary captain, Balazs Dzsudzsak, had a shot deflected on 
to the crossbar and then forced Orjan Nyland into a good low save after a 
driving run. Kiraly denied the substitute Marcus Pedersen with his body after a 
mistake by Richard Guzmics at the other end.

The centre-back made up for that slip by forcing Henriksen to turn a corner 
into his own net seven minutes from time and, although the AZ Alkmaar forward 
then scored at the correct end moments later, it was too late for Norway who 
were trying to reach the Euros for the first time since 2000. “Congratulations 
to Hungary. They were better than us over the two legs,” said Norway’s 
Per-Mathias Hogmo.

A minute’s silence was held before the start of the match in memory of Marton 
Fulop and Pal Varhidi, two former members of the Hungary national team who died 
on Thursday, and the victims of the attacks in Paris on Friday.

Hungary, who last played at the Euros in 1972, are the 21st nation to qualify 
for the championship in France, from 10 June to 10 July, and can now look 
forward to the draw in Paris on 12 December.
 