
Hurricane Otto <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hurricane-otto> strengthened 
to a category two storm as it made landfall on the sparsely populated Caribbean 
border between Nicaragua and Costa Rica as an unusually strong late-season 
event.

The US National Hurricane Center said Otto hit land near the town of San Juan 
deNicaragua <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicaragua> with winds of 110 mph 
around midday local time.

Nicaragua also closed schools and was evacuating more than 10,000 people from 
communities in the storm’s path. Heavy rains were expected to affect the whole 
country on Thursday and Friday, raising the possibility of flooding and 
landslides.

Tsunami warning after 7.2-magnitude quake off El Salvador coast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/tsunami-warning-after-72-magnitude-quake-off-el-salvador-coast>
Heavy rains from the storm were blamed for three deaths in Panama, and 
officials inCosta Rica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/costa-rica> ordered 
the evacuation of 4,000 people from its Caribbean coast and closed schools 
nationwide for the rest of the week as the storm approached.


Costa Rica has already experienced flooding in some areas and the president, 
Luis Guillermo Solís, announced that public employees would not have to work on 
Thursday or Friday.

The country’s National Meteorological Institute noted that a hurricane had 
never made landfall in Costa Rica since records-keeping began. Otto is the 
southernmost hurricane on record to hit Central America.

The US National Hurricane Center said the storm had regained hurricane 
strength late on Wednesday night after fluctuating between tropical storm and 
hurricane status earlier in the week. By Thursday morning, Otto’s maximum 
sustained winds had increased to nearly 105mph (165km/h) with additional 
strengthening possible before landfall.


In Bluefields, Nicaragua the nearest big town on the Nicaraguan coast 
residents prepared to ride out the hurricane.

“In our house, we have packed up some things in plastic bags and we went out 
to buy some provisions, just in case,” said Bluefields resident Jean Hodgson. 
“But if we had to leave our house, we don’t know where we could take refuge.” 
The area is low-lying and easily flooded.

Further south and closer to where Otto hit residents in the coastal town of 
Punta Gorda said they were planning to ride out the hurricane.

“There is fear, because these kinds of things are scary, but we are praying 
and doing what the authorities have told us to do,” said Punta Gorda resident 
Sara Pantin.

By Thursday morning, 16 government shelters in Costa Rica held about 1,335 
evacuees. People often take shelter with relatives during such evacuations.

Costa Rican President Luis Guillermo Solís said Otto could damage the 
country’s important coffee and agriculture sectors.

Nicaragua also feared damage for impoverished farmers and to coffee crops that 
are almost ready to harvest.
 