
I’m a single parent with sole responsibility for my two children. Their father 
left about five years ago, before they started school, and now has no contact 
with them. Initially, I did quite well after the split. I was able to support 
them through the breakup and they adapted fairly well. Recently, however, I 
have not been coping so well. My mother, who was my only real support, died 
last year and I feel I haven’t properly grieved for her as I have had to keep 
my family and my part-time job going. I now feel quite weary and overwhelmed.

My elder child has started to become very anxious and tearful and it was 
suggested that her emotions could be linked to mine. To help her, I have been 
very wisely and warmly advised, I must first help myself – get counselling or 
do something outside the home for myself. The trouble is that doing anything 
for myself seems impossible. I have no free time and little spare cash. I have 
a network of friends who can help out when I really need it, but I don’t want 
to burden them unless it is an emergency.

I was never close to my mum, as she wasn’t nurturing, but she adored her 
grandchildren and they adored her. I am quite shocked by how hard her death hit 
me, given our difficult relationship. My dad is still alive but not in my life 
and hasn’t been for most of my adulthood.

I love my children and, for the most part, really enjoy my life with them, but 
I fear that our closeness may be making us spiral together and it could be 
problematic for them as they hit their teenage years.

I would say this is an emergency. You are deserving enough to have friends who 
can help out: use them. I doubt they would see helping you as a burden and when 
you have regained your equilibrium – and that day will come – you will be in a 
position to help them.

I think part of the issue is that you were never properly nurtured yourself, 
so you now find it hard to do this as an adult. I have been reading a lot about 
grief lately and one of the things that I have realised is that, if you have 
had a difficult relationship with a close family member, grieving for them can 
be more problematic than if you got on well – all those lost opportunities for 
a better relationship, all those “what ifs?”. This can take people by surprise.

I consulted family therapist Caroline Wells, of the Association for Family 
Therapy and Systemic Practice (aft.org.uk 
<http://www.aft.org.uk/view/index.html?tzcheck=1>). The first thing she 
remarked on was what a lot you had been through. She said: “There’s an 
overwhelming sense of loss in your letter. You are doing amazingly well given 
the challenging circumstances.”

I second that. I asked Wells, why now? Why is it that you seem to have been 
coping well and now feel as you do? She pointed out that we have levels of 
tolerance, but that, after a while, “When you start stacking things up, that 
resilience gives in”. It is like carrying heavy shopping – you can do it for a 
while but after a bit, it gets too heavy.

Wells also asked if your elder child was about to go to secondary school. If 
so, she may be worried about the transition. “The change to secondary school 
can be a struggle, especially if you have something else going on,” she said. 
Your elder child may also be missing her grandma – and worried about you. I 
wonder if she sees grief as a “grown-up” emotion and so her feelings are coming 
out in different ways – ways that she thinks are more “OK” for her?

“Your daughter’s emotions may be linked to yours,” says Wells, “but that may 
not be the whole story. I think you need to acknowledge that you are both 
struggling in your own separate ways. You are grieving separately, but your 
strength will be in making some link.”

We also wondered how the younger child was doing?

A great way for you all to talk about grandma – and start to process feelings 
– might be to make a memory book of her. Put in photographs and write down 
things that you remember about her. Perhaps do a family tree in the book. Don’t 
worry if you cry. You will eventually stop.

Wells thought that you should “prioritise yourself. Go to your GP to make sure 
you have no underlying health needs and get on a list for counselling.” I know 
services and resources vary hugely, but start the process. Sometimes just 
admitting to “someone in authority” that you need help can be a significant 
first step. If you want to go privately (it doesn’t have to be that expensive), 
look at the website of the Association forFamily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Therapy given above. There 
are also free resources – see links below, for you and the children.

Wells also suggested that if your mother died in a hospital or hospice, you 
could see if there are counsellors there (even a year later). “As part of the 
healing process, you could think about writing a letter to your mum. Perhaps 
this could be shared with someone close in a meaningful way.”

Writing a letter you will never send may sound silly, but it can be amazingly 
cathartic.

Useful organisations for you and the children include:

cruse.org.uk <http://www.cruse.org.uk/>, winstonswish.org.uk 
<http://www.winstonswish.org.uk/>, youngminds.org.uk 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/>

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com <mailto: annalisa.barbieri@mac.com>. 
Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
 