
I got into clean eating with a friend around my AS levels, when I was 16. My 
friends only followed the diet for about two weeks but when they all stopped I 
continued. I got addicted to it and I lost loads of weight.

We all started the diet because we were really stressed and tired and had 
heard eating better made you feel better, but for me it went wrong.

Clean eating trend can be dangerous for young people, experts warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/01/clean-eating-trend-dangerous-young-people-food-obsession-mental-health-experts>
I cut out snacking, I had smaller portions, and everything was a health food. 
I prepared all my meals myself from scratch.


I cut out dairy and any drinks that weren’t water. I was eating fruit and 
vegetables and no carbohydrates and no snacking. I was eating no processed food 
– I would have a handful of dried fruit if I had a snack. An average dinner 
would be just meat or fish and a small side of vegetables.

I obsessively watched Lean in 15 – a YouTube channel on healthy eating by Joe 
Wicks. I used to watch a lot of his videos and also followed loads of 
“transformation” accounts where people ate healthily to lose weight.

At first I did this all to feel better in myself and then it became about 
losing weight. I liked how it felt and people saying: “Oh you’ve lost weight 
and you look great.” I used to limit food groups and obsessively weighed my 
food. I had foods I was afraid to eat and would avoid, such as carbohydrates. 
This went on for two years, from 16 to 18, and eventually I was diagnosed with 
anorexia with orthorexic tendencies.

As well as losing weight, orthorexia made me feel exhausted. I couldn’t sleep 
because I was really hungry the whole time. I had depression and anxiety and I 
couldn’t focus on anything at all.


My parents noticed that something was wrong. I actually didn’t know what was 
happening – they took me to the doctor. I went to the Priory for diagnoses and 
was referred to Camhs (child and adolescent mental health services). I then got 
sent there on an outpatient basis and got cognitive behavioural therapy. That 
helped a lot.

Because of my eating disorder I have body dysmorphic disorder and have always 
feel more overweight than I am. CBT helped me realise that this was not 
logical. Medication also helped with my depression and gradually everything got 
better.


I feel more normal about food now. I am a student at Leeds and cook for 
myself. I eat out with friends. I still suffer guilt when I eat unhealthily but 
I can cope.


I think health food bloggers have a big influence on young people and they 
should make it clear that everything should be eaten in moderation. For 
example, it’s OK to have a biscuit every now and then – it’s not going to kill 
you. The expression clean eating makes it sound like other foods are dirty; 
it’s like making an enemy out of everyday food, making it something negative in 
people’s heads.

Healthy eating is supposed to make you feel better, but not if you develop 
orthorexia. Although some people need to be careful about what they eat, others 
can take this lifestyle to the extreme.

 