
I am a woman, aged 28, and at the beginning of my 20s, as a student, I lived 
in a big city with my boyfriend. I had, I thought, escaped the drama and pain 
of a difficult childhood and was making it as an independent adult.

Now, at the end of my 20s, I feel that all the progress I have made as an 
individual has been reversed. When I finished my studies I had to come back to 
my home country, and the only work I’ve been able to get is low-paid 
call-centre work. My relationship has ended. I have been obliged to move back 
in with my parents because my salary is so low and because, last year, I had a 
major depressive breakdown, and could not take care of myself.

During this time I met a man and fell in love. He seemed to be the only light 
in my life, representing everything I had wanted – a creative, independent, 
passionate life. I wanted my whole life to be folded into his. A few weeks ago, 
he ended it and now I feel I am going off the deep end. 

I am tormented by a pronounced sense of inadequacy and shame. I feel that I 
have no identity, because everything I predicated this identity on – my 
creative life, my studies, my friendships, my love-relationships – has 
disappeared. I have always been the black sheep of my, essentially 
dysfunctional, family, and have little in common with them. They have tried to 
be patient with me during my breakdown, but my dominant feeling now is that 
everyone is sick of me and wishes I would buck up and get out of the family 
home. 

I want this more than anything too, but I am struggling to concentrate and 
have periodic “freak-outs” where I do impulsive things. Every day of the week I 
have a new idea for escape. 

In the midst of this, I seem to have lost the ability to be comfortable around 
people. I think my friends, most of who I have little left in common with, are 
frightened by my behaviour and distance themselves. I find social situations 
stressful and have begun to avoid them.

People tell me I am “stuck in a moment” and that it will pass, but I see no 
evidence of this. Fixing the mess seems beyond me, but I am on my own and, I 
think, so obviously flailing and needy that it deters other people.

I thought there was one very telling word in your letter: “all the progress I 
have made as anindividual.” As opposed to what?

I contacted Helen Morgan, a psychoanalytical psychotherapist (bpc.org.uk 
<https://www.bpc.org.uk/>). One of the things she identified may be at the 
absolute core of your issues and it is that you seek your identity outside of 
yourself. “I wondered,” says Morgan, “if you located your identity in others to 
replace something you feel is lacking inside yourself? Resolving this would be 
about a process of discovery of who you really are through exploration within a 
good therapeutic relationship.”

We all have external things that “make us us” or that give us more confidence, 
but it shouldn’t be where all of us is located. But at the heart of your letter 
is that you’re constantly looking for things outside of yourself: to validate 
yourself, give you reason, definition – and this makes you vulnerable.

This could be connected to your childhood – you talk about your difficult 
childhood and dysfunctional family home but don’t go into further details. We 
wonder if, given this, being back at home is really the best place for you – 
are you being looked after there? Is there anywhere else you could live? Was 
going home for pure practicality, an act of masochism or were you trying to get 
what you never got there growing up?

Morgan feels that you have, in your last relationship, sought “something 
total. A father? A rescue? What you wanted to be yourself?” This is a lot to 
ask of someone else. I was keen to know more about that last 
relationship because it seems to have triggered something: what did that 
relationship replay?

“What echoes throughout your letter is that you want someone to help you,” 
says Morgan.

You have tried doctors and counsellors, but I did wonder what sort of help 
you’d had. Cognitive behavioural therapy, for example, probably won’t help much 
here. Is there another GP you can try at the surgery?

I know how hard it is to keeping knocking on a door for help when you feel 
desperate and rebuffed, but you are deserving of proper help and support. Some 
therapists will offer sliding-scale fees and Morgan also thinks you might look 
into group therapy – as that may benefit you and be cheaper (groupanalysis.org 
<http://www.groupanalysis.org/>).

The fact that you left home to study and made a success of your life should 
give you some comfort. I do believe that, with proper support, you can start to 
unravel yourself from this and start to slowly rebuild who you are. Most people 
struggle at some point in their lives, it’s not a case of you being a mess and 
everyone else a success.

In your longer letter, you talked about suicidal thoughts, which I take 
seriously. I don’t know where you live but please look at these links:
samaritans.org <http://www.samaritans.org/>; mind.org <http://www.mind.org.uk/>;
sane.org.uk/what_we_do/support <http://www.sane.org.uk/what_we_do/support>; 
together-uk.org <http://www.together-uk.org/>

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
 