
A few weeks ago, I thought about buying a shed. I thought about buying a shed, 
and it was the most exciting thing I did that day, because I’m a hot-rod rebel 
and my entire life is a thrill-a-minute joyride of unimaginable debauchery.

In the end, however, I didn’t buy a shed – mainly because it turns out that my 
tolerance for sheds is so abysmally low that I can only look at a maximum of 
three sheds before deciding that all sheds are stupid and only ninnies need 
them. However, that hasn’t stopped me from being ambushed by adverts for sheds 
on a near-hourly basis ever since.

Thanks to a web cookie on the shed site telling an ad server that this is now 
my defining personality trait – Stuart Heritage: shed enjoyer – the vast 
majority of adverts I see online are now for sheds. It feels as if I’m being 
stalked by sheds. It feels as if I’m living in the first draft of an Edgar 
Allan Poe poem, written in the days before he realised that ravens are scarier 
than sheds.

“Hey, shed guy!” the adverts scream. “Remember those sheds you looked at the 
other week? They’re still here! Look how boxy and mundane they still are. Come 
on, click it. Click the shed.”

Behavioural retargeting <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behavioral_retargeting>
, this is called. Chances are you’ve encountered it, too. Maybe you once went 
on Amazon, purely to see whether the word “Singalongamax 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Singalongamax-Max-Bygraves/dp/B00000854Y>” had 
hyphens in it or not, and now you can’t move for Max Bygraves adverts. Maybe 
you ordered your partner a NutriBullet for her birthday, and every site you 
subsequently visited carried an advert for NutriBullets, and you had to fling a 
coat over your screen every time she came in the room in case it ruined the 
surprise, and now she’s convinced that you suffer from a crippling porn 
addiction. Behavioural retargeting is everywhere, and it’s infuriating.

The easy way out would be for everyone to just install an adblocker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ad-blocking> and be done with it. Certainly, 
that’s what people are doing in their droves – it’s been estimated that up to 
a quarter of adults use them.

But this is where I have to draw a line in the sand, because I’m not a 
monster. If I use a site – any site: a news site or a forum or social media – 
it’s because it has some worth to me, and I don’t want to see it go anywhere. 
That’s what adverts are for. You put up with a peripheral banner telling you 
how funny The Book of Mormon is, and the site gets paid as a result. But when 
you install an adblocker, you remove this revenue stream and the sites you like 
begin to suffer. By installing an adblocker, you’re actively contributing to 
the reduction of the internet. If you install an adblocker, one day everything 
you enjoy will be replaced by three rotating Facebook clickthrough galleries 
entitled The Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Presents 21 Funny Faces 
That Dogs Pull When They’re Horny, and you’ll have nobody to blame but yourself.

The problem I have isn’t so much with adverts themselves, but with the 
specific adverts that follow you around from site to site like a wounded puppy, 
tugging on your trouser leg until you finally put it out of its misery. Before 
it was sheds, it was coats. Before it was coats, it was coffee tables. I’m also 
being stalked by a pair of shoes that I looked at once, and now bloodlessly 
creep into my Facebook stream at every opportunity. They’re nice shoes, too, 
but I refuse to buy them as a matter of principle. If those shoes ever go near 
my feet, the internet will have won and I’ll be no better than a child.

Marketers know how infuriating retargeting is, too. In 2014, researchers 
performed a study 
<http://www.inskinmedia.com/blog/retargeted-ads-put-half-people-buying/> into 
retargeting, and found that people generally get more annoyed the more they see 
an ad for something they had previously looked at online. They overwhelmingly 
said that the adverts made them angry and, if they ever happened to see an 
advert for something they had already bought, they instantly became four times 
more likely to never buy it again.

Clearly, retargeting has its upsides – if they didn’t increase sales on some 
level they wouldn’t exist, plus it’s now easier than ever to sweep through your 
office, clock everyone’s retargeted banner ads and make a discreet inventory of 
all the perverts who’ve ever thought about buying adult-sized Peppa Pig duvet 
covers – but the downsides vastly outnumber them. If they annoy people so much 
that they would rather install an adblocker and choke their favourite sites to 
death in the process, then something needs to be done.

Luckily, something can be done. There’s a little blue triangle in the corner 
of these adverts. Click it, and you’ll be able to opt-out of most retargeted 
ads. You’ll still see adverts, but they won’t be the same creepily omnipresent 
ads that would otherwise haunt your every move. And that’s a win-win. You stop 
feeling like you’re being stalked by a shed, the site still makes money and 
nobody has to make the uncomfortable decision to install an adblocker. You’re 
just left with the perfect, undiluted web experience you always wanted. Good 
writing, helpful debate and several dozen ill-advised “Ten Celebrities You 
Didn’t Know Were Jewish” sponsored-link galleries clogging up the bottom of 
every single article you ever read. Perfect.
 