
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/money/series/dearjeremy> advice column in the 
Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. 
We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.

I became a business analyst (examining how a business works to identify any 
changes that need to be made) after leaving university and am now in my late 
30s. It’s an area I’ve always interested in because it combines analytical 
thinking with, crucially for me, interaction with the workers who can both 
suggest changes and who have to carry them out. It is practical and personal.

I started out in staff jobs but found there were more opportunities on one-off 
projects with different companies – move from firm to firm, analyse the 
business, work with the team, formulate an outcome and move on.

So, by choice, five years ago I became a freelance/contract worker in the 
banking sector. It is well paid and I could afford a few weeks off between 
contracts relatively stress-free, until the next job I wanted came along. I 
used this time to do a distance learning degree in international affairs, which 
has added to my CV.

But this year, for the first time, I am seriously considering a change of 
career. In truth, I feel I have no choice. I finished my last contract in 
spring 2016 and since then ... nothing.

First, the contract market overall seems dead with 40%-50% less vacancies in 
banking, plus thousands of contractors and perms out looking. As a business 
analyst, there are fewer vacancies because companies and the government aren’t 
starting new projects – I’d guess this is the hangover from the Brexit decision.

Second, my department and role have moved into a combined IT function, which 
seems an industry trend. This is not a great fit for me as I don’t have an IT 
background and the methods of working leave me feeling I am in the wrong job, 
which I did not feel before.

I’ve always been people (not IT) focussed and under the new way of working 
interaction is limited. We are expected to write software specifications and 
test systems. This is not something I have done before and not the direction I 
want my career to go in.

I have to face the fact the old model is largely outmoded and most job adverts 
are for hybrid business and systems analyst types. Where now?

Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a 
brief email todear.jeremy@theguardian.com <mailto:dear.jeremy@theguardian.com>. 
Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply 
personally.
 