
I’m a divorced man of 56. I’ve been on my own for two years and am only now 
dipping my toe back in the dating game. While I feel I can cope with how things 
have moved on and have no trouble with online dating, the main thing that 
worries me is the sex. 

I was with my wife for 26 years but the marriage began to wind down after our 
only son left home for university and she threw herself more and more into her 
career. We rubbed along but after two more years she was offered a high-powered 
job in another country. I wasn’t ready to abandon my elderly parents or my own 
(slightly less glamorous) job. It was the final straw.  

As she was so readily able to walk away from me, my self-confidence has taken 
a beating. We had a reasonably good sex life on and off over the years but my 
fear is that I won’t be able to perform well enough with someone new. With my 
wife, I knew what she liked and she wasn’t shy about letting me know what she 
wanted. But with a new woman? I’m not so sure it won’t be an embarrassing 
disaster. I suppose you could call it performance anxiety. It almost makes me 
want to stay single.

Well, you can stay single. There’s no imperative to have a relationship. You 
are still young (although even if you were older, you don’t have to be in a 
relationship) and have plenty of time on your side before you jump into another 
relationship. Two years is a relatively short time after nearly three decades 
of marriage.

I’m sorry to hear your marriage ended. I was interested in you saying how your 
wife was “readily” able to walk away, as if it was a decision she made in a 
moment, but it sounds as if things had been building up for some time from what 
you say – about how the marriage had “wound down” and you “rubbed along”. So it 
sounds as if the job was a way out for her, but out of something that had been 
unsatisfactory – it sounds – for both of you for some time.

I consulted Chris Mills, a psychotherapist and family mediator who specialises 
in relationships. “The first thing that jumped out at me,” he says, “is that 
you see sex as a performance and it’s a performance for your partner.”

But he also says that you need to communicate what your fears are to any 
prospective girlfriend, otherwise, if things don’t go according to plan, that 
may lead to misunderstandings and “she may think there’s something wrong with 
her”.

Do you want to date or just have sex? You can do whatever you want as long as 
you are open and honest

Mills also thinks your letter is all about what made your wife happy sexually, 
and what might make a future partner happy. “What makesyou happy? What do you 
want? You’re going to have to work out what it is you want and like, and I 
wonder if you are struggling with creating intimacy? Maybe thinking of it as a 
performance acts as a barrier to actually getting close to someone.”

Intimacy and sex, as I’ve said before, can be entirely different things.

Do you want to date or just have sex? The great thing is, you can do whatever 
you want as long as you are open and honest with yourself and anyone you meet.

With regard to performance anxiety, we weren’t sure if you meant being shy 
about sex with a new woman or were worried about erectile dysfunction, which is 
not at all uncommon in middle-aged men. If the latter has occurred or does 
occur, your GP should be able to help. But I wasn’t sure if you were just 
nervous of having sex with a new person after so long with your wife. This is 
perfectly understandable but the chances are that any woman you meet will also 
feel nervous.

“At the moment,” says Mills, “you are fixated on this imaginary woman and what 
she may want and whether you will be able to provide it, whether you will be 
able to put on ‘a good show’.”

So what do you do? Well, I can’t guarantee that any new liaison won’t be an 
embarrassing disaster, but the chances are it won’t be. The idea of it is now 
so largely writ in your head that it’s almost unattainable. But, like a lot of 
imagined things, when you get there, it’s likely to be entirely real, human and 
manageable – it may even be magical and amazing. But sometimes life’s most 
perfect days and moments happen with least planning.

Mills says: “This may be difficult advice for you to take but I would say do 
the online dating thing, meet women but don’t expect to have sexual feelings 
for them immediately. Let the build up of the relationship determine what 
sexual contact – if any – there will be. You sound like you might be so nervous 
that you won’t be able to determine if you fancy a woman or not. Trying to 
relax, giving it some time and if you get to the point of wanting sexual 
contact, talk to her – the chances are she will also be nervous.”

If your new partner wants a performance, she will go to a show. Try to see 
dating and relationship building more as a journey you will take together, 
rather than you having to provide all the entertainment yourself.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence
 