
I’ve fallen in love with one of my best friends, and I don’t know whether to 
tell her. Granted, it’s not an original dilemma, and given that the upshot of 
doing nothing is the continuation of our friendship, it feels selfish and 
presumptuous to ponder hypotheticals. And yet I can’t help but wonder “what 
if?”. The problem here – and it’s a big problem – is that she has a long-term 
boyfriend, and I’ve become friends with him, too. We aren’t close friends, 
principally because I’m hugely jealous of him, but clearly any attempt to steal 
his girlfriend would be a huge betrayal.

I also think that his mental health hinges on his relationship to a large 
degree. It’s in her nature to be sensitive to this, but I wonder whether she 
doesn’t also feel somewhat trapped, and that her refusal to live with him – 
even after several years – might be symptomatic of this. We’re both introverted 
and quite shy individuals, and although we’re completely at ease in each 
other’s company, neither of us is given to discussing these issues. I don’t 
feel I can speculate on her reasons without projecting (although it’s entirely 
possible that she simply doesn’t realise how much I like her), but for me it 
stems from a fear of rejection, blatancy and the very real possibility of 
jeopordising our friendship. Increasingly, though, I feel that this could be a 
price worth paying. I still believe that pondering hypotheticals is a waste of 
time, but the question remains, and at 31, I’m conscious that time is running 
out. Should I carry on picking at petals, or just tell her how I feel?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto://private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 