
I am a woman of 33 and have been in a relationship with another woman for 
eight years. Our relationship is great. She is gorgeous and we couldn’t be more 
compatible – everything I want in a partner and more. I love her and want to 
stay together for ever. It is not perfect but I think we have a strong, 
communicative, intimate relationship. There is nothing I would change.

However, over the past few years I’ve become increasingly obsessed by the 
concept of having sex with someone new, or rather the fact that I never will 
again. When I’ve seen problems like this asked before, the answer always seems 
to be that there must be something missing in the relationship. But I don’t 
believe there is. Our sex life is good and we try new things. It is literally 
that excitement of someone new that is taking over my mind.

I don’t want to cheat, and never would, but I’ve got to the point where every 
time I meet another gay woman, I imagine the idea, even if she’s not my type. 
Before I got together with my partner, I denied my sexuality. It was only 
through falling in love with her as one of my friends that I was forced to 
admit it. I’m not sure if this is because I never dated other women, and that 
I’ve never even had that experience of noticing who I fancy in the normal 
adolescent way.

Another possibility is that before we got together, I had some emotional 
issues and us getting together was the most magical and happy time of my life. 
Maybe I’m seeking this “new love/new sex” as a form of escapism. I’ve discussed 
this with my partner (not fully admitting my obsession but saying I feel I 
would like to have sex with someone new). She’s very understanding and we 
talked about making sure that our sex life never got dull. So you can see why 
I’m struggling to understand this feeling and struggle even further to 
understand how to shake it.

What you feel is normal. There aren’t many people in a long-term relationship 
– if they are being honest and have any imagination – who haven’t wondered what 
sex with someone new would be like, or pondered about the fact that they may 
never have sex with someone new again.

You might find it useful to read this other article I wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/04/what-if-i-never-get-over-him-her-google-answer>
. Although the subject matter (how to get over an ex) doesn’t concern you, it 
goes into what happens when we fall in love, which explains why new people – or 
the thought of them – are so exciting.

I contacted family and couples therapist Stefan Walters (bacp.co.uk 
<http://www.bacp.co.uk/>), who thinks this is “less about your relationship, 
more about grieving a sense of youth and the new”.

Indeed, often when we are on the brink of new commitments, either about to get 
married, or moving in together, or have a baby, or just that our relationships 
go into a new, deeper phase, we can start to panic and think, “Is this it?” It 
doesn’t mean that anything is lacking, just that we’re adapting to that change.

You’re not looking for permission to have an affair – as some readers do – but 
Walters thinks you are “looking for permission to make your girlfriend your 
life partner”.

Fantasy is a wonderful and powerful thing. Nothing goes wrong in our fantasies 
and everything is exactly as we want them to be. But reality never lives up to 
fantasy. But, for lots of people it’s important to have fantasies as long as 
one doesn’t think they’re a premonition.

Walters thinks it is important not to “frame the relationship as the enemy” 
(not that you are so far). When people do this and seek excitement outside it, 
they can fracture off and start doing lots of new things on their own, until 
they become so self-reliant that the relationship is a burden. While it’s 
important to retain a sense of self and do new things on your own, it’s also 
important to do things as part of a couple, too. “If you have new experiences 
together [not necessarily sexual],” says Walters, “You get a massive release of 
dopamine. So make sure you do new things together.”

Walters also thinks that perhaps because this is your first lesbian encounter, 
you may feel you’re missing out. This can happen to people who hook up with 
their first partner, but, reassures Walters, “You may have struck gold first 
time.”

Also, he points out that everyone goes through lulls in their relationship and 
that’s normal. So you don’t have to talk up the perfection of it all the time. 
Real relationships are not perfect.

Here are some other resources Walters and I want to recommend to you: Mating 
in Captivity by Estelle Perel 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mating-in-captivity.html> and the Ted talk 
that Helen Fisher gave on “why we love and why we cheat” 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/helen_fisher_tells_us_why_we_love_cheat?language=en>
. Both are fascinating and explain how at odds long-term relationships are with 
human nature.

You might also find useful the feature How to have sex with the same person 
for the rest of your life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/16/have-sex-same-person-rest-life-keep-exciting-bedroom-work>
, which was published in Family on 16 April.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
 