
Flicking through photocopied pages, and pausing, and then taking a deep 
breath. And then again, turning over to a new page allowing yourself time to 
absorb the sentiments, before carefully moving on, slowing down time around you 
to let the new ideas settle.

These are the initial movements, the capsules of realisation, for a rookie 
zine reader. At once so ordinary and yet so overwhelmingly liberating, the 
transition to this from being a passive news reader via social media can leave 
you feeling giddy. For me, this is because the power of a zine is the 
inextricable, life-affirming granting of permission to speak.

What are zines and which should I start reading?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/10/what-are-zines-and-which-should-i-start-reading>
There’s a liberty to creating, or witnessing subversive material knowing that 
it won’t be monitored, that the information is contained only within the pages 
of the zine. The trustworthiness of a physical object in our current age is 
strangely compelling. Links shared via Facebook or messenger apps can be 
intercepted, logged, or dispersed otherwise into the ether. Especially for 
teenagers, zines counter the anxiety and subsequent frantic deletion of browser 
history so that your family can’t see it. Hide it under your bed instead, or in 
a zipped inner sanctum within your school bag.

I must have first picked up a zine at a punk show, or maybe it was a hole in 
the wall pop-up store. I started reading lighter zines with a confessional or 
humorously therapeutic spin, before moving on to zines with an interest in 
queer life and resistance.

Now, my fascination is on an emerging strain of self-publishing, one that 
specifically acts as a way of navigating (and circumventing) online 
surveillance. Just months ago I put out a zine focused on “cyborgs”: a loose 
metaphor for the way we have become socially and physically inseparable from 
technology, and the implications that has.

Zines have long been used as a method of political organising in activist 
cultures and sub-cultures, so this is not exactly new – it’s more a 
continuation of a tactic that in recent years has become important once again.

The popular television show Mr Robot and its success in pop culture, as well 
as media spotlighting on whistleblowers Edward Snowden and Chelsea Manning 
signals a shift in consciousness. These events have spurred people to assess 
their own moral standpoint in regards to institutional transparency. In 
addition, widespread disillusionment with online surveillance, and the 
commodification of our social media usage, has pushed people to seek 
alternatives to online communities. You can find zines catering to all kinds of 
interests via online anarchist libraries, which are easily accessible. Such 
websites encourage the distribution of hand-printed resources.

Mia Van Den Bos is a researcher and curator of Sister Gallery in Adelaide, a 
space for new technologies and communication within art. She says that part of 
the appeal of zines is that “printed zines aren’t networked, so there’s no 
logging on IP addresses and the ability to track where information has come 
from and who has accessed it.”

Zines are accessible, often friendly to the reader and easy and cheap to make. 
If you have a printer and a spare few hours and some ideas, you can become a 
zine publisher just like anyone else. The process of zine-making becomes 
meaningful when you realise how differently people engage with them – readers 
become more connected to the tactile experience of a booklet, often making for 
more mindful and considered consumption.

Tumblr was my saviour. It made me see I wasn't monstrous and unloveable | 
Jonno Revanche
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/24/tumblr-was-my-saviour-it-made-me-see-i-wasnt-monstrous-and-unloveable>
Zines don’t necessarily exist to peddle consumer agendas. Sponsored and 
targeted content have been growing in popularity online, and while that may be 
necessary for the survival of journalism, the pursuit of clicks sometimes 
becomes a conflict with the expression of integrity, or even merely 
thoughtfulness.

These products of teen rebellion stand in direct opposition to what older 
generations assume about millennials. Just years ago, people were saying that 
print was dead – that as a medium it would not be able to find a foothold 
within a digital landscape. But instead, it’s actually just evolved, adapting 
to the needs and wants of the people who access it. New print formats have 
appeared, it seems, out of necessity, and not just for aesthetic value.

The main, streamlined forms of online news and communication that young people 
have taken for granted have not existed forever. As citizens, as responsible 
humans who feel a need for justice and transparency from the media and from 
corporate monoliths, we shouldn’t hesitate to look towards old media as a way 
to alleviate our anxieties about online communication.
 