
My husband and I have been married for nearly a decade. We’ve had some 
difficult things to deal with over the years. We also had children in rapid 
succession, which has been wonderful but very hard work. I felt I was 
increasingly struggling, particularly as his tendency is to be very negative 
and critical of me. I felt I was looking after the children, working, 
supporting him and still, for him, I wasn’t working hard enough or paying 
enough attention to the house or children.

He would find fault with everything I did and talk about me “abandoning” the 
children for work. If I tried to protest about this or other things that upset 
me, he would point out that I was wrong or didn’t understand or just stop 
talking to me until I apologised. I did still feel I loved him and was trying 
to hold it all together until a year ago when I sort of broke down and said I 
couldn’t do it any more. His reaction was to say I was depressed. We went to 
Relate, but he stopped going when the counsellor said he was controlling and 
felt the relationship had characteristics of domestic abuse.

I suggested we separate for a while just so I could get some peace and 
headspace back but that triggered a tirade of criticism of me, how I’ve hurt 
him and the children, till I’m absolutely in bits. Mediation triggered the same 
response. We’re now with another therapist that he’s found but I’m struggling 
with the sessions, feeling panicky and worn down as it seems like however much 
I say this is hurting me, the emphasis is on finding a way for us to be 
together again.

I don’t know what to do. I don’t even know how to get to a place where doing 
something seems possible. Sometimes it seems easiest to give in and try to make 
everyone happy. Please help me as I’m getting increasingly ill with the stress 
and worry. Please believe me, this is real and I’m not just depressed.

I believe you. Your longer letter was desperate. What I have reproduced above 
is what you said I could without you being identified, so there is much I 
cannot refer to. You sound like a woman whose life is closing in on her. You 
have every right to want to walk away from a relationship that is making you 
unhappy, if that’s what you decide.

But I appreciate this isn’t easy for you to do. I think you know that this 
relationship is abusive (abuse is not necessarily physical). Google thepower 
and control wheel <http://www.domesticviolence.org/violence-wheel/> for a 
useful graphic on understanding domestic violence and it’s harming you very 
much: your longer letter showed great awareness.

But while you seem to recognise what is happening, you seem paralysed by an 
inability to believe it, which is leading to indecision. The impression I get 
is of someone spinning round and round in their thoughts, so much so that they 
weren’t able to stand still and see what was happening any more.

There are positives in your life that I want you to keep in sight: you have 
family and friends in whom you have confided who will support you. You have a 
job. These are all things that will help you through.

But I want you to take one step at a time. The first thing to do is call the 
National Domestic Violence Helpline 
<http://www.nationaldomesticviolencehelpline.org.uk/> on 0808 2000 247 and keep 
trying if you don’t get through straightaway. I know you’ve been to someWomen’s 
Aid <https://www.womensaid.org.uk/> drop-in sessions, but it didn’t seem as if 
you had really talked to someone and that is key. I wondered if part of you is 
scared of actually talking to someone who “knows”, as this will force you to 
face up to what is happening and that, in turn, will make you feel you have to 
do something? This is completely understandable but you have to ask yourself 
what will happen if you do nothing? Imagine five, 10 years from now.

You do need to talk to a domestic violence adviser who understands what you 
are going through, who won’t minimise how you feel or say it’s your fault. You 
need to find out what your rights are, especially relating to your home and 
children (I know this worries you) and what your options are – and then you can 
make a decision based on facts, not just fear.

Please remember: your safety, and your children’s safety, is top priority so 
please make these phone calls where you will not be overheard and preferably 
from someone else’s phone so your call history cannot be accessed. Refuge (
refuge.org.uk <http://www.refuge.org.uk/>) recommends that you keep important 
documents such as your passport and your children’s, in a safe place. For more 
tips on keeping safe, visittinyurl.com/he3gzqd 
<http://www.refuge.org.uk/get-help-now/help-for-women/keeping-safe/>.

If you decide to leave, you must not tell your partner your plans, however 
tempted you are. (If at any stage you feel threatened or unsafe, call 999.)

There is a lot of information you can access (from a safe browser) on the 
internet: the forums on Women’s Aid provide a place to talk to other women who 
have been or are going through a similar experience. Rights of Women has great 
information on what happens to children when parents separate (
tinyurl.com/goh8xzo 
<http://rightsofwomen.org.uk/get-information/family-law/children-law-parents-separate/>
) and also a section about domestic violence injunctions (tinyurl.com/hg9m7s8 
<http://rightsofwomen.org.uk/get-information/violence-against-women-and-international-law/domestic-violence-injunctions>
).

Also, you do not have to continue going to these therapy sessions with your 
husband if you do not want to and they are making you feel so wretched. And 
don’t discount therapy just for yourself – ask your GP or trybacp.co.uk 
<http://www.bacp.co.uk/>.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
 