
I moved to a newly built house in the large village of Newport, Essex, in 
March, and askedBT <https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> to continue 
to supply my phone and internet. I made it clear that a new line would need to 
be laid, but didn’t think it would be hard as the house is almost opposite the 
telephone exchange and surrounded by houses that are already connected.

The first installation date in April was pushed back to July, and since then 
we have been given around a dozen dates, only for BT to fail to turn up. The 
senior complaints team at BT has failed to resolve the issue, as has Openreach.

Our MP, Sir Alan Haselhurst, has also tried to intervene, and while they 
respond to him more than me, we are still waiting for a phone line. Six months 
on I am at a loss as to where to go from here. I have the kids on my back 
constantly – teenagers being forced to live without the internet is tantamount 
to child abuse apparently!

EB, Newport, Essex

How complicated can it be to get a phone/broadband line connected to a 
new-build house? You are just the latest new householder to complain about this 
– Ofcom needs to work on a solution because it keeps happening.

Openreach says the delays occurred because the builder failed to get in touch 
early enough. The Highways Agency then required the work to be carried out on a 
Sunday, and Openreach admits it failed to apply for the correct permissions. It 
has apologised and says the work has started this week. All being well, you 
could be reading this online this week ) and the teens will be back in the 
modern world.

And finally …

Last week Vodafone was fined £4.6m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/26/vodafone-fined-46m-for-serious-breaches-of-consumer-protection-rules>
 by Ofcom for “serious and sustained” breaches of consumer protection rules, 
including £925,000 for flaws in its complaints-handling processes and £3.7m for 
taking pay-as-you go customers’ money without providing a service. This was 
partly prompted by us sending lots of complaints about it to the regulator – 
Vodafone has been our most complained-about mobile provider for some time.

While it’s great that it has been held to account, some will wonder if the 
fine is big enough. Last year, the firm reported sales of more than £40bn and 
adjusted operating profits of more than £3.1bn, so the fine equates to about an 
hour’s sales, if my calculations are correct.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 