
Over the past five years, I’ve lost all interest in sex. This has already cost 
me one relationship and I’m worried that my wonderful new partner will leave as 
well. Don’t get me wrong, I still find women attractive; I just don’t want sex 
– the thought fills me with anxiety and utter dread. My last partner used to 
get uncontrollably angry and aggressive, so I just used to have sex to stop any 
conflict.

People find each other for particular reasons. Whether or not you have been 
open with your girlfriend about the nature of your struggles, I imagine she has 
a pretty good idea. She chose you for a reason. You sound lonely in your 
relationship, but you don’t have to suffer alone or be so frustrated and 
afraid. Instead, take courage and have a deep, sincere conversation.

My husband only wants sex four times a year – what do I do?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/14/my-husband-only-wants-sex-four-times-a-year>
Start by letting her know all the positive feelings of love and admiration you 
have for her, then try to share truths about your frustration, about your 
sexual feelings, your strong desire to please her and your frustration that 
it’s not easy for you to do so.

Ask her to share the task of working through these problems – with 
professional assistance if necessary. Intimacy involves truly seeing your 
partner, and being truly seen. Without a greater level of honesty between you, 
you may be tempted to go through the motions of sex without wanting it, as you 
did previously.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 