
I’ve been having sex regularly with a married man for about 10 years. The sex 
is amazing, which is why we’ve continued for so long. We are intellectually 
matched and get on very well, but neither of us want the relationship to be 
anything more than it is. I feel lucky to have what I have with him. I am 
independent and very happy not to be in a “normal” relationship. I work 
overseas a lot and having him to satisfy me when I am back is perfect. I am 
very content with all aspects of my life.

However, I know that the relationship will come to a natural conclusion at 
some point. As that time gets closer (we don’t have a fixed date, but we are 
not getting any younger), I wonder how I will feel. Yes, I will be immensely 
sad to have lost a special, intimate relationship but I am not sure if I will 
suddenly want to share my life with someone full-time. If I do, how will I go 
about finding that next someone? I will have such high expectations that I 
wonder if I will ever find another man who can make me feel satisfied – both 
sexually and emotionally. I don’t want what I have to stop, but I know that is 
not possible. There must be others, both the single lover and the married one, 
who have had a similar experience.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 