
My elder sister has always been tricky for me to deal with as she is very 
critical and suspicious of anyone’s opinions or motives, and pulls everyone 
down for their life choices. For the sake of our elderly mother, we all try to 
bumble along but this has not been easy.

Due to ill health, I have had more financial support from Mum than my sister, 
on the proviso that all will be evened out with any future inheritance. This 
has caused tensions between my sister and myself – understandably – but I have 
done my best to make sure everyone in the family knows and agrees about this. I 
have found it particularly difficult as my elder sister is two-faced about it – 
encouraging me to ask Mum for help against any “future money” while saying very 
horrible things to my other sister.

My mother now has early onset dementia – her memory is poor, and Mum is 
anxious that we siblings all get on. Because of this, Mum will tell us 
different things, which of course makes honest communication between us all 
even more tricky.

Mum has decided to move to live near my elder sister. We are all a bit sad 
about this (having offered for many years to have her live with us) but all 
want what’s best for her.

My sister has now become very difficult and refuses to involve my brother or 
me in any plans (she gets on with my younger sister). While with Mum recently, 
I read her post for her, to find that my elder sister has now been awarded 
power of attorney (PoA).

Because I find my sister so slippery to deal with, as I find she moves the 
truth around to suit her defensive position, I thought long and hard about how 
to request that she keeps my brother and me in the loop. Her reply was simply, 
“Why should I?” I just don’t know how to deal with her and want very much to be 
fair.

Did your mother actively know and approve the power of attorney? Did she have 
capacity to do that? She can only grant PoA if she has capacity. And, in that 
case, only the person giving it – in this case your mother – can apply for it. 
Your sister should not have applied for it on her behalf.

“Any conversation about PoA,” says Gary Rycroft, a solicitor and member of the 
Law Society wills and equity committee, “should start with the person who wants 
to give PoA saying, ‘I’d like to give PoA to …’ Not someone saying ‘I’d like to 
apply for PoA for …’”

In dealing with a tricky member of the family, my advice is to always pick the 
medium you best converse in – so if you can’t talk to each other, could you 
consider email for communication? That way, too, you will have a record of what 
has been said.

It’s interesting that your younger sister gets on with her and I wonder if she 
could be the one to bring you all together in this? Does your elder sister keep 
the younger one in the loop about your mother’s care?

I’ve taken out the location where your mother may be moving to as I didn’t 
want to identify you, but note that if she does move outside England and Wales 
different laws may apply, according to where her assets are.

How do your other siblings feel? If your mother wants you all to get on, is 
she aware that you can all be given PoA by her? Just because you don’t get on 
very well with your sister, doesn’t mean that she will mishandle your mother’s 
affairs, but I do think that, even in the most convivial family, being 
transparent, united and correct in the way you handle things for an elderly 
person is a good idea.

I think you and your other siblings need to establish exactly what your mother 
wants. This is key – it is her life and assets we are talking about. The 
questions to ask are:

Who does she want to have as PoA? Does she know all her children can be given 
PoA? Does she want you to have PoA for property and finance or welfare and 
health or both (there are two types)? Is her will up to date and does it 
reflect – if she wants it to – who has already had money from her, such as you?

“When you do this, also ask your mum about her advance care planning and how 
she’d like you to act on her behalf,” says Rycroft.

No one likes to look into a future where a parent can’t decide things for 
themselves, but it can make difficult decisions further down the line so much 
easier.

Contact the Office of the Public Guardian 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/office-of-the-public-guardian> if 
you feel your mother’s best interests are not being served – ie you have a 
concern about how your sister is handling your mother’s affairs.

Rycroft thinks the answer to your sister’s question “Why should I?” is simple: 
“Because we are also our mother’s children and we care about what happens to 
her.”

Your priority is your mother and her care. If she is being well looked after, 
if her wishes are being followed and if she is not in any way being exploited, 
you may need to leave your difference with your sister to one side for now. But 
I still believe all of you should be involved with your mother and your 
sister’s care of her should include keeping her siblings up to date.

A useful link: gov.uk/courts-tribunals/court-of-protection 
<https://www.gov.uk/courts-tribunals/court-of-protection>

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
 