
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/money/series/dearjeremy> advice column in the 
Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. 
We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.

I live in a city and am looking to move closer to family in a more rural part 
of the country, although with access to larger towns and cities. I have worked 
in human resources for about 10 years, mainly in the private sector, and while 
I enjoy the job I am looking for a change of direction when I move home, 
potentially with the ability to work more flexibly, or for myself.

I am a HR generalist but particularly enjoy the areas where I can interact 
with people and help them with their careers. I enjoy recruitment and 
selection, and often help friends and families, giving advice on their CVs and 
applying for jobs. I enjoy training people and engagement activities. I am less 
keen on the more “traditional” aspects of the job, such as discipline and 
grievance and policy. However, I do enjoy the application of these processes 
where it comes to providing advice and support to managers and individuals.

I understand people well and enjoy helping them to understand situations and 
the motivations of others.

I am now unsure of where I can best utilise my skills and am also very aware 
of the perception of HR people when it comes to applying for roles in different 
areas. I’m not sure people outside the profession would always recognise the 
key skills I would bring.

I have managed people in the past, and have considered whether using my skills 
to manage a team in a different area would be a solution, but I’m not sure what 
role I would have the experience for. I have also considered roles such as 
careers advice but am reluctant to make a move to the public sector. What would 
you and your readers advise?

Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a 
brief email todear.jeremy@theguardian.com <mailto:dear.jeremy@theguardian.com>. 
Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply 
personally.
 