
If you follow me on Twitter, you’re going to get – in addition to tweets about 
New York City, politics, feminism, and the New York Rangers – lots of tweets 
about cats. And cat rescue. And the treatment of animals in factory farms. And 
cruelty-free products of various sorts.

You’re also going to get a lot of tweets about horse racing, because when I’m 
not teaching high school English in Brooklyn, that’s usually what I’m writing 
about.

Recently NPR’s sports show Only A Game asked me a question that I get asked a 
lot: if you love animals so much, how can you love horse racing?

I tried to give an answer in this segment for the show 
<https://onlyagame.wbur.org/2015/05/23/teresa-genaro-horse-racing-animal-rescue>
 last month, and I try to answer it every time someone from my non-racing life 
finds out what I do in most of my spare time. The short answer is that, like a 
lot of relationships, it’s complicated.

Thoroughbred racing at its best is a sport of unparalleled beauty. And by 
“best,” I don’t mean the sport at the highest levels; by “best,” I mean big 
fields of healthy horses, ridden by courageous, conditioned athletes over 
well-maintained tracks, a competition of skill and speed and stamina.

But even the most romantic racegoer can’t avert her eyes from the risks to the 
athletes, both equine and human, and it is a hard truth of horse racing that at 
any moment, an accident can happen that can result in serious injury or death.

So it’s a reasonable question: if you love animals, how do you love racing?

Sometimes, the answer is that it requires a kind of denial, the same kind of 
denial required if you love animals and love bacon. Or leather shoes. Or any 
activity in which animals are used or asked to participate in for human profit.

Sometimes, the answer is that most of the horses in racing are treated well, 
better, certainly, than most of the animals produced for food here in the US.

Sometimes, the answer is that by being part of it, I can hope to be a small 
part of improving conditions for horses.

But mostly, the answer is a combination of all of those things, and a 
recognition that over the last decade, thoroughbred racing has taken a number 
of steps to reduce the risks to horses (and therefore jockeys), a result of a 
public increasingly uncomfortable with seeing animals solely as profit-making 
property and finding a voice to let racing’s leaders know that.

In 2008, The Jockey Club launched the Equine Injury Database 
<http://www.jockeyclub.com/default.asp?section=Advocacy&area=10> to compile 
information on racetrack injury, releasing an annual review in an effort to 
detect patterns and risk factors, using them to change practices and policies 
in order to reduce catastrophic injury.

In 2012, East Coast tracks introduced a proposal for medication reform, 
limiting the number of medications that can be legally used in horses, setting 
thresholds and time limits for their use. (In most states,the only medication 
that can be present in a horse’s system on the day it races is furosemide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/31/lasix-drug-debate-bleeding-horse-racing>
, a diuretic that can have a salutary effect on pulmonary bleeding caused by 
exertion.)

A four-pronged national medication proposal that includes increased penalties 
for repeat violators is being enacted, at least in part, by a number of racing 
jurisdictions.

Programs to fund and facilitate thoroughbred retirement are growing, at 
individual racetracks and at the national level. In 2011, the Thoroughbred 
Aftercare Alliance was established to accredit and support retirement, 
adoption, and retraining facilities across the country. CARMA (California 
Retirement Management Account), Turning for Home in Pennsylvania, and the 
Finger Lakes Thoroughbred Adoption Program and Take the Lead, both in New York, 
are all industry initiatives in which owners, trainers, and retirement programs 
work together to fund and facilitate thoroughbred retirement and retraining for 
a post-racing career.

There is much work still to be done. In thoroughbred racing, change comes 
slowly, impeded by the bureaucracy of state racing commissions, variability in 
rules from state to state, and significant differences of opinion over 
medication reform. According to the Equine Injury Database, equine fatality 
rates have dropped since 2009, but not enough.

Since the Only A Game segment, I’ve heard from people who ask themselves this 
question, who wrestle with enjoying a sport that can damage the animals they 
love, and who stick with racing because they want to be part of making it 
better.Horse racing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/horse-racing> isn’t 
going anywhere, and surely, it is better that people who care about animals on 
every level—as trainers, jockeys, owners, and fans—are a part of the sport, 
than for them to turn their back on it.
 