
During the run-up to the general election, my children and I took our new 
puppy for a walk around the block. A campaigner for Ukip, presumably spying a 
happy scene ripe for spoiling, approached. If there was, as the prime minister 
once suggested, racism in the Ukip pamphleteer’s closet, its whiff did not 
dampen the generosity of our dog’s greeting. As the man handed me a sticky 
leaflet, the puppy peed in excitement on his shoes, before trying to hump his 
leg, wetly.

The scene was a cause of great hilarity for my children, none of whom will be 
able to vote for another two general elections. “Barney peed on the Ukip man,” 
they’d tell bewildered visitors during the following days and weeks. It was a 
minor victory for a generation to whom so much worse has been done by this 
political class.

As with any divorce, Brexit will hurt the children most – and not just because 
it has introduced an insufferable portmanteau into their coming history 
lessons. Its effects will be felt by the youngest for decades, a final blow 
from baby boomers who have, obliviously or otherwise, systematically spoiled 
their descendant’s chances over the course of their lifetimes. Ours is the 
first generation that will be worse off than that of our parents. Many will 
never own a home. Many will struggle to find employment. All will have to 
contend with our new demented weather, a climate disease contracted by the 
boomers, with which the young must now attempt to deal if they’re to survive a 
wet, sweltering future.

Games offer a metaphor for a vision of life that can be ordered, understood 
and conquered

In this context, it is no great mystery that video games are the preferred 
medium of the under-40s. They appeal for a great many reasons. It might be the 
team sport-like camaraderie and sense of shared accomplishment they provide. It 
might be plain escapism, the way they present a place of relative calm into 
which one can retreat and fire off a few virtual rounds into some aliens inHalo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/halo>, or tug at a few virtual weeds in 
Animal Crossing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/11/why-sentimental-pastoral-themes-make-perfect-fodder-for-video-games>
. But often, beyond the shots of dopamine, we play video games to escape the 
pressures and anxieties of the world or, more precisely, to replicate them in 
forms that can be more easily mastered.

Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>, in other words, offer a 
metaphor for a vision of life that can be ordered, understood and conquered. 
They are fair and just in a way that the real world is not. The game makes its 
player a fair bargain: “Give me your time and energy and you will prevail in 
accordance with your effort.” It says: “Work hard and victory will be yours. 
You will be glorious.”

While most politicians believe they came to power in a meritocracy, few would 
dare to make such a promise of plain fairness to the proletariat today.

Games function more like the natural world than the political world: they are 
reassuringly underpinned by order, logic and mathematical equations. For that 
reason, they are comforting. Politics, by contrast, is chaotic and 
unpredictable. Outcomes can be swayed and interrupted by personalities, 
opportunists and, in this post-fact, post-truth world, the allure of 
disinformation.

Moreover, games provide us with unending second chances. Thanks to Mario’s 
stock of lives, there’s always a do-over, a chance to try out new approaches in 
search of the optimum strategy, a way to wind back the clock to the precise 
moment before a terminal mistake. On the world stage, unlike in the virtual 
domain, we may now have to watch as fear trumps love. As our grandparents know 
so well, there are no do-overs for this. No wonder video games are so appealing.
 