
"The pope and I once had a fight," says Nelso, miming fisticuffs with his 
hands. "But that was 30 years ago. Back when we were young and I had hair!" He 
slaps his balding head and laughs.  

Nelso Lenarduzzi, charismatic and white-whiskered, is the director of the 
Jesuit Museum in Argentina's central province of Córdoba. We're in the middle 
of a tour of his exhibition – which includes Jesuit tapestries and relics from 
long-lost local Indian religions – when he suddenly lets slip on his heated 
clash with the man now known asPope Francis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis>.

In the early 1980s, Jorge Bergoglio, then a relatively young priest acting on 
behalf of his superiors, visited the museum and announced he wanted to take 30 
items back to a chapel in Buenos Aires province. Nelso was horrified as the 
priest listed some of the museum's most-treasured pieces, including a valuable 
altar.

"We didn't actually have a fist fight," he admits, laughing again at the idea, 
but strong words were exchanged and Bergoglio would not budge. "Now, at least, 
I can say I've seen him at his toughest and I know he's no pushover."

The Vatican's recent selection has shone a spotlight on Argentina. Yet 
although Bergoglio's Argentinian life has been largely dissected – from his 
football allegiances to his politics – a lot less has been made of his Jesuit 
connection. For those interested in finding out about the country's Jesuit 
history, Córdoba is probably the best place to start. This, after all, is where 
the order once had a base so powerful it was seen as a serious threat to early 
Spanish rule.

The province of Córdoba is famed for its warm, dry climate, and green, fertile 
sierras. At its heart is Argentina's second city, also called Córdoba and 
nicknamed La Docta (or the learned one) on account of its large student 
population. Since 2000, the city has also boasted Unesco world heritage status, 
thanks to its Jesuit block, which includes a stone church, priests' residences 
and one of the oldest universities in South America (1613).

Bergoglio lived within the block for two years in the 1990s and now his 
bespectacled face gazes back at you all over town: on a celebratory banner 
outside the church, on a caricaturist's easel on a tourist-filled pedestrian 
walkway, and even on the pavement as a street trader sets out papal souvenirs 
in the late summer sun. Back in the late 16th century, the pope's predecessors 
arrived here from Europe and set about spreading their scholarly branch of the 
Catholic faith. They were so successful and efficient in their work that the 
Spaniards ultimately withdrew funding, scared that they were forming a state 
within a state. So, to keep the funds flowing for their evangelistic work, the 
Jesuits came up with plan B: the workingestancia.
 Alta Gracia's Jesuit estancia Photograph: Alamy 
Five examples of these estancias still stand, scattered across these central 
plains. My first stop was Estancia Caroya, surrounded by green fields and 
orange trees, 44km north of the city. Its design is typical for the era: a 
colonial-style mansion, built around a courtyard, with arched walkways and its 
own chapel. The whitewash walls and terracotta roof certainly look attractive 
against the cloudless blue skies, but aesthetics were not the Jesuits' main 
motivation. Estancias were working farms, heavily involved in the mule trade, 
and each plying its own specialist trade, from wine production to making 
bayonets.

Only one to two Jesuits would live onsite, with labour from hundreds of 
African slaves.

"This is something that was not talked about for years," says Claudio Videla, 
director of the Caroya estancia. "It was a dark part of history. Slaves were 
considered sub-human. Even after their sons were freed, the next generation was 
sent to their deaths when they were put in the front line [in civil and foreign 
conflict]."

This explains why today's Argentina has hardly any people of African descent, 
compared with Brazil or Uruguay.

Jesuits also worked with local indigenous populations, who received a wage (to 
prevent an uprising) and completed much of their artisan work. Look up to 
Córdoba's cathedral, for example, and you see angels' faces with Indian 
features, rather than traditional European cherubs.

I made it to three out of the five estancias on the tourist route: Caroya; 
neighbouring Jesús María (where I find Nesto's museum); and finally, 35km 
south-west of Córdoba city, Alta Gracia, which squats at the start of the 
sierras, amid miles of cornfields. 

Visiting the town of Alta Gracia gave me the chance to drop in on one of 
Argentina's other famous sons. In the 1940s, the Guevara family moved to the 
province, hoping the dry air would help cure the asthma of their oldest, 
Ernesto. The boy, who grew up to be known as Che, is now depicted in a bronze 
statue on the family home's front porch. Rooms of the small suburban home have 
been turned into a mini museum, featuring family photos and various 
memorabilia, including his last-ever diary entry before he was executed in the 
Bolivia jungle. Back in the early 2000s, this tiny museum might see about 5,000 
visitors a year. Then, one day in 2006, two VIP guests popped in – Fidel Castro 
and Hugo Chavez. After that much-publicised appearance, annual visitor numbers 
shot up to 100,000.
 A statue of Ernesto "Che" Guevara as a boy at his childhood home in Alta 
Gracia. Photograph: Alamy 
It's the mix of high-profile visits and Unesco recognition that has given 
Córdoba's tourism a real boost in recent years. Once famed only forlomito 
(steak) sandwiches and fernet (the bitter Italian spirit drunk here as if it 
were water), the province is now trying to relaunch itself to appeal to the 
more sophisticated traveller. TheAzul Real  
<http://www.azurrealhotel.com/english/azur-real-boutique-hotel-cordoba.html>
(the city's first boutique hotel) scored a coup earlier this year by persuading 
three hugely talented chefs (and siblings) to move a successful restaurant in 
their own home into the premises (+54 351 152 275476,casagalan.com.ar 
<http://www.casagalan.com.ar>; try the spectacular £25 tasting menu).

Directly opposite Estancia Jesús María, Restaurante El Museo opened in 
December. Featuring reclaimed wooden furniture and cushions made from Brazilian 
coffee sacks, it's full of rustic charm. A hotel extension is due to open here 
next year.

But will tourism grow as result of the new pope? According to Nesto, the boost 
will only become a major deal if Pope Francis ever makes a return visit. (No 
fighting please, chaps.) Meanwhile, Córdoba continues to pick up a range of 
unlikely fans from across the world.

"We had another British visitor, not long ago," Tomas, from the local tourist 
board, tells me. "She's an actress. Well, no, not an actress. She's, erm … 
Well, her name is Katie Price." Yes, Jordan was here in 2011, accompanying her 
Cordobese boyfriend Leandro Pena (he spoke no English; she spoke no Spanish; 
Tomas acted as their translator).

Córdoba: from the Pope to Che Guevara to Katie Price. Hardly the Holy Trinity, 
but there must be a tourist board slogan in there somewhere.

Missions accomplished

If you don't make it to Córdoba, you can also get a taste of Argentina's 
Jesuit past in the north-eastern, rainforest-dotted

Misiones province. The area's four missions have been reduced to ruins by the 
area's humidity but are still impressive (especially San Ignacio Miní) and they 
make a worthy detour from Iguazú Falls (200km further north). Day trips can be 
arranged from Cuña Pirú or Don Enrique lodges (more here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2011/sep/30/iguazu-falls-argentina-brazil-rainforest>
).

Córdoba essentials

Journey Latin America (0208 747 8315, journeylatinamerica.co.uk) 
<http://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk> has a seven-day trip to Argentina, 
including stays in Buenos Aires and Córdoba, for £1661pp, including flights, 
accomodation, transfers, excursions and most meals.

A stay at Azur Real Boutique Hotel (azurrealhotel.com 
<http://www.azurrealhotel.com>, +54 351 424 7133) costs £145 per night.

For more on Córdoba, see cordobaturismo.gov.ar 
<http://www.cordobaturismo.gov.ar>.
 