
It is part Soviet theme park, part wacky anti-western wonderland. Stuck to the 
barricades outside the "Donetsk People's Republic" are several caricatures of 
Barack Obama. There is Obama as Hitler, complete with moustache. There is 
Obama, Bonaparte and the Führer, and the words: "They all thought their nations 
were superior." And there is Obama as a monkey (the monkey-Obama, visible on 
Friday, had disappeared by Saturday).

Further inside, past a serpentine wall of tyres, activist Vitaly Akulov stood 
beneath a flag of Stalin. The Soviet leader had a Kalashnikov. Wasn't he 
responsible for the deaths of millions of Soviet citizens? "Without a tough 
tsar who uses harsh methods you can't build an imperium," Akulov observed. 
Other banners read: "Fuck EU and USA", "Donbass with Russia" and "Russians 
should be together!"

Two weeks ago pro-Kremlin separatists seized Donetsk's regional administration 
building. They have been there ever since, transforming the 11-storey block 
overlooking the green Pushkin boulevard into an improvised youth hostel and 
counter-revolutionary HQ. They are a bizarre group, including teenagers in 
balaclavas, some just 15 or 16, and bearded men in military jackets. But if
Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> has his way 
they will soon become the east's new "government".

On Thursday, Russia, Ukraine, the United States and the EU hammered out a deal 
in Geneva to de-escalate the six-month-oldUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> crisis. It was agreed that all 
illegal groups would end their occupation of official buildings and give up 
their weapons. Some 48 hours later, however, the separatists who have grabbed a 
string of municipal premises across the Donbass region, with the capital in 
Donetsk, had not budged.

"Of course we're not leaving," said Alexey Kirolov, a 24-year-old activist, 
munching his breakfast in the "republic's" pop-up ground-floor cafeteria. A 
table was laid out with sandwiches – salami and pork fat – biscuits, tea and 
coffee. Donated bottles of pickled gherkins were piled up nearby. But what 
about Geneva? "Russia signed a bit of paper. Everybody knows they didn't mean 
it," Kirolov said. "Putin's not going to give up on us. We're his people."

On the 11th floor – reached via a lot of stairs, since the lifts don't work – 
the "republic" leadership was planning its next move. In what used to be the 
economics and legal departments, exhausted activists lolled on chairs listening 
to the radio. On Friday "people's governor" Denis Pushilin, a neatly dressed 
local businessman apparently handpicked for the role, denounced the Geneva 
deal. He told journalists that his supporters wouldn't leave buildings before 
the "illegal" government in Kiev quit. A leaflet bearing his name had been 
dumped outside Donetsk's Jewish synagogue. It said that all Jews in the city 
had to register, warning that if they did not they would face a fine. Pushilin 
has denounced the leaflet as a hoax and a "complete lie". Its provenance 
remains a mystery.

Speaking to the Observer, Vladimir Markovich, Pushilin's close colleague, said 
the usurping government in Kiev didn't have the right to sign anything: "They 
are not legitimate." Ukraine's democratically elected parliament, at least, had 
voted in the new government. Even members of Viktor Yanukovych's Party of 
Regions had supported it. Had anyone actually voted for him? "No, but local 
people from my area back me."

Markovich described himself as the "republic's" speaker. He said his activists 
had barricaded the building with tyres and razorwire because "fascists" might 
storm their camp at any moment. "We have no weapons, we've never had them," he 
said. The protesters would continue their sit-and-sleep-in until a referendum 
was held on the region's future status, he said. The separatists want this by 
11 May.

With the Geneva agreement already dead, two scenarios were now likely, 
according to Igor Todorov, a professor at Donetsk's university. The first was 
thatRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> would annex the east of 
Ukraine, as it did last month with Crimea. The second was that Moscow would 
install a puppet regime analogous to the one in Trans-Dniester, the breakaway 
Moldovan region next to western Ukraine, he said. "The Kremlin will decide at 
the last minute."

Certainly Russia is treating the "Donbass People's Republic" as a dignified 
government-in-waiting. The separatists make no secret of wanting to join 
Moscow. In the lobby of the occupied building is a large map of Donbass, with 
"Russia" scrawled on it.

The US, EU and Kiev say there is overwhelming proof that the Kremlin is 
co-ordinating the armed uprising using undercover soldiers and FSB agents. 
Moscow denies this.

Todorov – a supporter of Ukrainian statehood – said he was deeply pessimistic 
about his country's future. He said he doubted presidential elections due to be 
held on 25 May would take place, at least not in the east. And in Kiev, he 
suggested, there was a growing feeling that Ukraine would be better off dumping 
its troublesome eastern provinces and creating a modern European country 
without them.

Last week, meanwhile, the Russian media reported that Yanukovych was planning 
to return to Ukraine on Easter Sunday. He would reappear in his hometown of 
Donetsk, it said, citing Russian sources (traditionally, Yanukovych visits the 
grave of his mother Olga over Easter in nearby Yenakiyevo). Yanukovych's 
imminent resurrection seems unlikely. But it is possible the Kremlin may deploy 
him at some point. "I can see a scenario where Russia brings back Yanukovych 
and puts him on a tank in Kiev," Todorov said gloomily.

Guarding the foyer of the "republic" HQ, a volunteer called Andrei said 
Yanukovych still enjoyed some local support: "I don't see why he couldn't come 
back, if the people create a 'living corridor' for him." Andrei declined to 
give his surname, but said he was a 27-year-old security guard from the nearby 
town of Gorlovka. He had a weapon of sorts – a metallic baseball bat with the 
word "bat" written on it, and was wearing a flak-jacket. What were living 
conditions like inside the occupied building? "Well, it's not home, obviously. 
But we have food. And there's even a basic shower." Andrei was sitting with a 
young female doctor dispensing medicines. On the wall were black-and-white 
photographs of Soviet war veterans. Next to the bathrooms was a sign in pink 
highlighter which read: "Make provocateurs clean the toilets."

Wouldn't it be difficult to organise a referendum in a couple of weeks? "It's 
all in hand. Look at how quickly it happened in Crimea," Andrei pointed out. 
"We already have people on the ground, in towns and villages, preparing for it. 
We are getting ready for a return to autonomy. Russia is helping us."

The theme of Soviet pride is ubiquitous, with the separatists casting their 
battle against Kiev as a re-run of the second world war, of Moscow against the 
Nazis. One portrait on the wall is of Konstantin Simonov, the distinguished 
writer and Soviet war reporter. A cruder poster contrasts a row of Russian 
soldiers with a European gay pride rally. It asks bluntly: "In which parade 
would you want your son to take part?"

Outside, beneath a balcony of Russian and Donbass flags, a sound system pumped 
out a string of schmaltzy Russian disco numbers. The occupiers may have 
powerful friends in Moscow, but the crowds in front of the building have often 
been sparse in a city of a million people. There is overwhelming support in 
eastern Ukraine for greater autonomy from Kiev, as well as for Russian to be 
given the status of an official state language. According to an opinion poll in 
February, though, the separatists are in the minority – with only26% in the 
east supporting union with Russia 
<http://dif.org.ua/en/publications/press-relizy/fbieioboj.htm>.

Underneath the Stalin flag, Akulov meanwhile said he wanted a federal 
republic: "I don't care if we end up with Kiev or Moscow. The main thing is we 
are on our own." Akulov said he was a lifetime member of the Communist party – 
"the USSR one, not today's one" – and a decorated retired miner, now aged 68. 
What had driven him to protest, he said, was the destruction of Soviet war 
memorials in the west of Ukraine.

"My father died very early. I was nine. He was injured several times while 
fighting in the Red Army. When they call Soviet troops occupiers I find that 
profoundly insulting." He disappeared into his red Communist party booth and 
returned with a notebook. He then read aloud a poem that was written to 
commemorate the 80,000 Soviet soldiers who died while storming Berlin in 1945 – 
a moving work addressed to young German women. "That's why we should win here," 
he said.
 