
Heading for a First … post qualification applications

With so much interest in university applications, news this week from Ucas 
<http://www.ucas.com/> that its review of university admissions, concluding 
that the system needed radical overhaul, was met with enthusiasm from those 
wanting to see much needed reforms.

Although the final detail is still quite some way off, the move by Ucas, the 
university admissions organisation, to give serious consideration to 
restructuring the academic year so that candidates apply with their A-level 
results is an important step forward. I continue to feel distinctly 
uncomfortable with the present out-dated system where university places are 
offered on the basis of predictions rather than actual results, but I realise 
the devil may well be in the detail.

Although there is a view within the higher education community that moving to 
a post-qualification applications system could in fact have perverse 
consequences, it's important that the Ucas analysis unearths the truth behind 
this. Although I don't doubt there may well still be difficulties ahead, the 
benefits appear to be considerable: a more efficient application system, the 
end of clearing and perhaps crucially, according to Ucas, the end of a system 
that has favoured the rich for decades.

It may well cause some short-term disruption for exam time-tabling and 
university admissions tutors but, to help realise the long-term benefits, this 
must be a reform worth pursuing.

Heading for a Fail … International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/international> student 
recruitment

Sadly, this week we received confirmation that the government's overzealous 
and ill-considered reforms to the visa application process were having a 
damaging impact on international student recruitment.

According to figures from the Home Office, there have been 11,000 fewer 
international students since the coalition reforms. If this leads to fewer 
students progressing to universities, it is not only damaging financially to 
higher education but to the economy more generally.

More importantly, though, this continued move is damaging to the academic and 
cultural impact of our institutions. Both home and international students 
benefit from the ability to meet other students from a diverse range of 
backgrounds – this contributes to a more rounded and cultural experience for 
all.

Ever since David Cameron claimed in last year's election campaign that he 
wanted to reduce net migration to the "tens of thousands from hundreds of 
thousands", policy has been manipulated to try and fit this. The idea that any 
government should ignore evidence to pursue a soundbite is embarrassing. No 
matter how many times the government may claim it wants to demonstrate that the 
UK is "open for business", its rhetoric gives the reverse impression.

The idea that student immigration figures are included in the total statistics 
is fundamentally flawed. The fact remains that students are a transient 
population who are net contributors to the UK economy and move back home after 
their studies. If David Cameron is so desperately wedded to his narrow pledge 
to reduce net migration to the tens of thousands, he should follow the evidence 
and remove students from the measure altogether.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist. He was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 