
The Scottish are keen woodland-goers, with 78% visiting woods for recreation 
compared with 56% across the UK, according to thePublic Opinion of Forestry 
survey <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/infd-5zyl9w>. Now, walks are being 
used by Scottish health services as an aid for those with mental health 
conditions.

Since 2007, Forestry Commission Scotland has been putting the calming effect 
of woodlands to good use in courses for groups of adults with long-term mental 
health conditions.Branching Out 
<http://scotland.forestry.gov.uk/supporting/strategy-policy-guidance/health-strategy/branching-out>
 consists of 12 three-hour sessions of conservation work, art creation and 
bushcraft, followed by a graduation ceremony. Healthcare professionals 
accompany their patients and take part, with specially trained woodland experts 
acting as leaders.

Participating healthcare professionals include occupational therapists and 
community psychiatric nurses. They come primarily as supporters rather than 
carers. “It’s de-medicalised. Everyone dresses the same,” says Kevin Lafferty, 
the commission’s access, health and recreation adviser, who adds that it can 
change relationships significantly.

“It allows both the healthcare worker and the patient to be more open so they 
can speak more freely to one another. Being in a woodland itself creates a 
positive environment for recovery and healing.”

The commission has trained more than 70 course leaders who have prior 
experience in outdoor skills. Often these are countryside rangers from councils 
or voluntary organisations, who go on a three-day training programme and a 
two-day mental health first aid course. In case of disruption, they are able to 
call on the healthcare professionals the patients know for assistance. However, 
those who would be unable to take part in group activities due to their mental 
ill health or who have blood pressure or heart problems are generally deemed 
unfit for courses.

Mental health services kept waiting for promised 'revolution'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/19/mental-health-nhs-revolution>
The first courses were run by the commission with NHS Greater Glasgow and 
Clyde, Glasgow city council and other local organisations at Cathkins Braes 
Country Park on the south-east edge of Glasgow. The operation now runs more 
than 200 courses.

“The focus was to look at the mental health benefits of woodlands and green 
space for mental health patients,” says Hugh McNish, social programme manager 
for the commission.

As well as being Scotland’s largest city, Glasgow has other advantages as a 
course location. “Glasgow is well served with access to green space, but people 
don’t always know where it is,” says McNish. “We have access to good quality 
woodland within half an hour.”

Nine of Scotland’s 14 health boards now use Branching Out, with NHS Grampian 
planning to join. The courses are open to patients with conditions including 
psychosis, schizophrenia, anxiety and mild depression, and accepts those living 
in the community and in mental health hospitals.

For some participants, that's the first qualification they've ever received 
... that can be quite a big deal.
Kevin Lafferty 
While the commission and health boards approach individual units with offers 
to take up the courses, patients have the final say in whether or not they 
attend. “It’s self-selection for the participants rather than a medical 
referral,” says McNish. Participants generally take part with other people from 
the service.

Following an initial briefing a week or two before the first session, groups 
of up to 12 are taken from a central pick-up point by bus to the woodland. 
Participants set up a camp area and are taught bushcraft skills, including how 
to light fires using natural materials, how to prepare food and how to build 
shelters.

The sessions also involve conservation work, removing invasive species such as 
sycamores and rhododendrons, and planting native ones including Scots pines, 
oaks and birches. “All the different sights and sounds and smells are very 
different from the hospital environment that I’m used to, and I’ve really 
enjoyed being out in the countryside,” says one participant.

As well as practical skills, the courses incorporate arts and crafts 
activities, with participants engaging in photography, sculpture using leaves, 
acorns and clay, and tree-dressing – wrapping trees in natural materials such 
as wool. “It’s like an art installation, it creates an interest,” says Lafferty.

The art is displayed at the course’s graduation ceremony, which can be 
attended by friends and family. Many participants also complete theJohn Muir 
Award <https://www.johnmuirtrust.org/john-muir-award>, which they receive at 
the ceremony along with certificates of attendance and skills learned. “For 
some of the participants, that’s the first qualification they have ever 
received,” says Lafferty. “That can be quite a big deal for them.”

Local voluntary services such as the John Muir Trust, the RSPB and Glasgow’s 
Coach House Trust <http://www.thecht.co.uk/> attend the ceremonies, enabling 
participants to volunteer for further outdoor work, increasing their 
independence. Some have developed skills learned on the course into formal 
qualifications for employment.

An evaluation of the scheme’s first year found that it cost less than £50 per 
person per day, with 70% of those starting the course completing it and 
participants reporting improvements in physical and mental health. 
Soon-to-be-published research is expected to confirm its cost-effectiveness 
when assessed against National Institute forHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Care Excellence (Nice) 
guidelines.

McNish says the commission has seen interest from outside Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/scotland>, including from the 
Irish Forestry Service. “It’s a model that can happen elsewhere quite easily,” 
he says, adding that the commission is happy to share its experience with other 
authorities.


He believes the courses could also hold benefits for people with other 
conditions. “We’ve focused on the mental health population, but equally it 
could work with dementia patients, rehab or obesity.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.




 