
Two of Britain's biggest engineering groups were in the takeover spotlight 
after this week's departures of their chief executives.

Analysts said the change at the top at car parts and aerospace group GKN, up 
3.9p to 198p, could highlight its lowly rating compared to others in the 
sector, and attract possible predators. Meanwhile after the abrupt departure of
Invensys boss Ulf Henriksson, analyst Harry Philips at Evolution Securities 
said his replacement - finance director Wayne Edmunds - was the driving force 
behind resolving its pension deficit, a key to any takeover. Philips said:
 We strongly believe that a form of resolution on the pension will lead to the 
value of the business, best seen in our 497p sum of the parts, being realised 
either organically or through corporate activity.

Mark Wilson at Collins Stewart said:  We think Invensys is an attractive 
target for its peers. In rail, Invensys technology is key to the competition 
between existing western players and emerging competition from the likes of 
[China's] CSR. In automation, Invensys is more exposed than most to oil and gas 
and nuclear retrofit markets, and Schneider/Siemens have interest in 
acquisitive growth in process automation.

The takeover hopes helped Invensys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/invensys> shares - which fell sharply on 
Thursday on news of the board changes - recover 11.9p to 353.1p, making it the 
biggest mover in the leading index. ElsewhereIMI added 6p to £10.21 on vague 
talk of a possible sale of its retail business, whose products include drinks 
dispensers for the likes of Coca Cola. There have been recent suggestions that 
IMI does not see itself as a long term holder of the business, preferring to 
concentrate on its industrial divisions.

Overall, bargain-hunting investors shook off continuing worries about 
Portugal's finances, war in Libya and unrest in the Middle East to push theFTSE 
100 19.89 points higher to 5900.76. A higher than expected revision to US 
fourth quarter GDP - showing growth of 3.1% compared to the original estimate 
of 2.8% and forecasts of 3% - also helped sentiment.

The leading index has now recovered all its losses since the Japanese 
earthquake on March 11, and this week's gain is the best since November.

Among the other risers Reckitt Benckiser, the maker of Durex condoms and 
Cillit Bang, climbed 96p to £31.60 after Bank of America Merrill Lynch lifted 
its recommendation from neutral to buy with a £36 price target, saying worries 
about slowing growth and generic competition to its heroin substitute suboxone 
had been overdone:
 We see limited downside from current levels as concerns about a slowing base 
business and suboxone generics appear to be fully reflected in the price.

Autonomy dropped 56p to £15.86 despite positive results overnight from US 
software group Oracle, after a downbeat note from JP Morgan Cazenove. The bank 
put an underweight rating on the shares with a £10 price target, saying:
 In our view the earnings quality is poor and deteriorating, revenue and cost 
objectives have been missed, the outlook is significantly lower than historical 
norms and yet the stock trades at a premium to the sector at 26.5 time 2011 
estimated adjusted earnings. We believe this is based on confidence in a figure 
that we cannot link to the financial statements and the hope of an acquisition 
later in the year. 
But George O'Connor at Panmure Gordon kept his buy rating, saying:
 The [Oracle] results bode well from the enterprise software sector generally, 
with Autonomy as the prime candidate for a positive read-across. Autonomy is 
closing the period (end March) and shares should begin the traditional 'lift'.

A number of retailers fell back following a spate of profit taking and mildly 
disappointing figures from John Lewis.Marks & Spencer lost 7p to 351.1p and Next
 24p to £20.19.

Among the mid-caps African Barrick Gold added 10p to 539p as Citigroup raised 
its recommendation from hold to buy, saying:
 We view African Barrick as a good, solid gold mining group with a top-quality 
key shareholder in Barrick. This ownership gives us comfort that decisions will 
likely be logical and that excessive risk will be avoided.

Its lack of political challenges has made it a safer entry into the gold price 
upside.

Aga Rangemaster, the Aga and Rayburn cooker manufacturer, ended 3.375p higher 
at 128.375p after Liberum Capital and Cenkos placed almost 17m shares with 15 
UK institutions at 124.5p each. The stake had been amassed by buyout firm 
Pension Insurance Corporation, and has been overhanging the Aga price as a 
mooted bid for the company never emerged.

Lower down the market Lo-Q, a specialist in queuing systems for theme parks, 
lost 1.5p to 153.5p after director Leonard Sim raised more than £1.5m by 
selling 1m shares at 154p each.Software Radio Technology, which makes marine 
communications systems, slid 1.375p to 38.375p after chairman Simon Rogers sold 
600,000 shares at 39.5p each.

Finally Berkeley Mineral Resources, which specialises in processing mining 
tailings, edged up 0.25p to 6.95p as traders anticipated news of an acquisition 
of stockpiles of lead and zinc in Zambia. Further deals are also believed to be 
on the cards.
 