
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iraq> have been cleared to take 
their place in Monday’s Asian Cup quarter-final against South Korea after the 
Asian Football Confederation dismissed a protest from Iran.


Iraq beat their old foes 7-6 on penalties after the teams finished tied at 3-3 
in Friday’s quarter-finals butIran <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iran> 
later submitted a formal protest, asking for the result to be overturned.

 In the protest, Iran alleged that Iraqi midfielder Alaa Abdul-Zahra should 
have not been allowed to play because he had submitted a positive doping test 
while playing for an Iranian club side last year.

 The Asian Football Confederation’s Disciplinary Committee met in Sydney on 
Sunday to discuss the case while the Iranian team remained in Australia in case 
the verdict went their way.

 On Sunday evening, the AFC announced the protest had been dismissed and Iraq 
would take their place against South Korea in the semi-finals.

Iraq beat Iran on penalties to settle classic Asian Cup encounter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/23/asian-cup-iran-iraq-match-report>
 “The AFC Disciplinary Committee from 2:30pm heard oral evidence from two 
officials of the I.R. Iran Football Federation, deliberated the matter based on 
its merits, and decided that the protest was unfounded. The protest was 
therefore dismissed,” the AFC said in a statement.

 “Due to the urgency of the matter, the terms of the decision were initially 
notified to the I.R. Iran Football Federation at 6:20pm. The full grounds of 
the decision will be communicated tonight in due course. The I. R. Iran 
Football Federation will have the right to file an appeal in accordance with 
the AFC Disciplinary Code.”

 It was not immediately clear whether Iran would lodge an appeal but the Iraq 
team said they were confident the case was closed. “It’s over,” a team 
spokesman told a news conference. “We play tomorrow.“

 Iraq team officials refused to answer questions about the case during their 
pre-game news conference at Sydney’s Olympic Stadium on Sunday, saying only 
that the matter was closed.

 Midway through the conference, Iraq’s media’s officer Tarik Bejan announced 
that he had just received formal notification the protest had been dismissed.

 “Our [FA] president met with them [the AFC] at 12pm and told them there is 
not a problem with the situation,” he said. “We are relaxed. If the coach 
chooses him tomorrow then he will play.“

 The Iraqi coach Radhi Shenaishil dismissed the case as a ploy by Iran to get 
the result overturned. “It’s something they created.” he said. “It hasn’t 
effected us in any way.“

 Shenaishil said he was more concerned about getting his team ready for the 
match after a short turnaround.

 The odds were stacked against Iraq before the tournament started with the 
team unable to train together or play matches at home because of the war in 
their homeland.

 But Iraq overcame similar obstacles to win the Asian Cup in 2007 – beating 
South Korea in the semi-finals – and Shenaishil said he was hoping for another 
miracle.

 “There’s no secret,” he said. “When you work together you can produce 
something great for your country.

 “It’s a special situation, we know our country needs us to win... just 
reaching the semi-finals will inspire people and we hope to keep winning.” 



 