
Road To Riches, third home behind Coneygree and Djakadam in last season’s 
Cheltenham Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/13/cheltenham-gold-cup-coneygree>, 
is odds-on across the board to win Saturday’s Irish Gold Cup at Leopardstown 
after 10 horses were entered for the race on Tuesday. The nine-year-old is 
top-priced at 4-5 for Ireland’s final Grade One chase before Cheltenham, a race 
Noel Meade, his trainer, has yet to win.

Road To Riches is also 12-1 to improve two places on his finishing position at 
Cheltenham last March, and if that is not quite “forgotten horse” territory, 
Saturday’s race would still be an ideal moment to remind punters he remains a 
live Gold Cup contender. He was beaten by a total of three-and-a-half lengths 
at last year’s Festival, and while Meade ruled him out of the Lexus Chase at 
Christmas because of a minor infection, Road To Riches seemed as good as ever 
in his previous start at Clonmel in November.

Coneygree gives huge crowd heartwarming win in Cheltenham Gold Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/13/cheltenham-gold-cup-coneygree> 
“His blood went a little wrong at Christmas and his scope wasn’t 100%, so we 
gave him antibiotics for about four days and then off we went again,” Meade 
said. “Running in races like that, you have to be 100%.

“He doesn’t know what price he is [for the Gold Cup] and we don’t really care 
but I suppose it’s because he’s hasn’t been out, and what you don’t see, you 
don’t think about maybe. We actually thought when he won at Clonmel he was 
better [than last season]. He had a pretty long season last year, he started in 
Galway [in July] and he was very flat after Cheltenham [when third in a Grade 
One at Punchestown], because he had a very hard race at Cheltenham, it was a 
real grueller.

“It didn’t surprise me he didn’t run as well at Punchestown as he did at 
Cheltenham, as he’d been trained for Cheltenham. Perhaps in hindsight it wasn’t 
a good idea to run him, but it’s easy to say that afterwards.”

Road To Riches is also relatively lightly raced for a nine-year-old, with 18 
starts in all and only 13 over fences, and did not start to find his best form 
until his second season in chases.

“He came a long way last season,” Meade said. “We had a bit of a problem with 
him at one stage when he lost his form and he did the same thing over hurdles. 
We found his diet was all wrong and we had to change that, and he just took off 
after that.

“He was suffering from ulcers a bit and when we realised we were able to sort 
it out and keep it under control. Ulcers used to be something I never thought 
about even 10 years ago and when I look back at my time training and some of 
the horses that I had, they must have been suffering with ulcers and we didn’t 
know. Now, it’s one of the first things we look for.”

Foxrock, the runner-up behind Carlingford Lough in the Hennessy 12 months ago, 
is the second favourite for Saturday’s race at 7-1. First Lieutenant, who along 
with Road To Riches is one of five possible runners in the race for Michael 
O’Leary’s Gigginstown Stud operation, is an 8-1 chance, while Gilgamboa, who 
was one of Tony McCoy’s final Grade One winners in a novice event at Fairyhouse 
in April, is 9-1.

Nicky Henderson has confirmed Peace And Co, last year’s Triumph Hurdle winner, 
will attempt to establish himself as Britain’s best hope for the Champion 
Hurdle at Cheltenham when he lines up for the Contenders Hurdle at Sandown Park 
on Saturday.

The five-year-old was due to take on The New One in Haydock’s Champion Hurdle 
Trial in January but was ruled out shortly before the final declaration stage 
with a minor problem.

“It was very minimal what forced us out of Haydock, I’d have loved to run 
there,” Henderson said on Tuesday. “He’s back moving really well again, he’s 
perfectly OK. He must have pulled a muscle in his back and he moved badly for 
about three or four days.”
 