
Is it OK to be bored by people's stories of how drunk they got last night? 
Yes. Every day, but especially on New Year's Day, we go through a routine. I 
tell you how hammered I got last night and how rough I feel. You tell me how 
slaughtered you got and how rough you feel. We give embroidered accounts of how 
much we drank but agree that rough as we feel, we bet (insert name here) feels 
even rougher because they got, I mean, absolutely massacred. We then give an 
embroidered account of what they drank. These dreary, ritualised rounds of plea 
bargaining, the verbal vomiting equivalent of the physical throwing up that 
would have occurred had anyone really consumed the quantities we feel obliged 
by custom to claim, need to be stopped. Try responding by saying you feel OK 
because you didn't have a great deal to drink - even if in reality you got 
absolutely pulverised.

 Is it OK to have not the foggiest notion of what the European Single Currency 
is, what it means or even to care? Possibly. Look at it this way. Most of us 
not in Holy Orders are entirely dependent on our personal finances, yet we 
leave bank statements unopened for years, have little idea of or interest in 
our pension arrangements and routinely discard financial sections. Vital as it 
all is, a large proportion of intelligent, otherwise scrupulously informed 
people regard anything financial as unbearably dull. This is deeply puzzling to 
those of a financial disposition. But those in charge of our national finances 
are both interested in them and, crucially for the rest of us, care. They are 
concerned to do the right thing, because a disastrous course of action for them 
would also be one for us. We should, therefore, be happy to hitch a ride on 
their self-interest and accept that they know what they are doing re the 
European Single Currency.

 Is it OK to feel a swelling of patriotic pride at the England cricketers' 
narrow victory over the Australians in the fourth Test Match? No. The Aussies 
had a bad day. A mild, strictly ironic, feeling of jingoism may be permissible 
if England repeat the trick in the fifth Test.

 Jonathan Margolis 
 