
In 2013, Nintendo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> opened a 
new research and development facility in its home town of Kyoto, Japan. 
Usually, a consumer technology manufacturer opening a new office wouldn’t be 
news, but this was different: the $350m building would house both the company’s 
handheld and console gaming R&D teams.

In the past, these groups had been kept apart, producing very different 
hardware and games for the different markets – now they would be merged. At the 
time, analysts thought this was to improve functionality between the Wii U and 
3DS, but now we understand this was not the end goal – the end goal was Switch. 
This hybrid gaming system, which works as both a portable machine and a home 
console, now looks to represent Nintendo’s future in the games industry. But 
what does that mean?
 The Nintendo Switch – a true synergy of the handheld and home form 
factors.But does anyone want that? Photograph: Nintendo 
We’ll find out much more about the device in a series of Livestream videos on 
Friday, but as ever with a new Nintendo product, pundits are questioning its 
role in the gaming ecosystem. They questioned the dual-screen design of the 
Nintendo DS after the vast success of the Gameboy; they questioned the boxy, 
toy-like GameCube, and they stifled laughter at the Wii, with its cheap 
off-the-shelf components and weird motion controller. Most of these, of course, 
went on to great success, with Nintendo’s famed business philosophy – the 
innovative use of withered technology – ensuring that money was always made on 
hardware as well as software. PlayStation and Xbox machines were selling 
better, but often at a loss.

But the Wii U really derailed things. The first console of the merged R&D 
generation failed to convince consumers that a home console needed a second 
handheld screen. There was talk of unique asymmetric multiplayer experiences, 
but few materialised; third-party publishers shied away and even Nintendo 
itself under-delivered on truly in-depth, interesting support for the GamePad. 
Since its launch in 2012, the console has sold around 14m units. PlayStation 4 
did that in a year.


Switch is an extension of the Wii U philosophy – a machine that offers two 
play forms, one involving your television, the other utilising a smaller 
handheld screen. The difference here is that the handheld component is the main 
console, and it is portable beyond the home. It’s a true synergy of the 
handheld and home form factors.

But does anyone want that? Right now, analysts are uncertain. One reason is 
that both the home and portable experiences may be compromised by this merged 
approach. “I don’t doubt the software will be good but aspects of the hardware 
concern me,” says veteran industry journalist Ben Parfitt. “Lots of people have 
very quickly dismissed any suggestion that a 720p screen is inadequate for the 
device, but I’m not so certain. Most smartphones now pack a higher resolution 
into a smaller display, and I worry that Switch visuals may be noticeably 
inferior than the target market is used to. With lots of gamers buying 4K 
screens for PS4 Pro and Xbox One S, having a device that needs a processing 
boost from its dock just to achieve 1080p seems implausibly dated.”

Smartphones have become the interesting factor here. For years Nintendo 
resisted bringing its intellectual property to mobile phones, but in 2015, a 
deal with Japanese mobile gaming specialist DeNa reversed that, leading to the 
successful releases Miitomo and Super Mario Run. Last year we also saw the 
phenomenon of Pokémon Go, downloaded over 500m times, with Nintendo receiving a 
share of the spoils from microtransactions. But the impact of this strategy has 
had wider ramifications for Nintendo.

“The general view during the first six months of the year was that 2016 would 
be dead for Nintendo,” says Chris Dring at industry news site 
GamesIndustry.Biz. “No Wii U games of note, a smattering of Japanese RPGs in 
what was probably the 3DS’s final year, and a couple of experimental mobile 
titles. Then Pokémon Go happened.

“The 3DS has been flying high since then, the Pokémon Sun and Moon games are 
the fastest selling titles Nintendo has ever released – which is astonishing. 
More 3DS games were sold in the UK last month than at any other point in that 
platform’s history – not bad for a machine that was coming to an end just six 
months ago.”

In short, if Nintendo’s dalliances with the huge smartphone market have been 
this successful, and have had such a positive effect on its legacy machines, 
why bother with an experimental hybrid system? Why not continue to support the 
3DS and Wii lines and concentrate handheld gaming concepts on the smartphone 
sector?


Perhaps part of the answer is control. Nintendo has always jealously guarded 
its game brands, and access to its hardware. The controversial “Nintendo Seal 
of Quality” that has restricted what third-party publishers could release on 
its consoles since the days of the NES, has created an ecosystem entirely 
controlled by Nintendo itself. But it cannot maintain that sort of rigid 
autocratic power in the mobile sector, where it is subject to the hardware and 
infrastructures of other companies like Apple, Google and Samsung.
 The new Zelda game on the Nintendo Switch. Photograph: Nintendo 
Furthermore, games work in a very different way in the smartphone sector, 
where design, structure and monetisation are all governed by free-to-play 
mechanics. Super Mario Run is very much a mobile phone rethinking of Mario 
rather than a mobile port of the classic Super Mario Bros series. It’s an 
endless runner (an accepted smartphone genre), with a try-now-pay-later format 
that suits the premium-averse phone user. Although Animal Crossing and Fire 
Emblem titles are coming to mobile, they’re likely to be similarly altered and 
rethought for this market. We’ve seen from some poor reviews for Super Mario 
Run that Nintendo’s veteran fanbase haven’t been happy – they want to full, 
epic gaming experiences they’re used to. Hence the Switch and its hybrid 
format. This way Nintendo gets to control content, design and experience.

But even if we accept this, the Switch proposition is troubled – it relies on 
games that will essentially play in the same way between the docked and 
portable formats. The thing is, handheld games aren’t just scaled down versions 
of their home console counterparts; they have a different aesthetic, and they 
are designed to meet different patterns of play. The most popular 3DS titles, 
the likes of Pokémon, Animal Crossing, Monster Hunter and Fire Emblem Fates, 
are designed to be played over long periods, but in shorter, less focused 
interactions – many have turn-based battles rather than real-time, so you can 
break off and think; their environments are often broken into smaller sections, 
so you get a sense of achievement in shorter, more scattered sessions. These 
games fit in with the world around you; they don’t constantly demand your full 
attention in the way that home console titles do.

So can the Switch produce console games that work outside of the home in this 
way? Arguably, Sony’s PSP and Vita handhelds never sold as well because they 
reallywere an attempt to bring the console experience to the handheld – and not 
as many people wanted that. “The Switch proposition is interesting but fairly 
complex and not entirely original,” says Piers Harding-Rolls, head of games 
research atIHS <https://technology.ihs.com/>. “Historically, there has been 
very limited success in the device category which offers a powerful gaming 
tablet which can be used as a home console – Nvidia’s Shield Tablet for 
example. Nintendo has a bucketful of IP and a more unique form factor to sway 
consumers to invest in the platform but I think the offer has to displace 
existing tablet and home console use, which is quite a challenge.”

Switch then, is a fascinating piece of hardware, which is utterly typical of 
Nintendo. But while the Wii effectively created its own niche of 
motion-controlled gaming, Switch is designed to sit in between other markets. 
The question is whether anyone wants that space to be filled. With the rapidly 
diversifying home console and smartphone sectors, the former appealing to 
“hardcore” gamers, the latter to the casual market, the industry is beginning 
to stratify along clear lines. Switch adds a kink in the line, but will it trip 
Nintendo up?


 * Nintendo Switch: what we’re expecting from the new console 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/11/nintendo-switch-what-were-expecting-from-the-new-console>
 * Nintendo Switch: can the new console succeed where Wii U failed? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/21/nintendo-switch-new-portable-console-wii-u> 