
The AV referendum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av-referendum> result 
comes as a thundering blow. In an era when voters are in rebellion against the 
old two-party duopoly, a third refusing to vote for either of the old tribes, 
the chance to shape an electoral system that might reflect that mood by 
recording people's true first choices has been cast away.

As for a properly representative system, that hope is dashed for years to 
come. Forget new parties breaking through, the portal to politics remains 
desperately narrow. Westminster can only be approached through the heavily 
guarded gateways of the old parties, barring the way to others. Parliament is a 
closed club that risks falling into deeper disrepute, further removed from its 
voters, less responsive to the increasingly complex feelings voters want to 
express. What's the point of voting, the poll refuseniks ask on the doorstep, 
if no one outside the two big parties ever has a chance.

How perverse to vote for less choice, but the reasons why are simple. The 
issue was steamrollered flat by the political passions of the day. For too many 
of those on the centre-left, instant vengeance against Lib Dems drove out all 
thoughts of the political future. It was a vile campaign, the No side 
mendacious beyond anything I can recall, the Yes side insultingly stupid with 
its call to make MPs "work harder".

Nick Clegg badly misjudged this by insisting the referendum be held on local 
election day, when winning councils was the activists' priority. A stand-alone 
referendum, after the Lib Dems had been trounced, might have aired the question 
better.

Shedloads of cash from Tory donors did its work. David Cameron's killer 
threat, untrue but mighty effective – that AV would leave the rump Lib Dems in 
power forever – probably won the day. But Labour's split between its 
retro-revengers and its forward-looking pluralists was a disaster. If Tony 
Blair at the height of his power dared not face down his party and push for PR 
with Roy Jenkins and Paddy Ashdown, Ed Miliband was in a considerably weaker 
position to whip the party in to embrace a more fluid multi-party future. Of 
course AV in itself, that "miserable little compromise 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/i-want-to-push-this-all-the-way-declares-clegg-1950668.html>
", wouldn't have produced that outcome – but voting it down makes all electoral 
reform moribund. So will the Lib Dems get House of Lords reform instead? No, 
the Tories will kill that too, just watch and see, whatever Cameron may 
pretend. For many the loss of any hope of electoral reform will mark a dark 
turning point in their enthusiasm for politics.

The great double losers of the day were the Lib Dems, poll-axed by the end of 
their reform dream. Thrashing about in near-death agonies, expect all manner of 
contortions that may be as self-destructive as everything else they have done 
in the last year. Their overall result was not quite as bad as some polls 
predicted, holding on in some places, but their catastrophic coalition 
miscalculation may yet split and wipe them out for a generation.

They may bring down the coalition. They may eject Clegg, but what's the point 
of replacing him with Chris Huhne? Even before the last election, he was 
pressing the not-so-cunning plan of going into a death-hug with the Tories. All 
the Lib Dem leaders convinced themselves insanely that they must prove they 
were a grown-up party of government, eager to take harsh decisions as nasty as 
the Tories.

How badly they misunderstood the nature of their swelling support: they were a 
safe haven for voters not wanting tough choices, nice people with apolitical 
instincts, trusting Clegg's promised "new politics" would keep their votes 
clean from contamination. Had the Lib Dems stood apart and stood their ground, 
loudly opposing Tory plans, objecting to the savagery of the budget without 
quite bringing down the government, they might have kept their virginity. 
Instead, their relentless trashing of "Labour who left us in this mess" slammed 
the door on an alternative coalition future – and ensured angryLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> voters killed off their AV hopes.

Today a frightening question confronts Labour: is this the start of a long 
Conservative hegemony? The economy is flatlining – but so is Labour. It gained 
too few seats, compared with its 2007 low vote. Why didn't it do better? 
Unemployment is rising, the NHS faces deep cuts, libraries, leisure centres and 
Sure Starts are slamming their doors, while university fees terrify families, 
middle incomes shrink and growing ranks of economists warn that George 
Osborne's plans are sending the UK into a downward spiral – yet Cameron's 
shield is undented. Some progress is made with "too far, too fast" – but 
nowhere near enough yet. If there were a general election tomorrow, Cameron 
would win.Labour remains unforgiven, blamed for everything, its faces still too 
redolent of a rejected Brown era. Twenty-three policy reviews under the aegis 
of "No money left" Liam Byrne are not so far an inspiring prospect.

Meanwhile, Lib Dem votes collapsing to Labour may paradoxically yield more 
Westminster seats to Tories. Labour regained its northern strongholds but until 
it besieges Tories in the south, it's not a contender. Losing Scotland was a 
blow. Boundary changes favour the Tories and if Scotland breaks away, then 
Westminster looks blue stretching into the far horizons of the future.

Is this the death of the idea that Britain has a "progressive majority"? Is 
this really a Conservative country after all, as the Blair/Brown/ Mandelson 
project always assumed? No, though without AV, first preferences can't be 
proven: a fifth of voters are forced to vote tactically. A solid third of 
voters are Tory but the anti-Tory vote is now more dispersed and without voting 
reform, harder to assemble into a winning force.

What is the Miliband, pluralist wing of Labour to do about that? Open up the 
party to new entrants, hold open primaries to become the gateway into politics 
for unconventional candidates assembled around the spine of Labour values. 
Cameron has cooled on this, since the Totnes Tory primary delivered a GP 
critical of his health reforms.

Labour can only be attractive if it is welcoming, open-minded, free-spirited, 
the party that unlocks doors to Westminster for new ideas and new people. In 
the last weeks, the worst of Labour often paraded the opposite. Where once left 
and right were Labour's deepest rift, now the deeper divide is the open-minded 
versus narrow sectarians. Haunted by its painful recent past, Labour has yet to 
tell us what it's for.
 