
After weeks of speculation that the chancellor was planning big changes to the 
tax relief on pensions in the forthcoming budget, on Fridaythe Treasury ruled 
out any immediate reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/04/george-osborne-backs-down-on-radical-pension-reform>
.


Currently, when savers pay into a scheme their contributions are boosted by 
tax relief at the rate they pay on their earnings, which can be as much as 45%. 
Figures from the government show more than two-thirds of pensions tax relief 
goes to 40% and 45% rate taxpayers.

So was the chancellor right to decide not to announce changes to the system 
now?

No he was not, says David Harrison, managing partner at True Potential Investor

The chancellor’s decision to abort pensions tax relief reform is a missed 
opportunity but not a surprise.

We saw the climbdown coming with reports that George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> was under enormous 
pressure, even from the PM, to ‘play it safe’ and avoid further antagonising 
the ‘Brexiters’ on the Tory back benches. A better example of pensions being 
used as a political football would be hard to find.

The door has been left ajar, however, and surely tax relief reform will be 
back on the table before long. And so it should be.

The case for reform is obvious. Tax relief is not fair, but worse is that it 
is ineffective at encouraging people to save.

It costs £34bn each year, two-thirds of which goes to higher and additional 
rate payers, and the UK still has a frightening savings crisis. Savers 
increased their Isa contributions by £20bn in 2015, but a law has had to be 
passed to make people save into a pension.

The chancellor has got a budget surplus to hit by the end of the decade, but 
there is more at play here. This debate was sparked because the Treasury asked 
how people could be incentivised to save more. The simple answer to that 
question is to build on what is already popular and working.

When Osborne revisits tax relief reform he should consider a retirement Isa – 
this would be simper, cheaper and far more transparent than a pension, with all 
its hidden charges.

With an annual limit of £25,000 and a 25% top-up on the first £10,000 saved, 
as well as no tax on withdrawals, a basic rate taxpayer would be better off 
than under the current system.

The only people celebrating today are the pensions companies and those who 
least need help to save.

Yes he was, says Steve Webb, director of policy at Royal London and former 
pensions minister

“After 10 months of increasingly feverish speculation, we learn finally from 
‘sources close to the chancellor’ that there is to be no big bang reform to 
pension tax relief.

Whilst this is a missed opportunity to go for a fairer and more effective 
system such as a generous flat rate, it is hard not to feel a sense of relief 
that some of the options that were under active consideration have been shelved.

Worst of all would have been to press ahead with the idea which the chancellor 
floated in July of a pensions Isa. Under this approach, all upfront tax relief 
would be scrapped but no tax would be paid on pensions in retirement.

This idea was full of holes, not least in terms of cost and bureaucracy. Every 
worker would have needed a duplicate pension pot – an existing one that had yet 
to be taxed, as well as a separate new one that had already taxed – with all 
the cost and complexity that would have entailed.

And the Isa approach risked undermining the engagement of workers and firms in 
pension saving, not least because it required savers to trust future 
politicians not to tax them for a second time.

Another mistake which has been avoided, at least for now, is taking billions 
of pounds out of the support given to pension saving.

Cutting support for pensions simply to plug a hole in the nation’s finances 
would have been dangerously short-termist. A reform that took billions out of 
tax relief would probably have done little for the incentives of ordinary 
savers, but could have led to large numbers of higher earners giving up on 
pension saving altogether.

Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> have been through a 
period of considerable turmoil in recent years, and we remain at a critical 
stage in the roll-out of automatic enrolment.

This April already sees further changes to lifetime and annual limits for 
pension saving that were announced last year, so a period of stability is to be 
welcomed.

Pensions are a long-term business. The chancellor should commit to no further 
changes to tax relief in this parliament so that individuals can plan for the 
future with confidence, not live in fear that another cut is just round the 
corner.
 