
There are, as it happens, at least two kinds of fake news. The one that has 
become a dirge through the first days of Trump, simple fibs dressed up as facts 
on Facebook et al – and the more insidious fakery that no one seems to have 
rumbled yet: mindless news, empty news, news as transient as the latest tweet 
from the Donald.

British journalists who haven’t been concentrated on Trumpian tactics may, 
perhaps, be excused last week’s farce. But would any prime minister in her 
right mind make Nigel Farage – loosest of cannons, most lethal of preening 
enemies –ambassador to the United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-will-not-be-ambassador-to-us-say-no10-and-foreign-office-donald-trump>
? It’s a joke, a non-starter. So why did a tweet from the president-elect seem 
to start it?

Because that’s what he does, that’s how he plays the media game: by total 
distraction. Why talk about serious policies or serious appointments (not to 
mention serious promises swiftly shredded) when you can whip up a meaningless 
storm in 140 characters?

Here’s his new White House chief strategist, Steve Bannon, sounding off 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/steve-bannon-trump-tower-interview-trumps-strategist-plots-new-political-movement-948747>
. “The media bubble is the ultimate symbol of what’s wrong with this country. 
It’s just a circle of people talking to themselves who have no f–ing idea 
what’s going on. If theNew York Times didn’t exist, CNN and MSNBC would be a 
test pattern. The Huffington Post and everything else is predicated on theNew 
York Times. It’s a closed circle of information from which Hillary Clinton got 
all her information — and her confidence. That was our opening.”

So what do you do to bubbles when you win? You burst them. You undermine their 
confidence. You threaten and bluster. And you make your antipathy to them, and 
their fear of you, a permanent theme. Remember, according to Gallup, that only 
14% of Republicans have a fair amount/great deal of trust in the media, as 
opposed to 51% of Democrats. It’s important for Trump to keep that distrust and 
hostility alive.

Important: and pathetically easy, because a warm bath of portentous 
introversion swills around inside this bubble. Trump’s aim, as Nic Dawes, a 
brilliant South African editor now head of media at Human Rights Watch in New 
York,tells fellow journalists in the Columbia Journalism Review 
<http://www.cjr.org/the_feature/trump_journalism_press_freedom_global.php>, is 
simple: “To delegitimise accountability journalism by framing it as partisan … 
Why should anyone care about your investigation of the president’s conflicts of 
interest, or his tax bills, if they emanate from the political opposition? The 
scariest thing about ‘fake news’ is that all news becomes fake. Yours too.”

And see how easily the gullibility game works out. Worried about the dodgy 
details of that $25m Trump University settlement? No sweat. Watch the cast of a 
Broadway musical slag off your vice-president, then start firing off tweets as 
usual. Result: no one stops to bother about those university details. The pack 
has moved on, as you knew they would. “He tweets and they go crazy,” says the 
mordant commentator Michael Wolff.

So it is, too, with top jobs for rightwing boys such as Bannon, and strategic 
withdrawals from campaign promises that don’t work any longer, such as locking 
up Clinton. Who wants to dwell on such things when you call America’s media 
luminaries in for an off-the-record session with the elected one, then smirk as 
news of his alleged fury with them leaks all over compliant papers? No problem 
with how such leaks happened. Need to confect another front in your war against 
the liberal elite? Mission all too possible.

Look, here’s a tweet calling off a meeting with the New York Times! And here’s 
another one putting it back on his schedule. Is that a story, or rather two 
stories? Meeting cancelled; meeting reinstated. Is theTimes to be praised for 
its fortitude in welcoming Trump on the record? Or is that, too, just more 
space devoted to examination of media navels – an obsession Trump plays on to 
perfection?

It’s so easy when a tweet or two provokes headlines round the globe. Easy when 
a single tweet can send Fleet Street and Westminster into a flimsy panic over 
Farage. Easy when the 24-hour news cycle that Alastair Campbell used to wail 
about can be spun up and away every time the president-elect logs on toTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>.

You can present the coming of Trump as a threat to press freedom, the first 
amendment, and American democracy. Heavy meetings duly summoned. Stiff lips 
quiver. We’ll see. But, for the moment, it’s more a threat to media sanity as 
the Donald hooks another open-mouthed big fish, and grins as he winds it in.
 