
Implanting two embryos during IVF <https://www.theguardian.com/society/ivf> 
can cut the chance of becoming pregnant by more than a quarter if one of the 
embryos is in a poorer state of health, new research suggests.


A study of almost 1,500 embryos that were implanted in women of all ages found 
that putting back a healthier embryo with one of poorer quality dramatically 
cut the chance of a successful pregnancy compared to just transferring one 
embryo.


Experts behind the study believe that the body tends to focus on the embryo 
termed the one of poorer quality and rejects a possible pregnancy, rather than 
focusing on the healthy embryo that would lead to a successful birth.


The research, being presented at the British Fertility Society annual 
conference in Edinburgh, involved data for 1,472 fresh single and double embryo 
transfers on day five after fertilisation (blastocyst stage).

 The transfers were carried out between between June 2009 and December 2013 at 
the Nurture Fertility clinic in Nottingham. Embryos were graded by an 
embryologist at the time of embryo transfer using a standardised grading system 
in IVF.


The results showed that compared to transferring a single embryo, transferring 
two embryos where one was good quality and one was poor resulted in a 27% lower 
chance of achieving a pregnancy.


Related: New DNA test for embryos could boost IVF success rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/20/new-dna-test-for-embryos-could-boost-ivf-success-rates>

Transferring two embryos of good quality was also no better than one for 
achieving a pregnancy.


Nick Raine-Fenning 
<https://www.nottingham.ac.uk/medicine/people/Nick.Raine-fenning>, medical 
director and research lead at Nurture Fertility, said: “The current feeling is 
that a good embryo will be recognised by the body and will be captured for 
implantation. But a poor quality embryo should be rejected by your body, your 
endometrium will reject it. What our research suggests is that if you put a 
poorer quality embryo back with a good one, it’s more likely to compromise the 
chance of the good one implanting.”


He said he would recommend that any woman with a good embryo – especially 
older women – should just have one embryo put back in their body.


“In their first cycle I would absolutely recommend that women – even older 
women – have one embryo transferred and the second embryo is frozen for future 
transfer,” he said.


He added: “This research shows the importance of quality over quantity. It 
helps better guide the contribution and risk when considering replacing a 
second embryo. Most patients understandably expect adding a second embryo will 
increase or even double their chances but this has never been the case.


“We hope this research will help clinics further reduce the number of multiple 
births, whilst crucially keeping their success rates high.”


The research did, however, show that if women only had two poorer quality 
embryos, they still had a higher chance of falling pregnant than if just one 
embryo was transferred.


Related: Boys conceived through IVF technique have lower than average fertility
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/06/boys-conceived-through-ivf-technique-icsi-have-lower-than-average-fertility>

The regulator, the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) leads a 
campaign to persuade women of the benefits of having embryos transferred one at 
a time during IVF.


It points to research showing the risks of multiple births, including that 
twins are six times more likely to be born prematurely than single babies.


Long-term health problems of prematurity include breathing difficulties, 
cerebral palsy and other physical and learning problems, it says.
 