
My father, Jack Aaronson, who has died aged 97, spent three decades as a 
principled and successful “company doctor”, helping to rescue failing 
manufacturing companies, as well as organisations such as Bonhams, the fine art 
auctioneers, and the Greyhound Racing Association. He salvaged many jobs and 
livelihoods in the process, including, in the late 1960s, those of 700 
redundant miners and steelworkers in County Durham who were retrained as 
engineers to build vehicle bodies for a failing company he had relocated from 
London.

Jack was born into an Orthodox Jewish household in the East End of London, to 
Samuel, an importer and exporter, and Sara (nee Chaikhin), a housewife. All his 
grandparents had come to England to escape persecution in imperial Russia; on 
Samuel’s side from Latvia, and on Sara’s side from Ukraine, via Palestine. 
Jack’s childhood was marred by his parents’ separation and his father’s return 
to Palestine. Sara struggled to bring up her seven children, who were often 
farmed out to other families, but this failed to dent Jack’s incorrigibly 
extrovert character and positive outlook on life.

After attending Central Foundation boys’ school in Islington, north London, 
Jack was unable to afford university, and left in 1936 for Palestine to gain 
work experience with an audit and accountancy firm. When the second world war 
broke out he was offered a commission in the British army, but chose to enlist 
in the ranks, in the Royal Artillery. War service took him to north Africa – 
including El Alamein – and to India, where he served in a Sikh regiment, 
finishing the war as a captain and meeting Marian Davies, an army nursing 
sister. They married in London in 1946 on demobilisation.

Qualifying as a chartered accountant, Jack became the founding general 
secretary of the Anglo Israel Chamber of Commerce before joining the General 
Electric Company as an economic and financial adviser, rising to become its 
overseas general manager. In 1963, after management changes at GEC, he 
resigned, and rebuilt his career rescuing failing companies on behalf of 
institutional investors, continuing that task well into his 70s through his own 
company, Equity Recoveries.

Although his achievements were considerable, he never quite joined the 
establishment and somehow remained an outsider. But he never lost heart, and 
even as a care home resident in his last two years retained his indefatigable 
energy and determination to do things for himself.

Marian died in 2008. He is survived by his two sons, Robin and me, and by 
seven grandchildren.
 