
Jack Hobbs looks like the main threat to Treve in next month’s Prix de l’Arc 
de Triomphe after a low-key but successful return to action here.The Irish 
Derby winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/27/jack-hobbs-irish-derby-william-buick-john-gosden-curragh>
has had a quiet couple of months with an autumn campaign in mind and gave every 
appearance of being the better for it as he sauntered home, clear of six 
outclassed rivals.

John Gosden <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/john-gosden> has yet to commit 
him unreservedly to the Arc, with Ascot’s Champion Stakes also a possibility, 
but there is no doubt that the Newmarket trainer is leaning in the direction of 
Paris. His colt is a 7-1 shot for the Longchamp race but those odds are now 
offered by one major firm, having been widely available on Saturday morning.

“There’s no reason not to go to France with him,” Gosden said. “We’re 
perfectly aware he’s given this 7lb penalty away, he’s won well and we’re happy 
to get a nice prep race at home rather than travelling for it and then having 
to come back to travel again. I think he’s an improving horse, like his father 
[Halling]. He handles soft if it goes that way in France, so there’s no reason 
not to look in that direction.”

Gosden seemed especially encouraged that, although Jack Hobbs was predictably 
fresh on his way to the start after his summer break, he “switched off and 
relaxed” as soon as the stalls opened. “That’s very important. You’ve got to 
relax in this game.”

William Buick, who has had the ride since Jack Hobbs was second in the Epsom 
Derby behind his stablemate Golden Horn, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/06/derby-epsom> said his mount had 
filled out and is now clearly a better animal. “He’s taken leaps and bounds 
forward. He’s a very exciting horse. Obviously, we learnt nothing today about 
his ability. All we know is that he’s very well and he’s on course for Paris.”

Gosden reported that Golden Horn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-horn> had worked well in the morning 
and was being aimed at next Saturday’s Irish Champion Stakes, provided the 
course does not take too much rain. “Leopardstown drains well and it’s good 
ground at the moment, so fingers crossed we can all go there and race there, I 
hope we can. But we’re certainly happy, very happy with the horse.”

Asked if Jack Hobbs and Golden Horn might meet again in the Arc, the trainer 
said: “Very possible. Anything’s possible but we’ll see.” The betting market 
certainly seems to feel that Golden Horn is a more likely runner in the 
Champion Stakes, for which he is high as 4-1, than the Arc, for which you can 
get 10s.

Haydock’s Sprint Cup provided a thrilling finish with Twilight Son edging out 
Strath Burn by a short-head with Magical Memory a close third after looking the 
likely winner a furlong out. Twilight Son’s trainer, Henry Candy, took this 
prize with Markab five years ago, while his jockey, Fergus Sweeney, was landing 
the first Group One of a 20-year career.

“I wish I’d taken a picture of him last year as he’s twice the size now that 
he was then,” Candy said. “I would imagine the owners would like to race him on 
next year, but if he has one more run it might be the Champions Sprint at 
Ascot.”

A plainly thrilled Sweeney said: “I thought this might come a year too soon, 
this sort of level, but I couldn’t believe the ease with which he travelled. 
I’d have loved to have had a lead for longer but nothing was good enough.”

Strath Burn deserves particular credit for getting so close from stall 16 on a 
day when those drawn high at Haydock seemed at a disadvantage. His owners, 
Qatar Racing, may not have the fondest regard for this race, won last year by a 
horse they had previously sold for 25,000 guineas.

Buick later completed a four-timer here and went back into second place in the 
jockeys’ title race. He trails Silvestre de Sousa by 27 wins with just over a 
month to go, so it will take a few more days like this one to make a fight of 
it.
 