
In a drab building in central Scotland, one afternoon in the armpit of winter, 
an actor who looks a lot like nice-guyJames McAvoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesmcavoy> is persuading a room full of 
blokes to – I'm paraphrasing here – Xerox their cocks.

"Come on!" he roars, all pouchy of eyes, gingery of beard and 80s of suit. A 
Christmas hat is jammed on his head, a bottle in his hand, as he leers 
malevolently in their faces. His beery challenge: where's their party spirit? 
Are they men or are they mice? They are, in fact, neither. They're coppers in 
possibly the worst police station in the world and, true to herd-like form, 
they duly – dully – follow his boorishly charismatic lead. Now the party can 
really start. Within minutes our "hero" and a secretary are using the 
photocopier room for altogether different purposes.

"I hated that scene!" James McAvoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesmcavoy> is telling me, with feeling. "Is 
that the day you came? Aw shit…"

It is a sunny day in London, spring 2013. As we talk on the balcony of a photo 
studio, 16 months have passed since I watched the Glaswegian go through his 
paces on takes four, five, six and seven of scene 111 of his new film,Filth 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1450321/>. "I was so gutted about that day," 
McAvoy continues, grumbling. "I thought we'd kicked the shit out of so much of 
this film, but that scene always felt a bit 'what the fuck is going on?'"

Adapted from Trainspotting author Irvine Welsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/irvinewelsh>'s 1998 novel, Filth is indeed a 
film that kicks the shit out of, well, everything: McAvoy's physical well-being 
(he's never looked rougher onscreen); Jamie Bell's reputation (theBilly Elliot 
andTintin kid is cast as a coke-addled sidekick); and, in the end, of the 
cinema-going public. This is a Brit-flick that isn't afraid to get its hands 
dirty, even if the bestiality scene has been cut.

Filth, one of the darker books in Welsh's always-forbidding oeuvre, is the 
story of a copper so bent even Uri Geller would be impressed. Directed and 
adapted by newcomerJon S Baird <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1580671/>, it is a 
gruelling, hilarious, scabrous, Edinburgh-set picaresque about corrupt police, 
friend-on-friend depravity, mental illness and cross-dressing.

As un-PC PC Bruce Robertson – a drug-taking, colleague-shafting, 
auto-asphyxiation-loving swine – McAvoy is a sensation. He's even required to 
sexually threaten his actress sister Joy, four years his junior, here cast as a 
gang member. It's the first time the McAvoy siblings – raised on a housing 
estate by their grandparents after their parents split when James was seven – 
have acted together. "Apart," he chuckles, "from pretending I hadn't beaten her 
up when we were kids…"

We've not seen a British film like Filth before. And even in a busy career 
that's barely halted since he graduated in 2000 from the Royal Scottish Academy 
of Music and Drama, we've not seen the star ofThe Last King of Scotland, 
Atonement and Arthur Christmas in such a pungent role. "I don't think it pulls 
any punches," muses McAvoy of a film so challenging that Baird had to scrape 
together finance from all over the place, including Sweden and Belgium. Fully 
26 producers are listed inFilth's credits, and the profusion of creative 
opinions led McAvoy to take a pay cut in return for his own producing role, the 
better to give Baird extra leverage and stay true to the film he wanted to make.

McAvoy isn't overstating the X-rated credentials of the film – which boasts an 
excellent supporting cast, including Eddie Marsan, Jim Broadbent, and Imogen 
Poots – nor the procedural challenges involved in shepherdingFilth to the 
screen. When I talked to Danny Boyle earlier this year about his recent 
thriller with McAvoy,Trance, the director talked approvingly of the actor's 
"pugnacious character", but he also seemed to have some inside knowledge ofFilth
's tricky progress towards the screen. "Our editor saw it and he said James is 
unbelievable in it – but whether anybody will ever get to see it 'cause it's so 
out there…"

Boyle's worries were misplaced – Filth is being released nationally, first in 
Scotland, then a week later in the rest of the UK. Still, McAvoy does agree, 
with evident satisfaction, thatFilth is "bonkers… It asks a lot of the 
audience, and there will be people who walk out of the cinema, I'm sure of it. 
And there will be people who don't understand it and get totally lost. But for 
those who get it, I think they'll really love it." All told, it's just the kind 
of role relished by a 34-year-old forcefully pushing his career in new 
directions.
 Partners in crime: in Filth with Eddie Marsan. Photograph: Rex 
As we talk in the midday sunshine, McAvoy is still processing another tough 
performance: hisOlivier Award-nominated, 88-show portrayal of Macbeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/feb/24/macbeth-review-michael-billington>
 at London's Trafalgar Studios, which closed three days previously. 
Five-foot-seven but broad, he had attacked the role with gusto, amplifying 
Shakespeare's warrior king's battle-hardened vigour and raging nightly across 
director James Lloyd's dystopian set.

"I'm not surprised that he's physical as Macbeth," says actor Mark Strong, who 
played opposite McAvoy in his other recent thriller,Welcome to the Punch. "The 
same was true in our film – you get the sense of an actor who is very 
physically capable."

Still, for all his fitness, Macbeth's lengthy run has taken its toll. "I've 
broken my thumb," McAvoy says, waggling a horribly swollen appendage. "I got 
hit by somebody's axe. I got stitches in my eye 'cause somebody hit me with 
their machete," he adds with something like pride. "So I was ready to finish 
physically, but I am kinda bereft, really. I'm just missing being Macbeth, and 
making people shit themselves nightly, and making people in the audience faint 
– which was getting really good fun! We were getting quite good at making 
people faint.

"Some people didn't like it," he shrugs of the grungily violent production. He 
insists he didn't mind the occasional walkouts duringMacbeth (I saw it, and it 
was gruelling), nor the "couple" of bad reviews. "But for people who do like 
that, I wanted to be able to give a million per cent, and leave nothing behind. 
Leave a lot on stage; leave a bit of yourself on stage. I like other kind of 
work, too," he adds, "contemplative pieces, or cerebral pieces. But my 
favourite kind of theatre is seeing people sweat blood."
 ‘I am kinda bereft. I’m missing being Macbeth and making people shit 
themselves nightly’: James McAvoy as the Scottish king, with Claire Foy as Lady 
Macbeth, earlier this year. Photograph: Johan Persson 
McAvoy lives in north London with his actor wife Anne-Marie Duff  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anne-marie-duff>and their three-year-old son 
Brendan. What, one wonders, is he like at home during an 88-performance run of 
a three-hour play that has him this steamed up?

"I'm not closed off – I'm just knackered. I've done long runs before, but it 
wouldn't be so bad if it wasn't for the physical way that we approached the 
play. So I wasn't doing any DIY," he jokes, "and I wasn't playing football at 
the weekend any more – I couldn't, I was just too sore. I had about enough time 
for my kid, and a wee bit of time for my wife. And that was kind of it, man. 
The rest was just trying to go: 'Fuck fuck fuck fuck fuck, how am I gonna do 
this tonight?'"

McAvoy is certainly committed, something that's been readily apparent every 
time we've met. We've talked amid the bodybuilding powders cluttering the 
kitchen of his rented Prague flat (where he was filming comic-book adaptation
Wanted with Angelina Jolie), and in a bar in Leipzig (he was shooting Tolstoy 
biopicThe Last Station, his sole big screen work with Duff). We've had 
breakfast in Soho and drunk tea in his living room in his home (he was just 
startingMacbeth). He tends to be loquacious, but business-like – there's no 
smalltalk – although he has gradually revealed a little more about his private 
life: the odd comment about Brendan, the occasional insight into how he and 
Duff manage their often conflicting lives.

"We've been really lucky in that regard in the past three years – I've not had 
to be away much, and neither's she," he says of the woman who became his wife 
in 2006 after their onscreen relationship in the first two seasons ofShameless 
became something offscreen, too. When, recently, Duff had to film in Manchester 
and Ireland, on both occasions McAvoy accompanied her. When he spent two months 
in New York last year filmingThe Disappearance of Eleanor Rigby (an "adult film 
about grief" also starring Jessica Chastain), Duff briefly put her career on 
hold and came, too.

"So we've been fine," he says briskly. "It's been a fairly cool time. The 
first time it is going to be hard is this year. 'Cause I'm contractually 
obliged to do the newX-Men film." Over a five-month shoot in Canada, he's 
reprising his role from 2011'sX-Men: First Class – the young, able-bodied and 
hirsute iteration of the "grown-up"X-Men films' Charles Xavier/Professor X, as 
portrayed by the hairless and wheelchair-bound Patrick Stewart.
 James McAvoy with his wife Anne-Marie Duff, who he met on the set of 
Shameless. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex 
"I can't make the decision to choose life over career," he continues firmly, 
which I know is something he's readily done before. "I have to go. And she also 
is doing a job that she'd already accepted by the timeX-Men came around." He's 
referring to Duff's appearance in the National Theatre's recently ended 
production of Eugene O'Neill's mammothStrange Interlude. "So it's the first 
time we're ever gonna have to confront it: being not a proper, together family 
for a sustained period, really."

Keeping it together. Staying out of the spotlight. Taking his job seriously. 
It's the McAvoy way. He's no A-lister gad-about: he's a serious bloke who 
prefers to keep all the drama out of his life and on the screen. He lives in a 
far-from-flashy terraced family home. He likes motorbikes and football. He's 
regular, likeable, malleable. According to his co-stars, he's a joy onset.

"James is really quite a gentleman," says his Filth co-star Imogen Poots, who 
plays a policewoman on the receiving end of Robertson's spittle-flecked 
misogyny. "He puts everyone at ease – it's just this beautiful gift. I don't 
know how many actors really have that skill, to make everybody around them so 
comfortable. I think that just sets the bar on a set. And he's extraordinary to 
watch, too. And very, very funny."

But he's also a young-looking charmer, and not an obvious choice to play the 
38-year-old, bilious, anti-hero degenerate of Welsh's novel. "It was always a 
question of: can we get away with my youthfulness?" affirms McAvoy. "I was 32 
when I madeFilth, which isn't that young. But I've kinda got young features, 
which will hopefully disappear some time soon so I can play my age" – he frowns 
– "which I am starting to do more," he adds hastily.

For the team behind Filth, this was the appeal. "That was the luck of getting 
someone like James," says Ken Marshall, who is described as "the real producer" 
by McAvoy. "Because the key to this film is making sure that you have a 
likeable character. While it's quite a tragic story, and Bruce is quite 
a despicable character, what you get with someone like James is the audience 
going into the cinema already liking him, already feeling a degree of warmth."

Jon S Baird recalls his and Irvine Welsh's first face-to-face encounter with 
McAvoy in London in early 2011. "And I was thinking; 'Jeez, I'm not sure I can 
see James McAvoy in this…'" remembers the director. "But he walked in as a 
smiley guy next door – and the way Irvine describes it, within 10 seconds he 
turned into a grizzly cop."

"James is the engine for the film," states Welsh, "and it's one of the most 
amazing acting performances I've ever seen. He's pushed himself and shown a 
whole different range to his repertoire that he's not had the opportunity to 
display before in the roles he's taken. I think it's better than Robert De Niro 
inTaxi Driver."

Um, really?

"Yeah, he does everything De Niro does and plays this kind of anti-hero that 
you're on the same side of, but he goes further out than De Niro did. And he 
also plays it with a kind of pathos that De Niro never got close to."

McAvoy would scoff at such fantastic(al) praise. But I relay Marshall's 
comments – about his being likable onscreen – and he shrugs. Yes, this is a 
film that roughens the edges and toughens him up, "and that was an attractive 
thing for me".

Would he rather be a leading man or a character actor?
 Upward curve: ‘I like to be the guy who’s in the most scenes and has the most 
lines’ Photograph: Jake Walters for the Observer 
"I'd like to be character lead," is his immediate reply. "That's what I'd like 
to be. The kind of part I played inAtonement is a leading man, and Filth is a 
character lead." He thinks about this. Actually, "what I like to do is be the 
guy who's in the most scenes, has the most lines, and has the best part! But 
hopefully not have to be too straight," he says with a smile.

It is time TO GO. McAvoy has only a few more days of freedom before he flies 
to Montreal for the epicX-Men: Days of Future Past shoot. The superhero 
franchise is a rare excursion into blockbuster territory for him. Is this the 
film in the original series where his character goes bald? "I think I do, yeah, 
I'm waiting to see," he replies, hedging his bets – the star of a superhero 
film reveals plot spoilers at their peril.

Has he been fitted with a skullcap? "Oh fuck, mate, don't!" he winces. "I 
think I'd rather just go proper baldy – shave it, and wear a wig for when I 
don't need to be bald." It worked for Jessie J, I say. "Yeah, but she's fit," 
he grins. "I'm getting on a bit. I'm not gonna look good bald… But, yeah, it's 
gonna be good. We've got an amazing bunch of people – we've got [Michael] 
Fassbender back, Nick Hoult back, Jennifer Lawrence back – we all had a 
cracking time last time. And the old guys – I don't mean old people," he adds 
hastily, laughing, "I mean the people from the old movies."

Again he's "sworn to secrecy" as to how exactly the younger incarnations of 
the original X-Men cast interact with Patrick Stewart, Ian McKellen et al. "Ah 
cannae talk about it," he grins, going full Glaswegian for a minute, "but we 
will get to hang out. And there's going to be four Macbeths! Me, McKellen, 
Stuart – and Fassbender's gonna do it on film, apparently, some time at the end 
of this year. So I'm sure that's gonna be a right old giggle."

It's a long shoot, but presumably a lighter role for McAvoy? A lot of touching 
his temple and pretending to read minds… "Yeah," he nods. "It'll be a doddle, 
man. Compared to what I've just been doing. Be a doddle compared toEleanor Rigby
, toTrance, to Filth – the lot. I mean," he clarifies, "there is some fairly 
emotional and mental, draining stuff in this new one – 'cause you've kinda got 
to fuck Charles up a little bit. But yeah," he says with a thin smile, "you're 
not gonna go to the places you go to inFilth."

Filth opens in Scotland on 27 September and the rest of the UK on 4 October
 