


 <>Bharat Tandon on Mrs Bennet
 'A woman of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain temper' … 
Alison Steadman as Mrs Bennet in the 1995 BBC adaptation. Photograph: BBC 
Read the opening chapter of Pride and Prejudice, and you might feel that 
there's nothing more to be said about Mrs Bennet. After all, Austen's narrator 
signs off her beautifully pitched dramatic exposition of Elizabeth's parents 
with something that sounds like a categorical declaration: "Her mind was less 
difficult to develope [sic]. She was a woman of mean understanding, little 
information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented she fancied 
herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her daughters married; its 
solace was visiting and news." Indeed, had this been Austen's previous novel,
Sense and Sensibility, there probably wouldn't be anything more to be said, 
since that story, at least in its early sections, is reassuringly direct and 
decided in its narratorial judgments.

Reread the beginning of Pride and Prejudice, on the other hand, and matters 
begin to seem far less clear cut. Take that famous opening sentence, for 
example: "It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in 
possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife." Readers have long 
noted that, as a statement, it's far from "universal"; rather, it's a prime 
example of the technique, with which Austen experiments from the later parts of
Sense and Sensibility onwards, of "free indirect style", in which characters' 
subjective opinions are presented as if they were external judgments. And after 
all, whose opinions are being presented here? The more one reads of what 
follows in the novel, the more it looks as if a chapter that closes with a 
putdown of Mrs Bennet might also begin with a sentence that channels her 
thoughts. Nor is this the only incident where the reader is obliged to take on 
Mrs Bennet's restricted views; compare the verdict on Darcy's standoffishness 
at his first public appearance: "His character was decided. He was the 
proudest, most disagreeable man in the world, and every body hoped that he 
would never come there again" (prominent among this "every body" being Mrs 
Bennet, of course).

Why, then, might Austen feel the need to let Mrs Bennet so far into the 
narrative texture of a novel that clearly sees her as an object of ridicule? 
Her track record inPride and Prejudice is not great, given that she tries to 
strongarm Elizabeth into accepting the odious walking cliche that is Mr 
Collins, as well as encouraging the very flirtatiousness that results in 
Lydia's elopement with Mr Wickham (presumably because she sees in her 
air-headed youngest daughters a reflection of her own past self). One 
explanation, I think, can be found in Austen's employment of the word 
"business". In this light, Mrs Bennet can be seen not as an aberration within 
the world ofPride and Prejudice, but more as an excessive, pathological 
response to a genuine social grievance. For, to someone in Mrs Bennet's modest 
social and economic position, getting that many daughters married off 
would indeed have been a serious business – especially considering the 
institutionalised iniquity of a family inheritance entailed away from the 
female line of succession.

Austen's art as a whole is an extraordinary aesthetic response to a whole set 
of contemporary constraints and pressures, whether those pressures be sexual, 
economic, or simply the claustrophobic atmosphere of populated social spaces; 
and if Mrs Bennet is sometimes unbearable, she's also the symptom of larger 
causes that are even less bearable. Austen couldn't avoid them, nor does her 
fiction try to. And whatever else one might lay at Mrs Bennet's door, she 
sticks up for her daughters, as when she declares of Mr Bingley that "he used 
my daughter extremely ill … I am sure Jane will die of a broken heart, and then 
he will be sorry for what he has done". After all, who ever wanted their own 
mother to be impartial? You might not always want Mrs Bennet in your space, but 
there are worse people to have on your side.

Bharat Tandon is the author of Jane Austen and the Morality of Conversation 
(Anthem Press) <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v26/n21/james-wood/inside-mr-shepherd>



 <>John Mullan on Mr Bennet
 Satirical cove … Donald Sutherland as Mr Bennet in the 2005 film. Photograph: 
Rex Features 
Everyone seems to love Mr Bennet, a satirical cove who relishes the follies 
of other characters. He's a master of the dry bon mot – who can forget his way 
of interrupting Mary's painful performance on the piano ("You have delighted us 
long enough. Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit")? But this shows 
us why we should think badly of him. He stops his daughter in her Suzuki-style, 
metronomic tracks, but his ironic barb amuses us at her expense. Everything is 
comedy to him. When Jane Bennet has her heart broken by Mr Bingley's sudden 
departure and subsequent neglect, Mr Bennet seems to think it is all a laugh. 
"Next to being married, a girl likes to be crossed a little in love now and 
then. It is something to think of, and it gives her a sort of distinction among 
her companions." The astute reader ofPride and Prejudice will reflect that even 
his droll ripostes are usually deplorable. "If my children are silly, I must 
hope to be always sensible of it." But not to do anything about it. He treats 
his younger offspring as objects of derision, but does nothing to improve their 
minds or their manners.

He married the idiotic Mrs Bennet because he found her sexy. He was 
"captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance of good humour which youth 
and beauty generally give". Having discovered his error, he has retreated into 
mockery of his wife. From the very first chapter, he is teasing and tormenting 
poor, stupid Mrs Bennet. She is desperate that he should visit Mr Bingley, the 
new single man in possession of a good fortune, and Austen tells us that he had 
always intended to do so, "though to the last always assuring his wife that he 
should not go". It may be funny, but it is connubial torture. A psychologist 
would surely say that he is punishing her for his own folly in having been 
attracted to her in the first place. Late in the novel Elizabeth reflects that, 
because she is fond of her father, she has too often ignored "that continual 
breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the 
contempt of her own children, was so highly reprehensible".

Much turns out to be Mr Bennet's fault. On an income of £2,000 a year, he 
ought to have been able to build up a sizable inheritance for his daughters, 
but has entirely failed to do so. He simply trusted that he would eventually 
have a son, who would duly inherit the estate and its income; by giving him 
five daughters, providence has denied him this security and ensured that his 
cousin, Mr Collins, will get everything.

And in critical moments he likes to be absent. He does not bother to attend 
the assembly room ball, where Jane first meets Mr Bingley and Elizabeth 
is insulted by Mr Darcy. He is at home reading a book. When trouble brews and 
voices are raised, he retreats to his library, where none may enter without his 
permission. He knows that his youngest daughter, Lydia, is a silly flirt, so 
why did he let her go to Brighton – resort of all sinfulness – chaperoned only 
by a teenage friend? When disaster duly strikes, and Lydia runs off with a 
notable rake to live in sin somewhere in London, he is powerless. Such an 
intelligent man should have seen it coming. "It has been my own doing, and I 
ought to feel it," he tells Elizabeth after his fruitless search for Lydia. 
Dead right.

John Mullan is the author of What Matters in Jane Austen?: Twenty Crucial 
Puzzles Solved (Bloomsbury) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/may/18/ten-questions-jane-austen>



 <>Zoe Williams on Elizabeth Bennet
 Feminist heroine … Keira Knightley as Lizzie Bennet in the 2005 film. 
Jane Austen <https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten> directs our 
sympathies like a Beijing traffic cop – balletic and graceful, she is also very 
firm and unambiguous, brooking no argument. There's really no room for 
Elizabeth Bennet to be anything other than a feminist heroine, having such a 
pert wit and lovely eyes, commanding our affections the way she does.

However, her relationship with Mr Bennet, so often seen as establishing and 
ratifying her status as the smartest and most interesting of the daughters, 
certainly complicates – if not pollutes – her standing as our narrator's ego 
ideal.

The marriage between the parents is just one union serving as a counterpoint 
to the love match that all the daughters so ardently, subversively desire. Mr 
and Mrs Bennet are ill‑suited, and Elizabeth operates as the father's ally in 
an essentially very uneven domestic civil war. Mrs Bennet has the ballast – the 
younger daughters and her own sheer energy for filling the air with noise – 
while Mr Bennet has the precision missiles: his sarcasm and the challenging 
aspect of Elizabeth, his dote. Their relationship is conspiratorial, playful in 
a sense, but allowing in no other players. Witness the arrival of Mr Collins: 
"His cousin was as absurd as he had hoped, and he listened to him with 
the keenest enjoyment, maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure 
of countenance, and except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no 
partner in his pleasure."

The truth is that his pleasure does require a partner – since it resides in 
his feelings of superiority over the rest of his family, its levity depends 
on an audience. Without his second daughter, he would be alienated. 
She internalises this filial duty so completely as to take on herself a duty of 
despising her mother, and, by extension, all the women around her. When this is 
noted – "'Eliza Bennet,' said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, 
'is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other 
sex, by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, it succeeds. But 
in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art'" - the direction of the 
narrative would have us take this as evidence that Miss Bingley is a bit of a 
bitch. But she's also right. Eliza Bennet, excepting a fondness for her older 
sister that seems mainly habitual and sentimental, can't stand women. The only 
allegiance she can forge is with Darcy's sister, Georgiana, who is incredibly 
shy, large and homely-looking. Elizabeth has built so much of her identity upon 
deriding other women that the spectrum of female companionship she can cope 
with is extremely narrow. To be in her confidence, women have to be incredibly 
quiet, in other words – this prejudice of hers is much more limiting than her 
prejudice against Mr Darcy.

To be so scornful, it would help if she had excellent judgment, but instead it 
is poor – she ridicules Jane for her easy assumptions of everyone's goodness, 
but her own adjudications (Wickham good, Darcy bad) are erratic and muddled. 
She affects an arch carelessness to shore up her already established paternal 
approval; and yet she does care, so the act of surrender is both cowardly and 
inauthentic. Her rejection of traits that she perceives as feminine – the 
reservation of judgment, which she casts as indecisiveness – interferes with 
her wisdom, rendering it less than it could be.

I would never argue that a feminist had to be sisterly, any more than 
sisterliness does anything for feminism. Nevertheless, it is a tough call to 
find a feminist icon in a woman who hates her sex to please her father.



 <>Sebastian Faulks on Mr Darcy
 A man without shame … Colin Firth as Mr Darcy in the 1995 BBC adaptation. 
Photograph: Allstar/BBC 
Mr Darcy may not be the first depressive to feature in an English novel, but 
he is almost certainly the first to be a romantic lead. This is a man without 
shame, whose shamelessness is made worse by the fact that he has intermittent 
access to good judgment. When he is without it, however, he is a manipulative, 
hypocritical, self-centred depressive, aware of some of his faults but 
unapologetic for them – bound by arrogance to ignore them because they are his, 
and therefore, by his definition, not really faults at all.

In her response to his second proposal, Elizabeth says brightly: "You must 
learn some of my philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives 
you pleasure."

Darcy's reply makes clear who he is – a man suffering from chronic depression, 
dwelling on the past, but unable to take responsibility for his own actions: 
"Painful recollections will intrude, which cannot, which ought not be 
repelled," he says; and it is the most revealing thing he says in the whole 
novel. He goes on to correct the servant, Mrs Reynolds's, account of his 
character and to confirm the darker views of Bingley and Fitzwilliam; but alas, 
for all he has learned from Elizabeth, he still cannot take responsibility for 
himself.

He blames his dead parents for "spoiling" him; he will not see that his 
character and actions have been for some years his own to shape. He is unhappy 
about himself, critical even, but is locked in a spiral with thoughts that 
"cannot, ought not to be repelled". He has, furthermore, no interests; he 
doesn't do anything. He will lend his fishing rods to Mr Gardiner but doesn't 
contemplate joining in the sport. In modern therapeutic terms, he needs to 
understand his own emotions more deeply, get to know himself, take exercise to 
release endorphins, abandon the protective persona ("beneath me") he has 
adopted and forgive himself for what he is and has been. There is much to 
forgive, much "work" to be done, and it is the sadness of the book that we 
suspect he will never be able to do it. When Elizabeth asks him why he was so 
silent on his last visit, when all seemed set fair between them, he says he was 
"embarrassed". Even she, all of whose defences are down as she heads for the 
altar, cannot let this go: "But tell me, what did you come to Netherfield for?" 
she asks in exasperated fondness. "Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be 
embarrassed?"

It will be hard for her to accept that in her husband the lack of vital energy 
that underlies depression will always dominate the intermittent bursts of 
activity, the little upswings that punctuate his melancholy. All that Darcy can 
do now is marry Elizabeth, his lifelong Prozac in an Empire-line dress: dear, 
busy, middle-class Lizzy with her wit and common sense, who will be good at 
sex, kind to his sister and will laugh at his aunt. It is more, really, than he 
deserves for his single outburst of politeness and his periodic financial 
largesse.

Sebastian Faulks is the author of Faulks on Fiction (BBC Books)



 <>PD James on George Wickham
 Christian gentleman … John Leslie as Mr Wickham at the Yvonne Arnaud theatre 
in 2005. Photograph: Alastair Muir/Rex Features 
"Mr Wickham senior, the highly regarded steward of the late Mr Darcy, was 
fortunate in his son George, who throughout his life was a child of whom any 
father could be proud. George was brought up with Fitzwilliam, the heir of Mr 
Darcy of Pemberley, a spoilt and ill-tempered boy with little regard for the 
future responsibilities of his privileged life. It was George Wickham who, in 
Darcy's youth, by personal example and precept largely helped to keep him out 
of trouble. Wickham became ordained straight from Oxford, as was his ambition, 
and having inherited a rich country living from the late Mr Darcy, served 
faithfully for three years as a well-loved pastor to his parishioners, while 
Fitzwilliam Darcy sank into dissolution and disgrace by seducing the five 
daughters of a Mr and Mrs Bennet of Longbourn.

But the Reverend Mr George Wickham's abilities were soon recognised and 
eventually he rose to a bishopric and was revered as the very model of a 
Christian gentleman. He married the daughter of a wealthy churchman but money 
was never important to him. His old age was blessed with numerous grandchildren 
and he was buried in his own cathedral, where an impressive marble tomb bears 
witness to a long life lived always in the service of others …"

PD James is the author of Death Comes to Pemberley (Faber & Faber)  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2011/nov/04/pd-james-life-in-writing>



 <>Paula Byrne on Lydia Bennet
 'Good humour and good spirits' … Ann Rutherford as Lydia Bennet in the 1940s 
Pride and Prejudice film 
Is Lydia Bennet Jane Austen's most misunderstood character? Seen through the 
eyes of her sister, Elizabeth, she appears to be a vulgar, lusty hoyden, whose 
outrageous antics put all her sisters' reputations at risk. Elizabeth 
complains: "Our importance, our respectability in the world, must be affected 
by the wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark 
Lydia's character." Perhaps Elizabeth is rather jealous of her youngest 
sibling, who, after all, is her mother's favourite child. But is it really so 
bad that Lydia refuses to conform to the strict and suffocating conventions of 
female propriety?

Lydia is a colourful character, full of "good humour and good spirits". She 
provides a strong contrast to her sanctimonious, humourless sister Mary, who 
spouts empty platitudes about acceptable female conduct. Refreshingly honest, 
Lydia says what everyone else is thinking, but dare not say. Here is Lydia 
describing the heiress, Miss King, who has set her sights on Wickham: "I will 
answer for it, he never cared three straws about her – who could about such a 
nasty little freckled thing?"

Lydia is a very modern character, who refuses to bow to the conventions of 
polite society. She won't comply with the rules. Lydia is boy-mad, but what 
15-year-old girl isn't? Stifled by the restrictions of her life in a small, 
provincial village, she longs for adventure and companionship. Her excitement 
at the thought of partying at that "gay bathing place, Brighton" places her as 
a very typical teenager. She dances with the soldiers, enjoys crossdressing a 
soldier in her aunt's gown, and gossips about a young private being flogged.

Lydia, unlike any other character in Pride and Prejudice, is fully in touch 
with her sexuality. She enjoys sex before marriage and has very little concern 
for the consequences. After their elopement, she and Wickham live together in 
lodgings in London. The long discussion between Elizabeth Bennet and her aunt 
is remarkably open: "But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but 
love of him, as to consent to live with him on any other terms than marriage?" 
asks Mrs Gardiner. Elizabeth, fully aware of her sister's "animal spirits", 
knows that she is very capable of living in sin. She has not been seduced or 
forced by Wickham. She gives herself to the rakish soldier with eyes wide open.

Austen allows Lydia to be free from repentance. Indeed, the moral torchlight 
is shone on the odious Mr Collins when he tells Mr Bennet to "throw off your 
unworthy child from your affection for ever, and leave her to repay the fruits 
of her own heinous offence". Lydia does not share the fate of another fallen 
woman, Eliza Williams inSense and Sensibility, who is abandoned by Willoughby 
when she falls pregnant with his child. It is a bold move on Austen's part to 
allow Lydia to escape scot-free from her "infamy". She is not punished for her 
disgrace, as was typical in novels of the age, but is rewarded with marriage to 
the handsome, charming man she loves.

Lydia could be described as a proto-feminist, as she refuses to conform to the 
protocols of courtship behaviour. She is honest to a fault, and is no victim. 
Nor does she pretend to be a prude or indulge in false shame. There is nothing 
fake about her. Furthermore, unlike the odious Caroline Bingley, she is open 
and forthright about her romantic interest in men, rather than devious and 
catty.

Austen despised "pictures of perfection" – heroines who have no flaws. Lydia 
bounces off the page in all her glorious, noisy imperfection.

Paula Byrne is the author of The Real Jane Austen: A Life in Small Things 
(HarperPress) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2013/jan/17/real-jane-austen-byrne-review>



 <>Janet Todd on Mary Bennet
 Disgruntled … Marsha Hunt as Mary Bennet in the 1940 film. Photograph: Rex 
Features 
Dear Miss Austen,

"You have delighted us long enough," you made Father say in front of the whole 
world. Everyone knows this putdown: it's nearly as famous as your witticism 
about everyone thinking rich men need wives. Typical malice. Yes, malice. How 
would you describe a person with an adoring sister and admiring father creating 
a child despised by father and siblings? If only characters could sue their 
creators, I'd have your £110 off you – and more!

So why did you do it? Clearly you can't stand aspiring girls, especially plain 
ones. I work "hard for knowledge and accomplishments". Yet you pick on me 
continually. But of course you're just being conventional – as usual! We all 
mock bluestockings, such easy targets. The wonderful Mary Wollstonecraft wanted 
girls to study and have careers. But you'll have none of it. All your pretty 
girls are untaught: sister Lizzie, of course; Emma with her reading lists; 
imbecilic Catherine Morland. If Father had fallen under a carriage before 
Lizzie married money, only I could have earned my living. But that carries no 
weight with you.

Father takes every chance to ridicule. "What say you, Mary? For you are a 
young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read great books and make extracts." 
According to you I wanted to "say something very sensible, but knew not how". 
At least you gave me the hide of a rhinoceros.

I have some pleasures, though always spoilt by sneering Father and his pet, 
Lizzie – I don't count those giggling idiots, Kitty and Lydia. I play well, and 
of course at Netherfield I perform. While I play, Lizzie squirms and rolls her 
eyes at Father, who, obedient to his favourite, barks at me. I do what I have 
to do: pretend not to hear. But you are there too, Miss Austen: everyone, you 
write, likes Lizzie's playing better, though she's less skilled. Nothing to do 
with the fine eyes, I suppose?

And what about cousin Collins? You're nasty to him too – though at least you 
made him funny. You know he'd have suited me. He'd come to marry one of us. But 
Father and Lizzie blow the whole scheme out of the water for the sake of a joke 
about Mama not speaking to Lizzie if she doesn't marry Mr Collins, and Father 
not speaking to her if she does. So complacent and rude are they that no one 
thinks to give me my chance. Yet I'd have liked playing music in church and 
writing my husband's sermons. If they'd thought for a moment, I'd have saved 
them all a deal of trouble, and Lizzie wouldn't have had to run after Darcy in 
Derbyshire in that shameless way she did.

We don't choose our creators or our parents. If I had a choice, I'd be very 
happy with Miss Brontë. I feel myself much suited for Jane Eyre.

Yours

MB

Disgruntled in Meryton

Janet Todd is the editor of The Cambridge Companion to Pride and Prejudice 
<http://www.cambridge.org/gb/knowledge/isbn/item6957866/The-Cambridge-Companion-to-'Pride-and-Prejudice'/?site_locale=>
 (Cambridge University Press)



 <>Lucy Mangan on Charlotte Lucas
 Claudie Blakley as Charlotte Lucas in the 2005 film. Photograph: Rex Features 
The older I get, the more I admire the pragmatist. Romance is fine in books – 
although even brilliant, bold, spiky Elizabeth is right at the edge of what my 
cankered soul can tolerate in a love‑blind, lovestruck heroine, and don't get 
me started on her demented descendant Bridget Jones. But I took, then and now, 
Jane Austen to be not so much a pleasant few hours' diversion but a manual for 
life, and looked beyond the dazzling protagonists for better guides through it.

Step forward, then, Charlotte Lucas, you magnificently clear-eyed, 
steel‑spined, iron-willed creature who, while everyone else is mooning over 
dance partners, parsing glances and bobbing curls hither and thither, is taking 
a cold, hard, dispassionate look at her situation and making a reckoning of the 
fates to come. Knowing that she is, at 27, on the very brink of spinsterhood 
and with no looks or fortune that will retard her progress towards it, she 
chooses to become the wife of Mr Collins, rather than live as an unwanted 
burden on whichever of her brothers ends up taking her in.

Personally I would take draining my brothers' resources or starving in 
a garret if familial bonds of duty and obligation failed (and yes, John 
Dashwood, I'm looking at you, you sod) or were abruptly severed by their 
untimely deaths and inadequate will provisions, over marriage to Mr Collins. I 
even suspect that if Charlotte had truly known what marriage to a man 
so teeth-gnashingly awful really meant – in a way that no woman without the 
experience of going out with, let alone sleeping with, someone inappropriate 
can – she would have made a different choice.

But she applies such knowledge of herself, of others, and of life as she 
has in a determinedly rational manner, and then sets out to manage the 
consequences as best she can for the rest of her life. She "did not seem to ask 
for compassion", as Elizabeth notes at the end of her first visit to the 
marital bower. Austen twists the knife in the more experienced reader's 
heart by adding: "Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, 
and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms", leaving us to 
envisage the desolate inner landscape Charlotte will have to survey for the 
decades after they fade. But I have faith – I have to have faith – that the 
former Miss Lucas will find a way to rationalise her sufferings and draw 
comfort from the knowledge that this is at least the fate she chose, rather 
than drifted into.

We are supposed, in romantic fiction and in life generally, to admire those 
who let instinct guide them, who let their hearts rule their heads. But it is 
a dangerous precedent to set in the former, and even more dangerous practice in 
the latter. Charlotte, standing calm and still in the middle of all the flap 
and pother – the Bennets should award her a special stipend just for advising 
Elizabeth not to be so bloody rude to Darcy every time she speaks to him (I 
paraphrase) – and gazing with a cool, appraising eye on her own and everyone 
else's best chance of the greatest happiness while everyone else's vision is 
either blinkered with pride, blurred by prejudice or occluded by simple 
stupidity (Lydia! Mrs B!) offers a valuable, if not ideal, corrective. 
I cleaved to her as a teenager and I cleave to her now. And if part of me wants 
to rewrite the implied end of her story so that she and Lady Catherine end up 
having an affair and the shock of the revelation kills Mr Collins, leaving his 
affairs in a state that contrives to return the Bennets' estate to them while 
Lady C sells Rosings and moves herself and Charlotte to Bridport where they 
open a boutique hotel for Georgian lesbians and die happy at the age of 110, 
well – who's to say I'm wrong?
 