
I learned only recently that Charlotte Bronte is a masterful writer. She 
crafted the story of Jane Eyre, a tale following young, abused Jane, through 
her experiences in school, then as a governess, and finally as a young 
independent women. As the story progresses, Ms. Bronte introduces a series of 
characters (Rochester, Helen Burns, Blanche Ingrim, St. John River, etc.) that 
also affect Jane’s life and kind of get the ball rolling for her character 
growth.

So much happened in this book to fit into a little biased box that is a 
review, but I can say that overall, I loved Jane Eyre. At first I was struck 
most by Bronte’s writing style, which is eloquent and beautiful, but then the 
storyline caught up with me and I fell in love with that too.

For me, the best part of the story was the beginning, when Jane is at Lowood 
School and defining herself as a person. The book could have ended there, but 
then Jane went to live with the horrible, horrible Rochester. To say the least, 
I hated him. He probably had some redeemable qualities, but I didn’t see them. 
As I read the story, I physically cringed ever time he was in a scene…. But the 
writing won out and I finished the book and am happy I did because Jane’s 
growth overpowers any hatred of Rochester (even my burning enmity).

Unfortunately, at times the profound language of the book was difficult to get 
through and I found myself trudging through the words rather than letting them 
carry me away. And sometimes the story grew very gloomy and creepy (ahem, 
Bertha Mason).

This book is definitely a commitment so if you have a fear of long books or 
thoughtful language, you might want to watch the movie instead. However, this 
classic book is really worth reading just for Jane and you should know that if 
you feel that Rochester is a conniving, disgusting, ridiculous, jerky playboy, 
you are not alone.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
I would give this tome a 4.3/5 rating. I know, a little specific, but I really 
loved the book overall and only disliked how overburdened the language was at 
times and the actions of some of the characters (specifically one whose name 
starts with R and ends with -ochester). Also, I was really only completely 
hooked by the story in the beginning and the rest I had to get into much slower.

 *  Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/jane-eyre-49.html>

Want to tell the world about a book you’ve read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 