
The substitute Tadanari Lee secured Japan a record fourth Asian Cup as his 
goal in the second period of extra-time helped the Blue Samurai to overcome
Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> in a tight final.

Lee volleyed home Yuto Nagatomo's left-wing cross after 108 minutes at Khalifa 
Stadium to clinch the title and deny Australia a maiden triumph.

Mark Schwarzer had nearly gifted Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/japan> the opening goal when, in trying 
to prevent the ball going behind for a corner, he kicked it straight to 
Nagatomo but the defender's effort from distance sailed over the bar with David 
Carney scrambling back to cover.

The Japan goalkeeper, Eiji Kawashima, did well to push Harry Kewell's 
close-range header away in the 18th minute after Tim Cahill had met Carney's 
corner on the far side of the box. Kewell then hit the side netting from a 
narrow angle when he latched on to Cahill's knockdown from Lucas Neill's 
diagonal ball just after the half-hour mark.

After the interval, Australia came agonisingly close to taking the lead when 
Kawashima misjudged Luke Wilkshire's cross, with the ball hitting the bar and 
then the on-rushing Cahill, but Maya Yoshida was on the line to keep it out.

Kewell lashed over from inside the six-yard box before Japan almost broke the 
deadlock in the 65th minute when Shinji Okazaki met Nagatomo's delivery from 
the left but his glancing header was just the wrong side of the post with 
Schwarzer motionless.

Kewell then wasted the best chance of the game six minutes later when he 
latched on to a long ball following a mistake from the Japanese defence and 
raced clear on goal but Kawashima denied him with his outstretched right leg.

The substitute Robbie Kruse almost made an immediate impact for Australia in 
the first period of extra-time but his header from Brett Emerton's cross was 
clawed away by a desperate Kawashima from under the bar.

Japan finally scored in the 108th minute when Nagatomo surged down the left 
wing and his cross found Lee unmarked eight yards from goal. The substitute 
waited an age for the ball to drop but his fine left-foot volley left Schwarzer 
with no chance as it flew into the back of the net.

The Australian keeper held Yasuhito Endo's free-kick and Carney struck a set 
piece into the wall as Japan clung on to claim a historic victory.
 