
Jeremy Hunt, the culture secretary, began his 44th birthday with a snarl at 
the racing and betting industries for their failure to reach an agreement in 
the levy negotiations that ended on Sunday night. Hunt must now act as arbiter, 
a role he clearly does not relish.

"It's a big disappointment that the racing and gambling industries have failed 
to sort this out," he said today, "but frankly the government should never be 
the last resort in an essentially commercial negotiation.

"We have therefore announced our intention to remove the role of the Secretary 
of State from determining the levy scheme in future and I hope this time will 
be the very last one that I have to be involved."

A joint statement from racing's representatives blamed the bookmakers for 
failing to offer any improvement on an initial offer that had been rejected by 
the Levy Board six weeks ago. "It was very apparent that the only way 
determination could be avoided was if racing agreed to their wholly 
unacceptable initial submission," said the statement.

A timetable for Hunt's determination has yet to be issued. On the last 
occasion when levy talks ended in deadlock, three years ago, the government's 
decision was issued the following February.

Paul Hanagan is no bigger than 1-9 to be crowned champion jockey when the turf 
season ends on Saturday, having extended his lead over Richard Hughes to five 
wins. Hanagan had a double at Wolverhampton , while his rival drew a blank.

Paul Nicholls said that he was "strongly considering" running Kauto Star 
against Denman in the Hennessy Gold Cup later this month, assuming that all 
goes well on his reappearance at Down Royal this weekend.

"If he runs well on Saturday, then [his owner] Clive Smith is of the opinion 
that there is no use wrapping them in cotton wool at their age and fancies a 
crack at the Hennessy," Nicholls said. The trainer added that there would be 
enough time for Kauto Star to recover before attempting a record fifth win in 
the King George on Boxing Day. Coral introduced him at 8-1 in their Hennessy 
market.
 