
The Jewish Chronicle is celebrating its 175th anniversary this week with a 
commemorative issue boasting a retro front page.

There is a contrast between that old-fashioned masthead amid a crowded layout 
and the up-to-the-minute main article: a news story about Donald Trump’s 
election as US president.

Inside, there are six more pages of Trump analysis. But there is plenty of the 
JC’s own history too across 12 pages plus a special magazine.

Its first issue appeared on 12 November 1841 and editor Stephen Pollard tells 
readers in a page 1 piece that, in Britain, the JC “is predated only by the 
Times and the Observer.”

I couldn’t help but note the paper’s editorial, a full-frontal assault on 
Trump for running an election campaign that“was self-consciously antisemitic.” 
<http://www.thejc.com/news/world-news/165787/the-jc-leader-trump-triumphant-so-what-now>
 It stated:

“Many of us have always looked to the US as a beacon of freedom. When the 
Third Reich looked unstoppable and Britain stood alone, it was the US that then 
sacrificed so many of its sons to defeat the Nazis.

In the Cold War it was the US, through Nato, that ensured the Soviet Union was 
held in check. And in recent years Nato has helped preserve the long-delayed 
freedom of Eastern Europe from the Warsaw Pact.

All that is now threatened. Mr Trump cites Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> as a role model and believes 
Nato no longer has a purpose. The message is clear: far from standing up to an 
aggressive tyrant, he will willingly acquiesce in that aggression.

For Jews, these are worrying times. We have already been scapegoated by Mr 
Trump, so it is no supposition to suggest that worse may be to come. History 
shows that when bullies take charge, they turn on the Jews.”

Doubtless, much more concern was aired about Trump during last night’s 
reception at theJewish Museum <http://www.jewishmuseum.org.uk/> to mark the 
JC’s birthday. But it was, of course, mainly a celebratory event.
 