
After 10 angry months of finger-pointing and procedural irregularities, it is 
hard to know what a satisfying conclusion to the Jim Best case might have 
looked like, but the one reached on Monday is not it. There is no closure here, 
no revelation that all is known at last. Instead, there is bitterness on all 
sides.

Best has been found in breach of the rules, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/jim-best-guilty-bha-stop-two-horses-non-triers-case-horse-racing>
 having alwaysmaintained his innocence. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/jim-best-bha-rehearing-horse-stopping-case>
 But his punishment will be nothing like as severe as the four-year ban set 
after the first hearing as part of a decision that was struck down in May. The 
revised six-month suspension is a rebuff to the British Horseracing Authority, 
which suggested a ban of up to six years here.

Racing’s ruling body can claim to have won the case it has pursued so hotly 
for almost a full year, but the cost has been significant and not just in the 
obvious sense of the sport’s money being poured into the pockets of QCs at one 
hearing after another. “If the BHA had done its work properly, this finding 
would have been made in April,” said William Norris QC, part of the three-man 
panel, during a brief clash with the BHA’s barrister, Louis Weston.

The panel landed another blow on the regulator in its published reasons, 
declaring there was in fact a deal between the BHA andthe jockey Paul John, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/paul-john-jim-best-british-horseracing-authority>
 the ruling body having promised to seek a low-level penalty for the jockey in 
exchange for his evidence against Best. The panel added that John has been 
treated leniently by the BHA but finally ruled the deal did not do substantial 
harm to his credibility.

What it will do to the BHA’s credibility is another question, considering the 
regulator has always denied there wasa deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/25/jim-best-british-horseracing-authority-paul-john-stopping>
 and, at the February hearing, argued it should not have to disclose any 
communications between it and John’s lawyers. When it was ordered to do so, an 
email came to light which, the latest panel has found, shows a deal was done.

Such deals are not forbidden but, as this panel notes, correspondence of that 
kind between the BHA and an accused person “must certainly be disclosed” to any 
co-accused such as Best. What can have led racing’s ruling body to do a secret 
deal with one of two accused men and then deny it for months? That turns out to 
be as big a question as any raised by the Jim Best case.

In a further extraordinary twist, the panel was allowed to leave the building 
without clarifying exactly what it meant by its order that Best’s licence would 
be “suspended”. The BHA had sought an outright ban that would prevent him from 
entering racing stables or from having anything to do with the sport.

Jim Best found guilty by BHA of telling jockey to stop two horses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/jim-best-guilty-bha-stop-two-horses-non-triers-case-horse-racing>
Did the panel intend something short of that or was this merely an example of 
three men serving at their first BHA hearing and using confusing terminology? 
The day ended with no definitive answer from the ruling body and that point 
will have to be clarified on Tuesday, which is entirely in keeping with the 
series of official pratfalls that have marked this case.

Should there have been a finding of breach at all? The published reasons fall 
some way short of offering complete assurance that the correct outcome has been 
reached. The line adopted by the disciplinary panel seems as tenuous and open 
to argument as some of the evidence it heard last month.

While the sole BHA witness, John, was found to be an unreliable and sometimes 
untruthful witness, the panel eventually preferred his version of events to 
Best’s. It cited video footage of the two races and Best’s behaviour at the 
time as backing up what John said.

But what can we make of this? It’s a particular surprise to see legal minds of 
the calibre of Norris and Sir William Gage indulging in the betting shop folly 
that a jockey’s intentions can be inferred by merely watching him on a TV 
screen, to the extent of asserting that “the ride at Towcester was without 
doubt a ‘stopping’ ride”.

The phrase “without doubt” hardly belongs in horse racing, a world in which 
horses and jockeys can always surprise you but are more likely to disappoint, 
wherein each curious turn of events has a dozen possible explanations. Its use 
here suggests a certain naivety in the panel’s analysis. While the expert 
witness in this case did not impress, there must surely be scope for making 
more and better use of experts for questions of race-riding in future, rather 
than leaving it to panellists whose qualifications for such a task are unclear.

The panel took against Best, they say, because he saw fatigue in John’s ride 
at Plumpton where they did not and because he did not respond as they would 
have done to the ruling of the Towcester stewards that John had deliberately 
ridden a non-trying race. “Any competent trainer would definitely have wanted 
to tell two important owners that a jockey had been found guilty of 
intentionally ‘stopping’ a horse,” they write.

Is it impossible to imagine that a trainer might not want to go looking for 
that sort of trouble? Anyway, the panel does not like the fact that this 
trainer does not behave as it thinks proper. Elsewhere, it describes as 
“bizarre” Best’s failure to discipline John over an offensive message.

Briefly, the panel considers the possibility that John might have stopped the 
horses for the benefit of an accomplice betting against them but waves that 
away as “wholly theoretical”, no evidence having been led on the subject. It 
seems an airy way to dismiss an almost unexplored line of inquiry. Having 
concluded that these were indeed stopping rides, the panel asks itself: “Who 
stands to benefit?” and decides Best was probably responsible.

Would it have been so difficult, instead, to concede this was a case of one 
accused man’s word against another with no sign of the definitive, independent 
piece of evidence that would show where the truth lay?

Perhaps this sort of outcome is what we should expect where complex 
disciplinary matters are decided on the balance of probabilities. But it’s hard 
not to wince at the prospect of livelihoods being taken away on the basis of 
such a problematic case, in which the behaviour of the pursuing regulator has 
been so worthy of criticism.
 