
Arrangements for the rehearing of the Jim Best case could shortly become a 
matter for the law courts. Solicitors for the Lewes trainer, exasperated by 
what they see as intransigence from theBritish Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority>, are expected 
to take the matter to the High Court if no progress is made in discussions 
between the two sides.

However, the prospect of agreement seems remote in view of the BHA response 
when asked to comment on the possibility of litigation. A statement from the 
regulator insisted it would not agree to change either the date of the 
rehearing or the proposed panel members, while noting that Best’s team is 
allowed to appeal to the panel itself on those subjects.

It is understood that Richard Wilson QC has been instructed on Best’s behalf. 
According to the Legal 500 guide to barristers, his reputation is “for being 
cogent and determined in court … His arguments are regularly described as 
‘admirable’ and ‘attractively presented’ by judges”.

Adam Brickell’s departure from BHA may not be the last after Jim Best case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/23/adam-brickell-bha-jim-best-> 
The timing of the rehearing is the principal source of contention, with the 
BHA pointing out that the week beginning 19 September was identified months ago 
as a potentially appropriate time, with all relevant parties asked to keep it 
clear in their diaries. Since then, however, it has emerged that the BHA’s 
disciplinary practices and procedures would be reviewed by an independent 
person, Christopher Quinlan QC, whosereport is to be published on 30 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/27/british-horseracing-authority-bha-publish-quinlan-review-disciplinary-process>
.

The Quinlan review took on even greater significance a week ago, with the news 
that the BHA’s integrity director,Adam Brickell, would leave the organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/23/adam-brickell-bha-jim-best-> in 
mid-September. While the authority insists Brickell’s departure has nothing to 
do with the disaster his department has become this year, it will not go ahead 
with the necessary reshuffle of responsibility until officials have had a 
chance to consider the implications of Quinlan’s report.

Quinlan could recommend change in the way the BHA appoints disciplinary panel 
members, the qualifications needed to sit on a panel, the BHA’s approach to 
disclosure, the use made of expert evidence and the manner in which the BHA 
presents its cases. He may also have something to say about whether it is 
appropriate for the BHA to use a QC, Graeme McPherson, who is also regulated by 
them as a licensed racehorse trainer. McPherson has so far represented the BHA 
at every stage of the Best case.

Best’s solicitors argue that, after months of vexed proceedings, it would be 
folly for the BHA to rehear the case in the week of 19 September, with the 
clear possibility that an overhaul of the system may be recommended the 
following week. They have also raised queries about the suitability of two of 
the three panel members named by the BHA but have been told the regulator is no 
longer willing to debate such points and that the only recourse is to take such 
concerns to the panel itself.

If Best presses ahead with his action, it could be heard in the High Court as 
early as next week. His lawyers would argue that the rehearing has not been 
arranged in the manner envisaged at the appeal hearing in May, when the 
regulator’s prediction was: “This is not a case where anyone would be imposed 
on Mr Best or where the objective observer would be able to say, ‘Oh, the BHA 
has picked its own chairman.’”

The BHA’s Robin Mounsey said: “Following clear direction from the appeal 
board, which stated that a rehearing of the Jim Best case was in the interests 
of British racing, the BHA has sought to put together a suitably qualified 
panel, in accordance with the rules of racing, and meeting the appeal board’s 
direction that it should be of unquestionable independence.

“As Mr Best chose not to accept our offer to use Sport Resolutions to convene 
a panel, the BHA has proposed a provisional panel. A process exists which 
allows the parties to formally raise a challenge to any panel member, a process 
which, if followed to its conclusion, would see an appeal board ruling on the 
suitability of the panel. This process is fair and transparent and will ensure 
the appointment of a suitably qualified and impartial panel.

“The timing of the rehearing has been proposed for several months, with all 
parties having stated their and their legal advisers availability for dates in 
September, which they were then asked to hold. Any challenge from Mr Best to 
the timing and/or final composition of the panel is in the hands of the chair 
of the disciplinary panel, who will make the necessary directions as to how to 
proceed.”

Best was charged with ordering a jockey to stop two of his horses in December. 
He was initially found in breach and banned from racing for four years but that 
verdict was quashed at appeal on the grounds of apparent bias relating to the 
chairman of the original panel and also because the published reasons were 
insufficient to support the verdict.
 