
The long-running saga of the British Horseracing Authority’s case against Jim 
Best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/jim-best-guilty-bha-stop-two-horses-non-triers-case-horse-racing>
 appears to be at an end, following the Lewes trainer’s decision not to appeal 
against the verdict of a disciplinary panel delivered last week. Best loses his 
licence to train and will not be able to reapply for six months, that being the 
penalty handed to him after the panel decided he probably had told a jockey to 
stop two horses.

However, a statement from his solicitor, Harry Stewart-Moore, insisted this 
was anything but an admission of guilt and threw the spotlight back on the BHA, 
deriding its disciplinary process. Declining to appeal was, the lawyer said, a 
practical decision, borne of the recognition a six-month suspension should not 
mean the end of Best’s business, in sharp contrast to the outright ban of four 
years which was the original penalty after ahearing in February. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/11/jim-best-guilty-ordering-jockey-stop-two-horses>
 That had to be quashed because of significant failings in the BHA’s process, 
resulting in a rehearing last month.

The difference in the two outcomes was so great Stewart-Moore labelled the 
BHA’s disciplinary proceedings “a lottery”. He said: “Mr Best is unwilling to 
take yet another extremely expensive roll of the dice over his future and the 
futures of his family and staff”.

Stewart-Moore described Best as “innocent of the charges against him” and 
rejected the panel’s conclusion the trainer had told Paul John to lose on Echo 
Brava and Missile Man last December. Referring to John, the solicitor said: 
“The BHA’s only witness, who they never bothered interviewing [before issuing 
charges], was found by the panel to be unreliable and to have entered into a 
deal with the BHA in exchange for giving evidence against Mr Best. If these 
proceedings were in any forum where the prosecuting authority did not have so 
much at stake, Mr Best would be appealing.

“Moreover, the deal between John and the BHA, the existence of which the BHA 
has absurdly denied throughout, and the failure to explain how a lawyer paid by 
the BHA ended up chairing the first disciplinary panel suggests the BHA cannot 
be trusted to ensure Mr Best receives a fair appeal hearing in any event.”

Thistlecrack and Cue Card to go head-to-head in Kempton’s King George
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/thistlecrack-cue-card-kempton-king-george-colin-tizzard-confirms-horse-racing>
The BHA declined to respond, pointing out the deadline for appeals in this 
case is 5pm on Wednesday and asserting an appeal could yet be made by either 
side. However, the ruling body has given no indication it may appeal in pursuit 
of a stiffer penalty and is not expected to do so, not least because, as the 
panel pointed out, the BHA’s guidelines do not call for a stiffer penalty for 
breach of the “non-trier” rules at the heart of the case.

Best’s wife, Suzie, applied last week for a licence to train with the aim of 
keeping the business running while he is suspended. The BHA has yet to offer a 
reaction or even an off-the-record indication of how it views her application.

Assuming the appeal deadline passes without further developments, the BHA is 
expected to break its long silence over various issues relating to the Best 
case, including how it came to appoint a chairman to the original panel who had 
been doing paid work for the ruling body over several years. A statement could 
come as early as Wednesday evening but is more likely to be released on 
Thursday.
 