
One of the panellists in the Jim Best rehearing appeared to reveal a limited 
understanding of betting on horses as he asked hypothetical questions about why 
a jockey might ride a stopping race. William Norris QC, one of three panellists 
expected to deliver a verdict next week, intervened on Thursday to suggest that 
punters who lay horses to lose would not be interested in doing so at odds of 
14-1 or higher.

Day four of the rehearing began with Best facing continued cross-examination 
over charges that he ordered a jockey to stop two horses last December, which 
he denies. Norris, who has shown a strong grasp of detail in his many other 
interventions and rode as an amateur in the 80s, opened up a line of discussion 
that had not been explored this week when he told Best he was interested in any 
possible reasons why a jockey might decide to stop a horse without the 
trainer’s knowledge.

Jim Crowley named new No1 rider for owner Sheikh Hamdan al-Maktoum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/jim-crowley-new-number-one-jockey-horse-racing-sheikh-hamdan-al-maktoum>
Norris suggested a jockey “might stop a short-priced horse on behalf of a 
gambler”. “But neither of these horses was a short price,” he continued, noting 
that Echo Brava started at 22-1 and Missile Man at 14-1 in the relevant races. 
On that basis, Norris seemed inclined to discount the possibility of gamblers 
being interested in laying either horse, even if they knew that the jockey 
would ride to lose.

Norris did not appear to be taking account of the possibility of laying either 
horse in the place market at shorter odds, or in the in-running market. It is 
not known whether anyBritish Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority> officials 
plan to fill the gaps in the panel’s understanding of betting before the case 
is completed. Best did not do so in his short response to Norris’s question, in 
which he said he did not know whether the jockey in the case, Paul John, was 
linked to any gamblers. John has admitted stopping both horses but insists he 
did so only because Best ordered it.

Continuing on the theme of why a jockey might stop a horse, Norris said 
another reason might be to disguise the horse’s ability for the sake of a lower 
handicap rating. “On whose behalf would that be done, other than in the 
interests of the trainer or the owner or both?” he asked, rhetorically. Norris 
briefly considered whether a jockey might stop a horse to “get back” at a 
trainer, then suggested to Best: “You don’t think that’s likely?” The trainer 
replied: “No”.

Earlier the BHA’s barrister, Louis Weston, was brought up short on two 
occasions in his cross-examination when the panel was unimpressed by lines he 
pursued. At one point he referred to a quote from Best in a Guardian article of 
2011. Best could not remember saying the words and, since Weston did not intend 
to call the writer of the piece as a witness, Norris told Weston: “We’ll file 
that in the bin”.

Weston also referred to the Best-trained Planetoid, in order, the barrister 
said, to illustrate the benefits of a horse having a low handicap mark. Two 
panel members intervened on behalf of those jockeys who had ridden Planetoid 
before it was allotted a rating.

Norris told Weston: “We need to proceed here with absolute caution”. Weston 
was forced to clarify that he did not allege Planetoid was run other than on 
its merits before moving to a different subject.

The panel also heard from Jack Callaghan, part-owner of Missile Man, who said 
Best had criticised John for his ride on the horse while the three men returned 
home from Towcester together, contradicting the case put by the BHA. “Jim did 
take the opportunity to have a real go at him,” Callaghan said. “He gave him 
what I would call a constructive bollocking.”

The hearing is expected to conclude on Friday with evidence from the jockey 
Jamie Moore and Best’s head lad, Paul Cooley. Barristers for both sides have 
committed to finishing their closing submissions by 4pm but the panel has 
indicated it will not issue an immediate verdict, opting instead to take time 
to consider the evidence before ruling at some point next week.
 