
Tom Morgan is being lined up to appear as an expert witness for the defence at 
the rehearing of the Jim Best case this week. A former champion jump jockey in 
Ireland, Morgan will offer his own interpretation of the rides given to two 
Best-trained horses last December – it being alleged by racing’s ruling body 
that both horses were stopped on Best’s instructions.

When the matter was first heard in February, much of the focus was on the 
ability and credibility of the jockey Paul John, who was well beaten on both 
Echo Brava and Missile Man. Having been found by both sets of stewards to be in 
breach of the rules requiring sufficient effort, John claimed that Best had 
told him to stop the two horses. Best denied that and accused John of lying in 
order to deflect blame from himself.

Much of this week’s five-day rehearing is expected to be given over to 
interpretation of the rides that John gave the two horses. There was no expert 
testimony at the first hearing but Morgan will now provide the disciplinary 
panel with the benefit of his own view on the subject.

Morgan shared the Irish title with Frank Berry at the end of the 1985-86 
season, when both rode 53 winners. He was attached to the Dessie Hughes yard at 
that time and won the 1982 Supreme Novice Hurdle for the trainer aboard Miller 
Hill, becoming the first jockey to ride into Cheltenham’s new winner’s 
enclosure.

Rehearing of BHA case against trainer Jim Best delayed further
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/06/rehearing-bha-case-against-trainer-jim-best-delayed-further>
Later, Morgan based himself in England as first jockey to John Edwards, for 
whom he won a Queen Mother Champion Chase on Pearlyman. He was leading rider at 
the 1989 Cheltenham Festival but may be best remembered for a hard-fought 
defeat that year, as he was second on the 25-1 shot Yahoo whenDesert Orchid 
achieved a famous victory <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GcCuIVn6egM> in the 
Gold Cup. Morgan then rode over to pat the winner in a moment subsequently 
described by the Guardian writer Neil Clark as “the most beautiful sporting 
gesture I have ever witnessed”.

The British Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority> declined to 
comment on the eve of the rehearing but it is believed the regulator will not 
field an expert witness of its own. John is expected to be the only prosecution 
witness, as he was at the first hearing, and the BHA will argue that his 
testimony, taken together with footage of both races, is enough to find Best in 
breach of the rules.

Best was banned for four years after the first hearing but the verdict’s 
validity was challenged within days, when Best himself discovered that the 
chairman of the original panel,the solicitor Matthew Lohn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/14/bha-matthew-lohn-jim-best-paul-gilligan-verdicts-quashed-british-horseracing-authority>
, had been working privately for the BHA for some years. An appeal panel 
subsequently quashed Lohn’s verdict on the grounds of an appearance of bias and 
also because the published reasons were found to be insufficient.

That began a difficult summer for the BHA’s integrity department, whose work 
has never previously attracted such scrutiny. Some of the heat went out of the 
subject when an independent review by the barrister Christopher Quinlan QC made 
24 recommendations for change that were immediately adopted by the BHA, 
including a revised power structure intended to ensure the disciplinary panel 
system is truly independent of the regulator in future. The exit of Adam 
Brickell, the integrity director who quit in September, should also allow the 
BHA to move on from this year’s criticism, for all that his departure was said 
to be unrelated to same.

But the rehearing is accompanied by escalating tension at the BHA’s High 
Holborn office, where there is bitter resentment that the pursuit of what 
officials see as a legitimate case should have rebounded so badly on the ruling 
body.

The outcome matters enormously. If Best is found in breach, officials will 
feel able to claim that a satisfactory destination has been reached, even if 
there were bumps on the road. If, however, the case falls apart, there will be 
questions about the judgment of senior officials who insisted on pursuing it 
despite the variety of ways in which their handling of it has been attacked as 
deficient.

Timeform accuses BHA of 'siege mentality' over Jim Best case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/timeform-accuses-bha-of-siege-mentality-over-jim-best-case>
One likely flash point this week is an email 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/british-horseracing-authority-argued-against-revealing-email-jim-best-case>
 sent in January from the BHA to John’s solicitor, in which the authority 
outlined what it would seek in the way of punishment for John if his evidence 
were as his lawyer had predicted. The BHA and John’s solicitor both deny that 
this amounts to evidence of a deal being struck in exchange for the jockey 
giving evidence.

However, Best’s representatives are unlikely to let the matter rest there and 
will point to the fact that the BHA initially resisted disclosing the email to 
them at the first hearing. Lohn did not refer to the email in his judgment, an 
omission which was described as “surprising” by the appeal chairman, Anthony 
Boswood QC, who said it was “clearly of potential relevance on the issue of Mr 
John’s credibility”.
 