
The jockey Paul John gave a colourful and brazen account of how he claims to 
have stopped two horses, as the rehearing of the Jim Best case began on Monday. 
The matter was originally heard in February but the verdict against Best, a 
Lewes‑based trainer, was subsequently struck down and the matteris now being 
reheard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/09/british-horseracing-authority-change-barrister-graeme-mcpherson-jim-best-rehearing-case>
 over the whole of this week at the offices of the British Horseracing 
Authority, with an outside chance of a verdict on Friday.

John claims Best instructed him to ensure Echo Brava and Missile Man were well 
beaten when they raced in December, a charge Best denies. The jockey’s 
credibility came under immediate attack from Jonathan Laidlaw QC, acting for 
Best, who repeatedly pressed John on the issue of whether a deal had been done 
with the BHA in exchange for his evidence.

A recent gallops injury has left John with a broken collar bone and his right 
arm in a sling. Wincing as he gave evidence, he described his efforts to stop 
the two horses in terms which would infuriate any punter.

Timeform accuses BHA of 'siege mentality' over Jim Best case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/timeform-accuses-bha-of-siege-mentality-over-jim-best-case>
“I’d torn his teeth out for the last mile and a half,” John said, watching 
footage of Echo Brava crossing the line at Plumpton in fifth place, 24 lengths 
behind the winner. At an earlier point in the race, the jockey said: “It looks 
like I’m trying to give it a kick and a squeeze but you can see as I do that 
I’m fighting with his head. It’s deceptive on the stewards and the punters. It 
looks like you’re trying when you’re not.”

John claimed he had used air-shots with his whip on both horses and spoke also 
of giving a “show slap” or a “show push” to improve the look of a ride. He said 
he knew where cameras were positioned around the track and would make a visible 
effort when near them.

But the defence painted a picture of John as a jockey whose career was hanging 
by a thread after he had left the service of three other trainers within 18 
months. Jump jockeys at the early ‘conditional’ phase of their career are 
expected to stay with their trainer for at least a year. When John signed up 
with Best in August 2015, the BHA sent a letter to the jockey explaining it had 
“significant concerns” about his employment history and noting that, if he left 
Best’s yard in less than a year, he would not get another licence unless there 
were “exceptional circumstances”.

Less than four months later, the raceday stewards found John had made 
insufficient effort on both Echo Brava and Missile Man. Laidlaw referred to a 
January email from the BHA to John’s solicitor, saying it would not seek to 
have him disqualified if he pleaded guilty and gave evidence that Best hadtold 
him to stop the horses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/british-horseracing-authority-argued-against-revealing-email-jim-best-case>
. “This isn’t a deal?” Laidlaw asked John.

“There was no deal made,” the jockey insisted. “I decided to come clean about 
Plumpton and effectively made that one worse for myself. I’m now an amateur and 
I haven’t ridden since I rode for Jim Best at Lingfield [in late December].”

Laidlaw argued that John’s problems with employers arose from his being 
talented but “inconsistent” in the saddle and “disobedient, rude, aggressive 
and difficult to manage” out of it, which John denied. John claimed he left one 
trainer, Victor Dartnall, because he was having trouble getting time off to 
take his mother to hospital for cancer treatment.

In support of his case, Laidlaw showed John footage of two rides which went 
badly wrong for the jockey. On Mother Meldrum at Exeter, he came within a few 
feet of going on to the wrong course, riding straight ahead while other jockeys 
followed the course to the right. On Karl Marx at Wincanton, he slipped 
haplessly from the saddle while leading at the top of the straight.

John claimed the tumble was the result of his having lost “15lb in 12 hours” 
in order to make the weight for the ride. He said he had lost the weight by 
taking a hot bath while “covered in baby oil” and drinking a pint of water 
containing four tablespoons of Epsom salts.

John acknowledged that he had once fought with his fellow jockey David Bass 
over a mid-race incident at Uttoxeter. He denied “squaring up” to Best’s head 
lad, Paul Cooley, saying: “He squared up to me and then I called him a snake”.

The jockey also denied repeated suggestions from Laidlaw that he liked a 
drink, insisting he might only have “a little brandy at Christmas”. When the 
barrister produced Facebook photos of John with friends in a pub, John replied: 
“You can be in a pub without having a drink” and insisted that fingers shown 
clasped around a bottle were not his.

John also denied a suggestion from Laidlaw that he had “put up” associates of 
his to confront Cooley and threaten him in an effort to dissuade him from 
giving evidence to the first hearing in February.

Disclosure of documents has been a vexed issue throughout this case and 
Laidlaw ended the first day’s hearing by pressing the BHA about a meeting 
between the regulator and John’s solicitor on 21 January. No note of that 
meeting has been shared with the defence.

Laidlaw told the panel that the BHA’s barrister, Louis Weston, “assures me he 
has checked and looked and found nothing”. He added there had been “an unhappy 
history” to disclosure of documents in the case.
 