
When the Jockey Club announced last week that its 10-year plan involved the 
sale ofKempton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> Park for housing to 
help fund a new all-weather course in Newmarket, its officials bent over 
backwards to insist that the decision had been taken with a heavy heart.

Roger Weatherby, the senior steward, talked of showing “leadership with the 
assets we have” and taking “tough decisions to help our sport keep moving 
forward”. The loss of Kempton, he stressed, was painful, but the only way to 
raise £100m or more to put towards a bright new future.

It is a claim that seems more difficult to swallow with every passing day. 
Spelthorne Borough Council, which covers Kempton, made it clear last week that 
the racecourse was not what it had in mind when it put out a “Call For Sites” 
that might be suitable for development. Local residents will fight the Jockey 
Club every step of the way as well.

Related: Kempton the victim as Jockey Club puts a price on ‘priceless’ 
heritage | Greg Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/10/kempton-jockey-club-greg-wood>

And as James Waters, the leader of Forest Heath district council, pointed out 
yesterday, there is a pressing need for new housing in and around Newmarket as 
well as in Sunbury. In addition to its extensive property portfolio in the 
town, and the famous collection of priceless paintings in the Jockey Club 
rooms, the club’s website states that it owns 4,500 acres of land in the area, 
of which about 2,500 comprises the famous gallops. That would seem to leave 
about 2,000 acres, a fraction of which is now earmarked for the new all-weather 
track.

Land for residential development around Newmarket is not quite as valuable as 
that in Sunbury, close to the M3 and M25. The latest estimate by the Department 
for Communities and Local Government, published in December 2015, suggests a 
value of £1.1m per hectare in Forest Heath and £1.3m in adjacent East 
Cambridgeshire. But even so, taking the average of £1.2m, and bearing in mind 
that prices have risen further over the last 12 months, that suggests that the 
2,000 or so acres of Jockey Club land around Newmarket which does not have 
racehorses exercising on it is worth in the region of £1bn.

The DCLG estimate of land value in Spelthorne Borough Council’s area, 
incidentally, is £4.97m per hectare, which values the 230-acre site at Kempton 
at £462m, a long way in front of the £100m that is apparently required. If the 
scheme eventually gets the green light, will the difference be ploughed back 
into racing, or used to help pay off the Jockey Club’s debts of £115m?

This is just one more question to add to a growing list, the most persistent 
of which is how a scheme that is so lopsided in favour of Flat racing, and the 
Jockey Club’s ancestral home in Newmarket in particular, can possibly be 
squared with its mission statement to work for the long-term good of all 
British racing. The potential benefits to Newmarket in the club’s proposals are 
obvious. The costs, however, will all be borne elsewhere.

The Jockey Club clearly has significant land assets around Newmarket that 
could be used to raise money for the town’s new track. It could also follow 
Newbury’s lead and consider development around Kempton that maintains the 
track, to keep the development of land around Newmarket to a minimum. Instead, 
it insists that flattening Kempton is the only option if its plan is to 
succeed. And that may be true – but not, perhaps because of the money.

In the aftermath of the announcement last Tuesday, most attention was, quite 
naturally, focused on the potential loss of the King George VI Chase at its 
traditional home. Nobody gave a second thought to the 57 all-weather Flat 
fixtures staged at the course last year. But those fixtures, and the media 
rights payments they attract, could be the real prize from the Jockey Club’s 
point of view. With Kempton gone, they can simply shift the fixtures to the new 
track in Newmarket.

If Kempton survives, they cannot, and no fixtures could mean no new 
racecourse. On that basis, the decision to sell Kempton, a profitable track, 
does indeed look like a necessary move for the Jockey Club – but even more 
surely like a poor deal for racing as a whole.
 