
Birthday parties for babies tend to be more for the adults present than the 
actual baby celebrated, and my daughter’s first birthday party — which, due to 
rush of people who happened to be in town Thanksgiving weekend, was pushed up 
to the Saturday after Thanksgiving (the 26th) instead of her actual birthday 
(the 30th) — was no different. I doubt she gave much of a damn about the grade 
of barbecue sauce purchased with the tray of boneless chicken wings or the 
fancy new Pack ‘n Play her grandmother bought her. And I know she didn’t care 
about the party’s superhero motif, because the first thing she did when seeing 
the bedazzled Batman shirt I wore was attempt to eat the bat.

I’m not much of a party person myself, but I looked forward to this day just 
to be able to witness her experiencing it. Her face when opening and playing 
with her gifts. (Which, as usual for her, landed somewhere between slightly 
bemused and slightly annoyed. My daughter is British, apparently.) Her eyes 
when she heard the “Happy Birthday” song sung to her for the first time. Her 
tiny legs as she walked from the cake stand to the couch her cousin was sitting 
on. And those same tiny legs an hour later when she apparently forgot she 
actually knows how to walk now and just started crawling everywhere.

Man who shot former NFL player Joe McKnight charged with manslaughter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/joe-mcknight-shooting-ronald-gasser-manslaughter-charge>
She is my Feminist Octopus — a name I’ve given her because her favorite words 
currently are “stop” and “no.” And also because she’s so damn curious and 
engaged with her surroundings that it’s like she had eight limbs; all 
simultaneously grabbing and touching and pulling and pinching. I know it’s not 
the most creative nickname, but I’m her dad and I’m allowed to be corny.

Our house right now is an emporium of random baby shit shoehorned into an 
adult living space. It’s like someone went to Babies R Us, emptied 20 shelves 
into 50 different bags, drove to Ikea, and arbitrarily sprinkled the bags’ 
content throughout the store; a Graco easy fold highchair parked adjacent to 
the living room mantle and both the fireplace underneath it and the 65 inch 
Sony 4K Ultra HD TV on top of it;Chicka Chicka Boom Boom laying on a Svärtan 
limited edition collection tray table. When babies arrive to couples who’ve 
never had children before, their presence is a colonization. A welcome 
colonization of course. A colonization with footies and frequent viewings of 
Sesame Street on YouTube (in Spanish though because we want her to learn that 
too). But a colonization nonetheless. Your resources are devoted to them, your 
thoughts possessed with them, your instincts stirred by them.

And it’s with this context that killings such as the killing of Joe McKnight 
are so brutal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/joe-mcknight-killed-louisiana-former-new-york-jets>
. So complete. Not necessarily tome. I, like many others who heard of the 
circumstances surrounding his death, felt an appropriate amount of outrage, 
sadness, and perplexity. But I wasn’t devastated by it the same way the 
grandmother who rented the space for his first birthday party 27 years ago, the 
uncle who first taught him out to catch a football, and the mom and the dad who 
had their lives upended and colonized by him 28 years are most definitely 
today. I can’t conjure many fates more cruel than to have a life that was 
treasured, prayed over, sacrificed for, led, and loved snatched away so 
senselessly. And for everyone — including the police — to know exactly who did 
it. And for that person to be free. As if those decades of memories and moments 
and gallons of formula and refilled diaper genies and doctors’ office visits 
and Polaroids of first steps meant nothing. Like none of that mattered. Like it 
didn’t even happen.

It’s no secret that the undervaluing of black lives isn’t as much about a 
conscious and seething racial animus but more the inability to regard us as 
fully human; a dynamic that manifests as a reluctance to give our capacity to 
hurt, bleed, double over in pain, and die any benefit of the doubt. It’s not 
that our lives and the diversity of life within each of our lives don’t matter 
at all. They just don’t matteras much. And for black men and black women as 
strong and sturdy and brown as Joe McKnight was, this modicum of empathy 
becomes nonexistent. He’s been “grown” his entire life; a “man” since before he 
could ride a bike;a threat since before he could spell 
<http://theundefeated.com/features/joe-mcknight-and-the-fear-of-the-black-man/>
. Perhaps Ronald Gasser will eventually be arrested, charged, and convicted. 
But his freedom today — that he’s receiving a consideration, a benefit of the 
doubt, that Joe McKnight did not, could not, and would never have — synopsizes 
America’s feelings about men and women like the one he killed and the broken 
and brutalized families they leave behind; communicating to them and to us that 
those birthday parties didn’t matter. That cake and those candles didn’t 
matter. That 28 years of life didn’t matter.

 * Editor’s note: It was announced on Tuesday 6 December that Ronald Gasser 
has been charged with the manslaughter of Joe McKnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/joe-mcknight-shooting-ronald-gasser-manslaughter-charge>
 * This article first appeared on Very Smart Brothas 
<http://verysmartbrothas.com/>  