
John Fuller’s house is deceptive. It sits at the end of a quiet street in 
north Oxford, whose broad, leafy vistas have long been the province of dons and 
daydreamers, although those denizens have now been joined by the super-wealthy, 
with their iceberg basements and climate-controlled wine cellars. Fuller, who 
celebrated his 80th birthday on New Year’s Day, settled here in the 1960s, and 
spent his academic career teaching English at Magdalen College where he 
eventually became vice-president. One of his duties was conducting an inventory 
of the college silver; the whole business was, he says amusedly, “almost like 
being a butler, or the social secretary”.

He also raised his family here, repeatedly extending the smallish house rather 
than moving, and so the experience of wandering through it is quite peculiar, 
with doors opening on to parquet-floored new rooms, all filled with books, 
pictures, chess sets, pianos. I use the word Tardis about three times, and then 
the photographer arrives and does the same; we’re both a bit embarrassed by the 
poverty of our imagination, or at least our cultural references.

But Fuller’s surroundings are apt enough, for he seems an intensely modest 
man; not in the sense of faux self-deprecation, nor of playing down what he 
does, because he speaks about poetry and his own work seriously, weighing his 
words carefully. It is clear that his engagement with poetry is dependent on 
his relationship with its centuries-old tradition of matching language to 
thought and feeling. His new work,The Bone Flowers, is a long “story-poem” (he 
has instructed his publishers not to call it a poem), which introduces the 
character of Billy Emerald, a man made wealthy by inheritance and a canny way 
with art acquisition: “He was an opportunist. Of the market / He liked to say 
when risking an ascription: / ‘It isn’t just the Porsche but where you park 
it.’”

Billy is dying, probably, and certainly noticeably ageing – he has “the 
dissipated phiz” to prove it – and is therefore prone to an awareness of death 
that the poem’s omniscient narrator strives to capture: “The requiem / Our mind 
constructs, and the creased sepulchre / We lie in, conspire against us”. But 
that narrator also exists as a presence separate to Billy’s story, cropping up 
at various points, including in the poem’s introduction, and thereby presenting 
us with an entirely different way of measuring the value and impact of human 
lives.
 John Fuller’s The Bone Flowers travels in the opposite direction to Philip 
Larkin’s The Whitsun Weddings. Photograph: Richard Bradford 
Here we find the narrator on a train, its progress north (the opposite 
direction to Philip Larkin’s in “The Whitsun Weddings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/10/philip-larkin-whitsun-weddings-50th-anniversary-train-poet>
”) sparking memories and thoughts of other poets: “Great Uncle Wiz”, or Auden, 
one of Fuller’s great influences since he readThe Orators as a teenager, Sean 
O’Brien and, most significantly, the late Ian Hamilton, whom he poignantly 
remembers as an absence of voice: “Thirteen empty years since last he spoke!” 
And then, naturally, his thoughts drift towards other lamented lost voices: 
Shakespeare, dead at 52; Byron at 36; Owen at 24.

Fuller’s awareness of these other whispers in his ear explains his more 
general interest in poetic forms, many of which he has adopted in his own work. 
“I’ve always found them doubly fruitful,” he says. “They introduce the history 
of poets who have written in that form, so if you write a sonnet, you write 
something which is like all those other sonnets, but different. You’re in a 
family. And a second sense is that, in themselves, they draw out of you what 
needs to be said. You might begin with the slightest notion of what a poem 
might be – Ian Hamilton, Darlington Station, for example – you don’t know what 
it’s going to be until you discover a form for it. But supposing that had been 
a sonnet entirely about him – it wouldn’t have worked, I don’t think.”

I don’t think anybody would write a poem unless somebody had previously 
written one

Does he never find form a constraint? In a sense, he says, but an enabling 
one. “I don’t think anybody would write a poem at all unless somebody had 
previously written a poem.” He is, of course, aware of the paradox inherent in 
what he’s just said: someone has to be the first. Has he ever wanted to be an 
innovator, to invent a new form?

“Well, yes,” he replies. “And I think I did, in a very, very minor way.” We 
stop off for a brief digression into comic biographical forms such as the 
limerick and the clerihew; and into the forthcoming 50th anniversary of the 
double-dactyl, a form “more or less invented by John Hollander and Anthony 
Hecht. I’ve got a little collection of double-dactyls which Shoestring Press 
are going to do next year.” Fuller’s invention is the “autogram”: “I think it’s 
my invention, nobody’s challenged me – I published a group of them in one 
collection of poems calledSong and Dance. And the idea is that you conceal the 
name of the subject – it has to be a writer – and you write a poem only using 
the letters in the name of the poet you’re writing about. But you don’t tell 
your reader who it is.” It works best, he says, when the poem is a pastiche of 
the subject. “It’s a joke, it’s not a very serious form, unless you feel that 
in some mysterious way, you’re getting to the essence of a poet by only using 
the letters in their name. There’s no reason why that should be so at all, but 
you make it so, that’s the reason why you’ve done it.”

He is chuckling as he says this, especially when he imagines the possible 
response. “Some readers would think that was so futile, or pretentious: how can 
Fuller sit down and waste his time producing that sort of thing?”

They might forgive him a little poetic downtime in the course of a prolific 
career that encompasses novels, short stories, children’s books and numerous 
volumes of poetry (19, excludingThe Bone Flowers and collaborations such as 
those with poet James Fenton and photographer David Hurn).

During his upbringing, poetry was not his primary interest despite its 
presence. His father, the poet Roy Fuller, used to joke about Charles Darwin’s 
son asking a school friend, “And where does your father do his worms?”, as 
though all families had a trade. He himself, even though he encountered Auden 
and loved the “baleful rhythms” of Eliot’sSweeney Agonistes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/22/ts-eliot-sweeney-agonistes-hinge-development>
, was more drawn to film, belonging, in the 1950s, to the Grasshopper Group, a 
collection of enthusiasts that included the future film-makerKevin Brownlow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/22/kevin-brownlow-academy-award-oscar>
. At the time, Brownlow was makingIt Happened Here, his film about the Nazi 
occupation of Britain, and he used to bring the rushes along to show the group. 
“He was doing it properly,” Fuller says. What about him? “I chickened out.”

I was craftily ensconced in this rather cushy job where you were being paid to 
think about literature

After national service, he went to Oxford, graduated and married Prue Martin. 
Then, after a year teaching in the US and three in Manchester, he returned to 
Oxford, where he taught from 1966 until his retirement in 2002. He must, he 
says, be one of the last generation who had academic credentials but could 
think of himself primarily as a writer, “who was craftily ensconced in this 
rather cushy job where you were being paid to think about literature and talk 
about it, and be with people who were interested in it”.

What was it like, being the poet son of a poet? “I had a very good 
relationship with my father about poetry,” he says. “He allowed me to read and 
criticise his poems, as I was very grateful for him to do with mine. He gave a 
lot of very good technical advice, and there was a time when I suddenly 
realised I rather missed him going, with ticks and suggestions, through a 
collection I might have sent him.” He wrote about his parents in the collection
Stones and Fires, which won the Forward prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/forwardprizeforpoetry> in 1996: “People 
seemed to like that,” he recalls now. “I didn’t know quite whether I was 
wanting to write about them. I’m not the sort of poet who writes a lot about 
family and personal things, but they’re kind of there, in certain ways.”

The question of appropriate subject matter for poetry, and appropriate form, 
leads us on to some of its contemporary manifestations. When he was “very 
young”, Fuller remembers, an exciting poetry reading might constitute “someone 
like Christopher Logue getting together with a jazz group and reading poems to 
jazz, that kind of thing, which seemed very tentative in a way. Some people 
were sceptical of it, some people thought, well, this is another route into 
greater popularity for poetry. Nowadays, you have a vast realm of performance 
poets, open mic evenings, a great tranche of that kind of thing going on, which 
I suppose is very good, really.”

What does he think of a poet like Kate Tempest, I wonder, whose work moves 
between music and the spoken word and frequently combines the two? “I’m very 
broad church in these matters. All kinds of things go on. I would much rather 
have that than a certain kind of poetry which doesn’t intend to mean anything.” 
(He is exceptionally discreet about identifying authors of such work.)
 Did Jack Kerouac’s work really spontaneously unroll in a haze of marijuana? 
Photograph: Jerry Yulsman/Associated Press 
As suggested by some of his poetic tastes – a fondness for the seriocomic 
skewerings of Byron, for example – Fuller is not much given to artistic cant. 
Chatting about the Beats, he muses on whetherJack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac>’s work really did spontaneously 
unroll in a haze of marijuana, with no corrections following. He’s certainly 
unconvinced by aspects of the counterculture, remembering his student days, 
when the Beats visited Oxford: “I published them in Isis. I think it was the 
first time they’d been published anywhere in this country, 1958. But we all 
thought they were rather apolitical; we were suspicious of that, somehow. It 
was protest in a vacuum, and when you actually talked to them, charming as they 
were, they didn’t seem to have the same issues in mind that one would have in 
Oxford, where contemporary events such as Suez were very much in everybody’s 
mind. Ceasing to own an empire, hoping for a juster world, was very much in the 
air.”

But neither does he let himself off the hook. He jokes that he’s like the 
historian AJP Taylor, who claimed to have “extreme views, weakly held”. A 
university contemporary of Dennis Potter and Ken Loach, he remarks that “I feel 
in my heart quite radical, but entirely, self-defeatingly, powerless to know 
how I would do anything about it.” He thinks of himself as more of a 
“generalising, philosophising sort of writer”, and even mentions a poem he’s 
written about a thrush singing in spring – “about as soggy and hopeful as you 
can get as a subject for poetry”. Yet he has recently contributed a poem to 
Standpoint magazine on the situation in Gaza, which will form the basis for a 
text for a Royal Pilharmonic Society-commissioned musical piece by Nicola 
LeFanu to be performedat the Barbican  
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=19138>in February.

We all thought the Beats were apolitical – we were suspicious of that

The Bone Flowers is subtitled “Blueprints for a Disappearance”, and attempts 
to look mortality squarely in the face – as opposed to the time in youth, 
Fuller remarks, when the realisation of death “hits you with great force” and 
you think “Wow, I don’t really want to think about that any more.” Now, he 
says, comes the need to be more decisive, and in particular to deal with the 
superstitions death can prompt, to achieve “a kind of exorcism of them”.

But it would be wrong to dwell on death at the time of birthday celebrations. 
More fitting, maybe, to give Fuller’s poetry the final lines, in the form ofThe 
Bone Flowers’ close:

Lucent the points of burning air. To sit
On terraces is to not want to go
So long as the flames glow. No, not one bit.
Reluctance is a struggle: burning slow,
Or hoping to be suddenly relit
Like those renewing birthday candles. Though
Birthdays have been and gone, and few will come
Again, still, think of this: there may be some.

• The Bone Flowers is published by Vintage. To order a copy for £9.34 (RRP 
£10.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bone-flowers.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 