
Ali Smith

I heard John Berger speaking at the end of 2015 in London at the British 
Library. Someone in the audience talked aboutA Seventh Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/dec/18/seventh-man-john-berger-review>, 
his 1975 book about mass migrancy in which he says: “To try to understand the 
experience of another it is necessary to dismantle the world as seen from one’s 
own place within it and to reassemble it as seen from his.”

The questioner asked what Berger thought about the huge movement of people 
across the world. He put his head in his hands and sat and thought; he didn’t 
say anything at all for what felt like a long time, a thinking space that 
cancelled any notion of soundbite. When he answered, what he spoke about 
ostensibly seemed off on a tangent. He said: “I have been thinking about the 
storyteller’s responsibility to be hospitable.”

Related: John Berger obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/john-berger-obituary> 

As he went on, it became clear how revolutionary, hopeful and astute his 
thinking was. The act of hospitality, he suggested, is ancient and contemporary 
and at the core of every story we’ve ever told or listened to about ourselves – 
deny it, and you deny all human worth. He talked about the art act’s deep 
relationship with this, and with inclusion. Then he gave us a definition of 
fascism: one set of human beings believing it has the right to cordon off and 
decide about another set of human beings.

A few minutes with Berger and a better world, a better outcome, wasn’t fantasy 
or imaginary, it was impetus – possible, feasible, urgent and clear. It wasn’t 
that another world was possible; it was that this world, if we looked 
differently, and responded differently, was differently possible.

With Berger, a better world was possible
Ali Smith 
His readers are the inheritors, across all the decades of his work, of a 
legacy that will always reapprehend the possibilities. We inherit his routing 
of the“power-shit” <http://www.newstatesman.com/2015/09/letter-rosa-luxemburg-0>
 of everyday corporate hierarchy and consumerism, his determined communality, 
his ethos of unselfishness in a solipsistic world, his procreative questioning 
of the given shape of things, his articulate compassion, the relief of that 
articulacy. We inherit writing that won’t ever stop giving. A reader coming 
anywhere near his work encounters life-force, thought-force – and the force, 
too, of the love all through it.

It’s not just hard, it’s impossible, to think about what he’s given us over 
the years in any past tense. Everything about this great thinker, one of the 
great art writers, the greatest responders, is vital – and response and 
responsibility in Berger’s work always make for a fusion of thought and art as 
a force for the understanding, the seeing more clearly and the making better of 
the world we’re all citizens of. ButJohn Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-berger> gone? In the dark times, 
what’ll we do without him? Try to live up to him, to pay what Simone Weil 
called (as he notes in his essay about her) “creative attention”. The full Weil 
quote goes: “Love for our neighbour, being made of creative attention, is 
analogous to genius.”

Berger’s genius is its own fertile continuum – radical, brilliant, gentle, 
uncompromising – in the paying of an attention that shines with the fierce 
intelligence, the loving clarity of the visionary he was, is, and always will 
be.
 Geoff Dyer with John Berger in Turin, 2004. Photograph: Jean Mohr 
Geoff Dyer 

There is a long and distinguished tradition of aspiring writers meeting the 
writer they most revere only to discover that he or she has feet of clay. 
Sometimes it doesn’t stop at the feet – it can be legs, chest and head too – so 
that the disillusionment taints one’s feelings about the work, even about the 
trade itself. I count it one of my life’s blessings that the first great writer 
I ever met – the writer I admired above all others – turned out to be an 
exemplary human being. Nothing that has happened in the 30-odd years since then 
has diminished my love of the books or of the man who wrote them.

It was the highpoint of my life. My peers had jobs, careers, even houses – but 
I was in a pub with John Berger
Geoff Dyer 
It was 1984. John Berger, who had radically altered and enlarged my ideas of 
what a book could be, was in London for the publication ofAnd Our Faces, My 
Heart, Brief as Photos. I interviewed him for Marxism Today. He was 58, the age 
I am now. The interview went well but he seemed relieved when it was over – 
because, he said, now we could go to a pub and talk properly.

It was the highpoint of my life. My contemporaries had jobs, careers – some 
even owned houses – but I wasin a pub with John Berger. He urged me to send him 
things I’d written – not the interview, he didn’t care about that, he wanted to 
read my own stuff. He wrote back enthusiastically. He was always encouraging. A 
relationship cannot be sustained on the basis of reverence and we soon settled 
into being friends.

The success and acclaim he enjoyed as a writer allowed him to be free of petty 
vanities, to concentrate on what he was always so impatient to achieve: 
relationships of equality. That’s why he was such a willing collaborator – and 
such a good friend to so many people, from all walks of life, from all over the 
world. There was no limit to his generosity, to his capacity to give. This did 
more than keep him young; it combined with a kind of negative pessimism to 
enable him to withstand the setbacks dished out by history. In an essay on 
Leopardi he proposed “that we are not living in a world in which it is possible 
to construct something approaching heaven-on-earth, but, on the contrary, are 
living in a world whose nature is far closer to that of hell; what difference 
would this make to any single one of our political or moral choices? We would 
be obliged to accept the same obligations and participate in the same struggle 
as we are already engaged in; perhaps even our sense of solidarity with the 
exploited and suffering would be more single-minded. All that would have 
changed would be the enormity of our hopes and finally the bitterness of our 
disappointments.”

While his work was influential and admired, its range – in both subject matter 
and form – makes it difficult to assess adequately.Ways of Seeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/sep/07/ways-seeing-berger-tv-programme-british>
 is his equivalent ofKeith Jarrett’s Köln Concert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/jan/31/50-great-moments-jazz-keith-jarrett>
: a bravura performance that sometimes ends up as a substitute for or 
distraction from the larger body of work to which it serves as an introduction. 
In 1969 he put forwardArt and Revolution “as the best example I have achieved 
of what I consider to be the critical method”, but it is in the numerous 
shorter pieces that he was at his best as a writer on art. (These diverse 
pieces have been assembled by Tom Overton inPortraits to form a chronological 
history of art.)

No one has ever matched Berger’s ability to help us look at paintings or 
photographs “more seeingly”, as Rilke put it in a letter about Cézanne. Think 
of the essay “Turner and the Barber’s Shop” in which he invites us to consider 
some of the late paintings in light of things the young boy saw in his dad’s 
barber shop: “water, froth, steam, gleaming metal, clouded mirrors, white bowls 
or basins in which soapy liquid is agitated by the barber’s brush and detritus 
deposited”.

Berger brought immense erudition to his writing but, as with DH Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dhlawrence>, everything had to be verified 
by appeal to his senses. He did not need a university education – he once spoke 
scathingly of a thinker who, when he wanted to find something out, took down a 
book from a shelf – but he was reliant, to the end, on his art school 
discipline of drawing. If he looked long and hard enough at anything it would 
either yield its secrets or, failing that, enable him to articulate why the 
withheld mystery constituted its essence. This holds true not just for the 
writings on art but also the documentary studies (of a country doctor inA 
Fortunate Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/07/john-sassall-country-doctor-a-fortunate-man-john-berger-jean-mohr>
 and of migrant labour inA Seventh Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/dec/18/seventh-man-john-berger-review>
), the novels, the peasant trilogyInto Their Labours, and the numerous books 
that refuse categorisation. Whatever their form or subject the books are 
jam-packed with observations so precise and delicate that they double as ideas 
– and vice versa. “The moment at which a piece of music begins provides a clue 
to the nature of all art,” he writes in “The Moment of Cubism”.In Here Is Where 
We Meet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/apr/09/featuresreviews.guardianreview6> 
he imagines “travelling alone between Kalisz and Kielce a hundred and fifty 
years ago. Between the two names there would always have been a third – the 
name of your horse.”

The last time we met was a few days before Christmas 2015, in London. There 
were five of us: my wife and I, John (then 89), the writerNella Bielski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/oct/24/fiction.features1> (in her late 
70s) and the painter Yvonne Barlow (91), who had been his girlfriend when they 
were still teenagers. Jokingly, I asked, “So, what was John like when he was 
17?” “He was exactly like he is now,” she replied, as though it were yesterday. 
“He was always so kind.” All that interested him about his own life, he once 
wrote, were the things he had in common with other people. He was a brilliant 
writer and thinker; but it was his lifelong kindness that she emphasised.

The film Walk Me Home which he co- wrote and acted in was, in his opinion, “a 
balls-up” but in it Berger utters a line that I think of constantly – and quote 
from memory – now: “When I die I want to be buried in land that no one owns.” 
In land, that is, that belongs to us all.
 Berger in 1962. Photograph: Peter Keen for the Observer 
Olivia Laing

The only time I saw John Berger speak was at the 2015 British Library event. 
He clambered on to the stage, short, stocky, shy, his extraordinary hewn face 
topped with snowy curls. After each question he paused for a long time, tugging 
on his hair and writhing in his seat, physically wrestling with the demands of 
speech. It struck me then how rare it is to see a writer on stage actually 
thinking, and how glib and polished most speakers are. For Berger, thought was 
work, as taxing and rewarding as physical labour, a bringing of something real 
into the world. You have to strive and sweat; the act is urgent but might also 
fail.

For him, thought was as taxing and rewarding as physical labour. You have to 
strive and sweat
Olivia Laing 
He talked that evening about the need for hospitality. It was such a Bergerish 
notion. Hospitality: the friendly and generous reception and entertainment of 
guests, visitors or strangers, a word that shares its origin with hospital, a 
place to treat sick or injured people. This impetus towards kindness and care 
for the ill and strange, the vulnerable and dispossessed is everywhere in 
Berger’s work, the sprawling orchard of words he planted and tended over the 
decades.

In 1972 he won the Booker prize, and in his acceptance speech explained that 
he would be donating half his winnings to the Black Panthers. His closing words 
were “clarity is more important than money”. Few people have possessed such 
clarity, nor yoked it to such persistently generous political ends. Art he saw 
as a communal and vital possession, to be written about with sensual exactness.

His essays on painting are packed with unforgettable images, the diligent, 
inspired seeing of an artist who’d given himself over to written language. 
Vermeer’s rooms, “which the light fills like water in a tank”. Goya, whose 
cross-hatched tones gave “a human body the filthy implication of fur”. 
Bonnard’s “dissolving colours, making his subjects unattainable, nostalgic”. 
Pollock’s “great walls of silver, pink, new gold, pale blue nebulae seen 
through dense skeins of swift dark or light lines”. Art criticism is rarely 
this plain, this fruitful, or this adamant that what happens on a canvas has a 
bearing on our human lives.

Capitalism, he wrote in Ways of Seeing, “survives by forcing the majority to 
define their own interests as narrowly as possible”. It was narrowness he set 
himself against, the toxic impulse to wall in or wall off. Be kin to the 
strange, be open to difference, cross-pollinate freely. He put his faith in the 
people, the whole host of us.

Host: there’s another curious word, lurking at the root of both hospitality 
and hospital. It means both the person who offers hospitality, and the group, 
the flock, the horde. It has two origins: the Latin for stranger or enemy, and 
also for guest. It was Berger’s gift, I think, to see that this kind of 
perception or judgment is always a choice, and to make a case for kindness: for 
being humane, whatever the cost.
 John Berger, pictured at home in Paris in 1999. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for 
the Guardian 
Simon McBurney

No one I have ever met listened like John. He leaned forward. His very blue 
eyes scanning yours. Then glancing away for away for a moment as his ear turned 
towards you. To be the object of this fierce attention was… to feel heard. And 
being heard, at once you had a place in the world. You belonged. You were 
situated. Sited.

John’s writing desk in his house in the mountains in France faced the wall. 
Above it drawings by his son Yves and his granddaughter Melina. A CD of Glenn 
Gould lay beside one of Tom Waits. His pen (he only wrote in ink) was fat and 
comfortable. The window to his left looked out onto the garden. A vegetable 
patch gave way to apple trees which in turn bordered a field where cows, except 
in winter, would graze.

We would watch them as each evening they were called to milk. Bells sounding, 
arses covered in shit. He listened to them in the same way. With the same 
attention. He was never not listening.

In 1992, never having met, I watched him watching The Street of Crocodiles ( a 
play created from the writings of Bruno Shultz) from a point of vantage above 
the audience. His body so concentrated as if he himself were creating the piece 
before him. Afterwards he suggested we eat. Days later he was in my kitchen 
discussing the show and the magnetic knife rack beside my ancient gas stove.

His short story The Three Lives of Lucie Cabrol is the final entry in a 
collection entitled Pig Earth, the first of the epic trilogy Into Their 
Labours, which chronicles peasant life, and migration into the cities, in the 
20th century. I asked him if he would allow me to make Lucie Cabrol into a 
piece of theatre.

He invited me to visit him in the Haut Savoie and picked us up at the airport. 
“Lucie was not her real name,” shouted John as he drove Tim Hatley, my 
designer, and I into the mountains. “I will show you where she lived and the 
site of her death.”

We drank his coffee, saw the memorials to the Maquis, walked the precipitous 
slopes. Laughed. There was always laughter with John. We heard how he had first 
heard the story of this woman, a mythic figure in the all the local villages. 
“To live here was always an act of resistance. She was tiny, the unlikeliest of 
survivors. But never accepted defeat. Even in the face of her own murder.”

For him resisting was part of existing. “... defiant resistance in the face of 
likely defeat. The poor, the ill, animals, the prisoner, especially the 
political prisoner, the migrant, the peasant, the Palestinian: he saw none of 
them as failures,” as Anthony Barnett writes.

His words joined things together. With certainty, clarity and, always, 
tenderness
Simon McBurney 
John Berger was my friend. Seeing people’s responses to his death over the 
last few days, many many people would claim him as theirs too. John had that 
quality of engagement. “The opposite of love is not hate, but separation,” he 
wrote.

His words joined things together. With certainty, clarity and, always, 
tenderness. The personal and the political, the poetic and the prosaic, the 
natural with the man made. And also the writer and the reader. They too were 
joined, bound together. Thus people felt, correctly, he was attached to them. 
And they to him. He was theirs. He listened to them. Even now, in the most 
deafening roar of these dark and absurd times, he makes me feel that it is 
possible to be heard. That we must be heard.

One consolation in the face of his absence, is that his writing will remain 
for me a place of refuge. A site where “language has acknowledged the 
experience which demanded which cried out...” Where words promise “that which 
has been experienced cannot disappear as if it had never been.”

“Can you hear me in the dark?”

In 1999, in the abandoned Aldwych Underground station we created, together, 
for Artangel, A Vertical Line. A meditation on the origins of art. The last 
movement was in a deep tunnel imagining the discovery of the Chauvet cave, the 
site of the worlds oldest prehistoric paintings.

“Can you hear me in the dark?” John shouts. And the piece begins...

Yes, John, we can still hear you in the dark.

The last time he fetched me from the airport, aged 84, he was holding two 
crash helmets. Laughing. We’re on the bike. Minutes later John and I were 
weaving through the Geneva traffic and hitting the motorway towards the 
mountains. Over his shoulder I glanced at the speedometer as it climbed towards 
160kph. If we die, I thought, at least it will be quick. Then I closed my eyes 
and pushed myself into his back.
 