
In all the euphoria, with the players pulling on “Bring on France 2016” 
T-shirts and the noise as good as at any other time since theRepublic of Ireland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> left Lansdowne Road, 
there was one moment when Martin O’Neill could be seen doing his best to drag 
Roy Keane to the centre-circle to take some of the crowd’s acclaim.

Keane resisted but O’Neill tried again. They grappled, embraced, laughed. 
Manager had assistant almost in a headlock by the time Keane wriggled free 
again. It was that kind of night and this was the soft-focus Keane: no beard, 
no scowl, just a sunrise of a smile. “As long aswe’re not in Saipan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/01/world-cup-moments-roy-keane-ireland-exit>
, we’ll be all right,” he said later, when asked about how the team would 
prepare for next summer’s tournament.

It had been the classic Ireland performance, full of fight-to-the-end 
endeavour, rigid discipline and downright stubbornness, culminating ultimately 
in a place in the European Championship and wonderful scenes at the final 
whistle when they could relax at last and reflect on one of the great nights of 
their modern era.

O’Neill’s team gave everything. They chased every ball, never shirked a tackle 
and, when they needed a centre-forward to show composure and experience, they 
had a 32-year-old from Stoke City, with silver flecks in his hair, who passed 
the test with distinction.

This is a team featuring three players from Championship clubs, a goalkeeper 
from West Ham’s reserves and a back-up from Millwall, currently ninth in League 
One. The only constant theme has been their spirit of togetherness and Jon 
Walters, the epitome of that team ethic, talked later about it being the 
outstanding night in his professional life.

His first goal was a penalty midway through the opening half and it was his 
volley, after 70 minutes, when the tension made way for a wave of euphoria. 
That was the moment the crowd knew that, barring a calamity, O’Neill’s men 
would be heading to France next summer and, considering the recent history of 
this team, they probably do not care a jot that there was an element of 
controversy attached to the win. Yes, there was some generous refereeing about 
the alleged handball offence that led to their penalty, but who could begrudge 
Ireland a dash of luck almost six years to the day since Thierry Henry’s 
infamous handball helped set up the goal that prevented Giovanni Trapattoni’s 
side reaching the 2010 World Cup?

The bottom line was that this was a collective victory featuring all the old 
traits for which Ireland – and O’Neill’s teams – are renowned. They were quick 
to the ball, strong in the tackle and their workload was prodigious. It helped 
that when the ball was played upfield to Walters it generally stuck, in the way 
that O’Neill always demands from his front players, and Bosnia were allowed so 
little time on the ball they were simply unable to dictate their own tempo.

There was only a concerted spell at the start of the second half when Bosnia 
put together some prolonged possession but, even then, Ireland’s goalkeeper, 
Darren Randolph, was not called upon to make a noteworthy save. Shane Long, a 
second-half substitute, ran clear with an opportunity to make it 3-0 and, on 
chances created, there could be no argument they deserved the win, even if the 
penalty that put them on their way was harsh on their opponents.

Ervin Zukanovic, the Bosnian adjudged to have handled Daryl Murphy’s cross, 
was so close to the ball an argument could legitimately be made there was 
little he could do about it. The ball struck him, rather than the other way 
round, but the Dutch official, Bjorn Kuipers, ruled in favour of Ireland and 
that left Walters placing the ball on the penalty spot and looking up to see 
his former Stoke colleague Asmir Begovic in the goal. Walters kept the ball 
low, aiming to Begovic’s right as the goalkeeper threw himself to the left.

Ireland had lift-off and, for O’Neill, the most encouraging part in the rest 
of the first half must have been how his team held off the possibility of a 
quick response. Bosnia were rushed into mistakes and, apart from one shot into 
the side-netting, Edin Dzeko was isolated in attack.

It can be tricky in these fixtures sometimes to get the balance right between 
attacking and conservatism but Ireland judged it well and their second goal 
gave them the breathing space they desperately wanted.

Emir Spahic’s dangerous tackle on Walters – reckless enough to warrant a 
yellow card that would have seen him sent off – gave Brady the opportunity to 
swing in a free-kick from the left. A Bosnian defender applied the first touch 
but Walters was at the far post. His volley beat Begovic at the near post and 
O’Neill was almost lost in the victory scrum.

Republic of Ireland v Bosnia-Herzegovina: Euro 2016 playoff – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/nov/16/republic-of-ireland-bosnia-herzegovina-euro-2016-playoff-live>
Football Weekly: Hungary qualify for Euro 2016 as England's friendly with 
France goes ahead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/audio/2015/nov/16/football-weekly-podcast-hungary-qualify-euro-2016> 