
Jordan Henderson will lead England out against Slovenia on Tuesday with the 
interim manager,Gareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate>, having praised his 
impact and growing maturity since taking on the unenviable task of succeeding 
Steven Gerrard as captain at Liverpool.

The midfielder, who impressed against Malta on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/08/england-v-malta-2018-world-cup-qualifier-live>
, will earn his 30th cap at the Stadion Stozice while the team’s full‑time 
captain, Wayne Rooney, watches on from the substitutes’ bench. Southgate has 
praised Rooney’s leadership skills within the setup over the past week and 
reiterated that the Manchester United player will remain “captain of this team 
while I am in charge”, but the armband will go to Henderson against the 
Slovenia team ranked No67 in the world.

England’s dropping of Wayne Rooney is not courageous, it is overdue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/10/dropping-wayne-rooney-england>
The 26-year-old, who will be flanked by Eric Dier as England seek greater 
defensive surety, was initially appointed captain at Liverpool by Brendan 
Rodgers at the start of last season andretained the role under Jürgen Klopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/jurgen-klopp-jordan-henderson-liverpool-tottenham>
 over a campaign badly disrupted by injury. Yet any doubts that he did not have 
the character or drive to make his mark on Merseyside have been allayed by his 
performances this season, with that form having obviously been noted by 
Southgate.

Now, if only for one game, he must follow another talismanic performer as he 
takes over on the pitch. “I’ve been very impressed by him,” the interim manager 
said. “What stood out for me is that he has taken over as captain at a football 
club were he has succeeded one of the most iconic figures in English football 
of all time. He has matured from that. He has shown great leadership skills 
with his club and is used to being captain, which is important.”

Henderson, despite being handed the armband, was keen to stress Rooney’s 
importance.

“Wayne is very experienced and, for me, he has been one of the best players in 
the world for many years,” said Henderson. “He sets an example to all of us on 
and off the field. He is someone we all look up to as a captain and a leader 
for his experience and the type of person that he is. He is massive for this 
team and just because he is not playing tomorrow, it won’t change anything. I 
am sure people will make a big deal of him not starting but, in football, teams 
change tactically for different opposition and for different reasons. As I 
said, this doesn’t change anything for us as a team in terms of Wayne not 
starting. He is our captain, he leads by example, and he’ll be ready to come on 
and make an impact when given the opportunity.”

Gary Cahill, the vice-captain under Roy Hodgson, may earn his 50th cap in 
Slovenia and he, Theo Walcott and Joe Hart have greater experience in terms of 
appearances among the current squad. Yet none of that trio captains his club 
side, a factor the manager clearly took into account. “He has got a voice and 
an opinion within this group too,” Southgate said. “He has got his clear ideas 
of what we need to work on, and a good tactical mind and understanding. Again, 
it was not an easy decision as there are other senior players in that dressing 
room, but he is the captain of a big football club and is used to that 
responsibility. It was the right decision for me.”

England captain Wayne Rooney dropped by Gareth Southgate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/england-football-wayne-rooney-gareth-southgate-dropped-slovenia-world-cup>
Henderson has also received a glowing report from the man he will replace. “I 
think Jordan is a fantastic leader,” said Rooney. “He has taken an incredibly 
difficult job from Steven Gerrard at Liverpool and he’s really grown into the 
position. He’s a fantastic player with great leadership qualities and he 
deserves his chance. It will be an incredibly proud moment for him and his 
family.”

Dier’s involvement, having been rested on Saturday after a minor hamstring 
complaint, had always been pencilled in, withEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> braced for a sterner examination 
than that offered by Malta at Wembley. The Tottenham player has made the 
defensive-midfield brief his own of late and is likely to sit in front of the 
back-line alongside Henderson, with his club-mate Danny Rose returning to the 
starting lineup for the injured Ryan Bertrand.

“I think it’s clear that you are talking about two different profiles of 
player,” Southgate said when asked if Dier was a straight replacement for 
Rooney. “They have different attributes. That’s the basis of the decision. As a 
coach you have to look at the right setup for that game. I knew with this 
situation that obviously the news would leak. It was pretty obvious that Eric 
would come into the game.”
 