
The Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> players, 
Virgil van Dijk such a towering presence in their number, were saluting a giddy 
travelling support long after the final whistle here. This club has waited 
three decades to force passage into a League Cup semi-final, but the new year 
will bring a collision against those same opponents from 1987, Liverpool, and 
thoughts of Wembley. They will be thrilled at the prospect of further progress.

This squad will not be daunted by the prospect of confronting Jürgen Klopp’s 
side, whose6-1 win at St Mary’s had jettisoned Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/02/southampton-liverpool-capital-one-cup-match-report>
 from the fifth round last year. Claude Puel, with only three starters retained 
from the weekend, could point to this victory as evidence of strength in depth 
as well as real cause for optimism. Few visiting teams will prevail as 
comfortably as this at the Emirates, hassling and harrying opponents who had 
not been beaten since the opening weekend, and ensuring their advantage was 
established early. Theirs was the swagger, the experience and all the bite on 
show.

It said everything that, when Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> would normally have expected to 
be laying siege to their opponents’ goal late on, it was their goalkeeper, 
Emiliano Martínez, blocking sharply from Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg’s shot, and 
Ainsley Maitland-Niles hacking Sam McQueen’s attempt from the goalline. Arsène 
Wenger bemoaned a lack of urgency in the first half which allowed Southampton 
to build their lead, but neither did his side whip up a frenzy of late 
opportunities when they were chasing the game. “Disappointing” was his verdict 
of the whole occasion, with the home support making clear their disgust at 
half-time and full-time. One route to silverware has been blocked off. It was 
as if the 19-match unbeaten run counted for little.

Southampton merited everything they achieved. Their authority was personified 
by Sofiane Boufal’s display, the Moroccan revelling in only his third start for 
the club since a record £21m arrival from Lille in the summer. He tormented 
back-tracking Arsenal players whenever the visitors countered, gliding away 
from his markers with menace. It was his first-time shot from Ryan Bertrand’s 
cutback 13 minutes in which Rob Holding blocked, only for the ball to run free 
to Jordy Clasie just inside the area. The Dutch international instinctively 
belted the loose ball into the corner with glee to register a first goal for 
the club.

The reward had been sparked by Maya Yoshida’s glorious crossfield pass from 
deep for Bertrand to collect but, in the relative simplicity of its 
construction, the goal exposed Arsenal’s fragility across an unfamiliar back 
line. The home side’s huff and puff in the period after the goal never 
threatened to force an equaliser. Then Harrison Reed snapped at Aaron Ramsey to 
steal back possession and, via a touch from Bertrand, the busily impressive 
Steven Davis supplied Boufal down the left.

The forward teased space from Gabriel before liberating Bertrand on the edge 
of the box and, with one touch to gather and another to spit his shot away 
before Holding could suffocate the attempt, Southampton’s lead was doubled. 
Martínez, perhaps unsighted by the clutter of bodies ahead of him, reacted late 
and the ball scuttled unchecked into the corner of the net.

“We were clinical in that half, two chances and two goals, and I like this,” 
muttered Puel through a smile. “We actually created many more chances in the 
second half and could have made the game safe, but it was still a fantastic 
result for us. Good solidarity, good attitude. I enjoyed what my players did.”

Boufal and McQueen might have added the third well before Wenger flung on Alex 
Oxlade-Chamberlain in desperate pursuit of the tie. The best Arsenal managed 
all night was arguably the England international’s dreadful attempt from Granit 
Xhaka’s clever touch, the ball arcing horribly over the bar. But Fraser Forster 
would not be beaten, with Yoshida and Van Dijk so resolute ahead of him.

This Southampton team boasts rare quality, particularly when one considers 
Charlie Austin, Nathan Redmond, José Fonte and Cédric Soares will be back for 
the Premier League game at Crystal Palace on Saturday. Their mid-table position 
in the top flight seems like a deception on nights such as this, and is perhaps 
primarily a reflection of having to juggle domestic duties with an attempt to 
progress in the Europa League. But this competition is offering the most 
immediate prospect of silverware.

“Arsène just told me to go on and win it,” said Puel when asked about his 
embrace with Wenger, once his manager at AS Monaco, at the end. By then the 
away support were in full voice while the locals grumbled towards the exits.
 