
As Veronica Brunati awoke on 9 July, 2014 she was greeted by a tweet from 
Diego “El Cholo” Simeone expressing his condolences to the family of Jorge “El 
Topo” López, a much loved Argentinian journalist covering theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>. “No!” Veronica 
replied, also on twitter, followed by “Diego, don’t tell me that”. Minutes 
later another tweet from her read “Please, I am El Topo’s wife. Please someone 
call me and tell me what’s going on”.

Pep Guardiola warned by Uefa for ‘Justice for Topo’ T-shirt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/29/pep-guardiola-warned-uefa-topo-t-shirt>
Just a few hours before, she had said good night to her husband and the father 
of her two children. She was staying in a hotel in São Paulo while he was 
moving across the city to stay with his colleagues. They were both journalists 
covering the World Cup in Brazil for different media outlets. Their young 
children stayed with Veronica’s mother in Belo Horizonte, where Argentina were 
based for the early stages of the World Cup. ButArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> had reached the last four of the 
tournament and, on the eve of the semi-final, São Paulo beckoned.

As Topo made his way towards his hotel on that fateful July night, the taxi he 
was travelling in was hit by some youths, who were being chased by the police. 
“It is so dangerous to carry out a five-hour long car chase at such speed on a 
main road of São Paulo on the eve of a World Cup semi-final,” says Brunati, 
whose entire life was turned upside down that night. “The drivers being chased 
had already been identified by the police, they could have proceeded in a much 
less risky manner,” she tells me now, stressing that the police targets escaped 
from the crash site and stormed into a nearby hotel waving guns, before being 
apprehended. “Given the number of tourists and journalists visiting that area 
of São Paulo on that night a strict safety protocol should have been observed,” 
says Brunati.

Throughout the following days, messages of support and offers of help began to 
pour in and those journalists present at the media centre still speak about the 
eerie sadness that enveloped the Argentinian correspondents during the minute’s 
silence prior to the match against Holland. After the game, the players 
remembered Topo with great fondness. They worked with him but he was also a 
friend.

Topo had a longstanding professional, and personal, relationship with River 
Plate, the Argentinian club back in Buenos Aires, and a press room at the club 
was named in his honour shortly after the World Cup. River Plate hired lawyers 
to represent Brunati in Brazil and help with the myriad of legal and 
administrative things that needed to be sorted out: from retrieving her 
husband’s possessions, to repatriating his body, as well as initiating criminal 
proceedings on her behalf.

A first stage has now been completed: the driver and passengers of the 
speeding getaway car have already been found guilty of numerous charges 
including murder, reckless driving, resisting arrest, car theft among other 
charges and they are now awaiting sentencing.

Speaking from São Paulo, Carlos Muller, Brunati’s lawyer, says they are now 
finalising the paperwork necessary to also bring charges against the State of 
São Paulo. “We will press charges of negligence, recklessness and malpractice 
by the military police while conducting the chase of the robbers and the civic 
police, who were then involved in dealing with the aftermath of the crash.

“It is our understanding that the police did not follow the minimum security 
procedures necessary during the chase and are therefore directly responsible 
for Topo’s death, and I say this because the very drivers of the police car 
have already stated in court that the high speed they drove made them fear for 
their own lives, but not the lives and safety of the civilians around them.”

Muller adds that the complaint will also raise the conduct of the civic 
police, apart from anything else because there was no one at the police station 
who spoke either Spanish or English, in the context of the World Cup, adding to 
the family’s distress and confusion. According to the Brazilian constitution it 
is an obligation of the state to provide safety and guarantee the wellbeing of 
everyone on Brazilian soil. “Another important factor here is that this was a 
Fifa event where Fifa demanded extra legislation so the president sanctioned 
extra laws to guarantee this; in this aspect the state is also obliged to 
guarantee safety. So how can it be that a citizen of the world, I’m not saying 
a journalist, but a citizen, becomes a victim in such circumstances?” says 
Muller.

As well as the police drivers, the taxi driver has also given evidence in 
court stating all he saw was the police vehicle approaching at high speed. 
Brunati mentions that the taxi was uninsured, something she finds shocking in 
the context of a World Cup semi-final. She further raises issues over the 
questionable manner in which the police first contacted the local Brazilian 
media, leading to the story breaking on social media before either herself, her 
partner’s employers or the Argentinian authorities were contacted.

In addition, there are questions over certain factual errors appearing on the 
initial police report and death certificate, and procedures of how the body and 
Topo’s posessions were dealt with in the aftermath.

Brunati feels badly let down by Fifa and the World Cup organising committee. 
She insists the only reaction to date from Fifa has been a single tweet that 
evening from the Fifa president Sepp Blatter’s account regretting Topo’s 
passing – and she has mounted a campaign on Twitter#JusticiaParaTopo 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/JusticiaParaTopo?src=hash> and a Justice for Topo 
Facebook page <https://www.facebook.com/JusticiaparaTopo>, seeking to clarify 
and elucidate the events surrounding her husband’s death.

The T-shirts and banners with the logo have been displayed by the football 
community often now. In January Barcfelona and Atlético Madrid players posed 
together before a match with the banner. The couple had lived in Spain and Topo 
had developed a bond with players such as Barcelona’s Lionel Messi and Atlético 
Madrid’s Argentinian manager Simeone as well as Spanish journalists such as Lu 
Martín from El Pais. Martín was the person who made sure a #JusticiaParaTopo 
T-shirt was worn by the Bayern Munich manager, Pep Guardiola.

Brunati says that within hours of the news breaking in Spain on 9 July, Martín 
had been in touch to express support from himself, Guardiola and several other 
colleagues and friends.

Guardiola wore the T-shirt during a Champions League press conference in 
April, ahead of Bayern Munich’s game against Porto, and was subsequently 
charged by Uefa for an “incident of non-sporting” nature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/22/pep-guardiola-fined-uefa-t-shirt-jorge-topo-lopez>
, before escapingwith a warning on Friday afternoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/29/pep-guardiola-warned-uefa-topo-t-shirt>
.

No doubt Guardiola was aware of the implications and consequences of his 
action but still decided to wear the T-shirt in the hope of creating public 
awareness for Brunati’s cause. And Uefa helped him do just that with their 
charge, 10 months on from the tragedy.

Like many within the football community of players and managers Guardiola took 
a humane stance over Topo’s tragic death – after all, he was a colleague 
working to promote and distribute football – and perhaps without meaning to, 
Uefa have helped him spread the word.
 