
A storm is brewing over the decision by Press Gazette to accept sponsorship 
for this year’s British journalism awards fromImpress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/impress>.

Judges have raised the issue with the magazine’s editor, Dominic Ponsford, 
arguing that the choice of Impress, the regulator founded as a rival to the 
Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso), is inappropriate.


The objectors see Impress as a state-backed body that presents a threat to 
press freedom. It has recently received official recognition under the royal 
charter on press regulation.

One of the judges, speaking on an off-the-record basis, said he would pursue 
the matter today (Friday) during what will be the second stage of judging.

He said that, given the fact that Impress does not regulate any of the 
newspapers responsible for the journalistic output under consideration, it was 
wrong for Press Gazette to allow them to be sponsors.

The choice will not have been anything to do with Ponsford and his editorial 
team, however. It is a commercial matter. Sponsorships are arranged by the 
magazine’s publisher, Progressive Media Group.

It has been approached for a comment and, at the time of writing, the company 
has yet to respond. Press Gazette is regulated byIpso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> and its editorial line has been less 
than supportive of Impress.

The complaining judge said Ponsford “has been given 24 hours to sort it out”, 
although it is unclear what would happen should the situation remain the same.

A boycott of the awards by newspapers seems unlikely, although some editors 
are exercised by any contact with Impress.

It is largely funded by Max Mosley <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mosley>, 
the former head of Formula One motor racing, who is regarded as anathema by 
certain editors and publishers.

Ponsford is not speaking about the matter ahead of today’s meeting. There is 
no mention of Impress’s sponsorshipon the website 
<http://awards.pressgazette.co.uk/>, which carries the logos of several 
organisations.

Impress is not represented on the judging panel and it is stressed that the 
judges’ decisions will be reached independently of any newspaper or outside 
body.

The awards ceremony is due to be staged on 6 December at the Stationers’ Hall 
in London.
 