
Junk food adverts aimed at children are to be banned online, in print and in 
the cinema after a detailed consultation on the damage they do by encouraging 
children to eat fattening and unhealthy food.


The announcement of curbs in non-broadcast media by the Committee on 
Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> Practice (CAP) was 
greeted with relief by health campaigners, who have long been frustrated by the 
deluge of ads for sweets, sugary drinks and fat-laden foods aimed at children, 
especially via their smartphones, often in the form of games. There was an 
outcry when the government’s obesity strategy published in the summer did not 
address the advertising issue.

The ruling was a start but did not go far enough, health organisations said. 
It will stop adverts for foods high in fat, salt and sugar in entertainment and 
publications explicitly for children but not in those for adults or families 
unless children make up more than 25% of the audience.

Junk food shortening lives of children worldwide, data shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/07/junk-food-shortening-lives-children-obesity-diabetes-data>
Cartoon characters and celebrities will be banned from promotional material 
but not food packaging, meaning they will still be seen on the boxes of 
sugar-laden breakfast cereals.

The CAP said it was bringing other media in line with the rules on TV 
advertising. “Childhood obesity is a serious and complex issue and one that 
we’re determined to play our part in tackling,” said its chairman, James Best.

“These restrictions will significantly reduce the number of ads for high fat, 
salt or sugar products seen by children. Our tough new rules are a clear 
demonstration that the ad industry is willing and ready to act on its 
responsibilities and puts the protection of children at the heart of its work.”

The need to act has become clear as children spend more and more time on 
computers and phones. Research from Ofcom shows that young people aged five to 
15 spend about 15 hours a week online, overtaking time spent watching TV for 
the first time.

From 1 July, adverts for products with high fat, salt or sugar content will no 
longer be allowed on video-sharing platforms and sponsored games if they are 
likely to appeal to children under the age of 16. Promotions, licensed 
characters and celebrities popular with children will be allowed for healthy 
food and drink products only.

Action on Sugar <https://www.theguardian.com/society/sugar> welcomed the new 
rules. “However, we need to see bans on advertising go further, as they 
currently do not manage exposure to these adverts during popular family 
programmes such as the X Factor or Britain’s Got Talent,” said its campaign 
manager, Jenny Rosborough, a registered nutritionist.

The Obesity Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Alliance, a 
coalition of more than 30 health charities, agreed that the move was important, 
“but it’s concerning that the new restrictions only apply when it can be shown 
that at least 25% of the audience are children. This loophole means that a 
significant number of children could still be exposed to adverts for high fat, 
salt and sugary products,” it said.

 “Research shows advertising greatly influences the food children choose to 
eat, and with one-third of children overweight or obese by their 11th birthday, 
we need to protect them from relentless junk food marketing in all walks of 
life.”

Junk food TV ads make children hungry and tempted, charity finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/05/junk-food-ads-children-cancer-research-obesity-advertising>
The Food and Drink Federation, which has fought other curbs including the 
government’ssugar tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/16/sugar-tax-industry-opponents-launch-campaign-levy-soft-drinks-obesity>
, was supportive of the changes. “Last year, FDF announced its backing for 
major changes to the way food and drink is advertised, based on our belief that 
non-broadcasting advertising rules should be in line with the strict rules 
already in place for TV,” said its chief executive, Ian Wright.

 “HFSS food and drink ads have long been banned on children’s TV, with 
under-16s today seeing far fewer of these ads than in recent years. As young 
people move away from traditional media towards new and social media, we feel 
it’s important that ad rules keep up with this change.”

The Advertising Association said other action against obesity was also needed. 
“These new rules reflect changing media habits and reinforce a regime which has 
already greatly reduced the advertising kids see for sugary, fatty foods. 
Regulation is important but we also know the effects of advertising are 
relatively small, so whether it’s supporting parents with healthier choices, 
improving education or getting more people more active, let’s now grab the 
opportunity to put our collective energy into tackling the big drivers of 
obesity,” said its chief executive, Stephen Woodford.
 