
Kelvin MacKenzie <https://www.theguardian.com/media/kelvin-mackenzie> told the 
then News International boss, Rebekah Brooks, and Sun editor, Dominic Mohan, he 
was quitting as a columnist in 2011 because he thought they had kept the full 
extent of phone hacking from him, according to evidence presented as part of a 
civil case against the newspaper’s publisher on Thursday.


The email forms part of evidence presented on behalf of public figures and 
others suing News GroupNewspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>
, the News UK subsidiary that owns the Sun, over alleged phone hacking and 
other privacy intrusions.

In an email to Brooks and Mohan sent at the height of the hacking scandal, the 
former Sun editor said he was resigning for three reasons, the first of which 
was the “inexcusable” way he believed he had been kept in the dark about how 
extensive the hacking had been.

He wrote on 20 June 2011: “I swallowed whole the News International position 
that it was the work of two rogue employees. As the go-to guy for the media 
(News never responds to radio or television requests) when it comes to the Sun 
or theNews of the World <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> 
issues, I was happy to take on the [Chris] Huhnes and [John] Prescotts in live 
debate and on occasion defeat them. So good was my defence that on more than 
one occasion I received texts and phone calls from Rebekah urging me to do more.

“But of course you guys knew different. It wasn’t ‘two rogue employees’. The 
scale, the width and the depth were much more serious than that and yet you 
allowed me to twist in the wind rather than let me know the reality. That was 
inexcusable.”

The other reasons Mackenzie gave for offering his resignation were the Sun’s 
employment of Jeremy Clarkson, who at the time was preventing his ex-wife from 
speaking about their marriage using a superinjunction, and his feeling that he 
was treated as part of the “ancien regime” and “like an outsider”.

MacKenzie went on to suggest he could quietly stop writing his column in a 
month’s time before saying he was “very anxious that their email does not get 
wide circulation and therefore, if the deal terms suit, a simple text saying 
‘OK’ would keep the numbers in the loop to a minimum”.

The evidence submitted in the hearing at the high court also includes Brooks’ 
response to MacKenzie denying any knowledge of what he was alleging. She wrote: 
“None of this email make [sic] any sense whatsoever and the allegations are 
unfair and untrue. You are clearly upset about something though – so please 
let’s meet asap and discuss.”

Brooks had also forwarded her response to Mohan saying: “I wouldn’t respond. 
Let’s see if he replies.”

The email was sent on 20 June, and MacKenzie’s departure was revealed 10 days 
later, on 30 June. Just a week later it was announced that the News of the 
World would close, followed shortly by Brooks’ resignation as chief executive 
of News International.

Brooks, who had edited both the News of the World and the Sun, was acquitted 
in 2014 of all charges related to phone hacking in a lengthy criminal trail, 
and in September 2015 she became the chief executive ofNews UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsinternational>, which had replaced News 
International. At the same trial, her successor at the News of the World, Andy 
Coulson, who subsequently became David Cameron’s communications chief, was 
found guilty of conspiring to hack phones and sentenced to 18 months in prison.

Lawyers for News UK are fighting to limit the disclosure of thousands of 
emails and other documents that the claimants say provide evidence that phone 
hacking and practices such as “blagging” private information were more 
prevalent at News UK’s titles than previously thought.

Former England and Real Madrid footballer Jonathan Woodgate recently added his 
name to the list of 16 complainants – which already included entertainer Les 
Dennis. There are also understood to be dozens of other people considering 
whether to make claims.

In September News UK took the unusual step of dropping its solicitors 
Linklaters mid-case, replacing them with a team from Clifford Chance including 
Jeremy Sandelson, who was instructed by James Murdoch during the Leveson 
inquiry and the culture media and sport select committee inquiry into phone 
hacking.

MacKenzie, who was editor of the Sun during its notorious coverage of the 
Hillsborough disaster, first became a columnist on the paper in 2006. After 
quitting in 2011, he went on to write for the Daily Mail, but left in July 2012 
after barely a year before briefly joining the Telegraph the following year. He 
eventually returned to the Sun in 2014 under Mohan’s successor, David Dinsmore, 
who is currently News UK’s chief operating officer under Brooks.

News UK declined to comment.
 