
“We haven’t lost yet!” was the rallying cry on Wednesday from the leader of a 
local campaign group outraged by plans to close Kempton racecourse and build 
3,000 homes there. Alan Doyle, who runs KeepKempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> Green, has spent more than three 
years fighting Jockey Club proposals to build on land next to the famous track 
and claims credit for turning around the local council’s attitude to the plans.

Doyle recalled: “People said years ago: ‘You lot are mad, why are you wasting 
your time? This is going to happen inevitably.’ And we turned it round; the 
council, having been against us, is with us. The Jockey Club, who thought they 
would be finished by now, haven’t started.”

Ascot may rival Sandown to host King George after Kempton Park closure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/sandown-not-guaranteed-king-george-vi-chase-kempton-park>
But Doyle was as stunned as most of the racing community this week when it 
emerged that the club’s plans now extend beyond the parklands alongside the 
Sunbury track and involve the entire site, with the result that the course 
could be closed in 2021. “It’s a real shock,” Doyle continued, mulling the news 
over coffee in Sunbury’s Magpie pub. “We didn’t think they’d go so far as 
threatening to bulldoze the place. It’s profitable.” A Jockey Club spokesman 
confirmed that Kempton makes an annual profit, though the extent of it would be 
difficult to extricate from the accounts of a group that includes 13 other 
tracks.

Doyle argues that the local infrastructure cannot cope with significant 
additional housing and points to news reports from 2014 suggesting that Sunbury 
health centre is under as much pressure as any in Britain, with patients 
sometimes queuing before dawn for an appointment. He says the local roads do 
not cope well with existing traffic and fears for the consequences of another 
3,000 cars being added.

Asked to assess his chance of preventing the proposed development, Doyle said: 
“I think we’re getting closer and closer to 50-50. When we started, years ago, 
I reckoned we had a 20% chance. It’s amazing how the facts can change if you 
put up a fight, absolutely amazing. If you make your local officials’ lives not 
nice, they change their minds. And it’s amazing how things that are 
‘inevitable’ aren’t.

“We’re not alone. This is happening on sites all around the south-east and I’m 
sure there are places in a worse plight, with more claim to be green belt than 
Kempton Park. We’re not alone but obviously for us it’s important. It’s green 
belt and if Kempton goes, we have no chance of protecting any other piece of 
land in this borough. It’s a flagship.”

Doyle, who discovered the initial plans for Kempton years ago while chair of a 
local residents’ association, stresses he is not simply anti-development and 
tells of how his group cooperated with one local builder who reduced the scale 
of his plans. “Who knows? We may lose. But you have to put up a fight. You 
can’t just let it happen.”

The Jockey Club says it is faced with a once-in-30-years opportunity to 
develop Kempton and raise a huge sum for investment elsewhere in its racecourse 
holdings. The rare opening is presented by Spelthorne borough council’s recent 
call for sites for new housing, coupled with the simultaneous review of the 
local green-belt boundaries. The club says it will not proceed with its plans 
unless it is assured of raising £100m, to be spent on other jumps tracks as 
well as on a new all-weather circuit at Newmarket.

The council’s leader, Ian Harvey, has reiterated his opposition to any 
proposed housing at Kempton. Quoted in local media after Tuesday’s news, Harvey 
said: “I have consistently made clear my strong opposition to development of 
this site and my determination to protect the green belt in Spelthorne. Nothing 
has changed. The council’s finances are very robust and any suggestion that it 
needs money from new development is completely groundless.”

Behind the bar at the Magpie, Toni Doncaster expressed shock at Kempton’s 
possible closure. “I think it’s just insane because it’s such a massive part of 
the community,” she said. “It’s something that Sunbury’s so known for. The 
racedays are such a big thing and I remember going to Kempton market on 
Thursdays with my mum. It’s a massive part of all our lives.”

Saturday’s jump-racing fixture here may be an occasion for regular spectators 
to voice their displeasure but Wednesday night’s all-weather fixture was as 
sparsely attended as most such racedays. One professional gambler, known only 
by the name Tracksuit Dave, expressed a measure of regret. “This is my bread 
and butter and a lot of other people’s as well,” he said. “It’s a lovely track. 
It’s a travesty to me.”

Nor was he impressed by the plans for a new track at Newmarket. “The only 
people who are gonna go are the stable lads and they’ll get in for nothing. 
You’re talking about history – look at these two statues, Desert Orchid and 
Kauto Star. This is gutting for everybody, not just the punter.”
 