
There are no weather-related problems ahead of Kempton's two-day Christmas 
meeting, featuring the William HillKing George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> on Boxing Day.

Although the track has sustained 71mm of rainfall since 15 December, the going 
on Christmas Day morning was described as soft.

Further intermittent showers have been forecast but clerk of the course Barney 
Clifford is in fine spirits.

He said: "We've had one millimetre of rain overnight and the ground is soft. 
The forecast is good for Christmas Day, and likewise on Boxing Day.

"There is a risk of shower, but nothing at all that would give us any cause 
for concern. It's all very good news."

Fontwell's Boxing Day fixture is also likely to go ahead without any issues. 
Five millimetres of overnight rain has left the ground heavy, but there are no 
plans to inspect at this stage.

Clerk of the course Ed Arkell said: "Providing the forecast it correct, we 
will be fine. The track dried nicely on Tuesday, despite a couple of showers, 
and the forecast is for a decreasing risk of showers."

It is also good news at Sedgefield, where the going on Christmas Day morning 
was described as soft. The forecast ahead of their Boxing Day card is for dry 
conditions.

Ffos Las and Huntingdon were not so fortunate, as both meetings were abandoned 
on Christmas Eve because of waterlogged tracks.

Market Rasen also reports for duty on Boxing Day, with the vibes from 
Lincolnshire deeply encouraging. The going is soft on the chase course and 
soft, good to soft in places on the hurdles track. A dry night has been 
strengthened by a positive forecast for Boxing Day.

Irish racing fans also look set fair for a bumper Thursday, with Limerick, 
Leopardstown and Down Royal all in a happy place.

Irish Turf Club press officer Cliff Noone said: "It's a fine, beautiful day 
here, and there are no concerns at all three courses. Everything is ready to 
go. There's no rain forecast for Christmas Day or tomorrow so it's all systems 
go."

Hopes are also rising that Towcester can overcome the threat of waterlogging. 
Although the nearby River Tove burst its banks on Tuesday afternoon, the 
residual standing water on the track is beginning to recede.

A statement issued by the track on Christmas Day evening read: "The forecast 
is to be dry and clear tonight and tomorrow. Most of the standing water has 
drained away and conditions continue to improve. We remain positive that racing 
will go ahead. Further updates will be issued at 7.30am."

There are no problems at Wetherby, where the forecast is for a dry 48 hours. 
The going at the Yorkshire circuit is soft, good to soft in places.

Wincanton had been battered by the recent wind and rain, which left standing 
water on parts of the track on Christmas Eve. The situation has, however, 
improved, with the official going heavy, soft in places.

Four millimetres of rain has fallen within the past 24 hours but Wincanton 
officials claim the forecast for Boxing Day "looks dry".
 