
The DJ Andy Kershaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-kershaw> today 
pleaded guilty to drink-driving and breaching a restraining order banning him 
from approaching his ex-girlfriend.

The former BBC Radio 1 presenter, who now has a show on Radio 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3>, admitted the offences at a court 
on the Isle of Man, where he was arrested last month close to the home of 
Juliette Banner.

Kershaw, 48, had moved to the town of Peel with Ms Banner and their two 
children in April last year.

But the couple split and Ms Banner moved out of the family home and into a 
small terraced house around 150 yards away.

Ms Banner won a restraining order against Kershaw on August 1 and he was 
arrested close to her property on August 29.

She has since moved house in an effort to reduce tensions between the couple.

The drink-driving charge came after Kershaw was stopped by police on September 
13.

He was breathalysed and gave a reading of 57 micrograms of alcohol in 100 
millilitres of breath. The legal limit is 30.

The deputy high bailiff, Alastair Montgomerie, adjourned the case until 
October 19 for social inquiry reports to be prepared.

He said: "As I have not heard any of the facts, the court is indicating all 
sentencing options are open."

Kershaw was bailed on condition that he cooperate with the probation service 
and not drive a car.

He must also comply with the original restraining order requirements that he 
does not approach Ms Banner, observes a 9pm to 7am curfew and does not enter 
pubs or restaurants selling alcohol.

Outside court, Kershaw said: "I've lost my kids, I've lost the woman I love, 
I've lost everything. It's a very difficult time for me. I just want peace and 
quiet."

Kershaw, originally from Rochdale, Manchester, studied politics at Leeds 
University before moving to London in 1984 where he worked as Billy Bragg's 
driver and roadie.

He was hired by the BBC and worked on the Whistle Test music show, before 
going on to host his own slot on Radio 1.

Kershaw has presented a world music show on Radio 3 since 2001, but it is not 
known if he will return to the show.
 