
The Home Office is investigating allegations by the Labour MP Mr Tam Dalyell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tam-dalyell>, that a 78-year-old 
Shrewsbury woman died after a violent encounter with British intelligence 
officers she discovered searching her home for sensitive documents concerning 
the Belgrano affair.

The claims, made in the House of Commons yesterday by the MP for Linlithgow, 
were denied by the police, whose own investigation into the mysterious death of 
Miss Hilda Murrell earlier this year is now in its ninth month.

But they also produced a call from Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal MP for Yeovil, 
for an independent inquiry into the matter. Miss Murrell's nephew, Mr Rob 
Green, who held a key position in naval intelligence during the Falklands 
conflict, is a constituent of Mr Ashdown's.

Mr Green said last night that he did not accept that the Belgrano controversy 
had caused his aunt's death. She opposed nuclear power and was no doubt listed 
as a potential subversive because of her criticism of the Government's attitude 
towards nuclear waste, he said.

The body of Miss Murrell, one of the country's most celebrated rose growers, 
was found on March 24 in a copse about six miles from her Shropshire home, 
where there had been signs of a break-in. At an inquest earlier this month, at 
which a verdict of unlawful killing was recorded, Detective Chief 
Superintendent David Cole, of West Mercia Police, who is heading the 
investigation, said he had been led to the inescapable conclusion that Miss 
Burrell was attacked by a burglar looking for cash.

He told the coroner, Colonel David Crawford-Clarke, that she had been driven 
from her home in her Renault 5 car, stabbed and left to die in the cold.

At the time of her death Miss Murrell, who was an active anti-nuclear power 
campaigner, was working on a document to be presented to the Sizewell B 
inquiry. It was later read at the inquiry by her nephew. It was this activity 
which fuelled earlier speculation about the reasons for the break-in at her 
home.

But yesterday in the Commons Mr Dalyell claimed that the real reason was that 
it was thought that some of Mr Green's supposed records on the Belgrano affair 
might be at the home of his aunt.

He told the House: 'I am informed that the intruders were not after money, not 
after nuclear information, but were checking to see if there were any 
Belgrano-related documents of Commander Green in the home of his aunt.

'Things went disastrously wrong. They had no intention of injuring, let alone 
killing, a 78-year-old rose grower. Yet being the lady she was, and in her 
home, Hilda Murrell fought and was severely injured. She was then killed or 
left to die from hypothermia - and the cover-up had to begin because the 
searchers were members of British intelligence, I am informed.'

Mr Dalyell went on to say that there were inconsistencies in police accounts 
given to Miss Murrell's family after the discovery of her body, three days 
after the apparent attempted burglary.

He claimed that the police version of a burglar breaking in and being 
surprised by the return of Miss Murrell 'did not tally with what was obviously 
a sophisticated break-in, in which the telephone had been cut, leaving it so 
callers could ring in but not out.'

Later yesterday Mr Dalyell said that the information which led him to make the 
allegations in the Commons had come from a 'confidential source.' He wanted a 
select committee of MPs created to monitor the activity of the security 
services.

A West Mercia police spokesman said yesterday that a report of their 
investigation had been sent to the Home Office, whose junior minister, Mr Giles 
Shaw, has promised that Mr Dalyell's allegations will be given 'full 
consideration and a proper and comprehensive reply.'

Mr Green, who has now retired from the navy, has publicly stated his 
opposition to the sending of the task force to the South Atlantic. He has 
described the sinking of the Belgrano as a necessary act in an unnecessary war. 
During the conflict he was involved in sending signals to HMS Conqueror, the 
submarine which sank the Argentine warship.
 