
Don Cossack finished strongly to record an easy success in the Grade Two 
Kinloch Brae Chase at Thurles on Thursday but the lazy side of his nature was 
on display too, prompting Gordon Elliott, his trainer, to suggest that the 
eight-year-old could wear cheekpieces when he lines up in the Gold Cup at 
Cheltenham in March.

Don Cossack set off as the 1-8 favourite against three opponents and crossed 
the line nearly 10 lengths clear of the runner-up, Wounded Warrior. It was not 
quite as bloodless a success as those bare facts might suggest, however, and 
for a few seconds on the final circuit, it seemed that Bryan Cooper, Don 
Cossack’s jockey, might need to earn his fee.

The favourite was ridden to keep his position after jumping both the fourth- 
and third-last fences, and was given a reminder by Cooper as well. It had the 
required effect, and Don Cossack was in complete command at the last, adding to 
the impression that he would have gone very close in the King George VI Chase 
at Kempton last month but for his fall at the second-last.

Don Cossack was narrowly in front of Cue Card, the eventual winner, when he 
came down at Kempton, having jumped the previous fence about a length behind 
him. As on Thursday, he raced a little lazily around halfway before staying on 
strongly, and Timeform rated his performance 3lb in front of both Cue Card and 
Vautour, who was beaten by a head into second place.

“I worked him in cheekpieces the other day and he absolutely flew,” Elliott 
said, “but I didn’t want to put them on him today. If we’re going to have them, 
we’ll have them for the Gold Cup. But that’s not definite, I’ll have to speak 
to Michael [O’Leary, Don Cossack’s owner] and Eddie [O’Leary, his racing 
manager] and we’ll see.

Impressive Don Cossack is an easy winner of the Punchestown Gold Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/29/impressive-don-cossack-punchestown-gold-cup>
“He’s that type of horse. Even when he won the Gold Cup at Punchestown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/29/impressive-don-cossack-punchestown-gold-cup>
 [in April] last year, before the turn in he was off the bridle. It’s not nice 
to be looking at, but he always seems to finish better and that’s his strength 
and hopefully we’ll have that for Cheltenham.

“He’s going to be an awful lot better on better ground. We’ve said it all 
along and the facts prove it, if you look at last year, when he gets the better 
ground, he’s a stone better horse. But he’ll have to be a stone better to win a 
Gold Cup.”

Don Cossack lined up for the Ryanair Chase at least year’s Festival and again 
finished strongly after being short of room two out.

The three-and-a-quarter miles of the Gold Cup will bring his stamina into play 
and he remains second-favourite for the Gold Cup behind Djakadam, last year’s 
runner-up, at a top price of 6-1.

“He’s come back in trip [today] which isn’t ideal as he’s turning into more of 
a stayer,” Cooper said. “He’s getting older and these old horses, they lose 
their speed when you train them to stay. What I liked was that when I jumped 
the second-last, I gave him two or three taps on the shoulder and he went on.

“He didn’t make any mistakes, when I wanted him he was there, but the big 
thing [will be] better ground. He’s by no means ungenuine, he’s just lazy, 
because we’ve spent two seasons trying to settle him and now that we have, he’s 
probably gone to sleep.

“He got the job done and now we can concentrate on Cheltenham. There’s only 
one day that counts.”

Don Cossack may have given his backers a few nervous moments on the way to 
victory, but he did not let them down as thoroughly as Bitofapuzzle, who 
travelled from Harry Fry’s stable to run in the card’s Grade Two novice chase 
for mares.

Sent off at 30-100, Bitofapuzzle was still travelling well three out, but did 
not come up at the fence when asked and gave Noel Fehily no chance to stay in 
the saddle. Victory eventually went to the 33-1 outsider Aunt Nora.

Impressive Don Cossack is an easy winner of the Punchestown Gold Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/29/impressive-don-cossack-punchestown-gold-cup> 