
Fide, the International Chess <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> 
Federation, holds its five-yearly presidential election in September and it is 
turning nasty.

The incumbent since 1995 is Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, controversial ruler of 
Russia's semi-autonomous Caucasian state Kalmykia. In his early years as Fide 
president Ilyumzhinov built a 'chess city', made the game mandatory in Kalmyk 
schools, and financed grandmaster chess so generously that his dubious human 
rights record and eccentric claim to have met "humanoid aliens" were shrugged 
off. But recently Fide's excessive reliance on ex-Soviet tournament venues and 
an autocratic rule change where a player loses if not seated at the board at 
the start have provoked a deluge of criticism.

Ilyumzhinov will be opposed by Anatoly Karpov, all-time world No3 and backed by
Garry Kasparov <https://www.theguardian.com/world/garry-kasparov>, all-time 
No1, abortive challenger for the 2008 Russian presidency and a fierce Kremlin 
critic. K and K, supported by the current world No1 Magnus Carlsen, held a 
fund-raiser in New York which raised over $100,000 for the Karpov campaign. A 
similar evening with Kasparov and Nigel Short is planned for Simpsons in the 
Strand, London, in August. K and K believe they can attract more Western 
sponsors to chess.

Many Western chess federations including the US and England have announced 
support for Karpov but Fide has 161 member nations, not far off the 200-plus of 
Fifa and the IOC, and Ilyumzhinov has won the last three elections with the 
help of sweeteners to third world delegates. Karpov is famous enough to turn 
some small countries his way, but the vote will be during the biennial team 
Olympiad at Khanty-Mansiysk in Siberia, a favoured Ilyumzhinov site.

An ugly fight for the Russian federation vote shows that the contest has a 
wider significance than just for chess. A majority chose K and K but a rival 
group led by the economist and presidential aide Arkady Dvorkovich first 
claimed a technical win then sent in security men to evict the pro-Karpov 
officials. Kalmykia's strategic position and its oil and gas, plus Kremlin 
hostility to Kasparov, may prove a key to this bitter contest.

3141 1 Bxf7+! Kxf7 2 Rc7+! Kf8 (if Nxc7 3 Qxg5 or Kg8 3 Qxe6+ Kh8 4 Qf7) 3 
Qh8+ Qg8 4 Qf6+ mates.
 