
It was one of the most dramatic moments of the World Cup, leaving many fans 
baffled. In the 120th minute of the quarter final against Costa Rica, Holland 
goalkeeper Jasper Cilissen was substituted for third-choice keeper Tim Krul. He 
went onto save two penalties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2014/jul/06/world-cup-football-world-cup-2014>
, seeing Holland through to the semi-final.

Many applauded the courage and the mind games of the Dutch manager Louis van 
Gaal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/louis-van-gaal>. But on closer 
inspection what the world was watching was one of the most high-profile 
examples of how technology and psychology are now deeply connected in modern 
sport. Some would argue that the emergence of technology in sport threatens to 
make it more mechanical, but the drama of the quarter-final suggests the 
opposite is true. It also highlights that knowledge of your opponent’s use of 
technology can be as powerful as having your own.

The Krul effect


After the win, van Gaal explained that Krul was simply a better penalty 
stopper. In fact, the data shows he had only saved two of the previous 20 
penalties he’d faced before that night; hardly the record of a specialist. The 
second choice goalkeeper in the Dutch squad, Michael Vorm, had a better record 
than Krul, having saved three of 11 penalties prior to theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>.

So why did van Gaal defy the apparent logic behind the numbers? He went on to 
reveal that Krul had studied past footage of all Costa Rica’s penalty takers 
before the game, a standard form of preparation and not something that 
Cillessen (or Vorm) would have found difficult to do. Krul concurred that his 
own video preparation was key to victory. And yet research shows that studying 
penalty takers is statistically insignificant to outcomes.

Studying goalkeepers is far more useful, according to a study by University 
College London 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0714/310714-Goalkeepers-prone-to-gamblers-fallacy>
 which suggests that most keepers conclude, after a few shots have gone in one 
direction, that the next player will change direction (despite each kick 
presenting the same odds for direction choice). By observing a goalkeeper, you 
can build up a picture over time that might reveal if they tend to guess early 
or wait. You can pin point particular weaknesses or habits they have. Indeed, 
when explaining the penalty shootout win against Greece in their previous 
match, the Costa Rican manager Jose Pinto revealed: “We had studied the 
opposition (goalkeeper) and that’s why we scored 100%.”

Video capture and editing is an established and readily available technology. 
Taking what Pinto had said to the media in the wake of victory against Greece, 
van Gaal, like any manager today, knew that the Costa Ricans would have studied 
Cillessen and would consequently have been aware of his weaknesses. He also 
knew it was unlikely that they had studied the Dutch third choice goalkeeper 
Krul, which made them unaware of his apparent strengths or weaknesses.


It was van Gaal’s understanding of his opponent’s technology-enabled 
preparations that provided the practical and psychological potency of his last 
minute substitution. “Their manager’s face when he saw me was priceless. It 
definitely had an impact” said Krul about his substitution. Chance had a big 
role to play, but it was the great reactions of Krul combined with van Gaal’s 
disruption of the Costa Rican team’s preparations and composure in the moment 
that proved telling.

Ahead of the game


Rather than making sport more predictable, the widespread adoption of 
technology creates a new opportunity for psychological gaming and drama. Player 
tracking systems for football, rugby, basketball, NFL and other professional 
sports have led to teams better understanding their own strengths and 
weaknesses through data. But crucially, if teams know that their opponents have 
such technology, they can predict their likely match tactics and respond 
accordingly. The tactical permutations will grow exponentially, as will the 
Machiavellian game changing plays and the high drama we love about sport.

Professor Jem Bendell of the Institute for Leadership and Sustainability 
<https://www.iflas.info> at the University of Cumbria Business School explains: 
“Whether in sport, war or market competition, knowing the assumptions and 
routines of an opponent can be as important as your own capabilities. Adopting 
new technologies can challenge our assumptions and change routines, but can 
also create new ones, even revealing vulnerabilities for a clever opponent. 
Therefore, understanding your opponents’ technologies can be as important as 
having them yourself.”

The practical implication for professional sport teams is that besides seeking 
to exploit the latest technologies for internal use, it will become paramount 
to constantly monitor what your opponents are doing. Most clubs aren’t there 
yet, and it’s clear that future assessments of new tech usage will need to be 
far more systematic, encompassing and outward looking if they are to lead to 
new opportunities to follow in van Gaal’s footsteps and out-think your opponent.

The evolution of technology in sport will not make sports more mechanical, but 
instead add new elements, enriching tactics, increasing tension and bringing 
drama to the fore.

Wolfram Klug is a sport business technologist, former business & technology 
director at international basketball federation FIBA, and CEO of the sport 
organisation consultants Digital Sport <http://www.digital-sport.net/>

The Creative Data hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/series/creative-data> is funded by 
Accenture <http://www.accenture-rugby.com/>. All content is editorially 
independent except for pieces labelled ‘Brought to you by Accenture’. Find out 
morehere. <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>



 