
Animation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/animation> has become such a vast 
and active division of cinema in recent years that the word itself no longer 
feels specific enough.Kubo and the Two Strings (Universal, PG), the Laika 
company’s ravishing new stop-motion spectacle, has about as much in common 
formally, stylistically and narratively with a Pixar CG romp as with any live 
action film. Muddling Japanese folklore with its own manner of whimsy in a tale 
of a samurai’s son on a complicated, spirit-riddled quest to save his family 
and discover his legacy, Travis Knight’s debut boasts frame after ornately 
designed frame of gasp-inducing beauty. It looks and leaps like nothing else in 
its peer group, yet I wish I’d been as absorbed by its world as I was awed by 
it. There’s something distancing and overworked about its ambitious adventure 
plotting, with a protagonist who never quite lights up inside. It’s the craft 
that held me entirely rapt.

Sheer technical ballast provides many of the thrills in Anthropoid (Icon, 15), 
Sean Ellis’s thoughtful, conscientiously acted and initially slightly musty 
anatomy of the 1942 assassination of Nazi official Reinhard Heydrich by exiled 
Czech soldiers – a historical nugget coincidentally receiving another depiction 
in this year’sforthcoming HHhH 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/27/most-exciting-period-and-historical-films-of-2017>
. Things start creakily as agents Cillian Murphy and Jamie Dornan (on strong 
form) navigate their undercover life in Prague, complete with stiff Europudding 
accents and an oppressively gravy-like palette. But it sparks to visceral life 
once the operation gets under way; its climactic, cathedral-set standoff is 
shot and cut with exemplary action film-making elan and may ring in your ears 
for some time after.

Speaking of aural assault, Iggy Pop and the Stooges get a suitably brash, 
buzzed tribute inGimme Danger (Dogwoof, 15), quiet quirkmeister Jim Jarmusch’s 
entertaining foray into rock doc territory – a film about as jumpy and 
crinkle-cut as Jarmusch’s recentPaterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/27/paterson-review-jim-jarmusch-adam-driver>
 was sweetly serene. To be honest, there’s less of an auteur stamp here than 
you might expect. The director is devoted entirely to his subject and little 
concerned with his experience of them. The result is an attentive, exhilarating 
fan valentine, amply filled with crunchy, carefully chosen archive footage, but 
not an improbable meeting of creative minds.
 Watch the trailer for Gimme Danger. 
New Zealand oddball Taika Waititi has pulled off an audience charmer in Hunt 
for the Wilderpeople(Signature, 12), a jaunty buddy comedy pairing an indolent 
urban foster kid (Julian Dennison, a smart but not smart alecky performer) with 
Sam Neill’s grizzled bush veteran as they head, pursued by sceptical social 
workers, into the not-so-great outdoors. It’s a cute setup, best when the 
pair’s relationship is most fractious, but their ramble runs out of path about 
halfway through. Bumptious goodwill just gets it by.

I was more consistently won over by another droll, kind-natured story of an 
adolescent fish out of water. Rewarded at Sundance last year but sadly denied a 
UK cinema release, Chad Hartigan’sMorris from America (Studiocanal, 15) plants 
a hip-hop-fixated African American 13-year-old in the supremely unlikely 
surrounds of suburban Heidelberg, and observes the ensuing culture shock with 
tremendous empathy and wit. Sparky comedian Craig Robinson plays his single dad 
with perfectly rumpled tenderness.

Finally, following a festive season dominated by comfortingly familial 
programming, Mubi.com’s curators are in a more challenging mood this month, 
launching a highlywelcome retrospective <https://mubi.com/specials/loznitsa> of 
the work of Ukraine’s Sergei Loznitsa, justly recognised as one of the great 
contemporary documentarians on the festival circuit, but rarely exposed to 
general audiences. The first film is his 25-minute 2000 shortThe Train Stop. A 
wry, surreal-to-real study of slumbering platform passengers undisturbed by 
passing trains, it’s an approachable introduction to his unmannered 
observational style and a beguiling gateway to his more imposing works. There’s 
good stuff to come.
 