
A future Labour government would ban the big four accountancy firms from 
delivering aid projects if they continue to use tax havens, the shadow 
international development secretary,Diane Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/diane-abbott>, has said.

 As MPs prepare to debate the disclosures about widespread global tax 
avoidance in the leaked Panama Papers, Abbott said accountancy firms might 
change their ways if they faced “opprobrium” by being banned from lucrative 
government contracts.

 Abbott warned of a conflict of interest in which the Department for 
International Development (DfID) spends money designed to reduce global poverty 
on the big four accountancy firms – KPMG, PwC, Deloitte and Ernst & Young – 
which fuel the “legal theft of the developing world’s public finances”.

 The shadow international development secretary told the Today programme on 
BBC Radio 4: “We have to appreciate that the big four – KPMG, PwC, Deloitte and 
Ernst & Young – are involved in facilitating tax avoidance on an industrial 
scale.


“They all have offices in BVI [British Virgin Islands] which is at the centre 
of the tax avoidance industry. It cannot be right that at one and the same time 
they are making millions out of facilitating tax avoidance … but they are also 
making millions out of contracts from international development. I would, 
obviously within the framework of the law, seek to stop that happening.


“There is a general problem with DfID with too money going to private 
companies and within that too much money is going to the big four accountants. 
The UK is at the epicentre of the tax avoidance industry and we need to bear 
down on it in a number of different ways.

“Transparency is absolutely key. But I believe the opprobrium that could fall 
on the big four, which up to now have avoided a lot of scrutiny in their role 
in tax avoidance, might encourage them to improve their ways.”

A DfID spokesperson said: “The UK’s Aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> Strategy is focused on 
ending extreme poverty, including by tackling corruption so poor countries can 
build proper tax systems and robust institutions and stand on their own two 
feet. DfID is one of the most transparent donors in the world according to a 
new report out today, and we encourage others to follow our lead.

 “To help millions of the world’s poorest people in some of the most dangerous 
places, DfID quite rightly works with a wide variety of partners, from 
charities to specialist private sector contractors.

 “We radically overhauled our approach to using contractors in 2012, including 
bringing in a tough new code of conduct – this has already saved taxpayers more 
than £500m.”
 