
This week Labour's announcement to back tuition fees at £6,000 has dominated 
the higher education agenda. But it's drawn both praise and criticism, and so 
I've taken the decision to award it both a first and a fail, and look at its 
strength and weaknesses.

Heading for a first … Labour's tuition fee policy

The removal of price variability, greater stability for university finances, 
the scrapping of the potentially destabilising core and margin model, and a 
significant reduction in student debt on graduation. Major steps forward that 
most accept would mute the market excesses of the coalition's higher education 
reforms.

In announcing an interim position, which Labour has put forward as an 
alternative which could and in their eyes should be implemented immediately by 
the coalition, it proves that higher education continues to retain a high 
profile on the political agenda. It also appears to have resonated well with 
lots of prospective students and their parents who recognise that Labour has 
tried to reconcile the tension between ensuring universities remain to be 
sufficiently well funded, while continuing to bring in a student contribution.

Many universities too have welcomed the announcement, particularly those 
concerned about how the ill-thought out core and margin model will work. This 
appears to threaten to solidify social inequality by further concentrating 
students from selective schools into universities who will be spending more 
money on their students, while the rest will be forced into a bargain basement 
race to the bottom as universities are forced to charge fees lower than £7,500, 
implemented as a result of Treasury miscalculations on what the average fee 
would be.

Heading for a fail … Labour's tuition fee policy

But for all the praise that Labour's announcement brought, there was a fair 
amount of dismay and dissatisfaction too. Chief among the concerns came from 
supporters of a graduate tax, feeling that the £6,000 announcement was an 
attempt to backtrack from Ed Miliband's support for the alternative to tuition 
fees which had been central to his leadership campaign.

While most accept that the transfer to a graduate tax isn't feasible 
overnight, crucial technical issues like ensuring that hypothecation will work 
and clarity on the funding method for universities to still receive upfront 
money would need to be resolved, it was the lack of clarity over whether the 
announcement was simply a suggestion for what the coalition could do now, or 
whether it might indeed find its way into the 2015 Labour manifesto that caused 
concern.

For others, the decision to back £6,000 appeared to concede that tuition fees 
are here to stay. There are still a sizeable number of critics of the tuition 
fees system no matter what form it takes, and with any cap it might have. For 
them, putting forward a policy that is far from ideal with its only redeeming 
feature being that it's not quite as bad as what the coalition has put forward 
doesn't cut the mustard, even as a short term fix.

But whatever your position on tuition fees or a graduate tax, the debate has 
certainly been reignited. As the Labour party conference comes to a close, it 
now appears clearer that the £6,000 suggestion is simply a short-term position 
to demonstrate the coalition could do something different right now. As for 
what might appear in the 2015 manifesto, I suspect we'll have to wait until the 
policy review is finally published.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, was formerly 
president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 2010-11 and 
tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 