
It seems a shame to be thinking about the mechanics of racing's funding system 
at the start of Derby week, which remains a special time in the calendar for so 
many fans of the sport. But there is little choice, since the usual suspects on 
both sides are digging trench systems and launching the first artillery 
assaults in what promises to be a long summer standoff over the next Levy 
agreement.

Still, the Derby does at least offer an example of what can be done when a 
problem is addressed with a clear objective in mind. Everyone who arrives at 
Epsom this Saturday will know that they are at a major event, from the moment 
they hit the first traffic jam a few miles from the track, or squeeze on to a 
train at Clapham Junction.

Twenty years ago, when the Derby was still on a Wednesday, you could see the 
race declining from one year to the next. The spaces on the infield were 
growing as rapidly as the line of double-deckers on the far rail was 
diminishing. The public was abandoning the Derby, and without the public, it is 
nothing.

This is said as someone who attended every year as a paying punter, looked 
forward to Derby day as no other, and enjoyed the traditional weekday slot. The 
decision to switch to a Saturday is still controversial for some, but as part 
of a plan to re-engage with the people by running it on a day when as many as 
possible could attend, it has been an outstanding success.

When it comes to the more complex issue of long-term funding for racing, 
though, there seems to be little clear idea of where people want to be in 10 
years' time. As ever, the Levy – the system by which bookmakers hand a 
percentage of the money they make from off-course betting to the racing 
industry – is the focus of attention, and the argument involves the usual 
demands for more cash from racing on one side, and blunt refusal by the bookies 
on the other.

It seems odd to recall that a few years ago, when the Levy switched to being 
calculated on bookies' profits rather than their turnover, Keith Elliott, one 
of the Levy Board's independent members, warned of the potential implications 
for punters. As Elliott correctly pointed out, it offered racing and bookmakers 
a clear economic incentive to work together and soak the punters for everything 
they could get.

The logic was sound. With hindsight, though, it failed to appreciate the sheer 
pig-headedness of many protagonists when offered an obvious way forward.

There is nothing unduly wrong with the current system as a basis for funding 
racing (and even if there were, it's what we've got, and it is not going to be 
abolished any time soon). If the bookies do well from racing, racing does well 
too, which is fair enough if – and it's a big one – it operates with long-term 
goals in mind.

It may lead into the dead-end situation that worried Elliott, in which 
relatively few punters pay a lot for their entertainment. Or it may finally 
deliver a system under which lots of punters pay a little, by offering them a 
top-quality betting product in a high-turnover, low-margin environment.

Cut the price, get more customers, make more money, reinvest. It's a pretty 
basic business plan, but until the racing and betting industries stop fighting 
old battles and appreciate how closely their interests may coincide, it might 
as well be written in ancient Greek.
 