
Ladbrokes slumped into a £43m loss last year - its first in 10 years - after 
the costs of shutting shops, boosting its digital business and implementing its 
proposed merger with Coral.

But as it concentrates on building up its self service betting terminals and 
digital operations, its UK retail business saw revenues rise 2% during the year 
but 6.5% in the fourth quarter. Operating profits fell 36% to £80.6m after 
increased marketing spend, product investment and a £50m increase in gambling 
tax. But this figure was better than expected and it said the new year had 
started well partly because “the unpredictability of the football season has 
thus far favoured bookmakers.”

Its shares have jumped nearly 6% to 129.7p, and analyst Nick Batram at Peel 
Hunt said:

The odds on Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> beating 
expectations would have been pretty long back in June last year. However, 
whilst it is early days there are encouraging signs that under Jim Mullen, the 
turnaround is (this time) tangible. There are threats (ie machine legislation) 
but top line momentum is now positive and the upside in Digital substantial. A 
strong start to the year provides a good base and we believe there is further 
to go. Buy.

Davy analysts said

An earnings beat of this magnitude should be greeted positively, though the 
scale of the online loss [£23.8m] will obviously continue to raise some 
questions. If management can convince the market that its investment in online 
opex is driving sustainable active customer growth, then a re-rating of the 
stock will likely follow. We continue to think that the stock looks cheap and 
that the valuation gap with William Hill will likely narrow over time.

At Numis Ivor Jones said:


Ladbrokes had a good finish to last year and is having a good start to this 
one. Some of this is a function of bookmaker-friendly sporting results (it had 
to happen sometime) but some of it is down to the investments of the past few 
years starting to pay off. It is too early in the year to start upgrading in 
our view, but Ladbrokes is warming up for Cheltenham in better shape than we 
might have hoped just a few months ago.

Management says that 2016 has started well. It is tempting to upgrade 
forecasts, but as the year has barely started, we are leaving our operating 
numbers unchanged while accounting for a higher ongoing tax charge and 
financing costs. We remain convinced that, even on current forecasts, the 
shares are materially undervalued and we reiterate our buy rating at 150p 
target price.
 