 The trouble with this sort of thing is that you can so easily sound like 
Professor Colin McCabe. But it is interesting, is it not, to observe the kind 
of language being used - no names, no pack drill, but mainly in the Sun - to 
chronicle the unhappy goings on in the South Atlantic.
Nothing terribly new about this. Paul Fussell, in his book The Great War and 
Modern Memory, drew up his own list of poetic and euphemistic language used in 
that conflict. A few examples: A horse was a steed or charger; to conquer was 
to vanquish; the front was the field; warfare was strife; to die was to perish; 
the army was the legion; the dead were the fallen. And so on. "This system of 
'high diction'," commented Fussell, "was not the least of the ultimate 
casualties of the war."

He was being premature. The last few days have turned up a list just as 
impressive as Fussell's Great War catalogue, and the shooting has only just 
started. A few examples: The Union Jack is The Flag of Freedom; the South 
Atlantic is the cruel waters; British soldiers are our brave boys; British 
commandos are our tough guys.

The language is unashamedly discriminatory. British casualties tend to be the 
price of victory, which doesn't seem to be true of Argentine casualties. Sea 
Harriers tend to be lost or shot down; while Mirages and Sea Hawks are, as a 
general rule, blown out of the sky. Argentine gun boats, by the same formula, 
are blasted to smithereens while British ships are generally sunk. Britain's 
"brave planes" carry out bombing raids or strafe enemy ships; Argentine pilots, 
by contrast, embark on desperate suicide missions or carry out merciless air 
onslaughts. And talking of "brave planes," you may have noticed that HMS 
Antelope (alias HMS Valour) was a brave little frigate, not so much blasted to 
smithereens as stricken.

You will remember me introducing you to the Professor of Accounting at Belfast 
University, Professor Perks, earlier this week. Allow me to do the same today 
for the Professor of Accounting at Birmingham University: Professor Trevor 
Gambling.
 