
It was the train journey that inspired one of Philip Larkin's best-known 
poems. Half a century after his seminal collection,The Whitsun Weddings, was 
published, the book's title poem, about the 200-mile trip fromHull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull> to London King's Cross – a drowsy 
train ride "all windows down, all cushions hot" – is to be recreated in a 
unique event that will further confirm Larkin's reputation as one of the 
nation's favourite poets.

Described by the Times Literary Supplement as "one of the best poems of our 
time", the poem tells of the weddings that Larkin observed through the window 
of his carriage as his journey progressed one Saturday in June, the train 
picking up newly married couples on the way to the capital for their honeymoon.

"Every time you stopped fresh emotion climbed aboard," Larkin said years 
later. "And finally between Peterborough and London when you hurtle on, you 
felt the whole thing was being aimed like a bullet – at the heart of things, 
you know. All this fresh, open life. Incredible experience. I've never 
forgotten it."

Larkin fans will be offered the chance to recreate the journey on Friday 6 
June – two days before Whitsun – when they can board a train from Hull to 
London that will feature exclusive recorded readings of Larkin's poetry by Bill 
Nighy and performances by other actors recreating some of the characters.

At several stations en route actors playing brides and grooms will board the 
train after being waved off by family and friends dressed in the clothes of the 
day. Once on board, they will share their stories of married life, love, joy 
and heartbreak from the past 50 years. The journey, for which tickets cost up 
to £65 <http://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/the-whitsun-weddings-tickets-11343409443>
, will also feature a soundtrack of Larkin's favourite jazz music.

"This will be one of those events that will forever stay in the minds of those 
that join us on board," said Andrew Pearson of the Hull theatre production 
companyEnsemble 52 <http://e52.co.uk/site/?page_id=39>, which is putting on the 
performance in conjunction withthe Philip Larkin Society 
<http://www.philiplarkin.com/> and Larkin 25 <http://www.larkin25.co.uk/>, a 
group dedicated to commemorating the poet's life and works. "It will be a very 
special journey and a chance to celebrate the anniversary of a truly great 
collection and a poet whose life and work is intertwined withHull, the UK City 
of Culture 2017 <http://www.hullcc.gov.uk/2017hull>," Pearson said. "This will 
be a unique event – a rare opportunity to experience theatre on board a train. 
We're delighted that Bill Nighy has got involved as this will be the only 
opportunity to hear Bill reading these poems. They will not be commercially 
available at a later date."

The event will be followed the next day by the unveiling of a commemorative 
Larkin plaque at King's Cross station by Baroness Virginia Bottomley, the High 
Sheriff of Hull.

Mounted on a wall next to the first-class lounge on the main station 
concourse, the plaque, carved by Martin Jennings, the sculptor who produced the 
statue of John Betjeman at St Pancras station, will display the final lines of
The Whitsun Weddings 
<http://www.poetryarchive.org/poetryarchive/singlePoem.do?poemId=7108>, which 
ends with typical Larkin melancholy: "A sense of falling, like an 
arrow-shower/Sent out of sight, somewhere becoming rain."

The unveiling of the plaque will complete a sequence of installations that 
began in 2010 with Jennings's statue of Larkin and the associated poetry 
roundels and bench seat at Hull's Paragon Interchange train station.

"It is fitting that Hull organisations are taking culture that is made in Hull 
to London in this way," said Steven Bayes, a Hull city councillor who holds the 
City of Culture portfolio. "Hull culture is not just for Hull, or for 2017. It 
travels well, stands the test of time, and celebrates roots and routes and the 
'Hullness' that is integral to the quirky theme of our original bid document."

He acknowledged that the plaque would be a useful marketing tool for Hull as 
it attempts to assert its cultural credentials. "It will be a permanent 
reminder of one of Hull's most popular literary exports and another means of 
helping us tell the world about Hull," he said.
 