
Proposals for league tables to help people decide which savings and investment 
products are right for them and offer good value will be unveiled by the 
government today.

The tables are likely to cover products such as personal pensions and 
endowment policies, with the first comparative information to be published next 
year. As well as rating financial products in terms of cost, flexibility and 
risk, it is proposed that the league tables take into account quality of 
customer service.

The proposals, in the form of a consultation paper, are being published by the 
financial services authority and the treasury. In addition to pensions and 
endowments, individual savings accounts, unit trusts and investment bonds are 
also likely to have their own tables.

The initiative comes as regulators continue their efforts to clear up the mess 
caused by personal pensions mis-selling in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and 
in the wake of growing disquiet over the alleged large scale mis-selling of 
endowment mortgages.

Plans for investment product league tables were announced by Gordon Brown, the 
chancellor, in the March budget. Other products may be added to the list after 
Mr Brown last week announced his intention to require banks to publish league 
tables clearly showing all their charges for financial services.

The tables will form part of a major consumer education programme aimed at 
improving financial literacy and money management skills starting at primary 
school age, as well as boosting public confidence in financial services 
companies.

At the programme's launch in May, FSA chairman Howard Davies said one of the 
aims was to make people 'better buyers' of financial products, 'so they don't 
get taken advantage of'.

He said: 'If we can improve people's ability to understand financial 
transactions and the risks involved in, say, buying life insurance or investing 
in individual savings accounts, we can improve their ability to make good 
decisions for themselves and therefore reduce the risk of getting into things 
like the pensions mis-selling scandal.'

The FSA will be seeking views on how the league table information should be 
made public. It is understood to believe it is not necessarily enough just to 
give it to citizens' advice bureaux and libraries, and may well be keen to 
explore the opportunities offered by the internet.

Later this month the treasury is expected to announce proposals on voluntary 
'model mortgages' whereby to obtain the seal of approval, lenders would clearly 
have to disclose all the costs of taking out a loan, including fees and 
charges, in plain English.
 