
Forget Richard Branson, Karren Brady and Mark Zuckerberg. There’s a new 
entrepreneur that has emerged over the last five years or so – the digital 
personality. These are the people who have cleverly mastered the art of social 
media, cultivated loyal fan bases and turned themselves into influencers to be 
taken seriously. They don’t wear suits, probably didn’t have a business plan to 
begin with, and are unlikely to need a boardroom any time soon. But what sets 
the most successful digital-first entrepreneurs apart and what can small 
business owners learn from their approach?

Diversification is key

Charlotte Crosby appeared in the MTV show Geordie Shore, cast as a 
party-loving, job-hating, crude stereotype of her native Newcastle. But instead 
of laughing, the audience grew fond of Crosby and her honest (and at times very 
awkward) commentary on her own antics. Now, she has amassed an Instagram 
following of over five million people, and has more than three million Twitter 
followers. She’s released the fastest-selling fitness DVD ever (which sold 
101,000 copies in a month), hosted the BBC Radio 1 Teen Awards and launched her 
own clothing range.

Crosby’s trajectory to fame and fortune has been swift. What she has 
brilliantly mastered is marketing her personality the right way. There are 
other examples – Joe Wicks started uploading videos of his Richmond boot camps 
in 2014, making the most of his cheeky narrative. His Instagram following 
boomed, alongside a Twitter and Facebook community, and it’s these platforms 
that helped him get the exposure he needed. Now he boasts a book deal, a staff 
of 50 and several high profile TV appearances. He has taken more than 100,000 
clients through his 90 Day Shift, Shape and Sustain Plan.

How can your business make the most of its personality and quirks? Can you do 
more on social media to help it realise its full potential?

When everyone goes left, go right 

YouTube entrepreneurs, many of whom have made millions from posting their 
video blogs (or vlogs) online, have made their livelihoods from being ahead of 
the curve. From Zoella, to Pointless, to Tanya Burr, to Pixiewoo, there are now 
hundreds of YouTubers and social media stars in high demand with brands, who 
want to work with them as influencers. Dominic Smales, CEO of Gleam Futures and 
Zoella’s manager, is one of the few people who saw this coming at a time when 
traditional (paid) media was king.

Smales saw a window of opportunity whereby the audience consuming free content 
would migrate to consuming paid-for content, or become receptive to product 
placement – as long as the personality is right.Even thought the majority of 
marketers didn’t consider the YouTube community as credible influencers, Smales 
did. His digital-first talent agency today boasts some of the biggest names in 
the business.

If you believe in a trend, or have noticed something that you think will catch 
on, trust your instincts and go for it – even if it’s on a small scale 
initially to test demand.

Personality is everything

As with all business, a relatable and genuine personality stands you in good 
stead. This is particularly important for small business owners, as it’s your 
personal brand that people are buying into. As we’re approaching the end of the 
year, it’s a good time to take stock. Think about how you could use personality 
to help your business shine.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx> sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
 