
Almost half a million first-year students will be packing their bags this 
September and waving goodbye. While university is now seen as a rite of passage 
for many sixth-formers, it’s not just seeing them off safely that concerns 
parents.

It’s natural to want young adults to cope well with the changes and demands of 
a new independent life; after the comforts of home and the structure of school, 
university can be unnerving even for the most confident.

Organising food, money and health are high on the must-do list. Parents can 
help their child by providing a few basic cooking recipes, suggesting they 
enrol with a local doctor and discussing how to budget on limited funds. Jeni 
Day, induction and transition project officer at the University of Hull points 
out: “Students often think their grant will be there on day one. But it can 
take a week or more, so be prepared.”

It’s advised to get accommodation organised early and to find out what 
facilities are available. Most halls have social media groups, so new students 
can connect up and overcome first-day nerves before they arrive.

Jacki Morris, studying at the University of Exeter, expressed the fears of 
many. “I was really worried no one would like me, but the opposite was true. 
Everyone was really friendly. We’re all in the same situation.”

It’s natural to want young adults to cope well with the changes and demands of 
a new independent life

Academically, it’s important to acknowledge the step-up from school learning 
to university lectures and tutorials. Suddenly, students have to self-motivate. 
“It may seem scary to have so much time that you don’t know what to do with 
it,” Day says. “So take control and take advantage of university skills teams 
to develop your way of learning and writing. Creating your own structure can be 
exciting.”

Social life at university 

Although the academic side of university is a priority, the social aspect 
remains a huge pull for students. Joining clubs and societies is an integral 
part of the university experience.

Paul Redmond, director of student life at the University of Manchester, says: 
“Most people are at university for an average of 1,000 days, and the time 
flies. Employers are looking for people who are well-rounded and have made the 
most of their experience at higher education, so clubs and societies enable you 
to develop skills, insights and experience.”

Back home, the changes for parents can be just as dramatic. From having a 
noisy household with normal day-to-day concerns, suddenly the house has an 
unusual hush and a still-packed fridge. Some parents admit they spent the first 
night in a hotel near the university just in case their child wasn’t coping. 
But parent Sandra James said she now believes that was a mistake. “I think once 
my son had settled in, hanging around made it worse. He got embarrassed I was 
still there, which made it more upsetting.”

However, Margaret Turnbull puts a positive spin on the experience and finds 
life much freer since her children left home. Her son Sam graduated in computer 
science from Loughborough University last year, and her daughter Helen became a 
primary schoolteacher. She says that after the initial shock of not having her 
children in the house, she became aware of a new freedom. “We now have much 
more time for ourselves. We can go out for a drink after work, and can eat when 
we like. Also it’s rather nice to have the TV to ourselves, not do so much 
washing and there still be food in the fridge in the morning. In some ways it’s 
quite liberating, and when we do see them we feel more appreciated, so 
consequently our relationship with them has improved.”

Top tips for starting university

 * Think of university like a job. Organise your time and plan your week, 
especially during the first term.

 * Although it’s important to join clubs and societies, establish a balance.

 * If things go wrong, use the support services. Don’t be scared: there are 
tutors and counsellors who can help. Don’t leave problems until they are 
critical.

 * Do not overpack: just take the essentials.

 * Familiarise yourself with where you’re going. Read the literature, check 
out the services or, preferably, visit the campus or the city.
 