
Quincy in the commune of Mieussy in the Haute Savoie was not where John Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/john-berger-obituary> made his 
first home in mainland Europe. In 1962 he moved to Geneva, where his then wife, 
Anya Bostock, was working. There, too, he met the photographer Jean Mohr, whose 
stark black and white images were central to several of his books. He also 
began to collaborate with the film director Alain Tanner, writing scripts for 
The Salamander (1971), The Middle of the World (1974) and Jonah Who Will Be 25 
in the Year 2000 (1976).

After his first novel, A Painter of Our Time (1958) – the story of an imagined 
refugee artist who returns to Hungary during the 1956 revolution – had been 
recalled from bookshops through political pressure on the publishers, he spent 
less time in London. Initially there were periods spent working with various 
groups of artists in Provence.

In 1974, at the start of his marriage to Beverly Bancroft, he moved to Quincy, 
the agricultural village in the Alps that was to remain their family home. I 
first met John in the same year, as one of the four founders of the Writers and 
Readers Publishing Cooperative. John was one of several established writers who 
decided that small publishing, with decision-making in the hands of those who 
actually made what the industry sold, was a good thing.

He enjoyed collaboration. While he did not put money into the group, he made 
its financial existence easier by not taking advances when books were 
published, and was there to advise, finding pleasure in going to meetings when 
he was in London. I imagine it was a similar pleasure to that he took in being 
part of the community in Quincy, where everyone participated in haymaking, and 
John’s table was ever busy with neighbours deliberating on problems or engaging 
in that gossip which is also storytelling.

Writers and Readers started an art list, republishing Berger’s backlist, 
including A Painter of Our Time. There was also the brilliant A Fortunate Man – 
standard reading for all GPs – and his new books. In the way of 1970s 
collectives, the organisation fell apart in the early 80s. But John and I 
remained fast friends. We didn’t always agree on politics, but his sense of 
justice was ever an inspiration and his volcanic laugh a joy. We even went on 
to win the Scott Moncrieff prize for literary translation together, for Nella 
Bielski’s The Year Is ’42 (2004).

When I published Losing the Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/24/losing-dead-lisa-appignanesi-review>
 (2014), a memoir about my parents’ war and its aftermath, he gave me a drawing 
he had made inspired by Rembrandt’s The Polish Rider. He was extraordinarily 
generous, and paid singular attention to young writers and artists, let alone 
to people needing a hand or a lift. A true listener, he said it was what his 
storytelling was all about. He listened with an ear for everything, not only 
what was spoken. And he managed in his encounters and in his stories, as well 
as his essays, somehow to confront despair and turn it into hope.
 