
The Levy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-levy> Board, which passes a 
share of betting revenue back to the sport, said yesterday that funds will be 
made available to schedule at least two all-weather meetings a day "for the 
foreseeable future" after racing suffered its first unplanned blank day for 
nearly a year yesterday. The tracks at Lingfield and Kempton were still 
raceable yesterday morning despite heavy overnight snow, but both meetings were 
abandoned as roads around the track were impassable.

"It's hard to be specific about the cost," Alan Delmonte, the Levy Board's 
operations director, said yesterday. "So much depends on footfall in betting 
shops, and the number of people betting when the weather is bad goes down 
anyway.

"The amount of levy generated per race is very variable too, but it's not a 
bad rule of thumb that £10,000 is lost every time a race doesn't happen. 
Tuesday had four fixtures scheduled originally, which would be about £250,000, 
and we make an abandonment payment of £10,000 to each course too, but at the 
same time, we will not be paying out prize money of £115,000. That would mean 
an estimated loss to the levy of just under £200,000."

All-weather racing was introduced into Britain in October 1989, and while the 
meetings do not generate as much turnover, and therefore levy, as jumping on 
turf, they are still vital to stabilise income in the winter months.

"It is very important for us to ensure that punters have British racing to bet 
on," Delmonte said. "We have informed the British Horseracing Authority that 
funding will be available for a second all-weather meeting every day for the 
foreseeable future. The benefit of a second fixture in betting shops is very 
significant. It's much better for the levy to have two fixtures with races 15 
minutes apart than one race every half an hour."

Kempton and Lingfield will both hold inspections this morning ahead of planned 
meetings today, while Wolverhampton's card tomorrow is subject to an inspection 
this afternoon. Saturday's meeting at Sedgefield has been abandoned, while Ayr 
will inspect today, with prospects for next Monday's card already described as 
"bleak".
 