
The Liberal Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> 
suffered a crushing blow tonight as Britain emphatically rejected AV as a 
system to elect MPs.

On a day in which hundreds of Lib Dems lost their seats in the local and 
devolved elections, the party had its hopes of changing the electoral system 
dashed decisively. With more than three-quarters of the vote counted, the no 
campaign had established an unassailable lead of about 69% to 31%, securing 
victory in almost every corner of the country.

Danny Alexander, the chief secretary to the Treasury, conceded that the Lib 
Dems' attempt to replace the first-past-the-post system with the alternative 
vote had failed, with the no camp outperforming the opinion polls by some 
distance in the UK's first national referendum since 1975.

Alexander, who was involved in drafting the coalition agreement in which the 
Lib Dems stipulated the referendum as part of their deal with theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>, said: "We wanted to have 
a referendum. We wanted to give the people the chance to vote on transforming 
our voting system, helping to put more power in people's hands.

"It is disappointing that people have chosen to vote the way they have. I 
think there is a whole number of reasons for that, but I think the most 
important thing is to accept with good grace the verdict of the people and say, 
'That's that'."

The Electoral Commission said a total of 19.1 million votes have been cast 
across the UK, giving a provisional turnout of 42%, said Jenny Watson, head of 
the Electoral Commission.

With such an overwhelming victory for the no campaign, the postmortem has 
started, with some campaigners saying the vote has put back electoral reform 
for a generation.

Lord Mandelson, a former Labour minister and a keen proponent of electoral 
reform, said AV supporters had paid a "big price" for staging the national poll 
on the same day as the first elections since the general election. He also 
criticised the yes campaign for failing to do the "groundwork" and paid tribute 
toDavid Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> for some 
"very bold leadership".

The prime minister had "mobilised" his support effectively, even at the 
expense of coalition unity, said Mandelson.

Describing himself as disappointed but "entirely unsurprised" by results 
coming in, Mandelson said: "Nobody could have foreseen the extent to which the 
whole vote over the last 24 hours has become a referendum on the Liberal 
Democrats in general, andNick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> in particular."

He added: "I think that the public felt the thing had come out of the blue as 
the result of some arrangement between the coalition partners and they didn't 
see why AV was such a big deal. I don't think they felt AV was the solution to 
many of the problems they feel are in our political system."

The highest turnout (50.7%) was in Scotland, which held the devolved Scottish 
elections on the same day. The lowest turnout was in London (35%).

Predictions that the capital would produce a turnout as low as 15% – being the 
only region without other elections taking place – proved wide of the mark, 
with more than twice that number casting their vote.

Some of the first results in the AV referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av-referendum> came from areas held by 
Lib Dems at Westminster – all of them delivering an emphatic rejection of the 
constitutional change that the party has championed. The Isles of Scilly was 
first to declare, with 65.3% support voting no, followed by the Lib Dem-held 
Orkney Islands, with 60.2% for no. The no campaign won all of the first nine 
areas to declare, with a thumping 70.27% to the yes campaign's 29.73%.

Jeremy Browne, a Lib Dem minister, acknowledged the yes campaign had failed to 
make "a sufficiently compelling case".

Browne told the BBC: "It already looks like there is a pattern in place. I do 
think there is an onus on the people who want to make a change to make the case 
for the change, and the yes campaign ultimately didn't make a sufficiently 
compelling case."

The turnout figures were published amid bitter recriminations within the Lib 
Dem camp over the tactics of their Tory coalition partners leading the no 
campaign.

Lord Ashdown, a former Lib Dem leader, who appeared effectively to concede 
defeat in the AV battle, said the Tories were also guilty of "bloody stupidity" 
for failing to prevent the no campaign – mostly funded by its supporters – 
targeting Nick Clegg personally.

"I don't put that in the box marked betrayal but I put it in the box marked 
bloody stupidity. And the truth is there are consequences for that," he said.

Moving his sights toward Cameron, Ashdown said any other prime minister would 
have dissociated himself from the "lies" produced by the no campaign.

"This is a triumph for the regiment of lies. We live with pretty strenuous 
political campaigns in Britain, but these were downright lies," he told the 
Guardian.

"David Cameron is the prime minister. He sets the tone of politics in this 
country. It is an unhappy fact that when he was asked to dissociate himself 
from a campaign that was run on the basis of personalisation and personal 
attacks, and messages that were far more than some subtle bending of the truth, 
he refused to do that."

Cameron sought to build bridges by insisting earlier that there would be "no 
celebrating, no congratulations" if the British public rejects AV.

He said he wanted a "clear result" but tried to play down the implications for 
the coalition, saying: "Whether [the result] is a 'Yes' or a 'No' there will be 
no celebrating, there will be no congratulations, the issue will be settled and 
we can get on with the vital work we're doing as a coalition, governing in the 
national interest."

But the Lib Dems signalled that tensions were far from resolved. Chris Huhne, 
the energy secretary, said there was "extraordinary anger" about the Tory 
behaviour in the no campaign "from top to bottom of the Liberal Democrats".

The crushing no vote follows large-scale Lib Dem losses in local and devolved 
elections, which Clegg branded "a real knock".

The Lib Dem deputy leader, Simon Hughes, told the BBC that the no camp had 
conducted a "fundamentally fallacious campaign" which would affect the 
coalition.

Hughes said that the five-year coalition deal would not change, but he added: 
"It will mean, from now on, we are very clear that we will keep to what the 
coalition has agreed in the coalition agreement – that other stuff will not be 
allowed in as policy unless our party has agreed to it, and I guess that the 
same will apply for the Tory party."

He said the party would now assert its independence in Westminster by 
extracting concessions on issues such as House of Lords reform and the 
expansion of private healthcare provision in the NHS. Hughes told BBC Radio 4's 
PM programme: "Lords reform is a done deal – that was part of the coalition 
agreement.

"NHS reform is absolutely the area that is now in the frontline. It is 
absolutely clear that what has been proposed in [Health Secretary] Andrew 
Lansley's Bill is not what was agreed in the coalition agreement and is not 
what our party members and supporters have agreed to.

"That will be changed and if it is not sufficiently changed it will not 
happen."

He dismissed suggestions that Clegg's position might be challenged, insisting 
the Lib Dem leader was "personally and politically as strong as when he joined 
the government".

But Tory backbencher Mark Field said Cameron's position had been "very much 
strengthened" by the results and the prime minister would not be in a mood to 
make "undue concessions" to Liberal Democrats following their "catastrophic" 
showing.

Field told the PM show: "Clearly there will be an effort to try and shore up 
Nick Clegg's position, but the idea that there will be a whole lot of policy 
concessions allowing the liberals to look good in the months to come is way, 
way short of the mark."
 