
The Liberal Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> 
have launched an official inquiry into the disastrous Yes to AV campaign, 
examining how money was misspent, staff demoralised and political capital 
misplaced in what campaign staff have described as a "living nightmare".

The inquiry, ordered by Tim Farron, the party's president, and being overseen 
by James Gurling, the chairman of the communications sub-committee of the 
party's federal executive, will see an interim report go to a meeting of the 
executive next week and a final report is expected to be published before party 
conference.

Farron decided the postmortem should be separated from a second inquiry into 
why the party did so poorly in May's local elections. He said : "A report will 
be published. Clearly we were not in total control of the Yes campaign, but it 
is clear lessons have to be learnt. A large amount of money looks like it was 
wasted and the whole thing has set back the cause of constitutional reform a 
long way. It would be very odd if we did not review what went wrong and what 
went right."

The inquiry has been established as angry accounts of the mistakes by the Yes 
campaign have begun to appear on the internet from campaign staff and those 
involved in efforts at the grassroots. The inquiry is sensitive forNick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> since John Sharkey, the Lib 
Dem 2010 election campaign manager, was the director of the Yes campaign.

In probably the most damning assessment online, Andy May, national manager of 
the regional staff for the Yes campaign, said: "From the very start, the 
self-interest of the major funders and the senior management's lack of 
creativity, lack of experience and inability to listen to staff and activists' 
concerns had a very negative impact on the chances of success. At headquarters 
there were just a couple of people who had any deeper experience than running a 
constituency campaign – yet had hugely important roles with national influence.

Criticisms raised by May include:

• A phone bank strategy yielded about 500,000 contacts when 3 million had been 
originally projected.

• A head of fundraising strategy was never appointed.

• The campaign spent a six-figure sum on polling and message testing in August 
but focus groups were pulled together at the last minute before the May 
referendum.

May said some "paid staff barely worked 9-5 on the Yes campaign at HQ. Others 
took long holidays over Easter and over the royal wedding which was never 
challenged by management. Meanwhile unpaid interns in the central office were 
putting in 60-hour weeks".

It has also emerged from freedom of information requests that the Yes campaign 
sent out 8.6m freepost leaflets at a cost to the taxpayer of £1.5m, while the 
No campaign sent out 40m at a cost £6.7m.

James Graham, the social media director for the campaign website, has 
described the campaign as a living nightmare, saying it was run on "rigidly 
hierarchical lines and secretive lines". He complained he was excluded from 
talks with the contractors charged with building the website.

The campaign, according to Graham, ignored focus group research that showed 
people were contemptuous of the idea that electoral reform would prevent 
corruption. Despite this advice, the campaign repeatedly sought to conflate the 
two.
 