
Cairns Taipans have launched an appeal against the NBL’s decision to award 
Brisbane victory after their match on Sunday was abandoned with just over a 
minute to go due to a blackout.

“Obviously there are lots of consequences, a loss, points spreads, the series. 
It could have a massive impact down the stretch,” Taipans coach Aaron Fearne 
said. “We have the ability to appeal and that is what we will be doing”

In the era of the NBA super-team, pinning your hopes on one star is deadly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/10/nba-super-teams-new-orleans-pelicans-anthony-davis>
The Taipans were trailing by eight points with 1:37 remaining in the game when 
the Cairns CBD suffered a blackout, plunging the Convention Centre into 
darkness. Officials tried desperately to restore power, but after half an hour 
the decision was made to abandon the match.

Under Fiba rules, if a match is unable to be completed for any reason, the 
team that holds the lead is awarded the victory. The NBL has confirmed it will 
conduct a full review into the appeal on Monday.

Bullets coach Andrej Lemanis wasn’t overtly pleased, but couldn’t begrudge the 
outcome. “We’ll wait and see what happens with that [Cairns appeal], but the 
rules are the rules. I don’t make them so we’ll take the win no problems,” he 
said.

“It’s unusual, when you’ve been around for a while you feel like you’ve gone 
through a few situations, but this one is unique. It feels hollow but I think 
we were playing well enough, my confidence is we were going to win that game 
anyway.”

Fearne admitted it would have taken something special to turn the match around 
in the time remaining, but he would have backed his men to do it. “We would 
have had to make some huge plays, but I’ve been involved in some games where 
that is exactly what we did,” Fearne said.

Bullets import Torrey Craig, whose first game against his former club was 
overshadowed by the drama, said it was just good fortune the lights had cut out 
when they did.

“I thought they were going to turn back on to be honest, but it is what it is, 
I’m happy we had the lead when the power went out.” Craig said.
 