
I am quite open about my relationship with the PlayStation 3. To date, the 
Sony console has done nothing for me. Until this week, the machine has sat 
under a substantial layer of dust and cat fur, discarded in favour of the 
superior games to both buy and download on the Nintendo Wii and the Xbox 360. I 
was even able to play SingStar, my traditional favourite party piece, on the
PlayStation <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> 2. But that 
all changed this week when the game I've been looking forward to more than 
anything in recent memory finally arrived.

Little Big Planet is the brainchild of Guildford-based developers Media 
Molecule. It has been on the blocks for over two years now, experiencing 
technological setbacks and cultural hiccups that have delayed it unmercifully. 
However, now I've had my hands on it, I can wax lyrical and say that it is the 
most exciting, forward-thinking, well-balanced, casual- and hardcore-friendly 
console game project I've played. Tall praise indeed.

It is a platform puzzler, taking inspiration from diverse products like 
Japanese cult game Katamari Damacy, the beautifully choreographed Abe's Odyssee 
and the ever-innovative Dreamcast's Chu Chu Rocket. So what makes this one so 
revolutionary? First, it was developed post-Facebook bubble, with a development 
team that paid attention to what was happening outside the world of gaming. As 
I've said before, the next revolution in interactive entertainment will come 
when games and web developers sit down and chat, coming up with new products 
that are as compelling as games but as accessible as the internet. That seems 
to be what's happened.

While the Xbox 360 innovated in the social networking space with Live, this is 
the first major step towards community-driven and community-developed gaming by 
a mainstream publisher. It's "Game 3.0", as Phil Harrison glibly put it during 
the LBP announcement at E3 2006. In a nutshell, because it is a game plus a 
toolset that allows other people to create their own levels, plus a 
distribution platform with integrated social network and ratings systems, LBP 
has the potential to be the MySpace of indie games development. Enter new 
ideas, fewer gatekeepers and more grassroots product.

Second, it is a new IP, which has a freshness that only indie games seem to 
have nowadays. Third - and I know this shouldn't be important - it looks 
stunning. Finally, and above all else, LBP has no pretensions.

It's managed to inspire an archaeological dig through my console pile to 
extract my forgotten PS3. The next challenge is to act as an inspiration for 
products that build upon it, rather than inspire a new generation of copycats. 
Can it do it? I think it can.
 