
Another Saturday brings another Grade One ride for Lizzie Kelly, the jockey who
made history last weekend as the first woman to win the highest class of jump 
race in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/26/lizzie-kelly-first-woman-grade-one-chase-tea-for-two>
. Saturday’s result here was not quite so impressive as her four-length Boxing 
Day success on Tea For Two but there is a lot to be said for finishing third on 
a 10-1 shot in a valuable race on television, so this can count as another step 
forward in the 22-year-old’s career.

There was a time as Kelly put the pace to the race when it seemed she might 
get her more fancied rivals in trouble but, however lucky Kelly is with her 
opportunities, she is still not quite blessed to the same extent as Ruby Walsh, 
who eventually cruised clear on Yorkhill to win this Tolworth Hurdle.

Kelly is still feeding off her success in Kempton’s Grade One Kauto Star Chase 
seven days before. “It’s been a bit of a whirlwind week since, but yeah, it was 
absolutely fantastic,” she said.

ITV wins terrestrial rights to show racing from 2017 as Channel 4 exits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/01/itv-win-rights-racing-channel-4> 
“I think the fact that it was at Kempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> on Boxing Day made it quite big 
because everyone was watching. I’ve been amazed at how high it’s gone, you see 
CNN International tweeting about it. It’s made national news and things like 
that. Winning a Grade One is obviously what I’ve wanted to do but that just 
kind of sweetened it a bit.”

Kelly is gratified to have been a record-breaker but, while there has been a 
general rush to appoint her as a standard-bearer for her sex in a sport in 
which women remain under-represented, this is a burden she carries lightly.

“That kind of thing passes me by a little bit. Because I don’t wake up in the 
morning and think: ‘I’m going to represent women today!’”

She is not convinced there is a tidal wave of women jockeys ready to invade 
jump racing, taking the view the risk of injury puts off more women than it 
does men.

And she shows impatience at the suggestion some women might need someone like 
her to inspire them into chasing their dream.

“No one ever pushed me to be a jockey. The only person who believed in me was 
me. My mum thought I was nuts. I was the person who organised me to go off and 
work at different yards. ‘Oh Mum, by the way, tomorrow I’m going to Henrietta 
Knight’s for two weeks, could you drop me at the train station?’

“I stopped telling people I wanted to be a jockey because you just have people 
laugh or tell you: ‘Oh no, no chance’. Belief has to be in yourself, whether 
you want to be an actress or a singer or the wolf of Wall Street.

“I wanted to be a jockey, that was my thing and I worked very hard for it. And 
you have to. These girls in racing, if they’re looking at me, thinking, I want 
to do that … Well go and do it, then.

“Go and find somewhere where you might get rides, get fit, buy yourself a 
point-to-pointer and give yourself a bit of experience. Do what you have to do 
to make it work.”
 