
Flogging a few Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> shares to the 
public will be “the biggest privatisation for more than 20 years,” boasted 
chancellor George Osborne , trying to generate a warm glow around the grubby 
business of offering a £200-a-head bung to private investors to own 
£2,000-worth of stock for 12 months.

Lloyds shares to be offered cut-price to the public
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/lloyds-bank-shares-to-be-offered-cut-price-to-the-public>
In the grand scheme of state-sponsored inducements (think Hinkley Point), the 
10% loyalty bonus on offer at Lloyds counts as small change. The potential 
giveaway is up to £200m if £2bn-worth of stock is sold in small bundles.

But the principle is indefensible. Why should some citizens – those with a 
grand or two in cash and an appetite for filling in forms – receive a discount 
at the expense of other taxpayers? Buyers won’t necessarily show a profit, but 
the odds are tilted in their favour.

It’s not as if Osborne needs to round up demand to complete Lloyds’ exit from 
the state’s books. The “drip feed” trading plan devised by the Treasury and 
investment bank Morgan Stanley 18 months ago continues to work splendidly. The 
state’s stake has been reduced to 12% with the shares sold to institutions at 
close to the market price, maximising proceeds. The trading plan could finish 
the job by next summer.

Osborne’s thin justification for pitching the last parcel of Lloyds shares to 
private punters is that he wants to build a “shareholding democracy.” This is a 
woolly political ambition on which nobody will hold him to account.

In the next breath, he says the proceeds from the sale will be used “to pay 
down the national debt”. That, at least, is clear. But, when the country owes 
£1.5 trillion, the priority should be securing the highest price possible for 
the Lloyds shares, not messing about with discounts, loyalty bonuses and 
advertising campaigns. A supposedly careful chancellor is letting up to £200m 
slip between the cracks needlessly.

Capita strays

Capita, traditionally, is a company that doesn’t do big deals and doesn’t 
stray far from the UK. Such conservative instincts may help to explain why, 
unlike outsourcing rivals Serco and G4S in recent years,Capita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> has not capitulated to 
management over-reach or skulduggery with contracts. It’s been a terrific 
performer for investors over the years.

But what’s this? Capita is in a race with Apollo Global Management, a US 
buyout firm, to pay £400m-plus for Xchanging, a back-office administrator for 
the insurance industry that operates in 13 countries.

Xchanging’s business sounds like much of Capita’s – dull work for private 
sector clients. But attempting to buy quoted rivals of this size is not 
Capita’s normal style. Until a German call-centre firm arrived earlier this 
year for £157m, the biggest purchase had been a £100m add-on a decade and a 
half ago.

Capita is a bigger business these days, so maybe is obliged to learn new 
tricks, including more foreign adventures. Certainly its shareholders seem 
unworried. There is a promise of £35m of cost savings and returns above the 
cost of capital from the off. The share price joined the market rally despite 
the possibility of a placing of new shares.

So, yes, Xchanging may be sufficiently attractive for Capita to break its old 
and successful habits. All the same, shareholders will hope chief executive 
Andy Parker makes two things clear. First, that Xchanging’s operations in the 
US and Australia will be sold to retain Capita’s status as a UK-focused company 
with a few tentacles in continental Europe. Second, that small add-on deals, 
coupled with contracts won under its own steam, will remain the first choice.

Reading China

Glencore’s share price may have risen 21% (or 72% if you prefer the whacky 
world of Hong Kong trading) but take with a pinch of salt chief executive Ivan 
Glasenberg’s grumble at an FT conference about hedge funds playing games to 
push down commodity prices.

Glasenberg is a trader and will know that markets do not always behave as 
theories say they should. Copper stocks may well be at low levels, suggesting 
the price is due a rebound, but predicting the timing is a mug’s game. The art 
is to keep your borrowings at sensible levels to cope with all weathers, which
Glencore <https://www.theguardian.com/business/glencore> has not.

After the recent rollercoaster ride in Glencore’s shares, there is no harm in 
the boss talking about distortions in the market and the underlying strength of 
demand from China. But, remember, Glasenberg also said this in August, before 
the crisis erupted: “At the moment none of us can read China. None of us know 
what is going on there and I’m yet to find the guy who can predict China 
correctly.”
 