
The London Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup> said a merger 
with its Frankfurt rival Deutsche Börse would be “compelling” and is pressing 
ahead with plans for a £20bn deal, as it reported a big rise in profits and 
revenues for 2015.

The LSE’s annual results confirmed its appeal, showing a 31% rise in profit 
before tax, stripping out one-off items, to £643.4m. Including exceptional 
items, profits climbed to £336.1m from £182.1m.

Revenues surged 78% to £2.3bn, boosted by the acquisition of US index provider 
Russell Investments. The LSE said it was on track to sell Russell’s asset 
management business for £1.15bn in coming months and will use the proceeds to 
pay off debt. The company raised its dividend for 2015 by 20% to 36p a share.

The results did not mention ICE, the owner of the New York Stock Exchange, 
which this week revealed it waspondering a potential counterbid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/nyse-owner-plots-offer-for-london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse>
, raising the prospect of a bidding war.

The LSE and Deutsche Börse said on 23 February that they were in talks 
<http://The LSE’s annual results did not mention ICE, the owner of the New York 
Stock Exchange, which earlier this week revealed it was pondering a potential 
counterbid.> to seal a “merger of equals” under which their key businesses 
would retain their brand names. The new holding company would be based in 
London. It is their third attempt at a tie-up in 16 years, and would create the 
third-largest exchange operator in the world.

The LSE’s chief executive, Xavier Rolet, who has run the exchange for the last 
seven years, on Friday described the planned tie-up as a “compelling 
opportunity to strengthen each other in an industry-defining combination, by 
creating a global market infrastructure group with significant benefits for our 
customers and shareholders”.

The company added that discussions were “ongoing regarding the other terms and 
conditions of the potential merger”.

Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets, said: “Given these 
results it’s not hard to see why Deutsche Börse and ICE are both interested and 
the fact that London is the centre of the European IPO market, where we’ve seen 
72% of the overall IPO activity in the last 12 months.

“London’s appeal as a centre for private equity and hedge funds makes the 
overall task of raising capital that much simpler in a very confined 
geographical location, and while some have cited the upcoming Brexit referendum 
as a risk to London’s status, it’s not immediately apparent that it would 
undermine any deal.”

He added: “In particular the LSE’s clearing business LCH.Clearnet is the main 
draw, though any successful bid may see any suitor offload the stakes in Borsa 
Italia and the French part of the Clearnet business.”



Joshua Raymond, market analyst at online trading firm XTB.com, said: “It’s 
been a solid year for the LSE. The focus of course now is whether a rival bid 
emerges from ICE that could spark a bidding war, or if the firms major 
shareholders remain convinced a tie up with Deutsche Börse on the already 
announced conditions is the best way forward for the trading house.”
 