
In the end, it all felt uncomfortable. All so desperately awkward. As an 
impartial observer and a guest inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> at its own carnival, witnessing 
the humiliation at the Estádio Mineirão was almost too much. The descent to the 
press conference room as the arena emptied became an exercise in avoiding eye 
contact with the locals. Those clad in yellow were numbed by the whole 
experience, trudging out into the night in disbelief at the embarrassment they 
had endured. The German contingent chorused almost apologetically in 
celebration, but all the home support wanted to do was escape. This was too 
much.

Recollections of that semi-final require context. The conviction that Brazil 
would prevail to fulfil the slogan emblazoned on the team bus – “Brace 
yourselves: the sixth is coming” – had grown through the World Cup’s group 
stage, expectations fuelled through the drama of apenalty shootout win over an 
excellent Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/28/brazil-chile-world-cup-2014-last-16-match-report>
 in the last 16 and the impressive nature of theirdismissal of the much fancied 
Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/04/brazil-colombia-world-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
 in Fortaleza.

By the time they arrived in Belo Horizonte even their cause seemed just. 
Neymar, the team’s talismanic forward, had been snapped by Juan Camilo Zúñiga, 
his back broken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2014/jul/05/brazil-colombia-neymar-injury-world-cup-quarter-final-photographs>
. Luiz Felipe Scolari and his players had arrived at the semi-final wearing 
white baseball caps bearing the messageForça Neymar, David Luiz and Júlio César 
holding aloft the forward’s No10 shirt during the national anthem. Romance 
dictated the collective would prevail for their broken hero. This was their 
moment.

The problem was that outpouring of emotion had merely masked the reality. This 
Seleção were simply not in Germany’s class. Their defence was ramshackle, 
denied Thiago Silva through suspension but still fundamentally flawed and 
permanently disorganised. The management’s tactics were naive, with even the 
selection of Bernard – once an Atlético Mineiro player – a decision made by the 
heart, not the head. There was no protection, no structure, no resistance. 
Joachim Löw’s team merely poured through them at will. Toni Kroos, Thomas 
Müller, Bastian Schweinsteiger, Miroslav Klose, Mesut Özil, Sami Khedira and 
Philipp Lahm ran amok.

Brazil had not been beaten in a competitive game on home soil since 1975, but 
they shipped five goals in 18 minutes before the half-hour mark. César screamed 
in frustration but those around him merely shrunk as if wishing the turf would 
swallow them up. The crowd could only gasp at the brutality of it all, 
summoning a few boos when André Schürrle added a sixth and regularly abusing 
Fred, who could do no right. They even offered a smattering of applause when 
the Chelsea forward added a seventh.

By the time Scolari was offering his excuses in the aftermath rumours were 
already emerging of rioting in São Paulo, vines of the burning of Brazil flags 
doing the rounds on social media. There were concerns as to how the tournament 
would conclude, particularly with Argentina still involved and in contention to 
claim the trophy in their rivals’ back yard, though the truth was the defeat 
had rather knocked the stuffing out of the home nation.

They had no energy left to revolt, other than to voice frustration at Scolari 
and, eventually, hound him from his position. All that remained was deflation 
after one of the most remarkable capitulations this stage had witnessed. The 
thrashing was staggering but seemed too emphatic for comfort. It was hard not 
to share Brazil’s grief at the way their dream died.
 