
Heading for a first: Lord Browne

Almost exactly one year after his much contested review into higher education 
was published, Lord Browne of Madingley returned into the spotlight this week 
as the chair of trustees for the foundation overseeing the new Queen Elizabeth 
Prize for Engineering. Unlike his funding review, this announcement was greeted 
with fanfare and the even rarer sight of cross-party support as David Cameron, 
Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband all got behind the new initiative.

Since the industrial revolution, the UK has arguably the richest history of 
any country when it comes to engineering, and while the United States, China 
and India have probably soared past us in recent years, the establishing of a 
new £1m prize here in the UK to reward the very best global engineering feats 
has undoubtedly set engineering hearts racing in this country, and further 
afield too.

Remarkably this is the first prize that the queen has put her name to, and 
given the interest it has sparked in the global engineering community it is 
already being talked about as a rival to the Nobel prize. If ways can be found 
to start exciting the imagination of the pupils in our schools too, as well as 
the engineers in our universities and in industry, then its contribution will 
be worth several times more than the £1m prize fund that will be awarded to the 
winners every two years.

Heading for a fail: University of California Davis

This week UC Davis was plunged into disarray as its chancellor Linda Katehi 
allowed riot police to disperse a rather modest gathering of students occupying 
a part of the campus. In the wake of Occupy Wall Street, emulated this side of 
the pond with a similar gathering outside St Paul's cathedral in London, a 
number of tented protests have sprung up on university campuses in the US. 
Although US authorities tend to be rather less tolerant of occupations, few 
expected the show of force that was thrust on protesters at Davis.

After getting the green light from Katehi, riot police wasted no time in 
trying to clear the small gathering of students. As students chose to hold 
their ground, what happened next was truly dreadful. Within minutes police 
moved from persuasion to forceful removal, but most shocking of all was the 
repeated use of pepper spray directly in the faces and mouths of non-resisting 
students. The whole farce was caught on film and has spread like wildfire on 
the internet.

Faced with the video evidence, Davis has been forced into acting decisively. 
The chief of campus police, Annette Spicuzza has been suspended while an 
investigation attempts to get to the bottom of exactly what happened and who it 
was authorised by. But as it was Katehi herself who sanctioned the police 
actions, andalthough she instructed them to do so peacefully 
<http://www.sacbee.com/2011/11/23/4074993/katehi-campus-police-were-told.html#ixzz1eXUInSfb>
, thousands of people have signed a petition calling for her resignation – no 
doubt fuelled with the anger of seeing students unceremoniously subjected to 
pepper spray.

Whatever your opinions on occupation as a tactic, there can surely be no 
justification for the use of such outrageous police actions to disperse a group 
of students who are peacefully trying to make a point – whether you agree with 
them or not.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 