
As a small boy in Bradford, David Hockney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hockney> would watch his father paint 
old bicycles and prams. “I love that, even now,” he remembered decades later. 
“It is a marvellous thing to dip a brush into the paint and make marks on 
anything, even a bicycle, the feel of a thick brush full of paint coating 
something.” He knew he was going to be an artist, even if he wasn’t sure 
exactly what an artist did. Design Christmas cards, draw signs, paint prams: it 
didn’t matter, so long as his job involved the unmatched sensuality of making 
marks.

Related: David Hockney on what turns a picture into a masterpiece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/26/david-hockney-what-turns-a-picture-into-a-masterpiece>

He’ll be 80 this July: the best-known living British artist, his verve and 
curiosity undiminished. In 1962, he spent a painstaking day lettering a note to 
himself on a chest of drawers at the end of his bed. “Get up and work 
immediately,” it said, and he’s been obeying it ever since. From monumental 
paintings of swimming pools and seething summer fields to tender, meticulous 
pencil portraits, from cubist opera sets to vases of flowers drawn on iPads or 
sent by fax machines, Hockney has always been a relentless reinventor, an 
artist who appears familiar while refusing to stay still.

As a spectacular new retrospective at Tate Britain makes clear, these twists 
and turns in thematic preoccupations and new techniques do not represent a lack 
of discipline or focus. Instead, they are staging posts in Hockney’s great 
quest: his passionate, obsessive attempt to remake the solid, moody, fleeting 
world in two dimensions. What do things look like, really, to stereoscopic 
human eyes, connected to a human heart and brain? Never mind the camera, with 
its rigid Cyclopean vision. There is a better way of seeing, though it might 
take a lifetime to master.

He was the fourth of five children, born in 1937 to creative, politically 
radical working class parents. His father had been a conscientious objector and 
was a lifelong campaigner for nuclear disarmament, while his mother was a 
Methodist and vegetarian (years later, asked by Women’s Wear Daily what he 
found beautiful, he picked his mum).

From the off, Hockney was canny if not outright machiavellian at pursuing his 
ambitions. At Bradford Grammar, art was only taught to people in the bottom 
form. “They thought art was not a serious study and I just thought, ‘Well, 
they’re wrong.’” A bright scholarship boy, he promptly went on strike, idling 
in all his other subjects in order to gain access. At 16, his parents finally 
consented to art school, first in Bradford and then, in 1959, at the Royal 
College ofArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>.

A cheeky lad in cartoonish glasses and weird, elegant clothes, he stood out at 
the RCA immediately, not least for the Stakhanovite intensity of his working 
day. Drawing was the foundation, the bulwark of his buoyant self-belief. If you 
could draw, he reasoned, you could always make money. The bloke selling 
sketches in the park was a comfort, not a fear, though in fact before he’d even 
graduated he was already making substantial money from his work.

In the late 1950s, abstract expressionism – the sploshes and splashes of 
Jackson Pollock <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jackson-pollock> – 
was casting a long shadow over British art. At first, Hockney played along, but 
the figure burned at him, a source of illicit fascination. It took a fellow 
student, the AmericanRB Kitaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/feb/10/rb-kitaj-obsessions-tate-war>
, to nudge him towards representation, suggesting he try mining his real 
interests for subject matter.
 Domestic Scene, Los Angeles 1963. Photograph: David Hockney 
Their conversation unlatched a door. Hockney had known he was gay since 
boyhood. Reading the poets Walt Whitman and CP Cavafy in the summer of 1960, 
both of whom attested freely to their love of men, he saw a way of inhabiting 
his sexuality that was at once frank and fruitful. Desire could be his subject; 
he could make what he described as “propaganda” for queer love. The paintings 
came fast. InWe Two Boys Together Clinging 
<http://www.hockneypictures.com/works_paintings_60_04.php> pastel escarpments 
of pink and blue announce a mood of romance, while inAdhesiveness 
<http://www.hockneypictures.com/works_paintings_60_02.php> two squat scarlet 
figures like pornographic Mr Men engage in oral sex, one sporting an alarmingly 
fanged mouth nicked straight fromFrancis Bacon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bacon>.

Coming out so emphatically took courage. Until the 1967 Sexual Offences Act, 
homosexual acts were illegal even in private. These new images were a political 
act, as well as a fantasy he willed into being. TakeDomestic Scene, Los Angeles 
<http://www.hockneypictures.com/works_paintings_60_09.php>, in which a lanky 
pink boy in pinny and socks soaps the back of a naked hunk standing beneath a 
solid blue jet of water. Hockney was imagining California permissiveness before 
he had even been there, conjuring a utopia that would become both his home and 
best-known subject.

Mr Whizz, as his new friend Christopher Isherwood nicknamed him, first visited 
LA in1964 <http://www.hockneypictures.com/chronology.php>, and immediately 
recognised a scene in need of a chronicler. The swimming pools, the sprinklers 
and jungle foliage, the taut, tanned people in their glass houses full of 
primitive sculpture were simultaneously raw material and aesthetic problems to 
be solved.
 Portrait of an Artist (Pool with Two Figures) 1972. Photograph: Jenni 
Carter/David Hockney 
Light on water, iridescent ribbons of glitter, a splash 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/hockney-a-bigger-splash-t03254>: he could 
deploy all the lessons of abstraction here, among them Helen Frankenthaler’s 
trick of diluting acrylic paint with detergent, so it would flood the canvas 
with reflective pools of colour. As for the people in his paintings, the lovers 
and friends, the central question was how to depict bodies in space while 
simultaneously capturing something of the relationship, the currents of emotion 
between them.

That many of his subjects were famous, the glamorous beau monde of Tinseltown 
and swinging London, can distract from the seriousness of his investigation, 
the weirdness of his solutions. The first of his double portraits was 1968’s
Christopher Isherwood and Don Bachardy 
<http://www.hockneypictures.com/works_paintings_60.php>. The novelist sits in 
hawkish profile, eyes locked on his much younger lover. A bowl of fruit, behind 
a phallic cob of corn, distorts the horizontal line into a triangle, forcing 
the viewer’s gaze to circle restlessly around the canvas.

This marriage of artificiality and liveliness returns in a visionary portrait 
of the curator Henry Geldzahler sitting on a pink sofa, haloed by a glowing 
window. Standing to his left is the rigid, transfigured form of his boyfriend, 
Christopher Scott, who in his belted trench coat has something of the air of a 
messenger angel, causing the museum curator Kynaston McShine to compare the 
painting to an annunciation. Though both men’s feet rest emphatically on the 
same tiled floor, they exist in different orders of reality.

Over the next few years, Hockney’s work became increasingly naturalistic, 
culminating in portraits such asMr and Mrs Clark and Percy <http:> and 1972’s 
melancholyPortrait of an Artist, in which his former lover Peter Schlesinger 
peers coolly down at a distorted body moving through the troubled light of a 
swimming pool. At first, naturalism had felt like freedom, allowing him to 
spring away from his contemporaries’ obsession with flatness, their need to 
labour the artificiality of a painting. He became fascinated by one-point 
perspective, a development that coincided with a growing interest in 
photography.
 Mr and Mrs Clark and Percy, 1970-1. Photograph: Mark Heathcote/David Hockney 
But by the mid 1970s, naturalism too had become a trap, a convention of seeing 
that failed to accurately capture the world. “Perspective takes away the body 
of the viewer. You have a fixed point, you have no movement; in short, you are 
not there really. That is the problem,” he observed. “For something to be seen, 
it has to be looked at by somebody and any true and real depiction should be an 
account of the experience of that looking.” In short, he wanted to invite the 
viewer inside the picture.

The two main zones in which he discovered his new approach were opera and the 
camera. In 1974 he was commissioned to design a production of Stravinsky’sThe 
Rake’s Progress at Glyndebourne, and over the next decade he returned 
repeatedly to set design, gripped by the puzzle of incorporating real bodies 
into artificial spaces.

The camera offered possibilities far removed from voguish photorealism. In his 
1982 exhibitionDrawing with a Camera he showed the composite cubist portraits 
he called “joiners”, made by collaging Polaroid photos, an approach that 
quickly inflected his paintings, too. The eye is bounced continually, alighting 
on small details; though the image is still it gives an illusion of motion, 
capturing the subject’s joggling hands and shifting emotional weather.
 Pearblossom Hwy, 11 - 18th April 1986, #1. Photograph: The J. Paul Getty 
Museum/David Hockney 
New technologies were always a thrill. Just as mastering etching, lithography 
and aquatint had opened horizons for possible pictorial constructions, so too 
did the photocopier and fax machine, the latter fondly described by Hockney as 
“a telephone for the deaf”. He became so addicted to sending friends enormously 
complex images, comprising hundreds of pages to be pieced together by the 
recipient, that he created an imaginary institute, The Hollywood Sea Picture 
Supply Co Est 1988. The smartphones and tablets of the new millennium would 
prove equally irresistible (many of his 1,500 iPhone and iPad drawings can be 
seen in a capacious new survey,David Hockney: Current, published by Thames and 
Hudson this month).

Hockney first realised he was going deaf in 1978, when he couldn’t hear the 
voices of female students in a class. He painted his hearing aid in cheerful 
red and blue, but the diagnosis depressed him, especially when he remembered 
how isolating deafness had proved for his father. The loss was progressive, 
gradually inhibiting his ability to hear conversations in groups or in the 
noisy restaurants he had once loved. There were compensations, though. He 
suspected it induced a compensatory sharpening of his vision, clarifying in 
particular his sense of space.

The other long shadow in those years was Aids. During the 1980s and early 90s, 
dozens and dozens of his acquaintances and closest friends died, among them the 
film director Tony Richardson and the model Joe McDonald. “I remember once 
going to New York and visiting three separate hospitals. It was the worst time 
of my life.” Years later, he confided to a friend that he did sometimes 
consider suicide, adding “we all have a deep desire to survive, because we like 
the experience of loving”.
 Woldgate Woods, 6 & 9 November 2006. Photograph: Richard Schmidt/David Hockney
You might expect death to darken his palette, but what emerged at the 
century’s end were revelatory landscapes. In 1997, Hockney was back in 
Yorkshire, making daily visits to his friend Jonathan Silver, who was dying of 
cancer and who suggested he might make a subject of his native county. Driving 
each day across the Wolds, he was struck by “the living aspect of the 
landscape”. It was seasonality that captivated him now, the slow decline and 
stubborn regeneration of the natural world. “Some days were just glorious, the 
colour was fantastic. I can see colour. Other people don’t see it like me 
obviously.”

The Yorkshire paintings that emerged over the next decade were vast, often 
made from multiple canvases joined together. Damp, fecund England, as luxuriant 
as a Matisse, the hedgerows writhing with renewed life. There is something 
cartoon-like and unadulterated about them, even gluttonous, a need to seize the 
mad abundance before it becomes something else, bud to leaf, puddle to ice, the 
endless migration of matter through form.

Hockney has long since attained the status of national treasure, a passionate 
cardiganed dandy vocally impatient with the nannying anti-bohemianism of the 
21st century. In 1997 he was made a Companion of Honour by the Queen; in 2011 
the first volume of Christopher Simon Sykes’s warm and knowledgeable biography
Hockney was published.
 David Hockney in London, 1966. Photograph: Jane Bown for the Guardian 
A small stroke in 2012 didn’t inhibit his interest in breaking new ground. 
Card players have his attention now. Sometimes these group portraits have the 
look of photographs, and then you spot one of his own paintings hanging on the 
wall, a witty rejoinder to different kinds of pictorial truth. But as well as 
the wit, lightness and exuberance of Hockney’s constructions they have a 
weighty quality, too.

“If you come to dead ends you simply somersault back and carry on,” he once 
said. The English are perennially suspicious of this kind of acrobatic ability, 
finding it easier to commend the diligent ploughing of a single furrow. When 
faced with negativity or bafflement about his new avenues and experiments, 
Hockney’s response has often been to note tersely that he knows what he is 
doing.

Learning to look, that’s what he’s been up to, and learning too that looking 
is a source of joy. Asked a few years ago about the place of love in his life, 
he answered: “I love my work. And I think the work has love, actually ... I 
love life. I write it at the end of letters – ‘Love life,David Hockney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hockney>.’”

• David Hockney is at Tate Britain, London SW1P, from 9 February. 
tate.org.uk/visit/tate-britain <http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-britain>. 
Olivia Laing’sThe Lonely City: Adventures in the Art of Being Alone is 
published by Canongate.
 