
These past few days, like every Christmas in living memory, God's 
representatives on Earth have warned of a collapse in the moral order. Basil 
Hume, for the Catholics, told his midnight mass that we have 'squeezed God out 
of our culture', while in Canterbury George Carey banged his tambourine about 
materialism and the 'fog of relativism'.

 The nation, Carey said, must realise that true security and confidence come 
from belief in the Lord.

 We've got into the habit of blaming our loss of faith on rampant consumerism, 
particularly since the churches lost their monopoly on Sunday opening. When, 
inevitably, the Daily Mail joined the latest chorus of 'It's not like the old 
days', it mourned the passing of a time when 'nobody worked, all the shops were 
shut and the parish church was, at least for once a year, jammed with 
worshippers belting out traditional carols'.

 As usual, the clerics and the dullards of Derry Street have got the wrong end 
of the stick. It's not shopping that's the new religion, but romantic love. 
Christmas now begins when the first sprig of mistletoe goes up for the office 
party, and ends with the last kiss in the early hours of the New Year. 
Goodwill, giving and the little baby Jesus have been squeezed out by snogging, 
sex and declarations of undying passion; the theme tune is no longer O Come All 
Ye Faithful, but Last Christmas, with George Michael singing about his search 
for 'someone special'.

 As a rule, anything that undermines religion is a good idea. The fewer people 
who believe they can bomb their way into heaven, or that you'll burn in hell if 
you swap fluids with someone of the same sex, the better. But although love's 
light shines brightest in the bleak midwinter, this is a year-round orthodoxy. 
It is now as unthinkable to question the value of lurve as it was to challenge 
the existence of God 200 years ago.

 A single emotion has become the be-all and end-all of western culture.

 Love has always been a theme in the arts, but over the past century we have 
come to look askance at any other topic. Whether or not it's all you need, as 
the Beatles sang, it's increasingly all you get. Every movie and TV drama has 
at least a romantic subplot; every radio show a scattering of soppy hits with 
names like How Do I Live Without You. The decade's biggest movie, Titanic, had 
everything you could want in a disaster movie - elemental dangers, stunning 
special effects, toffs behaving badly - but the creators still insisted on 
spinning the whole thing around Kate Winslet's unlikely infatuation with little 
Lenny DiCaprio. Last year's female role models were the unspeakably wet Ally 
McBeal and Bridget Jones. And in singer Jane McDonald, we have seen a woman 
with all the charisma and musicality of a mullet elevated to superstardom 
largely because of her betrothal to a nice bloke called Henrik.

 The only area of popular culture that has so far escaped the 'gentler 
emotion' is live comedy - and that's perhaps because it's too important to 
laugh at.

 The fact that it's now that much harder to become a star unless you're 
someone's idea of a heart-throb may not matter much outside showbiz; what does 
is that you're seen as abnormal if you're not in love, or at least wanting to 
be. Where past generations hoped for a couple of years of passion, followed 
with luck by a long stretch of comfortable intimacy, we expect to be in love 
right here, right now, all the time. More people live alone than ever before, 
but we are taught that we are incomplete unless we are in a relationship. And 
it sinks in young. A balanced, lively 10-year-old with plenty of friends 
recently told me she was looking for a boyfriend because she'd been 'single' 
for almost a year.

 In this sort of environment, the temptation is overwhelming to throw yourself 
at anyone who'll have you, whether or not it makes you happy. Deborah Corrigan, 
a Page 3 girl unfortunate enough to have Jim Davidson for a boyfriend, recently 
told the News Of The World that the boorish comic had nagged her about the size 
of her breasts, put her down in front of his friends and finally gone off on a 
'wild rant', calling her a 'slag' because she had done a soft-porn photo-shoot. 
'In the end,' she said, 'he set out to destroy me.' Now she is trying to patch 
things up.

 'I still love him,' she said. 'Neither of us is easy to live with, but that's 
one of the reasons we still feel for each other.' The logic may not be 
watertight, but it's depressingly familiar. Because we have deified love, we 
treat it as something outside us, a force over which we have no control - 
unlike hate, the emotion that's supposed to be its counterweight. Perhaps 
because of Carey's 'fog of relativism', we no longer believe morality or even 
common sense has any part to play. Something that exists only in the mind, it 
seems, cannot be tempered by it.

 All-conquering romance, love that scorns reason - it sounds beautiful. But 
let's face it: there's something's very wrong with a world where anyone has to 
go out with Jim Davidson.

 Jeremy Hardy is back next week.
 