
The London Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup> and Deutsche 
Börse said the terms of their merger would withstand Britain’s vote to leave 
the EU, after LSE shareholders voted almost unanimously in favour of the deal.

At a meeting in London, 99.89% of LSE shareholder votes were cast for the 
company to be acquired by Deutsche Börse. Shareholders were expected to support 
the deal but it has faced growing opposition inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> since the UK vote for Brexit in the 
23 June referendum.

Before the vote, LSE and Deutsche Börse established a referendum committee to 
examine problems created by a Brexit vote.

Announcing its shareholders’ vote for the merger on Monday, LSE said the 
committee would work to ensure the combined company met all regulatory 
requirements. Because the UK is likely to stay in the EU for at least two years 
it may take many months to complete that work, LSE said.

LSE added: “The parties emphasise that the agreed transaction includes all 
necessary mechanisms to respond to the outcome of the referendum. Whether the 
UK is just European or a member of the EU, the merger will create a globally 
competitive, industry-defining market infrastructure group at the service of 
European industry.”

About 50 shareholders gathered at the low-key meeting, held at the London 
offices of Freshfields, LSE’s legal advisers. Two asked questions.

Dinesh Jain, an individual shareholder, asked why, now Britain was leaving the 
EU, “do we want to shackle ourselves to a corpse”, Reuters reported. LSE should 
scrap the merger, which Germany was likely to veto, and instead do deals with 
exchanges in Asia and Latin America, he said.

Donald Brydon, LSE’s chairman, stuck by the deal and said other countries such 
as France were looking to take business away from LSE.

“There are some people already seeking to pick over the bones of the UK very, 
very rapidly indeed. Everyone would be wise to take things a step at a time in 
this area,” Brydon said.

The referendum committee will respond to developments in Britain’s 
negotiations with the EU but the main terms of the deal will remain intact and 
could only be changed by further shareholder votes once approved.


The holding company for the combined group will have its main listing in 
London but will also be traded in Frankfurt and the company will be regulated 
in the UK. Carsten Kengeter, Deutsche Borse’s chief executive, will run the 
company.

The exchanges announced a £21bn deal in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/23/lse-london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse-merger-europe>
 to create a European powerhouse of trading in stocks, bonds and complex 
financial instruments to take on rivals in the US and Asia. It is the third 
time the companies have attempted a merger after failed attempts in 2000 and 
2005.


Before the referendum, both companies claimed the merger was Brexit-proof. But 
following the vote, German politicians and regulators have criticised the deal 
and called for revisions to the terms or for it to be scrapped.

UK construction suffers biggest fall since 2009 as Brexit fears bite – 
business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jul/04/stimulus-hopes-markets-ftse-100-construction-business-live>
Germany’s markets regulator BaFin said last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/28/german-regulator-bafin-merger-deutsche-borse-london-stock-exchange-brexit>
 the plan to base the combined company in London would not work if the UK was 
outside the EU. BaFin said it was difficult to imagine the most important 
exchange in the eurozone being run from outside the EU.


BaFin cannot veto the deal but Deutsche Börse will face pressure to respond to 
the regulator’s concerns along with the German state of Hesse, where the 
company is based and which has a veto power.

Several German politicians called for the combined company’s base to be in 
Frankfurt, while Thorsten Schäfer-Gümbel, a leading Social Democratic party 
politician, said the deal was dead.

Joachim Faber, Deutsche Börse’s chairman, said: “I strongly endorse the 
statement of London Stock Exchange Group following their general meeting today 
and continue to recommend the transaction to the shareholders of Deutsche 
Börse.”

With questions hanging over the City of London’s status as the EU’s undisputed 
financial centre, politicians in other countries are eyeing opportunities to 
attract banks and other financial companies to base their operations there.


LSE and Deutsche Börse said after the referendum result was announced that the 
merger remained on course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse-merger-brexit-vote-uk-german>
 and that the rationale behind it was intact.

LSE shares fell more than 15% in the two days after the referendum result was 
announced but have recovered some of their losses. The shares closed down just 
over 1% at £24.93 on Monday.


Deutsche Börse shareholders will vote in a postal ballot and have until 12 
July to swap their shares for those of the new company.

 