
Lucy Kellaway, the columnist and associate editor of the Financial Times, is 
leaving the newspaper after 31 years. 
<https://www.ft.com/content/ed9bc938-acb7-11e6-9cb3-bb8207902122>

From next summer, she will begin a new career as a maths teacher in a 
“challenging” London secondary school. In so doing, she will be acting as a 
pioneer for the charityNow Teach <http://nowteach.org.uk/>, which she 
co-founded earlier this year.

It was set up to encourage high-flying professionals in the business world to 
retrain as teachers and help to address the shortage of maths and science 
teachers.

Kellaway said: “I’ve had one of the nicest jobs in journalism by writing a 
column for 22 years. I love it, but I don’t want to spend my entire life doing 
it.

“I think teaching is hugely important and I’m in the luxurious position of 
being able to take on the task. My mother was a teacher. One of my daughters is 
a teacher. It’s in the family, and I’m very excited about making this move.”

Kellaway’s columns, poking fun at modern corporate culture, have long been 
regarded as a jewel in the FT’s crown. Editor Lionel Barber describes her as “a 
unique voice for the business community.”

Her invention of the character Martin Lukes, an egotistical and obnoxious 
business manager, attracted a huge audience and won Kellaway a columnist of the 
year award. She also turned the satirical column into a successful book.


In her latest incarnation, “Dear Lucy”, she acts as a business agony aunt 
attempting to solve problems sent by readers. She then broadcasts the columns 
on theBBC World Service <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-world-service>.

Kellaway will retain her links with the FT because she has agreed to 
contribute 12 pieces a year for the paper. She said: “You could say I’m having 
my cake and eating it because I will still write for the FT. After all, there 
are long school holidays.”

Barber spoke of his admiration for Kellaway’s willingness to “give something 
back to the community” by taking up a teaching post.


He said: “I love Lucy as a journalist and as a personal friend. She has done 
an incredible job for the FT family over three decades and I’m delighted that 
she will continue to write for us.”

Kellaway, who is 57, joined the FT in 1985 after working in a foreign exchange 
dealing room and then at the Investors Chronicle. In her years with the paper 
she has had spells as energy correspondent, Brussels correspondent, a Lex 
writer and interviewer.

In October last year, she revealed in her column 
<https://www.ft.com/content/15b581ae-7828-11e5-933d-efcdc3c11c89> that she had 
separated from her husband, David Goodhart. They have four grown-up children.

 