
Lovely day for voting, wasn't it? Balmy May weather. Perfect for strolling to 
a primary school and choosing an electoral system. I, for one, enjoyed it.

Of course I voted. It's terribly important to vote. People died for that 
right. Women fought and struggled. Vital to use it now we've got it. More 
important than anything else. Just think of Zimbabwe. I certainly voted. Nobody 
can say I didn't. Vote, vote, vote. I know I did. Has anyone said they saw me 
not voting? Exactly. It can't be proved. I definitely voted.

All right, I didn't vote. Please don't shout. This is my mea culpa.

The sports stars were a key factor. Endorsing the No campaign were Darren 
Gough, David Gower, James Cracknell and Jane Couch. The Yes campaign had 
Stephen Fry, Colin Firth and Eddie Izzard.

What if, in my unconscious mind, I voted yes purely because I preferred those 
celebrities? Too obvious! Of course I would side with that bunch over the 
athletes! Actors and writers, yawn.

That's the side I was on at school. Always the bookish nerd in glasses, even 
though I was too vain actually to buy glasses until the age of 30 – and only 
then because I'd accidentally walked into an optician's, mistaking it for a 
chip shop. I'm damned if I'm going to be 20 years out of school andstill not 
picked for the sports team.

"Shall I vote no, then?" I wondered. "Everyone else will. And I am British, 
after all. I hate and fear change of any kind. I didn't like it when the 
newsagent got a new window display."

But Darren Gough and David Gower? That's rich. I refuse to be warned off 
fudges and coalitions by players from the one sport that never seems to reach a 
decisive conclusion. How come they love first past the post, all of a sudden? I 
don't really understand cricket, but its scoring system strikes me as 
proportional representation in sporting form. Meanwhile, oddly, Kriss Akabusi 
was a yes. Maybe he always wanted to be a cricketer.

And James Cracknell? He's recovering from a major head injury. A magnificent 
Olympian, great adventurer and family man – it's a sign of enormous character 
that he's making a comeback and ran the marathon – but he's not, perhaps, the 
person to whom I'd currently turn for guidance on a complicated new voting 
system which is a struggle for anyone to get their head around. He's not 
allowed to drive.

As for Jane Couch, the boxer, I've seen her fight and she's an inspirational 
woman. And yet, she's been punched more times than she probably cares to 
remember or, possibly, can. Are we absolutely certain she was best placed to 
lead us through the intricacies of second-choice voting counts?

The No campaign also had Peter Stringfellow. I didn't know he'd ever said no 
to anything in his life. Interesting that someone felt it would be persuasive 
to brandish Stringfellow at the electorate, as if he was the most respected 
public figure they could think of.

"Next on the list after Stringfellow," said a friend of mine, "is The Barrel. 
I think he must be a wrestler."

And yet, I've always had rather a soft spot for Peter Stringfellow. What if I 
found myself voting nojust because he's a bit of a character and wears funny 
trousers?

You might say: stop being such a child and make up your own mind without this 
glittering outside help. But how could I? It evidently wasn't going to make any 
difference to anything and I was bamboozled by everyone pretending that it 
would.

Clegg and Cameron appeared to be in tremendous disagreement over it, but that 
came a little too soon after Clegg was caught on microphone whispering to 
Cameron that they ought to have a tremendous disagreement about something.

For me, it felt as significant as trying to decide whether to leave the car 
keys in a saucer by the front door or a saucer by the phone – with one vast 
group of people telling me that leaving them by the door was a dangerous, 
Luddite obstruction to important social change, while another warned me that 
leaving them by the phone was effectively supporting the BNP. Something wasn't 
right here. I felt the same suspicion of muggery that I do when I've just spent 
two hours sorting out all the different bits of recycling, then remember that 
China is building several coal-fired power stations every week and America 
pumps crude oil into the sea.

It was all so suspicious, my brain hurt. I always leave my keys on the kitchen 
table anyway. Or in a shop.

So, either way I voted, there seemed to be a risk I'd make a dangerous 
mistake, but (unable to grasp what effect any of it would really have on 
anything), it seemed more socially responsible to stay at home and let it be 
decided by those more persuaded than I was.

It was only the next day I realised: people make the same argument for not 
voting in general elections. They say there's no difference between the 
parties, so they don't care enough to show up. And I harangue those people, I 
bore them with my earnest insistence. I would always, always vote in a general 
election.

Ever since that realisation, I've felt restless and incomplete, the vote 
abstractly missing, like when I've forgotten to pack something for a holiday 
but I'm not sure what. So you really needn't write crossly in. The regret is 
already on my shoulder like an albatross, pecking at my arm.

Damn it, I realise now: better to vote the wrong way than not to vote at all. 
I'm an idiot. In my defence, my social conscience is now pricked and 
reinvigorated. So much so, I might even go online later and see how it all 
turned out.

www.victoriacoren.com
 