
A majority of the corporate giants who sit on the committee of the CBI 
(Confederation of British Industry) fail to pay the living wage, according to 
research by the Guardian.

British Airways <https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishairways> and BP 
International are among the 15 corporate members of the 21-strong president’s 
committee of the CBI that are not designated as living wage employers.

The research, based on the work of the Living Wage Foundation 
<http://www.livingwage.org.uk/>, comes as the CBI prepares to voice concerns 
about George Osborne’s own version of the living wage at its annual conference 
next week.

The chancellor’s national living wage, dismissed by critics as a rebranding of 
the national minimum wage, is due to be introduced at a rate of £7.20 an hour 
from next April – way below the foundation’s own definition of an hourly living 
wage of £8.25.

The CBI responded to the Guardian’s research on Friday by warning that 
“unaffordable mandated wage increases” put jobs at risk.

Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader, called on the companies to start 
paying the living wage as soon as possible. “The UK’s biggest companies should 
pay the living wage – these are some of the biggest and most successful 
companies in the world because of the work of their staff,” Farron said. “If 
the heads of these companies can be paid millions, then every worker should 
expect at the very least to be paid the living wage.”

The companies that are not accredited living wage employers include Airbus 
Group, BAE Systems, Capita, ExxonMobil, IBM (UK),Jaguar Land Rover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jaguar-land-rover>, Shell, TSB Bank and 
Veolia Environmental Services. The six companies on the committee that do pay 
the living wage are Accenture, Centrica, HSBC, KPMG, the National Grid and 
Pearson.

Internal CBI documents leaked by the Vote Leave campaign this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/04/cbi-urged-to-come-clean-on-eu-stance>
 show that the employers’ organisation is to lobby for the chancellor’s 
national living wage to be introduced gently before reaching its target of £9 
an hour by 2020.

 In a background briefing note for a meeting of the president’s committee in 
September, attended by the Treasury chief secretary Greg Hands, the CBI says: 
“In public statements we’ve highlighted support for a higher skilled, higher 
wage economy but stressed that a national living wage does not reflect firms’ 
ability to pay, calling it a ‘big gamble’. We’re engaging BIS [Department for 
Business, Innovation and Skills], Treasury and OBR [Office for Budget 
Responsibility] to stress the full impact of the policy and will be lobbying 
for an independent Low Pay Commission to ensure the path to £9 is as affordable 
as possible.”

The CBI said a failure to be designated favourably by the foundation did not 
mean that a company was not paying the living wage. Many of the companies that 
have failed to win designation as living wage employers say that the vast 
majority of their staff are paid far higher salaries.

A spokesman for Capita said the majority of its employees were in roles paid 
above the living wage. “With over 60,000 employees in the UK,Capita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> ensures it pays salaries 
equivalent to local rates and continuously reviews salary levels across the 
group,” he said.


A spokesman for British Airways said: “We regularly undertake audits to make 
sure we keep up with best practice and comply with all current legislation.”

ABB, BP, GE, IBM <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ibm>, Jaguar Land 
Rover, Oracle and Veolia did not return the Guardian’s requests for comment 
prior to publication.

A CBI spokesperson said: “Businesses want to ensure staff are fairly paid. 
Some firms pay the living wage and are accredited by the Living Wage 
Foundation, others pay it but choose not be accredited, so it doesn’t follow 
that a lack of accreditation means a company isn’t paying the living wage.

“Company circumstances differ greatly and it’s down to individual firms to 
make their own decisions on pay. The introduction of the compulsory national 
living wage, rising to £9 by 2020, is already taking a gamble.

“Business wants to see pay rise, but this must be driven by productivity 
improvements. Unaffordable mandated wage increases put hours and jobs at risk. 
To avoid this an independent Low Pay Commission must have a critical role to 
play in recommending the path of future national living wage rises.”

The Living Wage Foundation has a strict definition for a company to be 
designated as a living wage employer. A spokeswoman said: “Accredited living 
wage employers commit to paying both all of their directly employed staff as 
well as sub-contracted teams working on their premises, at least the living 
wage, and in the capital, the London living wage.”
 