
Ask someone about their biggest regret, and many times ‘not travelling enough’ 
or ‘not seizing travel opportunities’ will come out on top. Travel affords us 
an escape from the daily grind, a bit of escapism and an enjoyment of the great 
outdoors. While taking time off work for a week or two might seem the best way 
to recuperate, there is another way to travel more. You can travel while still 
working, and even in some cases, take your team with you.

Away days

If you run your own small business, away days are a great choice for building 
team morale in a fresh environment. If there are several departments as part of 
your company, a team away day can encourage people who don’t normally 
communicate to get a better understanding of each other’s roles. Whether it’s a 
weekend at a country house, a week away on the slopes or a day at a workshop in 
a new part of town, there are loads of options that will produce great results. 
From Game of Thrones-style forest adventures to ‘escape the room’ tasks, there 
are many companies that specialise in providing these kind of experiences. And 
the rewards are many – it increases morale, improves cohesion and rewards good 
results. Long-term, it could lead to a better company structure, a more 
enjoyable environment and a happier team.

Working from somewhere new

If you feel that you need some time off from the office but don’t want to give 
up working altogether, why not try working from abroad? You’ll need to take 
into account considerations such as family obligations, financial commitments 
(such as a mortgage) and any other dependencies you have, but if you can sort 
these out, there are lots of benefits. Working from another country means that 
you can enjoy different weather (perhaps some more sun!), a different culture, 
and a different pace of life. For example, if you are largely desk-based, you 
can work on your computer from anywhere in the world and catch up with clients 
and colleagues via the magic of video technology. Remember that you’ll need to 
have built up a good list of clients if you want to do this, as starting from 
scratch in a new country is difficult.

Taking time off

If you can afford to do it, taking time off from work can do wonders for your 
small business when you return. If you’ve run your business for a long time, 
you will have been in a routine, even if you weren’t aware of it. Hearing new 
ideas, meeting new people and making new connections will refresh your outlook 
and provide you with renewed motivation and inspiration. These are all things 
that happen when you travel – you’ll be faced with new challenges, enjoy a 
sense of achievement when you overcome them, and see places far removed from 
your daily life. It’s a scary thought to leave a position that feels 
comfortable, but facing your fears is the way to dissipate them.

Travel more with work

If you have a yearning to travel more, but don’t want to completely move or 
give up your business, you can develop more relationships and projects that 
require travel. Think about your current client list and consider what an 
international addition could do for your business – perhaps make that your 
target for next year. In addition to courting clients with an international 
presence, consider attending conferences and summits that are held abroad to 
your yearly calendar. You’ll make new connections, pick up new business tips 
and enjoy all of the benefits of spending time away from the office. Also, 
there could be techniques and customs that other countries use that could help 
you achieve more success with your own business. If you already have clients 
and contacts abroad, make time to see them face-to-face – again, this does 
wonders for your relationships.

Whatever business you’re in, travel could improve it. Away days with your 
team, taking a few months off for yourself, and many more options can add new 
dimensions to your working outlook. No matter how large or small scale you go, 
there is a huge value for both you and your small business in extra travel.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx> sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
 