
Hospital ID badge dangling from his neck, Angus considered the empty bed in 
front of him. After a few strong sniffs, he moved on.

Nearing the next bed, his floppy ears perked up before he stopped dead in his 
tracks, tapping his paw and eyeing his handler expectantly.

The two-year-old English springer spaniel is believed to be the only canine 
hospital employee in the world trained to sniff out the notorioussuperbug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mrsa> Clostridium difficile, or C 
difficile.

The seeds of Angus’ unlikely career were planted three years ago, after Teresa 
Zurberg, a Vancouver resident, suffered a C difficile infection. Her bout with 
the bacteria – which attacks people whose immune systems have been weakened by 
antibiotics – left her in the hospital for five days and she lost 20 pounds.

“It was awful. I almost died,” Zurberg said. 

Her husband, Markus, a nurse who works in patient safety and quality care, 
stumbled across an article on a beagle in the Netherlands who had been 
specially trained to check patients forC difficile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2007/oct/11/health.medicineandhealth1>. 

Could Zurberg – a canine handler who trains bomb- and drug-detecting dogs – do 
the same thing in Vancouver? he wondered. “I told him, ‘If it’s got a smell, I 
can teach a dog to find it,’” Zurberg said. Their new English springer spaniel 
pup might be perfect for the job, she suggested.

The pair approached Vancouver Coastal Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, the health authority that 
oversees the city’s general hospital – and were surprised by the enthusiastic 
reaction they received. “I was expecting them to laugh at us but they were 
like: ‘Hey, that’s really cool.’”
 Once Angus detects the bacteria, the area is cleaned with a robot that uses 
ultraviolet light to disinfect 99.9% of the C difficile spores. Photograph: 
Vancouver Coastal Health 
Working with the health authority, Zurberg and Angus became part of a 
one-of-a-kind pilot program. The hope, said Nancy Desrosiers of Vancouver 
Coastal Health, was to find an innovative approach to address what has become a 
global concern.

“It really is one of those vicious cycles,” she said, pointing to a steadily 
rising number of infections that result in longer hospital stays and increase 
the likelihood of further infections. “InCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>, 64% of all of our C difficile cases 
are hospital-acquired.”

Unlike the patient-sniffing beagle in the Netherlands – who is now retired – 
Angus, it was decided, would focus exclusively on searching for C difficile in 
the hospital environment.

Hospitals normally use ultraviolet light to find the bacteria, but Angus can 
move much more quickly and efficiently through rooms. Once he detects the 
bacteria, the area is cleaned with a robot that uses ultraviolet light to 
disinfect 99.9% of the C difficile spores.

The decision to have him work on environments rather than patients minimised 
the chances of Angus triggering patients who may have allergies or 
sensitivities to dogs.

With the dog’s role in the hospital now clearly laid out, Zurberg began 
training Angus, mimicking the techniques used to train dogs to detect bombs or 
drugs.

“All of the detection work for the dogs, it’s just a game. To them, it’s just 
a way to get what they really want, which is their toy or their food, depending 
on what they’re rewarded with.”

As she taught him to associate the scent with a food reward, researchers from 
the hospital kept her stocked with a steady supply of the scent of C difficile 
– isolated from the bug – on cotton swabs.
 Angus, the C difficile-sniffing dog. Photograph: Vancouver Coastal Health 
The training took about 10 months. After passing a series of detection tests 
in a local nursing college with mock patient wards, Angus was brought into the 
hospital this summer.

Easily excitable when he’s not focused on work, Angus is accompanied by 
Zurberg at all times during the four days a week he spends at the hospital.

“It’s a very multi-ethnic health authority and I have to be really conscious 
of who’s around me and what issues they may have with dogs,” she said. “That’s 
part of the reason we chose a floppy-eared dog as opposed to a pointy-eared 
dog, because he’s not so intimidating-looking.”

Like any other member of the hospital staff, Angus faces a slight risk that he 
could be infected by C difficile. “He’s young and he’s not autoimmune 
compromised, so his risks are extremely low,” Zurberg said. His health is 
carefully monitored through regular veterinarian visits, she added.

His stint at the hospital has attracted global attention, and health 
authorities from Finland to Chile have contacted Zurberg with questions about 
replicating the idea. The aim, said Zurberg, is to develop a program that would 
train other dogs to sniff out C difficile and make them available to hospitals 
around the world.

Zurberg’s voice raises with excitement as she contemplates the possibility 
that Angus might hold the key to regaining control over a superbug that has 
affected so many people around the world.

“So many people come up to me and say: ‘My dad died of C diff,’ or ‘This 
person in my family has C diff,’ and they thank me for what we’re doing,” she 
said. “It opens the doors to other possibilities – what else can we have a dog 
detect? We’re only really limited by our imagination.”
 