
Wayne Rooney <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wayne-rooney> may be having 
a chequered season, both on the pitch and off it, though he is at that stage in 
an illustrious career where history beckons at every turn.

Last week against Feyenoord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/manchester-united-feyenoord-europa-league-match-report>
 he not only produced one of his most convincing displays of the season but the 
opening goal he both made and scored confirmed him as Manchester United’s 
all-time leading scorer in Europe, as well as pushing his club tally to a 
within a single strike of Bobby Charlton’s record of 249.

Manchester United sink West Ham with Ibrahimovic and Martial doubles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/manchester-united-west-ham-united-efl-cup-match-report>
With Rooney starting this game as captain on 248 goals an ideal script now 
suggested itself. A goal against West Ham would equal Charlton’s mark and 
hopefully propelManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> towards the last four 
of the EFL Cup, leaving the opportunity for the record to be broken on Sunday 
at Everton, which is where this remarkable story began.

If West Ham had any objections to that scenario they needed to register them 
early and they failed. Less than two minutes were on the clock when the home 
side took the lead with a well-worked move that carved the visiting defence 
wide open. The only slight snag from Manchester United’s point of view was that 
Rooney had started the attack rather than finished it. Operating in the No10 
position behind Zlatan Ibrahimovic, Rooney collected a header from Marcos Rojo 
following Adrián’s upfield clearance and slipped Henrikh Mkhitaryan through, 
for the Armenian to find Ibrahimovic with a deft backheel that rendered scoring 
almost a formality.

That was exactly what José Mourinho would have wanted from Rooney when he 
selected him as support striker, but making goals for other people was not 
going to produce the required fanfare. Neither was taking corners or dropping 
deep to help out the defence, both of which Rooney found himself doing in the 
first half, although when Pedro Obiang was booked for a clumsy foul on Anthony 
Martial the would-be history man could not resist a potshot at goal from the 
free kick. Adrián threw himself to his left to save, though it looked as if the 
shot was missing anyway.

As is often the case on these occasions there seemed to be some uncertainty 
over protocol as Manchester United went in search of a second goal. Ibrahimovic 
looked to be conflicted at least once over whether to go it alone or give it to 
Rooney, while the latter was unselfishness personified in finding others when 
close to goal and eschewing the option of going for glory.

West Ham’s first-half equaliser probably did the home side a favour in that 
respect. Manchester United now needed another goal from somewhere and it no 
longer mattered who scored it. It turned out to be Martial, which should please 
Mourinho, and came as early in the second half as the opener had come in the 
first. It also involved another backheel, this time from Antonio Valencia, and 
though Rooney was shouting for the ball as the again impressive Mkhitaryan 
strode into the area, Martial was marginally better placed and his finish left 
no room for argument.

That still left Rooney in limbo, and a yellow card for protesting the award of 
a free-kick too vigorously was not the memento of the evening the captain was 
looking for either, especially as it put him out of the game at Goodison. In 
fairness, Rooney was playing his non-scoring role very well, and when he 
slipped Martial into the box just before the hour the winger should really have 
claimed his second goal and sealed the victory. The home side had to wait only 
an extra six minutes for that, Martial having no difficulty sweeping in 
Valencia’s precision cross from the six-yard line, but though the crowd began 
supportively chanting his name every time the ball came his way Rooney was 
still going short of opportunities in front of goal.

Worse yet, when a glimpse of one came along from Ibrahimovic’s improvised 
cross, all Rooney got was an accidental kick in the mouth from Winston Reid for 
his pains. He had to leave the field for treatment to a cut lip, and though he 
gamely battled on the closest he came to a goal was a curling shot that did not 
curl anywhere near enough. And so the show moves on. Just not to Everton, where 
at least Rooney would have been sure of a reaction if he scored, though perhaps 
not an enthusiastic one. There might be next to no reaction at all if this bit 
of Manchester United history ends up being made next Thursday at Zorya Luhansk.
 