
The popular belief that bookmakers never lose will be shattered for the second 
time in less than a month on Saturday evening if Many Clouds, the 8-1 
favourite, can emulate the great Red Rum and become the first horse for 42 
years to win theGrand National <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational>
 twice.

A series of winning favourites at the Cheltenham festival in March left the 
betting industry nursing a loss of at least £60m. Bookies would normally see 
the Grand National as a good chance to get at least some of it back, but 
victory for Many Clouds would push the industry-wide loss over the last four 
weeks towards £100m.

 “We would estimate our own loss at £5m if he wins,” said Jon Ivan-Duke, a 
spokesman for William Hill. “Over the industry as a whole, that would equate to 
about £30m.

 “Many Clouds is a horse that many people know and remember from last year, 
and he’s popular with racing fans as well because he’s a good horse and has 
been well backed over the last few months. People are always looking for the 
next Red Rum in the National, and Many Clouds might just fit the bill.

 “He could be the worst result for the bookmakers since Red Rum, or certainly 
along those sort of lines.”

 Red Rum, the winner in 1973, 1974 and 1977, is the only horse in the Grand 
National’s 177-year history to win the race three times. He finished second in 
1975 and 1976. In an earlier age of austerity and economic crisis, a bet on Red 
Rum was rightly seen as a safe investment.

Red Rum enjoyed worldwide fame by the time of his retirement in 1978, and he 
subsequently spent many years attending the openings of betting shops, 
supermarkets and even a rollercoaster – the Steeplechase, on Blackpool Pleasure 
Beach. After his death in 1995, he was buried next to the winning post atAintree
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aintree>.

Red Rum owed his celebrity status to his exploits in the world’s most famous 
race, but also to a back-story that read like a fairytale. He was trained by 
Ginger McCain, a car dealer from nearby Southport who had dreamed of winning 
the National since childhood, and exercised on the beach behind McCain’s 
showroom, where the saltwater seemed to ease a problem with the horse’s hooves.

Rules of racehorse names: 18 characters or fewer and nothing (too) rude
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/08/rules-racehorse-names-18-characters-not-rude-grand-national>
Many Clouds does not bring quite as much romance to the National, but Leighton 
Aspell, his jockey, will become the first rider in history to win three 
consecutive Grand Nationals if they cross the line in front.

On Friday, the Grand National course proved it is still a daunting undertaking 
for riders and horses alike. Becher’s Brook, the most famous obstacle on the 
course, claimed the life of a horse for the first time since the fences were 
modified in response to welfare concerns in 2012. Gullinbursti fell and died 
instantly in the Topham Steeple Chase, while Minella Reception, who also fell 
at the fence, was taken to the racecourse stables for further assessment.

The fences at Aintree were rebuilt with soft artificial cores made from 
plastic birch after two horses suffered fatal injuries in the Grand National in 
2012. There have been no deaths from 119 starters in the National in the last 
three years.

This year’s race will start at 5.15pm, the latest off-time in its history, to 
ensure that as many punters as possible get a chance to place a bet.

“The Grand National is a race where bookies like to think they will make a 
good bit of money,” said Simon Clare, of bookmakers Coral. “It’s like Christmas 
for turkey farmers, really. The Cheltenham Gold Cup [in March] is the second 
biggest betting race of the year, but we take 12 times as much on the National.

“The difference this year is that we could make record sales and take more on 
the National than ever before, and yet if Many Clouds wins, he’s the one horse 
that means we will be paying out more than we take.

“This is the one day of the year when people engage with betting. We spent 
years trying to persuade some of the once-a-year punters to come back the 
following week, but we don’t even bother trying any more. A great swath of the 
British public engage, they want to have a bet on this one day, and then they 
disappear. That’s how important this race is to bookmakers.”
 