
The world is reportedly on the verge of a potential medical emergency as 
antibiotic resistance continues to rise, yet new drugs do not appear to be 
coming on stream fast enough to combat so-called “super bugs”.

The means by which a bacteria becomes resistant are natural processes of 
evolution, exacerbated by doctors overprescribing antibiotics and patients not 
always finishing their treatment. This gives bacteria additional opportunities 
to come into contact with antibiotics and devise ways of surviving.

Antibiotic Research UK <http://www.antibioticresearch.org.uk> has been set up 
to raise money to develop new antibiotics as well as educate doctors and the 
public on how to get the most from existing drugs. It believes open data could 
help to solve the problem of overprescribing GPs by pinpointing which practices 
and which towns or villages are prescribing significantly above the national 
average.

WHO hails 'swift and positive response' to Zika data-sharing initiative
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/apr/06/zika-open-data-sharing-initiative-world-health-organisation>
By teaming up with database analytics company Exasol 
<http://www.exasol.com/en/>, the charity has, for the first time, drawn up a 
map of prescription rates across England during 2011-15, which has led to some 
intriguing results, claims Antibiotic Research UK founder, Prof Colin Garner.

“We had some surprising results,” he says. “Coastal towns were often way above 
the national average, whereas London was generally below the average. We 
overlaid a social deprivation map over our findings are saw a strong 
correlation with high levels of prescribed antibiotics and deprivation.

“The other stand-out finding was the seasonality of prescriptions. We compared 
August 2014 and December 2014 and prescription levels shot up. There’s 
absolutely no reason for that because the conditions you would need antibiotics 
for don’t suddenly increase in the winter.”

Age and social conditions are key

The seasonal uplift is strong evidence, Garner suggests, that overprescribing 
is taking place and underlines the need for the results of the project to be 
shared with the NHS.

The links with areas is open to some interpretation because some practices may 
serve populations which are very young or very old and will typically be 
expected to be prescribed antibiotics more frequently than older children and 
adults of working age.

The issue was highlighted by Kensington and Chelsea. The affluent London 
borough had the lowest rates of antibiotics prescriptions in the UK but, at the 
same time, was also home to the GP practice with the highest rate. The anomaly 
was solved when it was discovered the GP practice with the highest rate of 
prescriptions served the nearby Chelsea pensioners.

The future will eat itself: digesting the next generation of wearable tech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jan/13/future-eat-digesting-next-generation-wearable-tech>
On deprivation, however, there was a very clear correlation. Clacton-on-Sea 
was identified as the area with the highest antibiotic prescription rates, 
which is also highlighted on the UK deprivation map.

“You have to be careful about drawing conclusions,” says Prof Garner. 
“Although we’ve shown a strong correlation between deprivation and prescribing 
antibiotics, age is a big issue. We found, for example, wherever you would 
expect populations to be older, you see uplifts and the same for the very young 
which tend to be in suburbs, hence the edge of London where young families tend 
to move out to has higher levels than the centre of London.”

The next stage for the project is to look for age information that can be 
combined with prescription rates. That will allow the researchers to not only 
discover where prescriptions are more common but also allow the authorities to 
draw a conclusion as to whether this is to be expected. Ages are not recorded 
for each prescription and so the researchers are considering adding average 
ages for regions to the data to highlight where high prescription rates are not 
accompanied by a practice serving a population where the average age is very 
young or old.

The charity’s map project has been welcomed by the Health and Social Care 
Information Centre <http://www.hscic.gov.uk/>, which stored the raw data, for 
“developing a new way of looking at an issue which has been the subject of 
debate among clinicians, health strategist and the general public”.

Resistance in real-time

While Garner and experts at Exasol focus on refining their map data, another 
researcher has a vision for recording antibiotic resistance in near real-time.

Justin O’Grady, a lecturer in medical microbiology at the University of East 
Anglia, is working withOxford Nanopore Technologies 
<https://www.nanoporetech.com/> to establish if sequencer testing equipment 
could be used to provide a quick diagnosis and reveal which bacteria is causing 
the illnesses and which antibiotic drugs they are known to be resistant to.

“Using a sequencer is a lot quicker than doctors at a hospital asking for a 
culture to be made to make a diagnosis,” he says. “Within minutes you can find 
out the bacteria involved and what antibiotics they’re resistant to so you can 
give the right antibiotics from the start rather than guessing and risk helping 
bacteria become resistant to even more antibiotics.

“If you could take the human DNA out of the results you could have the 
sequencers reporting to a central database, which would build up a near 
real-time picture of antibiotic resistance across the country. It would be an 
incredibly useful tool for mapping resistance.”

O’Grady is nearing the end of a project to prove the feasibility of such an 
approach and expects to report on his work in the coming months. During that 
time Antibiotic Research UK is hoping to present its findings to the NHS. The 
aim will be to establish if the map is robust enough to inform where efforts 
should be concentrated in reminding healthcare professionals what constitutes 
best prescribing practice, and educating the public to always finish a course 
of treatment, even if they begin to feel better.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 