
A senior Tory has accused Margaret Hodge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaret-hodge>, the Labour chair of the 
public accounts committee, of bringing parliament into disrepute by being 
“abusive and bullying” towards senior HSBC executives when they appeared before 
her panel.

Sir Alan Duncan, a former international development minister, called on Hodge 
to apologise after she demanded thatRona Fairhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rona-fairhead> quit or be sacked as chair of 
the BBC Trust over her role as an independent director at HSBC.

In a letter to Hodge, Duncan also claimed she had made “undoubtedly libellous 
assertions” about the tax affairs of the bank’s chief executive, Stuart 
Gulliver.

The letter follows a fraught hearing on Monday when MPs from both parties 
questioned threeHSBC <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> bosses 
over allegations that its Swiss private banking arm had colluded in tax evasion 
and avoidance by its clients.

During the hearing, Hodge said Fairhead’s performance as an HSBC director – a 
job for which she is paid £513,000 – meant that she was no longer fit to 
continue in her £110,000-a-year role heading the BBC Trust.

“I really do think that you should consider your position and you should think 
about resigning, and if not, I think the government should sack you,”she said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/mar/09/ed-balls-speech-on-tory-spending-cuts-politics-live-blog>
.

Gulliver is a non-dom, having changed his domicile to Hong Kong for tax 
purposes. He was also one of HSBC’s first Swiss private banking customers, 
having opened an account 17 years ago, which he said was to hide the level of 
his bonus payments from his colleagues. The accounts eventually held £5m, via a 
Panamanian company.

Hodge was highly critical of Gulliver’s tax arrangements, and her views 
appeared to be endorsed by several Tory members of the committee. Stephen 
Phillips said to Gulliver: “Wouldn’t the sensible thing be to stand aside and 
let the board replace you?”

Duncan, who has been a longstanding critic of Hodge’s combative style at the 
helm of the public spending watchdog, said she was guilty of straying beyond 
the committee’s remit and indulging in “inappropriate grandstanding”.


He told Hodge there was “no greater an example of this than your insulting and 
offensive performance yesterday”. She had launched an “utterly contemptible 
attack on Rona Fairhead in her capacity as chair of the BBC Trust, which you 
speciously linked to her former role in HSBC,” he wrote.

“You maligned her reputation and suitability for her current role at the BBC 
and called on her to resign or be sacked. This is inexcusable. You were rude, 
abusive and bullying in a manner which brings your committee and the 
proceedings of the house into disrepute,” he told her.

Duncan said the approach undermined the role of select committees to “take 
evidence, form a view and publish a report”. He added: “You have pre-empted 
this proper process by injecting into a hearing of the committee a 
self-aggrandising outburst which was nothing short of vile.

“As if to prove the inappropriateness of your behaviour, you tried to mitigate 
it by saying this was just a personal view. Thus in your own words you have 
said why it was utterly inappropriate for you to use the platform of a Pac 
hearing in this way.”

He suggested that many professionals were “in despair at the lack of 
understanding and cheap haranguing which characterise your manner” after a 
series of hearings at which Hodge has led fierce interrogations of senior 
business figures and others.

“I ask you once again to realise how unacceptable it has become,” he told her. 
“I think it only appropriate that you should reflect on your conduct and 
apologise to both Stuart Gulliver and Rona Fairhead.”

Sir Michael Lyons, a former chair of the BBC Trust, supported Fairhead on 
Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/10/rona-fairhead-ex-bbc-trust-chair-michael-lyons-margaret-hodge>
. He said: “I don’t think yesterday’s performance is the be all and end all of 
whether Rona is and can do a good job at theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Trust. We see a whole set of people 
appear in front of the Pac committee. It has become sort of a bear garden and 
sometimes appears quick to reach very profound judgments on issues which are 
complex.”
 