
Tory MPs can always be relied on to roll about laughing when Keith Simpson, 
the veteran sage and wit of the party, delivers his annual joke about a 
tigerish member of the clan. "Boy Harper, stand up," is one of the former 
Sandhurst history tutor's favourite lines in his after-dinner speech at the 
parliamentary party's annual away day.

Mark Harper, 42, who looks absurdly young for his years, usually blushes and 
slopes off for a chat with his colleagues after the annual Simpson quip.

In recent months, however, the Boy Harper has come of age as he deals with one 
of the most sensitive jobs in government. He occupies a tricky Cabinet Office 
position as the Conservative deputy toNick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> who is, to put it mildly, not 
the most popular figure on the Tory benches at the moment.

Harper's task over the past two years has been to pilot legislation that has 
been anathema to many of his Tory colleagues but vital to theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> and therefore essential 
for keeping the coalition alive. His first challenge was the legislation for 
the AV referendum on electoral reform that was defeated after Harper's other 
boss – David Cameron – asked Tory donors to donate to the No campaign that 
trashed his Cabinet Office boss.

But Harper's greatest challenge starts next week when the House of Lords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> reform bill begins its lengthy 
parliamentary journey with a two-day debate in the Commons on Monday and 
Tuesday. The bill will slowly change the membership of the second chamber so 
that by the third election after the next – around 2025 – 80% of its members 
will be elected.

The current membership of 826 peers will be reduced to 450, of whom 360 would 
be elected. The remaining 90 would be appointed by a statutory appointments 
commission. Elections would take place on the same day as the general election 
on an open-list system from eight different regions. The open list system is 
designed to give voters a choice between voting for a party and individuals.

Harper will have the most delicate job on Tuesday night when he winds up for 
the government before two votes, the results of which will probably decide the 
fate of the coalition. The main vote on the second reading of the bill will 
pass because Ed Miliband, who supports reform of the upper house, has 
instructed Labour MPs to vote with the coalition.

But the government could lose the vote on a "programme motion", which limits 
debate on the bill in the Commons to 14 days, because Labour will join forces 
with as many as 100 Tory rebels. Harper believes that Miliband, who wrote the 
Labour manifesto for the last general election which committed the party to 
House ofLords reform <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lordreform>, is 
playing a duplicitous game, he told the Guardian.

In an interview ahead of one of the most crucial weeks for the coalition, 
Harper places himself above the fray as he says that all three parties should 
support Lords reform on the grounds that it was in each of their general 
election manifestos. But the issue is highly charged and brings out that highly 
effective political beast identified by Tony Blair as the "forces of 
conservatism" that are present in all parties.

For Tories the issue is a visceral one. Opponents of Lords reform, who are 
adamant they will defeat the programme motion, encompass traditionalists who 
cannot bear the thought of tinkering with the constitution to romantics 
depicting themselves as true democrats who believe that a mainly elected second 
chamber will challenge the supremacy of their belovedHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>.

Then there is the Clegg factor. Many Tory MPs simply cannot support a measure 
which is dear to the hearts of all Lib Dems – completing the reform of the 
upper house that has been stalled since Herbert Asquith embarked on the journey 
in the wake of the row over David Lloyd George's 1909 "people's budget". The 
highly sensitive nature of Tory-Lib Dem relations were highlighted on Friday 
when Richard Reeves, Clegg's outgoing strategy director, warned that the Lib 
Dems were prepared to block Tory plans to reduce the number of MPs if Cameron 
fails to persuade his party to support the reforms.

The man in charge of piloting the new bill through the Commons is well placed 
to understand Tory concerns about Lords reform. Harper voted against all the 
reform options in the last parliament when Jack Straw made a late attempt in 
the final years of the Labour government to burnish its reformist credentials. 
Labour ejected all but 92 hereditary peers in 1999, but then the reforms 
stalled. Harper says he has always been a reformer and that he only voted 
against change because he believed the priority then was to reform the Commons. 
There is now no excuse for his Tory colleagues to vote against a bill which is, 
he says, not just a Lib Dem measure.

"I would disagree with the contentions it is a Lib Dem bill," he says. "It was 
in the last three Conservative manifestos, it's been Conservative policy to 
have a mainly elected House of Lords since 1999. [There is a] very strong 
Conservative case for reform – the whole thrust last election was moving power 
from the centre to the voters and the whole Conservative approach to having a 
smaller government, limited government and having better parliamentary control 
over executive."

Harper, who even dares to warn some of the Tory rebels not to engage in "silly 
games", is determined to show the Boy Harper tag is out of date. "I've been a 
member of parliament for seven years, doing this for two years," he says. "I 
may have aged quite a lot, but I've enjoyed it hugely. I do have a reputation 
for doing all the difficult jobs in my party. I'll leave it to colleagues to 
judge me."
 