
My father was the vice-president of Canadian Steel in Hamilton, Ontario in 
Canada. We did belong to a country club so I guess we were upper middle class. 
He was born in Crossmaglen in Northern Ireland. He came first to Texas then he 
got deported for being an illegal immigrant; a stowaway kind of thing. Then he 
came back through Canada, met my mother and the rest is history.

I am the youngest of five and it's the greatest position in the world; your 
feet never touch the ground. You're told by everyone you're the most brilliant, 
fascinating, adorable person, so even if you wanted to have self-esteem issues 
it's just not possible.

There was tremendous humour in the house growing up. A lot of laughing. But 
there was tragedy during my teenage years. When I was 12, my brother David died 
in a car accident; when I was 17 my mother died from cancer and two years later 
my father died from a stroke but I think the reason all that didn't throw me 
sideways was because I had such a solid foundation. Those kinds of situations 
are horrible but I think that you are either empowered by them or you become a 
victim of them. I remember speaking to my friend the satiristStephen Colbert 
<http://www.colbertnation.com/about> a couple of days after a Whitehouse 
Correspondents' Dinner where he'd pushed it really, really far withhis material 
in front of George W Bush 
<http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-869183917758574879>, who was not 
finding it funny at all. I said, "Weren't you scared?" and he said, "When I was 
12, my father and two brothers were killed in a plane crash together. That day 
I was scared." And when he told me that story I thought, "I know from what you 
speak."

If I'd become a drug addict or alcoholic, people might have said, "Well, look 
what he went through," but in a strange way it made me more resilient. It made 
me stronger. It's not like I forgot these people in my life. They're still with 
me every second, but maybe I was locked into the concept that there's always a 
yin for a yang. You go through this tragedy but you're also given a little 
window into what life is ahead and sometimes that's empowering.



Before my wife Nancy died two years ago, we were together for 36 years, but I 
would have been divorced five times if I hadn't found the right person. I 
wouldn't have faked it and played a game just because I didn't want to be 
divorced. It's been a tough two years for my children. This is the thing of 
life that we live in denial about, that it will ever happen to us or our loved 
ones, and when it does you gain a little and you suffer a little. There's no 
big surprise.

Frank Sinatra once said of his father that he was always there to piss on his 
dreams, so you don't want to be that guy. My son Henry has just been 
backpacking round Europe. My son Oliver works at Warner Brothers and my 
daughter Katherine is a social worker.

It might sound unlikely that Clare Short <http://www.clareshort.co.uk/> is my 
cousin, but if you saw a picture of my father it's not. I didn't meet Clare 
until the 90s. In the days my father went to Canada, you kind of said goodbye. 
People weren't getting on the jets every second. I went over in September to 
Crossmaglen and all the cousins got together. My father was one of 11. My uncle 
Frank, Clare's father – went to Birmingham and my father went to Canada, and 
the rest all stayed in that area. I saw Clare for dinner two weeks ago, and we 
certainly share the politics. A Conservative would not do well in the Short 
family.

• Tim Burton's Frankenweenie <http://www.disney.co.uk/frankenweenie/>, 
starring Martin Short, is in cinemas now
 