
A day of turmoil in the betting markets at the low-grade cards at Lingfield and
Kempton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> on Wednesday was 
overshadowed by a serious fall for Martin Harley, who was fired into the ground 
in the closing stages of Lingfield's second race when his mount Red Art 
suffered a fatal injury.

Harley was crowded well inside the final furlong on Red Art as he tried to 
deliver a late challenge, and his mount then appeared to clip heels with 
another runner, causing the jockey to suffer a crashing fall.

Harley, who is due to ride Mount Athos in the Dubai Sheema Classic, one of the 
world's most valuable turf events, at Meydan in Dubai on Saturday week, was 
taken to East Surrey Hospital for examination, believed to be for possible rib 
injuries.

Paul Struthers, the chief executive of the Professional Jockeys' Association, 
said on Twitter on Wednesday evening that Harley would be transferred to St 
George's Hospital in Tooting for further examination. "No further updates at 
this stage until tomorrow in all probability," Struthers said, "but Martin is 
conscious and stable and is thankful for all your kind wishes."

Red Art was one of a series of runners at the two all-weather meetings which 
were the subject of strong market support. During the course of the morning, 
two separate gambles appeared to be taking place, the first involving five 
horses linked to the owner Stephen Arnold, and the second centred around four 
runners, including Red Art from the Tony Newcombe stable.

It also emerged during the morning that the British Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority> had "alerted 
the Gambling Commission yesterday [Tuesday] to the possibility of a complex 
betting-related issue involving races at Lingfield and Kempton".

A statement from the BHA said that the regulator had acted "to protect both 
the integrity and image of the sport and the interests of the betting public", 
and that "the full circumstances surrounding the case will be examined".

The first three runners linked to Arnold produced a single winner with two 
more unplaced on the card at Lingfield, while Newcombe's second runner at the 
course, Dorback, was declared a non-runner after Harley's fall. Newcombe had 
another non-runner and a loser on Kempton's evening card.

Pat Cosgrave, who was banned from riding for six months by the Emirates Racing 
Authority on Tuesday, is to appeal against the decision. Cosgrave, who was 
riding Anaerobio in the Jebel Hatta at Meydan on 8 March, was found guilty of 
improper riding after ERA stewards decided he had deliberately moved off the 
rail in the home straight to allow Vercingetorix, the eventual winner and a 
stablemate of Cosgrave's mount, a clear run to the line.

"In this country, if Pat was found in breach of any rules the penalty guidance 
in Britain is absolutely clear," Struthers said. "It's five to 10 days with an 
entry point of seven. Pat, Christophe [Soumillon, the jockey on Vercingetorix] 
and Mike [de Kock, trainer of both horses] denied team tactics. The appeal is 
going in and I'd be pretty certain if it is entirely unsuccessful then the 
application [for the ban not to be reciprocated] will go to the BHA because it 
is just a brutal penalty."

Paul Bittar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paul-bittar>, the chief 
executive of the British Horseracing Authority, said on Wednesday that 
commitments by George Osborne, the chancellor, to reform and extend the reach 
of the Levy system represent a "major milestone in our efforts to secure the 
future finances of our industry".

In his budget statement, Osborne said the government will "extend the 
horserace betting Levy to bookmakers who are based offshore. And we'll look at 
wider Levy reform and at introducing a 'racing right' to support the sport."

Bittar said in response: "For too long we have sought a funding mechanism 
which reflects the nature of the modern racing and betting industries. Today's 
commitment brings us considerably closer to achieving this goal, and securing 
the future prosperity of one of the country's leading sports, and a major 
employer across the country."

Tony McCoy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tony-mccoy>, who will be crowned 
champion National Hunt jockey for the 19th time when the season ends in April, 
rode his 200th winner of the campaign when Palermo Don, the 8-11 favourite, 
took the final race at Haydock on Wednesday. It is only the second time in nine 
seasons that McCoy has reached a double-century.
 