
The Financial Conduct Authority’s annual meeting on Wednesday will have the 
atmosphere of a funeral.

On Friday, the Treasury announced that Martin Wheatley, the regulator’s chief 
executive, was leaving. George Osborne had told Wheatley his contract would not 
be extended beyond March, so Wheatley quit.

His position has been under threat since a botched FCA press briefing wiped 
£3bn off the value of UK life insurers. It took the FCA more than six hours 
after trading started to set the record straight – a delay it would never 
tolerate from a company that had misinformed the market.

City leaders furious at Wheatley’s aloofness and uncompromising attitude have 
used the fiasco to lobby against him.

Intriguingly, the FCA would say only that it expected Wheatley to attend the 
meeting, suggesting he may not turn up. If he does go, he will face questions 
about the regulator’s four-year inquiry into the near-collapse of HBOS in 2008. 
Philip Meadowcroft, who campaigns on governance matters, was told last year 
that the report would appear by the end of 2014. The delay is apparently due to 
stonewalling by lawyers acting for ex-HBOS directors. Meadowcroft will 
reasonably ask: “What possible credence, in asking for the fourth time, can we 
put on the FCA’s reply this year?”

D-day for Libor accused

The trial of Tom Hayes, the former City trader accused of manipulating the 
Libor rate, will wind up this week with the jury expected to be sent out to 
make their deliberations on Friday.

The trial, which started in late May, has featured colourful language from 
each side and its fair share of drama. At one point, Hayes broke down crying 
while protesting his innocence.

Whether he was the “ringmaster” of a plot driven by greed, as the prosecution 
argued, or taking part inwhat he claimed was an industrywide activity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/01/libor-trial-court-hears-tom-hayes-interview-with-investigators>
, the trial has highlighted once again the apparent disregard for rules and 
ethics in some parts of the City.

The court heard that Hayes, who worked at UBS and Citi, described the 
derivatives market as like the wild west 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/16/libor-trial-tom-hayes-compares-derivatives-market-to-wild-west>
. In one of many chatroom conversations read to the jury, Hayes promised 
another trader to “fucking reward you” with, yes, a night at a strip club.

What is it about the City that turns seemingly dull, reasonably bright 
graduates into these cliches – and has anything really changed? Replacing 
Martin Wheatley at the FCA with a less hostile figure would send the wrong 
message to these traders.

AO investors hope for power surge

John Roberts, the founder and boss of AO World, has said he doesn’t “give a 
shit” about short-term investors in his online appliance retailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/05/ao-world-chief-defend-lacklustre-flotation>
. High-quality shareholders could see the business’s long-term potential, he 
said last year.

Let’s hope so. The shares dropped to a record low on Thursday, valuing AO at 
£550m – little more than a third of the £1.6bn it was fleetingly judged to be 
worthwhen the company floated in February 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/27/ao-world-flotation-payout-bankers-rothschild>
. As recently as February this year the company was valued at almost £1.4bn, 
but a dire profit warning knocked almost a third off the shares in one day. 
Roberts struck a humbler tone, and admitted the company might have benefited 
from flotation hype before encountering tougher than expected trading 
conditions.

AO will release a further trading update on Tuesday, the day of its annual 
general meeting. Out-of-pocket shareholders will be hoping for some sign of 
revival.

Roberts and his fellow board members are unlikely to get too much of a 
grilling because AO holds the gathering at the company’s head office on the 
outskirts of Bolton. That’s good for the company’s workers who own shares, but 
it’s a big deterrent to the awkward squad of retail shareholders who turn up to 
AGMs in London to give bosses a hard time.
 