
Martin O’Neill spoke of his satisfaction at the Republic of Ireland’s score 
draw in the first leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/13/republic-ireland-bosnia-herzegovina-euro-2016-play-off-report>
 of their Euro 2016 play-off against Bosnia-Herzegovina – and of his relief 
that the match was not abandoned despite the dense fog that descended in the 
second half and threatened to turn the game into a farce.

“I’m delighted that the fog didn’t prevent the game from being finished,” 
O’Neill said. “I was concerned. When the fog came down it looked as if it was 
deepening. But the fog did not get worse after the first 15 minutes of the 
second half and the referee [Germany’s Felix Brych] saw fit to keep the game 
going. I’d like to thank the referee. I might have a gripe about one or two 
decisions but I thought he was outstanding and I haven’t said that for a long 
time.”

The Bosnia manager, Mehmed Bazdarevic, said “I can only comment on the first 
half because in the second I could hardly see anything” but, in fairness, he 
did not blame the poor visibility for the result, saying instead that “we did 
not manage to make life difficult for our opponents”.

Robbie Brady struck Ireland’s goal in the 82nd minute before Eden Dzeko drew 
the hosts level three minutes later, but the away goal means the Irish have an 
edge going into Monday’s return leg in Dublin, where Bosnia must score at least 
once. O’Neill says there is no question of his team resting on such a 
precarious advantage. “Bosnia are capable of scoring so I don’t think we can 
just sit back. We will try to attack more than we did here and play to win, 
that will be our objective.”

Ireland will be bolstered by the return of Jon Walters and John O’Shea, both 
of whom missed the first leg through suspension, and Shane Long may have 
regained fitness by Monday, too. O’Neill also draws confidence from the latest 
display of his team’s battling qualities, praising how they navigated their way 
through the difficult assignment in Zenica. “We might be lacking certain things 
but in terms of desire and wanting to go out and compete, that sort of 
performance tonight epitomised that. We coped with the very fine players that 
Bosnia have in their team.”

He said he was especially pleased with the central defensive duo of Richard 
Keogh and Ciaran Clark. “I thought they were really excellent. They had a very 
tough job all evening against top-quality players and they were outstanding for 
us. Clark was absolutely rock solid and Keogh had a very strong game.”
 