
With Northern Ireland having already earned an invitation to Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/11/finland-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
, the Republic of Ireland manager Martin O’Neill craves a ticket to the party. 
He confesses to being “envious” of his Northern Ireland counterpart, Michael 
O’Neill, and also of the managers of England and Wales, all of whom can relax 
as the Republic try to navigate their way through a play-off against 
Bosnia-Herzegovina with a seriously depleted squad.

“Michael [O’Neill] is having a cigarette somewhere, as is Roy Hodgson and 
Chris Coleman, smoking and enjoying themselves,” said O’Neill. “I’m envious, 
I’d like to join them if at all possible.”

The Republic reached the finals four years ago thanks to a play-off victory 
over Estonia but generally they have found these last chances difficult to 
grasp, prevailing in only two of seven play-offs in their history. Their 
preparations for the first leg of the latest one, away to Bosnia, have been 
equally inauspicious, as the manager admits that injuries and suspensions will 
force him to “adjust personnel certainly, and perhaps also style”.

It will be fascinating to see which style he adopts. The fact that away goals 
will be taken into consideration in the event of the two-legged tie being level 
after extra-time could incite him to go for a more offensive approach than he 
has pursued in previous matches on the road. But does he have the tools? Injury 
to Shane Long and suspension to Jon Walters strip Ireland of players who 
contributed a third of their goals during the group stage. Robbie Keane no 
longer has even a fraction of their mobility or menace and Daryl Murphy has 
shown little hint of such qualities during his three appearances in the 
campaign so far.

Republic of Ireland must keep cool to pass Bosnia test in Euro 2016 play-off | 
Paul Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/12/republic-of-ireland-bosnia-herzegovina-euro-2016-play-off>
However, the Ipswich Town striker’s aerial power, and his timely hat-trick 
against Rotherham United last weekend, could see him get the nod. Knowing that 
Walters, and possibly also Long, will be back to enhance Ireland’s attack in 
the second leg could push O’Neill further towards prioritising caution in the 
first leg. “The most important thing is still being in the tie with a chance of 
victory on Monday night,” said O’Neill. “While we can’t win the tie here, we 
don’t want to lose it.”

The team-sheet will reveal the manager’s intentions. The closest player that 
Ireland have to Miralem Pjanic, Bosnia’s wonderfully creative midfielder, is 
Wes Hoolahan but O’Neill tends not to start the 33-year-old in away matches, 
especially with a second game to come so soon after.

The manager hinted that will not change here, especially as Hoolahan is one of 
five key Irish players (along with James McCarthy, Séamus Coleman, Glen Whelan 
and Marc Wilson) who will be banned for the second leg if booked in the first. 
And the referee on Friday night, Germany’s Felix Brych, is noted for his 
pernicketiness. “While you don’t want to start preempting things that might not 
materialise, I think you have to take some things into consideration,” said 
O’Neill when asked about the possibility of starting Hoolahan in Bosnia.

The manager bristles at suggestions that omitting the Norwich City schemer 
betrays undue negativity. But if Ireland were to focus on solidity, that could 
leave O’Neill open to accusations of failing to appreciate the importance of an 
away goal and, paradoxically, of taking an excessive risk given the weakened 
Irish defence. John O’Shea, hitherto the only ever-present Irish player in the 
campaign, is suspended for the first leg following his thoughtless late 
dismissal in Poland last month. Aston Villa’s Ciaran Clark or Wilson will have 
to partner Richard Keogh in the centre of defence.

Injuries to Rob Elliot and Kieren Westwood mean that Darren Randolph will 
continue as the goalkeeper; he has performed admirably in his two caps but the 
Bosnians are aware that the West Ham reserve is inexperienced and will surely 
set out to test his fortitude in Zenica, where Bosnia play their home matches 
because the cramped 12,000-seater stadium is considered luckier than the more 
spacious Olympic stadium in the capital, Sarajevo. “This place is something 
special for us,” said Edin Dzeko, Bosnia’s former Manchester City striker and 
chief threat. “It gives us ever more power to give even more, we love this 
place.”

That seems a strange tribute to pay to a ground where they began the campaign 
with a defeat by Cyprus but Bosnia have improved hugely since appointing Mehmed 
Bazdarevic as manager four matches into the campaign. The suspended Everton 
midfielder Muhamed Besic is the home team’s only significant absence and their 
key players go into Friday’s game on the back of strong recent form for their 
clubs. Whereas O’Neill could have to call on players such as left-back Stephen 
Ward and midfielder Aiden McGeady, who have rarely played all season. The one 
constant of this Irish team throughout the campaign has been a willingness to 
battle, which brought that famousvictory over Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/republic-ireland-germany-euro-2016-qualifier-report>
 last month. They will have to fight with similar gusto in Bosnia to set the 
stage for another night of celebration in Dublin on Monday.
 