
The letter I remember most vividly was “the fruit one”. The correspondent had 
confessed to Dolly Doctor the details of a masturbation habit that – from 
memory – involved not only the somewhat expected banana but entirely surprising 
nectarines. My best friend, reading the magazine aloud, attempted to intone the 
seriousness of the young woman’s concern between bouts of hysterical giggles.Am 
I normal?pleaded the letter. We roared. By the time it came to read the 
doctor’s soft advice, my best friend was laughing too hard to keep reading.

There were maybe four of us, in various combinations of pyjama, rolling about 
the floor of my best friend’s father’s flat, stuffed with cake and overflowing 
with the full flavours of teenage nastiness; judging others without mercy, 
inflating the self by deflating the other, engaging in a competitive “normalcy” 
that would avow a solid, conformist puritanism within seconds of pretending to 
some detailed, wild experience.

Goodbye, Dolly: December issue will be magazine's last in print
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/30/goodbye-dolly-december-issue-will-be-magazines-last-in-print>
We were 14, maybe 15, and many times we splayed ourselves on that floor and 
other floors across our suburban wilderness, reading Dolly magazines aloud to 
mock the readership we imagined for them: girls less cool than us, less funny, 
younger, stupid, too dumb to guess what boys were doing to them, paranoid and 
insecure around sex, taste, love and clumsy at masturbation.

We were, of course, that precise audience ourselves; awkward and 
uncomfortable, personalities squeezed and misshapen by bodies fast outgrowing 
the selfhood demanded to manage them. It’s extraordinary to consider the amount 
of pretending that teenagers do at the same time they fail to recognise it in 
others. Our adolescent narcissism insisted on “the fruit one’s” veracity, even 
as we subsequently spent hours comprising our own made-up Dolly Doctor letters 
in response to it, outdoing one another’s suggestions for dirtiness. I clearly 
remember, “What about ‘I fuck Lego’?” shouted across the room.

Now, Dolly magazine, having falling victim to the digital world, is ceasing to 
print after 46 years. Recalling that precise evening in the early 90s, the 
slick pages of the magazine, the taste of cake, the fibres of the carpet, I am 
provoked to profound respect of the adult writers and editors who engaged all 
those years of teenage nonsense.

No matter how outrageous the teenage suggestion, Dolly’s voice was always 
steady:yes, you’re normal, but if it’s causing pain or problems in your life, 
please see a doctor.As kids, we thought the advice was individual but the 
lesson was collective. I was never too preoccupied with fruit, but when only a 
couple of years later it took me a couple of weeks too many to recover from a 
broken heart, the repeated, gentle message to seek out some extra help was 
soundly heeded. Please remember, the feminist revolution took place in the 
space of a historical blink – my own generation were offered experiences our 
mothers had never imagined. These magazines guided us through new social-sexual 
territories our own parents couldn’t know – and of which we could not tell them.

Australian writer Casey Bennetto was opining on Facebook recently his concern 
that the “morality plays” of gentle sitcoms that taught our generation of young 
people mores and consequences has been superseded by years of reality 
television that instead rewards behaviour at its most entertaining and extreme.

I contemplate the end of Dolly magazine and I ponder similar consequences in 
magazine media, and its specific effect on young girls. There was a message 
consistency that came from Dolly – of respect, self-care, boundaried behaviour 
– that we learned from their careful editorial even as we thought we were 
laughing at it. The self-selected, click-bait channels of post-truth internet 
swap it for chaos.

Dear fruit-lover, you may indeed be normal, but whose voice can you now trust 
to tell you so?

What was the best lesson you learned from Dolly Doctor? Tell us in the comments
 