
What was the point of Theresa May’s song and dance about putting workers and 
consumers on company boards? She first performed the routine in July in her
pitch to be leader of the Conservative party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-tory-leadership-pitch-andrea-leadsom>
 and then, as if to emphasise the seriousness of her intent, she repeated it in 
her speech to the party’s conference in October. Now she has abandoned the 
idea. The business world made a fuss and May has backed down.

The relevant passage of the PM’s speech to the CBI on Monday was an exercise 
in verbal gymnastics designed to obscure the U-turn. Don’t be fooled. This is a 
retreat, pure and simple, and May is silly to pretend otherwise. Previously the 
PM was talking plainly about having “not just consumers represented on company 
boards, but employees as well”, while the new approach merely deems it 
important that “the voices of workers and consumers should be represented”.

Theresa May: I won't force companies to appoint workers to their boards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-force-firms-appoint-workers-boards-cbi>
The language is superficially similar – but the two stances are miles apart. 
The former implied designated positions on boards. The new description mandates 
precisely nothing. Indeed, May was explicit that she would be happy to see a 
few “advisory councils and panels” that leave current board structures intact.

There is a fair argument that May’s original vision was unworkable anyway. Who 
is the “consumer” for a company like Rolls-Royce? Its direct customers like 
Airbus or Boeing, or people who fly on planes? For multinationals operating 
around the globe, could a single worker really have represented all interests?

Yet May, presumably, had considered such practical objections when she set out 
her original thinking. She said then that non-executive directors, “drawn from 
the same, narrow social and professional circles as the executive team”, had 
failed to provide sufficient scrutiny. If that was the failing, the new 
iteration ignores it.

Not all companies, let’s be clear, are deaf to outsiders’ views and concerns. 
But, under May’s revised framework, the grubbier end of corporate Britain will 
be able to pay lip service to the gospel of inclusive capitalism and then carry 
on exactly as before. FutureMike Ashleys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 will not tremble.

A parallel objection can be made about the other half of May’s speech on 
Monday: the passages about carving out a new industrial strategy. Did the PM 
actually think about policy details before making her previous bold promises 
about rethinking the government’s approach to business? Not on this evidence.

We will see only a green paper on industrial strategy this year, not a white 
paper. In the meantime, we have May’s ambition for the UK to be “the global 
go-to place for scientists, innovators and tech investors” with no clarity on 
the key question of how that unremarkable goal sits with the plan to reduce 
levels of immigration.

Meanwhile, May has discovered the financial industry’s new buzzword for 
long-term money – “patient capital” – and acknowledged the need for more of it. 
But her review, to be led by the private equity tycoon Sir Damon Buffini, will 
presumably go over the same ground as a report commissioned by Sir Vince Cable 
when he was business secretary in the coalition government. The trick is to 
formulate some policies, as opposed to describing the problem endlessly.

May’s speech, then, was a disappointment. On industrial policy, an extra £2bn 
for research and development is welcome but the big decisions lie ahead. On 
executive pay, it sounds as if the PM is retreating to the soft position of 
making all shareholder votes binding – the least radical reform.

The desire to see workers in boardrooms has been replaced by an appeal to 
business to please be nicer in future. The complexities of Brexit seem to have 
bred timidity elsewhere in government, just as critics predicted.

Sherwood’s Goldman: BHS was a blip

Goldman Sachs was heavily criticised by MPs in the summer for adding “lustre” 
to the “otherwise questionable process” whereby Sir Philip Green sold BHS for 
£1 to a three-time bankrupt. The bank “underplayed to us the nature and extent 
of their role,” said the MPs, and Michael Sherwood was obliged to apologise for 
the “highly regrettable oversight” of failing to reveal, until the 11th hour, 
that Goldman had been approached to provide a £40m loan to facilitate the 
transaction.

Now Sherwood is quitting as co-head of Goldman in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/michael-sherwood-quits-goldman-sachs-europe-role-bhs>
, a job in which he earned $21m last year. Is the involvement with Green, his 
old chum, related? Absolutely not, says Sherwood, BHS was “one blip in a 
30-year career” and he was already thinking of leaving.

There is no reason to doubt him, but Goldman, love it or loathe it, is a firm 
that prizes its reputation. We can probably say this: after BHS, Sherwood’s 
chances of succeeding Lloyd Blankfein as global boss had fallen to somewhere 
between slim and non-existent.
 