
Guardian Members Corey Sutch and Isy Mead attended a discussion with the South 
African comedian, writer and current host of The Daily Show, Trevor Noah

‘His book is an amazing tribute to his mother’

Isy: In Noah’s new book, Born a Crime, he recalls growing up in a township in 
apartheid-eraSouth Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>. It 
was fascinating to hear about the people who have played a part in his life and 
how he rose to fame.

Corey: His mother survived being shot in the head by her abusive partner, but 
refused to leave her home. She seems to have taught him a lot about pushing 
back against those who try to victimise you, and I think he’s drawn a lot of 
strength from her.
 Isy Mead Photograph: Supplied 
‘When he started out, he was scared of how people would perceive him’

Isy: He’s had an amazing rise to fame, considering he grew up in such a 
hostile environment. He said he has encountered racism from both white and 
black people, and once was even mistaken for a Mexican!

Corey: The struggle he has encountered as a mixed-race man was especially 
interesting to me, as someone who grew up in Northern Ireland and is in an 
inter-racial relationship. It’s amazing to think that he was the product of a 
union that was not only taboo, but illegal. I don’t think the issues of race 
and colonisation are discussed as openly as they ought to be.
 Corey Sutch Photograph: Supplied 
‘Noah’s voice is particularly important in the current climate’

Isy: His story shows the extremity of what can happen when corruption takes 
over society. It was a really interesting perspective. He described apartheid 
as “the most perfect racism” because it had an impact at so many different 
levels. He had an interesting perspective on recent events in America, and made 
a point of emphasising that we actually don’t know what’s going to happen.

Corey: His take on left-wing reactions to race was really thought-provoking. 
He said people can sometimes be almost accidentally offensive, and gave an 
example of a football game during which a banana was thrown on to the pitch and 
one of the team’s representatives immediately apologised for the “racist” act. 
But it wasn’t necessarily.

‘He did a great job of identifying how American humour differs from British 
humour’

Corey: He spoke about his visit to the Edinburgh Fringe and London’s Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Store when he was younger, and how 
those experiences had shaped him as a performer and helped refine his humour. 
He vividly remembered seeing Eddie Izzard – he had no idea who he was but he 
taught him a lot!

Isy: He said, quite succinctly, that Australians are more honest in their 
humour, British people are more awkward, and Americans are all about 
performance. His own style has probably been influenced by all three in some 
way. And I think possibly his own comedy is so well-honed because of what he’s 
had to overcome. He told this brilliant story about how, when he was little, if 
the car broke down on the way to church, his mother would interpret it as a 
sign of the struggle they needed to overcome in order to find God, and he just 
thought it was a sign they should go home!



Corey is 22, lives in London, and works for an Aids charity, the Staying Alive 
Foundation. Isy is 33 and works in Oxford as head of learning at The Story 
Museum.

This event 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/an-evening-with-trevor-noah-28603221004>
 took place on 26 November atCentral Hall Westminster in London. To find out 
about upcoming eventssign up to become a Guardian Member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/>
 