
New year rarely feels as joyful as it should. The idea of a fresh start – 
something uplifting, motivating, freeing – seems, in practice, to result in 
denial with a side order of beating yourself up. So this year, instead of 
cutting something out, how about taking something up?

Later this month, we’ll be launching a new podcast series exclusively for 
Members, in which Guardian journalists will debate the topics you think 
important, and answer questions submitted by you. We’re hoping it might be your 
new monthly habit for 2017.

The podcast, We Need to Talk About…, will be yours to shape. We know from your 
emails and letters that you are incredibly knowledgeable and care deeply about 
a wide range of issues – political, environmental, cultural, and beyond – so we 
want you to help set the agenda for the podcast: to determine what exactly we 
need to talk about.

We Need to Talk About… will include conversations and features recorded 
exclusively for the podcast, and audio from special live events, as well as 
featuring your voices. For each podcast we’ll bring together Guardian Members 
and journalists to discuss the big news issues of the moment alongside the 
topics you feel are under-reported or deserve more attention.

Some of these live events will take place at the Guardian’s offices in London, 
but others will happen elsewhere in the UK, as well as in the US and Australia. 
We hope that means many Members will be able to join us in the next 12 months 
at these live debates.

But we also hope that, wherever you are based in the world, you’ll join us on 
the podcast if you can’t make it to an event in person. I’ll be working with 
Guardian producer Stuart Silver to bring you a monthly audio programme that 
features the most interesting points from the event, along with thoughts from 
Members on how the panel tackled the thorny issues and your ideas for solving 
them.

But most importantly, we’ll be featuring your questions in both the live event 
and the podcast. You can submit questions to me via email at
weneedtotalkabout@theguardian.com <mailto:weneedtotalkabout@theguardian.com>, 
or fill in the form below. Do please leave us your phone number, whichever way 
you send your question – we might like to give you a ring, chew it over, and 
record it.

For those who dive straight into the comments on the website, or go first to 
the letters section, this idea that readers have interesting and illuminating 
contributions to make to the Guardian will hardly be news. But through 
Membership we’ve been looking for ways to amplify Members’ voices, give them 
more active participation in the Guardian, and bring journalists and readers 
closer together.

 The audience at the Guardian Live event at the 2015 Labour party conference 
in Brighton. Photograph: Andrew Hasson for the Guardian 
We’ve been doing that through collaborative reporting projects such as The 
View from Middletown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/ng-interactive/2016/oct/11/view-middletown-gary-younge-us-presidential-election>
, in which Gary Younge spent a month in Muncie, Indiana ahead of the US 
election, andLabour & Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/ng-interactive/2016/jun/16/guardian-labour-liverpool-ewen-macaskill>
, where Ewen MacAskill dug into debates around the future of the UK’s Labour 
party. Both these extended series had readers at their hearts – we asked you to 
guide us on where to go, who to talk to, what to pursue.

We hope the We Need to Talk About… podcast allows us to hear more from you, 
and for journalists and Members to work more closely together. At this 
political and cultural moment, in particular, it feels crucial for the media to 
broaden the range of experiences and insights it gives voice to. I am looking 
forward to talking with you – please don’t be shy in joining in.

As a first step I’d love to hear about the topics you think we should tackle 
in the podcast. We regularly ask Members for your views on how we should cover 
stories such as Brexit, Trump’s America and the changing world of work. Your 
responses are often illuminating. So tell us, what does the Guardian need to 
spend more time reporting? What could we cover better or differently? Are there 
issues that you’d really like to discuss with other Members? Essentially: what 
do you think wereally need to talk about? 

You can be sure those topics will form the basis of our future events and 
podcasts. But with our first audio programme due later this month, we’ve had to 
plan ahead. Many Members have contacted us already about the subject of climate 
change, and the importance of keeping the issue at the top of the news agenda. 
In a recent survey of Members, the environment was one of the topics you said 
you wanted the Guardian to cover in more depth. So in late January, you can 
expect to hear from me, other Guardian journalistsand your fellow Members in We 
Need to Talk About… Climate Change.

We’ll be recording part of the podcast at a special panel debate on 19 January 
in London –reserve your place here 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/newsroom-24-hours-to-save-the-world-30691626481>
 – and, whether or not you can attend the live event, we’d love you to 
contribute to the discussion.

There are two ways you can do that: by sending us questions for the panel, and 
by telling us about how you are responding to climate change. If you are 
employed or volunteer in this area, you might like to tell us more about your 
work, and we’d love to hear from Members who are trying to make changes in 
their personal lives. You might only be taking a small step – but if all of our 
tens of thousands of Members are taking such steps, then together we might make 
an impact. By sharing your actions with others, you can help us all take action.

I look forward to hearing from you. Do get in touch. 

 * Vicky Frost is the Guardian’s deputy membership editor. The first episode 
of We Need to Talk About…, will be available late January  