
Guardian Members Gareth Daniels, Hugo Bebbington, Judith Borghouts and Gem 
Faulkner all attended an event with the musician, songwriter and singer Johnny 
Marr, who co-founded pioneering indie band the Smiths. 

‘He said he relates more to women than men’

Gareth: He talked about the role glam rock played in defining his style and 
that of the Smiths, who were quite foppish. He was a huge fan of Bowie and Marc 
Bolan. He said he enjoyed going to gay clubs in the late 70s because they were 
safer environments than straight clubs.

Hugo: He discussed his blurred sense of masculinity, and how this influenced 
his music and style. People were experimenting with ideas of gender in the 70s 
and 80s when he was first starting out, and hearing about that was fascinating.

‘Marr’s working class roots played a big part in his style’

Gareth: He is a big football fan, but isn’t very comfortable being at matches 
because he doesn’t like the rowdiness. He’s definitely not your classic 
football lad.

Gem: He talked about the first time he discovered disco. He was listening to 
Neil Young in one room, and his sister was playing Chic in the next room. At 
one point she poked her head round the door and sarcastically said “Well you 
look like you’re having fun!”

Judith: He explained how fortunate he felt to have had such a supportive 
family. He said he didn’t think he would have achieved all that he has without 
them.

Hugo: I am the same age now that he was when The Smiths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/smiths> broke up. As well as giving me an 
inferiority complex, that was really interesting to hear.

‘When he ran on stage and started playing This Charming Man, everyone’s jaw 
dropped’

Judith: Jon Savage did a brilliant job of making Johnny feel at ease talking 
about his past, and getting him to open up about his career.

Hugo: He explained that he had been influenced by Bowie when coming up with 
the riff for Hand in Glove.

Gem: There were several guitars stacked against the side of the stage. I 
noticed the black Fender Jaguar covered in stickers from his time in Modest 
Mouse. I wish I’d have had the courage to ask him to play one of his songs from 
that era!

Gareth: It’s only when you look back that you realise just how influential the 
Smiths were.

‘Trump’s victory was the big elephant in the room’

Judith: He shied away from discussing politics. The night was more about the 
music.

Hugo: At one point someone asked him what song he would play to an alien 
landing on earth today, and he said Pretty Vacant by the Sex Pistols! It had 
been a crazy week and this was a great antidote.

‘Overall, he came across as just being a really nice, genuine guy’

Hugo: I didn’t realise he had recently worked on film scores for blockbusters 
including Inception and Spider-Man 2. He is so unassuming for someone who has 
meant so much to so many people.

Judith: The highlight was getting to meet him afterwards, even if only 
briefly. He was so down to earth and funny. I was surprised at how happy he was 
to discuss his time with the Smiths. It was only a small part of his career and 
I would have thought he would be sick of people bringing it up, but he wasn’t!

Gareth Daniels, 47, lives in Streatham, south London, and is part owner of a 
printing business. Hugo Bebbington, 23, lives in Elephant and Castle, London, 
and works in comms at a US TV network. Judith Borghouts, 27, is a PhD student 
from Amsterdam who has lived in London for the last two years. Gem Faulkner, 
21, is from Milton Keynes and works for HMV.

This event 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/johnny-marr-a-life-in-music-26874849398>
 took place on 10 November at theMilton Court concert hall in London. To find 
out about upcoming eventssign up to become a Guardian Member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/>.







 