 Josef Mengele, the "Angel of Death" at Auschwitz concentration camp, spent his 
last years in his Brazilian hideaway lonely, depressed and short of money, 
according to 86 letters, notes and diaries discovered filed away in a Sao Paulo 
police archive.
One of the most wanted Nazi war criminals, because of the experiments he 
conducted on children and other inmates, Mengele apparently lived his last 
years suffering intense abdominal pains.

Fear of being discovered made him chew the ends of his moustache, resulting in 
a ball of hair blocking his intestines.

The typewritten letters and handwritten notes were found when police files 
were being reorganised, and excerpts were translated and published by the 
newspaper Folha de S Paulo.

They had been seized at the home of an Austrian couple, Liselotte and Wolfram 
Bossert, now dead, who befriended Mengele, and at the small house in the 
seaside resort of Bertioga, on the outskirts of Sao Paulo, where he was living 
when he died from a heart attack in 1979.

Most of the letters were addressed to Wolfgang Gerhard, an Austrian Nazi 
Mengele befriended in Brazil.

There were also 20 letters from Gerhard to Mengele, written after he returned 
to Austria in 1971.

Mengele's diary reveals a man who was unrepentant about Nazi actions during 
the second world war.

In January 1976 an entry reveals that Mengele was reading the memoirs of 
Albert Speer, Hitler's architect and armaments minister.

He commented: "He diminishes himself, showing repentance, that is lamentable." 

At the same time he was depressed and resentful about his lonely, hard-up life 
in exile.

In 1976 Mengele wrote in his diary, after complaining that he would not be 
able to make a trip to Rio because neither he nor his friends could afford the 
price of the petrol: "What's going to happen? Now I feel lonely, or rather 
abandoned, more painfully than ever."

In another entry, apparently referring to having to buy the silence of 
friends, he wrote "everything in life has a price".

Mengele came from a well-to-do family, and during his first years in exile, in 
Argentina, he lived well.

But by the time he reached Brazil in 1960, after 10 years of hiding in 
Paraguay, his funds had dwindled.

He probably hoped that sympathisers in the large and often wealthy German 
community in Brazil would provide him with a comfortable life.

But things did not work out the way Mengele had planned, and his notes show a 
man constantly worried about money.

In 1974 Wolfgang Gerhard, writing from Austria, suggested that he should 
return to Europe for medical treatment for his pains, saying he should go 
before he got too old to travel - he was 63 - and that it would not be as 
difficult as he was imagining.

But Mengele, who had been forced to sell the small flat he had bought in Sao 
Paulo, did not have the money.

The letters also show that, although he now lived in a country where 
interracial marriage was the rule, rather than the exception, Mengele had not 
changed his racist views.

He talked about the "disagreeable" results of miscegenation and the advantages 
of countries where European immigrants did not mix, and praised the apartheid 
system in South Africa.

He had a peculiar explanation for the "indisputable" cultural achievements of 
the Jews: the fact that "they always lived with peoples of a high cultural 
level ... like Moses in Egypt, Einstein in Swabia, Mendelssohn in Germany or 
Disraeli in England".

When his skeleton was exhumed in 1985 many questioned whether it was really 
his. In 1992 DNA tests showed conclusively that it was.
 