 The financial hurricane that is sweeping through the financial markets chose a 
bad time to touch down in Mexico.
In a week's time, the opposition PRD will be asking Mexican voters whether 
they are willing to foot the bill for the last financial crisis - currently 
around $60 billion and rising.

A day later, President Ernesto Zedillo makes his fourth state-of-the-union 
address, in which, among other things, he will once again be trying to reassure 
the nation that, unlike the last four presidents, he will not bequeath his 
successor a major economic disaster.

The country's banking system is burdened with bad debts and a lack of 
liquidity despite a government bail-out that amounts to almost $700 for every 
man, woman and child in a country in which 40 per cent of the population 
survives on less than $2 a day. "We are talking about the well-being of at 
least two generations of Mexicans," said the PRD chairman, Andres Manuel Lopez 
Obrador, as he announced the unofficial referendum.

As the value of Mexican stocks spiralled downwards in the past fortnight, it 
was bank stocks that led the way. And as the government contemplates the need 
for measures such as a rise in interest rates to stave off further capital 
flight, it is only too aware that higher rates will lead to more bad debt and a 
worsening of the credit outlook for business.

Those who can, says economic consultant Armen Kouyoumdjian, are seeking 
credits in dollars. This means, he adds, that if there is a further devaluation 
"we are going to go back to having debts which have ballooned in dollars and 
not being able to service them".

For a country still emerging from the economic collapse of 1995, which 
required a $50 billion rescue package organised from Washington, it has been a 
cruel blow.

Oil prices running at a third below those of last year have already forced 
three successive budget cuts totalling over $3 billion - 0.79 per cent of GDP. 
The peso is already pushing 10 to the dollar, a value well below that 
originally projected for the end of the year. The Mexican stock exchange (BMV) 
has lost around 48 per cent of its value in dollar terms in 1998.

The bail-out of 1995 contributed to a notion that the US, now tied ever more 
closely toMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> through the Nafta 
free trade agreement, could simply not afford to allow it to go under. But 
anti-Mexican sentiment in the US Congress has grown in recent years, and 
another bail-out is almost certainly out of the question.
 