
The former Conservative leader Michael Howard said today that racing had been 
presented with a "once and for all chance" to boost its income at the expense 
of offshore bookmakers who take bets on British racing. Such firms do not 
currently contribute to the levy on betting profits that funds the sport but 
Lord Howard, who is chairman of the racecourse group Northern Racing, believes 
the government could be persuaded to force a change.

"The previous government held a consultation on whether [offshore] bookmakers 
should be licensed by the Gambling Commission," he said. "My view is that they 
should and that this licence ought to require them to pay the levy."

From a high of £116m three years ago the levy yield has declined to £75m for 
2009-10 and one report today claimed that the bookmakers will offer no more 
than £50m in negotiations over next year's amount. The betting industry says 
the sport generates less gambling than in the past but the British Horseracing 
Authority claims that bookmakers should be paying more than £100m per year.

On the thorny question of how to extract a levy from offshore operators, Lord 
Howard said the government might have to threaten an advertising ban on 
non-compliant firms, which would imperil several major race sponsorships.

"But I don't think that would happen. I think the betting industry would 
accept, at that stage, that the game was up.

"Those firms who remain onshore would welcome this. Those who are offshore 
clearly will not but I find it difficult to imagine what rational arguments 
they would advance to counter it."

Lord Howard pointed to last week's government statement that the levy system 
would be altered "with a view to ensuring the funding for racing is fair and 
collected from as broad a base as possible".

"What could they mean by 'as broad a base as possible' other than that those 
who are offshore should pay levy?" he asked. "If racing does not take advantage 
of this opportunity, it may not come again."
 