
Oftentimes, when you are casting about for a subject for a new book, life can 
give you a little nudge. In the case of my latest novel, A Suitable Lie, it 
gave me several.

One occurred in early 1998 when I heard the topic of male spousal abuse being 
discussed on the radio. Just a few weeks later, I was transferred by my 
employer and on my first day, one of my new team turned up for work with a 
black eye. People joked that he should know better by now than to argue with 
his wife. It was apparent from his reluctant smile that this was what had 
happened.

I couldn’t believe that they found this funny and in a quiet moment I asked if 
he needed to talk to someone. What he subsequently described was a pattern of 
violence I’ve heard described over and over again.

I slowly began feeling my way into the novel over the subsequent months, 
researching as I went, finding victims with surprising ease, even within my own 
social circles. If this issue was so rare, why was I meeting victims without 
any difficulty? Then I came across the British Crime Survey of 1999 and one of 
the first things I read was that domestic violence was equally likely to happen 
to men and women:4.2% of both male and female respondents 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20110218135832/http:/rds.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs/hors191.pdf>
 said they’d experienced domestic abuse from a current or previous partner in 
the preceding year. (The lifetime experience of the crime was 23% for women and 
15% for men).

It is fair to say that social surveys can give more reliable estimates of the 
extent of domestic abuse than official police figures, but accurately recording 
the issue of domestic abuse for both genders is fraught with problems for all 
kinds of complex reasons.

In any official literature I came across the perpetrator was​ (and still is)​ 
always described as 'he'

Awareness of male victims was and still is poor and I considered how people 
had laughed at my colleague with his black eye. Later research explained how 
society often views women’s violence against their male partner as
“understandable, pardonable and sometimes humorous” 
<http://jiv.sagepub.com/content/26/18/3599.abstract>.

I finished the novel just as my agent retired. I wrote to more than a dozen 
others, and no one would touch it. No feedback, just a simple no thanks. 
Meanwhile the issue was rarely discussed, and in any official literature I came 
across the perpetrator was always described as “he”. I began to wonder if I was 
the one out of step. I lost faith in the book and set it aside.

Fast forward to 2015 and I received another nudge. I was chatting to someone 
at my gym; he was worried about his friend and relayed a tale of abuse that 
matched the one from my colleague all those years ago. His mate had nowhere to 
go, no one believed him and he was feeling suicidal. And again I wondered: why 
do people seem to feel that highlighting male victims takes the focus away from 
women?

I’d heard that Karen Sullivan was starting her own publishing house, Orenda 
Books <http://orendabooks.co.uk/>, so I called her and pitched the story of a 
young widower, looking after his infant son, finding love again and that love 
almost being the end of him. She loved the idea and asked for a read.

With the first draft of the book, the story and the abuse began on the wedding 
night. Karen, however, pointed out that this might not give the reader time to 
get to know Andy the widowed father. Instead, they would meet Andy the victim 
from the start, and be less able to engage their empathy button.

She suggested we see the book as a terrifying love story. Allowing the reader 
to experience their love demonstrates why, despite the violence, Andy stays. He 
loves her. She can change. Things will improve. Told this way, I hoped the 
reader would be less likely to find the abuse “pardonable or humorous” and see 
it for what it was.

One major newspaper asked for a feature, then refused to publish it, saying my 
statistics were ridiculous. The editor refused to believe in the existence of 
male spousal abuse, despite the presence of links to research from the Office 
of National Statistics showing4% of men and 8.2% of women were estimated to 
have experienced domestic abuse in 2014/15 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/compendium/focusonviolentcrimeandsexualoffences/yearendingmarch2015/chapter4intimatepersonalviolenceandpartnerabuse#background-notes>
.

Looking back at my research folder, I have clippings from newspapers all over 
the world arguing that we need to take battered husbands more seriously. The 
clippings are mostly from 1999 and 2000. But all these years later, it appears 
nothing has changed.

Why are we still reluctant to have an honest discussion about this issue? Are 
we blinkered by our anger toward male perpetrators to the extent that we can’t 
see male victims? Or is there some strange form of sexism at play here? Do we 
ascribe higher standards to women? We see the effects of male violence all the 
time; on our streets and on TV, so we have sadly come to expect it. Are women 
judged more harshly in general, so we don’t want to believe they are capable of 
such actions?

Unfortunately, although my novel does provide a portrait of the insidious, 
horrifying nature of this violence – it cannot provide answers.

Extract

The newspaper headline on the board read, “Divorce Dad Kills Kids”.

As I turned and walked away from the shop, I realised just how weary I was. 
Each step was an effort and each time my heel jarred onto the ground, 
shockwaves reached my spine. The banner had sapped what strength I had left. 
What kind of a world did we live in where someone would think such a crime was 
their only way out? What kind of a god would countenance such an act? I 
stumbled to a halt. What on earth would drive a man to do such a thing? Only an 
extreme emotion would result in such a dreadful action. Was it desperation, 
anger, jealousy? A disturbed mind’s version of an act of love?

I willed myself to continue walking and my own situation pushed its way to the 
front of my thoughts, like a small child in a crowd shouting, “What about me?” 
What about me? Would I ever feel that desperate?

The banner blazed like a warning.

I would have to find a solution. I would have to find a way out of this trap. 
At last, my circuit brought me home. The door was unlocked, I pushed it open 
and walked inside. Pausing by the living room door, I saw her curled up in a 
chair. Fast asleep. Even in the weak light I could make out the silted lines of 
mascara that ran from her eyes and down the pale expanse of her cheeks, almost 
past her nose.

She had obviously fallen asleep waiting for me.

And that was the first time I thought about murder.

More about the book

In a less subtle writer’s hands this subject matter could have descended into 
a schlocky mess, trying to be shocking for the sake of it, but Malone handles 
the gradual degradation of the central relationship between Andy and Anna 
expertly and with real understanding... A straightforward delineation of 
domestic abuse would have been engaging enough, but Malone throws in some 
twists and turns. Crucially, these feel properly embedded in the story, rather 
than thrown together to obfuscate or confuse. It’s a tough high-wire act, 
balancing believability with surprise, but the author pulls it off with aplomb. 
Excellent stuff. –The Big Issue

Buy the book

A Suitable Lie by Michael J Malone is out now, published by Orenda Books 
(£8.99).It is available from the Guardian bookshop for £7.37 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/suitable-lie.html>.
 