
Reviewers will often say a book made them laugh out loud, when what they mean 
– funny books being so bafflingly thin on the ground – is that it made them 
smile; their exaggeration is a symptom of their relief that it even did that. 
ButSkios, Michael Frayn's new novel, his first for 10 years, truly does make 
you laugh out loud. I sniggered on the train and the bus; I sniggered in the 
kitchen, the bedroom and, on one occasion, in the shower. I wasn't reading the 
book in the shower, obviously. But I was thinking about it, and that was enough.
Skios, which stars a pompous academic called Dr Norman Wilfred, a shambolic 
bounder called Oliver Fox, and something called the Fred Toppler Foundation, 
organiser of an annual thought-fest for rich people – it's like the World 
Economic Forum at Davos, only without the snow, the balance sheets or Stephanie 
Flanders – really is hilarious.

"Oh, good," says Frayn, when I tell him this. "I'm glad. It is a bit of an 
experiment. I wanted to see if you could do farce as a novel. In the theatre 
the audience is released by the laughter of the people around them. But with a 
novel you have an audience of only one; no corporate reaction." He pauses. "Of 
course, at this stage [in my career] self-plagiarism is a terrible danger. I 
realised recently thatSkios is slightly similar to a film I wrote, Clockwise 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YMNMLuofw80> [starring John Cleese]. Though 
things inSkios go wrong for different reasons. The other difference is that, 
with a novel, you do need to know what the characters are thinking. You need to 
know what Oliver Fox thinks he is up to, which is, frankly, not very much."

This is true – though it's the unreliable Fox who sets the dominoes falling 
when he lands on the Greek island of Skios for a romantic assignation. On 
seeing a taxi driver holding a sign that reads "Dr Norman Wilfred", Fox decides 
– who knows why? – to pretend to be him, a move that provides him with the 
chance to enjoy a little of the Fred Toppler Foundation's hospitality, and to 
deliver its keynote speech. Meanwhile, on the other side of the island, a 
lovely young woman called Georgie Evers discovers, to her horror, that the man 
who has been delivered to her villa is not the gorgeous Oliver Fox but a 
balding, slightly podgy fellow called Dr Norman Wilfred.

"It had been in my mind for a while," says Frayn. "Every time I arrived at an 
airport and saw the line of people holding up cards, I thought: what would 
happen if I went up to one of them? How far would I get?"

It's probably not giving too much away to say that Fox gets a very long way 
indeed. He is… deluded! "He saw his life as Dr Norman Wilfred stretching in 
front of him like the golden pathway into the rising sun," writes Frayn. "He 
had no choice but to walk along that pathway, towards the warmth, towards the 
light."

Where did this Oliver Fox come from? "Well, there is a touch of a real person 
in there," says Frayn. "John Gale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780701207762/clean-young-englishman>
, a wonderful reporter at theObserver. When I was a student I passionately 
admired him. He wrote these extremely cool, offbeat pieces. I desperately tried 
to imitate his style, quite unsuccessfully. When I joined theObserver, I met 
him. He was a manic depressive; in the end he killed himself. But his manic 
phases were extraordinary. He once told me he'd been walking down Fleet Street 
when he realised that the car next to him – the traffic was slow-moving – had 
white ribbons on it. He could see the happy couple sitting in the back and he 
knew –he just knew – that what they wanted him to do was to get in. So he did. 
He sat and chatted quite happily. He had that absolute certainty. There's a bit 
of that in Oliver."

Frayn, who will be 80 next year, always tells interviewers that his current 
book/play/memoir will be his last. "I'm never going to write anything ever 
again," he says to me, mock solemn. He and his wife, Claire Tomalin, are 
enjoying the quiet after the storm (herbiography of Dickens  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780670917679/charles-dickens-a-life>
was published last year); neither of them has begun a new book yet and the 
atmosphere is "quite jolly – we get a bit monosyllabic when we're both writing".

But it's impossible to imagine them not working – and sure enough, in the next 
breath, he reveals that he has been rewriting parts of his 1993 playHere which, 
by the time you read this, will have opened at theRose Theatre, Kingston 
<http://www.rosetheatrekingston.org/rose-productions/here> (meanwhile, the Old 
Vic's ace revival ofNoises Off  
<http://www.oldvictheatre.com/noises-off-west-end/>continues in the West End). 
Isn't work his engine? "Well, if you haven't got a job, it's difficult to 
retire. I've sometimes thought that I should go out and buy a clock and present 
it to myself. It does seem a bit improbable [to be almost 80]. An elderly actor 
was once asked what it was like being old. He said: it's like being young but 
having a lot of slap on your face. I've got quite a bit of slap on my face. But 
it doesn't feel any different internally."

Frayn's last book was a memoir of his childhood, My Father's Fortune 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780571270583/my-fathers-fortune-a-life>
 – that was another thing he used to say: that he'd never write about himself. 
"I intended to write about my father [who was a funny, kind and deaf asbestos 
salesman] but I found I had to write about myself because part of his 
experience in life was having a son and finding ways to get on with him." I 
wonder what he feels about this book two years' on; I think it's a masterpiece. 
"One of the sad things about writing non-fiction is that it moves you still 
further away from the original events. I wrote it as truthfully as I possibly 
could but, looking at it now, I wonder if I made the whole thing up. I'm glad I 
did it. But it was emotional. People said afterwards: have you achieved 
closure?" He snorts. "I would say: absolutely not! It just stirred all the 
feelings up again…

One of the nice things, the terrific things, was that I got letters: from 
people who recognised something of their own family life but also from people 
who knew my father. The most wonderful was from someone who'd been in the next 
hospital bed to him when he first had cancer. My father had been having a rough 
time, he was in great pain, but this man – a student who'd had his appendix 
removed – said that my father realised he was homesick, and kept an eye on 
him." His eyes fill with tears.

A while ago a friend of Frayn's told the New Yorker that he and Tomalin were 
living an idyll – and this is how it looks from the outside. Their house close 
to the Thames in Petersham is luxuriantly light and organised; their lives are 
replete with work and family (between them they have six children and 10 
grandchildren); the painful things – Frayn was married when he fell in love 
with Tomalin – are now in the past. Is this how it feels? An idyll? "No!" he 
yelps. "Wherever you live, however you live, there's still the weekly shopping 
to do, the computer to fix." The Russians, he says, have a wonderful but 
impossible-to-translate word for this stuff – the exhausting logistics of life. 
He says the word, and then he spells it, for the benefit of my tape. But when I 
get home I can't hear either – and when I Google it, I'm offered the chance to 
buy a mail order bride. We sort this out by email later: it transliterates as 
"byt". But Google's misunderstanding is, I think, quite delicious, it being 
exactly the kind of thing that happens on the strange and bewitching island of 
Skios.
 