
Michelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama>, who could 
become the first African-American first lady in January, tonight gave a 
personal and sentimental account of life with her husband in a primetime speech 
intended to bring his narrative into the homes of millions of American voters.

In her first major speech since Barack Obama launched his presidential 
campaign 20 months ago, she was loudly welcomed by the 4,000-plus delegates at 
the Democratic convention in Denver waving "Michelle" banners.

She went on to speak about Obama as a husband and father who lived his life 
imbued with American values.

One of the biggest cheers of the night came when she offered an olive branch 
to the Clinton camp, praising her for her success in advancing the women's 
movement. Clinton had "put those 18 million cracks in the glass ceiling so that 
our daughters and sons can dream a little bigger and aim a little higher".

Michelle Obama lacked the rhetorical ability of her husband and failed to 
arouse the audience in the way he is capable. The final ovation was loud but 
not prolonged.

The insights into Obama family life were carefully designed to counter jibes 
from his Republican rival, John McCain, that he is too fond of his newfound 
celebrity status, that he is elitist and out of touch with working-class 
Americans.

She insisted that in spite of all his success since he launched his White 
House campaign 19 months ago, "the Barack Obama I know today is the same man I 
fell in love with 19 years ago".

She tried to counter accusations raised by the Republicans about her 
patriotism after an out-of-context remark she made in January suggesting she 
had not been proud of the US before Obama won the Iowa caucus that month. In 
her speech, she pointedly described the US as a "great country" in which 
everyone had the chance to rise.

The loud response when she began the speech eclipsed even that given an hour 
earlier on a surprise appearance by senator Edward Kennedy, who is suffering 
from a brain tumour.

The four-day convention is scheduled to culminate on Thursday with the formal 
endorsement of Obama as the first African-American presidential candidate with 
a serious chance of reaching the White House.

Although Obama has been a regular presence on US screens all this year, his 
life story and politics are still relatively unknown to most Americans.

Before Michelle Obama spoke, the convention saw a short video describing her 
early life in Chicago's South Side and her relationship with Obama, who joked 
that she had been won over when he bought her an ice cream.

She was introduced by her brother Craig, who spoke about their early life 
together and insisted she would be the first lady. Her mother was also in the 
audience.

She portrayed Obama as having come from humble beginnings and as a patriot who 
shared American values. He had worked as a community oganiser in Chicago 
alongside people who believed, "like you and I believe, that America should be 
a place where you can make it if you try".

In one of many sentimental passages, she won a round of applause when she said 
he had been unchanged by his success and illustrated it with a description of 
the birth of their first child: "He's the same man who drove me and our new 
baby daughter home from the hospital 10 years ago this summer, inching along at 
a snail's pace, peering anxiously at us in the rearview mirror, feeling the 
whole weight of her future in his hands, determined to give her everything he'd 
struggled so hard for himself, determined to give her what he never had: the 
affirming embrace of a father's love."

After she finished, Obama, who is not due in Denver until Wednesday, joined 
the convention by video to praise his wife and to invited his children to 
comment on her speech. "I think she did good," one of them said.

The children then waved at the screen saying, "love you, Daddy".

As Michelle Obama intervened on behalf of her husband with her first major 
speech since he began his campaign 20 months ago, Cindy McCain also went into 
action.

John McCain told fundraisers in Sacramento, California, that she is to visit 
Georgia to assess the humanitarian situation after the conflict with Russia.

McCain's campaign team sees foreign affairs as their candidate's strong point 
and believes he was helped by the conflict. Her presence in Georgia will help 
bring the issue back into the US election campaign.

"She is on her way to the little country of Georgia," said John McCain, who 
criticised Russia's involvement.
 