 Mexicans trying to cross illegally into the United States are dying in 
unprecedented numbers. Immigrant rights groups blame a policy designed to drive 
them from crossing points in the towns and cities on to remote desert routes, 
where many die of heatstroke.
On Thursday a man's body was found in the desert near Plaster City and a 
woman's was recovered from the All-American irrigation canal, which crosses the 
border, bringing the recorded deaths this year in the California border area 
alone to 107. The previous weekend three bodies were recovered from the desert 
west of the border town of Calexico, and another two from the canal.

Along the 2,000 miles of border about 170 have died this year, roughly one 
death every 36 hours. Last year's total was 130.

The rise has been inexorable since October 1994, when the border patrol 
launched Operation Gatekeeper in San Diego. Similar operations were started in 
Arizona and Texas.

A patrol spokesman, Salvador Zamora, said the "number one goal" was to prevent 
migrants entering illegally through central San Diego and San Isidro - formerly 
the most popular crossings.

The number of border guards has been hugely increased, and they now use 
military-style tactics. Steel fences, sensors and stadium-type lights are also 
used to deter the migrants.

There is no pretence that the overall flow of undocumented migrants has been 
affected. An estimated 300,000 still cross each year.

The difference is that they run a greater risk of dying, and have to pay 
guides - polleros - up to $1,000 (£625).

"The object is not to reduce the number of migrants," said Victor Clark of the 
Binational Human Rights Centre in Tijuana. "Operations like Gatekeeper are 
aimed at satisfying ideological demands from conservative groups for border 
control."

He says the biggest impact of the current policy - apart from the sharp 
increase in deaths - has been to turn the polleros' business into a thriving 
branch of organised crime.

"Pollero cartels like the one known as Los Peralta in Tijuana have the 
capacity to take as many as 100 people across the border every day," he said. 
"If they're charging an average of $1,000, imagine the money they're making and 
the power they have to corrupt the authorities."

Record-breaking temperatures this year have added to the danger for those 
trying to cross. Daytime highs in Imperial Valley, California, have averaged 
44C in the shade - and there is precious little shade.

Not all the deaths are due to heatstroke, however. A significant minority 
drown while trying to swim across irrigation canals, which can be 20ft deep and 
are often fast-flowing. Others have been killed in high-speed chases by border 
guards.

The authorities are trying to dissuade migrants from using desert routes, and 
rescue them when they get into trouble.

"It's a policy that's firm, but not cold," Mr Zamora said.

The Mexican foreign ministry is running a campaign to highlight the risks, 
putting warning signs near popular crossing points. But few migrants appear to 
be aware of it.

Activists say that as long as big inequalities of income persist, the flow of 
migrants will continue. "Signs won't stop desperate people," said Mr Clark.
 