
Barack Obama and Donald Trump launched the first big battle of the next 
American presidency on Wednesday as they made fiercely opposing cases over the 
future ofUS healthcare <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/healthcare>.

The outgoing president made a rare visit to Capitol Hill to rally Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> to defend the Affordable Care 
Act (ACA) and “encouraged us to fight”, one congressman said.

Trump, meanwhile, fired off on Twitter at “the failed ObamaCare disaster” as 
his vice-president-elect, Mike Pence, met House and SenateRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> and promised immediate steps 
to dismantle it.

The duelling events on Capitol Hill illustrated the high stakes over 
healthcare reform, seen as Obama’s proudest domestic policy achievement but now 
facing demolition by a unified Republican government.

Not for the first time, events in Washington were somewhat upstaged by Trump 
himself, who tweeted that Republicans “must be careful” to ensure that 
Democrats shoulder the blame for the “failure” of Obamacare. “Don’t let the 
Schumer clowns out of this web,” he wrote, referring to Democratic Senate 
minority leader Chuck Schumer.

In another tweet, the president-elect said: “Dems are to blame for the mess. 
It will fall of its own weight – be careful!”

Later the Senate took its first step toward repealing the health law. In a 
51-48 vote mostly along party lines, the Senate approved a procedural motion to 
open the debate on a budget resolution that Republicans hope to use as a 
vehicle to dismantle the law. The debate is expected to carry into next week.

All Democrats voted against the bill and only Rand Paul, a Republican from 
Kentucky, broke ranks with his party because the resolution would not balance 
the budget deficit.

Earlier Pence, a frequent conduit between Trump and lawmakers, urged 
Republicans to unite in condemnation of Obamacare but offered few clues as to 
what its replacement will look like.

He said the administration would keep Trump’s campaign promises to end illegal 
immigration, build a wall along the Mexican border and rebuild the US military. 
“But the first order of business is to repeal and replace Obamacare,” he told 
reporters. “The American people voted decisively for a better future for 
healthcare in this country and we are determined to give them that.”

Along with House speaker Paul Ryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/paul-ryan>, he sought to portray Obamacare 
as a disaster from which Americans needed immediate “relief” as soon as Trump 
takes office on 20 January.

Barack Obama and Mike Pence slated for healthcare showdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/barack-obama-mike-pence-us-healthcare-showdown>
“We’re going to be in the promise-keeping business,” Pence said. “It will 
literally begin on day one. Before the end of the day, we can anticipate that 
the president-elect will be in the Oval Office taking action, to both repeal 
executive orders and also set into motion through executive action promises 
that were made on the campaign trail.”

He did not specify whether these executive orders would include changes to the 
healthcare system but, in New York, Trump’s incoming press secretary Sean 
Spicer reportedly suggested that they would. The orders will come “within hours 
of being sworn in”, he was quoted as saying.

Pence, a former six-term congressman, had been on Capitol Hill when Obamacare 
was signed into law in 2010, he continued. “I remember all those promises. We 
were told if you like your doctor, you can keep him: not true. We were told if 
you like your health insurance, you can keep it: not true. We were told the 
cost of health insurance would go down: not true.”


He added: “The American people have sent new leadership here because Obamacare 
has failed. It has been rejected by the American people.”

Democrats hope to exploit Republican divisions over how to replace Obamacare 
and at what speed. But Pence seems determined to make criticism of Obamacare a 
rallying point, with a PR offensive imminent.


“As the president-elect said today, and as I admonished members of the House 
Republican conference today, it’s important that we remind the American people 
of what they already know about Obamacare, that the promises that were made 
were all broken, and I expect you’ll see an effort in the days ahead to talk 
about the facts around Obamacare,” Pence said.

Ryan also argued that Obamacare was in urgent need of repair, but sought to 
quell fears that millions of people would lose heath insurance. He told the 
press conference: “So much damage has already been done to the country.


“Obamacare is a story of broken promise after broken promise after broken 
promise, followed by failing programmes, higher premiums, higher deductibles, 
so we want to make sure that as we give relief to people from Obamacare we do 
it in a transition that doesn’t pull the rug out from anybody during that 
transition period. That’s the point that we’re all trying to make.”

Asked for specifics, however, Ryan replied: “We have a plan to replace it. We 
have plenty of ideas to replace it and you’ll see as the weeks and months 
unfold what we’re talking about replacing it with: how you can get better 
choices with lower prices by not having a government taking over our healthcare 
which is causing all this problem in the first place.”

Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, later claimed that Ryan had 
clearly failed to provide an alternative plan, demonstrating why Republicans 
felt “queasy” about a root and branch overhaul.

Earnest said Obama, who spent more than an hour and a half with Democrats, was 
received “warmly” and expressed “envy” for the opportunity that party members 
have to keep up the effort. “The president is confident that the kind of 
arguments Democrats can put forward is a winning one,” he said.

Obama “encouraged us to fight”, Democratic representative Elijah Cummings told 
reporters of his colleagues’ meeting with the outgoing president.

Fresh from the meeting, Schumer, standing next to a sign that read “make 
America sick again” – a slogan several leaders later repeated – said Democrats 
were united in defending the legislation, which helped drive down the rate of 
Americans without insurance to historic lows.

Schumer told reporters: “Our Republican colleagues don’t quite know what to 
do. They’re like the dog who caught the bus. They can repeal but they have 
nothing to put in its place. And that means so many good things go which was 
the summary of the meeting.”

He added: “Republicans will soon learn that you can’t keep the good parts of 
the ACA and remove the rest of the law and still have it work. That’s what 
they’re struggling with. That’s why they’re not getting anywhere. What they 
would do would throw the entire insurance marketplace into chaos, plain repeal.”

House minority leader Nancy Pelosi called the Republicans’ plan to repeal the 
law but delay its removal an “act of cowardice” and slammed their other option, 
“repeal and replace”.

Pelosi, who described the meeting with the president as “transformative”, said 
Obama asked if Democrats were steeled for the fight.

“He didn’t have to ask us that,” she said. 

But the president also encouraged Democrats to be open to Republicans’ ideas 
on how to improve certain provisions of the law, she said.

Democrats acknowledged that there is little they can do to stop Republicans 
from repealing the Affordable Care Act, a top priority for the party that has 
so far failed to bring forward a plan to replace the law. But Pelosi said 
explicitly that Republicans will need their help to replace the law, and the 
Democrats at the press conference vowed to make that process difficult.

Democrats are gearing up for an aggressive messaging campaign to try to rally 
the public around the law, which has helped cover roughly 22 million previously 
uninsured voters.

“They want to repeal it and then try to hang it on us,” Schumer said. “Not 
gonna happen.”

Senator Bernie Sanders began his remarks by quoting from one of Trump’s tweets 
from May 2015 in which the president-elect promised supporters that if he was 
elected there would be “no cuts” to social security, Medicare and Medicaid.

This promise was a “cornerstone” of Trump’s campaign and to renege now would 
mean one of two things, said the Vermont senator, who campaigned for universal 
healthcare: “either Donald Trump simply lied to the elderly and the working 
people of this country”, or he should “come forward, maybe through tweets, one 
of his tweets, and say clearly thatDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will veto any legislation 
that cuts Medicare, that cuts Medicaid or that cuts social security”.

Despite constant criticism from Republicans that the healthcare law is too 
costly, a new analysis found that a wholesale repeal of the law would cost 
roughly $350bn over the next decade, according to a new analysis by the 
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a bipartisan group that advocates 
for fiscal restraint.






 