
The international arms trade has become the greatest threat to development and 
has to be controlled by a tough treaty to regulate weapons and munitions sales, 
a government minister warns.

In a speech to the International Institute for Strategic Studies 
<http://www.iiss.org/> thinktank, Alan Duncan, the minister for international 
development, will urge allies such as the US to set aside their concerns and 
sign up to the comprehensive arms trade treaty (ATT), which will be hammered 
out during a month-long negotiation at the UN in July.

Britain has been one of the key supporters of a treaty that could prevent 
countries selling arms to any regime that might use them to violate human 
rights.

Speaking to the Guardian, Duncan said: "The arms trade has become the greatest 
threat to development, beyond disease and disaster. We are making some progress 
on issues such as polio and malaria.The factor that is most restraining 
development is conflict, which is why this new treaty is so important. It has 
massive implications for development."

The UN conference in July is the culmination of six years' lobbying and 
haggling by governments, arms companies and aid agencies. It should lead to a 
treaty that harmonises and toughens up international laws governing the sale of 
arms into one comprehensive, legally binding, document.

Oxfam has estimated that the absence of a single binding treaty has allowed at 
least $2.2bn [£1.38bn] worth of arms and ammunition to be imported under arms 
embargoes between 2000 and 2010.

At the moment, the new ATT would ban all weapons sales to countries that could 
use them to abuse human rights, or encourage corruption or armed violence.

Such a treaty might have stopped Syria importing arms in 2010, the year before 
an uprising brutally suppressed by the Assad regime.

Duncan admitted there would be difficulties defining the banning of arms sales 
in this way, but insisted it was right to include the concept.

"It is nebulous, but we are in favour of it being there. It will be left to 
the signatory countries to implement. We are not setting up an international 
police force. There will be a shared obligation among signatory countries to 
police the treaty."

Duncan added that it was essential the ATT included "from fighter planes down 
to portable weapons, small arms and ammunition".

He said: "Including the portable weapons is vitally important. It is one of 
the most dramatic drivers of conflict and development decay. This treaty has to 
cover the full spectrum of weaponry. Crucially, there will also be a register 
of brokers, to stop middlemen from being able to dump arms into areas."

In recent months the US has expressed concern about the treaty being too 
prescriptive, as have China and Russia.

But Duncan hopes Washington can still be persuaded and ensure there is "a 
quantum leap forward". He said: "The US is less enthusiastic than we are, but 
you never know. If our defence industries can be in favour of this, so can 
theirs. Our resolve is clear and we are taking a lead."

The global weapons market is estimated to be worth $55bn, and the UN Office 
for Disarmament Affairs says: "The trade in conventional weapons – from 
warships and battle tanks to fighter jets and machine guns – remains poorly 
regulated.

"No set of internationally agreed standards exist to ensure that arms are only 
transferred for appropriate use."

In a recent report, Oxfam claimed that in the first decade of this century 
several states broke embargoes and continued to trade weapons on a large scale. 
The report cited a list of countries, which included Burma ($600m of trade from 
2000 to 2010), Iran ($574m from 2007 to 2010) and the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo ($124m, 2000 to 2002).

• This article was amended on 22 May 2012 to clarify the name of the 
International Institute for Strategic Studies.
 