
All 41 companies highlighted by the Government for their role in the £11 
billion pensions mis-selling scandal have now been taken off the official list 
of shame.

But Treasury Economic Secretary Patricia Hewitt warned she would resurrect the 
list if there was evidence of firms dragging their feet in phase two of the 
crackdown. The Government in July 1997 began publishing monthly figures showing 
how rapidly the worst-offending companies were compensating victims of the 
scandal. Their names were removed when they hit specified targets.

So far nearly £2 billion has been repaid to more than 330,000 investors, many 
of whom were wrongly advised between 1988 and 1994 to leave lucrative company 
pension schemes and take out inferior personal plans.

Twenty firms have been taken off the list in recent months, and yesterday the 
remaining 21 were removed.

The 21 are: Abbey Life, Berkeley Independent, Burns Anderson, Co-operative 
Insurance Society, Colonial, Countrywide Independent, DBS Financial Management, 
Equitable Life, Financial Options, Friends Provident, Hill Samuel, Hogg 
Robinson, IFA Network, Legal & General, Lincoln National, London & Manchester, 
Pearl Assurance, Sedgwick, Standard Life, Sun Life of Canada and Windsor Life.

Yesterday Ms Hewitt said it was good news that it was no longer necessary to 
publish performance figures for the review of priority cases.

But, referring to the recently launched second phase of the investigation, 
which involves tracking down up to 1.8 million younger potential victims, she 
told companies they must make swift progress. 'If there is any evidence of 
attempts to avoid or delay phase two I will not hesitate to resume publication 
of information about firms' progress.'

The Personal Investment Authority, the pensions watchdog, was satisfied that 
all of the 41 firms had devoted significant energy and resources to 
compensating their mis-sold customers, she said.

The PIA has fined several hundred firms a total of £5.7 million in connection 
with pensions mis-selling.
 