
The publisher of the Daily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> has paid out more than 
£500,000 to settle phone-hacking claims by 29 people including the entertainer 
Les Dennis, presenter Natasha Kaplinsky and EastEnders actor Steve McFadden.

The former footballer Sol Campbell, retired boxer Audley Harrison and model 
Victoria Hervey were also among those whose claims against Mirror Group
Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> (MGN) were settled at 
the high court.

Many of the claimants were friends or family of the famous people targeted by 
journalists. They included David Beckham’s father, Ted, and singer Charlotte 
Church’s ex-boyfriend Steven Johnson, his father – also called Steven Johnson – 
and his mother, Yvonne Kearle.

In all but one case – that of the Emmerdale actor Jayne Walton, who received 
£40,000 damages and her legal costs – the details of the agreements were not 
made public.

McFadden, who plays Phil Mitchell in EastEnders, was said to have been caused 
“significant distress”. Kaplinsky, the TV presenter who won Strictly Come 
Dancing in 2004, was said to have been “heartbroken” when private details of 
her wedding and honeymoon were published.

Kim Waite, acting for Trinity, accepted that unlawful interception of 
voicemail or other privacy breaches had occurred, and offered her “sincere 
apologies” to all 29 claimants. She said Trinity “deeply regrets the wrongful 
acts” and would not do the same in the future.

The other people who had their claims settled included the actor Neil 
Morrissey’s partner Emma Killick, the actors William Mellor, Sarah Parish and 
Abigail Titmuss, the musician Lee Ryan, Barry Smith, ex-boyfriend of the actor 
Sadie Frost, and the sports injuries doctor Mark Waller.


The TV presenter Jeff Brazier, Simon Clegg, former chief executive of the 
British Olympic Association, the Big Brother contestant Victor Ebuwa, James 
Gardner, a friend of the footballer Paul Gascoigne, and George Best’s agent 
Philip Hughes were also among the 29.

Others included Best’s son, Calum, the former real estate agency director 
Sandy Armstrong, the singer-songwriter Samuel Preston and his ex-fiancee.

A number of those who settled their claims with MGN, a subsidiary of Trinity 
Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror>, including Dennis and 
Clegg, are involved in a separate civil case against the Sun publisher News 
Group Newspapers.
 