
Scotland Yard is thought to be considering charges under the theft act against 
salesmen alleged to have mis-sold pensions or endowment mortgages. Although the 
fraud squad's mis-selling inquiries are currently confined only to sales 
representatives, it is believed the prospect of theft charges could persuade 
them to turn Queen's evidence against executives of leading financial 
institutions.

Such charges would focus on the misuse of promotional literature or other 
brochures and investment tables by salesmen in dealing with customers. Failure 
to provide customers with information that would have enabled them to chose the 
best investments could be caught by the act.

Section 17(b) provides for a seven-year jail term for anyone 'dishonestly, 
with a view to gain for himself or another or with intent to cause loss to 
another in furnishing information for any purpose produces or makes use of any 
account, or any such record or document which to his knowledge is or may be 
misleading, false or deceptive in a material particular'.

The fraud squad since spring 1997 has been investigating specific complaints 
of the mis-selling of financial products, chiefly pensions but also a smaller 
number of endowment mortgages. Contrary to reports suggesting the squad's real 
target are 'big fish' at the top of leading institutions, its inquiry is 
concentrating on individual sales agents.

Scotland Yard confirmed yesterday that its inquiry was continuing and that it 
remained at an early stage, with no decision on charges or statutes having been 
finalised.

However, evidence of explicit or implicit instructions from senior managers to 
sales forces to the effect that pensions or mortgages ought to be sold 
aggressively, regardless of their suitability for the customer, would 
inevitably take inquiries further and further up the corporate chains of 
command.

The maximum penalty under section 17(b) is identical to that provided for 
under section 47 of the financial services act, the more usual legal route for 
action against mis-selling.

But section 47 contains the defence that the accused reasonably believed that 
his act or conduct would not create a false or misleading impression. The 
absence of such a defence in the theft act may make prosecutions easier and the 
threatened stigma of a theft conviction, as against the impression of a 
technical rule breach arising from a section 47 conviction, may lead accused 
persons to incriminate their seniors in an attempt to avoid prosecution.

Use of the theft act may also blunt scepticism among crown prosecutors about 
the likelihood of success in taking allegations of financial services 
mis-selling through the criminal courts.

The Serious Fraud Office already has declined to become involved in the 
inquiry on the grounds that there is, as yet, no evidence of 'serious or 
complex fraud'.

Although the fraud squad investigation combines allegations of the misselling 
of both pensions and endowment mortgages, the two cases have very different 
histories.

Whereas the £11bn pension mis-selling scandal relates to the six-year period 
between the deregulation of occupational pensions in 1988 and the emergence of 
official disquiet in 1994, endowment mortgages continue to comprise 30% of all 
home loans, despite widespread concern that they are little more than 
commission-earning vehicles unsuitable for most mortgage customers.
 