
Roman Torres gives the Seattle Sounders a historic win
This was a defenders’ MLS Cup final and so it was fitting that a defender 
should strike the decisive blow. Roman Torres was already something of a cult 
figure for the Sounders support before he strode up to hitthe most important 
penalty in the franchise’s history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/seattle-sounders-penalty-shootout-mls-cup-toronto>
. Now the image of his celebrations will be immortalised in Seattle.

Of course, the narrative that will be drawn from this match seems a little 
bizarre considering that an entire season came down to a few inches, with 
Justin Morrow smashing his penalty off the underside of the crossbar just 
moments before Torres converted to give Seattle their first ever championship 
win.

But nonetheless, the impact this triumph could have on the Seattle Sounders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/seattle-sounders> is profound. Alexi Lalas 
said whoever won the 2016 MLS Cup final would go on to become “a super-club”. 
Of course, the Sounders might claim to have been a super-club for a while now. 
They might have beaten TFC without a single shot on goal - a triumph for the 
post-truth age - but this was the fulfilment of a club that had long boasted 
everything but on the field success. This, however, could be the springboard to 
something even greater.

Seattle Sounders hold nerve in shootout to clinch first ever MLS Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/seattle-sounders-penalty-shootout-mls-cup-toronto>
Drew Moor v Nelson Valdez
Given that both these two teams had waited an MLS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mls> lifetime for this game it perhaps 
shouldn’t have come as too much of a surprise that the opening exchanges were 
testy. What was surprising was that referee Alan Kelly kept his cards in his 
pocket after a couple of excessive challenges.

First, Nelson Valdez went in crotch-high on Drew Moor, although the Sounders 
striker could at least plead a degree of innocence on the basis of his apparent 
focus on the ball. It wasn’t quiteRoy Keane on Alf Inge Haaland 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p_st29mlQwU>, but the first yellow card of the 
match probably should have been flashed, even at such an early stage.

Moor’s retribution on Valdez just seconds later, however, was much worse. With 
no chance of winning the ball, the TFC defender raked his studs down the 
achilles of the Sounders striker. It was a moment that could have set the 
course of the final. Moor quite feasibly could have been sent off, tipping the 
weight of the contest in Seattle’s favour. Another referee might not have been 
so lenient. Another referee might have stemmed the ill-temper which came to 
define the game.

Stefan Frei sends game to extra time with one save, and to penalties with 
another
It is the way of these things that no matter how cagey the game, no matter the 
lack of attacking quality, one team always gets a chance to win it late on. So 
it proved forToronto FC <https://www.theguardian.com/football/torontofc>, who 
with just seconds of stoppage time left to play at the end of the match, were 
presented an opportunity to snatch a winner.

Michael Bradley’s corner was flicked on into the six yard box, where Jozy 
Altidore appeared set to provide the finishing touch. But Frei threw himself at 
the TFC striker, in the midst of a diving header himself, to punch clear and 
send the game into extra time. The Seattle Sounders’ Twitter account hailed the 
Swiss goalkeeper a “master champion of the earth” for his intervention, but 
even better was to follow.

Altidore’s towering header looked certain to find the back of the Seattle net, 
with his effort looping into the top corner. Nobody, though, counted on Frei 
somehow finding a way to claw the ball back off the goalline with all the 
mannerisms of a peak David Seaman. Without his astonishing save the Sounders 
wouldn’t have made it as far as a penalty shootout.

Neither Sebastian Giovinco nor Jordan Morris lasting the distance
There was a limp to his walk as Giovinco trotted over to the touchline towards 
the end of the first period of extra time, suggesting the Italian had either 
succumbed to cramp (like he did against the Montreal Impact) or had played 
through an injury. Whatever the reason, there was a certain symbolism to the 
withdrawal of Toronto FC’s best player. They had been ground down.

It was a big call by Vanney. While Giovinco had struggled all night and looked 
to have run out of gas well before he was eventually substituted off, the 
Italian is a difference-maker like no other in MLS. Particularly with a penalty 
shootout looming, taking off a player who excels when the pressure weighs 
heaviest was a gamble.

The match was robbed of another difference-maker soon after when Morris was 
withdrawn by the Sounders. What’s more, the rookie was replaced by Brad Evans, 
a sure sign that Brian Schmetzer unashamedly planned on seeing out extra time 
and planning for penalties. Giovinco and Morris were billed as match winners, 
but neither lasted the distance.

The Seattle Sounders’ summer of change

Frei, Torres and every other player in rave green who won the title will be 
remembered for the night they gave the Seattle Sounders their first ever MLS 
era championship win, but in truth the defining stretch in the club’s season 
came back in July.

How much was Sigi Schmid to blame for his own downfall with the Sounders?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/27/sigi-schmid-seattle-sounders-mls>
It was then that in the space of just two days long-time Sounders coach Sigi 
Schmid was fired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/27/sigi-schmid-seattle-sounders-mls>
 and new Designated Player Nicolas Lodeiro was signed. Those two events 
ultimately shaped what would become the most momentous few months in the club’s 
history. From there the Sounders would go on to win 13 of their next 20 
fixtures, with Lodeiro the catalyst, particularly with Clint Dempsey ruled out 
with a heart problem.

Momentum is a powerful thing and Seattle collected just about as much of it as 
they possibly could over the final few weeks of the regular season and into the 
post-season. They found a groove that nobody, not FC Dallas, not the Colorado 
Rapids and not Toronto FC, could dislodge them from. It all started with a 
couple of big summer moves.
 