
Racing could and should be a gold mine for the government but is now in danger 
of becoming another failed industry. Less than a year ago the British 
Horseracing Authority did not respond to my warning that the finances of 
British racing were heading for a dramatic decline. As it turns out, the 
sport's financial standing is worse than I predicted, as the contribution to 
prize money from the Levy, a percentage of profits from off-course betting paid 
by bookmakers, is forecast to drop from the 2009 level of £63m to £37m in 2011.

We all hope a government decision, in the autumn, will lead to a modernised 
Levy that in turn obliges bookmakers and exchanges to pay a reasonable price 
for the product. Furthermore, the government must pass effective legislation 
requiring all betting operators, on-shore and offshore, to pay tax and levy 
that they are currently avoiding.

The size of the problems should be regarded as an opportunity for the 
government and racing to bring about change. Some of these will be very 
unwelcome in the short term. However, I am optimistic that a better funding 
system for racing, based on strict commercial principles, will emerge.

As the reality of our dire situation dawns, so the value of the Horsemen's 
Group, made up of owners, trainers, breeders, jockeys and stable staff, becomes 
increasingly recognised. Only a grouping of all these constituents can provide 
the necessary foil to the strength of the racecourses' interests.

Already, it is being grudgingly acknowledged by the racecourses that the 
system, whereby virtually every fixture receives funding from the Levy Board 
cannot continue. Equally, the Horsemen's Group is now aware of how much the 
racecourses are earning in media rights and expects a reasonable proportion of 
this income to make up for the deficiencies of the Levy in softening the blow 
on prize-money levels.

As I said last autumn, we are now moving inexorably towards a defined tiered 
system of racing based not on racecourses but on fixtures. This will result in 
premier fixtures, run at the top tracks, and, underneath that level, fixtures 
categorised according to the prize-money they offer which will be based on 
guidelines set by the Horsemen's Group. Within this system, minimum prize-money 
levels will be set according to the classes of race, not simply by the sport's 
governing body, the BHA.

The relationship between the Horsemen's Group and the racecourses will develop 
into the strongest commercial axis within racing. It should be a relationship 
based on sound negotiating principles with each side understanding the 
financial position of the other. Once this is in place, the BHA can do what 
they were always supposed to do – regulate.

As for the remaining life of the Levy Board, as long as they can be satisfied 
their statutory obligations are being met, they should confine their role to 
facilitating the payment by all betting operators of a reasonable price for the 
racing product. The way in which the money is divided up should be left to the 
Horsemen's Group and racecourses to agree upon.

With all this in place, we can then focus on constructing an effective and 
sustainable mechanism whereby all betting operators pay a commercial rate for 
the privilege of taking bets on racing.

There is a clear understanding that these reforms are essential to restructure 
the racing industry so that it is sustainable, modernised and financially 
healthy. An entertainment industry that, in difficult economic times, 
guarantees employment and substantial revenues to the government.
 