
It was one of the greatest games of the early '90s and now The Secret of 
Monkey Island <http://www.worldofmi.com/thegames/monkey1/index.php> is back. 
Releasing on Xbox Live Arcade "this summer" TheSecret of Monkey Island: Special 
Edition <http://www.lucasarts.com/games/monkeyisland/> sees the original game 
given a graphical spruce up (although, brilliantly, you can play with the 
original graphics) for its re-release. I recently spoke to producer Craig 
Derrick about the game, the art, the puzzles and why he - amazingly - thought 
that the PC version was better than the classic Amiga one.

Why is now the right time to revisit Monkey Island?

It's always a great time to revisit Monkey Island. We've discussed revisiting 
the franchise for some time now, but we needed the right project and platform 
to reintroduce players to the world and characters of Monkey Island. We 
discussed doing a direct port of The Secret of Monkey Island on iPhone or XBLA; 
we talked about adding new features to the original game and we even briefly 
discussed the idea of doing an original, SCUMM-based 2D sequel set between 
Monkey Island 2 & 3. And, hell, why not throw in an episodic game done by 
Telltale in for good measure! These were the typical fanboy conversations I was 
involved in here at LucasArts and I loved it, but I, like many, figured this 
would likely never happen. Then something remarkable happened. Last summer I 
was closing out another internal project and our new president, Darrell 
Rodriguez, asked me to look into ways of revisiting the library titles that 
best reflected the LucasArts heritage of great story and characters and of 
course Monkey Island was on the top of my list.

How do you get the balance between attracting new players and satisfying the 
needs of fans of the original?

I believe you have to look at the barrier of entry for both groups. As great 
as the original is we knew that a generation of gamers may never have heard of 
Monkey Island or be familiar with the classic LucasArts point-and-click 
adventures. Plus, the game was very dated graphically (which is also, of 
course, part of its charm), had no voice over dialogue and at times is very 
challenging to a novice. We knew if we wanted to bring new gamers to it we had 
to update all of these areas and focus on accessibility to the new player via 
updated controls and an in-game hint system. At the same time we knew we 
couldn't alienate our original fans. Early on we knew we wanted to include the 
original game with the special edition in one form or another, stay true to the 
original composition of the background art, establish some continuity in the 
character designs based on their appearances throughout the series and bring 
back as many of the original voice actors from the very first Monkey Island 
"talkie", "The Curse of Monkey Island". We thought if wecould do all of that 
then we may just be able to appeal and balance enough features for both new and 
old fans alike.

Why Xbox Live and not Wiiware or PSN?

Well, we never said we wouldn't be on Wiiware or PSN now did we? The truth is, 
though, Xbox Live offers a great user experience and downloadable service to 
gamers and we think it's a great platform to launch the game on. And, of 
course, the game will also be available on PC via digital download, plus we may 
have another platform announcement to make very, very soon.

Do you think today's gamers will be excited by a point and click game?

Today's gamers are more diverse and broad than I would say even the audience 
of point and click games was back in the 90's. When we started this, however, I 
always told the team that this wasn't necessarily about getting people excited 
about a point-and-click game, but about getting people excited about a game 
with great storytelling, characters and humour. The Special Edition adds a 
unique, whimsical art style and gameplay pacing and mechanics that I think will 
stand apart from many of the games available on Xbox Live.

Were you tempted to tamper with the original game? ie make some puzzles less 
obscure?

We considered adding new puzzles, but no, we never wanted to tamper with the 
original game or make puzzles less obscure in nature. What we didn't do, 
however, is create an in-game hint system that will help new players solve 
those more obscure puzzles without having to consult an online hint doc. The 
hint system works in a way where the first time you get a hint it simply 
reminds you of what task you're attempting, which is a great way to come back 
into the game if you've left it or have forgotten what your objective may be. 
The next time you ask for a hint it's a little more specific without completely 
spoiling the solution and then of course the last time you ask for a hint the 
game out right tells you what to do and where to go.

With point and click style games now appearing on the Wii and DS is this a new 
golden age for the genre?

I love the resurgence we're seeing in classic point-and-click adventure games 
and obviously the Wii and DS both provide pointing devices that adapt quite 
well to that type of interface, but I'm not quite sure we've entered a new 
golden age quite yet. The point-and-click interface was an innovation created 
by LucasArts for adventure games back in the late 80's / early 90's, but how 
has that interface or the genre really evolved since? My eye is on innovations 
occurring in cinematic action / adventure games today in titles like BioShock, 
Heavy Rain, Alan Wake and the upcoming stuff we're doing at LucasArts. This is 
where I think we may start to see the beginning of a new golden age.

Why do you include the original graphics?

The original graphics and gameplay was our "get out of jail free" card. When 
putting together the pitch for what would eventually become the special edition 
it was very important in some way to include the original game. I figured, if 
we go and update all of the art, add visual effects, update the music, and add 
spoken dialogue there's going to be someone that just wanted to play the 
original game. At first I thought we may simply include an emulator, but as I 
discussed more about the special edition idea with the engineers they started 
to believe we could actually run the original SCUMM code and game under the 
updated content. Once we had that initially working we did a test where we 
switched from the updated features to the original game running underneath and 
everyone's jaw dropped at the comparison. At that point we knew we had 
something very, very cool.

Why do you think the Monkey Island series is held in such high regard?

Timeless story, humorous characters and a great, cinematic presentation that 
was way ahead of its time.

What was your favourite version of the original? PC or Amiga?

The PC. Growing up I had a Commodore 64 and remember playing Maniac Mansion on 
it fondly, but I'm sad to admit that I never upgraded to the Amiga, so I 
remember playing Monkey Island for the first time on my friend Roger's 
computer. All of our friends would gather at Roger's house every weekend 
because he was the kid who had the computer, the big TV and all of the game 
systems. We would order pizza and just play Monkey Island and all of the 
adventure games out at the time. Ah, good times!

Why do think comedy is such a rare commodity in today's games?

Dying is easy, comedy is hard. It's a combination of action games selling the 
most and not many people knowing how to write comedy well. There are of course 
exceptions to this. Valve is doing great, dark humour in Team Fortress 2 and 
Portal. And of course you can't talk about humour in games without discussing 
Tim Schafer and his amazing ability to put humour into everything he does. 
Still, those folks are the exception not the rule.

Does this mean a similar revamp of Monkey Island 2 is on the cards?

Fingers crossed. Ever since we announced the game everyone has been asking 
about Monkey Island 2, Maniac Mansion and all of our great adventure games. 
Monkey 2 is definitely high on my list, but the special edition is really a 
great big experiment to see what interest there is for these types of games and 
if people are interested in playing them on a console. If the fans really 
respond well, then I think it will be tough to say no to another one..
 