
Readers of the Guardian Northerner will have seen our recent piece 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/the-northerner/2012/sep/24/js-fletcher-yorkshire-most-prolific-writer-richmond-georgian-theatre-north-country>
 onNorth Country Theatre 
<http://www.harrogatetheatre.co.uk/page.aspx?parent=18aadf8c-40a3-46f7-bf6c-e960d786908e&showIdentifier=4886dca5-e948-4952-adf5-931f31c0d75a>
's production ofThe Lighthouse on Shivering Sands, adapted from a novel of 1911 
by Halifax-born and Wakefield-educated J.S.Fletcher.
 Makes you want to read on, doesn't it? The Lighthouse on Shivering Sands. 
While many other Yorkshire writers have enjoyed continuing popularity - think 
of Charlotte Bronte and her sisters orJB Priestley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/priestley> - Fletcher has rather faded from 
public consciousness. Indeed, on being asked to write this piece, this outpost 
of theNortherner believed that she had never previously heard of him, until she 
chanced on a battered copy of hisNooks and Corners of Yorkshire while dusting 
the bookshelves, itself a rare event...

In the pages relating to my own home of the Calder Valley, Fletcher writes:

In places like Ripponden, Mytholmroyd and Barkisland, any discerning traveller 
will see things which he will not find elsewhere in England


although annoyingly, he does not state what these things might be, going 
straight on to discuss theHalifax Gibbet 
<http://www.historylearningsite.co.uk/halifax_gibbet.htm>, and not returning to 
the villages. He does, however, give a helpful list of inns and hotels nearby; 
the two listed for Halifax, the White Swan and the Old Cock, are still there.

Fletcher was an immensely fast and prolific writer, which may be why he forgot 
to go back to the Calderdale curiosities. He wrote 237 books, more than any 
other Yorkshire person ever, which leaves me, as a fellow writer, exhausted 
simply thinking about it. Hisoeuvre spanned fiction, history, dialect and 
poetry.

Born in 1863, the son of a clergyman who died when his son was only eight 
months old, Joseph Smith Fletcher went on to become one of the leading 
exponents of crime-writing's'Golden Age'. 
<http://www.classiccrimefiction.com/goldenage.htm> Among his creations was the 
clerical detective Rev. Francis Leggatt, vicar of Meddersley, a place described 
in shorthand familiar today as being located 'away in the North.' Another 
creation was private investigator Ronald Camberwell, who features in several of 
Fletcher's books.

Loyally, Calderdale libraries 
<http://www.calderdale.gov.uk/leisure/libraries/index.html> still hold 131 of 
his titles, among them such enticing works asCobweb Castle and Dead Men's Money
, each one taking only a few weeks to polish off. Thanks in part toPresident 
Woodrow Wilson <http://www.whitehouse.gov/about/presidents/woodrowwilson>'s 
admiration for his work, especially his best-known titleMurder in the Middle 
Temple, Fletcher became better known in the United States than in Britain.

Originally a student of law, Fletcher switched to journalism for its greater 
excitement and worked on theLeeds Mercury and the Yorkshire Post. His wholly 
inappropriate byline for an urban child who continued to live and work in 
cities was 'Son of the Soil'. His plots often revolve around clever swindles, 
rather than murder, and he is quoted as saying:

I believe I got my interest in criminology right from the fact that a famous 
case of fraud was heard at the Quarter Sessions at a town where I was at school 
- its circumstances were unusual and mysterious and the truth hard to get at; 
oddly enough, I have never yet used this as the basis of a story.
Then, when I left school, I meant to be a barrister and I read criminal law 
and attended a great many queer trials for some time. But turning to journalism 
instead, I knew of a great many queer cases on famous murder trials. Also, I 
learnt a good deal about criminology in conversations with the lateHB Irving  
<http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/ACirving.htm>the famous actor, who was an 
expert.
 Fletcher knew the importance of a romantic element, even in haunted 
lighthouses up north. 
Another of his singular traits was creating a setting for his financial 
whodunnits which comprised a bank with bedrooms attached which helped the plots 
to rattle entertainingly along. Such arrangements were not uncommon in northern 
cities, where bankers and accountants liked to stay close to their work during 
times of crisis or major audit or not infrequently didn't just stay late at the 
office, but slept there.

Fletcher married the Irish writer, Rosamond Grant Langbridge, with whom he had 
a son. He was made a Fellow of the Royal Historical Society, and died in 1935. 
It is time for a revival of interest in his work and perhaps North Country 
Theatre's choice of play will get that under way.

Michael Nunn, who reviews plays at Lancaster for the Northerner from time to 
time, adds:

I was delighted to see your kind mention of my relative by marriage Joseph 
Smith Fletcher. His son, Rev Valentine Fletcher, married my late father's 
cousin, Phyllis Muriel (Mary) Hinckley, the daughter of a Birmingham 
schoolmaster, Arthur Hinckley MC MSc. The Hinckleys, including my grandmother 
Emily Jane, were originally from Altofts and Normanton, West Riding.

Mary Fletcher went to Oxford in the 1920s and worked as a teacher and 
examiner. Valentine himself was at Oriel, Oxford, and served as an Anglican 
priest in Elland, Bradford, Duxford in Cambridgeshire, Dundee Cathedral and 
Littlemore in Oxfordshire. He published a monograph,Newman's Oxford, in the 
1970s.

I am of course delighted (not least as a mere journalist but as one who's just 
had a newly-devised evening of rehearsed readings performed in Lancaster's 
Grand Theatre) that JSF's work is being reappraised and indeed performed. He 
certainly was a leading figure in early C20 detective fiction, owing not a 
little to Dickens and Conan Doyle. He also published guidebooks to his beloved 
North, including historical city guides to Leeds and Sheffield. Since a recent 
downsizing move I've given my Fletcher collection to our local Oxfam Bookshop, 
but I'm sure there are still plenty of his works available if one looks inthe 
right places <http://www.detective-fiction.com/js-fletcher.htm>.
 