
You’ve found your place through Clearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> and decided to defer for a 
year, or perhaps you have simply decided to apply next year. Either way, you 
are now in the enviable, and perhaps slightly scary, position of having a whole 
year to fill.


Tens of thousands of young people from the UK will head overseas to work this 
summer – to bolster experience, earn money to travel, and widen their skill 
sets – and you could now be one of them.

Although there is, of course, something to be said for going it alone in 
foreign lands, a gap year of purely backpacking is becoming less common; most 
young people are opting to do some kind of volunteering or work while abroad.

Tim Fryer, STA Travel’s UK country manager, says: “Today’s young people are 
under more pressure than ever to have broad work experience and an impressive 
CV to show future employers or university admissions boards.

“Heading overseas to work somewhere such as Australia or New Zealand on a 
Working Holiday Visa, teaching English abroad, doing an internship, or taking 
part in a volunteering or conservation project – these are all great ways of 
doing this.”

He adds that it’s not just about boosting career prospects: “These sorts of 
experiences also boost life skills, confidence and maturity, as they completely 
immerse you in a community and place.”

The volunteer route

Jennie Mann spent her gap year volunteering in Costa Rica – “living in 
hammocks in the rainforest and chopping down bamboo with a machete to build 
footpaths” – and in Nicaragua, helping build an aqueduct to provide homes with 
running water. Her top tip is to organise your gap year through an organisation 
such asRaleigh International <https://raleighinternational.org/> or 
International Citizen Service (ICS) <http://www.volunteerics.org/>, both of 
which provide bursaries. “They give structure and safety to young people as 
well as the freedom to explore countries and meet new friends,” she says. “You 
get great leadership skills that look fantastic on your CV.”

Raleigh International’s Mike Butcher says joining an expedition is a good way 
to make friends if you’re travelling alone: “You’ll be in a team of about 12 
volunteers, from a diverse range of backgrounds, including volunteers from the 
country in which you’re working. Each team then has a volunteer manager, who is 
there to facilitate the project and support you.

“If you’re considering some independent travel after your programmes, 
volunteering first might just give you the confidence to do it – and, in all 
likelihood, some travel buddies.”

He adds: “Whatever you choose to do, make sure you are passionate about it.” 

My amazing gap year diary

Emily Potter from Bristol has spent her gap year working, volunteering and 
backpacking. At the end of August she flies home to start studying at Leeds 
University

Autumn 2015

Having had summer off after my A-levels, I’m now saving money for travelling. 
I mainly do events waitressing and bartending. It is definitely not boring, but 
it is quite unpredictable, sometimes going from no shifts for a couple of days 
to three in one day.

Christmas 2015

In the new year, my adventure begins. My first stop is Morocco, where I’ll be 
volunteering withEducation For All (EFA)  
<http://www.efamorocco.org/get-involved/volunteer.html>which helps girls in the 
very rural High Atlas mountains finish their education. My own school’s been 
supporting the organisation for years so I’d heard a lot about it. It seems 
like a great opportunity to get to know a country and a culture I’m interested 
in. People keep asking if I’m nervous to go away but I’m too excited to be 
nervous.

January 2016

I’ve arrived in Asni, Morocco. Everyone has been very welcoming and lovely, 
but it was a little daunting being introduced to about 35 girls in such a short 
space of time – and after so little sleep.

February 2016

My main job as a volunteer is helping the girls who live in EFA’s boarding 
houses with their English and French. I help a lot with homework, and the group 
“lessons” I lead consist mainly of games and debates, but any chance to 
practise is useful for them. There is also always some project on the go, like 
repainting all the plant pots on the roof, or redoing the displays. If there is 
nothing to do, then we go and play football.

March 2016

Being of a similar age to the girls has helped me make really good friends. A 
couple of them invited me to stay with their families for the weekend, which 
was so much fun. I have even been to an Amazigh (Berber) wedding. They dressed 
me in a Kaftan and we danced until 6am and then walked home half way up a 
mountain. It started snowing and we were all wearing heels, and we had one 
torch between the five of us but because we were all so tired, we thought it 
was the funniest thing. That was one of my best moments.

April 2016

After leaving Asni, I travelled through Morocco to Tangier, before getting the 
ferry to Spain and flying to Budapest to do some interrailing around Europe 
with my best friend. We’re in Prague now. We spent the day wandering around and 
there’s so much to see and the city is beautiful. We had no plan so we just got 
lost for a couple of hours and took every opportunity to eat interesting 
looking food.

May 2016

I flew home from Brussels and now I’m getting ready for my next adventure – 
Nicaragua. I first went there when I was 16 and I really wanted to come back to 
explore it more. I’m going to do an internship at a place called Casa Xalteva 
in Granada. It’s great because it’s a non-profit Spanish school that funds an 
educational programme for underprivileged local children and adolescents.

June 2016

I usually have Spanish lessons in the morning and then spend the afternoons 
getting all my work done. My internship involves me doing all the admin, so my 
days are mainly spent emailing potential students and making sure everything is 
set up for their time studying here.

July 2016

In September, I’m going to Leeds University to study French and Arabic. It’s 
exciting, but at the moment I’m more excited about being in Nicaragua and 
exploring Central America. Granada is close to a lot of really amazing places, 
including an enormous lake full of tiny islands, a crater lake, two volcanoes, 
the capital city Managua, and the Pacific coast. I have a lot of options for 
exploring so I just pick a place when I have time and visit.


Gap year top tips

 * Do your research. If you want to volunteer, find out about the 
organisation, ask difficult questions, and make sure they’re reputable.

 * Go to a country where you can get a work visa. Combining work and 
backpacking is easy in countries such as Australia and New Zealand meaning you 
don’t have to save quite as much. Plus working in a country is one of the best 
ways to get under its skin.

 * Think outside the box, initiatives such as Help Exchange 
<https://www.helpx.net/> enable you to help families or businesses in exchange 
for food and accommodation – a really cheap way to see the world. Just check 
the reviews from previous helpers first!

 * Consider staying in the UK and finding a meaningful opportunity here. 
Volunteering Matters <https://volunteeringmatters.org.uk/> has full-time 
opportunities for young people wishing to live away from home for six months or 
a year while making a difference in this country.

 * Overall, think about the impact you want to make, and go out and do it.
 