
This week, the entire US film industry will descend upon Park City, Utah for 
the 33rd annualSundance film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundancefilmfestival>. While journalists 
there scrabble to reheat last year’s takes on the future of indie film-making, 
the rest of the world – or at least those of us tragic enough to keep tabs on 
the festival circuit – will wait with baited breath to see which of the 
festival’s 100-odd films are declared the breakouts.

Once upon a time, such a designation practically guaranteed a film’s success 
out in the wider world. Now, while plenty of Sundance movies do manage to cross 
over, many of those anointed by the festival’s hype machine do not. The hottest 
entry at last year’s edition was undoubtedly the slave rebellion drama The 
Birth Of A Nation, but, after selling for $17.5m, the film went on to become a 
box-office flop best known for itsdirector’s historic rape charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/30/nate-parker-birth-of-a-nation-rape-allegation-60-minutes-interview>
.

Meanwhile, German-American coming-of-age tale Morris From America won a pair 
of major awards at Sundance, but made so little impact beyond the festival 
circuit that its straight-to-video UK release this week barely registers as a 
fall from grace.

Newcomer Markees Christmas <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm6192976/> plays Morris, 
a 13-year-old introvert and aspiring rapper forced to move from New York to the 
German city of Heidelberg by his football coach father. Separated from his 
classmates by a linguistic barrier he struggles to overcome, Morris is also a 
lone black face in an overwhelmingly white place, a distinction that colours 
his interactions with everyone from high-school bullies to his kooky language 
tutor. Even Katrin, Morris’s sympathetic German crush, is prone to reductive 
racial assumptions about her new American beau.

Sadly, such complexities fail to lift what’s largely a familiar exercise in 
adolescent myth-making. Strip away Morris’s hip-hop ambitions and idiosyncratic 
German lessons and you’re left with the same flatly timid protagonist through 
which film-makers have been filtering their vestigial teenage angst for decades.

As a result, Morris From America is catnip to middle-aged viewers nostalgic 
for their own formative years – a demographic in ample supply at Sundance – but 
may mean little to anyone else. Real-life teens in particular are likely to 
find the film foreign to their experiences, and not just because of its 
setting. In one scene, Morris finds a dirt-ridden porn mag by the side of the 
road and delightedly takes it home, acting out a 1980s rite of passage that was 
cliched then, and feels downright farcical in the age of PornHub.
 