
People in the UK and many other countries get more of their calories from 
alcohol than from sugary drinks like cola and lemonade, according to new data 
which suggests that tackling Britain’s drink problem may be more important for 
health than cracking down on sugar consumption.

Of 24 countries tracked by the data analysts Euromonitor International, all 
but one have higher daily calorie consumption from alcoholic drinks than sugary 
beverages. In the UK, adults are consuming more than 106 calories per head 
every day from alcoholic drinks, compared with 98 from sugar-sweetened drinks.

Theresa May's first test was obesity and she has failed, say health experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/21/theresa-mays-first-test-was-obesity-strategy-and-she-has-failed-health-experts-say>
The highest calorie intake from alcohol is in South Korea, with nearly 168 
calories a person each day and only 44 calories from sugary drinks. Also high 
are Poland, the Czech Republic, Finland and Germany while – of the countries 
examined – only the people of Taiwan get more calories from sweet drinks than 
alcohol. The US was not included.
Calories from sugar and alcohol 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-14T15:02:10/embed.html>
Sugar <https://www.theguardian.com/society/sugar> has been targeted by health 
experts and obesity campaigners. A number of governments are introducing taxes 
on sugar-sweetened drinks which are recognised as a major cause of childhood 
obesity.

But little has been said or done about alcohol, which the new data suggests is 
more significant even than sugary drinks in obesity in adults. Most people are 
unaware that alcohol can make you gain weight, because – unlike food – the 
number of calories are not routinely marked on beer cans and bottles of wines 
and spirits. Yet a large glass of 13% wine contains 228 calories and a standard 
glass 160 calories. A pint of 4% beer is also around 160 calories.

“In the UK, alcoholic drinks above 1.2% ABV are currently exempt from having 
to provide calorie information. This research demonstrates clearly that this 
exemption should now end,” said Prof Sir Ian Gilmore, chair of the alcohol 
health alliance.


“The public have the right to know what is in their drinks, so they can make 
informed choices about their consumption. These labels should make the public 
aware, for example, that a pint of standard-strength beer contains around 180 
calories, about the same as a packet of crisps, and that a large glass of red 
wine contains around 200 calories, roughly equivalent to the calories found in 
a doughnut.”


Euromonitor’s nutrition analyst, Sara Petersson, said this did not let sugar 
off the hook. “It is very interesting because the whole reason why soft drinks 
are under attack is because they are liquid calories. We don’t have a 
compensatory mechanism that says we should eat less after drinking them,” she 
said. “It works the same way with alcohol and if anything, not only does it 
have a worse health effect but it is an appetite stimulant which makes you eat 
more. That is not to take anything away from the need to reduce sugar. That is 
crucial because it is a very important source of weight gain.”

But, she said, tackling alcohol consumption was also crucial to combatting 
obesity, which can lead to heart disease, type 2 diabetes and cancer, and was 
in danger of crippling health systems around the world.

Euromonitor’s nutrition data <http://www.euromonitor.com/nutrition-industry> 
also shows that the average daily consumption of calories in the world is 1,398 
calories, with the lowest amount in India at 761 calories per capita per day 
and the highest in Belgium at 2,559 calories per capita per day. It also shows 
that most of the developing countries it tracked (78%) get more calories from 
packaged food than fresh food.
 