
MPs have accepted hospitality with a value of more than £1,000 from 
authoritarian regimes in the Middle East and north Africa on 107 occasions in 
the last decade, a Guardian investigation has revealed.

Fifty-nine current and former MPs, including Alan Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan>, Liam Fox and Keith Vaz, have 
accepted flights, accommodation and hospitality from regimes including those of 
Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Yemen.

MPs have had to log donations and hospitality on the register of members' 
interests, and also – if donations are worth £1,000 or more – with the 
Electoral Commission since 2000. The Guardian has analysed the commission's 
returns relating to the Middle East to see which countries provide the most 
high-value hospitality to parliamentarians.

Qatar tops the rankings with 32 trips, at a value of £109,400, followed by 
Bahrain with 18 trips worth £42,700 and Oman, with 16 trips at £45,040.

Several of the Oman visits were made by Alan Duncan, minister of state at the 
Department for International Development, who accepted more high-value trips 
than any other MP.

Duncan visited Oman on seven occasions at the government's expense, including 
to attend Sultan Qaboos's 40th birthday celebrations last December. Duncan was 
also on a cross-party visit to Bahrain in 2009. In total, Duncan accepted 
hospitality worth more than £21,000 from the two countries.

A spokesman for Duncan said all hospitality received complied with 
parliamentary rules.

"Alan is a Middle East specialist," he said. "He has been going to the region 
in a personal and official capacity for 30 years. Any hospitality has been 
fully declared in the register according to House of Commons rules."

Department of Health minister Simon Burns accepted the most trips after 
Duncan, visiting Qatar on four occasions, and the UAE and Bahrain once each. 
The total value of his visits was £22,000.

There were also several cases in which MPs accepted sponsored trips to the 
Middle East funded by outside organisations; the culture secretary,Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, for example, declared he 
received flights and hospitality worth £1,065 from the British Syrian society 
for a three-day visit to the country in May 2007.

Former international development secretary Clare Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/clareshort> accepted £1,580 worth of 
flights, hotel accommodation, food and travel expenses from al-Manar television 
in Lebanon in 2008. Al-Manar is described by the US government as "the media 
arm of the Hezbollah terrorist network", and was classed as a specially 
designated terrorist entity by the US in 2006.

Short said her trip had been registered with Commons authorities and that the 
visit allowed her to see how reconstruction in southern Lebanon was proceeding 
after the country's conflict with Israel in 2006.

"I did an interview for the TV programme and was free to express my views 
without censure, and I also met with senior Hezbollah officials," she said. "I 
do not accept US advice on who I should speak to. UK diplomats also talk with 
Hezbollah. I have also met with Hamas leaders on a number of occasions as well 
as Fatah leaders, and the Syrian and Lebanese governments."

Vaz is the only MP on the Electoral Commission's register to have had 
hospitality from the Yemeni government, which paid the £2,000 costs of his 
visit in 2006 with the all-party group for Yemen. A spokeswoman for Vaz said he 
was the chair of the MPs' group and that he had been born in the country. She 
added that he had paid the cost of flights for subsequent visits, though 
entries on the register of members' interests do show some internal travel and 
hospitality funded by the Yemeni government.

Top destinations

Trips by country

Qatar 32

Bahrain 18

Oman 16

Egypt 12

UAE 10

Saudi 8

Kuwait 4

Jordan 3

Tunisia 2

Yemen 1

Syria 1
 