
Amid the natural disasters, Libyan turmoil, rising unemployment and the 
European debt crisis, it's nice to know wealthy consumers around the world are 
still out there buying posh leather handbags.

Mulberry has just issued its third profit upgrade in four months, saying that 
strong UK and export sales during January and February has continued into 
March. It added:

Margins for the year to date have continued to be strong, as increased sales 
have led to improved operational gearing. Order intake for the Autumn 2011 
collection is encouraging.

Mulberry's shares - tightly held as they are - have jumped 159p to £13.79, a 
13% increase. Philip Dorgan at the company's broker Altium said:
 We are moving our top line forecast ahead by 3% to £120m. However, this has a 
much larger impact upon profits, because higher full price sales means higher 
gross margins and greater volume growth means that operational gearing benefits 
operating margins. We are therefore increasing our 2011 pretax profit forecast 
by 16%, from £18.5m to £21.5m.

Mulberry's brand has become both relevant and desirable to the global 
consumer. But it barely has a toe in some of the world's largest luxury goods 
markets. As this changes, we expect sales momentum to continue and this will 
have a leveraging effect upon operating margins, which we expect to climb to 
over 20%. In January, we significantly
upgraded our target price from 1,000p to 2,000p on the basis of 5.7 times 2013 
sales, a premium to the European luxury goods sector, but we think that this is 
deserved, considering the potential for both growth and superior operating 
margins.

Meanwhile FinnCap's David Stoddart was also positive:
 News this morning that Mulberry has once again outperformed our revenue 
expectations triggers the latest in a series of forecast upgrades for 2011 and 
beyond. The continuing stream of upgrades is, however, only part of the reason 
for our continuing buy recommendation despite the high rating. The global 
potential for what remains a relatively small business offers the scope for 
strong profits growth for many years. It is to management's credit that the 
business remains under control despite the seemingly breakneck speed of revenue 
growth. Cash balances continue to build so Mulberry is well-placed to sustain 
rapid growth. 
For more confirmation that posh products are in demand, upmarket cooker maker 
Aga Rangemaster has reported a jump in full year profits, from £0.5m to £19.9m, 
with a steady growth in sales throughout the year.
 