
I’m a 30-year-old man and I was in an emotionally abusive relationship for 
five years. She controlled all aspects of the relationship, frequently breaking 
up then changing her mind. We only met at large social events or hotel rooms in 
her home city. After one particular break-up, she decided that calling what we 
had a relationship made her uncomfortable and I was banned from doing so for 
the final year of what we had. She was dismissive, cold and would often go 
silent for long periods until I was begging her to tell me what was wrong 
(usually something I’d done). I adored her, and know now that I was addicted to 
her and her approval. 

Two years ago, she broke up with me for good. My confidence was shattered, I 
spiralled drastically, and resorted to harmful behaviours to cope. Since then, 
she has continued to manipulate me, one day telling me she missed me then the 
next saying we shouldn’t speak any more or that we never should have dated. I 
often found myself apologising for things that happened years ago in an attempt 
to keep her on side. I have a huge problem with loss, and the idea of losing my 
“best friend” of five-plus years terrified me. 

Around the same time as the break-up, I met someone who has been an emotional 
anchor through everything. She’s been the first person I’ve trusted since my 
ex, and she has helped me to manage my harmful behaviours, as well as help me 
understand that my previous relationship was not normal and has caused 
significant damage. We have become emotionally and physically intimate since 
January. However, this has been difficult at times because I know she wants to 
be in a proper, established relationship, but I still feel emotionally unable 
to label what we have as that.

Since becoming close to someone new, my ex has being very nice again, sending 
photos of herself in underwear, reminiscing about the good times we had, and 
being very public about how close we are, despite not seeing each other in 
months. She has gone out of her way to make the new person in my life 
uncomfortable, but I have done nothing to stop that beyond telling her that we 
were seeing each other.

I want to be free of my ex and her toxic influence, but I’m finding it nearly 
impossible to cut her out completely. In the meantime, someone I’m very close 
to and don’t want to lose is getting increasingly frustrated at my inability to 
commit to her, while still putting me and my needs first. 

It is a feature of an abusive, controlling relationship that the person so 
plays with your mind that you no longer know who you are. Because they are so 
controlling, you also lose the ability – and confidence – to think for yourself.

Such relationships are deeply damaging and that damage can continue for a 
while after the relationship has ended, because that person has defined you so 
completely. And you have not severed contact with her, so her influence 
continues.

One line of yours really jumped out at me: “She’s been the first person I’ve 
trusted since my ex.” But you could not trust your ex. Do you have a role model 
for someone – male or female – who has never, truly let you down, who puts you 
first? I would also have liked to know more about your problem with loss and 
where it stems from. Apart from a fleeting mention of other friends in your 
longer letter, what is your general support network like? Where is your family? 
What anchors and grounds you?

It’s possible that neither of these two women is right for you. I wonder if 
you could get some distance from both to find out a bit more about yourself. 
Perhaps you can’t give your new “girlfriend” what she wants because it’s not 
what you want, lovely and supportive though she sounds? And even though this 
relationship may seem entirely the opposite to the last one, and so very much 
better, it may still not be right for you, at this time.

There is no doubt at all, however, that your ex is not good for you. You know 
that. I’m afraid the only way to be free of your ex is to free yourself from 
her and give her no purchase on your life. This will be hard, but I do believe 
you are ready to do this: if you do nothing, nothing with change. Only then can 
you really see what this new relationship holds for you.

I think it would be hugely beneficial to talk to someone outside your circle 
of friends (all of whom, however well meaning, will have their own agendas). 
You can be totally honest with someone neutral and I do think that it is 
important to really explore why your ex still has a hold on you. However, I 
want to make it clear that her abusive behaviour was not your fault – she alone 
must take responsibility for that.

The Men’s Advice Line (mensadviceline.org.uk 
<http://www.mensadviceline.org.uk/>, tel 0808 801 0327) offers support on the 
phone or by email. There is also advice online but I urge you to ring and speak 
to one of their specialists, who will have specialist knowledge of male victims 
of abusive relationships.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB  <https://twitter.com/annalisab>
 