
My boyfriend almost never initiates sex with me. We’ve talked about it, but 
never seem to get to the bottom of why this is. I enjoy being sexually 
assertive, but want to feel passion from him. I know he enjoys the sex, but I’m 
feeling fed up. I have been thinking about asking him to have an open 
relationship as I feel so frustrated. It would help if he communicated with me, 
but he does not tell me why.

My wife prefers masturbation to having sex with me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/09/my-wife-prefers-masturbation-to-having-sex-with-me>
Your boyfriend is communicating with you, in his own way. You understand what 
he is telling you, but don’t like the message. Good communication is a two-way 
process. It is a vital aspect of every area of your relationship – not just 
sex. If you are a person who needs more than grunts and bare minimum 
intercourse. you will have to make that clear, and educate him about your own 
needs. Do this without laying blame. Gently explain your feelings of 
frustration, and ask for what you want in an inspiring manner. There is a big 
difference between a seductive invitation for him to take the initiative, and a 
threat or ultimatum. Everyone has a unique set of erotic triggers, and it takes 
partners time to learn these things. Rather than settling for what is first 
offered, it is well worth making an effort to request alternatives before the 
“rut” occurs. Many people are willing to please their partners but just don’t 
know exactly how.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 