
I’ve been with my boyfriend for two years and we have a stable, loving and 
wonderful relationship. The only problem is there’s a significant age gap – I’m 
25 and he’s 48. If it wasn’t for this, we’d probably be heading towards 
marriage and a family in the near future, but we both have some serious 
reservations about whether continuing is the best thing for me. Mutual friends 
have encouraged us to go for it, and I’m sure that things would be great for 
the next 20 years or so, but we have to be pragmatic and think beyond that.

Realistically, I wouldn’t expect him to live past his mid 80s at best. While I 
am not particularly worried about my children having an older father (my 
siblings and I did), the thought of being a widow for 20-plus years terrifies 
me. I don’t think I could be happy or fulfilled in the long term without anyone 
to come home to or to share my daily life with. I have trawled the internet for 
stories of women who had been widowed at about this age and what I found wasn’t 
just sad – it was horrific. Almost without exception the women talked about 
wanting to die, even years after their husbands’ deaths, and many said the only 
reason they kept going was to avoid upsetting their children. The possibility 
of my husband becoming ill and incapacitated at a stage where I want to be 
active and travel also weighs heavily on my mind.

We have discussed these issues openly and at length, and have made multiple 
attempts to pull away from each other. We have tried to cease contact and have 
even been living in different cities for the past year, but, as neither of us 
wants to be apart, we can’t make any of it stick. Just the thought of seeing 
someone else makes me feel sick and anxious. And there’s no guarantee that 
separating would mean I’d find someone with whom I’d be happier.

Things can’t keep going on like this – I need to commit or walk away, but I 
feel paralysed. Neither is a choice I want to make and I’m afraid of being 
filled with regret years down the track.

I’ve been thinking about your letter for some weeks now and what strikes me is 
your overthinking. You are exploring every possibility, every scenario and in 
so doing you are, as you say, paralysing yourself. Because you are largely 
exploring the negatives, with every thought of “what if …” you end with a 
sadness, a disaster. That’s exhausting and pernicious.

You say: 'I know I need to commit or walk away,' but actually, you don’t

We tend to overthink when we are anxious and this was one of the first things 
psychotherapist and couples counsellor Chris Mills picked up on. He felt this 
might be why “you are attracted to a man who, chronologically, could be your 
father [perhaps because he gives you authority or makes you feel safer]. I’m 
not making any negative judgment about the age gap, as manyage-divergent 
relationships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/aug/15/age-gap-soros-peoples-panel>
 are very happy and successful – as long as the age difference isn’t the main 
element driving the attraction.”

When we are anxious or unsure, we also want rock-solid guarantees and tend to 
think in black and white. You say, “I know I need to commit or walk away,” but 
actually, you don’t. Sometimes the most proactive thing you can do is … nothing.

As Mills says: “There’s no obvious definitive answer to your dilemma, and not 
surprisingly you wish there were. You’re reaching for a perfect solution. 
You’re also trying to map out a risk-free future. Sadly, neither exist and 
wouldn’t even if you and your boyfriend were similar ages. But why the urgency 
in either committing or walking away? This question is too important to rush. 
You’ve got time. I suggest you carry on enjoying each other’s company and carry 
on talking, and my guess is that in the next few years there’ll be fresh 
information that will help you both decide. And anyway the decision is just as 
much your boyfriend’s as it is yours.”

Large age gaps in a relationship: our readers respond | The people's panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/aug/15/age-gap-soros-peoples-panel>
I was struck by how catastrophic you felt losing a partner would be and how 
your life would be, in essence, not worth living. While few would relish the 
thought of losing a partner, there are many examples of people leading 
successful and fulfilling lives after the death of one. I feel this needs 
further exploration, because if you are prone to anxiety, you will find 
something to catastrophise about in any relationship you go into. I worry you 
are looking for resilience outside of yourself. What has made you so much in 
need of absolute certainty?

When a decision is so vast, and with this many variables, the key is to 
shorten the focus. Think about the next year or two. Think about your own self, 
your life, as well as that with your partner. Do nothing just yet, because I 
don’t think you are ready to. Remember that if you split up and it’s not the 
right thing to do, this has the ability to affect all your future 
relationships, so this relationship has the ability to have an impact, even if 
you don’t stay in it. You need to explore it further, either until it’s no 
longer right for you, or you feel going forward with it is. You need to split 
or stay for concrete reasons, not based on a projection of what might happen.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU, or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
 