
I have a problem talking to my family about gender issues, sexism and 
feminism. I find there is a lot of latent and underlying sexism in how members 
of my family conduct their lives. That isn’t to say they aren’t good people – 
they are. They don’t believe women should be unequal, yet they are unwilling or 
unable to see that, in so many ways, we are.

I am 22 and have finished university, and my experiences have educated me 
about feminism and sexism. I have been treated badly by previous boyfriends and 
have had various difficult problems relating to consent and sex. I have come to 
realise just how important feminism is in everyday life and how easy it is for 
people to live their lives and not realise they are being disrespectful 
or sexist. I’ve realised how many subtle acts (calling a woman a slut, 
believing you have ownership over a woman in a club, leering and nodding 
approvingly at a woman on the street) can affect someone’s mental health or 
self-perception.

I tried to tell my 21-year-old brother that calling women “birds” was 
unacceptable and he talked over me, telling me it was just a joke, to change 
the subject, that he wasn’t interested, to stop going on like “that”. Whatever 
“that” is, I don’t think he sees it in a positive light.

My mother believes I preach too much, and people are allowed their own 
opinions. I don’t see sexism as an opinion and don’t believe that anyone is 
entitled to their sexist beliefs. I can’t help feeling that I must change these 
beliefs in my family but don’t know how to go about it as they are so 
unreceptive and close-minded. They see me as a hysterical woman preaching on a 
soap box to them about something they don’t want to acknowledge or see as a 
priority. Is it too late – are sexism and patriarchy too ingrained? Is there 
any way I can bring up these subjects in a certain manner so they are better 
received? After being so badly treated by men viewing me as an object this is 
an issue close to my heart, my family being so unreceptive is extremely hurtful.

Very few people will respond to having their views challenged with: “Thanks 
for that, you’ve completely changed my mind.”

The first thing to try to remember is that new/contradictory information 
presented in a gentler manner is more likely to “go in”. It’s really difficult, 
though, when the subject matter is so important and you feel so passionately 
about something. But if you want to change the way someone thinks, you just 
can’t go in all guns blazing, because it won’t alter anything – if you shout or 
preach (and I’m not saying you are) all people tend to notice is the method of 
delivery, not the information being imparted.

I contacted Hera Cook, a historian of feminism, women and sexuality, for her 
advice on how you could move things along in your family.

“Basically,” she says, “you can’t ask your family members to change how they 
live. You can only share ideas, and there are few easy ways to share ideas that 
challenge people’s everyday behaviour.”

I think it’s that everyday behaviour that can be the most pernicious.

“Think of it,” continues Cook, “as a long-term project and focus on your own 
life. It’s hard enough to change our own behaviour [let alone that of others].”

Cook suggests “sticking to concrete events – your mother probably works and 
may well get paid less than men for doing work of equivalent value. You can 
bring up issues like this when they arise.

“You can also change your own behaviour,” says Cook. “For example, you might 
refuse to do more housework tasks than your brother, or ask him to share work 
when you do it. This will arouse conflict but it will be understood in a way 
that theoretical arguments won’t be.”

The other thing I would suggest is reflective listening. When we think we are 
right about something, the tendency is to try to tell people in a passionate 
way. We are so keen to get our own point of view across, we rarely listen to 
the other. But I think this may be a powerful tool for you. Let your family 
explain their thinking and ask them questions about it: this is a great way to 
get people to think about their behaviour without telling them to change it.

So for example, ask your brother how women might feel when he calls them 
“birds”. Are there any words that men are called that leave him feeling 
uncomfortable? He might not admit it to you, but this will hopefully set him 
off thinking. When your mum says you preach, ask her: “What do you 
feel passionately about, Mum? How do you get yourself heard in this family?” 
Ask them what they feel about issues that are important to you and then discuss 
them.

Cook also wonders if your family talks about the news and current affairs? “If 
so, you can put your perspective in those discussions without directly 
demanding that your family change. If they don’t, could you start buying a 
newspaper (if you don’t already)? It means you will have a physical item that 
you can ask your family whether they saw or liked, and perhaps draw some of 
them into it.”

Your problems solved

Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB 
<https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 