
My husband divorced his first wife 20 years ago. They have one child, with 
whom he has a difficult relationship. I am a relatively recent addition to the 
family and was not entangled in his messy breakup. His ex-wife is best friends 
with some family members, who, out of loyalty, cannot fully embrace me. She is 
still included in family emails, her birthday is acknowledged, gifts are 
exchanged, she stays in the family home when she visits (sometimes for several 
weeks) and joins the family for Christmas. They sometimes mix us up and call me 
by her name.

The first wife has spoken ill of me and my husband. Even though I am 
financially independent with my own assets, and we have a pre-nup, the ex and 
child fear my grabbing his inheritance. He thinks it normal for families to 
include ex-partners to this extent and feels I ought to accept it.

This is my second marriage too, and while I keep in touch with my ex-husband’s 
family, I restrict contact to sending good wishes at Christmas and on special 
birthdays. I accept that I am not part of that family any more, even though my 
own child is. I have never discussed matters of inheritance with my ex or tried 
to influence his will for my child. I cannot accept what seems like an unusual 
status quo in my husband’s family. I feel excluded and disrespected. Am I being 
unreasonable?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 