
My husband and I are in our mid-50s and have been together for 30 years. 
I cannot remember the last time we had sex – it was at least four years ago. 
The last few times, he found it difficult and lost his erection. I don’t know 
why, and I think I felt that maybe it was me somehow. The problem is that we 
have no intimacy at all. He has never been terribly demonstrative physically, 
and I wonder if this is because his parents never were, but now we never touch, 
never hold hands, never cuddle.

Occasionally, I have tried, but it is very obvious that he doesn’t want 
me near him – he becomes stiff and awkward until I let go. At the moment, every 
conversation we have turns into an argument and, at times, it seems better not 
to talk at all. Hence the idea of even starting to become close again is not 
something I feel I want to do. I see other couples our age holding hands and 
being affectionate – even my parents, who are now 80.

I feel lonely. Our two children will soon both be gone. I often think about 
leaving him, but the reality is very difficult to think about. We have very 
little pension between us and our future depends on selling up and possibly 
buying somewhere smaller. If I were to leave him, we would both struggle for 
money, and I would certainly have no option of retiring from my job, which I 
find very stressful.

We live as housemates. We share things, we do things as a family sometimes, we 
eat together and share cooking, etc. We don’t spend evenings together. We go 
out as a couple maybe once a year.

I yearn for some love and affection from someone and, although I could go on 
as I am, when I think of the next 30 years or so without this, especially when 
my children have left, I feel very down. I don’t know what to do. I wouldn’t 
know how to begin to leave him as I have nowhere to go, cannot afford to rent 
somewhere else, and don’t want to leave our lovely house. I am going round in 
circles and, meanwhile, month after month, year after year goes by. I wish I 
could just have a break from him in the hope that we could then continue, and 
make a new start.

Some couples have no, or little, sex but a lot of intimacy, and function well 
and are happy. Some couples have a great sex life but little else. The key is 
what both of you are happy with, and you are clearly not happy.

The lack of intimacy seems to bother you the most, which isn’t surprising. 
Intimacy – which a specialist in relationships once described to me as “knowing 
absolutely what was going on with the other person” – is really about 
communication and that seems to be sorely lacking. Communication is hugely 
important in relationships.

Typically, when a man loses his erection, the partner personalises it and then 
retreats
Jo Coker 
I consulted Jo Coker, a psychosexual therapist (cosrt.org.uk 
<http://www.cosrt.org.uk/>), who said: “This is such a common problem and 
usually it is disguising other major problems.”

The erectile dysfunction is not something to discount easily and should, Coker 
advises, be medically checked out in the first instance. Has your husband been 
to seen a GP? I appreciate that it is a difficult subject for you to bring up 
with him.

“Typically,” Coker explains, “when a man loses his erection, the partner 
personalises it and then retreats. What then tends to happen is people become 
more distant. They don’t communicate and every conversation turns into an 
argument.” Furthermore, what may be happening if your partner fears erectile 
dysfunction again, is that he will fear physical closeness and you in turn 
interpret that as rejection. And so it goes on.

Coker continues: “His parents not being overly affectionate with each other 
doesn’t necessarily explain why your husband is like this. His parents’ 
generation tended not to be so demonstrative.” Although we note that you say 
your parents are very affectionate together – this may throw your own 
relationship into starker relief.

I think it is very much worth trying to reconnect, because you can’t really 
think about splitting up if you haven’t tried as far as possible to fix this. 
I think therapy would really help you: either try your GP or find an accredited 
local therapist through the College of Sexual and Relationship Therapists site (
cosrt.org.uk/information-for-members-of-the-public/therapist-listing 
<http://www.cosrt.org.uk/information-for-members-of-the-public/therapist-listing/>
) .

It would be most beneficial if you could go to therapy together, but you can’t 
make your husband go. I appreciate that even asking him to go may be too much 
at the moment – but, remember, you can have couples therapy on your own and he 
can join you later, or not at all. It would be amazingly beneficial for you to 
talk in a safe place – this problem is nothing to be ashamed of.

What you and your husband need is communication and when you do eventually sit 
down and talk, it will be amazing what comes out. I always think that seeing 
yourself through someone else’s eyes can be incredibly intimate, or incredibly 
alienating. That is the risk, but either way it is illuminating and, unless you 
want to spend the next 30 years in this dulled state, it is a process you have 
to go through. Good luck.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU, or emailannalisa.barbieri@mac.com <mailto:annalisa.barbieri@mac.com>. 
Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB 
<https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 