
Over our 17 years together, I have always thought my husband and I had 
different sex drives (mine higher than his), but over the past 10 years he has 
rarely wanted sex, believing that four times a year is normal. He has 
finally begun to confront his issues and – after having something of a 
breakdown at work – has been diagnosed with social anxiety disorder. He now 
tells me he has never felt “100%” about our sex life and can’t just “conjure up 
the feelings”. He also says he has a fear of intimacy. Am I a fool to think he 
could ever get past these feelings through therapy, which he is starting, or 
should I just give up on a fulfilling sex life?

I am terrified of any kind of sexual contact
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/10/im-a-young-woman-attracted-to-boys-but-im-terrified-of-any-kind-of-sexual-contact>
Try not to take his confessions personally. His low libido may well be found 
to have medical or psychological causes, and a thorough investigation and 
treatment could lead to considerable improvement. The therapeutic process can 
be healing and lead to vast improvements in mental, sexual and relationship 
health. Support him in this process as best you can and, if possible, seek your 
own help and/or join him in couples’ therapy. It is terribly painful to feel 
needy and to lose hope, and you deserve to have your needs met. In the 
meantime, work on resolving the underlying resentment you have. It will help to 
understand his struggle with clinical anxiety and how that affects his sexual 
desire and arousal.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 