
My husband and I have been having relationship problems, but I thought we were 
doing OK until I found out he has been lying. He went away for a long weekend 
with friends and they visited lapdancing clubs. I knew as soon as I picked them 
all up at the airport – they looked so guilty. But when I asked him later he 
lied, first about visiting a lapdancing club, then about having a lap dance, 
then about how much he spent on lapdances, and about physical contact during 
the lapdance. One of his other friends told his wife all the details, and so 
the rest made a pact to keep it secret from their wives.

He expects me to just get over it but I am so hurt by his behaviour that I 
can’t. It’s not the first time: previously, I discovered he had been paying for 
porn – again, when I confronted him he denied it until I showed him the credit 
card statement. I don’t feel we really recovered from this but stayed together 
anyway. There have been several other times when he has stayed out all night 
with no explanation, sent porn emails around his office and inappropriate texts 
to women at work, and got into fights – he’s been charged with assault more 
than once. All this he blames on drinking too much and not feeling like he has 
grown up. I don’t know how we can regain trust, or get over this yet again.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email:
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 