
My husband comes from a large family. There appears to be a hierarchy that 
exists within the family, where the older brother and sister, who seem to be 
pulling most of the strings and making all the key family decisions with no 
discussion or input from the younger siblings. They are both in their mid 40s 
and seem really angry about everything.

My husband’s parents often discuss matters with these older children, who all 
still live at home, but not with the younger children. The older siblings are 
all single and either unemployed or in dead-end jobs. The younger siblings, on 
the other hand, have all carved out successful careers and are in stable and 
happy relationships.

Recently it came out that the parents had transferred the entire family estate 
to the older three siblings and had not mentioned anything to the younger 
children about this. Once this was questioned, one sibling who did used to have 
a loose relationship with us, stopped visiting, and the older ones stopped 
talking to their younger siblings altogether, to the point where one of them 
became quite ill but kept it secret.

My husband and one of his sisters has tried numerous times to reach out to the 
other half of the family, but they do not seem interested in having a 
relationship. For example, they have missed our 10th anniversary party, they 
haven’t ever visited our children since they were born and have never been to 
our house. It is the same for the other two siblings.

When asked about this, they say it’s because of some petty squabbles they had 
in the 90s over silly things when their positions as the eldest in the family 
were challenged by their younger siblings, who wanted to break free and do 
their own thing.

Our children have never met some of their aunts and uncles. I find this really 
sad. The younger siblings are not allowed to visit the parents at the family 
home, and instead the parents come to our houses (sometimes in secret).

My husband has said to his parents that they need to try to facilitate some 
sort of compromise, but they have said they cannot help as everyone involved is 
grown up and need to resolve any issues themselves.

I find it difficult to understand how siblings can behave this way and how my 
husband’s parents just don’t seem to care that there is a divide in the family.

What a shame for all involved. Not so much because of whom the estate is been 
left to – ultimately that’s a decision for the parents, but I believe these 
things should be discussed openly – but because of the stratification in the 
family.

My first thought was about the culture behind all this. I contacted Myira 
Khan, a counsellor. “My immediate thought on reading your letter,” she said, 
“was, are you from a non-western culture, or have you married into one? This 
strikes me as a very traditional family. And this hierarchy will be very 
typical of particular cultures.”

Khan thinks your letter “raised two distinct concerns, namely the issues 
within the family and what impact is this having on you/your relationship? What 
needs are not being met, in you, by this conflict?”

When I first read your letter, I thought it sounded very unfair but Khan 
helped me to understand that certain cultures “are dominated not by an ‘I’ 
culture but a ‘we’ one, whereby a person’s sense of self is based upon being a 
part of a family, the relationships within the family dynamics and hierarchy 
and doing what is best for the family (‘we’) rather than being an independent 
individual (‘I’). It may be that the younger siblings wanted to break the 
family dynamic, wanted to move to have more independence. In so doing, they 
have challenged things in the family and their behaviour may have been 
perceived as selfish. It may be seen that the younger siblings started all this 
by behaving in a way that says ‘I am more important than my family’. That, in 
certain families, in certain cultures, is something huge; it would be perceived 
as very selfish. The parents may well be feeling the younger children have 
rejected the family – or what family means. Furthermore, the parents may want 
to be taken care of in old age, and now the older children have an incentive to 
stay.”

This isn’t to say you can’t find it odd and unfair and even dysfunctional.

There was very little of you in this letter so it’s very hard to see your 
place in this family. Given the number of people involved and – it’s fair to 
say – probably some fairly entrenched views, there is only so much you are 
going to be able to do. I would work out what you want to achieve. Which 
relationships matter the most to you and your husband?

It sounds as if you do have a relationship with your in-laws, as they visit in 
secret. Could you build on this but without referring to “the rift”? Make it 
about your current relationships, and don’t try to go on about the past, which 
will only make them defensive. Could you contact the aunts and uncles directly 
to start building a relationship with them? But you do need to be realistic 
about how much you can do.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU, or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/annalisab>
 