
When I was a 14-year-old back in 1975 my life was dull and quiet. The routine 
of my girls’ grammar school was enlivened only by the weekly cricket club 
disco. Summer holidays were in a caravan in the Lake District or North Wales. 
I’d been abroad once to Majorca. Clothes were expensive and thus few, but 
mainly bell-bottomed. We had a tv (I think we might have just gone to colour 
then) and the three day week was only just over. I remember being blown away by 
the radical first episode of Starsky and Hutch! We had a phone of course but 
hardly ever used it. There was a constant but vague Soviet nuclear threat and a 
more real IRA bomb threat. The very idea of a woman prime minister seemed 
laughably impossible.
 Wuthering Heights cover Photograph: Sally Green 
I didn’t own many books. I had progressed from the small mobile library to the 
appalling school library. It never occurred to me to ask the librarian (was 
there one?) for advice. There was no teenage section of the library. There was 
no such thing as Young Adult literature. I was desperate for something more but 
I hadn’t got a clue what it was, and that applied to more than books: travel, 
friends, tv, film, music, politics… life.

I won the Upper 4 Progress Prize at school that year and was awarded the book 
of my choice:Wuthering Heights 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/wuthering-heights-34.html>. I fell in love 
with Heathcliff and with the moors and that one without the other would be 
impossibly empty and pointless. But then I put the book on my bookshelf and got 
on with my GCSEs and Margaret Thatcher came to power and I lived in London for 
a while then came back up north, became an accountant, travelled the world, and 
worked hard to pay off the mortgage. I got married and I had a child, turned 
earth mother and kept chickens. I hardly had time to read.

And then out of the blue in 2010 I sat at my desk. I’d never written any 
fiction since that GCSE English exam, but I had an idea for a story about 
witches. Eventually the story turned intoHalf Bad 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/half-bad.html> about a mysterious, barely 
literate boy who is an abused, beaten outsider. He swears and curses, spits and 
kicks. He’s dirty. He seethes. He runs away to the wild mountains of Wales to 
escape the confusion of people he doesn’t understand. His real home is anywhere 
wild, away from other people. He loves a girl he know he can never have and 
she’s one of the few who show him kindness.

In Half Bad I referenced Wuthering Heights but never gave much thought to if 
or how I’d been influenced by it, though I always knew that Heathcliff was my 
ultimate hero. I’ve only been to Haworth once, and was shocked at how bleak and 
cold it was and this added to my awe for Emily Bronte, who lived a short, quiet 
life and yet who could write with such passion. I realise now that Wuthering 
Heights has seeped into my blood, my bones, into my upbringing. It is the basis 
on which I build my world and Heathcliff’s spirit roams through it all.

Love against the odds in books, a Valentine's Day special
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/feb/12/love-against-the-odds-in-books-valentines-day>
In Half Bad Nathan is only happy when he’s scrambling over the Welsh 
mountains, and in the sequel, Half Wild, he begins to realise the power the 
earth holds. I’m writing the third book of the trilogy at the moment and this 
link between my hero and the earth grows further.

heaven did not seem to be my home; and I broke my heart with weeping to come 
back to earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung me out into the 
middle of the heath on the top of Wuthering Heights; where I woke sobbing for 
joy.

he’s more myself than I am. Whatever our souls are made of, his and mine are 
the same; and Linton’s is as different as a moonbeam from lightning, or frost 
from fire.

My great miseries in this world have been Heathcliff’s miseries

My love for Linton is like the foliage in the woods: time will change it, I’m 
well aware, as winter changes the trees. My love for Heathcliff resembles the 
eternal rocks beneath: a source of little visible delight, but necessary. 
Nelly, I am Heathcliff!

Because misery and degradation, and death, and nothing that God or Satan could 
inflict would have parted us, you, of your own will, did it. I have not broken 
your heart—you have broken it; and in breaking it, you have broken mine.

Sally Green is the winner of the Teen category of the Waterstone’s Children’s 
books prize 2015. Her latest book isHalf Wild 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/half-wild.html>. 
 