
When I was growing up in the 70s just about every adult you encountered would 
demand to know what you wanted to be when you grew up. They’d interrupt 
whatever you were doing to ask it and you’d trot out whatever came into your 
head at the time – I used to say I wanted to be in a gang of lady pickpockets 
or else Prince Edward’s paid best friend-cum-cook – and the adult inquiring 
might shake their head nicely and laugh. And that would be that.

It was different if they’d asked it as you stood beside a grandparent. You’d 
feel the grandparent tense ever so slightly and then relax when you said you 
wanted to be a lady astronaut or be Tottenham Hotspur’s first lady goalkeeper 
because, though both things were unlikely, they were somehow the right answers.

One of my brothers, who didn’t like to lie, would say he hadn’t quite decided 
what he wanted to be. He was only telling the truth, but it was seen as him 
being awkward and difficult and I advised him, eventually, to “just say janitor 
or music teacher” which I’d seen inWhat Do People Do All Day? by Richard Scarry 
<https://www.harpercollins.co.uk/9780008147822/what-do-people-do-all-day>, a 
glorious book full of sweet anthropomorphic animals in Alpine clothing, doing 
important jobs. I know now the point of the book wasn’t to offer career 
guidance but, at the time, it seemed that way.

I remember, for instance, being captivated by the picture of the sawmill 
beside a deep, narrow river at the edge of a forest and the operatives – cats 
and pigs – engaged and happy, slicing logs in half and driving fat-tyred trucks 
over small hills. I knew I shouldn’t cite this as my future career – not only 
because it was in a children’s book but also because I wasn’t sure 
Leicestershire could offer up that much timber.

As I got a bit older, say about 10, I started to perceive the question 
differently, as though it might be a test or a trap or a way of assessing how 
normal you were or how good (or bad) your mother was at mothering. So I started 
to offer more sensible career aims that only the totally sane and normal would 
have. But it seemed the grownups didn’t want boring, plausible answers. One 
time, I told a great-uncle I’d like to be a newspaper reporter and something 
like this happened:

“I want to be a newspaper reporter.”

“How will you know what to report?”

“I don’t know yet, but hopefully I’ll learn.”

“Ah, but to be a good news reporter you have to have a sixth sense for the 
news.’”

At which point I backed down, knowing I’d probably never have a sixth sense – 
for anything.

My sister was more sophisticated than me, due to her uncanny understanding of 
human nature from a young age. She knew that adults wanted children to want to 
be astronauts, rock’n’roll singers and friendly burglars. She assured me that 
the question wasn’t meant as a test of your mental stability or your mother’s 
goodness, nor was it about truth – it was simply the invitation to tell a 
little story. She told me I must stop saying I wanted to have two sets of twins 
or be a lady policeman, which she felt both dull and demeaning.

“You’re supposed to say something which is nice to hear and wonderful to think 
about,” she said.

“Like working in a sawmill?” I ventured.

She wasn’t sure about the sawmill, but she suggested a decent alternative. 
“Say you want to work in a children’s shoe shop that’s really a pet shop and, 
instead of a pair of Clark’s shoes in every box, there’s a pair of puppies.” It 
didn’t make sense and though it was undeniably wonderful to think about, I 
wasn’t sure I could pull it off.

Next time we were cornered, it was by a dear old aunt and before she could 
even get the words out, my sister had announced that when she grew up she was 
going to devote her life to breeding Appaloosa horses. It sounded far-fetched, 
but I could see the exchange of pleasure and kudos.

“They’ll be the most beautiful horses in the land and they’ll be known far and 
wide,” said my sister. The aunt was delighted to hear it and I could tell she 
was picturing them in her mind.

“And what about you, Nina?” she asked (as soon as she’d finished imagining my 
sister’s horses cantering in slow motion), “still thinking about catering for 
the royal family?”

“No, actually, I think I might work in a shoe shop.” I began, and the aunt, an 
accomplished dinner party thrower, looked slightly disappointed.

“Or I might work in a sawmill by a deep, narrow river, at the edge a forest.”

“Yes, next to an Appaloosa horse farm perhaps,” the aunt said, closing her 
eyes and imagining it all.

• Paradise Lodge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/03/paradise-lodge-nina-stibbe-review>
 by Nina Stibbe is published by Viking.
 