
When I was in sixth form, my mother decided that she wanted to go to 
university. Of course I was happy for her. But then the doubt set in. Wouldn’t 
it be weird having a mum who was studying at the same time as me?

Other young people may have had to listen to family members reminisce about 
their experience of university, but it’s rare for a parent to choose to go to 
university alongside you.

There are contrasts: we study very different subjects – my mum tales 
psychology, while I opted for creative writing, so our experience varies in 
terms of content and assessment methods. And we aren’t at the same 
institutions: while my mum lives at home and studies at the University of South 
Wales, I moved away to attend Bath Spa University.

We sit down and study together with tea and biscuits

But at first it was still strange. My mum talks about her student friends and 
they are only slightly older than me. I was also used to my mum being around 
all the time, while now she has other commitments and everything has changed. 
It was hard to get used to, but we talked about it and told each other how we 
felt.

By being open we’ve learned what we want and need from each other. Sometimes 
that means just giving each other space. It’s nice to go home for the weekend 
and not worry about having to balance work and spending time with my mum. Now 
we can sit down together and study while catching up over tea and a biscuit.

I find that my mum’s awareness of university life can help because it means 
she knows and understands what I’m going through. It’s also great having a 
mother who knows what she wants, is passionate about her studies and is 
prepared to work hard to achieve her goals – it gives me motivation to do the 
same.

When siblings attend university at the same time, there can be competition, 
whereas when I think about my mum, I don’t worry about her getting a better 
grade than me. As a teenager it can be rare to feel like your mum truly 
understands you, so I appreciate that my mum does.


‘Sometimes she gets frustrated with me’: what it’s like for Venetia’s mother 
Claire


Starting university a year before Venetia gave me an insight into many of the 
challenges that students face. While I appreciate that the experience isn’t the 
same for everyone, my time at university gave me a level of knowledge that can 
only come from being a student.


Don't be a helicopter parent when your child takes off for uni
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/19/dont-be-a-helicopter-parent-when-your-child-takes-off-for-uni>
My experiences were fresh in my mind when Venetia started university, which 
meant I could offer advice and be helpful. However, sometimes she gets 
frustrated with me – I can see it in her face – when I explain how my 
university does things, as I’ve learned that sometimes hers does it differently.

The inital period was emotionally challenging. I think this may have happened 
when she went away to uni anyway, regardless of me being a student. My daughter 
was moving away from home for the first time – a life changing event for both 
of us. Learning about a new subject and facing deadlines only added to the 
pressure.


The role of being both a mum and a student has been a learning experience, 
which I have now settled into. I would say that the strength we both share is 
that we can communicate effectively. This is beneficial whatever the 
circumstances. I am also very focussed, dedicated and comfortable with 
independent learning. I feel that we have reached a stage where we can share 
space, be engrossed in our own study material, and yet be supportive of each 
other if the need arises.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 