Close encounters podcast trailer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/close-encounters/embed.html>
My partner dislikes kissing. He also “sleep sexes”, starting sex without 
waking up. During this, he kisses passionately. We have discussed it at length 
and he understands my upset, but tells me it is not a reflection of a lack of 
intimacy nor attraction to me, but a phobia. But I miss kissing.

Giving you what you want seems possible for your partner only while he is 
unencumbered by conscious resistance, so I wonder if you conflict in other 
ways? You might pose this to him – not in a blaming style, but rather as an 
interesting problem you can try to solve together. You could point out that, 
despite his conscious reticence, his passion during sleep suggests that he 
actually has an unconscious interest in the act of kissing.

But perhaps you should accept his explanation that he has a long-term phobia 
(I have seen this clinically a number of times). It can be based on a general 
germ phobia or it can be very specific to the prospect of oral connection. 
Phobias develop for a variety of reasons; sometimes there is a traumatic base, 
and sometimes it can be an aspect of a more general anxiety disorder. Intimacy 
issues could also certainly be playing their part. Try to convince him to seek 
help, and not just to improve your chances of more intimate conscious sex; 
sleep behaviour disorders can predict more serious medical problems and should 
be investigated.

I hate receiving oral sex from my boyfriend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/25/hate-receving-oral-sex-from-my-boyfriend>
• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com>(please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 