
I am the eldest of four, aged 55, and have a teenager. My parents divorced and 
lived in countries very far apart 45 years ago, when communication and travel 
were challenging and expensive. The polarisation and role-casting was set up 
early: the first child is responsible and bookish; no 2 kind and motherly; no 3 
the only son, whom both parents prop up financially; no 4 is the baby and only 
one “uninfluenced” by the father and therefore good in the mother’s eyes. 
Second child never had children. Fourth lived away and secretly from everyone 
until she was found after 15 years.

Both parents seem incapable of being grandparents – almost disconnected with 
the children of no 1 and 3 but when 4 emerges, it is a chance to start anew. 
However, the old favouritism re-emerges as well and is transferred on to the 
“new” grandchildren and long-missing child.

It has become so apparent, the distinction in treatment, that it is hurtful 
and deeply damaging to my child. I have tried to have an open conversation with 
my mother (about more than the weather or another sibling) but am stopped 
before it starts and told that it is not possible and that I am influenced by 
past exposure to my father (with whom I have not lived since I was 10 and have 
seen briefly 10 times in 45 years). I am at the point of disappearing from the 
mess.

The communication has worsened between siblings, parents and children; Father 
is usually unavailable and Mother critical. Seems like it was in the growing-up 
years but compounded with an additional generation.

I have tried to discuss this with a close family friend and a psychologist, 
but everyone begs off. Professional help has not given me any more skills. 
Before they die, how can I keep the communication with my parents but stop 
getting the dregs?

There was a curious lack of detail in your letter, which is reproduced almost 
in its entirety.

First, is it deeply damaging to your child – or to the child in you? You 
mentioned your child briefly in a second email to me and it seemed you were 
more conscious/worried of your child seeing how your mother has affected you. 
Your child has the added benefit of having you and her father (I presume) as a 
buffer. They are not in the full glare of it.

It can be very damaging when parents show such distinct favouritism, but it 
says more about them than the child. Not that this really helps you, in the 
moment of feeling crushed and rejected. Favouritism can have its roots in a few 
things, sometimes it’s that a child reminds the parent that they were a less 
than ideal mother/father in the early years and instead of seeking to remedy 
it, can’t bear the guilt the child reminds them of, so they throw it back at 
the child. Sometimes certain children remind one parent of the other parent and 
this brings angst, not joy. Some adults seem to forget that it was their choice 
whom they chose to have children with.

Whatever the cause, and there are many, it is never the fault of the child, 
and favouritism can harm all involved – even the favourite. So things may not 
be as rosy as you think for child no 4, she did go off to live in secret, after 
all.

Dr Susan Benbow, a psychotherapist (aft.org.uk 
<http://www.aft.org.uk/view/index.html?tzcheck=1>), thinks your youngest sister 
going off disappearing for 15 years “begs a lot of questions”, and indeed it 
does. It also sounds as if she didn’t come back of her own volition, but was 
found. Have you ever discussed this with your sister?

Benbow also thinks that maybe your mother is living “in fear of losing her 
again and making up for lost time”. This doesn’t really excuse her behaviour 
toward you, however.

There was very little about your father in your letter. And it sounds as if 
your communication with your parents (at least your mother) is not face to 
face. This can make an already difficult situation even harder.

But I was intrigued by where your siblings live and how you communicate with 
them? How do you know about how this favouritism manifests now?

Is it OK to have a favourite child?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/15/is-it-ok-to-have-a-favourite-child>
I think you need to look at what you would ideally like and ask yourself how 
achievable this is. I hate to be defeatist, but one must be realistic: it 
sounds as if your mother hasn’t got the self-awareness, or will, to change. 
Thus I’m afraid that the ideal relationship you want may never happen. I wonder 
if you might consider shifting your focus away from your parents and on to to 
your siblings instead? Is there a sibling you are closer to? Could you start 
with them? Ask them how it is for them? I honestly think the key to this is in 
you building adult friendships, if you can, with your siblings. Put your 
energies into them, and your own immediate family.

A dysfunctional sibling relationship is often – but not exclusively – set up 
in childhood. While the children stay under the umbrella of the parents, 
geographically, emotionally etc, that relationship often can’t grow into 
adulthood.

You might be amazed by what could happen if you stop craving parental approval 
and start forging your own relationship with your siblings, not the one your 
parents have defined for you.

You mention professional help hasn’t aided you. Not all professional help is 
equal. Look for someone who deals with family dynamics (the AFT link above 
should help).

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
 