
Once upon a time there were two parents living in domestic disharmony, kept 
together (probably) by their adored and indulged son. The mother died and, 
after a few years, I came on the scene and married this father of the 
one-and-only son. The son and I got on well for a few years.

I then discovered that his father – despite the son now being over 40 – paid a 
monthly sum to cover the son’s psychologist’s bill. It was admitted that the 
money was not actually being used for this purpose. I then learned that, 
despite having no responsibilities, the son had debts that ran into a 
comfortable four-figure sum. (Even though he earned a large salary.) He was 
also propped up by his dad when it came to paying income tax.

The mindset behind this was his belief that he was entitled to his mother’s 
money, even though her will had bequeathed it to his father, and his father had 
made it clear that the son would be his sole beneficiary.

I was able to show that none of my four children by a previous marriage had 
any dependence on me, nor had expectations of inheritance. Such matters were 
never discussed. My husband took my point that propping up his son was 
counter-productive, enhancing his dependence on his dad. He stopped his monthly 
payments for the fictional psychologist and suggested the next income tax 
hand-out be a loan (which was not honoured). I am therefore vilified as 
responsible for having “influenced” my husband against his son.

When we are together, my stepson is covertly rude to me by engaging his father 
in conversations in which I can have no input, but has also been overtly rude 
in shouting at me that I was living off his father and responsible for his 
mother’s death. (There is no logical way in which I can be implicated.)

I believe the three of us should have an easy, unselfconscious companionship, 
accepting each’s relationship with the other. I know that my husband’s view is 
the same.

I think my stepson would ideally like to turn back the pages, push me over a 
cliff and resume milking his father dry. He is in a state of confused jealousy 
about his father re-marrying. How can I improve our relationship?

Sometimes when people want love, but feel they don’t have it; they want money 
instead. And often when family members disagree, they have more in common than 
they realise.

Your stepson does sound quite disagreeable in parts, but why does it irk you 
so much that he is/was so indulged by his parents? Weren’t you, by yours?

I found the side-swipe at your husband’s first wife unnecessary and callous. 
If you are like this in real life with the son, I’m not surprised he is 
grasping at what he can from his father. And whereis his father exactly, in all 
this? Leaving you two to fight like siblings.

I consulted a psychologist, Emma Kenny (bacp.co.uk <http://www.bacp.co.uk/>). 
She says: “While it would be easy to respond sympathetically by agreeing that 
the son is indeed a freeloader, who sees his father as a cash cow, I believe 
that would do both of you a disservice. It would only compound the already 
clear hostility.”

Families often have different approaches to money and inheritance. Some are 
adamant their children should get by on their own, others see leaving a 
monetary legacy as an act of love.

“One of the main issues,” says Kenny, “seems to be your concern about money. 
You suggest he resents his inheritance being spent and give as an example your 
own children as being financially independent. This demonstrates the unhealthy 
competition you are creating on all sides. You’ve decided your children are 
more capable, successful and well-adjusted than your husband’s. You suggest 
that your own kids don’t expect a penny in inheritance – how do you know? 
You’ve never discussed it.”

You can’t marry into a family and expect the children to have been parented as 
yours were. One way isn’t right for everyone. And as Kenny points out, “Your 
stepson’s mother may have indulged her son and may well not have agreed with 
the parenting style that you feel is correct. Potentially, this man grew up 
feeling cherished and important and, when his mother died, looked to his father 
to continue this emotional and financial bond.”

Kenny also feels that it is his father who has allowed this “bailing out” to 
continue and that the son may view it as a “physical manifestation of love”. Of 
course he could be a total and terrible freeloader but that is for his father 
to deal with. I wonder if you feel massive resentment towards your husband but 
it’s safer to project this on to your stepson?

“Stop making your stepson feel like a failure, stop acting like a detective 
and allow your husband to make the decisions he wishes to about his son,” says 
Kenny. “Sit down as a family and agree to allow their relationship to progress 
as they see fit. Draw a line under your previous issues and agree to move on 
more positively. Stop trying to control your husband, and accept that there is 
room for him to love both of you. Finally, you are suggesting that money 
shouldn’t be so important to your stepson – maybe you could lead by example.”

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/annalisab>
 