
My sister is a bright graduate who has always been stubborn and single-minded, 
and needed intense, passionate relationships. When she met her husband and they 
married and had kids, I assumed she had at last found happiness. But for the 
past two years she has embarked on an affair with someone she met at work.

She is being very open about the affair, with our family and with her husband. 
She says the other man needs her and she needs the romance of it as marriage 
isn’t enough. He comes to their house and she expects her husband to socialise 
with him. My brother-in-law has agonised about the situation but doesn’t want 
to leave his house and family. He expects, as we all do, that eventually it 
will fizzle out. But it hurts him.

I am starting to worry for the children, who are aware of Mum having this 
“friend” (we found out from the kids that she recently took them away for a 
weekend with the other man) and starting to get old enough to realise something 
is going on, and also relationships between my sister and our wider family. My 
parents have tried but failed to talk to her about it and she is impossible to 
talk around on any subject, consistently of the view she is right and we are 
wrong. Her argument is that because her husband is “OK” with this, we should 
all be too. To keep positive relations with her, my parents are being asked not 
only not to judge but also to accept what she is doing, which I consider 
unreasonable.

She has always had this stubborn character, but about five years ago 
self-diagnosed herself with a condition [details not published]. When you read 
about women with this condition, it does help to understand her. She has 
refused to seek any professional advice for it, preferring to do her own 
reading. But she is bright and I feel, on some level, she must know that the 
situation is hurting her husband. I haven’t got involved so far because I know 
she will simply shut down communication once we try to discuss it.

Is there any way we could get through to her the damage she is doing to those 
around her for the sake of her own happiness? Or do I simply sit on the 
sidelines, supporting her husband and my parents and waiting for the inevitable 
fallout?  

Open or polygamous marriages are the way some people operate their 
relationships, of course, but it does need both sides to agree. And it doesn’t 
sound as if this is happening here.

Although I think affairs between a couple are private, this isn’t really an 
affair she is conducting in private. She is asking you all to, in effect, join 
in – to accept another partner in her life when, it seems, her own partner does 
not. You are right that you cannot stop her, but she cannot make you approve of 
the situation if you do not.

I contacted the psychotherapist Julia Cole (bacp.co.uk <http://www.bacp.co.uk>
), author of After the Affair, who thought what was “interesting is that, 
usually when people have affairs, there is a ‘bubble’ effect, which protects 
them from what’s happening in the real world. But that isn’t happening here.

I feel there is something very gauntlet-throwing about her ­behaviour, almost 
as if it were a cry for help

“What I think is happening here is that this is like a defence mechanism. Your 
sister is not having to deal with issues with her husband. My feeling is that 
this [the affair] is some sort of smoke screen for your sister, diverting her 
from something else that’s going on. I would like to think whatever she’s 
diverting from should be the focus.”

Any idea what that might be?

We both felt that the self-diagnosis of a condition was a red herring, as Cole 
puts it. And no justification for her behaviour.

I feel she isn’t taking responsibility for her behaviour at all – is she 
usually like this? Or is she absolving herself, now, of responsibility because 
she is usually the responsible, sensible one? There is something about her 
behaviour, as if she is saying: “I’m different and I don’t have to live by 
normal rules.” I feel there is something very gauntlet-throwing about her 
behaviour, almost as if it were a cry for help.

Of course, your primary concern seems to be for her children. I asked Cole how 
she thinks they may be feeling. “Quite confused – they may start asking 
difficult questions soon. They may even start regressing.”

What to do? Cole recommends, as your sister seems to have quite 
black-and-white thinking, asking her “very specific questions, such as ‘How do 
you think this is affecting your husband/your children?’ Not in a guilt-trip 
way but in the spirit of inquiry. Some people just don’t understand how they 
can affect others.”

Cole advises that if your sister is just defensive or dismissive, you could 
gently press further by saying something like: “Have you noticed your husband 
is much more sad than usual?” If she says “no”, you could then try saying 
something like: “I’ve noticed it. I wonder why you haven’t?”

If your sister really will not take responsibility that her behaviour is 
hurting her family, all you can do is offer them support – but try making it 
clear you don’t take sides and you are there if she wants to talk. “You could 
also,” says Cole, “encourage your brother-in-law to get counselling on his own.”

The pertinent question I would ask your sister is: “How would you feel if your 
husband were doing this?”

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU, or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
 