
I recently separated from my husband after 20 years. We have two teenage 
children. My daughter has chosen to live with me; my son with his dad. It was 
all fairly amicable although the marriage was borderline abusive as my ex is 
quite controlling.

Towards the end of the marriage, I met a lovely man online and after I decided 
to leave my husband, we met and started a relationship. We were careful not to 
make it known.

My daughter is quite controlling as well and we have had quite a tempestuous 
start to our new life, with her being very demanding and quite unpleasant 
sometimes. After a few weeks she managed to get into my (password-protected) 
phone on a pretext and went through all my messages and phone logs and found 
out about my “affair”.

She demanded that I tell my husband about it. I refused as it would just upset 
him and make our divorce even harder, but after a week of her crying, raging 
and telling me she couldn’t see her dad again now she knew about this other 
man, the next time I saw my husband I told him.

Predictably, he was hurt, angry and has barely spoken to me since, not even to 
sort out childcare arrangements or let me know my son is all right. I wish I 
hadn’t told him, although I believe my daughter would have spilled the beans if 
I hadn’t – she had already told her brother (he is fairly calm about it all). 
Basically, I was blackmailed by my daughter.

When my new partner heard about this, he was horrified. He doesn’t want any 
trouble or drama and can no longer imagine a life with me that involves my 
daughter. He has ended things.

My life with my daughter is now very difficult as I don’t trust her an inch 
and find all this very difficult to forgive. Her snooping and blackmail has 
cost me an amicable divorce and my new relationship. However, she is still only 
young and is my daughter. I have already made her life very hard by leaving the 
family home and don’t want to make things even worse by making her go back to 
live with her dad. She doesn’t want to do that.

I am at my wits’ end. I feel like the world’s worst parent as well as feeling 
terribly sad about all of it. 

I’m going to concentrate on the daughter angle of your letter, which I have 
edited to protect identities.

On first reading of your longer letter, your daughter’s behaviour does seem 
shocking. But then I mused on it a while and thought about how her life must 
have been these past few years: you in a “borderline abusive” marriage, her 
family home split up, her brother living somewhere else, her mother conducting 
a relationship in secret, which she clearly suspected. And she is still a 
child. I strongly believe people should be responsible for their actions, but I 
also believe they should be allowed to grow into those responsibilities first.

If you forget, for a moment, about the way your daughter has gone about 
things, and concentrate on what you think she might be trying to communicate to 
you, what do you think that might be? Behind all behaviour there is a message, 
which we shouldn’t lose sight of.

You want to mend bridges with your daughter, which is good. But stop sending 
your friends messages calling your daughter names (edited out of your letter 
here). That is not going to help anyone and does not reflect well on you.

When we don’t feel safe, when we feel information is being withheld, most of 
us will try to find out what’s going on

The psychotherapist Naomi Stadlen thinks that your daughter “hasn’t lost hope 
[in having a relationship with you], her anger shows she hasn’t withdrawn”. 
Stadlen feels that “this crisis is an opportunity to turn things around for 
both of you and to find a way to talk to one another” – rather than the 
extremes of behaviour you both have at the moment.

“Your daughter is desperate. She is trying to find out the worst [hence the 
snooping] because this tells her how bad it is. She is snooping because she 
doesn’t feel safe.”

When we don’t feel safe, when we feel that information is being withheld, most 
of us will try to find out what’s going on. The not knowing makes us insecure. 
“However,” says Stadlen, “you can’t ensure privacy until you’ve restored a 
certain amount of trust.”

You are, of course, entitled to a private life, and I would suggest taking 
control of this: change the password on your phone, don’t give it to your 
daughter again (presumably you did the first time, otherwise your daughter 
should apply for a job with the FBI).

“It is vital that you listen to your daughter,” advises Stadlen. “Her 
behaviour shows that she doesn’t feel heard. Sit with her either by yourself or 
with a mediator, and ask her to tell you what is wrong. Try not to justify or 
defend yourself. Give her time to shout, calm down, and finally tell you her 
real concerns. That will help you to rebuild the trust between you. There may 
be no quick answers to her problems, but knowing she can confide in you will 
help. Your first task is to steady this rocking boat.”

familymediationcouncil.org.uk <http://www.familymediationcouncil.org.uk/>

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB 
<https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 