
I am increasingly worried about my 19-year-old son, who isn’t in regular work 
and who has started stealing from other family members.

He dropped out of education before completing his A-levels and has since had a 
series of labouring jobs where the pay isn’t good. He has never been a great 
communicator, but his life is a total mystery as he never brings friends home. 
My husband and I both work, and we have a nice home and a good standard of 
living. My son has a free rein and we put very few demands on him. He is able 
to help himself to whatever he wants from the fridge and has his own room. It 
is like having a stranger in the house, who comes and goes. And, while he can 
be perfectly pleasant, he can also be verbally abusive to me and his sister if 
we upset him – it doesn’t take much, such as asking him how his search for a 
job is going.

Sentimental items of jewellery have gone missing in the past, and when 
challenged he denied all knowledge. A few weeks ago, some money went missing 
from my daughter’s room. I had cleaned her room that morning (I have two very 
messy grownup kids) and had seen it. The following day, I searched his room and 
found evidence that he had taken it. When challenged, he said he needed the 
money but would replace it – although he didn’t.

My husband is furious and is angry at me for not telling him at the time. I 
had been trying to avoid a row by giving my son an opportunity to put the money 
back. The pattern of our parenting has generally been that my husband cracks 
the whip and I think he is too harsh and so I collude with the kids to try to 
protect them.

My husband says he won’t live with a thief in the house. My son does have 
friends with whom he can stay, but they are mostly non-working dope-smokers 
(just like my son, I guess). I am afraid that if we make him homeless, his 
problems will just get worse. 

My first thought was how disengaged you all seem from one another, and the 
curious lack of detail, as if you have all been bumbling along until now.

I contacted Angela Evans, a child and adolescent psychotherapist (
childpsychotherapy.org.uk <http://childpsychotherapy.org.uk/>), who has worked 
extensively with troubled teenagers. One of the first things she picked up on 
was that you are cleaning the rooms of your grownup children. She feels this is 
indicative of something else – perhaps an inability to let go of your role of 
mothering (this is not to apportion blame, but it may help to identify your own 
colluding behaviour) and therefore your son not being able to separate and 
become his own person.

“Adolescence is about separating from adults,” explains Evans. “To an extent, 
you should be experiencing your older teenage children like a stranger.” Evans 
feels that your son probably already felt like a failure, finding himself out 
of education, with no aim or job. She thinks you should stop asking him how the 
job hunt is going, as this will just provoke more anxiety. Also, it becomes 
about your agenda, not his. In Evans’ extensive experience of working with 
teens, she says, “Lying and stealing is classic behaviour among difficult 
teenagers when they are angry and feel left out – it replaces an emptiness.”

If we take the stealing as a form of communication, what do you think your son 
is trying to say to you?

Clearly, however, some major communication channel has broken down between you 
all.

You mention drugs, in passing, and I wonder how much of a factor that is. If 
he is on drugs, his behaviour, explains Evans, “is not driven by the thinking 
part of the brain”. (You may findtalktofrank.com <http://talktofrank.com> 
useful.)

If we take the stealing as a form of communication, what do you think your son 
is trying to say to you? I was especially struck that he stole jewellery from 
you that had sentimental value. This seems – if he were thinking about it at 
all – like a particularly aggressive act. Evans wonders what the relationship 
is like between him and his sister? “Is she the ‘good’ sibling?” It’s 
interesting that he seems to have stolen from you and his sister, not his 
father.

What to do about it? “The key is for you and your husband to be a team,” says 
Evans. “You need to talk and find a middle ground you are both happy with.” 
When you have talked, Evans suggests you then talk, and listen, to your son. 
“You need to draw up a contract to make family life run smoother. His growing 
adulthood needs to be recognised, but there also has to be no stealing. You 
need to make time to check in with one another and respect one another’s 
spaces. Your daughter could be part of the contract and family discussions too, 
as she will be part of the family’s dynamic.”

You all need to agree on certain standards of behaviour. “Then you all sign 
it,” says Evans. “If he’s still hopeless, if he doesn’t want to sign it, try to 
model the behaviour anyway.” If you are fair and decided, you will be 
confident, but it is key that you work out your parameters. There’s no point 
saying, “If you don’t do this, this will happen”, if you know you won’t be able 
to do that. I do feel you need to be more confident in your handling of your 
son.

Finally, says Evans, “stop cleaning your children’s rooms, let them take 
responsibility, encourage them to be independent”.

Your problems solved



Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU, or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com <mailto:annalisa.barbieri@mac.com>. 
Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
 