
The perfect way to begin what was always going to be a tiring week: utterly 
exhausted and nerves completely shredded! We were in New Orleans for a wedding; 
the ceremony was on Sunday afternoon, the reception went on late into the 
evening and we had a 7am flight back to New York, where I would resume the tour 
promoting my latest blockbuster.

So we were bound to be whacked on Monday morning. Then, just before getting 
into bed, something inexplicable occurred. Having placed my wife's laptop on a 
table, some law of original gravity sent it crashing to the floor.
The computer, to its immense credit, gurgled valiantly as we pumped the power 
button in the futile hope of resuscitation. I have expended much energy urging 
my wife to back things up; the fact that she ignored this advice and was now in 
the grips of techno-psychic meltdown put me in the I-told-you-so seat where I 
normally preside quite comfortably.

On this occasion, the gloat potential was compromised somewhat by the way that 
I had "smashed" (she used the verb repeatedly) her computer. The consequences 
of this "accident" (a word I repeated ever more frequently) were potentially 
catastrophic. Most immediately, it meant the difference between five hours' 
sleep and none at all as I lay in the shared but divisive darkness. Yes, my 
mortification was tinged with relief that it was her laptop and not mine that 
had gone belly-up.

I confess this now because it's all worked out fine. Turns out that New 
Yorkers drop their laptops the whole time. The first people we saw in the 
morning when we arose, zombie-eyed, from our unhappy bed, had spilled a laptop 
a few weeks earlier and everything had been retrieved at a place on West 23rd 
Street. Sure enough, within 24 hours of arriving in Manhattan, I was down 
$1,400 and she had a new computer with the old data miraculously salvaged. For 
some reason, there seemed something distinctly un-London about this expensively 
happy outcome.

By the time of my reading that evening, a tempest made the city feel like it 
might end up at the bottom of the ocean. Frankly, I'm amazed anyone made it to 
the dry dock of the Barnes and Noble bookshop. The few who did were rewarded by 
a poignant vision of the sleep-deprived auteur in summer jacket - it had seemed 
appropriate, what with the wedding in the South and later stops in California - 
so drenched below the brolly line that he looked like he'd waded across the 
Hudson.

Just time, on Tuesday, for lunch with my publisher, Dan Frank, in what DeLillo 
calls "a major eatery". I am what is known as a "midlist" author. Perched above 
me are the "bestsellers", but I'm sadistically curious about what lies in the 
murky depths below. Dan pauses for a while and then says: "Poetry."

En route from Boston to Portland, Oregon. Strangely, these book tours give 
writers a sense of what it could be like not to be writers: to be employed as 
busy executives or hard-travelling salesmen. By Thursday, things have settled 
into a routine that, with small variants, holds true for whichever city I'm 
visiting: plane, taxi, hotel, lunch, an interview or two, gig (if one can 
dignify a reading with that word), dinner, drinks, several more drinks, sleep, 
alarm, hangover, taxi, plane ...

It's a fraught existence, dominated by the fear of missed connections and lost 
receipts. The cities pass in a blur so that one is left not with memories of 
places but of a generically American experience of planes and trains.
American life is predicated on the assumption that it is natural to chat to 
strangers. (A corollary of the inherited English awkwardness about doing this 
is that if you get into a conversation it's often difficult to extricate 
yourself from it.) There's a lovely sense on these domestic flights of all 
being in it together, rather than separately suffering. The "it", of course, is 
America, which all passengers tacitly or explicitly believe is better than 
pretty much any place else.

Seattle. Reading at the Elliott Bay bookshop, I'm struck by the paradox of 
these events. However much people enjoy what they're hearing, even if they are 
hanging on your every word, there are certain words they long to hear more than 
any others. These are "last" or "one more", followed, ideally by "short" (as 
in: "I'll read one more short piece"). Even the least sympathetic crowd is won 
over by the blissful release promised by this announcement.

San Francisco. It used to be the case on these tours that an escort picked you 
up in a town car and made sure you didn't get lost between the hotel and 
wherever you were reading. This always seemed like a waste of money and, in 
these recessionary times, midlist authors are expected to fend for themselves 
and take taxis. Fair enough. Except taxis can seem a bit extravagant, too, so 
instead of blowing a fortune on getting from SF to Menlo Park and back by taxi, 
I volunteer to take the train. This endears me to my publishers. I imagine them 
saying: "ThatGeoff Dyer <https://www.theguardian.com/books/geoff-dyer> - he 
might not be much of a writer but, heck, he sure keeps his expenses down!"

Then I start fretting that the opposite may be true, that by behaving in this 
frugal, age-of-austerity fashion, by manifesting my astonishment that I'm being 
flown around the country and put up in swish hotels to blah on about myself and 
occasionally sell and sign a couple of books, I'm acting like a lower-midlist 
loser, that it's actually the limo-demanders and business-class divas who 
command the respect and affection of publishers. Plus there's the logistical 
quandary of whether it's a bit mean to claim back the $2 subway rides I took in 
New York.

The Dyer CV

Life: Born in Cheltenham, 1958. Educated at Corpus Christi, Oxford. Married; 
lives in London.

Work:  Author of four novels and five other books, including But Beautiful 
(Somerset Maugham Award winner),Out of Sheer Rage(US National Book Critics 
Circle Award shortlisted),The Missing of the Somme, Yoga for People Who Can't 
Be Bothered to Do it (WH Smith People's Choice award winner), The Ongoing Moment
 (EM Forster Award from the American Academy of Arts and Letters). His new 
novel,Jeff in Venice, Death in Varanasi, has just been published.
 