
Growing up in Luton, we’d always eat on a cloth, placed on the floor of the 
living room, with no TV allowed. There were no chairs back in Bangladesh and 
Dad wanted to keep the tradition, so we never owned a dining table. Rice was 
our staple, with seven or eight curries at each evening meal, Bangladeshi 
style. We’d sit in a circle, with me nearest the gas heater, because I was 
always cold.

Dad was a chef with his own Indian restaurant and he’d bring home his tools, 
gadgets, widgets and big mixing machines, and – although he wouldn’t admit it – 
make quite Anglicised curries. Whereas for Mum everything was simple-simple, 
stripped back and traditional. She’d never do bulk cooking, whereas he’d buy a 
whole sheep every Friday. He’d come home from work and badger Mum to do things 
properly, saying, “You’re not cutting that onion right”, and she’d look at him 
as if to say, “I don’t care – I’m bringing up six children.” They’re the 
funniest couple; always battling, but with a strange camaraderie.

Most summers we went to Bangladesh and stayed in Grandad’s village, filled 
with relatives. I’m one of 67 grandchildren. The main thing I noticed is that 
we ate more than everyone else there. They ate tiny portions, partly because 
they had lots of children, and never snacked. We’d have biscuits, crisps and 
chocolate in between meals and they’d have nothing, unless they happened to 
find a mango on a tree.

The concept of dessert doesn’t exist in Bangladeshi cuisine and so the only 
time we had it was at school. The only reason we had an oven at home was 
because it came attached to the cooker. Mum would keep her frying pans in there 
and anything else that would fit. Storage was its only use. So I had no idea 
where cakes came from until I was a teenager. When I got into baking it was a 
big surprise; no one could fathom it.

I also have a senseless love affair with cheese. My mother never bought any 
because there was none in Bangladeshi cuisine. I was introduced to it – and 
grapes and crackers – at school and it was very painful because then I’d crave 
cheese every night at home. It felt very English – and French. I seem to fall 
in love with things I wasn’t brought up with. Sometimes there’s nothing better 
than finding another cuisine and loving it differently.

Porridge reminds me of Dad being in hospital. He needed a blood transfusion 
and was possibly high on morphine, because he’d rave on and on about the 
porridge. He really loved that porridge in hospital, then refused to believe 
anyone could make porridge as well as the nurse, who I think he secretly 
fancied.

As a teenager I became quite strong-willed and would question a lot of things 
– asking “Why?” when Mum or Dad said things. I’d want straight answers. I was 
discovering things like food and the opposite sex and I’d say: “You’re not 
telling me the truth. Talk to me.” I remember once we were cutting the lawn and 
I asked Dad what grass tastes like and we ended up cooking grass together, as 
an experiment. It didn’t taste good. That’s why cows eat it, not humans.

I first met my husband on the day we got married, when I was 20. I moved to be 
with him in Leeds, 165 miles from Luton. The kitchen was absolutely tiny. But I 
got my first hand-held mixer and first set of scales and first blue cake tin 
from Tesco and that was very exciting. I really mourned not being with my 
parents, yet having a kitchen of my own – where I wasn’t told off for using all 
the eggs – was a breath of fresh air.

Once I had my lovely husband, home and kids, I got comfortable, I suppose, and 
the weight piled on. But then I looked at myself one day and thought, “Do 
something about this, Nadiya.” In the year beforeBake Off I shed three and a 
half stone – in six months. But I still wanted to eat whatever I liked – 
sausages and mash is one guilty pleasure – so I’d walk at least eight miles 
every day to justify it.

Since I was eight, if ever I was going out and thought I might be in a 
situation where I might get stressed, I’d carry a paper bag, to control my 
breathing during panic attacks. Almost nothing or anything could trigger one 
off. I remember once, when I hadn’t seen my parents for six weeks, I travelled 
down from Leeds to Luton and was hyperventilating from the sheer joy. 
Sometimes, when I was struggling, including duringBake Off, they’d travel up 
and fill my freezer full with cooked meals sealed in Tupperware containers. 
That was their way of showing how much they loved me.

When I made a quiche Lorraine for the first time, it fell on the floor, the 
whole thing. At times like that, it’s a takeaway for our dinner.

When I went into Bake Off I never imagined I’d come out the other end elevated 
and a role model – for Bangladeshis, bakers, Muslims, women and all; I didn’t 
expect any of it. If I am a role model, in a positive manner for anyone, I’m 
very happy to bear the burden. But I strive to be a role model for my children 
and that’s about as far as I go.

My children are pitilessly honest about my food. I’d made a bavarois cream 
pudding – with white chocolate and lavender – and was so excited to bring it 
out of the fridge, thinking, “The kids are going to love this.” I asked my son, 
seven at the time, “Will you give this a go?” He spooned some in his mouth but 
said, “Is that a joke? Don’t ever do that to me again. It’s disgusting.” I 
said, “Well, that’s not going in the [Bake Off] tent then.”

Nadiya’s Kitchen is out now (Michael Joseph, £20). Click here to order a copy 
for £16 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/419720/>
 