
When I was a girl and wanted a horse, I thought National Velvet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9781405230315/national-velvet>
, published in 1935, was about a girl who wants a horse: a female version of, 
say, Walter Farley'sThe Black Stallion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780340576564/the-black-stallion>
. But Enid Bagnold did not write a young-adult novel, and now that I am grown 
up and know something about horse racing, I appreciateNational Velvet much more 
than I once did.

The horseless novel, The Squire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/crime/9780954714802/the-squire>, 
that Bagnold published three years afterNational Velvet, provides the clue – 
what fascinates Bagnold is family life, and indeed, the driving force behind
National Velvet is the intricate psychological chaos that is the Brown 
household. Father owns a shop and a slaughterhouse on the south coast, Mother 
does the books and cooks the liver, kidneys and sheep's heads that remain after 
the steak is sold. The three older daughters are "golden greyhounds", and 
Donald, aged four, is a beautiful boy who is determined to control his own 
narrative. A "black barking dog on a string" lives outside – "the Browns slept 
and lived and ate beside its barking" – and a clump of spaniels huddles against 
the front door, unnamed, sometimes tumbling in. The fox terrier is named and 
has indoor privileges, while Mi Taylor, who helps in the slaughterhouse, lives 
in a box stall with a rotting floor beside the old mare that the girls ride 
when they get up at dawn to deliver meat. In this world, a neighbour's piebald 
horse that leaps over five-foot walls and gallops into town, slipping and 
sliding on the cobbles, only qualifies, at first, as mildly interesting; much 
less important than the gold band of Velvet's brace, which is a constant topic 
of conversation, since Velvet keeps removing and hiding it.

Velvet, 14, is the plain one – weak stomach, "all teeth", "cottony hair" – and 
her father is openly worried that she'll never find a husband. Velvet, though, 
is still in that last stage of childhood when sex and love simply do not exist 
except as the peculiar activity of older sisters. At the end of chapter one, 
she says her prayer, "Oh, God, give me horses, give me horses! Let me be the 
best rider in England!"

The Lord, of course, works in mysterious ways. We know from the beginning that 
when The Pie is sold in an informal lottery by his owner, Velvet will hold the 
winning ticket. But Velvet, whose only equestrian experience besides riding the 
old delivery mare is acting out imagined gallops on the photos of famous 
racehorses cut from magazines and library books, needs a well-trained horse, 
and so Bagnold makes sure she gets Sir Pericles, "a slender chestnut" with "a 
fine artistic head". Sir Pericles belongs to Mr Cellini, an eccentric old man 
who is walking about his garden when Velvet shows up with the meat his 
housekeeper has ordered.

"'I'm very much too old,' said the old gentleman. 'Too old. What did you say 
you'd brought?'

'Meat,' said Velvet. 'Rump.'

'Meat,' said the old gentleman. 'I shan't want it. Let's see it.'

Velvet pulled the dank parcel out of her bag.

'Throw it away,' said the old gentleman, and threw it into a bush."

After talking to Velvet about horses and showing her the ones he owns, he then 
signs a paper bequeathing them to her, walks around a corner, and shoots 
himself in the head. Bagnold is not interested in practicalities, or, indeed, 
in plausibility. She is interested in idiosyncrasy.

Much is made of Velvet's mother, Araminty, who had been coached by Mi Taylor's 
father to swim the Channel, but who has since become so "embedded in fat" that 
"her keen, hooded eyes hardly lift[ed] the rolls above them". Though everyone 
else is talkative, she usually communicates in monosyllabic commands: "Larder", 
"Lay the table". She is a mystery to her children. Only once does she explain 
herself, when Velvet goes to her room to help her treat a sore made by the tip 
of one of her metal stays: "Mrs Brown rose and drew breath. Working from the 
bottom up she unhooked the metal fencework within which she lived, and sat down 
again." Velvet treats the wound, and her mother becomes philosophical. 
"Childbirth … an' being in love. An' death. You can't know 'em until you come 
to 'em. No use guessing and dreading. You kin call it pain … but what's pain? 
Depends on who you are and how you take it." Later, it will be Araminty who 
funds the deception Velvet must, as a girl, embark on to race, with the emblems 
of her former pain – gold sovereigns she has saved from her Channel-crossing 
prize.

Like Araminty, Mi has also been moulded by his father – he hates water and 
avoids it. He has never ridden a horse. He has spent his life running away from 
his family, hanging out at racecourses, doing odd jobs, developing his theory 
of things but not in fact doing those things. He goes along with Velvet's horse 
obsession, and works out the details, but she is the motivating force.

Bagnold's appreciation of idiosyncrasy provides her narrative structure. She 
skips from character to character and incident to incident in a way that does 
not seem to add up to a picture of how a young, very amateur rider might take a 
barely broke little horse over the stiffest jumping course in the world and 
survive. As much time is given to Donald's tantrums and her sisters' choice of 
sweets or attachment to canaries as is given to Velvet's training methods.

When the girls set off for the summer gymkhana, in the soaking rain, they are 
more concerned with the fact that they only have two mackintoshes between them 
than they are with the coming events. Throughout the gymkhana chapter, 
narrative focus moves like a hand-held camera – noting remarks, images, crowd 
response, weather. In the midst of it all, Velvet remains focused: she manages 
to win one race on Sir Pericles and to settle for The Pie's single excellent 
effort over the wall in the jumping class. It is only then, 140 pages into a 
250 page book, that she begins conditioning The Pie for the Grand National – 
she rides him in the evenings, on the hills around the town, and occasionally 
they secretly jump some old jumps at a local estate.

After the gymkhana, the narrative moves away from Velvet, until by the time of 
the race, Mi's is the principal point of view – he delivers the entry fee, puts 
together the ruse whereby Velvet will race under the name of a half-Russian 
jockey who is out of the country, recognises the dangers Velvet is confronting, 
and panics. The nature of Velvet's task is detailed only a few sleepless hours 
before the start, when Mi shows Velvet a map of the jumps and explains them to 
her as a substitute for walking the course. She listens for a while, then 
quails, then refuses to think about it – the course is obvious enough; her 
faith is in The Pie.

It's clear by the start of the race that Bagnold has given herself a narrative 
dilemma: is she to detail the race from Velvet's point of view, or from Mi's? 
She finesses this one very nicely. As Velvet arrives at the start, she is 
relieved: "The worst moments had come and gone, and there could be no doubt at 
all that she and The Piebald were in together for the Grand National." All she 
sees when the tape goes up is that "the green course poured in a river before 
her …" Mi knows, of course, that the worst moments are still to come, and his 
anxiety is enhanced by the fact that he is too short to see anything in the 
seething crowd. And then the fog settles in. Bagnold relates the race through 
half-seen glimpses, overheard remarks, unsubstantiated rumours, all anchored by 
Mi's fears and regrets. It is an exciting chapter, full of wit and dread, and 
perhaps attests to Bagnold's method of composition, as detailed in her 
autobiography: "I'm afflicted by images. They gang up at the mind's exit and 
block. My thoughts come so quickly that I 'jump' the story. I think I've told 
it, but I've not … As I write forwards, I have flashes backwards, afterthoughts 
and enricheners, on what's two pages behind."

The real horror of Velvet's quest comes after the race, when the press takes 
up the story of a girl winning the Grand National. Velvet is carried off in an 
ambulance; Mi can't find her and must renounce her in order to save himself. 
The Brown's establishment is besieged. Velvet, though, is preserved from the 
chaos by the focus her faith in The Pie affords her – the novel's last image is 
of Velvet "able to get on quietly with her next adventures".

Bagnold was not as fortunate. In 1944, Hollywood made National Velvet a 
phenomenon, while betraying many of the charms of the novel.Elizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/elizabethtaylor> was never a plain one with 
cottony hair and buck teeth; the Shore Course at Pebble Beach, California, 
looked nothing like Aintree; and The Pie, maybe 15 hands, was transformed into 
a giant chestnut with sparkling white stockings.

In her autobiography, Bagnold reflects on her Hollywood experience with 
bemusement – once she'd received her cheque for £8,000, she bought the most 
expensive cigarette case to be found in Bond Street for her husband (a hundred 
pounds), a silver-plated model pony for her daughter (£120), and some 
typewriters. Though she was smart enough to invest the remainder, she was not 
worldly-wise about taxes - every year, she threw away the tax notice she 
received in the mail. Eventually, Bagnold owed thousands in back taxes and 
interest, and because of clauses in the contract that she hadn't noticed, she 
earned nothing from later productions. But the novel remains a strange and 
original production, inventive, lively and alluring, a fairytale rooted deeply 
in rain, muck and, as Araminty might say, what you kin call pain.
 