
For more than 30 years, the bones of Josef Mengele, the German doctor who 
conducted horrific experiments on thousands of Jews at Auschwitz, lay unclaimed 
inside a blue plastic bag in São Paulo’s Legal Medical Institute.

Dr Daniel Romero Muñoz, who led the team that identified Mengele’s remains in 
1985, saw an opportunity to put them to use. Several months ago, the head of 
the department of legal medicine at the University of São Paulo’s Medical 
School obtained permission to use them in his forensic medical courses. Today, 
his students are now learning their trade studying Mengele’s bones and 
connecting them to the life story of the man called the “angel of death”.

Related: Dead zeppelins: Brazilian gravesite is airships' stairway to heaven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/brazil-zeppelin-hangar-nazis> 

“The bones will be helpful to teach how to examine the remains of an 
individual and then match that information with data in documents related to 
the person,” Muñoz said recently, flanked by students.

Mengele died nearly four decades ago when he drowned off the coast of the 
state of São Paulo. He had been on the run for years, hiding while being 
pursued for performing experiments on inmates and sending thousands of them to 
the gas chambers during the second world war.

Mengele’s life on the run, and the mystery surrounding his whereabouts, are 
part of what make his bones a useful teaching tool, Muñoz said.

“For example, examining Mengele’s remains, we saw a fractured left pelvis,” he 
said, adding that “information found in his army record said that he fractured 
his pelvis in a motorcycle accident in Auschwitz”, the notorious Nazi death 
camp in Poland.

Holding Mengele’s skull, Muñoz pointed to a small hole in the left cheekbone, 
which he said was the result of long-term sinusitis.
 Josef Mengele. Photograph: AP 
Muñoz said that a German couple who harbored Mengele in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> told police that he often suffered 
from dental abscesses that he himself would treat with a razor blade.

“I don’t know what I feel” about Mengele’s bones being studied, said Cyrla 
Gewertz, a 92-year-oldHolocaust <https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust> 
survivor. “I already have too many painful memories of him and what he did to 
me and others at Auschwitz. These are memories I cannot erase from my mind.”

After the war, Gewertz, who said she was also interned in other concentration 
camps like Ravensbrück and Malchow, went to Sweden, where she lived for seven 
years and where she met and married her husband with whom she came toBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> in 1952.

Originally from Poland, Gewertz has a tattoo on her left arm identifying her 
as an Auschwitz prisoner: A24840. She said she came face to face with Mengele 
on several occasions.

“[Mengele] told me to strip and step inside a large vat with extremely hot 
water,” said Gerwertz during an interview in her São Paulo apartment. “I said 
the water was too hot and he said if I didn’t do what he ordered, he would kill 
me. After that I had to step into a vat with freezing water.”

Gewertz said she once saw Mengele kill a newborn baby girl by throwing her off 
the roof of the camp’s barracks.

“He was an evil, perverse man,” she said “He was a torturer.”

After the war, as leading members of Adolf Hitler’s Third Reich were put on 
trial for war crimes, Mengele fled to Argentina and lived in Buenos Aires for a 
decade.

He moved to Paraguay after Israeli Mossad agents captured Holocaust mastermind 
Adolf Eichmann, who was also living in Buenos Aires. In 1960, he arrived in São 
Paulo, where he received shelter from German couple Wolfram and Lisolette 
Bossert and a family of Hungarian immigrants.

Mengele, then 67, died while swimming at a beach in the coastal town of 
Bertioga in 1979. The Bosserts buried him in Embu on the outskirts of São Paulo 
under the false name of Wolfgang Gerhard. Years later, German authorities 
intercepted a letter sent by the couple to Mengele’s family with news of his 
death. They alerted Brazilian authorities.

Related: Mengele letters reveal life ended in pain and poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/nov/23/secondworldwar> 

In 1985, his body was exhumed. Teams from Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, Israel, the US and Brazil 
confirmed it was Mengele, using methods including the vetting of personal 
accounts from people who knew him in Brazil, comparing handwriting in seized 
letters and analyzing the recovered cranium to see if it matched old photos of 
Mengele.

Professor Maria Luiza Tucci Carneiro, a historian who coordinates the 
University of São Paulo’s Laboratory for the Study of Ethnicity, Racism and 
Discrimination, said she hopes the classroom learning eventually goes beyond 
the science to history and ethics.

Students should also learn “how physicians, psychiatrists and other leading 
scientists were in the service of the Reich, lending their knowledge to exclude 
the ethnic groups classified as belonging to inferior races”, said Carneiro. 
“An exclusion that culminated in genocide.”
 