
A regular season NBA game might be too great an ask, but NBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> Commissioner Adam Silver has flagged 
the possibility of the league bringing a pre-season game to Australia in the 
near future.

With an ever-growing Australian contingent in the NBA – including No1 draft 
picks Andrew Bogut and Ben Simmons – Silver believes it is a case of when and 
not if the NBA will bring a game to Australian shores.

“Yes I could see us returning for a pre-season game,” Silver said before 
Thursday’s game between Indiana and Denver at London’s O2 Arena. “It’s a 
fantastic market and it’s a market our players enjoy travelling to.”

Size matters: the evolution of the NBA big man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/nba-big-man-evolution-basketball>
“Obviously it’s a bit of distance from the United States but we go to China 
for the pre-season so I think it’s just a question of working out the 
appropriate business arrangement, but it’s something we are looking to do.”

While Australia is on the agenda for a pre-season game, it seems the Middle 
East is next in line for a regular season match. “We have an enormous following 
in the Middle East but we’re not doing enough,” Silver said. “In fact we used 
the few days we were here in London for several meetings with Middle Eastern 
authorities, whether they be sports bureaus, broadcasters or other interested 
parties.”

“Whether those things (we do) be junior NBA to hosting games, it’s an area of 
the world where we should be doing more.”

Silver revealed he was a big fan of Australian basketball and lauded the 
nation’s ability to produce high-quality players despite a limited population. 
“We see in those markets where the best young talents are brought together at a 
young age, those markets are producing the best young players,” he said.

“Markets like, Australia, markets like Serbia, have great systems and are 
relatively small markets compared to others - that quite frankly have no NBA 
players right now – we’re looking at that model (in terms of player 
development). They do a fantastic job in Australia and Serbia creating top 
notch payers and we’re trying to replicate that.”



 