
West Ham have drawn up a shortlist of seven names to replace Avram Grant 
should they decide to dispense with the manager's services at the end of the 
season – Neil Warnock, Paul Lambert, Malky Mackay, Chris Hughton, Slaven Bilic,
Ian Holloway <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ian-holloway> and Martin 
O'Neill.

Who could succeed the Israeli will depend, in part, on whether the club are in 
the Championship or Premier League in August. As West Ham are currently bottom 
and three points from 17th place with three games left the most likely scenario 
is that they will be relegated. That would almost certainly result in Grant 
being sacked.

When appointed last summer Grant was given the remit of maintaining the club's 
Premier League status during his first term in charge while David Gold and 
David Sullivan, the co-owners, focused on reducing the £110m debt. That figure 
is now down to around £80m but during a troubled season West Ham have rarely 
been out of the relegation zone.

It is understood that Gold and Sullivan never envisaged such a struggle, with 
the owners hoping West Ham would be 15th or 16th for the majority of the 
campaign and that Premier League status would be secured in March.

Grant has said that seven points may be enough to avoid the drop but West Ham 
may need to defeat all of Blackburn Rovers, Wigan Athletic and Sunderland to 
have any chance of survival. Even then he may not keep the job, as Gold and 
Sullivan may still decide he has not comprehensively fulfilled his remit.

Relegation would cause the "£40m hole" in the club's finances Sullivan spoke 
of last week, meaning the owners would have to recruit a manager capable of 
lifting the club back into the Premier League on reduced finances.

Warnock, who has won the Championship with Queens Park Rangers pending the 
ongoing FA hearing into the signing of Alejandro Faurlín, has also taken Notts 
County and Sheffield United into the top division during his career. He was 
wanted by West Ham to replace Gianfranco Zola when the Italian was in charge 
last season. The then Crystal Palace manager is thought to have rejected those 
advances as he had agreed to join QPR.

Karren Brady, the West Ham vice-chairman, has a good relationship with him 
after her husband, Paul Peschisolido, played for Warnock during his eight years 
as Sheffield United's manager.

Lambert is an attractive candidate after taking Norwich City into the Premier 
League, his second consecutive promotion as their manager. He managed this with 
Norwich in a precarious financial position and Mackay, who played for West Ham 
in 2004-05, has also impressed this season for similar work in making Watford 
credible playoff contenders from December until early spring, when a minuscule 
budget that allowed him to spend only £500,000 on transfers finally caught up 
with the club.

Hughton, a lifelong West Ham fan, has been in the directors' box for the last 
three games at the Boleyn Ground and is a candidate after guiding Newcastle 
United into the Premier League last season. His stock is high after being 
dismissed from the Tyneside club in December despite the team being 11th.

Bilic has been offered the position previously but failed to become the 
manager after he asked for a sizable transfer kitty that was beyond the club's 
means. The Croatia coach was a Hammers defender in 1996-97 and is a fan 
favourite. His lack of experience of club management in England may count 
against him.

Holloway is arguably the most intriguing option. His success at winning 
Blackpool promotion via last season's playoffs, and the club's attractive style 
this season, both achieved on a limited budget, have won him admirers within 
the West Ham hierarchy.

O'Neill may appear the least likely candidate due to his reported refusal to 
take over from Grant in January had the latter been sacked. But if O'Neill were 
given assurances regarding team matters and budget, he could be tempted back 
into management.

Scott Parker, meanwhile, remains a serious doubt for West Ham's critical game 
against Blackburn on Saturday as the midfielder continues to require intensive 
treatment on a long-standing achilles complaint.

The 30-year-old has missed the last three matches and he is understood to be 
receiving a course of injections in an attempt to see him through the fixture 
and the campaign's two final games.
 