
When the earthquake struck at midday we were in our weekly music and art 
class. Our orphanage,Unatti Foundation <http://unattifoundation.org/>, is home 
to 20 girls but on Saturday children from the outside, mostly street kids, join 
us in our music centre. We had around 70 kids altogether. We had to get them 
all to an empty space near the centre. They were all crying but luckily no one 
was hurt. It was very stressful.

For a few hours I didn’t know what to do. I was sitting on the floor and 
someone came to me to ask for donations to buy rice. I immediately donated 
2,000 rupees (£12) to them. Then I decided, no more donations, I will take care 
of this. I went to a dealer in town to buy sacks, I could still drive there, 
and we started cooking for people on the street. Now we are taking care of more 
than 5,000 people.

 The girls from the Unatti Foundation with their food. Photograph: Ramesh 
Prahananga/Unatti Foundation 
The girls are looking after one spot by themselves. They were scared at first 
but after I talked to them, they became strong and now they really like helping 
people. They are cooking and clearing up the dust and plastic. I am very proud 
of them. And they are proud. They are serving people. They want to do more.

The international organisations are doing nothing in Bhaktapur. Today was the 
first time I saw big trucks come into the town. The aid supplies will start by 
tomorrow I hope. The rice market where I buy the food is going to be empty 
soon. So even though I have the money, it will be hard to find the food for the 
people.

Many people from Bhaktapur city have moved out because they lost their homes – 
40% of buildings have been destroyed here. The old buildings are all destroyed. 
Our fear is that everyone will leave then there will be very few people inside 
the city. And then even the people who haven’t lost their homes won’t be able 
to stay, because there are so few people there. We are worried about this.


The hospitals are working but it’s a very limited service. Many people who 
were injured during the earthquake are not getting the support and medications 
from the hospital because they say that they have to take care of the serious 
injuries first. I’m scared that if we are not able to maintain our cleanliness 
then there will be diseases. That might be a big problem in the future.

 Girls from the orphanage clearing rubbish. Photograph: Ramesh 
Prahananga/Unatti Foundation 
Until yesterday the girls were sleeping in tents, now they are back home 
sleeping in the Unatti Foundation’s building. In the morning they will go out 
to the spot in the street and take care of everything: preparing tea, biscuits, 
dhal bhat (rice and lentils) for lunch and they will prepare snacks and dinner 
in the evening.


There are big organisations like Unicef, UNDP, and other international NGOs in 
Nepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal>, but still none have come to 
Bhaktapur. The people are very angry. It’s been five days and no one has come 
to us. One international NGO came with around 100 tents but the people needed 
around 10,000. They were so angry, violence was about to break out. It’s really 
different than the picture you see on TV. They ran away.

It seems like many people – the Red Cross, government – came with very few 
supplies and taking lots of photographs. It seems like they are focusing on 
publicity not on solving the problem. We need support anyway, anyhow, any 
channel, it doesn’t matter – Unicef, UNDP, any local NGO.

Don’t rush to Nepal to help. Read this first | Claire Bennett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/27/earthquake-nepal-dont-rush-help-volunteers-aid>
Now we have 20 girls in the home but maybe after this earthquake we will look 
after more – it seems like we should.

• As told to Anna Leach.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 