
In the past few decades, the fortunate among us have recognised the hazards of 
living with an overabundance of food (obesity, diabetes) and have started to 
change our diets. But most of us do not yet understand that news is to the mind 
what sugar is to the body. News is easy to digest. The media feeds us small 
bites of trivial matter, tidbits that don't really concern our lives and don't 
require thinking. That's why we experience almost no saturation. Unlike reading 
books and long magazine articles (which require thinking), we can swallow 
limitless quantities of news flashes, which are bright-coloured candies for the 
mind. Today, we have reached the same point in relation to information that we 
faced 20 years ago in regard to food. We are beginning to recognise how toxic 
news can be.

News misleads. Take the following event (borrowed from Nassim Taleb). A car 
drives over a bridge, and the bridge collapses. What does the news media focus 
on? The car. The person in the car. Where he came from. Where he planned to go. 
How he experienced the crash (if he survived). But that is all irrelevant. 
What's relevant? The structural stability of the bridge. That's the underlying 
risk that has been lurking, and could lurk in other bridges. But the car is 
flashy, it's dramatic, it's a person (non-abstract), and it's news that's cheap 
to produce. News leads us to walk around with the completely wrong risk map in 
our heads. So terrorism is over-rated. Chronic stress is under-rated. The 
collapse of Lehman Brothers is overrated. Fiscal irresponsibility is 
under-rated. Astronauts are over-rated. Nurses are under-rated.

We are not rational enough to be exposed to the press. Watching an airplane 
crash on television is going to change your attitude toward that 
risk, regardless of its real probability. If you think you can compensate 
with the strength of your own inner contemplation, you are wrong. Bankers and 
economists – who have powerful incentives to compensate for news-borne hazards 
– have shown that they cannot. The only solution: cut yourself off from news 
consumption entirely.

News is irrelevant. Out of the approximately 10,000 news stories you have read 
in the last 12 months, name one that – because you consumed it – allowed you to 
make a better decision about a serious matter affecting your life, your career 
or your business. The point is: the consumption of news is irrelevant to you. 
But people find it very difficult to recognise what's relevant. It's much 
easier to recognise what's new. The relevant versus the new is the fundamental 
battle of the current age. Media organisations want you to believe that news 
offers you some sort of a competitive advantage. Many fall for that. We get 
anxious when we're cut off from the flow of news. In reality, news consumption 
is a competitive disadvantage. The less news you consume, the bigger the 
advantage you have.

News has no explanatory power. News items are bubbles popping on the surface 
of a deeper world. Will accumulating facts help you understand the world? 
Sadly, no. The relationship is inverted. The important stories are non-stories: 
slow, powerful movements that develop below journalists' radar but have a 
transforming effect. The more "news factoids" you digest, the less of the big 
picture you will understand. If more information leads to higher economic 
success, we'd expect journalists to be at the top of the pyramid. That's not 
the case.

News is toxic to your body. It constantly triggers the limbic system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2012/may/16/neuroscience-psychology>
. Panicky stories spur the release of cascades of glucocorticoid (cortisol). 
This deregulates your immune system and inhibits the release of growth 
hormones. In other words, your body finds itself in a state of chronic stress. 
High glucocorticoid levels cause impaired digestion, lack of growth 
(cell, hair, bone), nervousness and susceptibility to infections. The 
other potential side-effects include fear, aggression, tunnel-vision 
and desensitisation.

News increases cognitive errors. News feeds the mother of all cognitive 
errors: confirmation bias. In the words of Warren Buffett: "What the human 
being is best at doing is interpreting all new information so that their prior 
conclusions remain intact." News exacerbates this flaw. We become prone to 
overconfidence, take stupid risks and misjudge opportunities. It also 
exacerbates another cognitive error: the story bias. Our brains crave stories 
that "make sense" – even if they don't correspond to reality. Any journalist 
who writes, "The market moved because of X" or "the company went bankrupt 
because of Y" is an idiot. I am fed up with this cheap way of "explaining" the 
world.

News inhibits thinking. Thinking requires concentration. Concentration 
requires uninterrupted time. News pieces are specifically engineered to 
interrupt you. They are like viruses that steal attention for their own 
purposes. News makes us shallow thinkers. But it's worse than that. News 
severely affects memory. There are two types of memory. Long-range memory's 
capacity is nearly infinite, but working memory is limited to a certain amount 
of slippery data. The path from short-term to long-term memory is a choke-point 
in the brain, but anything you want to understand must pass through it. If this 
passageway is disrupted, nothing gets through. Because news disrupts 
concentration, it weakens comprehension. Online news has an even worse impact.
In a 2001 study two scholars in Canada 
<http://www.wired.com/magazine/2010/05/ff_nicholas_carr/> showed that 
comprehension declines as the number of hyperlinks in a document increases. 
Why? Because whenever a link appears, your brain has to at least make the 
choice not to click, which in itself is distracting. News is an intentional 
interruption system.

News works like a drug. As stories develop, we want to know how they continue. 
With hundreds of arbitrary storylines in our heads, this craving is 
increasingly compelling and hard to ignore. Scientists used to think that the 
dense connections formed among the 100 billion neurons inside our skulls were 
largely fixed by the time we reached adulthood. Today we know that this is not 
the case. Nerve cells routinely break old connections and form new ones. The 
more news we consume, the more we exercise the neural circuits devoted to 
skimming and multitasking while ignoring those used for reading deeply and 
thinking with profound focus. Most news consumers – even if they used to be 
avid book readers – have lost the ability to absorb lengthy articles or books. 
After four, five pages they get tired, their concentration vanishes, they 
become restless. It's not because they got older or their schedules became more 
onerous. It's because the physical structure of their brains has changed.

News wastes time. If you read the newspaper for 15 minutes each morning, then 
check the news for 15 minutes during lunch and 15 minutes before you go to bed, 
then add five minutes here and there when you're at work, then count 
distraction and refocusing time, you will lose at least half a day every week. 
Information is no longer a scarce commodity. But attention is. You are not that 
irresponsible with your money, reputation or health. Why give away your mind?

News makes us passive. News stories are overwhelmingly about things you cannot 
influence. The daily repetition of news about things we can't act upon makes us 
passive. It grinds us down until we adopt a worldview that is pessimistic, 
desensitised, sarcastic and fatalistic. The scientific term is "learned 
helplessness". It's a bit of a stretch, but I would not be surprised if news 
consumption, at least partially contributes to the widespread disease of 
depression.

News kills creativity. Finally, things we already know limit our creativity. 
This is one reason that mathematicians, novelists, composers and entrepreneurs 
often produce their most creative works at a young age. Their brains enjoy a 
wide, uninhabited space that emboldens them to come up with and pursue novel 
ideas. I don't know a single truly creative mind who is a news junkie – not a 
writer, not a composer, mathematician, physician, scientist, musician, 
designer, architect or painter. On the other hand, I know a bunch of viciously 
uncreative minds who consume news like drugs. If you want to come up with old 
solutions, read news. If you are looking for new solutions, don't.

Society needs journalism – but in a different way. Investigative journalism is 
always relevant. We need reporting that polices our institutions and uncovers 
truth. But important findings don't have to arrive in the form of news. Long 
journal articles and in-depth books are good, too.

I have now gone without news for four years, so I can see, feel and report the 
effects of this freedom first-hand: less disruption, less anxiety, deeper 
thinking, more time, more insights. It's not easy, but it's worth it.

This is an edited extract from an essay first published at dobelli.com 
<http://dobelli.com/>. The Art of Thinking Clearly: Better Thinking, Better 
Decisions by Rolf Dobelli is published by Sceptre, £9.99. Buy it for £7.99 at
guardianbookshop.co.uk 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444759549>
 