
I must commend this terrific analysis by a former Sunday Times colleague, Liz 
Gerard, “The press and immigration: reporting the news or fanning the flames of 
hatred? 
<http://www.sub-scribe.co.uk/2016/09/the-press-and-immigration-reporting.html>”

It runs to almost 3,500 words and makes for uncomfortable reading. But 
journalists should make the effort because it is a factual account of truly 
industrial-scale misreporting and misrepresentation.

Her meticulous research, complemented by reproductions of front pages and 
statistical graphs, is a fine piece of work, worthy of being a Phd proposal.

By looking back to the coverage of immigration since the May 2010 general 
election, she has been able to reveal a disturbing pattern of wholly negative 
articles about refugees seeking asylum in Britain.


The worst culprits were the Daily Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress>, which splashed on migration 
issues on 179 occasions, and the Daily Mail, with 122 splashes. She writes:

“The Sun and Star see footballers and reality TV stars as better sellers, but 
are generally hostile [to immigration]. The Telegraph is not quite as fevered 
as the white-top tabloids, but shares their outlook.

The Guardian, i and Independent are all generally sympathetic, while the Times 
tries to steer a middle course.”

As for the Daily Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror>, it 
is “the one paper that has shunned front-page stories about migration”.

Recognising that “there is a groundswell of opinion that something needs to 
happen to stop this dangerous drip-feed of negative headlines”, Gerard asks: 
what is to be done?

Her first approach was to the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso), 
only to discover that it avoids getting involved in what might be termed 
“general” complaints.

As for the alternative regulator, Impress, which has yet to finalise its code 
of conduct, its complaints officer “was hopeful that the end product would be 
strong enough to tackle such drip-feed effects.” But it transpired that 
Impress, like Ipso, is wary of dealing with complaints “based on a collection 
of articles.”

There is more, much more, to appreciate in her article. And she promises yet 
more in future.

Let me finish with one of the examples turned up by Gerard that illustrates 
how the Express, in its desperation to publish anti-migrant material, happily 
regurgitates “news” stories.
 Daily Express, 23 November 2010. Photograph: Clipshare 
On 23 November 2010, it carried a splash “A gypsy’s mansion built on benefits” 
with an inside spread showing two pictures of the alleged house.

 Daily Express, 30 March 2016. Photograph: Clipshare 
On 30 March 2016, the Express ran “You pay for Roma gypsy palaces” with an 
inside spread also carrying two pictures.

Gerard writes: “Doesn’t the house and its interior look familiar?” Indeed they 
do.

The second use in the Express was doubtless prompted by a Sun spread (“Dun 
Roma-ing”) the day before. After all, one of the depressing features of 
anti-migrant stories is that newspapers have a habit of endlessly repeating 
them.

Anyway, please click now to Liz Gerard’s piece. 
<http://www.sub-scribe.co.uk/2016/09/the-press-and-immigration-reporting.html>
 