
A curious little cameo always plays out at the high court at the end of a day 
of evidence in the trial of a person accused of a serious sexual crime against 
women or young children. As the van carrying the accused sweeps out of the 
gates, a small crowd rushes forward, spitting venom at the alleged perpetrator. 
The police prevent the mob rushing the vehicle, but in a half-hearted fashion. 
After all, they seem to be saying, you can hardly blame these good, law-abiding 
and child-loving citizens for venting their fury at someone who has been 
accused of such heinous crimes.

You always wonder, though, what else motivates some people to make their way 
to the courtroom and hang around before their quarry appears. I’ve been at 
trials like this and watched the crowd surge forward. In the main, the throng 
is made up of people from edgy neighbourhoods of the type that make civilised 
people hold their noses.

The trial of someone accused of evil doings gives them the opportunity to say 
to politer society: “Look, you might think we are a thoroughly bad and 
disreputable lot, but at least we’re not as bad as him.” They feel better about 
themselves for a little while because they realise that they are not quite so 
bad after all.

It’s why sex offenders are targeted by other inmates. “You might think we’re 
hopeless criminals,” say the common thieves and murderers, “but we are still a 
few notches higher on the food chain than these nonces.” They compete with each 
other to land a blow on these dregs of society, knowing that someone will call 
theSun or the Star, which will report that the sex offender got his “just 
deserts”.

In the Commons on Thursday, another mob gathered and assembled stocks, in 
which they placed the virtual character of Sir Philip Greenbefore spending 
three hours lobbing rotten food at him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/philip-green-labelled-billionaire-spiv-in-commons-debate-on-knighthood>
. Green was like the former boss of theMirror group of newspapers, Robert 
Maxwell; he was an “asset-stripper”. He was “a billionaire spiv” who ought 
never to have received his knighthood. In fact, to many who sat on the green 
benches, he was worse than all these things: he had “shamed British capitalism”.

The right honourable ladies and gentlemen were beside themselves with glee at 
being handed this rare opportunity to show the country that, whatever we might 
think of them, they are essentially decent coves. None of them would ever stoop 
to the levels of avarice that Greenp did, as he enriched himself at theexpense 
of BHS and its 11,000 employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/28/frank-field-accuses-sir-philip-green-of-asset-stripping-bhs>
 and their hard-earned pension funds.

The Tories, though, have a higher category of opprobrium in which to bank all 
the disdain they have for Green. It’s the one that they use for the crime of 
“getting caught”. Green, you see, had become too greedy and had been caught and 
this had led to unwelcome scrutiny of capitalism and its nature. In normal 
circumstances, the Tories and their camp followers in the rightwing press can 
brand the enemies of capitalism as “socialists” or “the hard left”, seeking to 
steal the hard-earned cash of successful people and break up their assets.

Green, though, is one of them and so he would have to be sacrificed. Best to 
do it in public and let people know that as well as “bad capitalism” there is a 
lot of “good capitalism” and that most people are “good capitalists”. Soon, 
everyone will forget it as quickly as they forgot about all those people and 
all those companies whose names appeared in thePanama Papers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>and whose money has paid 
for thousands of prizes at Tory fundraising dinners. These Tories at 
Westminster, ably supported by Labour’s Blairites, are famed for giving 
capitalism a good name. What is it they say again when, regrettably, a company 
is taken over, its name changed, its historic debts unpaid, its workers sacked, 
its assets liquidated and the business renamed with fresh funding? “A little 
pruning now and then is cherished by the wisest men.”

Why, the Royal Bank of Scotland avidly sought to fill its boots by going after 
small businesses and imposing impossible terms and conditions on loans and 
overdrafts in a practice known internally as“the dash for cash” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37591335>. This bank and its brother institutions 
in the UK’s banking cartel, such as theBank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/30/astounding-failures-in-bank-of-scotland-checks-led-to-corruption-court-hears>
, brought the nation to the brink of economic catastrophe. In the eight years 
since, not a single boss has faced criminal charges.

Perhaps next month Theresa May could organise another one of these fun-filled 
parliamentary occasions when MPs get to pillory people and institutions. I 
would go further and have an annualX Factor and Great British Bake Off-themed 
event in which the public gets to strip a handful of prominent people and 
venerable businesses that have been caught with their long-johns down. We could 
call it The Purge. Using our telephones and smart devices, we could gather 
around the television and vote for all the other Philip Greens (the UK supports 
loads of them). First up would be the aforementioned RBS. I would propose 
taking away its right to use the title Royal. As we have a Bank of Scotland, 
that would be the end of RBS… and good riddance. This institution has cost 
Britain much more trouble and money than Green.

Then, of course, we’d have Tony Blair. He doesn’t have any UK honours but he 
has loads of massive properties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/14/tony-cherie-blair-property-empire-worth-estimated-27m-pounds>
. For his great act of folly in leading us into an illegal war, one of his 
properties should be confiscated every year until he finally decides to 
apologise for misleading the nation and making us a puppet state of George 
Bush’s hillbilly administration.

For the royal family, we could have a royal It’s A Knockout-themed show, in 
honour ofPrince Edward’s dismal attempt 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/was-this-the-day-when-royalty-lost-the-plot-1305932.html>
 at breaking into light entertainment in 1987. Here, we could get several of 
the most pointless royals, such as their Edward, Charles and Andrew, to fight 
it out across a series of obstacles to avoid being removed from the civil list.

We could hold this every year until not a single one of this family, which has 
cost the country more thanSir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>, took not another penny 
from the public purse.
 