
Obese people and smokers will be asked to lose weight and give up cigarettes 
or face delays to routine operations after a health authority’s proposals were 
approved byNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England.

Patients with a body mass index (BMI) of at least 30 will be asked to lose 
weight or face a 12-month delay for elective surgery while smokers will be 
asked to quit for two months or face a six-month postponement, the Vale of York 
Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) announced.

The North Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> CCG ruled 
out a “blanket” ban and said each patient would be dealt with on a 
“case-by-case basis” when the plan comes into force in January.

Decision to deny surgery to obese patients is like 'racial discrimination'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/03/hospitals-to-cut-costs-by-denying-surgery-to-smokers-and-the-obese>
The CCG said: “Smokers and obese patients that need routine surgery, but do 
not wish to access the support services or fail to meet the criteria will not 
be denied their operation, but it could mean they have to wait longer than they 
otherwise would have done.”

Dr Shaun O’Connell, the CCG clinical lead who is also a local GP, said the 
plans would give patients the “best possible health outcomes in the long term” 
while helping to protect finances.

O’Connell said: “There is no ban and no blanket policy … decisions about what 
is in the best interests of their health, will be made on a case-by-case basis.”

The CCG, which serves a population of more than 351,000 in areas including 
York, Selby and Tadcaster, said there would be exclusions from the plan, which 
will probably include emergency and bariatric surgery and operations on 
patients under 18.

This year, NHS England intervened in the policy after the Royal College of 
Surgeons raised concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/03/vale-of-york-nhs-obesity-smokers-deny-elective-surgery>
 that the proposals went against clinical guidance and made smokers and 
overweight patients soft targets for financial savings.

But the public body has now approved the plan.

An NHS England spokeswoman said: “Vale of York CCG has made clear its 
commitment to supporting patients to achieve better health and clinical 
outcomes by referring them to an established weight loss or stopping smoking 
programme, where appropriate.

“However, every patient’s case will be considered in the light of their own 
particular circumstances and on the basis of clinical need.”

A Downing Street spokesman said: “The Vale of York Clinical Commissioning 
Group has been very clear that there is no ban and no blanket policy. People 
who fail to meet certain criteria will not be denied their operation. 
Clinicians will give advice to patients and it is right that they do so.


“Procedures for patients will be based on the best interests of the patient’s 
health. They won’t be denied the operation. What is important is that the 
patients receive the appropriate clinical advice and that is what is taking 
place at the Vale of York CCTG.


“It’s consultants and clinicians whose job it is to give that advice, and it’s 
for them to advise what is in the best interests of their patients before they 
undergo surgery.”

 