
Nick Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> said his party had 
suffered a "bitter blow" as Britain rejected AV in the nationwide referendum on 
the voting system.

The Liberal Democrats were left reeling on a day that also saw hundreds of Lib 
Dem seats wiped out in English local elections, as well as suffering a heavy 
defeat in the Scottish parliamentary election, where they ended up with just 
five MSPs.

With almost all of the 440 results declared after more than 12.6 million 
people had rejected a switch to the Alternative Vote, with 5.2 million in 
favour – a margin of around 68% to 32% – which firmly quash the Lib Dems' 
cherished dream of electoral reform.

The rejection of AV, under which voters rank candidates in numerical order, 
was a further humiliation for Clegg the deputy prime minister, for whom a 
referendum on voting reform was his main prize in negotiations to form a 
coalition last year.

Clegg said the result was a "bitter blow" at the end of a "disappointing day" 
following election results which he said earlier showed his party was bearing 
"the brunt of the blame" for coalition spending cuts.

"I wish I could say this was a photo-finish but it isn't. The result is very 
clear," he said.

"I am a passionate supporter of political reform, but when the answer is as 
clear as this, you have got to accept it. In a democracy when you ask a 
question and you get an overwhelming answer, you just have to accept it and 
move on."

He added: "This is a bitter blow for all those people – like me – who believe 
in the need for political reform. But the answer is clear and the wider job of 
the government and the Liberal Democrats in government will continue: to repair 
the economy, to restore a sense of prosperity and jobs and optimism to the 
country. That's the job that we have started and we will see it through.

"Clearly this has been a really disappointing day and we have had a lot of 
very disappointing results overnight, but we are going to pick ourselves up, 
dust ourselves off and move on."

Clegg faced calls to quit from some of his own councillors after the party had 
the worst election night in its history, losing many seats to Labour, but 
senior Lib Dems rallied to his defence to insist that despite the setback on 
electoral reform and the party's disastrous showing, Clegg's position was safe 
and the coalition would survive.

Chris Huhne, a lib Dem member of the cabinet, who was vociferous in his 
criticism of the Conservatives' conduct of the AV campaign – said it was 
"ridiculous" to suggest that Clegg should lose his position or that the Lib 
Dems should quit the coalition.

"We have a coalition agreement which we have pledged to deliver and we plan to 
go ahead with it," he said.

The party's net loss in the elections across 279 in England saw them lose 
almost 700 seats: more than half the total they were defending, losing control 
of nine councils, with just 9 councils still to declare.

In contrast, their coalition partners hailed a result which saw the 
Conservatives gain control of three councils and win an additional 81 seats. 
The Conservatives estimated their vote share suggested a "Conservative victory" 
in local elections and an improved performance on the 2010 general election.

Labour secured 800 additional seats, gaining control of 26 more town halls 
with a few results still to come in.

But the first set of local and devolved election results under Ed Miliband's 
leadership saw a poor performance in Scotland, where they lost seven of their 
MSPs – a result which prompted Scottish Labour leader Iain Gray to say he would 
stand down.

The Electoral Commission said that a total of 19.1 million votes have been 
cast across Great Britain, giving a provisional turnout of 41.8% (a figure that 
does not include Northern Ireland).

Lord Mandelson, a keen supporter of electoral reform, said AV supporters had 
paid a "big price" for staging the national poll on the same day as the first 
elections to be held since the general election.

He also criticised the yes campaign for failing to do the "groundwork", and 
paid tribute to David Cameron for some "very bold leadership" which had seen 
him mobilise support at the expense of coalition unity, according to Mandelson.

Describing himself disappointed but "entirely unsurprised" by the results 
coming in, Mandelson said: "Nobody could have foreseen the extent to which the 
whole vote over the last 24 hours has become a referendum on the Liberal 
Democrats in general and Nick Clegg in particular."
 