


Nikki Haley

US permanent representative to the United Nations

Background

Nikki Haley stands out in a field of Trump nominees who are overwhelmingly 
wealthy and elderly white men. The South Carolina governor is 45, and the 
daughter of Indian Sikh parents. Compared with her rivals for the job of 
representing the US at the UN, she is not seen as highly ideological, nor does 
she have much diplomatic experience, although several ambassadors at the UN 
have said they have had dealings with her as governor.

In the course of the hearings, she will be closely questioned on her knowledge 
of the world’s flashpoints and scrutinised on whether she shares Trump’s world 
view, especially on Russia.

Key points to watch for

Relations with Russia: The relationship between the US and Russian 
representatives on the UN security council is central to the functioning of the 
body. Haley will be questioned on how she might improve that relationship and 
whether that would mean no longer holding Moscow to account for Ukraine, Syria 
and hacking the US election. Trump’s nominee for secretary of state, Rex 
Tillerson, said he had not discussed Russia with Trump. Has Haley?

Israel-Palestine: Expect Haley to lambast the security council and the Obama 
administration in general over the 23 December resolution condemning Israeli 
settlement building on the West Bank and in East Jerusalem. This will rack up 
easy points with Senate Republicans.

Syria: Haley may begin to sketch out how a Trump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> would seek to work 
with Russia to bring an end to the war in Syria, and to what extent that would 
imply support for Bashar al-Assad.

North Korea: Trump has said that North Korea will not build an 
intercontinental ballistic missile capable of delivering a nuclear warhead to 
the continental US. Haley will inevitably be asked how the new administration 
would go about ensuring that.

Usefulness of the UN: Haley will sound a sceptical tone on the UN, but will 
presumably describe it as capable of redemption, or otherwise why would her 
post have cabinet rank?
 