
Ruby Walsh, who was due to ride Sir Des Champs for Willie Mullins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins> in the Grand National at 
Aintree on Saturday, will miss the race after suffering a hairline fracture to 
a wrist in a fall from Blood Cotil in the Topham Chase here on Friday. Nina 
Carberry, the outstanding female jockey of her generation, will come in for the 
ride on the 22-1 chance, who was a winner at the Cheltenham Festival in 2011 
and 2012.

Walsh was stood down for the day after the fall, his second in two races after 
an unexpected departure from Vautour, the 1-5 favourite, in the Grade One 
Melling Chase earlier on the card.

The initial signs were promising that he would pass the doctor at the track on 
Saturday morning but an X-ray revealed a fracture which will force him to watch 
from the sidelines.

Grand National fears mount after two horses die from falls at Becher’s Brook
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/08/grand-national-fears-death-horse-gullinbursti>
Walsh was also due to ride Douvan, the brilliant winner of the Arkle Trophy at 
Cheltenham last month, in the Maghull Novice Chase on the same card, and 
Yorkhill, who took the Neptune Investment Novice Hurdle three weeks ago, in the 
Mersey Novice Hurdle. Both horses, who will be odds-on to make a significant 
contribution to Mullins’s challenge for the British trainers’ title, will now 
be ridden by Paul Townend.

Carberry, meanwhile, suddenly has a realistic chance to become the first 
female jockey to win theGrand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational>. She had expected to watch 
the race on television having been booked to ride a reserve who did not get 
into the final field. Now she will be aboard a horse whose best form would make 
him a serious contender.

Mullins took a lead of just over £54,000 in the race for the British trainers’ 
championship during racing here on Friday, but the fall of Vautour brought a 
sudden halt to his apparently relentless progress towards the title.

In the favourite’s absence the Tom George-trained God’s Own and Paddy Brennan 
took the £112,000 first prize, a purse that most punters and bookies had 
assumed would take Mullins into a clear lead over Paul Nicholls, the champion 
trainer in nine of the last 10 seasons.

Vautour cleared the first eight fences with his familiar slick precision but 
he put in an extra half-stride at the ninth and fell after clipping the top of 
the fence.

God’s Own then held the challenge of Al Ferof in the closing stages to win by 
two and three quarter lengths, giving Brennan his second Grade One win at the 
meeting after Cue Card’s victory in Thursday’s Betfred Bowl.
 