
Soft drinks <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/softdrinks> made with 
artificial sweeteners, such as diet colas, do not help people lose weight and 
may be as big a part of the obesity problem as the full-sugar versions, 
academics have said.


A paper by researchers at Imperial College London and two universities in 
Brazil contends that artificially sweetened beverages, often called diet 
drinks, are just as big a problem as those containing sugar. There is no 
evidence they help people lose weight, they say, possibly because people assume 
they can eat more because their drinks are low in sugar.

The report says the combined factors of what goes into artificially sweetened 
drinks, how they are consumed, and their environmental impact mean that “far 
from helping to solve the global obesity crisis [they are] a potential risk 
factor for highly prevalent chronic diseases”.

Sugar-sweetened drinks, including sports beverages, have been identified as 
one of the major causes of obesity. Many countries, including Mexico and 
France, have introduced sugar taxes to try to reduce consumption, and the UK 
plans to do so next year.

The Case Against Sugar review – an unsweetened attack on diet myths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/the-case-against-sugar-gary-taubes-review-compelling-attack-diet-myths>
Many manufacturers are looking to boost sales of drinks containing artificial 
sweeteners in order to escape the levy. Such products already account for 25% 
of the global soft drinks market.

Prof Christopher Millett, senior investigator at Imperial’s School of Public 
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, said: “A common 
perception, which may be influenced by industry marketing, is that because 
‘diet’ drinks have no sugar they must be healthier and aid weight loss when 
used as a substitute for full-sugar versions. However, we found no solid 
evidence to support this.”

The paper <http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002195>, published in the 
journal PLoS Medicine, is a commentary on the research done so far into 
artificially sweetened beverages promoted as healthier alternatives and the 
impact on weight.

It says the evidence does not suggest they help with weight loss, although 
they probably do not cause people to put on weight. Some studies show no weight 
loss; others show a small loss, but those studies were not always well done and 
were often funded by the soft drinks industry, the authors say.

Maria Carolina Borges, the first author of the study, from the Federal 
University of Pelotas, in Brazil, said: “The lack of solid evidence on the 
health effects of ASBs [artificially sweetened beverages] and the potential 
influence of bias from industry-funded studies should be taken seriously when 
discussing whether ASBs are adequate alternatives to SSBs [sugar-sweetened 
beverages].”

The paper argues that “given their negligible nutritional benefits and 
potential detrimental health impacts”, the environmental impact of 
manufacturing artificially sweetened drinks should be taken into account. It 
takes 150-300 litres of water to make one litre of drink, it says, and there is 
considerable solid waste and cumulative chemical pollution.

Prof Carlos Monteiro, a co-author, from the University of São Paulo, said: 
“Taxes and regulation on SSBs and not ASBs will ultimately promote the 
consumption of diet drinks rather than plain water, the desirable source of 
hydration for everyone.”

The British Soft Drinks Association dismissed the paper. Its director general, 
Gavin Partington, said: “Contrary to the claims made in this article, 
scientific research shows that low-calorie sweeteners, such as those found in 
diet drinks, help consumers manage their weight as part of a calorie-controlled 
diet.

“At a time when we are trying to encourage people to reduce their overall 
calorie intake it is extremely unhelpful that products that contain no sugar, 
let alone calories, are demonised without evidence.”

He added: “It’s worth bearing in mind that the UK soft drinks sector is the 
only category in which sugar is consistently falling year on year – over 17% 
since 2012.”

The sugar conspiracy | Ian Leslie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/07/the-sugar-conspiracy-robert-lustig-john-yudkin>
Global beverage companies have been investing in soft drinks, flavoured water, 
juices and ready-to-drink tea and coffee containing artificial sweeteners in 
response to the obesity crisis and the outcry over sugar. The World Health 
Organisation has said sugar should not be more than 10% of people’s energy 
intake, and preferably lower than 5%.

On Tuesday the supermarket chain Sainsbury’s announced a 13% cut in the sugar 
content of its own-brand cereals.

The government has asked food manufacturers to reduce the sugar content of 
their products by 5% by the end of this year. Sainsbury’s said it had also 
removed all illustrated characters from its cereal boxes as part of a 
commitment to responsible marketing to children.

Dr Alison Tedstone, chief nutritionist at Public Health England, said: “Our 
extensive evidence review showed swapping to low or no sugar drinks goes some 
way to managing calorie intake and weight.

“It’s especially so for young people as they consume three times the amount 
recommended, mostly from soft drinks. However, maintaining a healthy weight 
takes more than just swapping one product for another. Calories consumed should 
match calories used, so looking at the whole diet is very important.”
 