
Police in Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
have no plans to launch a fresh inquiry into killings carried out by British 
troops during the Troubles.

The force issued the statement after a front-page report in the Sun said 
officers would reinvestigate all 302 killings carried out by British troops. 
The paper said at least 500 ex-servicemen, many now in their 60s and 70s, would 
be “viewed as suspects” during the process.

The move was described to the Sun 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2353150/decision-to-investigate-brave-british-troops-over-killings-in-northern-irelands-30-years-of-the-troubles-branded-witch-hunt/>
 as a “brand new witch-hunt” by Conservative MP Johnny Mercer, a former army 
officer.

The Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Service of Northern Ireland 
(PSNI) clarified that officers in the Legacy Investigations Branch (LIB) were 
reviewing all murder cases linked to the Troubles, including those carried out 
by loyalist and republican paramilitary forces, and state personnel.

“There is no new single probe or bespoke inquiry into deaths attributed to the 
British army,” said assistant chief constable Mark Hamilton, head of the PSNI’s 
legacy and justice department. “All Troubles-related deaths will be reviewed by 
LIB using the case sequencing model, which does not prioritise military cases. 
This is not a new decision.”

The Ministry of Defence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> 
would provide legal representation for all affected soldiers, a spokesman told 
the Guardian.

The PSNI announced in 2013 that it would review all killings attributed to the 
military, following a report by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary 
(HMIC) that year which found that troops and police officers could face murder 
or manslaughter charges for killings that occurred when they were on duty.

The report criticised the LIB’s predecessor, the Historical Enquiries Team 
(HET), for failing to treat killings attributed to British troops in the same 
way as those believed to have been carried out by paramilitary forces. After 
the report, PSNI announced it would revisit all military-related cases “to 
ensure the quality of the review reached the required standard”.

In 2014, the LIB took over responsibility for investigating the 3,200 
homicides that took place during the Troubles. Rather than treating cases 
chronologically, the LIB looks at forensic opportunities, available witnesses 
and other investigative material when deciding which cases to tackle first, a 
spokeswoman for the PSNI explained. The branch’s workload includes 238 
incidents attributed to British troops, the spokeswoman confirmed.

This week officers in the LIB passed a report to the Public Prosecution 
Service in Northern Ireland to decide whether former members of the Parachute 
Regiment should be prosecuted over the 1972 Bloody Sunday shootings, in which 
14 activists were shot. The murder investigation started in 2012 following a 
public inquiry that found the killings were unjustifiable.

The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> reported that 302 people died 
in these incidents, which were mostly shootings, and that many of the incidents 
involved several personnel opening fire, meaning at least 500 veterans will 
have their cases reviewed. Half the dead are believed to be IRA or loyalist 
fighters, while the others are civilians, the paper said.


It said that some of those whose cases will now be re-examined were given 
pardons in the 1998 Good Friday peace deal, or received “letters of comfort” 
from Tony Blair assuring them they would not face prosecution.


Prosecutions stemming from killings during the Troubles are extremely rare. 
The Irish News journalist Allison Morris, who has reported extensively on the 
legacy process, has identified six criminal prosecutions resulting from such 
review processes in the past 18 years, all of which have taken place in the 
past five years. None of the prosecutions were of armed forces personnel or 
police officers.

The process of investigating unsolved murders by state forces as well as by 
loyalist and republican paramilitary units was a key aspect of 2015’s Fresh 
Start agreement.


Mercer told the Sun: “This is a brand new witch-hunt, as well as total and 
complete betrayal by the government of those who have done its bidding.”

A spokesman for James Brokenshire, the Northern Ireland secretary, told the 
Sun that the PSNI acted independently of the government.

He added: “While this government firmly believes in upholding the rule of law, 
we are concerned that investigations into Northern Ireland’s past focus almost 
entirely on former police officers and soldiers. This is wrong, and does not 
reflect the fact that the overwhelming majority of those who served did so with 
great bravery and distinction.”

A Ministry of Defence spokesman said: “The overwhelming majority of those who 
served in Northern Ireland did so with great bravery and distinction. Any 
member of the military affected by this process will rightly be supported 
throughout, and will have free Ministry of Defence legal representation.”
 