
Potentially the most serious threat to the UK in its 310-year history moved a 
step closer to fruition as the Scottish National party swept to untrammelled 
power in the Scottish parliament, giving its leader,Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>, a mandate to hold a 
referendum on independence at the time of his choosing within the next five 
years.

The stunning result in Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> – 
giving Salmond a working majority of nine at Holyrood – gave David Cameron a 
new constitutional headache as he saw off the introduction of the alternative 
vote for Westminster elections. The no campaign, of which Cameron was a vocal 
supporter, won the nationwide historic referendum on AV by an overwhelming 
margin of 68% to 32% on a 42% turnout.

In a presidential campaign Salmond turned round a Labour poll lead and swept 
through Scottish Labour's heartlands taking 69 seats, to Labour's 37. The SNP 
reached its majority by taking Kirkcaldy, the home turf of former Labour prime 
minister, Gordon Brown.

The stunning result in Scotland, caused by a collapse in the Liberal Democrat 
vote there and a rudderless Labour campaign, led Salmond to announce he would 
be holding conversations immediately with Cameron to "lay down markers as to 
what this result, what this mandate, means in terms of Scotland's relationship 
with the United Kingdom".

He will call for specific transfers of power to Scotland in an attempt to 
assemble slowly a consensus for independence, leading to a referendum at some 
point after 2013.

Cameron said: "If they want to hold a referendum, I will campaign to keep our 
United Kingdom together with every single fibre I have." Despite the SNP's big 
win, polls showed most voters in Scotland oppose independence.

In a rejection of the Liberal Democrats' 90-year quest for electoral reform 
and Nick Clegg's supposed big prize of the coalition, the yes camp won only 11 
of the 440 voting areas and not a single region in theAV referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av-referendum>.

Clegg accepted the result without complaint. "When you have such a 
overwhelmingly clear answer you just have to accept it and move on. This is a 
bitter blow for all those people who believe in the need for political reform, 
but the answer is clear and the wider job of the government, and the Liberal 
Democrats in government will continue, to repair the economy, to restore 
prosperity and jobs and a sense of optimism in the country. That is the job we 
started and we will see it though. We will dust ourselves off and move on."

Labour leader Ed Miliband, who also campaigned for a yes vote, said: "I am 
disappointed, but the people have spoken clearly on this issue, and it is a 
verdict I accept."

The result reignited angry Liberal Democrat cabinet accusations, led by the 
energy secretary, Chris Huhne, of bad faith by Cameron.

Senior yes campaign figures accepted they had never managed to persuade voters 
that there was a problem that needing fixing. They said in retrospect they 
needed as long as five years to build a consensus for change.

In probably the worst day for the Lib Dems since the party's formation in 
1988, Clegg also saw his painstakingly constructed citadels in northern town 
halls dismantled by swings to Labour in local council elections.

In his first nationwide electoral test, Miliband won more than 800 seats in 
the English council elections. Labour plans to govern alone in the Welsh 
assembly after making four gains that left them one seat short of an overall 
majority.

But Labour lost seven seats in the Scottish parliament, and Miliband's 
officials are disturbed by the way in which the Tories, across most of southern 
England, escaped serious punishment despite council spending cuts and an 
unprecedented squeeze on the living standards of middle England. The Tories 
made net gains of three councils and 154 seats, many from the Liberal 
Democrats, a fact Conservative headquarters refrained from advertising.

The Tory achievement, put alongside the Lib Dem reverses, underscored the 
contrasting fortunes of the two coalition partners.

Despite the reverberations from his reverses, in terms of Scottish independence
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence>, electoral reform 
and his party's cherished local government base, Clegg only faced isolated 
calls to resign from second string councillors.

But the former Liberal leader, Lord Steel, was one of many Lib Dems elders to 
demand a different kind of relationship. "Cosying up to the Tories has been 
wrong. Coalition now will have to be much more businesslike, less giving the 
impression of hearts and minds joining, which they are not," Steel said.

Clegg will respond sympathetically to these appeals to be more open about 
differences, and to the demands to push harder for favoured political projects 
such as Lords reform and social mobility.

Clegg himself admitted the results were dire. "In politics as in life 
sometimes you get these ups and down and we have taken a real knock," he said. 
Voters wanted reassurances that there was not going to be reliving Thatcherism.

Cameron tried to smooth relations with his coalition partners without making 
any specific concessions. He said: "Of course, the government has had to take 
difficult long-term decisions in the national interest and that always makes 
local elections difficult."

On the AV vote, Cameron said: "There will be no celebrating, there will be no 
congratulations."

He said that while the Tories and their coalition partners had "different 
histories and traditions and sometimes quite different views", the parties were 
working together to sort out the long-term problems the country faced.

"That is what we are committed to do and I am absolutely committed to make 
this coalition government, which I believe is good for Britain, work for the 
full five years of this term," the prime minister said.

"It is then that I believe the coalition and its parties will be judged by the 
electorate."

Some Tory rightwingers , such as Peter Bone and Bill Cash, pressed Cameron to 
exploit his electoral advantage and end the coalition before 2015.

In order for a Scottish referendum to take place, the Scottish parliament 
would first have to pass a bill setting up a referendum. If that was passed by 
Scottish voters, the Scottish government would negotiate with the UK government 
terms of independence including such issues as division of the national debt, 
North Sea oil, the future of the defence bases on the Clyde, Scotland's 
membership of the EU.

Westminster would then have to authorise a second and final referendum, asking 
the people of Scotland to confirm that they want independence on these terms. 
Successive British prime ministers have recognised the right to 
self-determination.

• This article was amended on 11 May 2011. The original gave 1998 as the year 
that the Liberal Democratic party was founded. This has been corrected.
 