
Two of the 10 meetings on the busy Boxing Day programme are in doubt after wet 
weather swept across the country on Monday, leaving the tracks at both Ffos Las 
and Fontwell close to unraceable. No problems are anticipated at Kempton Park, 
however, where the two-day Winter Festival meeting will open with theKing 
George VI Chase <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> card.

The bank holiday meeting at Ffos Las could succumb to the elements as early as 
Tuesday morning, with an inspection planned for 8am and the ground already 
heavy.

"We have had a fair drop of rain this morning and I've just checked the 
forecast again and it is due to be with us for most of the day," Tim Long, the 
course's general manager, said on Monday. "We will have a look at 8am tomorrow 
on the back of what we have today and what the forecast is like and take a view 
from there."

Ed Arkell, the clerk of the course at Fontwell, reported that the track had 
been raceable on Monday morning, "but we've had 11mm by this evening and the 
worst is to come. We'll have to see what we get tonight and then work out what 
we'll do tomorrow."

At Kempton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton>, however, there is keen 
anticipation of a meeting which will also include the seasonal debut of 
Sprinter Sacre, the top-rated chaser in training, in the Desert Orchid Chase on 
Friday.

"We've been forecast up to an inch of rain today," Barney Clifford, the clerk 
of the course, said on Monday, "but up to early afternoon we'd only had a 
couple of millimetres. Today is the windiest day, I think, and then it should 
settle down with sunny periods, possibly with the risk of a shower, over the 
next three days and turning wet again on Friday."

Nine runners are due to go to post for the King George after Captain Chris, 
last year's runner-up, was ruled out by a minor injury on Monday morning. "He 
banged a joint schooling," Philip Hobbs, his trainer, said. "It's nothing 
serious but he won't be running."

Paul Nicholls, who has already won the race a record seven times, will saddle 
both Silviniaco Conti and Al Ferof.

"Everything is on schedule," Nicholls said on Monday. "I think the rain at 
Kempton will definitely help Silviniaco Conti. You'd be worried it wouldn't 
suit him so well round there if it was quick.

"Al Ferof is well. There is a bit of a doubt at the trip on softer ground but 
he's by Dom Alco, they stay well and he looked like he was staying on up the 
hill when winning the Paddy Power [at Cheltenham] last year. I can't split them 
really."

The bookmakers cannot separate The New One and My Tent Or Yours in the betting 
for the main supporting race on the Kempton card, the Grade One Christmas 
Hurdle. Both are top-priced at 11-10 and it is then 20-1 bar those two in a 
six-strong field.
 