
Hi, Noel. Brotherhood <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brotherhood> is out on 
DVD. Do you get excited about things such as Christmas-timed home entertainment 
releases?

I don’t really get excited. I’m a bit long in the tooth for that now. It’s 
definitely nice, especially because the film did so well, but you know, that’s 
what’s supposed to happen.

Kidulthood <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/mar/03/4> came out 10 
years ago. Will people still be watching this trilogy in 10 years’ time?

The films will be dated in the way that they look: the old phones and the Game 
Boy colour and all that. But the story of working-class people going through 
what they go through – that’s never going to stop, is it? The story in the 
first one is pretty weak, but it stands the test of time because people related 
to it so much. The second story is much better, but maybe the film is not as 
well made, but that was my first time directing. I think the third one is the 
best of all three, but because it has the first two to stand on.

In one scene in Brotherhood <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brotherhood> you 
get rinsed by Stormzy’s character for being an old git using dated slang. Was 
that a nod to you no longer being the young provocateur film-maker you once 
were?

I think I’m now just the older provocateur film-maker. I still make films that 
I think people don’t want to acknowledge and don’t want to give credit to, but 
they can’t ignore them.Charles Gant wrote an article 
<https://www.bifa.film/awards/news/knowing-the-score> about the top independent 
British films of the year: Brotherhood is No 4, above David Brent, above I, 
Daniel Blake, above High Rise. The numbers don’t lie.

Are you saying you don’t get the respect of more arthouse friendly films?

There just needs to be an element of respect for our own film-makers. I was 
withDavid Oyelowo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/24/david-oyelowo-theres-resistance-to-films-with-a-black-protagonist-video-interview>
 on a panel the other day and he said there’s a drain of talent because people 
here aren’t respected. That’s why he left, that’s why David Harewood left, 
that’s why Idris left, that’s why Chiwetel(1) left, that’s why everyone leaves.

Are you hinting that you’re next?

If I feel like I’m butting my head against a glass ceiling then, 100%, I’ll be 
gone. But so far I’ve still been able to make the projects I want to make. I 
was born and raised here. I don’t need to chase going over to America.

Stormzy told me he liked that he could go from reaching big audiences to 
hanging out with suits to seeing a friend who had just got out of prison. Is 
that something you can identify with, having a toe in different worlds?

Sure. Yesterday I was in Berlin, on a set with massive stars (2). Next week, 
I’m meeting a friend for coffee who has come out of prison. But I don’t feel 
like that’s anything special. The difference is, people like Stormzy and myself 
are not expected to succeed. So when we do, it’s a story. “Oh yes, aren’t they 
authentic blah blah blah.” No, that’s life. Everyone know’s someone that’s been 
in trouble. Everyone knows someone who has got like 10 kids with 10 different 
women. It’s not a story.

Your company (3) takes unsolicited scripts from new writers. Are they mostly 
rubbish?

Yeah, there’s lots of rubbish but we do find good stuff and occasionally we 
start developing. There are two things on our slate that were from completely 
random new writers. They’re very close to getting made, actually, so it does 
work.

You grew up in Ladbroke Grove, in north-west London, which you say is the 
streets but I think is very posh. How do you feel about the way that area has 
changed in your lifetime?

What I like about west London is that it’s still really mixed because there 
are so many residents in the council estates, you just can’t get rid of them. 
The area is such a melting pot and it always has been, but it has become 
ridiculously expensive.

Do you worry that, in a generation’s time, it will be a lot less mixed?

I think people from different cultures will still mix, but those people will 
probably all be middle class. But that doesn’t mean they won’t have a 
working-class mentality. My kids are not just handed things. It’s like: you 
work hard, you do good stuff, you get a star. You get 10 stars, you get a 
reward or whatever. It’s about earning. That’s the mentality that I’m trying to 
implement in them. Ladbroke Grove still has a kind of bohemian, working-class, 
hard-graft mentality, it’s never going to be like millionaires’ row, where 
everyone has a nanny and has help.

So you’ve got the star system with your kids but complete this sentence: The 
problem with young people today is …

I wouldn’t say that the problem is with young people; the problem with society 
is that it lets young people believe that there’s a quick, easy way to succeed: 
go on X Factor, be a YouTuber, put your stuff on Soundcloud. If you’re a girl: 
just go and get your boobs out. For a boy: you don’t need to do anything but be 
a sportsman or a rapper. That’s society. That’s not young people. We need to 
re-educate them: every rapper you see needs a manager, they need an A&R. Every 
footballer needs a physio, they need a coach. Every actor needs an agent, they 
need a lawyer. Those are the jobs you can be equally if not more successful in, 
you know. Focus in on those careers.

Brotherhood is on download now and will be released on Blu-ray and DVD on 26 
December.

Footnotes


1) That’s Idris Elba and Chiwetel Ejiofor to you and me.

2) I tried to find out what the movie was, all he would say is that it’s a 
“huge” project.

3) Noel’s production company, Unstoppable Entertainment, has an open 
submissions policy.
 