
Norway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> has become the first country 
in the world to start phasing out the FM radio signal in favour of Digital 
Audio Broadcasting (DAB).

The switch off, which will take place gradually region by region, began on 
Wednesday morning on the edge of the Arctic circle in the northernmost city of 
Bodø. It was broadcast live on Norwegian television.

The Norwegian government has said the cost savings, which it estimates will be 
around 200m Norwegian kroner (£19m) a year, will let broadcasters invest more 
in programming, and give listeners a better and more reliable sound that will 
be more easily receivable in a country with lots of mountains and rocks.

Norway has long felt the disadvantage – and the expense – of getting FM 
signals to a relatively small population of 5.25 million spread around a 
landscape shaped by fjords and mountains. It has already turned off its long 
and medium-wave transmitters. Community radio and smaller local radio stations 
will continue to broadcast on FM until 2022, after which licences will be 
reviewed.

The government decided that with 70% of Norwegian households already tuning in 
digitally it was time to phase out the dated technology, which it said costs 
eight times more than DAB. Norway has 26 DAB or DAB+ (a more advanced version) 
channels, including the five on the FM spectrum that are soon to be removed.

But the transition has faced a considerable amount of scepticism, with many 
listeners complaining in Bodø that their radio reception was poor.

“This morning I put my DAB radio on and it had a very glitchy sound,” said 
Lasse Marhaug <http://lassemarhaug.no/home>, a sound artist and composer. “And 
digitial glitching is not as warm as an FM crackle. It made me think maybe it’s 
not such a good idea. In Norway we’re so keen to be first with everything, I 
wonder if we’re not going into this too fast.”

Elderly Norwegians who are particularly dependent on the radio, have been most 
vocal about the expense and hassle of having to replace old FM sets and first 
generation DAB sets which will no longer work on the new DAB+ system.

Up to 2.3 million car users have no DAB sets at all, and many fishermen for 
whom radio is vital, are also said to be ill-equipped. Critics have warned that 
emergency traffic messages – often vital in Norway’s inclement winters – may go 
unheard.

Motorists have been bombarded with offers to either upgrade their analogue 
sets using a 1,500 kroner (£143) adapter or to buy a new DAB radio for around 
4,000 kroner.

In a poll conducted by the daily newspaper Dagbladet, around two-thirds of 
Norwegians said the government was acting too fast. Much of the discussion has 
centred on the elderly and fears that they could be left isolated because they 
have neither the money nor the technical knowhow to make the transition. DAB 
sets for the home cost around 1,000 kroner.

Marhaug, 42, said his elderly father had spent a small fortune replacing the 
seven radio sets he has around his home. “He is a typical Norwegian – being so 
spread out, we’re very much a nation of radio listeners, and he depends on it 
as his main source of information and communication,” he said.

Dubbed ‘FMExit’, the transition is being closely watched by other nations in 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> considering the move, in 
particular Britain, Denmark and Switzerland, all of which are considered to be 
well prepared. The region of South Tyrol in northern Italy will also begin its 
FM switch off this year. Other countries such as France and Germany, where 
broadcasters have failed to be convinced of the advantages of DAB, are 
considerably behind.

Germany was due to switch off FM signals by 2015, but in 2011 MPs voted 
against the schedule.

In the UK more than 45% of radio listening is digital. The government has said 
the switch from FM to DAB will happen when the figure stands at 50% and the DAB 
signal can be received by 90% of the population.

“The main reason behind this big technological change is that we want to offer 
a better radio service to the entire population,” said Ole Jorgen Tormark, the 
head of Digitalradio Norge, which is owned by the public broadcaster NRK and 
the commercial station P4.

He argued that DAB would offer better coverage, would allow listeners to catch 
up on programmes they missed, and offered a more reliable method of 
broadcasting vital crisis bulletins in times of emergency.

The advocates of the move say that as DAB and FM have operated side by side 
for almost 22 years, the move should be a smooth one.

The FM switch-off is due to be finished in Troms and Finnmark on 13 December.

FM or Frequency Modulation was invented in the United States 1933 and made 
widely available in the 1950s. DAB was developed by researchers in the 1980s.

Amid the wave of nostalgia being felt towards FM, one Norwegian artist has 
said he is planning a requiem for the old radio waves, which gradually diminish 
as the year progresses.

Marhaug said: “There’s a great deal of nostalgia. I miss the white noise 
already. It’s like someone has died – and there’s no way back.”
 