
Norway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> will next week become the 
first nation to start switching off its FM radio network, in a risky and 
unpopular leap to digital technology that will be closely watched by other 
countries considering whether to follow suit.

Critics say the government is rushing the move and fear many people may miss 
emergency alerts that until now have been broadcast via FM radio. Of particular 
concern are the 2m cars on Norway’s roads that are not equipped with digital 
audio broadcasting (DAB) receivers, they say.

Sixty-six per cent of Norwegians oppose switching off FM, 17% are in favour 
and the rest are undecided, according to an opinion poll published by the daily 
Dagbladet last month.

Nevertheless, parliament has given the final go-ahead for the move, swayed by 
the fact that digital networks can carry more channels.

Six of the best DAB radios
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/19/digital-radios-six-of-the-best-dab>
Switzerland plans a similar move from 2020, and Britain and Denmark are among 
those alsoconsidering such a switch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/16/digital-radio-switchover-2020-ed-vaizey>
. A smooth transition to DAB, which is already beamed across Norway, could 
encourage these countries to move ahead.

The shutdown of the FM (frequency modulation) network, introduced in the 
1950s, will begin in the northern city of Bodø on 11 January. By the end of the 
year, all national FM broadcasts will cease.

“We’re the first country to switch off FM but there are several countries 
going in the same direction,” said Ole Jørgen Torvmark, head of Digital Radio 
Norway, set up by the national broadcasters NRK and P4 to help the transition.

Torvmark said cars were the biggest challenge: a good digital adaptor for an 
FM car radio cost 1,500 Norwegian kroner (£140), he said.

Ib Thomsen, an MP from the Progress party, a partner in Norway’s 
Conservative-led government, was scathing about the move. “We are simply not 
ready for this yet,” he told Reuters.

“There are 2m cars on Norwegian roads that don’t have DAB receivers, and 
millions of radios in Norwegian homes will stop working when the FM net is 
switched off. So there is definitely a safety concern.”

For the same cost, digital radio allows for eight times as many stations as 
FM, and is said to have clearer sound and less hiss. The current system of 
parallel FM and digital networks, each of which costs about 250m kroner, saps 
investment in programmes.

Britain plans to review the need for a switchover once digital listening 
reaches 50%. On current trends that could be by the end of 2017, a Digital 
Radio UK spokeswoman said.
 