
About a third of the way through this collection of brief, lapidary 
propositions and thoughts on the making of films, we see, in shouty capitals: 
“THE SOUNDTRACK INVENTED SILENCE.” There are a couple more occasions when 
Bresson resorts to such typography, but this is the most striking in that it 
uses a loud voice, so to speak, to evoke silence. It is also correct, you 
realise: after all, before soundtracks you had either a continuous musical 
accompaniment, or the clattering of the projector itself.

If there were any director you might expect to write what is, in effect, a 
philosophical notebook on the art and science of film-making, it would be 
Bresson. He studied philosophy as a young man, as well as painting, an ideal 
pairing for the contemplative, ascetic cinema ofDiary of a Country Priest, 
Pickpocket and A Man Escaped – all from the 1950s, when the bulk of these notes 
were written. He started off as a scriptwriter, so he knows the value of words. 
Notice the way he insists on calling it “cinematograph” rather than cinema. Not 
a fancy Gallicism: more a reminder to us that cinema is a kind of writing – cf 
“photograph”, writing with light. There is a lot of silence in his films, and 
yet this very stillness draws in the viewer. As Bresson puts it: “Draw the 
attention of the audience (as we say that a chimney draws).” (French:tirer.)

This translation, by Jonathan Griffin, first appeared in 1977, two years after 
the book’s French publication, and 22 years before Bresson’s death, aged 98. It 
features an introduction by JMG Le Clézio, who went on to win the Nobel prize 
for literature in 2008. I can admire Le Clézio’s fiction, but his introduction 
really is all fancy Gallicism. “To Bresson, art is the only possible escape 
from the bitterness of impotence. But it is also much more. It gives way to the 
only visible part of the being, the merging part.” The what?

Bresson does not express himself like that because film-making isn’t just an 
art, it’s a science and involves a number of practical skills. There must be 
nothing extraneous or redundant: everything in the frame has to be there for a 
reason, and he knows this. You can tell very quickly that the practical 
experience of making a film, the literal nuts and bolts of it, is never far 
from his mind. “Get to know my resources, make sure of them,” ends the first 
note in the book. “The faculty of using my resources well diminishes when their 
number grows,” runs the second. These two statements should be tattooed on the 
hands of every aspirant film-maker, and not just aspirant ones, come to think 
of it. He is also good on directing actors, or “models” as he called them (he 
preferred to cast unknowns, and indeed non-professionals). He was no fan of 
“acting”: “The terrible habit of theatre,” runs one note in its entirety.

But why should we be interested in the notes of an obscure director from 
another country? Well, Bresson was one of the great directors, and even at a 
time when most of the best directors in the world were French, he was still 
remarkable. What he had to say is worth listening to. He was a film-maker who, 
in David Thomson’s deft words, “photographs reserved faces to evoke all the 
wildest emotions of the spirit”. And how many of us like to imagine ourselves 
as directors from time to time? This is also a collection that reaches beyond 
its subject matter. It actuallyis philosophy. “Things made more visible not by 
more light, but by the fresh angle at which I regard them.” That doesn’t just 
apply to film directors.

• Notes on Cinematograph is published by NYRB Classics. To order a copy for 
£7.64 (RRP £8.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/notes-on-the-cinematograph.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 