
In the runup to the inauguration of its first president, the republic of the 
United States was engaged in an earnest debate over how to address its new 
leader. After a month the joint congressional committee on titles came up with: 
"His High Mightiness, the President of the United States and Protector of their 
Liberties." By some accounts George Washington was more than happy, but others 
feared that it smacked too much of the deferent, monarchical culture they had 
just deposed. After much discussion they agreed on "Mr President" – ensuring 
that for all the trappings of office and power enshrined in the constitution 
nobody in the country enjoyed a higher title than Mr.

More than two centuries later the basic tensions highlighted by those 
deliberations still inform the contradictory characteristics Americans seek in 
a president. On the one hand they want him (and so far it has always been a 
him) to be just like them. Frustrating though it may be to those who follow 
policies and platforms, the polling questions about whom voters would most like 
to have a beer or carpool with matter. They suggest a human connection, even if 
it is only imagined, that is neither irrational nor entirely shallow. People 
want to know that the person they are electing can relate to them and their 
daily lives. When George Bush Sr announced himself "amazed" at the sight of an 
electronic scanner in 1992 it helped frame him as out of touch as the nation 
emerged from recession.

On the other hand there is a desire for the president to exude the gravitas of 
the office. Indeed, there is a reverence for the post that verges on the 
indecent in a democracy. So when people refer to "presidential" qualities they 
are not talking about human attributes but traits that might emerge almost 
magically from the seal itself. It's as though the occupant of the West Wing 
must have singularly impressive and uncommon abilities and judgment worthy of 
heading a nation many refer to as "God's own country".

Needless to say this navigation between the ordinary and the extraordinary is 
little more than a mediated performance. The fact that George W Bush clears 
brush,Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> plays 
basketball or Bill Clinton eats fast food is unremarkable. The fact that they 
are seen doing it is what is significant. In a controlled media environment 
what you are allowed to see them doing matters.

Obama performs the presidency badly. Over the past two years he has managed to 
come across as aloof, detached and occasionally dithering. On a human level his 
professorial demeanour makes him look like a leader who understands but does 
not necessarily feel. On a presidential level it makes him look like a leader 
who prefers to think than to act.

This dislocation is particularly acute because his candidacy – rooted in the 
promise of change – endowed his presidency with expectations of transformation 
both symbolic and substantial that no individual could possibly meet.

This became painfully apparent last week during a televised town hall meeting 
whenVelma Hart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/21/barack-obama-us-democrats-midterms>
, a black woman – the demographic bedrock of Obama's base – expressed her 
frustration with his presidency. "I'm exhausted. I'm exhausted of defending 
you, defending your administration, defending the mantle of change that I voted 
for, and deeply disappointed with where we are right now."

Obama acknowledged hard times but went on to answer with a laundry list of 
achievements. His answer was competent but at no time did it emotionally 
connect with her or anyone else. Afterwards, Hart told the Washington Post: "I 
think he has made progress. I just thought by now the progress would be more 
evident for the man-on-the-street level. I thought there was something special 
and secret he knew that would make things operate differently."

Asked if she thought her expectations had been unrealistic, she said: 
"Absolutely. It took decades to get here. He's only been in office for two 
years. But I guess I started to believe, on some small level, that he had a 
magic wand."

In the absence of a magic wand Obama's task is to funnel that utopian energy 
he unleashed into the incremental realities and institutional limits of his 
office. He campaigned in the big picture; now he must govern in detail. In a 
practical sense this is not a problem: he is clearly more comfortable in shades 
of grey than in black or white. For example, in Bob Woodward's new book, 
Obama's Wars, he says he doesn't think about the Afghan war in "classic" terms 
of winning or losing: "I think about it more in terms of: do you successfully 
prosecute a strategy that results in the country being stronger rather than 
weaker at the end?"

This cerebral trait was once regarded as an asset. Whereas his predecessor was 
impetuous, Obama was praised for being contemplative and unflappable. Bush had 
a gut; Obama had a brain. Bush was the "decider"; Obama was the thinker. After 
eight years of a president who mastered a performance that did not square with 
reality and had no patience for policy, the country was ready for more 
substance.

But performatively, it is insufficient. It turns out that there are moments 
when flappable beats stoic in public perception. His slow-burn approach to 
problem-solving conveys to many not deliberation but detachment. He has proved, 
at times, unable or unwilling to reflect the public mood. During the Louisiana 
oil spill he came off as insufficiently angry and urgent.

Whether one thinks these impressions should matter or not is an entirely 
different issue to whether they do. Take the economy. Throughout the recession 
Obama has appeared insufficiently impatient and distraught at the pace of 
improvement and the toll it is taking on ordinary families. Perceptions of his 
lack of urgency relate to the slow rate of progress his policies are having on 
the economy and the fact that most of his signature achievements – the stimulus 
bill and healthcare reform – have not been experienced by most as having 
improved their lot.

When he took office 72% of voters believed he understood "the problems of 
people like you" – that figure is now down to 50%. Many Democrats are desperate 
for him to feel somebody's pain.

'I would like to see him be a lot less cerebral and a little more emotional," 
Jim Moran, a Democratic congressman from Virginia, told the New York Times. 
Others just want him to come across as more accessible. "He needs more Ray's 
Hell Burgers and less candlelight dinners," said Kenneth Duberstein, Ronald 
Reagan's former chief of staff (who supported Obama in 2008).

Last week Bill Clinton, the performer- in-chief, gave his advice 
<http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0910/42598.html>: "Embrace people's 
anger, including their disappointment at you," he told politico.com. "And just 
ask 'em to not let the anger cloud their judgment. Let it concentrate their 
judgment. And then make your case."

Obama does have a case. But his tepid economic policies mean it's not as good 
as it might be and his poor performance means he doesn't make it as well as he 
might do. The next time he meets someone like Hart he not only needs something 
more impressive to say to her, he needs to find a more impressive way of saying 
it.
 