
The founder of Appliances Online, who set up the business following a £1 bet 
in a pub, is set to scoop £400m in cash and shares when the business floats 
next month.

AO, as the internet-only retailer is now known, is expected to be valued at 
£1bn - more than three times the valuation placed on it by analysts recently. 
John Roberts owns nearly 40% of the company, putting him in line for a windfall 
of around £400m whan AO lists on the London stock market.

The firm is at the head of a queue of as many as 15 British retailers expected 
to float this year with a total valuation of around £8bn. Convenience store 
retailer McColl's confirmed plans for an initila public offering last week 
while Pets at Home and Poundland are expected to reveal their plans within a 
fortnight. The businesses are hoping to cash in on a surge in the equity 
valuations of retailers amid hopes of a recovery in the consumer economy and 
investors' new supply of cash from multimillion pound payouts from the likes of 
Vodafone.

AO has signed up Brian McBride, chairman of online fashion retailer ASOS, as a 
senior non-executive in a bid to replicate the success of the web clothing 
business, which has seen its shares rise 2,000% in the past five years.

The kitchen appliance website, which was founded in 2000 by Roberts, wants to 
raise about £60m from issuing new shares while existing shareholders, led by 
Roberts and his management team, will also sell stock.

Roberts said: "We are recognised as a stand out competitor within the IPO 
queue. We are not the product of private equity deal. We are not taking profits 
and running for the hills or refinancing our balance sheet to pay off debts. 
I'm not going anywhere and there is passion and energy in this business. It is 
like my sixth child."

The new funds raised will go towards enhancing the online retailer's services, 
extending from washing machines, fridges and cookers into new markets such as 
TVs and small electrical appliances like kettles and toasters as well as 
expansion into Europe. The company has promised investors it will set up 
infrastructure, such as a warehouse and delivery network, to launch in Germany 
within 12 months of listing.

AO's finance director, Stephen Caunce, said: "Our ambition is to be the 
leading electricals retailer across Europe."

AO has had a significant impact on the UK's electricals market in recent few 
years as it has stepped into a gap left by US online giant Amazon, which does 
not sell large kitchen appliances, to attack high street chains such as Currys. 
In the year to March 2013, AO's sales rose nearly 30% to £275m and it achieved 
profits of £8.1m.

The etailer says it controls nearly a quarter of all online sales of major 
domestic appliances in the UK and expects that market to grow by 11% annually 
between 2013 and 2016. While city investors are keen to get their hands on 
another fast growing internet retailer, independent retail analyst Nick Bubb 
said AO was quite a different proposition to ASOS.

"White goods are obviously low margin products, compared to fashion, and it's 
hard to see that the business can ever make that much money, despite its 
excellent customer service reputation," he said.

Meanwhile, AO's plan to sell more small kitchen appliances and TVs puts it in 
direct competition with Amazon as well as major supermarkets and Dixons, which 
owns the PC World and Currys chains. AO's capability to set up overseas is also 
unproven.

But Roberts said: "The market is unquestionably moving on-line. Online is 
where all the growth is the only growth are of the electricals market."

He said AO had been able to grow quickly by offering the best prices, but also 
by offering superior service which had won it more fans than the much larger 
Tesco on social media site Facebook. "We are not only a price story. We deliver 
an outstanding level of service not matched by anyone else in our market," 
Roberts said.
 