
I queued in the early hours outside H&M to buy some of its new range by 
designer Kenzo. I spent just over £500 on items for my three daughters, 
intended as Christmas gifts.

I was disappointed that the receipt showed that for Kenzo items there is only 
a three-day window for returns or exchanges. Yet the same receipt says H&M has 
extended its refund policy until the end of January, allowing others who don’t 
like a Christmas gift to return them. Doesn’t this effectively dilute shoppers’ 
rights? PK, Hemel Hempstead, Herts

With the season of goodwill and joy – and shopping – looming, it’s worth 
reiterating to readers that retailers are under no obligation to accept returns 
unless they are faulty, but luckily most will provide a goodwill returns policy 
over Christmas.

That said, designer collaborations are always more strict than regular returns 
because of the huge demand, so it is unfortunate (or deliberate?) timing that 
these annual jamborees tend to be on the eve of the festive season. And, as you 
say, three days for purchases from stores is a tight window indeed.

H&M says this policy is clearly displayed at till points as well as on 
receipts. “Due to the increased demand of our designer collaborations, H&M 
reserves the right to amend our returns policy to three days, not including 
faulty items that can still be exchanged/refunded within 28 days. This does not 
affect our customers’ statutory rights and we ensure these guidelines are 
clearly communicated on sales receipts and throughout our stores,” a statement 
by H&M said.

Online purchasers (or those who actually managed to buy this range online – 
the website crashed on launch day) are in a better position as they will have 
28 days to complete their return, but still with the likelihood of falling 
short before Christmas. This might be unfair but underlines the fact that you 
should always check returns policies in advance. We just hope you don’t end up 
dressed head to toe in Kenzo yourself.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 