
Woody Allen said 80% of life is showing up. 


Every single day of my ministerial career I showed up. I did my job. I 
answered the hard questions. I faced the opposition, the media and the public.

Ask any NSW press gallery journalist. As premier I ended every media 
conference by asking, “Are there any more questions?”, and the journalists 
answering no.

Arthur Sinodinos defends no-show at Senate inquiry on political donations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/28/arthur-sinodinos-defends-no-show-at-senate-inquiry-on-political-donations>
Ask your fellow Coalition colleagues in NSW. Every time they called an 
inquiry, no matter how politically motivated, I showed up. An upper house 
inquiry into the murder of Michael McGurk: I showed up. An upper house inquiry 
into the sale of electricity assets: I showed up. 

After Barry O’Farrell was elected he instituted a second electricity 
transactions inquiry, conducted by Justice Tamberlin. I volunteered to show up 
to that as well, but was never called.  

Not one of these inquiries made adverse findings. If anything, these processes 
vindicated my actions. Tamberlin found my government acted with probity in 
regard to the electricity transactions and achieved the best possible result 
for taxpayers.   

As for planning, there was absolutely no evidence uncovered of any planning 
official involved in McGurk’s murder. Later Icac found no evidence 
of corruption in the NSW planning system while I was minister. 

So why won’t you turn up to the Senate and answer questions about the 
fundraising activities of the NSW Liberal party in the 2011 NSW state election?

Did you know the Free Enterprise Foundation was taking funds from prohibited 
donors and sending them to the NSW Liberal party? If you didn’t know, why not? 
You were the honorary treasurer and finance committee chair, after all. 

Who conceived this scheme? What legal advice did you receive? What advice did 
you give to candidates in regards to NSW fundraising laws and prohibited 
donors? Was O’Farrell aware of the washing of funds from prohibited donors? 

Here’s the question I really want you to answer: why the hell did the Liberal 
party undertake such stupid, questionable and potentially illegal acts in that 
election? I led a 16-year-old government that was trailing some pretty high 
profile scandals. Surely you could have just passed the plate for gold coin 
donations at the Ku-ring-gai and Manly Liberal party branch meetings and still 
won the election. 

Was it hubris? Was it immaturity? Was it carelessness? Was it idiocy?

Labor tries to set up snap Senate inquiry into NSW Liberals' fundraising 
scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/18/labor-tries-to-set-up-snap-senate-inquiry-into-nsw-liberals-fundraising-scandal>
Your party’s fundraising tipped more money into key seats and likely ended the 
careers of several good, hardworking Labor MPs who were simply outspent in the 
campaign. Now we know why. The funds were ill-gotten. The NSW Liberal party 
subverted democracy. Do you care?

I know you are at both the beginning and the end of your political career. 
After years of supporting others as an adviser, you finally have your chance to 
be the man, to make the decisions, to run the show and be seen to run the show. 
 

But this is also the end. You aren’t young. This is your second chance. There 
won’t be a third go. You are likely terrified this is how your whole career 
will be defined. 

You seem willing to do whatever it takes, including disrespecting the Senate 
when it exercises its proper authority, in the hope you can avoid the tough 
questions. 

You can’t. Not forever. 

I didn’t always believe in karma, but that bottle of vintage Grange a few 
years ago reminded me that people, more often than not, reap what they sow. 

Show up. 
 