
The Oscars race row made its presence felt at the Evening Standard film awards 
in London on Sunday night. The prizes, which are only eligible to British and 
Irish talent, featured a shortlist more ethnically-diverse than the Academy 
Awards, whose nominees luncheon takes place on Monday.


In what host Simon Amstell described in his opening monologue as “another 
great year for white men”, the best actor award was won byIdris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba> for his role as a ruthless 
rebel fighter who presides over a troop of child soldiers in Cary Fukunaga’s 
Beasts of No Nation. The performance, for which Elba has not been nominated for 
an Oscar, also secured him the same prize at the Screen Actors Guild awards 
last weekend.

Elba said Fukunaga had worked for six years to get the film together before he 
came onboard. The director, he said, is half Japanese, half American, “the crew 
were from New York and Ghana, and the money came from all over. That is fucking 
diversity.”

Accepting the editor’s award for Andrew Haigh’s marital drama 45 Years, the 
actor Tom Courtenay said that Elba’s victory was one which would go down well 
with his 45 Years co-starCharlotte Rampling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlotte-rampling> – an allusion to 
Rampling’s controversial comments about the debate being “racist to white 
people”.

“Charlotte is in America,” said Courtenay, “but she’ll be absolutely delighted 
that Idris won the award tonight.”

Charlotte Rampling: I regret that Oscars racism comment was 'misinterpreted'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/23/charlotte-rampling-i-regret-that-oscars-racism-comment-was-misinterpreted>
Rampling is up for best actress at the Academy Awards but on Sunday was beaten 
to the Evening Standard award by Maggie Smith for The Lady in the Van, in which 
she reprises her role in the film adaptation of Alan Bennett’s play some 17 
years after it was first staged – and 37 years after her most recent win at the 
Standard awards, for California Suite. The victory gives Smith, 81, a shot of 
fresh momentum ahead of next Sunday’s Baftas.

“See, there are parts for old actors,” she said in a speech in which she 
thanked Bennett, director Nicholas Hytner and her makeup and wardrobe team “for 
making me look so dirty” – as well as the real Miss Shepherd, the homeless 
woman she plays. “She was a funny old thing. But that’s how we all get when we 
get to be.”

Bennett himself took the Standard’s special award, presented to him by 
long-time alter-ego Alex Jennings. He kept his speech brief, explaining: “These 
lifetime achievement awards are a sharp nudge in the director of the grave.”

Meanwhile Emma Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-thompson> won 
the comedy award for her turn as Robert Carlyle’s foul-mouthed, chain-smoking 
78-year-old prostitute mother in The Legend of Barney Thompson. In her speech, 
Thompson paid tribute to her late friend and colleague, Alan Rickman, “who many 
of us still miss deeply”. “He always predicted I would end up looking like my 
mother after a lifetime of Guinness, fish suppers and untipped Players. So 
thank you.”

She was presented with the awards by Stanley Tucci, himself a major awards 
player this year as part of the ensemble drama Spotlight.

That film is now seen as chasing The Revenant for the best picture Oscar, 
following the latter’s victory at Saturday night’s Directors Guild Awards in 
the US; the DGAs are traditionally reckoned to be a key Oscars bellwether.

The ceremony, which marked a revival of the awards after a three year hiatus, 
gave its best film award to Brooklyn, John Crowley’s Academy Award-nominated 
drama starring Saoirse Ronan.

Other winners included Asif Kapadia’s documentary about the late singer Amy 
Winehouse and Maisie Williams, who won the newcomer award for her role in Carol 
Morley’s The Falling.

Meanwhile the publicly-voted blockbuster of the year prize was won by Star 
Wars: The Force Awakens. Anthony Daniels, who plays C3P0 in the series, and is 
the only actor to have been in all seven films, took to the stage. “When I’m in 
costume I look like an Oscar,” he said. “But this is the first and probably the 
last time I will actually hold an award.”

Other guests included Vanessa Redgrave, Matthew Perry, Emilia Fox, Terry 
Gilliam, Agyness Deyn and culture minister Ed Vaizey, who was credited by 
Amstell with encouraging people to see films “by making it very difficult for 
people to borrow a book, or see a play or find happiness”.
 