
“So here we are. My name was Eileen Dunlop. Now you know me … This is the 
story of how I disappeared.”Ottessa Moshfegh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ottessa-moshfegh>’s novel, Eileen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/eileen-by-ottessa-moshfegh-review-bell-jar>
, shortlisted this week for theMan Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize>, centres on the escape of a 
young woman from a New England town where she has lived unnoticed and unloved. 
Her flight is made possible by a seductive redhead, an act of retribution, a 
serious crime and a gun: not surprisingly, the book has been tagged as “noir” 
and a “psychological thriller”.

Add its hint of unreliable narration, and Eileen might appear to be jostling 
to enter Gillian Flynn’sGone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/20/gillian-flynn-gone-girl-review> 
territory. Hollywood mogulScott Rudin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/scott-rudin> has bought the film rights, and 
the screenwriter hired for the project isErin Cressida Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/erin-cressida-wilson>, who has just adapted
Paula Hawkins’s <https://www.theguardian.com/books/paula-hawkins> The Girl on 
the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/08/the-girl-on-the-train-paula-hawkins-review-novel>
.

Yet Moshfegh, 35, is not usually a writer of Hitchcock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfredhitchcock>ian page-turners. For some 
years she has been touted as a “crucial” new voice in American literature. Her 
prizewinning novellaMcGlue (2014) is literary and experimental, and her short 
stories have been published in such distinguished magazines as the Paris Review 
and the New Yorker. The coming together of a hip young “writer’s writer” with 
genre fiction has contributed to the buzz that has surroundedEileen since its 
appearance in the US in 2015. More significant is that this intense, singular 
novel – both playful and fierce – is not exactly what it seems.

I meet Moshfegh at her home in East Hollywood, Los Angeles, the day after she 
has learned of the Man Booker shortlisting. “I’d had a hard day,” she says, 
“and I’d woken up at three in the morning in a state of panic, so went outside 
to smoke a cigarette – and I don’t smoke very much. When I came back in, I 
found the email from my agent. And I just wrote back: ‘Holy shit.’”

I didn't want to keep my head down and wait 30 years to be discovered … so I 
thought I’m going to do something bold

Yet Moshfegh (the second syllable rhymes with leg) wasn’t wholly surprised. 
She is candid aboutEileen being a deliberate exercise in playing with the 
format of commercial fiction to get the attention of a big publisher.McGlue and 
her early short stories might have won awards, but they didn’t pay much, and 
she “wanted to write a novel to start a career where I could live off 
publishing books. That was my prime motivation for writingEileen. I thought, 
fine: I’ll play this game. And I still feel like I’m playing it.”

She didn’t want to “keep her head down” and “wait 30 years to be discovered … 
so I thought I’m going to do something bold. Because there are all these morons 
making millions of dollars, so why not me? I’m smart and talented and motivated 
and disciplined and … talented: did I say that already?”, she laughs. “I said: 
fuck it. Which was also: fuck them. I was pretty hostile. I thought: I’ll show 
you how easy this is.”

So Moshfegh “went out and bought a book called The 90-Day Novel, by Alan Watt. 
It’s ridiculous, claiming that anybody can write a great book, and quickly too. 
And I thought ifI were to do this, what would happen, would my head explode? So 
I followed it for 60 days – it was soboring. But it ended up as an Oulipian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/jul/12/oulipo-freeing-literature-tightening-rules>
 thing, struggling with a limitation, and it was actually interesting to 
conform to the rules. So … it started out as a fuck-you joke, also I’m broke, 
also I want to be famous. It was that kind of a gesture.” Moshfegh pauses and 
frets – though she laughs again – that “the Booker people will be disgusted” 
with her revealing the origins ofEileen in such terms.

But of course “this was only the beginning … then it turned into a work of its 
own”. In Moshfegh’s hands, an off-the-peg novel structure was warped and 
elevated into something unique. For a start, the narrator, an elderly Eileen 
looking back to 1964, plays fictional games. And while the book has fun with 
suspense and noir cliche – Rebecca, the redhead, is more an idea than a fully 
developed presence – it is full of astounding and funny sentences that only 
Moshfegh could have written. Most importantly, the central character is an 
unforgettable and distinctively dark creation.

Eileen as a 24-year-old is miserable, full of anger and self-loathing. She 
wakes up next to her vomit after a heavy night’s drinking. She hates her 
alcoholic father and wishes him dead. Though obsessed by her plainness, she 
wears her dead mother’s frumpy clothes. She touches herself and smells her 
fingers. She hasn’t yet dared to have sex, but stalks her fantasy man and 
believes her first time “would be by force”. Her house is filthy and she eats 
terrible food, when she eats at all. Addicted to laxatives, she tells of her 
basement toilet purging: “torrential, oceanic, as though all of my insides had 
melted and were now gushing out … Those were the good times.”

Eileen by Ottessa Moshfegh review – an odd double of Plath's Bell Jar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/eileen-by-ottessa-moshfegh-review-bell-jar>
This isn’t unfamiliar ground for Moshfegh. The wonderful McGlue is written as 
the internal monologue of a self-harming sailor, accused of murder, who can’t 
keep food down and who has nearly drunk himself to death. And the stories in
Homesick for Another World, her collection to be published in January, are, she 
says, “my first attempt to impress on people how weird it has been for me to 
feel alive. And I do that by using these puppets who are struggling with their 
absurd miseries.” Moshfegh told Vice magazine: “My writing lets people scrape 
up against their own depravity, but at the same time it’s very refined … It’s 
like seeing Kate Moss take a shit.”

The vast majority of critics have embraced Eileen, but one used the words 
“queasy” and “gratuitous”. When I ask Moshfegh about the reception of the 
novel, she rails against those who “want to know in this juicy way why I have 
written such an unlikable character. I just want to say: ‘How dare you?’” We 
live in a world in which mass murderers are re-elected, she says, yet it’s an 
unlikable female character that is found to be offensive: it’s “sexist and 
idiotic”.

“At the same time, I get it,” she continues. “Eileen is a character that makes 
people uncomfortable. She is not going to, you know, cheer you up. But might it 
not be liberating to hear the thoughts of someone who is completely ignored by 
society?” Those readers or reviewers who focus on Eileen’s unlikability, she 
believes, “probably felt ashamed” when reading the book, and are unable to 
confront their own more debased impulses.

Moshfegh has said before that “most people who pick up a book labelled 
‘thriller’ or ‘mystery’ may not be expecting to confront troubling ideas about 
women in society … I couldn’t be like, Here’s myfreak book … So I’ve disguised 
the ugly truth in a kind of spiffy noir package.” The “great irony” is that, to 
her, “Eileen is not perverse. I think she’s totally normal … I haven’t written 
a freak character; I’ve written an honest character.”

When I mention the importance of drink in Eileen and her other work, Moshfegh 
tells me she “drank alcoholically” for five years from the age of 17 or 18, 
“and then spent eight years in AA thinking deeply about alcoholism … One of the 
first things you hear when you go to AA is that it’s not a cult, but itis a 
cult. I was indoctrinated, I was hard core.”

I’ve had eating issues since adolescence and there’s nothing in my work that I 
haven’t thoroughly researched privately

And the problematic relationship between food and the body that features in 
her writing? “I’ve had eating issues since adolescence, and while I don’t enjoy 
speaking about this publicly, I can say that there’s nothing in my work that I 
haven’t thoroughly researched privately.” As for Eileen’s body obsession, she 
has said it’s hardly surprising, even inevitable: we “live in a culture of 
objectification … women are judged by appearance first. This is why I’m not 
putting my photo on my book jacket.”

The bleakness of Eileen’s life is prolonged and taken to such a level it’s 
almost black comedy. In conversation, Moshfegh is funny about the trials of 
existence, and her short stories have been acclaimed for their comic timing. “I 
used to be much funnier in person,” she deadpans. “I used to be hysterically 
funny. There was a period in my 20s when I was a crack-up.” But she insists 
that even if Eileen’s misery and self-hatred might “begin to seem absurd … that 
doesn’t mean it’s not real”.

People are constantly being “abused, enslaved”, she has said. It happens all 
around us, every day, but “we’ve become numb, so we do nothing”.Eileen, which 
revolves around a juvenile prison, and the particular motivation for a 
patricide, is shaped by this anger. Then again, Moshfegh says she is 
“completely fatigued and sick” of having to talk about the novel as an “object 
containing ‘issues’”. For her it was an experiment, and a year on from its 
publication, she’s very “happy for it”, but it is only one project among many.

***

If I could unplug my internet completely I would … I value my brain … In the 
long term I want my writing to be important

Moshfegh has described herself as “a lurker on the edge of society … looking 
at the world” and thinking: “what a weird show”. She was born in Boston to a 
Croatian mother and an Iranian father, both professional musicians. Her 
mother’s parents joined partisan armies to fight the Nazis; her paternal 
grandfather “owned half of Tehran” before the family was forced to leave, with 
all assets seized, in the Iranian revolution of 1978-9. Her family was 
culturally rich but financially poor within an affluent Bostonian 
neighbourhood: Moshfegh was ashamed of their rusting car, but read the complete 
works ofHermann Hesse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/24/hermann-hesse-steppenwolf-review>
 at an alarmingly young age, and was playing four instruments by the time she 
was seven.

“My family’s values seemed very different from the values of the world I was 
living in,” she recalls. As a child, she always felt removed: “I had this 
epiphany when I was five, sitting on the carpet in kindergarten listening to 
Mrs Balfour trying to teach us how to read the clock. It dawned on me that time 
was passing and we were all going to be dead – what’s the point? So I had that 
realisation, and then people were telling me to put my crayons away. And to get 
in line, and to smile. And I thought this was total bullshit.”

Her sense of alienation is expressed with humour, but is genuine and profound. 
“I felt like I was living in hell for most of my childhood and adolescence and 
my 20s,” she says. “There was a brief period in my early 30s when I felt life 
was OK, and now it feels like hell again. The shape the hell took is precisely 
what my work is about.”

Ottessa Moshfegh: I didn’t set out to write Eileen as a noir novel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/28/ottessa-moshfegh-eileen-noir-novel-musical-family-school-interview>
Moshfegh gave up music when “the discipline and intensity” it required was 
channelled into her writing. After her college years in New York – 
“humiliating” – she “lived a life” in her 20s: “I got jobs, fell in love, moved 
to China for two years, fell out of love, got other jobs.” She dates the 
beginning of her writing “career” to her MFA course at Brown University, during 
which, in 2010-2011, she wroteMcGlue: “Looking back I’m astonished that I wrote 
it, I think it’s an astonishing book.”

Writing the hallucinatory novella – which is both a celebration of rhythm and 
language, and a historical gay love story with exotic locations – “almost felt 
like an exorcism”. Before it was published, she had already begun the series of 
stories to be included inHomesick for Another World, which led to recognition, 
awards and fellowships.

The first story in the collection, “Bettering Myself”, is told in the voice of 
a damaged, alcoholic high-school teacher, who meets up with her former husband. 
According to Moshfegh, it “is not so far from a true story. I’m not the 
character. But … it came from very close to home.” As did the fairytale-like 
final story, “A Better Place”, which concerns a young girl who, as the author 
describes it, “feels as though she’s been lied to and … doesn’t want to live in 
a world … at the mercy of others”. The stories in between are highly varied and 
hugely entertaining, but most originate from a position of hostility or a 
difficult personal experience. Many of them skewer egomaniacal men and 
privileged people unaware of their bigotry.

Even as her renown has increased, Moshfegh has expressed discomfort with 
becoming a literary personality. If the literary world was a high school, she 
told Vanity Fair, “I would be sitting with the goths, looking at everyone, 
being, like,Whatever.” She has given up Twitter and Facebook – “tacky” for a 
known author – and tells me “if I could unplug my internet completely I would … 
I value my brain”. But she is driven and ambitious – what matters is the work, 
especially the new novel she is deep into, set in the New York art world in 
2000, in which a woman hibernates for a year: “In the long term,” she says, “I 
want my writing to be something important.”

There may be aspects of promoting her novel that she finds wearying, but – she 
smiles – she “doesn’t mind being inconvenienced by the Booker”, and has kept 
October free in her schedule in case. (If an American writer won it, she 
thinks, the media in the US would care more about the prize.) So what if, in 
some circles,Eileen gets bracketed with the bestselling thrillers by Flynn and 
Hawkins? “Trying to protect its reputation as a postmodern work of art would 
not only be arrogant, but pointless.” Besides, she retains a deep connection 
with her memorable and controversial central character, whom she grew to 
understand completely. Eileen “is a living person”, she says. “And I have a 
feeling she’s angry with me for talking behind her back.”

• Eileen by Ottessa Moshfegh is published by Vintage. To order a copy for 
£7.37 (RRP £8.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/eileen-449891.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 