
How charmingly quaint is that walk down the road to the church hall polling 
station. How civilised are the party workers collecting numbers outside, 
politely conversing across an ideological chasm. Inside, two officials ticking 
off names as they hand out ballot papers seem part of history. In the booth, a 
pencil – a pencil!

What an archaic anachronism. This is the way old folks vote and the young 
don't. Why on earth can't everyone vote on the same mobile phones that are 
trusted to transfer mountains of money worldwide? It suits too many of the580 
MPs in rock-solid safe seats <http://www.electoralcalculus.co.uk/safeseats.html>
 not to bother much about the mass of non-voting young people and low earners.

Of all our democracy's dysfunctions, the method of voting might seem a small 
one – but modernising elections would be a sign that Westminster was serious 
about the cataclysmic decline in turnout. As it stands, so long as the old 
parties reckon on slipping into Downing Street on a barely legitimate 35% of 
the vote, their pious handwringing and furrowed brows is all just crocodile 
tears.

Those who don't vote don't count, and end up paying a heavy price. However 
well intentioned,Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> can't get 
itself elected by pleading the cause of needy non-voters: so elections depend 
on ever fewer swing votes in a diminishing number of marginals. These are 
middling people, just interested enough to vote but not to pay much attention 
to politics – yet these indifferents decide the fate of a country 
more ideologically riven than ever.

The angry alienated may not care about electoral systems, but they might be 
even angrier if they knew what harm they suffer from their voting boycott. 
At the last election76% of over-65s voted, compared with 44% of under-24s 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/divided-democracy-political-inequality-in-the-uk-and-why-it-matters>
 – a 32-point difference. And a 23-point gap shows by how much high-earners 
outnumbered low earners. Professor Sarah Birch's research for the Institute for 
Public Policy Research shows the toxic effect of these two factors together: 
only a third of under-35s earning £10,000 or less voted, so their voice was 
swamped by the 80% of over-55s earning £40,000 or more who did.

Now look how this government rewards those who vote and punishes those who 
don't. In thechancellor's first spending review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/oct/20/spending-review-2010-osborne-cuts>
, average voters suffered a cut of 12% – £1,850 each. But non-voters – the 
young and poor – lost 20%, or £2,135.

Our democracy prides itself on probity: cheating is negligible. But the system 
itself is now so corrupt it warps everything. Marginals are plied with good 
things: no hospitals ever close in marginals, says the Electoral Reform 
Society. For a glimpse of pork-barrel politics, look at the loot thatDanny 
Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/feb/18/liberal-democrats-treasury-danny-alexander>
 has brought from the Treasury to secure his patch in Scotland: ski lifts, 
petrol tax breaks, a sleeper train and exemptions from housing benefit cuts. 
Meanwhile, the chancellor's father-in-law tells the Lords the"desolate 
north-east" should be fracked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jul/30/fracking-north-east-england-tory-peer>
 – desolate only of Tory votes.

Rotten boroughs abound: by today some 105 councils will be ruled at least 75% 
by one party, mainly Tory. Manchester may be 100% Labour when you read this: 
only by good luck is it a good council, despite no opposition scrutiny. Voters 
think first-past-the-post is unfair, understanding how few of their votes 
count: in marginals more surge to the polls, as they know their votes matter.

Why didn't people opt for at least modest reform in the alternative vote 
referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/06/reasons-av-referendum-lost>
 three years ago? Partly because of a huge Tory donor-funded no campaign: more 
fool them, as AV would have helped see off Ukip. But mainly this was a case of 
voters wreaking revenge on what was a Lib Dem project. Tory fools also blocked 
Lib Dem Lords reform, which allowed Nick Clegg to wreck boundary changes that 
would, of course, have favoured David Cameron. Stupid doesn't begin to describe 
Conservative folly. As for Labour, Ed Miliband is a voting reformer –but the 
party was split, safe-seaters tribally opposed. Besides, the chance to crush 
the boundary changes at the cost of losing Lords reform was just too 
irresistible.

That self-interest is why voters are right not to trust Westminster to reform 
itself. The old duopoly tries to force a multi-party electorate into its 
two-party mould. If there was a genuine sense of a crisis of legitimacy, 
Westminster would do its utmost to encourage voting.

Even without changing the system, millions more might vote if it were made 
easier. At least 6 million are not registered, mainly the young and poor in 
precarious housing. So why not allow anyone to register as they vote? (The
Electoral Reform Society has a secure way 
<http://www.electoral-reform.org.uk/missingmillions/>.) Let people vote in any 
polling station, anywhere: New Zealand does it. Keep polling stations open for 
a week: ignore media demands for next-day results.

Local councils gerrymander, so take control nationally of election funding. 
There is a great variation in spending on efforts to register voters or to make 
voting easy. There should be huge voting signs hung out everywhere, but rotten 
boroughs – especially Tory ones – don't want hoi polloi at their polls.

Votes at 16 would help, especially if their first vote was compulsory, and it 
was taught in citizenship classes: many adults who have never voted secretly 
fear they don't know how. None of these are "the answer" to the great 
disconnect, but while Westminster fails to do all it can, we know its MPs sit 
too complacently in their safe seats.

Of course the "answer" lies in the nature of politics itself. But our rotten 
centre-ground-seeking voting system turns politicians into constipated rabbits, 
afraid to say anything original, battered by press and Twitter for gaffes if 
they do. Off-the-leash free-speakers like Nigel Farage and Boris Johnson are 
liberated from those constraints. All politicians' tongues would be freed too 
if voters could choose each MP from a pool of six party candidates in a 
multi-constituency system. The dismal closed list displayed on your EU ballot 
paper yesterday said it all: Blair's legacy is a list of names chosen by head 
office for their obedience, voters excluded from choosing the best.

We need a politics free to espouse bolder policies that seize the public 
imagination. Trust comes with enthusiasm for a cause; both main parties fail. 
Labour has a year to make its tentative policies bold enough to fly. I've heard 
plenty of Labour candidates this time yearn for a signature pledge to take back 
the railways, as 19 franchises come free in the next parliament. The lesson 
from Ukip is: who dares wins.

 