
Concerns are growing that those reaching retirement are leaving themselves 
open to fraud, as well as the risk of running out of money in their later 
years, because they are not taking any advice or guidance over their pension 
pots.

An independent survey commissioned by the Observer in conjunction with insurer 
LV=, on the first anniversary of the introduction of pension freedoms, reveals 
that only one in five of those within five years of retirement plans to take 
paid-for, regulated financial advice. The results come from 1,500 people over 
the age of 50.

Most of what Britons think they know about personal finance is wrong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/datablog/2015/jul/07/britons-know-personal-finance-wrong-datablog>
It also revealed that four in 10 over 55 do not plan to take any form of 
paid-for advice or free guidance at all, increasing to half of those over the 
age of 50. Of those planning to seek some sort of help, many will turn to 
friends and family (13%), their pension provider (16%) or the government’s free 
servicePension Wise <https://www.pensionwise.gov.uk/> (14%), which offers 
basic, free guidance rather than tailored advice.

Under the reforms, which began a year ago this week, the chancellor abolished 
the requirement to convert a pension pot into an annuity, leaving people free 
to cash in some or all of their funds. While the freedoms have been broadly 
welcomed by the pensions industry and those across the political divide, this 
reticence to pay for advice has led to calls for both intervention and warnings 
about the threat of fraud.

Last week research released by Citizens Advice revealed that almost nine in 10 
people (88%) miss common warning signs of a pensions scam – such as unusually 
high investment returns, cold calling and offers of free financial advice – 
despite feeling confident that they can spot fraudsters’ tricks.

The report, entitled Too Good to be True, revealed a mismatch between people’s 
confidence in spotting a scam and their ability to do so. Three in four (76%) 
said they are confident they can identify a pension scam, but just 12% were 
actually able to do so when a scam was presented to them.

The research reveals how scammers’ tactics are moving towards free pension 
reviews and advice as a first step towards tricking people out of their pension 
pots.

The government campaigns about wearing a seatbelt and stopping smoking. We 
need to be equally interventionist about this
Richard Rowley, LV 
“Labour has warned time and again that people need to be able to secure 
good-quality advice when accessing pension pots early,” said shadow pensions 
minister Angela Rayner. “There is growing concern that pensions freedoms have 
made people over 55 a greater target for fraudsters, and recent research shows 
11 million have been cold-called or texted about their pension. This suggests 
that vultures are circling.”

She added: “The small print in the recent budget revealed the Treasury 
received nearly a billion pounds more in tax last year through pension 
freedoms. At the very least, government has a duty of care to ensure people are 
forewarned about the potential risks.”

Richard Rowney, the head of pensions at LV=, said it was a concern that people 
were not taking financial advice. “If you think of the government campaigns 
about wearing a seatbelt and stopping smoking, I think we need to be equally 
interventionist about this,” he said.

The primary barriers to advice, according to the Observer/LV= survey, are lack 
of trust in financial advisers (23% of those asked); thinking that free 
guidance is sufficient (22%); and the cost (20%).

“Even when people can afford it, they can find it difficult to understand the 
pricing of advice and what they will get for their money,” said Gillian Guy, 
chief executive of Citizens Advice. “Fraudsters are finding new ways to try to 
trick savers out of their pension pots. Advice can be vital to making sure 
people know the warning signs to watch out for to avoid falling victim to a 
scam.”

In an effort to encourage people to take advice, George Osborne announced in 
last month’s budget that the government will consult over the introduction of a 
“pensions advice allowance” to allow people to withdraw savings to pay for 
regulated advice.

A Treasury spokesperson said: “To help people take control of their 
hard-earned savings, the government has launched the Pension Wise guidance 
service, which has so far seen more than 2.2 million visits to the website and 
over 54,000 telephone and face-to-face conversations.”
 