
Although best-known for her cameo appearance in Peeping Tom, Michael Powell's 
classic 1959 film, Pamela Green, who has died aged 81, was the leading British 
pin-up of that period. For a generation of young men, her lithe figure, long 
blonde hair and photogenic features represented an unattainable ideal 
of feminine allure. Her role inPeeping Tom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/peeping-tom> was the first appearance of a 
naked woman in a British feature film.

The only child of an English architect and his Dutch wife, Green spent her 
first decade in the Netherlands. On the eve of the second world war, she and 
her parents decamped to England. Always keen on painting and drawing, in 1947 
she was accepted on to the fine art course at St Martin's, one of London's 
leading art schools. Between sessions in the painting studio and the life room, 
where the self-proclaimed "naked civil servant", Quentin Crisp, posed regularly 
– his scrawny form presenting a test of her draughtsmanship – Green haunted the 
cafes of neighbouring Soho.

As a means of funding her studies, she worked as a life model at other art 
colleges. She soon discovered that she could earn much better fees by posing 
for photographers who produced the decorous and unrevealing nude studies, often 
lit to resemble classical statuary, that punctuated magazines such as Lilliput 
and Men Only. Among those photographers were Bill Brandt and Angus McBean.

While still a student, Green endured a violent, short-lived marriage that 
ended before she had completed her course. On leaving college, she found work 
as a nude in West End stage shows that incorporated static tableaux of the type 
made famous by the Windmill theatre, typically mimicking famous works of art. 
This way of working had evolved as a way of dodging the rules imposed by the 
lord chamberlain, who acted as official censor. At his insistence, female 
nudity was permissible on stage only provided the models were motionless and 
discreetly lit.

Through her role in the lavish 1953 production Folies Bergère, she met the 
photographer George Harrison Marks. Having established himself as her 
boyfriend, he persuaded her to model for the nude postcards that he was 
employed to produce, postcards that enjoyed a furtive trade via backstreet 
newsagents and smutty bookshops. Eventually, Green and Marks began to produce 
their own picture sets. With the profits from these, they decided to create a 
monthly nude photo magazine.

From the Gerrard Street building where they lived and worked, they launched 
Kamera in 1957. Besides designing the costumes and backdrops, Green posed in a 
variety of convincing disguises, her alternative personae including Rita 
Landré, the flame-haired French sexpot. Thanks to the kitsch eroticism and 
dramatic staging of its heavily retouched colour photos, Green and Marks sold 
150,000 copies in five weeks. Before long, assisted by a team of 15 people, 
they were also producing regular calendars and 8mm striptease films, the latter 
earning them a court appearance and a surprise commendation from the magistrate 
who requested a copy for his son.

Impressed by her pictures in Kamera, Powell recruited Green for a small 
speaking part in Peeping Tom. He cast her as the victim of the film's sinister, 
duffel-coated protagonist, a serial-killing photographer played by Carl Boehm. 
For the scene in which she is murdered, Powell chose to reproduce one of her 
set designs for Kamera. On its release, the film's portrayal of warped 
sexuality provoked critical outrage which has since metamorphosed into doting 
reverence.

Green consolidated her growing notoriety by starring in Marks's directorial 
debut, the hit nudist film Naked As Nature Intended (1961). Their relationship 
having ended in acrimony, Green left Marks for Douglas Webb, a former RAF 
airman and veteran of the Dambusters raid, employed as a stills photographer on 
feature films. Green then took on the role of Webb's assistant on productions 
such as The Go-Between (1970). She combined this work with fleeting appearances 
in movies, her credits including the Peter Cushing vehicle Legend of the 
Werewolf (1974).

As the British film industry collapsed, Webb diversified into television 
assignments, notably the title sequence for The Sweeney, which featured Green's 
fingerprints in the montage. After she and Webb had gone into semi-retirement 
on the Isle of Wight, where she became an improbable stalwart of the Women's 
Institute, she was invited to write the preface to Doing Rude Things (1992), 
David McGillivray's groundbreaking account of the British softcore porn 
industry. The book led to her being interviewed regularly, and the consequent 
media coverage earned her cult status, sustained by a popular website, redolent 
of the 1950s world within which her brand of comparatively innocent erotica had 
flourished.

• Pamela Green, actor and model, born 28 March 1929; died 7 May 2010
 