
The independent disciplinary panel which decided that the trainer Jim Best had 
ordered Paul John, a conditional jockey, to stop two horses in races last 
December published the reasons for its impositionof a six-month suspension on 
the trainer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/jim-best-guilty-bha-stop-two-horses-non-triers-case-horse-racing>
 on Wednesday , and suggested as it did so that if the British Horseracing 
Authority wished to see a sterner penalty for such a serious offence, it should 
amend its sentencing guidelines to reflect that.

However, its reasons did little to dispel widespread surprise that an offence 
which, in the panel’s own words, involved “dishonest practices” that “strike at 
the heart of racing’s integrity” had resulted in what appeared to many in the 
sport to be an extremely lenient penalty.

Trainer Jim Best found guilty of ordering jockey to stop two horses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/11/jim-best-guilty-ordering-jockey-stop-two-horses>
If Best decides not to appeal against the result, he will still be allowed to 
visit racing stables and attend race meetings, associate with licensed jockeys 
and trainers, and buy and sell horses at auctions during the six-month period 
when his licence is suspended. The process which concluded on Monday was a 
rehearing of the case, after the result of an earlier hearing – which resulted 
in a four-year disqualification for Best – was quashed on appeal.

The appeal was lodged after it emerged that Matthew Lohn, the chairman of the 
original panel, had been paid by the BHA for his advice on non-disciplinary 
matters.

The new panel reached the same decision as the first: that John, a conditional 
rider at Best’s stable, had deliberately stopped two horses –Echo Brava, in a 
race at Plumpton on 14 December 2015 and Missile Man at Towcester on 17 
December 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/paul-john-jim-best-british-horseracing-authority>
 – and had done so under orders from the trainer.

The members also stressed in their findings a view that “the worst feature of 
the case is the fact that Mr Best, the trainer, suborned a young Conditional 
Jockey to do wrong when he should have been taking steps to guide him in the 
right direction as opposed to engaging in dishonest practices.” Where the 
earlier panel had imposed a four-year ban from the sport, however, it decided 
on a six-month suspension.

In its reasons for imposing the suspension, the panel says that in reaching 
its decision, it “gained only limited assistance from the [BHA’s] guidelines as 
to the length of that suspension. As a comment, we suggest that if the BHA 
regards suspension or disqualification for a longer period as appropriate for 
such a case as the present, then it would be wise were the guidelines to 
reflect that policy directly and with clarity. Speaking for ourselves, we can 
see that might better reflect the gravity of the kind of misconduct we find 
here.”

The panel also said that it had been mindful of the possible effect on 
innocent employees at Best’s yard in Sussex had it imposed a longer suspension, 
or decided to disqualify him from the sport rather than merely suspending his 
licence.

The panel’s words did little to dispel confusion about the penalty, however, 
as in addition to charges related to the stopping rides, Best was also found in 
breach of Rule A(30), a more general offence which covers conduct prejudicial 
to horseracing. The BHA’s guidelines suggest a range of possible penalties for 
a breach, including suspension or disqualification for between one month and 
three years.

In a statement on Wednesday, the BHA said that it had “argued that the panel 
should impose a significant period of disqualification on Mr Best to preserve 
the reputation of British horseracing and to maintain public confidence in the 
integrity and proper regulation of our sport”. The regulator also said that it 
“will consider the panel’s comments over the coming days, and months, but we 
will make no further comment while the appeal window [for Best] is still open”.
 