
The verdict in the Jim Best rehearing is to be announced on Monday afternoon, 
more than a fortnight after closing arguments were presented by barristers for 
both sides. In a surprising development, the outcome is to be revealed at the 
offices of theBritish Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority> in the 
presence of all those involved and representatives of the media, rather than 
being posted online in the usual manner.

Hennessy announces end for sponsorship of famous Newbury race
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/hennessy-end-sponsorship-famous-newbury-race-horse-racing>
There is not thought to be a precedent for calling back all the parties so 
long after a hearing to be told the verdict in person. The break with tradition 
comes at the direction of the three-man disciplinary panel, chaired by the 
former judge Sir William Gage, who are said to have told the BHA how they want 
the verdict to be handled.

The timing caused a certain amount of resentment within the sport, as it 
clashes with a long-planned media event in Kensington to promote theKing George 
VI Chase <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> on Boxing 
Day. That provoked frustration at both Kempton racecourse and the race’s new 
sponsors, 32Red, who can expect less publicity in consequence, though the BHA 
view is that it would have been inappropriate to bargain with the panel over 
timing.

BHA insiders were among those expressing puzzlement as to why the panel would 
ask to give the verdict in an open forum. It could be seen as a recognition of 
the importance of the case, which has generated many headlines since charges 
were first issued in January.

Best, a Lewes-based trainer, denies instructing a jockey to stop two horses in 
races that took place last December. He was initially found in breach and 
banned for four years, a verdict that was quashed in May on the grounds of an 
appearance of bias and insufficiency in the published reasons.

Nicky Henderson hoping Cheltenham dry run will suit My Tent Or Yours
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/05/nicky-henderson-my-tent-or-yours-yanworth-international-hurdle-cheltenham-horse-racing>
Separately, the BHA confirmed it would not allow the media to sit in during 
the rehearing of Paul Gilligan’s case next week. Gilligan, a trainer based near 
Athenry, is accused of running one of his horses at an unregulated (“flapping”) 
track, which he denies. Like Best, he was initially found in breach but 
obtained a rehearing after it emerged that the solicitor who chaired his 
hearing had been paid to give private advice to the BHA for some years.

Under established BHA guidelines, members of the media can sit in on hearings 
involving mid-race incidents, which would not include a case such as 
Gilligan’s. However, there was a discussion about whether the ruling body 
should stretch a point with the aim of demonstrating transparency in its 
disciplinary systems at the end of a year in which it has been heavily 
criticised. Gilligan’s lawyer made no objection to media presence at the 
hearing.
 