
The Italian foreign minister, Paolo Gentiloni, has been chosen by Italy’s 
president to replace Matteo Renzi as prime minister, a choice that signals 
continuity in the centre-left government’s domestic and foreign policies at a 
volatile time for the eurozone’s third-largest economy.

Gentiloni said he had accepted the mandate set for him by Italy’s president, 
Sergio Mattarella, after the leaders of the country’s opposition parties had 
failed to agree to “share responsibilities” and create a coalition government 
together.

“I consider this a high honour that I will try to carry out with dignity and 
responsibility,” he said moments after the decision was made public. He added 
that he hoped to form a new government soon, which would helpItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> “reassure fellow citizens” and face 
its international obligations.

Gentiloni’s new role will not be official until he chooses his cabinet and 
secures a vote of confidence in parliament. A vote will probably occur early 
this week.

The decision to choose Gentiloni, an experienced minister in Renzi’s 
government who is not seen as harbouring his own political ambitions, virtually 
guarantees that Mattarella will call for early elections in 2017, before the 
natural end of the parliamentary term in 2018. It also means his tenure is 
likely to be influenced by Renzi, who remains at the helm of the Democratic 
party.

The change in leadership comes one week after Renzi was defeated in a 
referendum on constitutional reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/matteo-renzis-future-in-the-balance-amid-high-turnout-in-italy-referendum>
, with about 60% of Italians voting down the measure. Renzi had vowed to resign 
if he lost the vote and he followed through on that promise on Wednesday after 
overseeing the passage of the country’s 2017 budget in parliament.


The biggest and most immediate crisis facing the incoming prime minister is a 
financial one. On Friday,the European Central Bank rejected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/crisis-hit-monte-dei-paschi-bank-refused-ecb-help>
 a request by Monte dei Paschi, the world’s oldest bank, for more time to 
arrange a necessary capital infusion by a consortium of private investors. The 
decision means that the Italian government may have to intervene to save the 
Siena-based bank, which is facing collapse because it holds billions of euros 
of non-performing loans on its balance sheet.

The board of MPS was expected to meet on Sunday night. The swift choice of 
Gentiloni could be seen as an attempt to assuage nervous investors and save the 
proposed recapitalisation of the bank.

Mattarella’s decision to pick Gentiloni means that he has the backing of the 
current parliamentary majority, led by his own Democratic party (PD). But his 
stint will be a temporary one with both the PD and its opposition, the 
anti-establishment Five Star Movement, pressing for early elections.

Italy is awaiting a critical decision by the constitutional court on the legal 
status of the country’s electoral law. The ruling is expected on 24 January. 
Once the decision is heard, it will have major consequences on how 
parliamentary seats are distributed in future elections.


If things go according to Renzi’s plan, Gentiloni would resign and new 
elections would be called once the electoral law is changed to reflect the 
court’s ruling. If Renzi can maintain the backing of his party, he will 
probably then lead the PD into the next elections.

In many respects, Gentiloni could not be more different from his excitable, 
charismatic – some say arrogant – predecessor. The 62-year-old native of Rome, 
who is nearly two decades older than Renzi and hails from a noble family, was a 
journalist before he began a career in politics in 1993, becoming a spokesman 
for the then mayor of Rome, Francesco Rutelli.

Gentiloni, who is Catholic, was elected to parliament in 2001, where he served 
as the chief broadcasting watchdog during the second term of conservative prime 
minister and media mogul Silvio Berlusconi. In that role, he frequently clashed 
with Berlusconi and criticised the conservative premier’s grip on Italy’s major 
broadcasters. He also helped defeat legislation that would have expanded 
Berlusconi’s control of Italian media.

Gentiloni’s politics were more radical in his younger days. At university he 
was a member of a leftwing student movement and then joined a socialist party 
before becoming a director of a pro-environment newspaper, La Nuova Ecologia. 
In 2002, he founded The Daisy party, which later helped form the current 
Democratic party.

After an unsuccessful attempt to represent the PD in a Rome mayoral contest, 
Gentiloni was chosen in 2014 by Renzi to succeed his first foreign minister, 
Federica Mogherini, after she was selected as the EU’s high representative for 
foreign affairs and security policy.


In his tenure as foreign minister, Gentiloni, who speaks fluent English, has 
worked closely with his US counterpart, John Kerry, in trying to bolster the 
UN-backed government in Libya and has been seen as a strong ally of the 
outgoing Obama administration.

A senior US Department of State official praised Gentiloni, saying he pursued 
diplomacy with “energy, focused determination, and initiative”.

“He knows the world’s trouble spots and takes action to shape events. For 
instance, he has been personally involved in trying to counter the forces of 
chaos in Libya ‎through a mix of diplomatic and humanitarian initiatives, which 
have made a difference there on the ground,” the official said.

At the same time, Gentiloni has gone out of his way to try to court Russia. 
Asked at a conference last month about comments he made previously suggesting 
that the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, could be trusted, Gentiloni said: 
“Italy has never cultivated nostalgia for the cold war.

“Together with our allies we have supported the need for dialogue with Moscow 
and to fully cooperate against terrorism. However, dialogue is not sufficient 
to rebuild trust. We are awaiting tangible steps forward on the Minsk 
agreements and for Russia to commit to stop Assad from bombing east Aleppo,” he 
said.
 