 The 35-year rule of Latin America's longest surviving dictator, 76-year-old 
General Alfredo Stroessner, ended yesterday as it began, with a military coup. 
Last night, Gen Strossner was under arrest and facing deportation to Chile as 
his successor and son-in-law, General Andres Rodriguez, was sworn in as 
president and pledged to bring in democracy. Taken prisoner after hours of 
heavy fighting in the capital, Asuncion, General Strossner was forced formally 
and 'irrefutably' to relinquish power and given 12 hours to leave Paraguay . 
The Chilean president, General Augusto Pinochet, immediately offered him asylum.
'I plan to start the democratisation of Paraguay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paraguay> , as well as grant respect to the 
Paraguayan citizen,' Gen Rodriguez, aged 64, told reporters at his central 
barracks. 'We are goint to bring the respect for human rights that we so need.'

The White House said it was watching the situation closely and hoped the 
overthrow of the dictator meant a move towards democracy.

Thousands of people sang and danced in the streets of Asuncion after Gen 
Stroessner was detained by army units backed by dissident members of his own 
Colorado Party.

With the president under arrest in army barracks, his ministers and close 
aides began a scramble for safety. The minister of the interior, Mr Sabino 
Montanaro, was reported to have been refused asylum at the West German embassy, 
but was taken in at the South African embassy.

Gen Stroessner's private secretary and ruling member of the official Colorado 
Party, Mr Mario Abdo Benitez, was not so lucky. With another 35 high-ranking 
party officials he was caught trying to cross the frontier into neighbouring 
Brazil.

The rebellion by Gen Rodriguez, commander of the First Army's mechanised 
cavalry corps, stationed in the outskirts of the capital, apparently began 
because he heard that Gen Stroessner, the armed forces commander-in-chief, 
intended to remove him from active service.

Under cover of darkness, troops early yesterday went into the city centre and 
began bombarding the central police headquarters near the cathedral and the 
presidential palace. They then attacked the Regiment of Guards next to the 
president's residence. In firce fighting at least 12 people were reported 
killed.

residents in Asuncion described hearing hours of shell fire and 
machine-gunning. Air forces fighters later buzzed the city in support of the 
rebels.

In a radio broadcast, Gen Rodriguez called on the armed forces to unite behind 
him.

One by one, regiments in other parts of the country declared their allegiance 
to the rebels. The only regiment to stay loyal to the president, the Regiment 
of Guards, suffered heavy losses.

Several civilians caught in the crossfire were reported killed and hundreds 
injured.

While stunned Paraguayans celebrated after realising that Gen Stroessner had 
finally gone, many opposition politicians, however, remained cautious. They 
fear that the triumph of Gen Rodriguez, a man often accused of involvment in 
drug trafficking and contraband, meant the continuation of 'Stroessnerism 
without Stroessner'.

Britain has advised travellers to stay away. 
 