
Carly Tait, a sprint wheelchair racer, is four months away from trials to 
represent Great Britain at this summer’s Paralympics in Rio – but she now finds 
herself at the sharp end of thegovernment’s controversial cuts to disability 
benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/23/pip-u-turn-billions-of-pounds-welfare-cuts>
. The 30-year-old from Wythenshawe, south Manchester, who has cerebral palsy, 
received a lifetime award of disability living allowance (DLA) when she was 18 
and for the last 12 years has used part of the benefit to lease an accessible 
car.

Tait describes the car as her “lifeline”. She says it has allowed her to 
attend university, have a job, get to two training sessions a day in Stockport, 
about 10 miles from home, and compete in track events around the country. But 
after being assessed in February for personal independence payments (PIP) – the 
government’s “points-based” benefit introduced to replace DLA – Tait has been 
told she will lose her car, which is provided by the Motability charity scheme.

Under the new rules, to be eligible for the Motability scheme, a disabled 
person needs to score 12 assessment points. Tait scored 10. “I had training 
half an hour after I opened the letter [from the Department for Work and 
Pensions],” she recalls. “I spent the entire time crying as I went round the 
track. My coach rushed over asking what’s wrong. There I was sobbing, ‘I’ve 
lost my car. They’re taking my car.’”

What is happening to Tait is only the tip of the iceberg. Despite the 
government’s much-publicised climbdown over one PIP cut to disability aids in 
the home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/18/treasury-in-retreat-over-disability-benefits-cuts>
, there is still wide-scale reassessment going on, which is seeing disabled 
people losing their cars. Since 2013,more than 17,000 disabled people 
<http://www.msn.com/en-ie/cars/news/over-17000-people-found-to-have-lost-motability-benefit/ar-BBqM5Xk>
 have had their mobility cars, powered wheelchairs, or scooters taken away 
after being reassessed, according to Motability. By 2018, the DWP will have 
retested some two million disabled people and it is predicted that90,000 
motability vehicles will be repossessed 
<https://fullfact.org/health/will-90000-disabled-people-lose-motability-vehicles-pip/>
.

The disability benefit cuts you haven't heard about
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/29/employment-and-support-allowance-the-disability-benefit-cuts-you-have-not-heard-about>
Tait says when she was called for her PIP interview she was sure she would 
still qualify for her car. “[I thought,] I’m going to my assessment in a 
wheelchair. What more evidence do they need?” But within a few minutes of the 
test, Tait says she began to feel the examiner wasn’t there to support her but 
rather “to catch me out”. This only increased, she says, when she told him she 
was training for theParalympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics>
. “He alluded to the fact someone like me – who can go wheelchair racing – 
shouldn’t get the same support as someone who can’t … It was like ‘you can do 
sport, you don’t need help,’” she recalls.

As well as limited sight and hearing, Tait’s disability affects both her legs 
severely – she uses a wheelchair and crutches – and leaves her with 
coordination problems. Despite this, she was judged as being able to walk more 
than 20m – a highly controversial but key factor used to judge whether a 
disabled person is awarded the enhanced mobility rate of PIP to qualify for a 
vehicle.

“Even things like rain and wind upset me. I fell over last summer and broke my 
foot because I tripped on the pavement. I had to crawl to the bathroom,” says 
Tait. “It’s almost as if they think if you can walk in your own house, you 
don’t need a car.”

Tait’s case highlights whether there is any sense in reassessing people with 
unchangeable or incurable conditions, such as hers. The justification by former 
work and pensions secretary, Iain Duncan Smith, was that around 70% of people 
who got a lifetime award were“just allowed to fester” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9263453/500000-to-lose-disability-benefit.html>
. People on lifetime awards began to be assessed for PIP from July. Over the 
next two years, waves of severely disabled people who had previously been told 
their DLA was for life could see their awards reduced or removed entirely.

“When I asked the assessor why I had to be tested again, he said ‘there might 
be medical advances’,” says Tait. “There’s no cure for cerebral palsy. I’m 
never going to get any better. I’ve been on a lifetime award since I was a 
teenager. And now someone who’s never met me before can take that away.”

Tait says the London Paralympics inspired her to take up wheelchair racing. 
“Until I watched the 2012 Paralympics I didn’t even know people with cerebral 
palsy could do sport, let alone be successful at it. Since then I’ve dedicated 
my life to being on the start line in Rio.”

In 2014, Tait represented Great Britain in the T34 wheelchair sprint at the 
Diamond League in Hampden Park, Glasgow and at the IPC Grand Prix Final in 
Birmingham, alongside Paralympic champion Hannah Cockroft. She took part in 
last year’s Sainsbury’s Anniversary Games at the Olympic Park in Stratford and 
this year, she has taken a 12-month sabbatical from work – as a digital 
marketer for the Co-op – to train for Paralympic qualification.

In December, Tait ordered a new car from Motability, specifically for her 
training needs. In addition to being suitable for her poor coordination, her 
racing wheelchair is 6ft long – it won’t fit in a manual car with the gearstick 
in the way – the car also had to have room for her everyday wheelchair. As she 
waited for her new car to be made, Tait had been using a hire car from 
Motability (her previous car was damaged in an accident). A few hours before 
she opened the DWP letter informing her she had lost her eligibility, the 
garage called to say her new car was ready. “It’s sat in the garage now, 
waiting for me,” she says.

Tait’s eligibility officially ends next week, but Motability have given her a 
three-week extension for her hire car to 3 May “as an act of goodwill”. Tait is 
appealing against the DWP decision. If successful, Motability has told her that 
she would have to reorder her new car, which could be another three or four 
months. To buy, her car would cost £29,500. “I can’t afford it without my 
benefits, not even to lease,” she says.

Take another look at the disability debate. Who’s missing? | Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/22/disability-debate-disabled>
On 24 April, competition season begins and, in addition to regular training, 
Tait needs to get to Stoke Mandeville and Coventry to compete. She says she has 
no idea how she will.

“This is Rio year,” she says. “This whole year has been about getting myself 
into a medal position. It’s a once in a lifetime opportunity. They made all 
this effort in London 2012 to showcase disability. But now the government is 
making us housebound.”

A DWP spokeswoman says: “Decisions on eligibility for PIP are made after 
consideration of all the evidence, including an assessment and information 
provided by the claimant and their GP. The majority of people leaving the 
Motability scheme will be eligible for a one-off payment of £2,000 [from 
Motability], which will help ensure their mobility needs continue to be met.”

Motability says it has already paid out £20m in transitional support and 
research shows it has helped customers to remain mobile without their 
Motability car, in many cases by purchasing a used car. This isn’t an option 
for Tait. She says: “I’m representing a country called ‘Great’. It’s not that 
great [for disabled people], is it? People need to know this is happening.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 30.

Lives Wythenshawe, Manchester.

Family Cohabiting.

Education Ashton-on-Mersey high school; South Trafford College; University of 
Central Lancashire, BA (Hons) marketing communications and advertising.

Career 2015-present: digital campaign assistant, Co-op Food; 2011-13: senior 
digital marketing executive, Bupa UK; 2008-11: marketing executive, Findel 
Education Ltd; 2007-08: account executive, Marlin Design Ltd.

Public life T34 sprint wheelchair racer.

Interests Seeing friends, vintage markets and design, theatre.
 