
The families of adopted children with special needs face a double struggle to 
obtain the support that they need from social services, a leading charity warns.

Days after David Cameron announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/oct/31/councils-face-adoptions-ultimatum?INTCMP=SRCH>
 a campaign against councils that failed to help people wanting to adopt, 
research from theNational Autistic Society <http://www.autism.org.uk/> (NAS) 
reveals a significant breakdown in support that can extend for years.

Case studies showed many couples felt their parenting abilities were being 
judged when learning difficulties or other special needs were diagnosed. "We 
were afraid to ask for help, in case our son was taken away from us," said 
Janet Love, a mother of two adopted boys, from Kincardine in Fife, Scotland. 
The NAS believes the problem is widespread.

Autism cannot be detected by genetic or blood tests, so it is rarely diagnosed 
before the age of two, and often much later, long after an adoption. Love's 
son, Euan, was five when a diagnosis of Asperger's syndrome andattention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder> 
(ADHD) came, just as his parents were adopting David, then aged six months.

"We wouldn't change anything about Euan," said Love, 49. "That's his 
personality. But if we had known how we were going to be treated by social 
services, the lack of support, we might have had second thoughts about 
adopting." Euan, now 11, had been striking out at her since he was two, and 
when he started school his behaviour became more challenging: "He was lashing 
out as soon as he came home, hitting, kicking, climbing out of windows," she 
said.

Love, an occupational-therapy technical instructor, and her husband, Marvin, a 
container controller, had endured years of IVF treatment before the two-year 
adoption process that brought them Euan in August 2000.

Fearful of losing him, or jeopardising their other son's adoption, they did 
not ask for help. "We already felt that, because we were adoptive parents, we 
would be judged more and they would take Euan off us. But we reached the stage 
when we had to seek help: we were desperate. And the very first time we asked 
for respite, we were told we wouldn't get it unless he was being neglected; 
unless he wasn't being fed properly or kept clean.

"You have that knowledge that they could take your child into care – it's 
really terrifying. You do feel like you're perpetually on trial."

The Loves' experience is mirrored by others in the NAS case studies. Alison 
Brown (not her real name) is a single parent in south London with two autistic 
children, a son of 14 and a daughter of eight. She feels that social workers 
ignored her concerns over her daughter's development from the start: as a baby, 
she screamed constantly, "with projectile vomiting for the first six months, 
every time someone went near her". Despite her own knowledge of autism, Brown 
was assured that the child was simply going through a stressful transition 
between families.

"I didn't get the support I felt I needed from the authorities. They should 
have listened to us more. We couldn't have been more vocal in the problems we 
were having but social services just didn't get it. Everything was extremely 
fragmented. Any help we got was months apart, so it wasn't any real help at all.

"They seemed to feel we were experienced adopters, and therefore could cope 
with anything that was thrown at us." Her marriage has since ended. Like the 
Loves, Brown had a sense that her ability as a parent was under constant 
scrutiny: "There's always this feeling that someone has given me this child and 
therefore I have to be this much better, that I have to be able to cope."

Local authorities had a legal obligation to extend support to families after 
adoption, not just in the short term but through their lives, said Jennifer 
Cousins, a disability consultant at the British Association forAdoption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/adoption> and Fostering.

Under the Adoption and Children Act 2002, councils have a duty to appoint an 
adviser to "ensure best support arrangements, respond quickly to problems and 
maintain agreements", she said. "It's a very worthy piece of legislation, which 
people are doing their very best to enact in the face of diminishing resources.

"But there's no question people are struggling with the provision side of it. 
There's no pretending they're not." She argued that – after investing many 
months of work in every placement, and facing significant care costs when an 
adoption broke down – all local authority agencies were committed to supporting 
families whenever problems arose.

How effective this intervention was, she said, varied across the country: 
"There are geographical inconsistencies. Although people are required to have 
an assessment of their needs, it doesn't always follow that they will receive 
the services or assistance that they need, because that depends on local 
resources. Social services cannot magic up community resources."

For Love, the solution seems obvious: "Adoptive parents go through so much to 
get there. If they do hit a problem, they need that extra support." And when 
that is not available, "my husband and I just get on with it. If one of us is 
going through a bad patch, pulling your hair out, just about to scream the 
place down, the other takes over. All these little things, they make life a wee 
bit more exciting. Stops you getting bored."
 