
The Paris agreement on climate change enters into force on Friday, marking the 
first time that governments have agreed legally binding limits to global 
temperature rises.


The passage of the accord – the fruit of more than two decades of often 
tortuous international negotiations on combating climate change – was hailed by 
nations and observers around the world.

Under the agreement, all governments that have ratified the accord, which 
includes the US, China, India and the EU, now carry an obligation to hold 
global warming to no more than 2C above pre-industrial levels. That is what 
scientists regard as the limit of safety, beyond which climate change is likely 
to become catastrophic and irreversible.
Paris climate agreement explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=e0baea36-2bf8-4f56-8f46-ef7c35de261b>
Countries have put forward commitments on curbing carbon emissions under the 
agreement, buta report on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/03/world-on-track-for-3c-of-warming-under-current-global-climate-pledges-warns-un>
 found those pledges would see temperature rises significantly overshoot the 
threshold, with 3C of warming. Environmental groups urged governments to do 
more.

Andrew Norton, director of the International Institute for Environment and 
Development, said: “The voices of the people who will be hit hardest by the 
devastating impacts of climate change need to be heard. Governments must work 
to plan practical steps for the agreement’s implementation, and set out how 
climate finance can actually reach people in the poorest, most vulnerable 
countries.”

Harjeet Singh, global lead on climate change for the charity ActionAid, added: 
“The Paris agreement sends a much-needed signal to politicians and industry 
that we have to build a new world, and this has to start now. However, the deal 
is not enough to keep people and the planet safe.”

Asad Rehman, international climate campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said: 
“The Paris agreement is a major step in the right direction, but it falls a 
long way short of the giant leap needed to tackle climate change. Far tougher 
action is needed to rapidly slash emissions.” Greenpeace said that while the 
deal needed strengthening, it was a “momentous occasion” that it had come into 
force.

Next week, governments will meet in Morocco under the auspices of the United 
Nations to discuss how to put the Paris accord into force, and meet its aims.

Patricia Espinosa, the UN’s climate chief, and Salaheddine Mezouar, foreign 
minister of Morocco, said in a joint statement: “Humanity will look back on 4 
November 2016 as the day that countries of the world shut the door on 
inevitable climate disaster and set off with determination towards a 
sustainable future.

Renewables made up half of net electricity capacity added last year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/renewables-made-up-half-of-net-electricity-capacity-added-last-year>
“The Paris agreement is undoubtedly a turning point in the history of common 
human endeavour, capturing the combined political, economic and social will of 
governments, cities, regions and businesses and investors to overcome the 
existential threat of unchecked climate change.”

Lord Turner, former head of the UK government’s statutory advisory committee 
on climate change, said: “The fact that this crucial UN agreement is coming 
into force within a year of signing is a hugely important achievement, and the 
good news is that agreement to the Paris deal is being matched by real progress 
in many countries.”

However, fossil fuel industries see continued opportunities for development 
within a low-carbon world.

Benjamin Sporton, chief executive of the World Coal Association, said: “For 
many countries, coal will continue to play a significant role in economic 
development, industrialisation and urbanisation. For the Paris agreement to be 
realised, we need to support those countries [that are committed to lower 
emission coal technology, such as high-efficiency plants]. We cannot wish coal 
away.”
 