 Travelling to work on the London Underground one morning some years ago, I 
noticed that the attractive young woman sitting opposite me was reading a copy 
of Alan Clark's first book, The Donkeys. A minor 1961 classic about the follies 
of trench warfare (it inspired Joan Littlewood's Oh! What a Lovely War), the 
volume was out of print at the time.
"Where did you get that?" I asked with surprise. The young woman blushed 
prettily and said her boss had let her borrow it. When I bumped into Clark a 
few days later, the then-MP for Plymouth Sutton drawled: "I hear you've been 
trying to pick up my secretary."

No, no, Alan, I wouldn't dare. Besides, I had immediately been struck by her 
resemblance to Jane Clark and wondered whether she took dictation on his knee. 
Clark would occasionally casually drop hints of conquests. I cannot remember 
whether his secretary was supposed to have been one of them.

What is established beyond doubt in BBC4's brilliantly entertaining adaptation 
of TheAlan Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> Diaries is 
that our hero - played by a craggy John Hurt - does not have his way with Jenny 
Easterbrook, head of his ministerial private office, after he becomes a very 
junior employment minister in 1983.

Who says that Margaret Thatcher must have had a sense of humour, stored 
somewhere for occasional use? Few Tory MPs of the period can have been less 
suited to the minutiae of employment policy than her ardent, priapic champion. 
He, and it, were both lucky to survive.

The appointment proved disastrous, as Jon Jones's BBC4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc4> adaptation quickly makes clear. Clark 
was bored with most subjects, famously got drunk at a wine tasting instead of 
reading the brief for his first - yes, first - ministerial speech from the 
Commons Dispatch Box and got bawled out by Clare Short.

At the time I wrote that, surely, such a worldly roué couldn't have been 
drunk. But, as usual, I underestimated his eternal schoolboy's impulse for 
mischief, a cross between Flashman and Mr Toad with unexpectedly sensitive 
glimpses of Rupert Brooke, usually involving family or animals.

When the diarist revealed exactly what he had consumed ("By 9.40 I was muzzy") 
in volume one, Ms Short sought me out to mock. As he wrote at the time, "Fool, 
Clark, fool." He often did, and the TV series is crafted to blend generally 
splendid dialogue with Hurt's narrator's voice reading from the Diaries.

But back to Ms Easterbrook. Julia Davis's portrayal is a joy. The incredulity 
with which she greets her new minister, the barely concealed scorn for the very 
person he is, the routine tactics she deploys to control and humiliate him, it 
is all good Yes, Minister stuff. But, unlike the hapless Jim Hacker, this 
minister is wondering if he can have his Etonian way with her. Fat chance 
there, but it is compelling unreality TV.

Alan even lusted after Mrs Thatcher, of course (I recall his excitement as she 
squeezed his little finger as she left No 10 instead of shaking hands), but he 
knew it was ridiculous. That, I think, is a major component of his success as a 
writer. In 50 years' time no one will read Dick Crossman's Diaries - the first 
of the candid post-imperial crop - for the jokes. Tony Benn and Barbara 
Castle's can be funny, sometimes unintentionally, but all three were major 
Cabinet players, keener on weighty self-justification than on one-liners.

Whereas Al - as his close chums apparently called him - shares with the great 
Pepys a nose for absurdity, for gossip and intrigue, for high politics and 
trivia, but crucially a candid willingness to make a fool of himself in print.

Remember Pepys, the lecher, coming home at lunch time, furtively to check if 
the sheets were warm after allowing Elizabeth to have lessons from a dancing 
master? Pure Clarkery, just as Elizabeth was as spirited and as blameless as 
Jane, wives to whom their erring husbands remained romantically devoted despite 
everything.

Sex sells these days, the vital ingredient that guaranteed the Diaries' 
progress to the small screen. The diaries of Henry "Chips" Channon, the 
snobbish American who became a loyalist Tory MP between the wars, paint a 
compelling picture of the Westminster-Mayfair-country house circuit. Chips had 
even worse political judgment than Alan, which is fun to read. But his diary 
lacks redeeming charm. And the sex, reputedly bisexual sex, was excised in 
Robert Rhodes James's discreet editing in 1967.

Or so Clark once told me. Was it true? Probably. You could never be quite sure 
with his indiscretions. That is why, like many other political reporters, I 
could never resist ringing him for a natter on Sundays. He flattered and loved 
to be flattered in return. The Diaries are full of predictions that he will be 
next into cabinet. But his heroine was never that rash.

One name the index does not contain is that of Jeffrey Archer. Clark's 
grandparents had made their pile in trade and became part of the idle rich 
("Some were richer, but none were idler," as his distinguished father, Kenneth, 
wrote). Jeffrey's richesse was much more nouveau than that, and Alan confessed 
to mixed feelings. "I know I ought to resist Jeffrey, but I can't."

But when he heard that Lord Archer had tried to find out what the Diaries said 
about him before publication, Clark later claimed that he went through the 
proofs deleting all references to the dashing novelist whom, in some respects, 
he resembled. Both were compulsive show-offs who infuriated more fastidious 
Tories while pulling in the paying customers. As populists on a platform both 
could be very unattractive. As a Plymouth MP, Alan enjoyed being admired by the 
prison officers at Dartmoor.

But it is not as a policymaker that Clark will be remembered, any more than 
Pepys is remembered as a major architect of British naval power. As you would 
expect, Hurt's performance is lovely, though to my mind, he is not sulphurous 
enough to catch Clark's darker moods or his vulpine charm. He is simply too 
nice.

Watching it, I was struck again by Clark's desire to shock respectable opinion 
("Did you see my Nazi letter in the Times?" he once asked me), long done, I 
suspect, to win the attention of his beloved father. In a touching scene, we 
see him say goodbye to the dying man. A towering mid-century intellectual, a 
pillar of the great and good, Lord Clark of Civilisation's unabashed cultural 
elitism, so well expounded in his own series, is now unfashionable.

How would father and son feel about that, as the reprobate Alan enjoys 
posthumous celebrity in a TV series of his own? Oedipal rivalries apart, both 
of them uneasily, I suspect.

BBC4's surprise is Jenny Agutter as Jane. I saw them side by side at a preview 
(Agutter is taller), but the physical similarities and the on-screen mannerisms 
are extraordinary. Jenny/ Jane is invariably calm and kind.

It is very good stuff, lovingly put together by producer Kate Lewis's team at 
Saltwood Castle and elsewhere. Saltwood, which Kenneth Clark bought soon after 
the ("Dear Bill") Deedes family was ruined in the Great Crash of 1929.

What I want in political drama - and in comedy, too, for that matter - is a 
feeling of authenticity. The plot may be rubbish, absurd melodrama even (House 
of Cards comes to mind), but if the characters, atmosphere and dialogue feel 
right, I stay tuned. That's why The West Wing failed for me, far too wholesome 
("It's a parallel universe for thwarted liberals," a US friend explained), but 
State of Play and Yes, Minister did not.

It is one of the paradoxes of our time that voters are "turned off" politics, 
but they hunger for charismatic political heroes. A Mandela, a Castro, even a 
cheeky chappy, a Red Ken or an Alan Clark. TV loves them, too. As Clark reaches 
a wider public, people ask me: "Who do you think is writing diaries at 
Westminster today?" How do I know. But I fear lots may be trying. I wonder if 
Whitehall's Jenny Easterbrook is writing her version.

· The Alan Clark Diaries begins on BBC4 on Thursday at 10pm.
 