
Age: 38.

Appearance: Billie Piper's blonde big sister.

The name rings a bell. Was she famous once? She was a bit.

What for? For nothing in particular, really.

Like Alexa Chung? Yes, almost exactly like Alexa Chung.

In that no one's quite sure how it happened? In that she started out as a 
model in her early teens, transitioned into presenting a television show, went 
out with a famous rock star and then left the country.

Ah, it's slowly coming back to me. What was the show and who was the rock star?
The show was Channel 4's controversial late-night cool-fest The Word way back 
in the early 90s and the rock star was Duran Duran bassist John Taylor – whom 
she married at the age of 19.

So what did she do between 19 and 38? Quite a bit actually, including swapping 
continents, careers and husbands. She moved to the US, became a successful 
photographer, divorced Taylor and, in 2006, married guitarist Nick Valensi, the 
tall beautiful one from the Strokes.

Sounds like a real renaissance woman. What's she done now? She's back in front 
of the camera, presenting new all-female interview show The Conversation on US 
channel Lifetime.

About what? In her own words: "Basically talking about the universal language 
of women."

Is that a thing? Apparently so, yes. All women speak it and the experts are 
interviewees Gwyneth Paltrow, Lady Gaga, Sarah Silverman and Jane Fonda. In the 
first episode, titled "Love & Loss", for example, Amanda and her guests talk 
candidly about the deaths of their fathers, postpartum depression and, a little 
jarringly after all that, their favourite sexual positions.

What, why? To inspire other women, of course. And who could fail to be 
inspired by the knowledge that Silverman enjoys "a good sound missionary-ing", 
Paltrow is "down with all of them" and Jane Fonda "can kneel" but "it's not 
quite as comfortable as it used to be before I had a fake knee".

Do say: "Finally, a show about real women's issues."

Don't say: "Wait, women have their own language now?"
 