
It took a month or two for Paul Nicholls to find his stride this season but 
there is a sudden relentlessness about his progress now. The champion trainer
sent three runners to Exeter on Thursday and returned home with a treble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/le-prezien-exeter-paul-nicholls-treble-cut-jlt-price>
, and he repeated the trick here on Friday, when his three winners included a 
Grade Two double with Capitaine and Politologue in the Supreme Novice Hurdle 
Trial and Mitie Novice Chase respectively.

Nicholls’s other runner, and winner, was Topofthegame in the maiden hurdle 
that opened the card, and therein lies the real concern for any trainer going 
toe-to-toe with the champion.Colin Tizzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-tizzard> has a glut of top-class 
chasers in his yard at present, including Cue Card and Thistlecrack, but he 
still trails Nicholls by nearly £400,000 in the title race. Nicholls, in other 
words, is winning the league with his youth team and his rivals can only wonder 
what they might achieve as more seasoned performers next season.

Le Prezien excels in a Paul Nicholls treble at Exeter to cut JLT price
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/le-prezien-exeter-paul-nicholls-treble-cut-jlt-price>
Politologue, who produced a series of breathtaking jumps to have his race won 
as he cleared the last, is an obvious candidate for Grade One contests next 
season, and probably this coming spring as well. Some bold-jumping 
front-runners pay so little respect to the fences that you fear they might miss 
one out altogether but Politologue always seemed to have the race under control 
and coped admirably on the couple of occasions when he got in a little too 
close.

Nicholls had suggested earlier in the afternoon that he is only “50-50” to 
have a runner in this year’sKing George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> at Kempton Park on 
Boxing Day, a race he has won nine times in the last 19 years. Silviniaco 
Conti, the winner for the last two years, is his only entry but he is a 50-1 
chance to beat leading ante-post contenders such as Cue Card, Thistlecrack and 
Coneygree.

“I’ll leave him in at the five-day stage but if they’re all in it, he won’t 
go,” Nicholls said. “If Thistlecrack didn’t run and there were only five or six 
in it, we might be tempted, as he’s won the race before and he likes the track, 
but I want to look at it first.

“I don’t think they need to be worrying about us on this year’s form and 
there’s every chance we might be better off waiting for the race he won at 
Ascot [the BetfairAscot <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ascot> Chase in 
February].”

It is not difficult to imagine Politologue being up to the required standard 
in 12 months’ time, however.

“He’s a proper horse and next season, when he’s six, he’ll be ready to go up 
and take on the big boys,” Nicholls said. “We need to get some experience into 
him and I’m not that mad about going too far with him this season, two-five or 
two-six is about as far as he needs to go because he jumps and he’s got plenty 
of pace.

“I’m really focusing on next season, he will be awesome and we’ve just got to 
mind him for that really. All these horses are horses for the future for us, 
and I’m not going to overface them.

“If he tells us that we should let him run in a big one along the way, we’ll 
let him, but I’m not that keen on three miles this year.”

Despite Nicholls’s reservations, Politologue was cut to around 14-1 for the 
three-mile RSA Novice Chase at the Cheltenham Festival in March but he is also 
now the same price – and as short as 8-1 – for the JLT Novice Chase, over two 
and a half miles.

Capitaine is another horse for the future and Nicholls even mentioned the 2018 
Arkle Trophy as a potential target for the four-year-old after his 9-1 success 
earlier on the card.

“I’d always thought he was smart but I completely got the tactics wrong [when 
he was beaten] at Haydock last time. I said to Harry [Cobden] that if he was 
keen, he should drop him in, but the winner got a soft lead and we didn’t pick 
him up on the heavy ground.

“I told Sam [Twiston-Davies] to dictate from the front today and just keep 
quickening. 9-1 was a massive price and if he hadn’t run at Haydock the other 
day, he would have been half that price. But the experience wasn’t lost on him 
and he had a penalty today as well.

“We’ve got a lot of really smart youngsters that are the future for us, he was 
bought to be a two-mile chaser and that’s what he’ll do next season. He’s the 
sort who could run in the Supreme [Novice Hurdle] if he improves again, but I 
could see him in the Arkle 12 months afterwards.”
 