
Paul Carberry, a flawed genius of a jump jockey with a great love of 
risk-taking, has been forced into retirement almost a year after his last ride. 
The 42-year-old Irishman has been out of action since breaking his left leg at 
Listowel in September and now concedes he will not recover sufficiently to 
resume his career.

Paul Carberry interview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/mar/16/paul-carberry-interview> 
“I saw my surgeon today and he advised me to stop,” Carberry said. “My leg’s 
not strong enough. I feel gutted.”

Carberry excelled at a particular kind of ride, holding his horse up at the 
back and then creeping quietly through the field to score by a narrow but 
comfortable margin. When it worked well, Carberry would be perfectly still 
after the last obstacle while his rivals flailed away in a futile attempt to 
keep up, an experience the jockey seemed to relish.

There were other occasions when it did not work so well, most notably when 
Carberry was beaten on Harchibald in the 2005 Champion Hurdle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/mar/16/cheltenhamfestival2005.cheltenhamfestival6>
, which produced one of the most controversial finishes to a major race there 
has been. Extraordinarily Carberry remained motionless between hard-working 
rivals until the final 50 yards but Harchibald was never quite in front and was 
still a neck behind Hardy Eustace at the line.

Opinion is still fiercely divided on the subject, with some saying Carberry’s 
ride was one of astonishing bravery which maximised the chance of a horse that 
could not be relied on to battle. Others think him foolhardy in the extreme to 
have left his effort until the final five seconds of a four-minute race.

Fairly or not, that finish will last in racing’s folk memory at least as long 
as Carberry’s high-profile successes, which were numerous and included aGrand 
National <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> victory in 1999 
aboard Bobbyjo, trained by his father, Tommy, who had himself been a top-class, 
National-winning jockey.

Carberry Jr also achieved a notable success in the Welsh National on Monbeg 
Dude, a notoriously poor jumper who was somehow coaxed home half a length in 
front of Teaforthree under a full-on drive from Tony McCoy.

Carberry may have modelled his approach to riding on that of Richard Hughes, 
the recently retired champion Flat jockey who vied with Carberry for mounts 
over hurdles in the early days of their careers. “Paul copied my style,” Hughes 
wrote in his autobiography. “When he first arrived on the scene, he was 
horrendous … extremely sloppy and untidy. Then he started to watch me.”

Hughes added: “I can confirm that Paul is as mad as everyone says. You never 
know what he is going to do next. He is not a mouthy person and tends to prefer 
doing the wrong thing to saying the wrong thing.”

Carberry’s wrong things included setting fire to a newspaper on board a flight 
from Spain to Ireland in 2005, for which he was initiallysentenced to two 
months in jail <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/may/24/horseracing.uk>, 
reduced to community service on appeal. In late 2009 he failed a breath test 
before racing and was banned for 30 days, missing the chance to win two Grade 
Ones on Go Native.

On other occasions he missed rides due to injuries sustained while hunting, 
once claiming he was head-butted in the stomach by a deer.

The trainer Noel Meade, who had a 20-year association with Carberry, said: 
“He’s been a huge part of my life and the yard’s life for a long time. It’s a 
sad day but I suppose he’s getting out in one piece or almost one piece.

“We’ve had a lot of great times together. He’s ridden for me since he was 16, 
apart from the two years he was in England, and even then he was riding for me 
on the weekends. There’s been a few little bumps along the way, but I don’t 
think there were any major disagreements.

“He was a hell of a good Flat jockey in his younger days but he had no 
interest in riding on the Flat. All he wanted to do was ride over jumps. He’s 
been a marvellous jockey and he is a special man.”
 