
Paysafe, which provides digital payment systems to businesses and consumers, 
has seen its shares slump by around a quarter.

The company, which is due to release results next month, is down 25% or 95.9p 
at 274.9p having fallen as low as 229.2p. Traders blamed a negative report from 
a short seller called Spotlight Research for the decline, but so far the 
company has not responded beyond saying it was looking at the report.

In a buy note this week Berenberg analysts said recent weakness in its share 
price was overdone:

Paysafe, like other payment-related stocks, has been weak lately. We believe 
that some of this weakness is related to: 1) the perception that regulation of 
fintechs is tightening (eg through the Second Payment Services Directive (PSD2) 
and the fifth Anti-Money Laundering Directive); 2) the strengthening of the GBP 
versus the USD 3); some sector rotation away from structurally growing 
companies to more cyclical ones; and 4) the end of Mastercard’s pre-paid issued 
card business outside the Single Euro Payments Area. That said, none of these 
factors should have had a material negative impact on Paysafe’s 2016 
performance.

On Monday Paysafe’s finance director Brian McArthur-Muscroft excercised 
options over 516,844 shares at 0.01p a share as part of the company’s long term 
incentive scheme. He sold 243,778 shares at 371.85p each to meet “tax and 
national insurance obligations and the option cost of the exercise” and 
retained the other 273,066.


UPDATE 2pm

The company has now responded to the slump in its share price, dismissing the 
Spotlight Research report as either inaccurate or old. In a statement to the 
stock exchange it said:

Paysafe Group is aware of a report published this morning by an organisation 
called Spotlight Research, which has disclosed a potential short interest 
benefiting from any weakness in Paysafe’s share price.

Paysafe confirms that all material information in the report is either 
factually inaccurate or has been previously disclosed.

The Group has a history of significant, transparent disclosure to the market, 
publishing two prospectuses in 2015 and being subject to substantial additional 
scrutiny through a full UKLA listing process as part of its move to the Main 
Market of the London Stock Exchange.

Having reiterated its upgraded guidance for the current financial year on 8 
November 2016, the Company’s business continues to perform well and management 
is next scheduled to update the market on 12 January 2017.

The company’s shares, which had fallen as low as 229.21p during the morning, 
are now down 11% at 330p.
 