
Clive Brittain, who started his racing career as a stable lad in the late 
1940s and rose to become one of Newmarket’s most successful and respected 
trainers, said on Thursday that he will hand in his licence at the end of the 
Flat season. “Old age would probably be a hint,” Brittain, who is 81, said, 
“but I want to spend a few years looking after my wife. She’s spent 60-odd 
years looking after me, so I think it’s only fair I spend some time looking 
after her.”

Brittain has been a hugely popular figure in Newmarket for decades, famous for 
his skill and patience as a trainer, his work ethic and his enduring ability to 
win major races with long-priced outsiders. It is a longstanding Newmarket 
tradition that Brittain’s string is always the first on to the gallops each 
morning, while the Derby, in which he saddled Terimon to finish second at 500-1 
in 1989, is the only one of the five British Classics to have escaped him. 
Terimon proved that his run was no fluke by winning the International Stakes at 
York two months later.

In all, Brittain won six British Classics, starting with Julio Mariner in the 
St Leger in 1978. His outstanding filly User Friendly won both the Oaks and 
Leger in 1992, while Mystiko took the 2,000 Guineas in 1991. His two wins in 
the 1,000 Guineas came with Pebbles (1984) and Sayyedati (1993).

Brittain was also a pioneer for British stables in major international events. 
His big wins abroad included the 1985 Breeders’ Cup Turf with Pebbles, the 
first success at the meeting for a British-trained horse, and victory in the 
1986 Japan Cup with Jupiter Island. His most recent Group One win was with
Rizeena in the Coronation Stakes at Royal Ascot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/20/clive-brittain-coronation-stakes-royal-ascot-rizeena>
 last year.

“I think in all my years, from being an apprentice jockey to being a stable 
lad and then a trainer, I’ve never had a day unemployed, which I would say is 
probably quite a feat in itself and I don’t think you can ask for more than 
that,” Brittain said.

“I’ve had a fantastic career with some fantastic horses, the likes of Pebbles 
and Sayyedati and Rizeena most recently. We’ve done things we wouldn’t even 
have dreamed about doing at the start, so I have been very lucky.

“Pebbles winning the Breeders’ Cup was really out of this world, along with 
Jupiter Island winning the Japan Cup.”

Philip Robinson, who rode for Brittain during a long and successful career as 
a jockey, is a possible replacement for the trainer as the licence-holder at 
Carlburg Stables in Newmarket.

“It’s to Clive’s credit that he has managed to go on as long as he has,” 
Robinson said. “To be able to train into your 80s is phenomenal, as it’s not 
easy work.

“Clive was a pioneer. He opened doors to the rest of the world and excelled in 
the early days, sending horses abroad when others weren’t even thinking about 
it.

“He wasn’t frightened to run horses at massive prices in the big races. That 
also became his trademark and a lot of them performed very well.”

American Pharoah, who was the first horse to complete the Triple Crown since 
1978 when successful in the Belmont Stakes in June, will be aimed at the 
Breeders’ Cup Classic in November followinghis defeat in the Travers Stakes at 
Saratoga last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/saratoga-stunner-american-pharoah-upset-by-keen-ice-in-travers-stakes>
.

In the aftermath of that race, in which American Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah> started at long odds-on 
but was beaten by Keen Ice, the colt’s owner, Ahmed Zayat, said that it was his 
“gut feeling” to retire him to stud.

Zayat has now decided to let American Pharoah run in the Classic, however, 
wherehis opponents could include Gleneagles, this year’s 2,000 Guineas winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/01/gleneagles-breeders-cup-classic-lates-season-target>
.

In a statement published on the American racing website drf.com, Zayat said 
that American Pharoah “deserves another chance” after his unexpected defeat.

“I have discussed all aspects of American Pharoah’s race last Saturday in the 
Travers - and his condition since the race - with our whole team and have 
decided American Pharoah deserves another chance, so we are pointing to the 
Breeders’ Cup Classic,” Zayat said.

“I am very confident in my decision. Not a moment has gone by since the race 
on Saturday when I have not thought about this decision. My initial concern 
right after the race was about American Pharoah’s condition, because he did not 
run his ‘A’ race.

“He has come out of the race in great shape. And after examining all the 
evidence and talking it over with our team - Bob Baffert [the colt’s trainer], 
my son Justin, Jimmy Barnes [Baffert’s assistant trainer], and Victor Espinoza 
[his jockey] - I believe there were a combination of factors that prevented 
American Pharoah from running his absolute best on Saturday. I have every 
confidence that he can run to his best again and he deserves the chance to do 
so.

“I am very confident that this is the right decision for American Pharoah. He 
loves to race. He has provided my family, racing fans and general sports fans 
with great thrills this year. He won the Triple Crown and he deserves the 
chance to be in the sport’s premier year-end event.”

The controversial former jockey Graham Bradley, who served a five-year ban 
from the sport for passing inside information to a cocaine-trafficker, has 
withdrawn his application to the British Horseracing Authority to be considered 
for a trainer’s licence.

“I’ve withdrawn my application for a licence, as it was taking that long that 
the yard I had lined up has fallen through and I haven’t got the right 
premises,” Bradley said. “I’m at Doncaster sales now and I’m just going to 
concentrate on Berkshire Bloodstock for the moment. I bought six horses the 
other day at Newmarket and another two at Doncaster, so that’s what I’m 
concentrating on.”

In addition to his five-year ban, which expired in 2007, Bradley faced a BHA 
charge last year that he had been acting as an unlicensed trainer with 
assistance from the trainer Brendan Powell. Both Bradley and Powell were 
cleared of the charge, butBradley suggested afterwards that the BHA might hold 
a grudge against him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/09/graham-bradley-fears-grudge-plans-train-bha>
.

The BHA said in a statement on Thursday that it would have objected to his 
application when it was considered by its licensing committee.

“Graham Bradley has informed the BHA that he has withdrawn his application to 
become a licensed trainer,” the statement said. “This follows the BHA having 
written to Graham Bradley to inform him that we would be objecting to his 
application and outlining the reasons for this objection, namely that we did 
not believe he was a suitable person to hold a licence.”
 