
Some older workers should see a big fall in the fees they pay to access their 
company pension cash after the government announced plans to cap charges.


Ministers are proposing 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pensions-minister-moves-to-create-exit-charges-equality>
 that early exit charges for money purchase workplace pension schemes be capped 
at 1%. That could make a huge difference to some workers: it has emerged that 
some employer schemes impose a maximum exit charge of up to 24%, which would 
take a huge chunk out of an individual’s pot.


However, only a minority of workplace schemes slap an exit charge on employees 
and the government announcement only affects people aged 55-plus.


The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) said it wanted to ensure workers 
were not “unfairly penalised” for accessing their own cash. Its planscoincided 
with confirmation 
<https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/fca-introduces-cap-early-exit-pension-charges>
 that exit charges for people cashing in personal pensions will be no higher 
than 1%.


In January, the government outlined its determination to cap “excessive” exit 
charges on pensions, which can run into thousands of pounds. An early exit fee 
is a charge imposed on someone when they transfer or take their benefits at the 
age of 55-plus, but before retirement age.


Evidence had emerged that some personal pension providers were imposing 
punitive charges on the over-55s trying to take advantage of the new freedoms 
introduced in April 2015.


The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) had proposed that for existing personal 
and stakeholder pensions, including group personal pensions and self-invested 
personal pensions (Sipps), exit charges should be capped at 1% of the value of 
a member’s pot, with a ban on exit fees in future pension contracts. The FCA 
has now confirmed this will happen from 31 March 2017.


However, this did not apply to workplace pension schemes – their exit fees 
were the subject of a separate consultation. Now the DWP has said it intends to 
extend the regime to occupational pensions, with the proposed 1% cap for these 
set to come into force in October 2017. There would be a ban on exit charges 
for people joining an occupational pension scheme after this date.


The majority of workplace scheme members do not face early exit charges, but 
where these are imposed, they can vary hugely.In a May 2016 report 
<http://www.thepensionsregulator.gov.uk/docs/survey-exit-charges-dc-2016.pdf>, 
the Pensions Regulator said that one small money purchase scheme reported a 
maximum potential charge for certain members of 24%. It said: “This high 
potential charge would be dependent on a member’s age when exiting the scheme 
and specific to particular investment options. The highest potential charge 
would apply to members aged 44 to 53 years of age.”


One large scheme surveyed said its maximum exit charge was a fixed fee of 
£650, while another said its maximum charge was 1.4% of a member’s fund.


Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> minister Richard 
Harrington said: “We are restoring fairness and creating a level playing field 
in a system that has favoured the interests of providers over consumers for too 
long. This new cap will protect people’s savings from excessive charges, so 
more of their money will go towards the comfortable retirement they have saved 
for.”


Tom Selby, a senior analyst at financial firm AJ Bell, said: “The cap on early 
exit fees for pensions, including occupational schemes, is a start, but 1% of a 
£100,000 pension is still a £1,000 charge for accessing your own savings.”


And Nathan Long, a senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said that while this 
was a step in the right direction, “it remains important to be vigilant when 
transferring pensions, as 1% could still be a chunky sum to lose from your 
pension at the point of retirement”.


He added: “There are also hundreds of thousands of people with large exit 
penalties under the age of 55 for whom the exit penalty cap will not help with 
pre-retirement consolidation.”

 