
Life and pension sales figures released over the summer paint a picture of a 
booming industry with almost internet-style growth. Few other industries can 
boast sales increases of 20-25% a year, with the prospect of further growth as 
the welfare state shrinks.

It would seem Britons are racing to buy life insurance cover and pension plans 
for an old age in which the state will do little to help them; and shares in 
these companies are soaring on the stock market.

Except the reality is quite the reverse. Britons are not putting more money 
into personal pensions - sales were actually down in the second quarter of 1999 
compared with the same period last year.

Neither is life insurance steaming ahead. Sales of 'term' products, which pay 
out a fixed sum if the insured person dies, are up only marginally on last 
year. Even the shares of quoted life companies are moribund; the life assurance 
sector has underperformed the FTSE 100 for most of 1999.

The bond business 

The soaring sales figures come not from life insurance and pensions, but 
short-term savings products. In the first half of 1999, total industry sales 
were about £20bn, yet about £1bn came from just one product: Prudential's 
Prudence bond. CGU chalked up £921m with its Portfolio bond. The 
jargon-obsessed life industry calls them 'single-premium with-profits bonds' 
and they account for much of the sales increases shown in the graph.

The bonds are a fairly low-risk stockmarket investment, promising returns of 
about 7% a year over a five-year period. Billions of pounds have poured into 
them from bank and building society deposit accounts, where interest rates have 
sunk to a paltry 2% to 3%. And the army of life salesmen and independent 
financial advisers who earn commissions of 4% or more on every bond they sell 
is helping lever them out.

But a booming with-profit bond business does not equal a healthy life 
industry. The with-profit bond business runs on wafer-thin profit margins 
suitable only for a handful of huge and financially strong life offices. 
Actuarial rules force life offices to put aside reserves for future liabilities 
such as bond payouts, so only those with big reserves can accept the business.

Buyers' strike 

Life insurance analyst Ned Cazalet says: 'It's a game that suits the likes of 
CGU or Prudential but few others. What's more, short-term interest rates are 
now rising, so the with-profit bond story is going to look a little less 
exciting for life companies.'

One-off lump sum investments are also a poor substitute for the industry's 
traditional bread-and-butter business: 10 or even 20-year pension plans. But 
recent figures revealed that total sales of regular premium pensions were down 
9% at £393m.

The reasons for the buyers' strike are not difficult to ascertain. The ink has 
hardly dried on the £11bn in cheques paid out to victims of pension 
mis-selling, yet last week industry watchdogs said a further £250m will have to 
be paid out to people mis-sold 'top-up' pensions.

Even the concept of the traditional pension is going out of fashion. Retiring 
savers are finding their pension buys a much smaller annuity income than they 
thought, and they are putting spare cash into property instead.

But the industry prefers another excuse for falling sales; planning blight 
caused by savers waiting for the advent of stakeholder pensions instead.

Yet stakeholder pensions, when they do come into force in April 2001, will not 
be a crock of gold for private providers. DSS rules will forbid providers from 
charging more than 1% a year on these schemes, a fraction of the usual charges 
in the early years of a personal pension.

The resulting squeeze on mid-sized life companies, particularly those which 
specialise in costly 'home service' premium collection, is expected to be 
intense. A spokesman for CGU says: 'You'll be lucky to see more than five or 
six companies operating in that market. It will all boil down to size and 
efficiency.'

Legal & General, CGU, Prudential and Axa have already said they will offer 
stakeholder schemes, while others such as Scottish Life say it will be 
impossible to make a profit.

Stagnant pension sales is not the only problem facing life offices. 
Mortgage-related endowment sales, the second biggest source of business for 
life offices, are flagging under constant press attack, while guaranteed 
annuities, sold in the 1980s when no one thought interest rates would drop to 
5%, are reckoned to be costing life offices about £7bn.

Huge mistakes have also been made in distribution strategy. Most of the life 
offices which built huge direct sales forces in the 1980s spent the 1990s 
laying them off. The current vogue is for distribution through IFAs, which 
explains Prudential's decision to snap up Scottish Amicable and Lloyds TSB's to 
buy Scottish Widows.

However, as one analyst points out, IFAs may be at their high water mark. 'The 
average age of an IFA is 55, and there's almost no new blood coming in to 
replace them,' he said. 'Some companies will see their distribution channel 
literally die out.'
 