
Peter Reading, who has died aged 65, was one of the finest poets of the 
generation that followed Ted Hughes. His pessimistic, bleak poems led him to be 
called the laureate of grot, a poet of dreck and gall. "Mordant, very mordant," 
was his description of his early work. "Eschew baggage for the expedition is 
brief," he had printed on T-shirts following a residency in the US. Though 
there was much more to him than this bitter nihilism suggests – he was always 
funny, for example – it is true that his accounts of our ruined world grew ever 
more fugitive and vestigial, book by book, until the last poem in each volume 
often all but disappeared from the page, worn out like a faded fax, or slumped 
to its foot in a shrunken font, or was parenthesised, or even proof-marked to 
be deleted.

Born in Liverpool, Reading went to Alsop high school, studied painting at 
Liverpool College of Art and worked briefly as a teacher and as a lecturer in 
art history. For 22 years from 1970, he worked as a weighbridge operator at an 
animal feedmill in Shropshire. The job, he said, left him free to think. His 
first full poetry collection, For the Municipality's Elderly, was published in 
1974. More books followed until one day a new weighbridge boss told him to put 
on a uniform. He refused and was sacked.

From then on he lived off his writing as best he could. He remained in 
Shropshire, most recently in Ludlow. Two awards from theLannan Foundation 
<http://www.lannan.org/> in the US (he was the only British poet to be honoured 
twice) and the support of Bloodaxe, his publishers, kept him going. Every year, 
perhaps one or two poems of three lines or four would appear in the Times 
Literary Supplement. BBC Radio 3 occasionally commissioned longer sequences.

Reading was a small, mostly quiet man (though wine sometimes made him growl a 
little), and for at least the last 20 years of his life – which was also the 
time that I knew him – he wrote as if he and the world of his poems were 
already dead. His own death was a central preoccupation which began early. He 
repeatedly anticipated it in his poems and wrote of the Earth like an 
archaeologist of the Anthropocene, picking through the junk we have made of our 
planet. Last Poems was published in 1994 and was followed by nine further 
collections, book after book of slag-heap epitaphs lit by anger and wine.

The poems were often composed in broken but tight-wired, neo-classical metrics 
that suggested fragments of lost work by Horace or Catullus or Propertius, all 
the while referencing tabloid news stories, the anti-bucolics of small-town 
Shropshire life, scientific discoveries, fossil remains, sickness and 
extinction. Bloodaxe published three volumes of Collected Poems, the last 
appearing in 2003, but the work continued, with -273.15 (as in absolute zero) 
in 2005 and Vendange Tardive in 2010.

Other titles included Ob. (1999), which was illustrated with a death-mask of 
Reading on the cover. Each book was slim but insistent and they were all – even 
as they went on – about stopping. Increasingly Reading sank personal oblivion 
into the dragging undertow of man-made global destruction.  

He was among the best poets of his time. His big themes were handled in small 
poems and without the remotest whiff of the sententious. He was a master of 
choler with a genius for tone; his world-weariness was beautifully done. The 
key book was C (1984). It consisted of 100 poems, each 100 words long, about a 
man dying of cancer. It is told from the point of view of the patient, whom we 
suspect might be Reading himself but who is also an older, scholarly man caught 
out by life. The sequence is formally inventive and unflinchingly graphic. It 
is also grimly funny.

Reading was also the best English bird poet since DH Lawrence. A childhood 
birdwatcher, he spent time ringing waders and passerine migrants on Hilbre 
Island in the estuary of the river Dee, and as an adult he continued to notice 
birds wherever he travelled. They went deeply into his poetry and delivered 
rare moments of epiphany, calm and wonder, even as he described their 
extinction at the hands of man (he wrote several dodo poems).

The only writer to regularly mention his binoculars, he often summoned birds 
by their scientific name and did little other than record a sighting, the scene 
surrounding, the prevailing weather and the ensuing celebratory drinks. But the 
effect of these observations and the intense pleasure, tinged with sadness, 
that they elicited is to preserve the primacy of the encounter and to return 
the bird intact and unassimilated to its own world.

Reading was the only poet to date to read his entire life's work – 26 
published collections – for a filmed archive held by the Lannan Foundation.

He is survived by his third wife, Penelope, and a daughter, Angela, from his 
first marriage. 

• Peter Reading, poet, born 27 July 1946; died 17 November 2011 
 