
AC/DC  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/11/acdc-coachella-review-angus-young>
drummer Phil Rudd is back in court following a conviction in July of 
threatening to kill and drugs possession. He is now accused of drinking alcohol 
during his home detention, a charge that he denies.

Rudd was sentenced to eight months of sober home confinement on 9 July after 
pleading guilty to threatening to kill a former employee, and possession of 
methamphetamine and marijuana.

A New Zealand judge allowed Rudd to remain in home confinement on bail pending 
a November hearing on the possible violation.

The 61-year-old Australian-born drummer could face further sanctions, 
including jail time, if the judge concludes Rudd was in breach of his 
conditions. However, drinking alcohol would likely be considered on the lower 
end of potential infringements.

Asked by reporters after the hearing if he was nervous about what lay ahead in 
the case, Rudd replied: “No, the only thing I’m nervous about is I don’t, I 
don’t actually don’t know what’s going on.”

Asked how he would be spending time on bail, he responded with 
“self-improvement,” before his lawyer hustled him into a waiting car.

The drummer acknowledged in a court summary of facts that he’d offered cash, 
vehicles and a house to an associate after asking him to have the former 
employee “taken out”. He also acknowledged that he’d directly said to the 
victim he was going to kill him.


Police arrested Rudd at his home on 18 July, accusing him of possessing and 
drinking alcohol. He was subsequently given a new bail condition of having to 
undergo drug and alcohol testing whenever police request it.

AC/DC are currently touring with Welsh drummer Chris Slade. Rudd has 
previously said that he wants to rejoin his band. “I’m going back to work with 
AC/DC and I don’t care who likes it or who doesn’t,” he told New Zealand’sOne 
News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/22/acdc-drummer-phil-rudd-i-want-my-job-back-and-i-want-my-reputation-back>
. “I want my job back and I want my reputation back.”

Rudd’s lawyer Craig Tuck said on Monday that he is appealing Rudd’s 
convictions and sentence.

 