
According to the Confederation of British Industry's year-on-year reports, 
companies feel they cannot get enough qualified scientists and engineers to 
fill their jobs. Kids at school just aren't flocking to do science A-levels and 
subsequent degrees in the numbers apparently needed, despite the ostensible 
promise of a healthy job market. The increase in A-level entrants for science 
subjects in recent years is encouraging, but it has still not caused numbers to 
recover to the levels of 20 years ago (unlike in maths where numbers have risen 
markedly). It is not difficult to see one of the reasons why this might be so. 
How can schoolchildren get a taste for what a life in science might be like? 
How can they find out what it is that scientists "do" day by day, or what it 
might mean to be a scientist? Or even what a trained scientist might do far 
removed from the lab, but where their scientific background is still crucial. 
And if they don't have a clue about these things, how can they make sensible 
choices at critical stages in their schooling about what courses and exams they 
should pursue?

Careers <https://www.theguardian.com/education/careerseducation> advice at 
school is often inadequate due to funding and time pressures, with many schools 
no longer able to provide face-to-face advice. Even in those schools which do 
have formal careers advisers, they are likely to be unfamiliar with the range 
of careers associated with scientific disciplines. A depressingly low 
percentage of such advisers themselves possess a science degree and so have any 
kind of first-hand knowledge to pass on. This is not a happy situation.

The consequence is that many schoolchildren will end up ill-informed, their 
knowledge of science beyond the classroom likely to be limited to either 
science fiction films and books or programmes they have seen on TV. CSI is 
probably not the best introduction to scientific practice in real life and, 
although series such as Brian Cox's recent blockbusters undoubtedly contain 
good science, the life he leads cannot be said to be typical of a physicist, 
let alone a scientist more generally. The idea that a scientific training is 
useful in all kinds of jobs beyond the obvious is also likely to be 
unappreciated; examples where we need more trained scientists include 
journalism, politics and the civil service. Even the more "obvious" career 
choices, such as engineering or computer gaming, may mean very little to 
students in terms of what is involved and what qualifications they need to get 
into such jobs.
 <http://www.flickr.com/photos/athenedonald/7997050271/> 
Nevertheless, it is encouraging to see that numbers taking science and maths 
A-levels has steadily increased over the past decade, including this year. 
There is also a small but steady rise in the number of girls taking both 
physics and chemistry at A-level. However, the overall numbers are still too 
low to satisfy the needs of CBI members and for physics have not yet returned 
to the numbers seen at their recent peak around 10 years ago.

How can scientific work be made more accessible to children and how can they 
be helped to appreciate the kinds of things scientists get up to in practice? 
Typical outreach events are designed to excite and intrigue the students, get 
them enthusiastic about the subject rather than provide them with much insight 
into the job market. In contrast to the standard Science Festival fare, for 
more than 25 years theCavendish Laboratory <http://www.phy.cam.ac.uk/> (the 
University of Cambridge's Physics Department), my place of work, has opened its 
doors once a year to a range of exhibitors to enable them to showcase their 
activities, their companies and their practicing scientists as part of the 
annualPhysics at Work <http://www-outreach.phy.cam.ac.uk/physics_at_work/> 
event. This week saw an invasion of more than 2,500 schoolchildren (mainly 
year-11s) to sample the exhibition. This is a major opportunity for the 
exhibitors – about 25 each year from industry and academia – to highlight what 
it is that physicists do in their daily work and why they find it exciting.

This exhibition can only scratch the surface of providing information about 
potential jobs to the students, but over the years it is obvious how valuable 
teachers find it as a way of informing their classes. What is the evidence for 
that statement? That they keep coming back! They even come half way across 
England to attend, the most distant group this year coming from Liverpool.

What do the children see when they come? They get to see a selection of half a 
dozen or so of the 25 exhibits, and they get to meet the people who do the 
science. They'll discover that scientists are articulate and passionate about 
what we do. Most won't be wearing white lab coats, or have Einstein-like hair. 
Exhibitors this year ranged from Rolls-Royce to the British Antarctic Survey, 
from Domino Printing to The Technology Partnership Consultancy, as well as 
several research groups from the physics department and further afield in the 
university. Something, one would hope, to appeal to everyone.
 <http://www.flickr.com/photos/athenedonald/7997464461/> 
I believe we need more events like this across the country to help students 
visualise what a life in science, or a career built on a science qualification 
but which isn't necessarily directly scientific, might mean. If all they think 
scientists do is sit at a bench intoning over bubbling test tubes, they are 
missing the big picture. We need to broaden their horizons and give them a 
taste of the spread of options in principle open to them. Sharing the 
excitement is vital, but sharing the reality is too.
 