
When it comes to choosing a course through Clearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing>, it’s a good idea to focus on 
the facets of your original choice that were most important to you. Was it the 
subject itself, the student experience, the university or its location? Did the 
course offer a year abroad, or the opportunity to work in the industry as part 
of the degree?

Make a list and number it in terms of priority. But don’t think of this as 
being set in stone. Remember your original criteria, but don’t be afraid to 
change them.


Joint honours courses are a good area to explore via Clearing – they often 
have vacancies because students are less aware of them. Take the heritage 
degree at Bath Spa University, which can be combined with its new history of 
art and design course. Running since last year, the course uses Clearing 
because it is still building up its reputation.

University league tables 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/university-league-tables-2017>
For Remy Ward, now an English and creative writing student at Liverpool John 
Moores University, Clearing offered the opportunity for her to change her mind. 
“I realised in mid-August that I didn’t like the university I was at, so I went 
online and checked my options. I found out I could call the Clearing people at 
JMU and ask to join first-year English and creative writing,” she says.

“The course I’m on now is excellent. All the subject tutors are so passionate 
about what they’re teaching that even if a topic has never interested you 
before, it can become your favourite.”

Sometimes, a course might be listed on Clearing because it’s so new that the 
programme that wasn’t finalised at the time Ucas registration began. Or perhaps 
the course simply has niche appeal.

The University of Manchester’s school of earth, atmospheric and environmental 
sciences – a world-leading faculty that counts Prof Brian Cox among its alumni 
– often recruits students via Clearing.

“Our geology and environmental sciences courses provide an exciting window 
into the workings of the natural world,” says Carl Percival, professor of 
atmospheric chemistry and admissions tutor at the school. “Many of our students 
have no previous experience of either of these subjects before studying with 
us.”

Clearing courses

 * Last year, a record 64,000 people found their university placements through 
Clearing – that’s one in 10 students.

 * About 30,000 courses are listed in Clearing when it opens each summer – 
everything from astrophysics to zoology.

 * The majority of universities now use Clearing for a number of their 
courses, even those with high entry requirements.

 * A Ucas survey last year showed that 92% of students on courses they’d found 
through Clearing were either confident or fairly confident they’d made the 
right choice.

 * You don’t have to be UK citizen to use Clearing: more than 5,500 students 
come from elsewhere.

 * Almost half of those using Clearing will be placed by the Monday after 
A-level results day.

 * Clearing not right for you? Around half of 18-year-olds who don’t get into 
university apply again the following year – and 85% of them get in.

Need to know which universities offer the course you are interested in? 
Consult theGuardian University Guide 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityguide>.
 