
One morning in the late 1950s, the author and journalist Pierre Berton, who 
has died of complications of diabetes and heart disease aged 84, was invited on 
a two-day fishing trip. He told his hosts that he had to write two 1,500-word 
comment pieces for his newspaper, the Toronto Star, to cover his absence. So 
his friends expected to wait for hours. Thirty minutes later, Berton came out 
of his office and said, "Done. Let's go."

Berton spoke of having 200,000 words a year in him, either for journalism or 
one of his detailed, masterful histories. He once produced 60,000 words in five 
days for a memoir. As a populariser of Canadian history he has no current 
equal; he also wrote children's books, anthologies, picture books and even a 
dubious volume of erotic short stories under the nom-de-plume Lisa Kroniuk.

Berton completed 50 books in 50 years. The last, Prisoners Of The North, 
published this autumn, was an account of adventurers in Canada's arctic region 
- an apt coda for its author, as it covers the world in which his life began.

Burton was born in Whitehorse, Yukon. He spent his teenage years working in 
Klondike mining camps, finally going south for a four-year stint at the Royal 
Military College in Kingston, Ontario. The journalism bug bit hard at 
university and Berton became, at 21, the youngest news editor of a Canadian 
daily paper, the Vancouver Sun, in 1942.

He later joined the staff of Canada's national news and comment magazine, 
Maclean's, in Toronto, where his nationalism took off. He had hoped to work in 
New York. "My idea was always to go to the States and work for Life magazine or 
the Saturday Evening Post," he said later. But he had no regrets. "I became a 
big frog in a little puddle."

He joined the Toronto Star in 1958 and was pushed on to the national stage 
through television around the same time, joining the current affairs game show, 
Front Page Challenge. He stayed with it for 38 years. He also fronted the 
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's public affairs flagship, Close-up.

Through journalism Berton embraced liberal social mores as they arrived in the 
1960s; in fact, in many instances he acted as their midwife. He was fired by 
Maclean's in 1963 for a column he wrote with the headline "Let's Stop Hoaxing 
The Kids About Sex".

Berton's book, The Comfortable Pew, in which as a lifelong atheist he attacked 
status quo religiosity, outraged churchgoers. But the wider public came to 
expect to be challenged by Berton's views.

It was his knowledge of Canadian history that finally won him a popular 
fan-base and challenged the idea that Canada's past is dull.The affable 
approachability of his books was criticised by exponents of a more joyless 
prose, but he held the national interest with his bestsellers.

He won one of his three Governor General's awards for literature for the 
two-volume epic The National Dream (1970) and The Last Spike (1971), which 
described the painful creation of the Canadian Pacific Railway in the 1880s 
that had turned Canada into a viable, unified nation extending from the 
Atlantic to the Pacific.

Berton was a workhorse, even in his last weeks; shy on the surface but 
symphonic on the page; a hater of small talk and of Quebec separatism. He 
didn't suffer fools, or bad writing, gladly: "I once told a columnist working 
for me that I had to rewrite his column just so I could throw it out."

Berton had a keen sense of humour. As a marijuana smoker since the 1960s, he 
agreed to appear on the CBC satire show, The Monday Report, this October, in 
support of recent steps towards liberalising marijuana laws. He offered a 
masterclass on how to roll and light a joint without burning a bow tie (he was 
famous for his bow ties). He recommended his heavy railway history books as 
excellent "rolling surfaces".

Berton was part of the liberal-left intelligentsia that could be said to have 
established Canada's identity as a tolerant and inclusive country in the second 
half of the 20th century.

He is survived by Janet, his wife of almost 60 years, their eight children and 
14 grandchildren.

&#183 Pierre Berton, journalist, historian, author and broadcaster, born July 
12 1920; died November 30 2004
 