
Canadian <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> police have charged a 
pilot from Sunwing Airlines with impairment after he was allegedly found passed 
out over his seat before takeoff early on Saturday.

Police said the pilot boarded the Boeing 737 with 99 passengers and six crew 
members in Calgary, Alberta, for a flight that was scheduled to make stops in 
Regina, Saskatchewan, and Winnipeg, Manitoba, before continuing on to Cancun, 
Mexico.

But before the flight took off, police said the gate crew as well as crew 
members on the aircraft indicated the pilot was behaving strangely. Police 
allege the co-pilot found the pilot passed out in the cockpit.

“They found him slumped over in the seat. He was the captain,” Calgary Sgt 
Paul Stacey told a news conference.

The ups and downs of being an airline pilot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/nov/20/ups-and-downs-of-being-airline-pilot-careers>
The pilot was escorted from the plane and has been charged with having care 
and control of an aircraft while being impaired, as well as having a 
blood-alcohol level exceeding 0.08 while in care and control of an aircraft.

Stacey said police were alleging the suspect had three times the legal amount 
of alcohol in his system.

“Because he has as much alcohol in his system as he does, they’re going to 
wait for him to sober up somewhat before he goes before a justice of the 
peace,” Stacey said.

Police said the pilot’s name would be released after he had appeared in court.

A Sunwing spokeswoman Janine Massey praised the rest of the crew for handling 
what she called a “very unfortunate matter”.

“We can confirm that shortly before 7am local time, the gate agents, first 
officer and crew of Sunwing flight 595, departing from Calgary and destined for 
Cancun, determined that the captain was unfit to fly and reported this 
accordingly,” Massey stated.

Sunwing, a low-cost Canadian carrier, said the plane took off a short time 
later with another captain.

“We are very apologetic for any upset that this has caused and would like to 
assure our customers that safety remains our utmost priority,” Massey said.

Stacey said Transport Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> had 
been contacted and he expected the suspect could face additional charges.

“It had all the potential for a disaster, but I’ll tell you this much – the 
likelihood of a pilot on a major airline like this actually being able to take 
off when they’re impaired like that is pretty slim, because there’s a lot of 
checks and balances,” Stacey said.

“There’s the other flight crew and there’s gate crew, and they’re all about 
safety. So, I’m not surprised that he got caught before [the plane] left the 
terminal.”

A Transport Canada spokesman Dan Dugas said in an email that it was a criminal 
offence in Canada for a flight crew to work within eight hours of consuming 
alcohol or while under the influence.

Dugas said Transport Canada was reviewing the pilot’s records, and Sunwing 
Airlines’ procedures and protocols.
 