
Some of the most joyously communal jazz played in Britain over the past 
half-century has involved South African emigres who took refuge in Europe from 
the apartheid system in the 1960s and 70s. The vocalist Pinise Saul, who has 
died of cancer aged 71, was a powerful part of that exodus. Many consider her 
to be one of the greatest South African jazz singers of her generation, whose 
distinctive identity combined the country’s indigenous music, its vibrant black 
music scene of the 50s and 60s, and a love of American jazz vocalists – 
especially Nancy Wilson, many of whose standards Saul covered.

Her formidable technique embraced methods from the Xhosa language’s percussive 
clicks to immensely creative jazz improvisation. She put her profound grasp of 
South African traditional choral harmony to eloquent use with her own South 
African Gospel Singers, an accomplished group drawing on Xhosa, Zulu and Sotho 
vocal traditions, sought after for more than 20 years after their formation in 
1989. Saul considered her roles as a freedom fighter and a musician to be 
inseparable in the apartheid years, and often performed at fundraising African 
National Congress concerts.

Saul was born in the Eastern Cape, to Nomini Saul, a domestic worker, and 
Mthuthuzeli Binase, a musician. She recalled, in a 2014 interview withLondon 
Jazz News 
<http://www.londonjazznews.com/2014/05/interview-with-adam-glasser-and-pinise.html>
, that she would barely have begun singing a song in her kitchen at home before 
the whole family joined in. In her teens, she met an influential local pianist, 
Tete Mbambisa, who recruited her to his vocal group, the Four Yanks, and by 
1962 the group were enjoying chart hits.

Mbambisa also played in a powerful instrumental group, the Jazz Wizards. Saul 
performed with them in a 1963 musical called Xapa Goes to Town, and she was 
then invited to Johannesburg to join the cast of the Zulu-language musical Back 
In Your Own Backyard. She remained in Johannesburg to frequent Dorkay House, a 
vibrant centre for African performing arts, and a cultural oasis under 
apartheid. Emerging South African stars including the vocalistMiriam Makeba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/nov/11/miriam-makeba-obituary> and 
trumpeter Hugh Masekela often met there.

In 1975, Saul joined the cast of Ipi Tombi, a dynamic black South African 
musical that became a hit in Europe and the US. She remained in London after 
the show’s West End run, and began performing with Jabula, a group whose albums 
were regularly banned inSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> for their anti-apartheid 
lyrics. In 1979, Saul and the band participated in the Unity festival in 
Boston, where she sang alongside Bob Marley and Patti Labelle.

Saul worked regularly with Dudu Pukwana’s groups Assegai, Spear and Zila in 
the 80s, and then with the guitarist Lucky Madumetja Ranku in the groups 
Township Express and the AfricanJazz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz> 
Allstars. Saul was to remark that Pukwana encouraged her into instrument-like 
vocal experiments she might never otherwise have considered. Zila pieces also 
drew her into writing lyrics steeped in township life - such as those for the 
buoyant dance tune August One, which touched on her own family life.

In 1989, the BBC invited Saul to form a singing group to feature in a TV 
documentary about Nelson Mandela, then about to be released from prison. A 
six-piece vocal group called the Progress evolved under her direction into a 
fully fledged choir, the South African Gospel Singers, who performed regularly 
at the South Bank Centre, London, for the next two decades. Saul and Lucky 
Ranku returned to SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> to 
play a homecoming concert in East London in 1990, and she also worked with the 
saxophonist Trevor Watts’s percussion-centred Moire Music group. In 2001 she 
appeared with Ranku at the Moers festival in Germany in the US saxophone star 
David Murray’s African-inspired world jazz project, M’Bizo.

In the 1990s, Saul and Ranku jointly ran the ensemble Township Express (a rare 
album credited to Saul’s leadership, Fishbone, was released in 1998), and in 
2009 Saul, with others, formed the exhilarating Township Comets.

Saul’s last UK gig was at The Ivy House, Peckham, in 2015, as part of the 
SA-UK season of London concerts. She was performing in a classy nine-piece band 
on new arrangements of songs from her Fishbone album. The audience were on 
their feet and dancing – as were Saul and her three vocal partners – for a 
vivacious version of Saul’s original The Girls.

Saul is survived by two sons, Mongezi and BoyBoy, 11 grandchildren and a 
sister, Nodasi.

• Pinise Saul, jazz singer, born 31 December 1944; died 26 October 2016
 