 General Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator who presided over a 
17-year reign of terror and ordered foreign assassinations, was arrested at a 
London hospital on Friday night by police acting on a request from Spain.
Pinochet, 82, was arrested at the London Bridge hospital on a warrant - an 
Interpol Red Notice - which alleges that between 1973 and 1983 he committed 
atrocities against Spanish citizens. He was held as he was convalescing after 
minor surgery to his back.

The news of Pinochet's seizure by Scotland Yard officers was greeted with 
euphoria by Chilean exiles and former victims of his torture. Among them was 
the former personal doctor of President Salvador Allende, who perished in 
Pinochet's coup. "It is a great triumph of justice," said Dr Oscar Soto. 
"Pinochet must now give account for more than 3,000 deaths, exiles and tortures 
in the 17 years of his dictatorship."

Pinochet's arrest is the culmination of a week of high-level police and 
diplomatic activity between London and Madrid. It is the first arrest of a 
former head of state travelling on a diplomatic passport on British soil.

The Spanish judges who requested his arrest had initially sought only to 
question Pinochet as part of an investigation into human rights violations in
Chile <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> and Argentina. But an 
international warrant was sworn after a warning from the British authorities 
that Pinochet was about to check out of the hospital and flee the country. The 
judges - who are now planning to travel to Britain to question him - have 40 
days to put a case for extradition.

His arrest is the result of a year-long struggle by Madrid judges Baltasar 
Garzon and Manuel Garcia Castellon to have Pinochet brought to account for the 
brutality that followed his overthrow of the government of Allende.

Sources in Spain said the arrest was made after a warrant was issued on Friday 
by Garzon, Spain's leading investigative magistrate on charges of suspected 
'genocide and terrorism'.

The net has been closing in on Pinochet since the summer when the US, which 
supported his regime, finally agreed to provide government documents to 
Castellon who launched his inquiry last year.

On Tuesday Castellon asked Britain to allow Spanish authorities to take a 
statement from Pinochet. On Wednesday Garzon asked Britain to detain Pinochet.

Garzon also wants to question him about Operation Condor, an organised plan of 
repression allegedly implemented by various Latin American dictatorships in the 
1970s and 1980s.

The Chilean government, which opposes Spain's investigations, says Pinochet is 
under no obligation to testify because he travelled to London on a diplomatic 
passport.

In a statement issued in Oporto, Portugal, where Chilean President Eduardo 
Frei is attending the Ibero-American summit, the Chilean government said it was 
"filing a formal protest2 with London for what it considers a violation of 
diplomatic immunity.

Earlier this year Pinochet took up his seat as a life-long senator in Chile - 
a role he wrote into the country's constitution. As a senator, he is immune 
from prosecution under Chilean law.

His sudden arrest caught many on the hop, including Pinochet's old ideological 
enemy, Cuba's Fidel Castro. "Is it true? Is it confirmed?" the 72-year-old 
Communist leader asked in Oporto.
 