
Government plans to save public money by closing dozens of tax offices are 
unrealistic and will cost almost £600m more than first estimated, Whitehall’s 
spending watchdog has found.


The National Audit Office said HM Revenue and Customs officials were now 
re-evaluating a scheme to shut 170 offices and open 13 regional centres 
instead. The government estimated that the plans would save tens of millions of 
pounds.


The NAO report concluded that HMRC’s costs for the original plans have risen 
by £594m in 14 months, more than half of which is the expense of running new 
buildings.


Auditors said the original plans would mean an increase in job losses without 
any understanding of the effect upon the collection of taxes.


In a single year, HMRC’s executive have had to downgrade their expected 
efficiency savings by more than half to £212m by 2026, the report said. HMRC 
“has yet to demonstrate how in practice the regional centres will help its
employees provide a better service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/10/hmrc-failing-to-answer-millions-of-tax-inquiries>
” and tackle tax evasion and avoidance, it added.


The findings come after Theresa May pledged to do more to tackle tax avoidance 
and evasion as part of an appeal to those who are “just about managing” in the 
UK.

More than a year on from the plans being announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/12/hmrc-staff-braced-for-thousands-of-job-cuts-if-tax-offices-close>
, and with the contract signed for its first regional centre to open this 
summer, HMRC “does not yet have an agreed programme business case”, the report 
said.


The NAO said HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> had 
underestimated the scale of the disruption involved, with up to 5,000 staff 
expected to leave as a result of the proposed move, while it had been unable to 
find suitable properties in some of its chosen locations.


“During the transition to regional centres, HMRC must ensure that its service 
to taxpayers and its ability to collect tax revenue are not impaired,” the NAO 
said.
The timetable for closures has been driven by a 20-year private finance deal 
HMRC has with the contractor Mapeley which concludes in 2021. More than 15 
years on from this being signed, “significant risks remain” in the handling of 
the contract, auditors concluded.


The NAO said HMRC was now reconsidering the scope and timing of the move to 
reduce the costs and the risks of disruption.


Options include changing the timetable for opening regional centres, 
reconsidering the location and size of some of them, and reassessing how and 
when to introduce flexible working practices.

The NAO findings have prompted deep concern among MPs and unions. Meg Hillier 
MP, who chairs the public accounts committee, said: “The government’s early 
overoptimism is once again going to increase costs to taxpayers, by £594m over 
10 years, and impact their own staffs’ livelihoods.

“As HMRC decides what actions to take in the short window it has before the 
Mapeley contracts expire, I urge it to heed lessons of the past before signing 
more long-term lease agreements, or letting experienced people go.”


Lady Kramer, the Lib Dem economics spokeswoman, said: “How can the public have 
confidence in our tax system when the organisation charged with bringing in 
money it so utterly reckless with how it spends it?”


Reacting to the NAO report, Mark Serwotka, the general secretary of the the 
PCS union, said it was now imperative that HMRC halted these plans and allowed 
MPs and the public to have their say.


“Cutting thousands of HMRC staff in recent years has hit the services it 
provides to the public, yet the department and this Tory government are 
ploughing ahead with poorly thought through plans that would mean thousands 
more job cuts,” he said.


An HMRC spokesman said: “Our 13 new regional centres are an essential part of 
our work to modernise HMRC and provide an even better service for our 
customers, while delivering annual savings to the taxpayer of over £80m from 
2025-26.

“It also means modern offices for our staff, with the latest technology, 
better collaboration between teams, local training and wider career 
opportunities.”

 