
Playwright, poet and novelist Aphra Behn was the first woman to make her 
living as a writer <http://www.lit-arts.net/Behn/>. Not much is known about her 
early life, but most commentators agree that she was born Aphra Johnson, some 
time around 1640, the illegitimate or foster daughter of Lady Willoughby, whose 
husband was the founder and governor of the South American colony, Surinam. 
Behn certainly lived for a time in Surinam; she draws on the experience in her 
novel, Oroonoko, a colourful, action-packed page-turner containing digressions 
that reveal a gifted travel diarist. On her return to England she was briefly 
married, probably to a Dutch merchant. She became a spy for Charles II in 
Belgium, and, insufficiently recompensed by the King, subsequently spent time 
in a debtors' prison. These unusual experiences must have helped foster her 
independent outlook, providing an additional perspective from which to satirise 
English courtly behaviour.

Her verse shares the elegance and wit of the Restoration comedy-of-manners to 
which she was sucha brilliant and prolific contributor 
<http://www.luminarium.org/eightlit/behn/behnbib.htm>. But poetry affords her 
an opportunity to explore sexual behaviour and gender politics in a more 
personal and combative way than the plays. Under cover of pastoral conventions, 
Behn writes observant, searching poems about her complex personal relationships 
with other male and female writers in her coterie, or "cabal", and her satires 
on male sexual behaviour are astute, if at times a shade melancholy.

This week's poem, appropriately set in the "holy time" of Lent, is one of the 
jauntier satires. "A Letter to a Brother of the Pen in Tribulation" ostensibly 
sympathises with its male addressee. "Poor Damon" is on a strict diet, but not 
for reasons of piety or vanity. He is suffering from the pox.

The real identity of "Damon" remains uncertain. Janet Todd suggests it may be 
the playwright Edward Ravenscroft. If Behn is not simply using comic 
exaggeration, he must have been unusually young-looking: "I durst have sworn 
thou hads't thy pusillage" implies he appeared to be too young for sexual 
activity. Behn's own footnote tells us she had been hoping he would write a 
prologue for one of her plays. We should clearly infer a professional rather 
than personal relationship.

The rake-hero was a favourite character in Restoration comedy, but in the poem 
he is the anti-hero. The unpleasant treatments for syphilis in the 17th century 
are described in mocking detail. "Tabernacler" refers to the regimen of the 
sweating-tub, a kind of fumigation. (Tabernaclers were originally those 
worshippers who used the temporary structures that replaced the churches burnt 
down in the Fire of London.)

Behn fast-forwards in the second stanza to "Blooming May", and enjoys 
elaborating on the spring-time celebrations from which the unhappy "swain" must 
be excluded. The satirical tone from now on steadily sharpens. Damon, 
naturally, will blame a woman for his condition, and Behn scathingly hands him 
the weapon: "And 'tis but just thou shouldst in Rancor grow/ Against the sex 
that has confined thee so." Pretending to take the man's side, she declares she 
could "curse this Female" but there is no need to do so, since "She needs it 
not, that thus could handle you." The woman in question is already cursed – and 
perhaps not only because she herself has the infection. Male inconstancy is one 
of Behn's perennial themes. As she says elsewhere, "The roving youth in every 
shade/ Has left some sighing and abandoned Maid,/ For 'tis a fatal lesson he 
has learn'd,/ After fruition ne're to be concern'd."

The rhyming couplets nip along in a characteristically lively and unforced 
manner. Behn has honed her rage against misogyny to an elegant, almost airy 
point. Although we have only a sketchy sense of the poem's context, there is 
plenty of vivid detail, and an unmistakable emotional charge. The inscription 
on Aphra Behn's tombstone in Westminster Abbey reads, "Here lies a proof that 
Wit can never be/ Defence enough against Mortality." Behn's poetry suggests 
otherwise. "The Incomparable Astrea", as she was sometimes called, stands as a 
landmark satirist at the beginning of the Augustan age – and her clear, 
knowing, distinctive voice rings out directly from that vantage-point to our 
own.

A Letter to a Brother of the Pen in Tribulation 
Poor Damon! Art thou caught? Is't ev'n so?
Art thou become a Tabernacler too?
Where sure thou dost not mean to Preach or Pray,
Unless it be the clean contrary way:
This holy time I little thought thy sin
Deserved a Tub to do its penance in.
O how you'll for the'Aegyptian Flesh-pots wish,
When you'r half-famished with your Lenten dish,
Your almonds, currans, biskits hard and dry,
Food that will Soul and Body mortifie:
Damn'd Penetential Drink, that will infuse
Dull Principles into thy Grateful Muse.
- Pox on't that you must needs be fooling now
Just when the wits had greatest need of you.
Was Summer then so long a coming on,
That you must make an Artificial one?
Much good may't do thee; but 'tis thought thy Brain
E'er long will wish for cooler days again.
For Honesty no more will I engage:
I durst have sworn thou'dst had thy pusillage.
Thy Looks the whole Cabal have cheated too;
But thou wilt say, most of the Wits do so.
Is this thy writing Plays? who thought thy Wit
An interlude of Whoring would admit?
To Poetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> no more thou'lt be 
inclin'd,
Unless in Verse to damn all Woman-kind:
And 'tis but Just thou shouldst in Rancor grow
Against the sex that has confined thee so.
      All things in Nature now are Brisk and Gay
At the Approaches of the Blooming May:
The new-fletched Birds do in our Arbors sing
A thousand Airs to welcome in the Spring;
While every Swain is like a Bridegroom drest,
And ev'ry Nymph as going to a Feast:
The Meadows now their flowry Garments wear,
And ev'ry Grove does in its Pride appear:
Whiles thou, poor Damon in close Rooms are pent,
Where hardly thy own Breath can find a vent.
Yet that too is a Heaven, compar'd to th' Task
Of Codling every Morning in a Cask. 
      Now I could curse this Female, but I know,
She needs it not, that thus cou'd handle you.
Besides, that Vengeance does to thee belong,
And 'twere injustice to disarm thy Tongue.
Curse them, dear Swain, that all the Youth may hear,
And from thy dire Mishap be taught to fear.
Curse till thou hast undone the Race, and all
That did contribute to thy Spring and Fall.

 