
I used to be hooked on pike fishing when I was a teenager. I was totally 
obsessed by pike. And then, when I began to fish for salmon, my son was just 
coming to the same age I'd been when I became obsessed by pike. He became 
obsessed,too. So, through the 1970s, we shared his pike fishing and my salmon 
fishing. We used to go constantly to Ireland on these expeditions... fishing 
the dark, mystic lakes. And he caught some enormous pike. They have a totally 
different mystique. You become hooked on pike at some very deep level.

I began to dream regularly about pike and about one particular lake where I 
did most of my fishing. Pike had become fixed at some very active, deep level 
in my imaginative life. This recurrent dream was always an image of how I was 
feeling about life.

When I was feeling good, I'd have dreams full of giant pike that were perhaps 
also leopards... always in that particular lake. They'd become symbols of deep, 
vital life. That's how I see it. My obsession with pike maybe was my obsession 
with those energies. It was a psychological thing. This went on for years. A 
very bad time might produce a nightmare dream of the lake lined with concrete, 
and empty.

I remember the day before I got married the first time [to American poet 
Sylvia Plath]. I hooked a pike in my dream, at tremendous depth. As it came up, 
its head filled the lake. I brought it out and its girth filled the entire 
lake. And I was backing up, dragging the thing out.

Then, during the 1960s, things changed. After my first wife died, I went to 
live in Ireland. I'd already begun to be interested in salmon. I used to poach 
the odd one, in Devon. The night before I left for Ireland, [I dreamed] I was 
walking beside a thin, rocky stream like a little stream on Dartmoor. And it 
went over a cliff. I went down the cliff where the falling water joined a swift 
river.

And coming up this river were these big salmon. As they came past me, they 
were leaping. And as they leapt, they shook themselves in the air. Their milt 
and spawn were splashed over me, I was completely covered . . . Since that 
dream, all my recurrent fish dreams have been about salmon. They just took over 
from the pike.

I think the fascination of fishing is more than just fish. It's to do with the 
whole world.. . your reaction to and your response to water and things living 
in water, the fascination of flowing water and living things coming up out of 
it - to grab at you and be grabbed.

Throughout the whole of religious tradition, rivers have been gods. Water has 
been the soul. And water is the ultimate life. Maybe that's what we brought out 
of the African deserts - the notion that water is life. I think that's a 
staple, that spring sources and flowing water are the spirit... are life. In 
Revelation, it issues from under the throne of God, pure as crystal. The divine 
influx. Somehow we make that connection.

I had an elder brother, 10 years older. He was already an obsessive pursuer of 
birds and animals - hunting them, shooting them. Insofar as you could in West 
Yorkshire. There were rabbits, crows and magpies. But he was alone in it. We 
lived in the Pennines, where you have the mill towns along the bottom of the 
deep valleys and farms up the sides and moors on top. He had that absolutely to 
himself. It wasn't a common pastime among people he knew. He invented it 
himself.

My father had no interest in it. Nor any of my relatives. Yet he was totally 
obsessed. And he took me into it. From the age of two or three, I lived 
completely in the world of this fanatic. His hunting was getting up at 4 
o'clock every morning to go up the hillside. Sometimes he'd take me with him. 
He went off to the war when I was eight or nine. I carried on myself.

By then we lived in another part of Yorkshire, and [there was] a small estate 
where I knew the son of the gamekeeper. My whole free time, except for after 
school in the evenings, when I played with kids in town, was getting away for 
shooting and fishing. We killed everything. I've got diaries that I kept when I 
was 11 and day after day I'm killing wagtails and robins and wrens and grass 
snakes - everything that moved. It was a total obsession.

And this gamekeeper's son was the same. We lived for it. And we were immersed 
in whatever literature there was available in those days - The Shooting Times 
and Gamekeeper... Old books. My brother, just before he went to the war, spent 
a year as a gamekeeper in Devon, which he calls the happiest year of his life, 
looking after the pheasants on a big estate. He was my model. I used to trap 
mice. I had a trapline for mice throughout a big farm. I used to skin them and 
cure the skins. I'd keep them under the lid of my desk at school and sell them 
for a penny, and maybe tuppence for a good one.

I had a line of gin traps for stoats, weasels and water rats - for their 
skins. This went on until I was 14 or 15. I was obsessed by shooting first, and 
then gradually fishing... I'd always fished, but gradually the pike fishing 
took over. That went on until I went to university. And I always thought, I'll 
keep it up. I had one or two guns and all my tackle. But while I was at 
university, I got overtaken by the intellectual life. After that, I married an 
American girl, but I still assumed that I would just carry on, that sooner or 
later I'd get back into shooting and fishing.

One day we were crossing the moor in West Yorkshire. My parents had retired 
back into the Pennines. We lived very near Haworth, where the Brontes had 
lived. I was taking her over the moor, to visit this old farmhouse said to be 
the original of Wuthering Heights.

Halfway across this moor, a grouse got up out of the heather. It was obviously 
wounded or sick and just fluttered away and collapsed again. I caught it. My 
instinct was that if it were sick or wounded, you killed it. So I killed it. 
And she went berserk. 'How could you do it?' It turned out that grouse were 
part of her mythology.

When she was a little girl in Massachusetts, she'd been on some bus and the 
fellow sitting beside her had begun to tell her a story of 'the heather bird's 
eyebrows'. She had treasured this vision of the heather bird's eyebrows. She'd 
no idea what a heather bird was. From the moment of first meeting her, I used 
to hear about this wonderful bird. Of course, it turned out to be a damned red 
grouse. And she'd realised this by the time this event happened in Yorkshire.

So, I'd not only killed this helpless thing in front of her, I'd killed the 
legendary bird. As she went berserk, I felt it go through me like an electric 
shock. A total transference to me of her feeling.

I realised I didn't want to kill any bird or animal, ever again. And I didn't. 
I stopped shooting. But I went on fishing. Fishing wasn't quite the same, 
although I didn't do a lot of fishing for a few years. We lived in America and 
did a bit... here and there. She liked fishing. But I never took it up 
obsessively again till after she died. Then it was exclusively fishing, more 
obsessively than ever.

An odd thing: I always used to be aware of everything when I was shooting. You 
go over a rise and instantly see everything in the whole landscape. You'd be 
aware of every bird or creature. Your eyes would just go straight to it. You 
were intensely alert to the whole landscape and the life in the landscape. I'd 
glance out of train window and I'd immediately see the ears of hares sticking 
out of the corn.

And then 10 years ago, this friend - I knew him as a fisherman but he also 
runs a little pheasant shoot for farmers in the north of Devon - said: 'Why 
don't you come up and walk around with us?' Wonderful little shoot among these 
lovely farms in Exmoor. And I said: 'I wouldn't mind coming up. I'll beat. I'll 
help flush the birds.' They were walking beaters down through gorges to the 
guns, little drives but very roughly organised.

We were all gathered together in this farmhouse before the shoot. Wintry 
morning. Then we wandered out and my friend shoved this gun at me. I said: 'No, 
I don't want to shoot.' He said: 'Come on. Have a day's shooting.' I took the 
gun. As soon as I got hold of that gun, my heart began to pound. Suddenly I was 
wildly excited. So I spent that day shooting. And I realised that what I had 
completely lost since I stopped shooting was automatically seeing everything in 
the landscape.

The moment I got hold of that gun, suddenly I could see everything again, all 
my senses had been restored to me - by the gun.

I came awake in some weird way. 

I had a wonderful day, as though I hadn't been a day away from a gun. But, at 
the end of the day, I gave him the gun back, told him how wonderful it had been 
and relapsed into my desire to shoot no more. So I'd been given a day's glimpse 
back into this paradise that I used to live in... that I'd completely lost.

I would never stop fishing, because I do not want to lose what goes with 
fishing... this last connection. To this whole - to everything. The stuff of 
the Earth. The whole of life. Occasionally it crosses my mind that, if ever 
they abolish fishing, I would have to leave the country. I'd have to go and 
live in a land where I can still keep hold of the world.

It's an extension of your whole organism into the whole environment that's 
created you... that's created us. We're just the animal tip of it. And so to be 
still actively engaged in the system of interaction that created us... is like 
keeping contact with your own organs in your own body.

It's as if to lose that would be like learning to live without kidneys. You'd 
have to live with a biology you'd diminished. You'd live an artificially 
diminished life. If I were deprived of that kind of live, intimate, interactive 
existence - allowing myself to be possessed by, and possessing, this world 
through fishing, through that whole... corridor back into the world that has 
made us as we are - it would be as though I'd had some great, vital part of me 
amputated. Had an electronic box instead of a heart. That's how I feel about it.

Any kind of fishing provides that connection with the whole living world. It 
gives you the opportunity of being totally immersed, turning back into yourself 
in a good way. A form of meditation, communion with levels of yourself that are 
deeper than the ordinary self.

When I'm fishing alone - as I come out of it, if I have to speak to somebody, 
I find I can't speak properly. I can't form words. The words come out 
backwards, tumbled. It takes time to readjust, as if I'd been into some part of 
myself that pre-dates language. It doesn't happen when I'm fishing with people.

I think it's like sleep. They're only now discovering what happens to you in 
sleep, that sleep is a huge system of physical reparation. All kinds of 
chemicals are produced that are necessary to repair your whole body - your 
whole life.

And I think certain experiences - the intense, real, direct and first-hand 
communication with the natural world that hunting and fishing provide - 
re-immerse you in those levels of awareness and interconnectedness within 
yourself. They become important to your well-being.

Jung used to say that most of his patients would be cured if only they could 
just re-immerse themselves in the primitive man or woman for five minutes. All 
the circuits would suddenly be reconnected. And they'd be restored to their 
real selves, their biological inheritance. That's what was missing. That's why 
they were sick. Because those circuits had been broken.

There's fashionable male therapy in all that, but hunting and fishing do it. 
They reconnect you in a gentle, natural way without going into artificial 
situations or altered consciousness. You just seem to go into a more natural 
mode. And people who don't fish and hunt are finding difficulty making that 
reconnection with the whole cycle.

The full interview can be obtained from Wild Steelhead & Salmon magazine, PO 
Box 3666, Seattle, Washington 98124-3666, US; fax 001 206 328 8761; e-mail,
salmon@wildsteelhead.com <mailto:salmon@wildsteelhead.com>
 