
As the results emerge (Lib Dem support collapses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/may/06/lib-dem-support-collapses-north?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 6 May), a nightmare scenario starts to look all too plausible. Collapse of 
Lib Dem support; voting reform off the agenda for a generation; SNP triumph 
leading to victory in independence referendum and drastic cut in Labour 
strength at Westminster; this further diminished by boundary changes. The 
overall outcome: permanent Tory rule in England, meted out in soul-destroying 
five-yearly dollops.

Richard Allen

Cambridge 

• The most successful victor would seem to be someone who has led a minority 
government. Is this a lesson we all could learn? Legislation is a small part of 
governing, and while the executive is held in check, it can get on with making 
the system work. It might also allow parliament to really examine issues on 
their merits and only pass bills which command cross-party majorities.

Gerard McMullan

London

• The No to AV campaign has at least done one thing – firmly restored the 
Tories as the nasty party.

John Madeley

Reading

• Now the Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> No campaign 
seem to have what they want, will they please return to party HQ the red rose 
logo used for the full-page ad on 4 May. 

Cecil Fudge

Hindhead, Surrey 

• Paddy Ashdown predicts long-term consequences for Cameron's "breach of 
faith". Every student area in Sheffield (a Labour gain) knows the real 
consequences of a "breach of faith".

James Caruth

Sheffield

• Nick Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> will "listen to 
what people are telling us", "learn lessons" and "move on". Who says oratory is 
dead?

Richard Green

Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire

• Given the Lib Dem threats to "twist David Cameron's arm harder", what do 
they propose? Given the likely result if an election is called, maybe they 
should be put on suicide watch?

Ian Reissmann

Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire 

• What's the significance of the clothes pegs in the picture of votes being 
counted in Sheffield (6 May)? Had they been attached to voters' noses?

Anand Chitnis

London 

• Went to vote. Not a single question on the Authorised Version. So 
disappointed.

Canon Wealands Bell

Lichfield, Staffordshire 
 