
Pope Francis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> has told bishops 
around the world they must adhere to a policy of “zero tolerance” for clergy 
who sexually abuse children and begged forgiveness for “a sin that shames us”.


 In a letter sent on 28 December but released by the Vatican only on Monday, 
Francis said: “I would like us to renew our complete commitment to ensuring 
that these atrocities will no longer take place in our midst.”

 Since his election in 2013, Francis has taken some steps to root out sexual 
abuse in the church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/04/pope-francis-church-law-paedophile-priests-catholic-bishops>
 and to put in place practices to protect children. But victims’ groups say he 
has not done enough, particularly to hold to account bishops who tolerated 
sexual abuse or covered it up.

 “[The church] recognises the sins of some of her members: the sufferings, the 
experiences and the pain of minors who were abused sexually by priests. It is a 
sin that shames us,” Francis wrote in the letter.

Pope Francis reveals new church law to deal with paedophile priests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/04/pope-francis-church-law-paedophile-priests-catholic-bishops>
 “I would like us to renew our complete commitment to ensuring that these 
atrocities will no longer take place in our midst. Let us find the courage 
needed to take all necessary measures and to protect in every way the lives of 
our children, so that such crimes may never be repeated. In this area, let us 
adhere, clearly and faithfully, to ‘zero tolerance’.

 The comments, included in a letter about the plight of vulnerable children in 
general, were some of his most comprehensive on abuse.

 Anne Barrett-Doyle, founder of the US-based research and monitoring group 
BishopAccountablity.org, said in an email that the pope’s words were little 
more than rhetoric.

 “This pope keeps proclaiming zero tolerance but doesn’t enact it. He knows 
full well that church law contains no zero tolerance provision. Zero tolerance 
is mere rhetoric. The sad fact is that the church still has not changed its 
system to make zero tolerance a binding reality,” she said.

 She said that while it existed in the United States, it is “still optional in 
the global Catholic church”.

 Francis, who has met victims of sexual abuse several times, both in the 
Vatican and on some of his foreign trips, said: “We join in the pain of the 
victims and weep for this sin – the sin of what happened, the sin of failing to 
help, the sin of covering up and denial, the sin of the abuse of power.”

 In 2015 Francis ordered the trial and defrocking of a Polish archbishop 
accused of paying for sex with minors in the Dominican Republic.

 The year before he set up a Vatican commission, including some victims, to 
advise local churches on how to prevent abuse. But some members have complained 
about the slow pace of change in the Vatican.

 Francis also approved the establishment of a Vatican tribunal to judge 
bishops accused of covering up sexual abuse or failing to prevent it. But the 
proposal has so far stalled.

 Church sexual abuse broke into the open in 2002 when it was discovered that 
US bishops moved abusers from parish to parish instead of defrocking them. 
Similar scandals were later discovered around the world and tens of millions of 
dollars have been paid in compensation.
 