
Pope Francis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> said Christmas 
has been “taken hostage” by dazzling materialism that puts God in the shadows 
and blinds many to the needs of the hungry, the migrants and the war-weary.


 Francis, leading the world’s 1.2 billion Roman Catholics into Christmas for 
the fourth time since his election in 2013, said in his Christmas Eve homily in 
Vatican City that a world often obsessed with gifts, feasting and 
self-centredness needed more humility.

 “If we want to celebrate Christmas authentically, we need to contemplate this 
sign: the fragile simplicity of a small newborn, the meekness of where he lies, 
the tender affection of the swaddling clothes. God is there,” the Pope said at 
St Peter’s Basilica.

 At the solemn but joyous service, attended by about 10,000 people as well as 
dozens of cardinals and bishops, Pope Francis said the many in the wealthy 
world had to be reminded that the message of Christmas was humility, simplicity 
and mystery.

 “Jesus was born rejected by some and regarded by many others with 
indifference,” he said. “Today also the same indifference can exist, when 
Christmas becomes a feast where the protagonists are ourselves, rather than 
Jesus; when the lights of commerce cast the light of God into the shadows; when 
we are concerned for gifts, but cold toward those who are marginalised.”

 He then added in unscripted remarks: “This worldliness has taken Christmas 
hostage. It needs to be freed.”

 Security was heightened for the Christmas weekend in Italy and at the Vatican 
after Italian police killed the man believed to be responsible for the Berlin 
market truck attack, while other European cities kept forces on high alert.

 St Peter’s Square was cleared out six hours before the mass began so that 
security procedures could be put in place for those entering the church later.


 Francis, who has made defence of the poor a trademark of his papacy, said the 
infant Jesus should remind everyone of those suffering today – particularly 
children.

 “Let us also allow ourselves to be challenged by the children of today’s 
world, who are not lying in a cot caressed with the affection of a mother and 
father, but rather suffer the squalid mangers that devour dignity: hiding 
underground to escape bombardment, on the pavements of a large city, at the 
bottom of a boat over-laden with immigrants,” he said.

 Outside the basilica, thousands of people who could not get inside watched on 
video screens.

 “Let us allow ourselves to be challenged by the children who are not allowed 
to be born, by those who cry because no one satiates their hunger, by those who 
do have not toys in their hands, but rather weapons,” Francis said.

 On Christmas Day, the pope will deliver his twice-yearly Urbi et Orbi (“To 
the city and to the world”) blessing and message from the central balcony of St 
Peter’s.
 