
Prince De Beauchene is as short as 7-1 for the Grand National after cruising 
to victory in the Bobbyjo Chase at Fairyhouse. He was having his second start 
since joining Willie Mullins from the Durham yard of Howard Johnson, who was 
banned for four years last summer for breaching the rules on horse welfare.

The nine-year-old won a valuable handicap at Aintree last April on his final 
run for Johnson and was kept under wraps by Mullins in advance of the weights 
for the National being set a fortnight ago. He was well beaten at Navan in 
November on his only previous outing for the Irish trainer.

"He showed a nice bit of improvement from Navan," said Mullins, confirming 
that the National was likely to be the horse's next race. "He'll like the 
better ground, judging by the size of his feet. He did everything nicely and I 
hope there will be more improvement to come from him."

William Hill's 12-1 was the best price available in the immediate aftermath of 
the Bobbyjo and, though the National is more than a month away, those odds seem 
likely to come under pressure. Paul Townend rode on Saturday because Ruby Walsh 
was here atKempton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton>, but there can 
be little doubt that Walsh will be in the saddle on 14 April and that in itself 
will attract the interest of many punters.

Mullins and Walsh combined to win the 2005 Grand National with Hedgehunter, 
who also won the Bobbyjo on his previous start. The 13-year-old Black Apalachi 
was another to run a promising prep-race with the National in mind, staying on 
into second on his first start since chasing home Don't Push It in the 2010 
National.

It emerged in the morning that the jockey Paddy Brennan had briefly 
contemplated changing his name by deed poll to Joe Coral, as part of a 
pre-Cheltenham Festival publicity stunt instigated by the bookmakers. The 
British Horseracing Authority squashed the idea, saying it was impossible for 
all sorts of administrative reasons, but it would have served the firm well 
when Brennan rode three winners here, including a popular success on Nacarat in 
the Racing Plus Chase.

Brennan seemed rather relieved that he had not changed his name, saying: "I 
hadn't discussed it with my parents. I'm not sure they would have been overly 
impressed."

Nacarat has run many fine races round here, including when landing the same 
prize three years ago, but he seemed beaten at the top of the straight when 
Hector's Choice went past. That rival's stamina quickly ebbed away, however, 
and the grey came home 11 lengths clear.

"He's been an absolute pleasure to train," said Tom George, who added that the 
horse would probably have been placed behind Kauto Star in the King George if 
he had not raced at Aintree three weeks before. "He lives in the stable nearest 
the lorry and every time a horse goes racing, he starts neighing because he 
wants to go with them. But we just want to keep him in one piece."

Nacarat is likely to miss the Festivals at Cheltenham and Punchestown and will 
turn up for a race at Aintree only if the ground is good enough.

George and Brennan also enjoyed an easy victory in the Adonis Hurdle with Baby 
Mix, who is consequently back at the top of betting lists for the Festival's 
Triumph Hurdle, disputing favouritism with Alan King's Grumeti, also a winner 
on this card. Minsk, who had been the Triumph favourite, was beaten on his 
hurdles debut at Fairyhouse but may still be sent over for the Cheltenham race.

Dragon Pulse, who won a Group Two when trained by Jessica Harrington last year 
and was beaten half a length in the National Stakes, has been moved to Mikel 
Delzangles in France. Harrington said there had been no falling-out with the 
owner, Tan Kai Chah, who will have other horses with her this year.

"It's very competitive in Ireland and it seemed the programme book in France 
offered better opportunities for him," Harrington said. Dragon Pulse is as 
short as 20-1 for the 2,000 Guineas at Newmarket in May, though this is not now 
expected to be on his agenda.
 