
The Prudential has never been accused of underpaying its executives so, in a 
sense, 2015 was far from a vintage year for the insurer’s top folk. The nine 
boardroom executives had to struggle by on £40.7m between the lot of them, a 
comedown from the previous year’s £53.3m. And chief executive Tidjane Thiam, 
who left to join Credit Suisse last summer, never quite reached the round 
figure of £50m in earnings over the course of his six-year stay.His final tally 
was £48m. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/31/tidjane-thiam-earned-5m-pounds-at-prudential-in-five-months>

The Prudential <https://www.theguardian.com/business/prudential> is a large 
and successful company – and its level of disclosure on pay is excellent – but 
these are extraordinary sums. The going-rate for a chief executive of a FTSE 
100 firm is £5m-a-year these days once the full paraphernalia of salary, 
benefits, bonuses, incentives and pension payments is totted up. At the Pru, it 
is now standard that four or five executives beat that level in a decent year. 
In addition, three employees outside the boardroom – probably fund managers at 
M&G – earned £5m-plus last year.

Tidjane Thiam earned £5m at Prudential in five months
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/31/tidjane-thiam-earned-5m-pounds-at-prudential-in-five-months>
Investors, no doubt, will merrily approve the remuneration report at the 
annual meeting. The ill-named “shareholder spring” of 2012, in which the Pru 
suffered a minor revolt, is a distant memory. Companies with strong share 
prices sleep quietly these days.

But, before they tick the “approve” box, let’s hope a few investors query the 
housing benefits granted to Mike Wells, Thiam’s successor, after his move to 
London from the US.

One can understand that the Pru would pick up his shipping costs of £200,000 
and a bill for temporary accommodation, even if it was an impressive £177,890. 
But then it paid £513,750 to cover the stamp duty on the house Wells bought in 
the UK. Further, the Pru has agreed to pay the interest on Wells’s mortgage for 
three years – that came to £56,604 for a period of less than 12 months, and 
maybe substantially less since the promotion only happened in June.

Nobody doubts that Wells was the right man for the job: he had led the Pru’s 
successful US business for years. But have we really reached the point where an 
executive who would hope to earn £10m a year can put his mortgage interest 
payments on the company’s tab?

It’s all standard practice in relocations these days, argues the Pru. Maybe 
that is correct, but it does reinforce a point the High Pay Centre has making 
for ages: perks are the hidden inflator in boardroom pay and the executive 
class lives by different rules.

Brighter news from AO World

John Roberts, founder and chief executive of AO World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ao-world>, seems to have learned from 
experience: cut the hype and show that you are concentrating on running the 
business.

In February last year, the City was seriously miffed by a profits warning from 
the online electrical retailer that came less than a year after flotation. 
Roberts’s insistence that it was just “a slight miss” and that shareholders 
should look to the long-term was interpreted as arrogance. As it happens, the 
judgment was unfair – in person, Roberts is not the brash individual of 
caricature – but the share price went on the blink.

On Thursday, AO came bearing brighter news. Top-line earnings in the UK are 
running ahead of expectations at about £17m for the year. Over on the 
continent, revenues from the launches into Germany and the Netherlands are 
running to plan.

A chance to have a dig at the doubters? If it was, Roberts declined. He spent 
the day telling City analysts not to get over-excited. Very sensible, too. If 
AO really is to become a pan-European disruptive powerhouse – an Amazon of 
fridges and freezers with turnover counted in the billions – the task will take 
years to complete. Best to treat quarterly trading updates as suitably 
irrelevant.

Brexit and steel

Let’s, please, forget the idea that leaving the European Union would save Port 
Talbot. Yes, it is true the UK would be freer to impose tariffs against cheap 
Chinese steel, assuming the current government performed a complete U-turn on 
the idea. And, in theory,the UK might be able to nationalise the steelworks at 
will 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/31/potential-options-government-tata-steel-port-talbot>
 or throw subsidies at a would-be buyer.

But, if a post-Brexit UK also wanted to negotiate access to the EU single 
market with minimal trade barriers, Brussels’ first demand would be adherence 
to its state aid rules. Maybe the EU would be happy to grant a carve-out for a 
UK strategic industry like steel – but you wouldn’t bet a single euro on that 
hope.
 