
Newspaper publishers have called on the government to curb the activities of 
search engines and social media websites.

Through their trade body, the News Media Association (NMA), they delivered a 
briefing to ministers on Thursday about their concerns.

They want the government to “ensure that online platforms operate within a 
framework that is fair, non-abusive and respectful of media plurality.”

The briefing states that “the online news environment is characterised by 
aggregation of news stories by third party players who repackage, serve, link 
to and monetise that content.”

It says that “Google dominates these activities in search and Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> dominates in social” and 
believes “there are potential benefits for news publishers in working with 
them, not least in terms of reaching new audiences.”

But publishers are worried that “the situation is far from win-win and 
significant value is being captured by companies who do not invest in original 
journalism at the expense of those who do.”

The NMA points out that publishers face substantial costs to produce quality 
journalism, saying: “It is becoming increasingly difficult to meet these costs, 
partly because of the lower value of digital advertising compared to print, but 
also because of the diversion of advertising spend from publishers towards 
aggregators.”

It continues by referring to another problem facing the industry: adblocking. 
The briefing states:

“Attempts to achieve sustainability in this difficult environment are also 
being undermined by the restrictive practices imposed by the most powerful 
online platforms and by the rise of adblocking outfits, who in their own way 
are part of the scramble to generate ad revenues from content to which they 
have made no contribution.”

And the publishers also raise a wider concern about “the impact on media 
plurality and the functioning of democracy.” Every day, it says, “the UK’s 
newspapers – digital and print - can be counted on to provide the subject 
matter of the country’s democratic conversation.

“However, they can only survive if the relationship between rewards for 
producing journalism is commensurate with costs.”

The document states: “The value chain of digital news has become wildly out of 
step with the contribution that each player makes and that this is not 
sustainable.”

The briefing was sent to Baroness Neville-Rolfe, the minister for energy and 
intellectual property, who had requested a summary of issues facing the 
industry. It was also sent to Matthew Hancock, minister for digital policy and 
culture.

Update 5pm: Google responded to the NMA’s appeal to the government. A Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> spokesperson sent the following 
statement:

“There is no advertising on Google News. Google creates value for the news 
sector by sending 10bn free clicks each month to publisher websites, which they 
can monetise.

“We have been working with UK publishers through the Digital News Initiative 
<https://www.digitalnewsinitiative.com/> to develop more sustainable models for 
online news, developing new products such asAccelerated Mobile Pages 
<https://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2015/10/introducing-accelerated-mobile-pages.html>
 in order to boost publishers’ traffic and increase monetisation.”
 