
Hardly a day passes without an announcement by one newspaper publisher or 
another that jobs must go, titles must be merged and offices must be closed.


Cutbacks have been the reality of the news trade in Britain for the best part 
of 20 years at national, regional and local level. And the same story has been 
unfolding in the USA, Canada, Australia and most European countries.

The cause, as we all know, is the onward march of the digital revolution. We 
who praise its advance cannot also help but lament its disruption.

Everyone involved in the business registers concern because its fate is so 
uncertain. We need to disaggregate the “everyone” because publishers and 
journalists are seeking very different outcomes. Nor should we regard all 
publishers as a single entity.

Publishers seeking only profit - such as the chains that control the bulk of 
the UK’s regional papers - are different from those whose newspaper ownership 
is about prestige and political clout (and propaganda).

And they are different again from the owner of the Guardian/Observer, the 
Scott Trust, which exists specifically to safeguard the papers’ journalistic 
freedom and liberal values “free from commercial or political interference.”


But no publisher, despite differing motivations, can escape the commercial 
effects of a technological revolution that is in the process of destroying the 
funding mechanism that has underpinned newspaper companies for more than 150 
years.

Journalists are aware of this but tend to turn a blind eye to reality. They 
blame publishers for the cutbacks, or at least, the way those cutbacks are 
carried out. I know, because I have done so plenty of times in the past, 
belabouring, say, Trinity Mirror or Newsquest or theTelegraph Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup> for the imposition of 
cuts.

Some have been more ruthless or cack-handed than others. Nor have journalists 
been too happy about executives enjoying handsome rewards for implementing 
redundancy programmes, a constant refrain by the National Union of Journalists.

It is irritating, probably intensely annoying, for those required to walk the 
plank. It does not, however, change matters. Whether chief executives are 
unpopular or over-paid or even incompetent is largely irrelevant. All are in 
the same boat and their task is clear: to ensure the survival of “the product” 
for as long as possible.

They must do so whether they work for public companies, where the appetites of 
investors must be satisfied, or private companies, where owners seek to make 
profits or, at worst, keep losses to a minimum.

Although journalists, even those without a smattering of economic knowledge, 
know this to be the case, they find it difficult to be dispassionate about it, 
not least because they are in the firing line.

Leaving aside the grumbles of veteran hacks who have never come to terms with 
the post-Fleet Street era, journalists who have enthusiastically grasped the 
advances offered by digital transmission have also begun to be hugely critical 
of their employers.

They have registered their anger about job insecurity, falling wages 
(including much reduced payments to freelance contributors) and sometimes poor 
working conditions, such as the pressure to work longer hours, to move house to 
keep their jobs or to travel further to reach their offices.

They also complain about apparent changes of direction by their managers who 
are struggling to cope with the fast-moving digital environment.


Then again, those of us who have been around for a long time know that 
journalists have a long history of bellyaching. It goes with the territory. We 
always know better than those above us.

Nor are journalists really appreciative of the fact that the audiences for our 
journalism are far greater than we enjoyed in the pre-internet era. They 
dismiss the figures as the result of clickbait, and in some instances, but not 
all, they may be correct: maximising eyeballs is helpful in attracting 
advertisers (just as it was, and is, with newsprint sales).

Meanwhile, the overarching concern of all journalists is the gradual reduction 
in their overall numbers and the retreat from face-to-face, eye-witness 
reporting. At the international level, foreign postings have all but vanished. 
Nationally, regional offices have been closed. As for the headquarters’ staffs, 
they spend decreasing amounts of time on the road.

Similarly, fewer and fewer reporters on regional and local papers are allowed 
leave their offices. Conceding that much more can be accomplished on computers 
than was ever the case in shoe-leather days of yore (we now take online data 
journalism for granted, for instance), it remains the case that journalism is 
undergoing severe retrenchment.

Doubtless, many of the essays in a forthcoming book with an somewhat 
optimistic title, Is print dying... and how to avoid it,* will detail what is 
largely regarded as “a crisis”.

If the authors (including me) are honest they will point to the distinction 
between the crisis facing publishers and the one facing journalists. In other 
words, they must differentiate between journalism as a business and journalism 
as a public service.

This is the reasoning behind my earlier statement about publishers and 
journalists seeking different outcomes and it is the crucial split between the 
two.

The crisis we journalists face at the hands of publishers is the destruction 
of our trade and therefore the annihilation of a public service. This is not to 
criticise publishers, which is why I spent some time explaining the pressures 
they face and the way they are tackling them. It is simply to rationalise what 
is happening.

Here, in a nutshell, is the reality. Journalists cost money. So the last thing 
newspaper publishers want nowadays are journalists.

By which I mean reporters, on-the-road reporters who spend time and effort to 
seek out stories. They are too expensive and, viewed in strictly economic 
terms, unproductive.

They can spend many days, sometimes weeks and even months, on their research. 
And what do most of them have to show for it at the end?

Even if they land a story that provokes a political row, say, or brings down a 
high-ranking official, it is highly unlikely to attract new buyers.

It might well add lustre to the newspaper, enhancing its status for holding 
power to account. But seen from a purely commercial perspective, reporters just 
aren’t worth it. And they, rather than desk-bound journalists, are the ones 
being laid off.

With them go skills and experience. With them go untold stories. With them 
goes the most potent and useful way of serving the public.

Publishers need to recognise the direction of travel. The public and the 
politicians who represent them need to campaign for the retention of reporters.

And the funding, you ask? As I have written before, and more than once, we 
need to find an accommodation with the hugely profitable and powerful new media 
organisations that benefit from the journalism they recommend.

In fairness, publishers know that. As one senior News UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsinternational> executive put it in an 
email to me a couple of days ago, “the republishing platforms reap financial 
rewards by distributing our content.”

But what happens when there is no-one to supply that content? In recognising 
the crisis, publishers and journalists must work together to find a solution.

*Co-editors: Ray Snoddy, Richard Tait, Neil Fowler and John Mair, due to be 
published in February 2017. This blog will form part of my chapter.
 