
You’ve probably been asked a lot of times but what’s the secret to bagging an 
ambitious, beautiful, and glamorous woman like your wife, Tzufit? Five things: 
Be yourself. Be confident. Be honest. Appeal to her brains and not what you see 
outside. And then … if all these fail, give me a call!

She has always sworn that you are more charismatic than José Mourinho. A lot 
of football fans won’t believe that. What I believe is that charisma is the 
ability to influence people to do what you want. There is no one template for 
that. My wife probably digs my style better, you know?

Speaking of José, how do you rate his second spell at Chelsea so far? He is 
great coach and no one should be surprised at the team he has built. It won’t 
be like the first time he was at the Bridge but I’m sure he will do well.

While Mourinho is having his second chance in England, your coaching debut in 
Africa begins at such a high level withGhana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> at the Africa Cup of Nations. Are 
you: a) scared b) excited or c) all of the above? The last time I was asked 
this kind of question with multiple choice answers was for my Bagrut, the high 
school exams in Israel! [Laughs] But, seriously, I am none of what you ask. I 
am simply curious.

Curious? As in to learn more about the African Cup? Not just that. I want to 
soak it all in. My whole life has been about learning and this a new learning 
environment. I want to learn everything I can to add to my existing knowledge.

You’ve not been with the Ghana team for long – just a few weeks. What have you 
learned? A lot. I have a group of very willing players who look at the 
collective instead of themselves. They understand the need to lower their 
individual goals for the sake of the team. And that is what I want.

How did that last point – the collective – feature in your selecting a team 
for the tournament, especially as you didn’t know them personally? Coaching is 
like fatherhood. After doing it for a long time, you notice patterns. One of 
the reasons I chose 31 players initially, before selecting 26 and then 23 was 
that I needed to establish those who understood the need for the team to win 
first.

Is that why Kevin-Prince Boateng, Michael Essien and Sulley Muntari were not 
named? No, no. You know their situation with the Ghana FA [Boateng and Muntari 
are on indefinite suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/26/kevin-prince-boateng-sulley-muntari-sent-home-ghana>
] and everything else that happened in Brazil has not really been sorted out so 
I think this is best for the collective.

You use the word “collective” a lot… Yes. Because as much as individual 
quality is important, even an averagely-talented team can achieve wonders with 
the right mindset.

That sounds like something Arrigo Sacchi would say… Yes! Actually, Sacchi is 
one of the coaches who really inspires me. He and [Johan] Cruyff. Amazing minds.

Those two were masters of the pressing game. Are we then going to see a lot of 
that in the Ghana team? We strive to be hard to break down. We strive to be 
organized. We strive to change our style quickly – and all this needs mentally 
and physically sharp players.

You also flew in physical trainers. Was the team not in the shape you wanted 
when you came in? Ghana has very good players but due to injury and other 
things, some had not been very active so yes we needed to work on their 
conditioning.

To be a great manager, Roots Manuva says a man must be “All Things To All 
Men.” How do you want the Ghana players to see you?As Avram Grant! [Laughs] I 
want them to see me as a guide who will help them reach a goal. They should 
approach me also as a friend. All players I have coached know that is my style.

If you won the African Cup, and Ghanaians proposed that you stay long after 
your 27-month contract, would you?[Laughs. Then a long pause] If I win this 
African Cup, that would mean ending 30-something years of waiting. In the 
immediate happiness of success, fans say things. But like a woman who is 
surprised with a proposal, I would ask Ghanaians to think carefully about this. 
I would love to stay if I am wanted, but first, let’s build the team, see 
through my current deal and take it from there.

You were said to have been courted by Premier League clubs. Why Ghana? Look at 
the profile of Ghana. If it were a club team we will say they’ve consistently 
gotten to the semi-final of the Champions League since, what, 2008? They want 
to go to the next level. For me, the people want a new foundation built for a 
winning team of the future. That is why I am here. At the time I was 
approached, this was the lure that clinched it for me.

You were approached? Did you not apply? Not personally. He [Avram gestures to 
his agent, Saif Rubie, standing nearby] told me about the job and if I would 
like it. I said yes, immediately. He contacted the GFA, I came for the 
interview and I got it.

• Gary Al-Smith is an African football specialist who is covering the 2015 
African Cup of Nations in Equatorial Guinea for the Guardian. Follow him on 
Twitter: @garyalsmith.
 