
Those in racing who complain about inaccuracies in the going descriptions 
provided by racecourses have a new champion in the owner Ritchie Fiddes, a 
multi-millionaire from his work in IT who is now intent on helping to cajole 
this most traditional sport into the 21st century. Fiddes has been lobbying the 
Turf’s ruling body on this topic, has been pleased with the response and 
believes progress will be made.

Fiddes, whose racing interests include a share in the popular sprinter Easton 
Angel, stresses that he has much sympathy with the clerks of the course whose 
job it is to describe the state of the ground at their track. “I understand 
that they’re doing their best,” he said on Monday. “But the going descriptions 
at times are factually wrong and it should be a simple thing to correct and 
resolve. There’s a general improvement that can be made.”

Horse racing tips: Tuesday 23 August
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/horse-racing-tips-tuesday> 
Nor is this, for him, an issue solely for owners. Fiddes points out that 
trainers and punters depend on accurate descriptions, while jockeys can have 
their day ruined by non-runners if the racing surface turns out to be other 
than advertised.

Fiddes has nothing but praise for the team who manage York, the nearest major 
track to his Ripon home, but does not have similar faith in many other venues. 
“At the moment we don’t feel able to trust the going descriptions that we’re 
being given. We’re having to walk the course on the day in order to take our 
own view.

“But by the time you’re there it’s really too late to be finding out that the 
ground is not what you expected. You’ve paid for the horse to get there, you’re 
there with your nice suit on, your friends and your family might be there as 
well. And your preparation has been for that race. There’s too much at stake to 
get there and find that the going is wrong.”

Fiddes also fears that clerks are rather too ready to irrigate their tracks, 
with the result that opportunities for fast-ground horses are harder to find. 
“Don’t get me wrong, I don’t want to see a return to the rattling firm ground 
of the past, the type of ground that injures horses or results in lots of 
non-runners. But as things are now, there’s a cultural aspect to this; people 
are shying away from good to firm ground with no jar as if it were dangerous.

“There are also safety issues involved. There have been meetings abandoned 
this year because over-watering causes tracks to be loose on top. That’s 
dangerous, especially on the bends. A small amount of rain in those situations 
can cause a track to become loose and slippy.”

Fiddes says he got an excellent response when he took his concerns to the 
British Horseracing Authority: “They’re proactive in areas where they can be 
but they always need more resources and their spectrum is so broad, it’s 
impossible for them to see everything that goes on at all times. They have 
responded with interest when I’ve approached them. They have acted on it and, 
as an owner, I can’t ask for any more.”

The going’s good: horse racing in Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/aug/31/horse-racing-in-ireland-travel-killarney>
The BHA’s spokesman, Robin Mounsey, confirmed: “We are always interested in 
the views of owners and have spent some time with Mr Fiddes discussing various 
constructive questions he has raised about the going. We are always looking to 
see how we can work with racecourses to improve the service which our customers 
receive and have also been gathering wider views on this topic for some time. 
We will be speaking to the racecourses about various ideas we have on this 
front, and other areas, in the near future.

“One development which we are looking forward to introducing is a new software 
system which will allow clerks of the course to provide more detailed 
information about the going, and more quickly, via a mobile app.”

On all known form, such a development will be taken up and used 
enthusiastically by some clerks and quietly forgotten by others. But Mounsey 
added that the BHA’s meetings with clerks in the near future will be an 
excellent opportunity to stress the benefits of providing accurate and reliable 
information at a time when all courses are keen to attract full fields of 
runners.
 