
Last Thursday's debate in the House of Commons on the future of the levy ended 
with a commitment by the Government to produce firm proposals on the funding of 
racing by the end of the year. There was also a general swell of support among 
those MPs present behind a proposal by Matthew Hancock, whose constituency 
includes Newmarket, to introduce a "racing right", to be sold to bookmakers 
wanting to bet on racing as part of a commercial system to replace the levy.

Hancock is a bright, confident operator and, unlike a few contributors to the 
debate, who seemed more interested in name-checking a track in their 
constituency, he seems to be genuinely interested in racing and its future 
prosperity.

Whether a "racing right" is the best answer, though, remains an open question. 
In the debate, Hancock drew a comparison with intellectual property rights and 
the rewards that would accrue to the developer of a new drug, even if it were 
very cheap and easy to produce. A similar system in racing, he suggested, would 
see owners properly rewarded for running their horses.

Yet there may be a flaw in the comparison. The important difference is that 
drug companies are in business to develop drugs. It is how they make their 
money. Racehorse owners are in racing by choice. It's what they do with the 
money they have made somewhere else.

It is possible that a racing right could be the basis of a funding system for 
the sport but if people are being given the right to decide how much they are 
paid for their hobby, it can't be fairly described as a commercial system.

It's a common problem when people talk about replacing the levy. There seems 
to be general agreement that a commercial alternative is the best option, but 
everyone seems to want it to be on their own terms, when they should really be 
considering what "commercial" actually means. In a truly commercial system, the 
market's terms are the only ones that matter.

That could mean many things. It might mean racing gets more from betting, or 
less. It would almost certainly mean some racecourses would emerge from the 
process as significant losers (if, indeed, they emerge at all). But as long as 
racing is getting what it deserves, rather than what it thinks it is owed, the 
basis is there to grow that income by increasing the sport's appeal to owners 
and punters.

Philip Davies, the MP for Shipley, was the lone voice that argued along these 
lines in last week's debate. "Can I suggest," he said, "that the commercial 
arrangement is simply between bookmakers and racecourses. And that often the 
problem is that on the racing side of the argument, there's too many people 
pitching in, when actually all the bookmakers want to do is to buy a product 
from the promoter. The promoter of the racing product is racecourses and then 
surely after that it should be up to racecourses to put on prize-money levels 
to attract the owners in the first place."

It's not often that I agree with everything an MP says, least of all a Tory 
one. However, John Penrose MP, for the government, had his doubts. "That is a 
potential solution," he said, "but there are many people, for example in the 
Horsemen's Group, who would be extremely worried by that."

My own worry, though, is that if Penrose does not appreciate the inherent 
contradiction in a commercial solution based on hobbyists' terms, a modern 
funding system for racing is as elusive as ever.
 