
Only the bookmakers expressed satisfaction yesterday as the minister for 
sport, Gerry Sutcliffe, announced the basis on which racing would be financed 
from April. As expected, Sutcliffe ignored all pleas to favour one side or the 
other and decided that the present Levy scheme should continue for another year.

"Despite thorough consideration I have not been wholly persuaded by the 
submissions of either the bookmakers' committee or the British Horseracing 
Authority," said Sutcliffe, whose written statement concluded with sharp words 
to both sides.

"It is a matter of serious regret to the government that we have again found 
ourselves in the position of having to make a determination when it would 
clearly have been more appropriate for the betting and racing industries to 
have agreed a suitable settlement between themselves. Representatives of both 
sides now need to proceed to detailed commercial negotiations without delay."

Racing's leaders described their frustration at an outcome likely to yield 
between £90m and £100m for the sport over the year, a similar total to that 
raised when the government last had to determine the Levy six years ago. The 
BHA had pressed for a sum between £135m and £153m, but bookmakers' 
representatives had argued they should not have to pay more than £40m, as their 
costs had been increased by the need to pay for the racecourse-owned Turf TV.

"We are standing still for another year," complained BHA chairman Paul Roy. 
"That delay in getting to grips with the issues is costing British racing 
millions of pounds." However, despite Sutcliffe's apparent unhappiness at being 
drawn into the process, Roy insisted that the minister was keen to begin a 
review of "every aspect of the modern relationship between racing and betting".

"He has confirmed that this review will commence immediately, and that it will 
specifically address all the issues, including the proper contribution of 
betting exchanges," said Roy. The BHA had argued that the exchanges' 
contribution should be trebled, a contention rejected by Sutcliffe yesterday.

Ladbrokes chief executive Chris Bell, who chaired the bookmakers' Levy 
committee, said he was "delighted" that the two sides were being urged to reach 
a commercial agreement without recourse to government. "Finally, racing and 
bookmaking are going to have to be totally aligned, to work together to improve 
racing for the customer.

"I'm a positive individual. I've been saying every year for two decades that 
we should be working together," added Bell, who claimed that Sutcliffe's 
determination to distance himself from the issue means the Levy system is 
doomed.

His opposite number at the BHA, Nic Coward, feels the Levy can only be killed 
off if the government is prepared to put something else in its place. "Racing 
has, for a decade, been saying, we want a different relationship with the 
bookmakers. The problem is what form that would take. Any new relationship 
would be founded in a new piece of law. We can talk about a new commercial 
relationship but it has to have a legislative foundation."

Sutcliffe is expected to return to the subject on Monday, when he addresses 
the BHA's annual conference.
 