
Tradition is important in the sport of horse racing, so perhaps it should not 
come as a great surprise that those in control of this billion-pound industry 
seem eager to revive that old classic, the last-minute Levy deal.

The bookies and the Levy Board have until tomorrow night to find an acceptable 
scheme through which racing recieves a percentage of bookmakers' gross profits 
to help fund the sport. If they do not, the government will be forced to do it 
for them - and racing and betting will have effectively conceded that they are 
incapable of looking after themselves.

There is no choice in the matter. The law decrees that the Department of 
Culture, Media and Sport must step in at 12.01am on Thursday if a deal has not 
been done. Many weeks of uncertainty will follow, since no one can do much 
planning ahead when they don't know what the numbers will look like. And is 
anyone trying to find a better way? The answer, sadly, seems to be no.

On the one side, the bookies have suggested that the money they will need to 
pay to take Turf TV in their shops from January should effectively be clawed 
back from the Levy. It is a laughable suggestion that borders on downright 
cheek, since nobody is forcing them to take Turf TV.

Racing's side, though, has hardly covered itself in glory either. Their stance 
was set out a couple of weeks ago in a speech by David Thorpe, the chairman of 
the Racecourse Association, which among other things resuscitated the 
Savill-era suggestion that big players on betting exchanges are effectively 
bookmakers and should be levied accordingly. Given the number of fine economic 
minds that have looked at this idea and declared it unworkable, the sudden 
decision to revive it smacks of desperation.

The real gem in Thorpe's speech, however, was one of the loopiest suggestions 
ever to emerge from the top tier of turf administration. The sport, he said, 
wanted Levy to be paid on the profits from bets on virtual racing.

They want Levy to be paid on profits from virtual racing. It needs to be said 
twice, just to be sure you haven't heard it wrong. Bets on horses with no 
owners or trainers, racing at non-existent tracks for no prize money and to a 
pre-determined script, and which exist merely as a set of 1s and 0s in a 
microchip, should return money to the real thing.

You can walk around this notion a dozen times, prod it, sniff it, even tickle 
it behind the ears, and it still looks just as barmy as it did on first 
acquaintance. What will be next? The Derby Day machine on Brighton pier?

And what, you wonder, would happen if the bookies decided to tweak the 
visuals, and have virtual camel racing from Dromedary Downs? Or wombats, 
because they're cute, or three-legged ostriches, or absolutely anything at all 
that isn't a horse? Because it doesn't matter what the virtual creatures look 
like - it is simply an electronic numbers game, and has nothing to do with 
real-world racing.

It might seem unfair to pluck one idea from an extensive speech and hold it up 
to ridicule, but the simple fact that a senior figure in the industry can stand 
up in front of an audience and suggest such a thing makes you wonder whether 
they are the ones trapped in a virtual reality. If this is as clear as their 
thinking gets, it is time to turn out the lights.

While racing's rulers are dreaming up ideas like this one, two interdependent 
industries are drifting towards the uncertainty of a Levy determination, 
something that would stretch the government's patience with the sport to 
breaking point. The bookies need to stop sulking about Turf TV, and the racing 
side needs to redirect its focus towards the real world. Or, to put it more 
simply, they need to start behaving like grown-ups.
 