
Racing's sectional interests presented themselves as shoulder-to-shoulder in 
the fight for more money from the betting Levy today, as the British 
Horseracing Authority supervised the launch of a new campaign ahead of a 
possible government determination of the next Levy scheme.

Racing United has the support of organisations representing owners, 
racecourses, trainers, jockeys, breeders and stable staff. Its charter calls on 
the government to "close loopholes in the Levy system" that "permit offshore 
bookmakers to avoid Levy obligations", to ensure that "betting exchanges and 
their bookmaker (business) users pay a fair commercial return to racing," and 
ultimately to "ensure that racing's return from the Levy in 2011 is between 
£130m and £150m".

The return to racing from the betting Levy hit an all-time high two years ago, 
when the spectacular losses of a single "high roller" Ladbrokes client pushed 
the yield to £115m. Last year that dropped to £93m, and this year's return is 
expected to drop again, to about £75m.

However, the break-up of the monopoly on the broadcast of live racing coverage 
to betting shops has seen a significant rise in the bookmakers' media rights 
payments, which they argue should be taken into account when assessing how much 
they contribute to racing.

"If you look internationally at where racing is and where it is currently 
going, we are getting the equivalent of less than 1% of [bookmakers'] 
turnover," Paul Struthers, the BHA's director of communications, said today. 
"In Hong Kong, it's 2%, in France it is 8%, and there are others that are 
higher than that."

The launch of the Racing United campaign was accompanied by a set of figures 
from the BHA, entitled "Bookmakers' false claims on increased contributions to 
racing", which appeared to suggest that, in percentage terms, bookmakers' 
combined payments have actually increased as a percentage of their gross win on 
British racing over the last four years, from 12.53% to 14.5%.

However, Struthers said that the figures did not account for the recent 
decisions of Ladbrokes and William Hill to move their significant internet and 
telephone businesses offshore.

"We have no way of knowing how much business they are doing through their 
offshore operations," Struthers said.

"We can either accept that we get what we get and there is absolutely nothing 
that racing can do about it, and die a slow death, or say no, we don't accept 
it. There have to be legitimate, viable, legal mechanisms the government can 
introduce to make sure racing gets a fair return."

Patrick Nixon, the chief executive of the Association of British Bookmakers, 
said that the BHA was being "disingenuous" in its use of figures, and in 
particular its comparison of current Levy yield to the freak, high-roller year 
of 2008.

"They are focusing on the Levy because it is Levy season," Nixon said. "Yes it 
has gone down, and there are many reasons for that, but we were paying £30m for 
pictures in 2007.

"Now it is nearly £75m, and SIS has already announced an increase next year. 
They have lost on the Levy swings, but certainly gained on the media rights 
roundabout."
 