
Racing took what it intends to be the first step towards a commercial, and 
hopefully lucrative, replacement for the 50-year-old levy system on Wednesday, 
when it published its response to the government's initial proposals on the 
best way to return money to racing from betting.

John Penrose MP, the minister with responsibility for racing and betting 
issues at the Department of Culture, Media and Sport, put forward three options 
in early May. These were: a retention of the levy but with government 
involvement removed; a direct commercial agreement between gambling and racing, 
which would be enforced as part of a bookmaker's licence; or an agreement based 
on a newly created "betting right", similar to copyright.

Representatives of the British Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority>, the 
Racecourse Association, the Jockey Club and the Horsemen's Group were 
presenting a united front as the sport indicated firm support for the betting 
right solution. This may have the benefit for racing of maximising income by 
separating revenue from media rights from the income from betting on racing.

This option is likely to be resisted by bookmakers in their own submissions to 
the government, however, since they fear that a right, once established, may be 
extended to other sports.

Racing's response to the government is based on a belief that racing's return 
from betting should be at least £100m per year, whereas the projected yield 
from the current levy scheme is as low as £58m.

"If you take the current levy rate of 10% and there's gross win of about £1bn 
on British racing, then you'd be up at the £100m level on that basis," Simon 
Bazalgette, the chief executive of the Jockey Club, said. "The aim is to 
increase it by ensuring that more money is bet on British racing and that 
British racing is better off as a result."

The principal reason why the current levy scheme is expected to realise as 
little as £58m, according to the racing authorities, is the result of 
bookmakers moving their operations offshore to avoid both betting duty, charged 
at 15% of gross profits, as well as the Levy Board's 10%.

"Our solution is for an intellectual property right backed up by a licensing 
regime that catches the payments from offshore operators, with no linkage 
whatsoever between payments for media rights and payments related to betting," 
Chris Brand, the BHA's acting chief executive, said.

"Our response went in on Monday and we believe that all the other responses 
[from representatives of the betting industry] went in on the same day.

"We are going into a period of discussion which will be round-table with all 
parties represented. We would look to see formal consultation in the autumn and 
we hope that there will be legislation announced in the Queen's Speech next 
year."

Dirk Vennix, the chief executive of the Association of British Bookmakers, 
said that, while the betting industry "has not seen the full detail of racing's 
proposal … we can say with certainty that a betting right for the sport is 
entirely unwarranted. Such a move would hand the horse racing industry a 
state-sponsored monopoly to add to its existing media rights monopolies."

Racing was abandoned before the final race at Bath on Wednesday night after 
Aviso slipped up on the final bend, hampering Leitzu, whose rider fell off. The 
stewards decided against running the final race after an inspection of the 
course.

The jockey Neil Callan, who was not at Bath, tweeted: "It's ignorance they 
were told 2 fix this problem last meeting when 4 horses nearly came down 
including mine it's a hazard."
 