
Anyone who walked down High Holborn last Thursday ran the risk of being hit by 
a flying champagne cork. The source of danger was not the offices of theBritish 
Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority> at 75 but the 
building that houses their lawyers, Olswang, at No90. The cause for celebration 
was the news that, in an unlikely alliance with the bookmaker William Hill, the 
BHA has decided to take the Levy Board to court.

The board decided earlier this year that it would not pursue some users of 
betting exchanges – ieBetfair <https://www.theguardian.com/business/betfair> – 
for levy payments, having taken advice from two QCs who reached "materially 
identical" conclusions that it was not within the board's power to do so. The 
BHA and Hill's have now decided to subject this decision to a judicial review 
and, if the learned friends cannot squeeze a seven-figure sum from that, they 
are not trying hard enough.

The eventual outcome can scarcely be in doubt. The Levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-levy> Board's advisers, Michael Fordham 
QC and Lord Pannick QC, are the top people in the field. The chance that the 
BHA/bookie team will find a judge prepared to disagree with them is as remote 
as the offshore servers that Hill's exploit in order to dodge their own levy 
obligations. Yet still Paul Roy, the BHA chairman, and Ralph Topping, the 
bellicose chief executive of William Hill, seem intent on pressing on. It is at 
once fascinating, baffling, stupid and pointless.

Topping, of course, can spend William Hill's money as he pleases and will 
answer for it to the shareholders in due course. And it may well be that Hill's 
are paying the bulk of the legal fees, which casts Topping as the schoolyard 
bully and Roy as the pipsqueak sidekick egging him on.

But that is no excuse for allowing the BHA to be dragged into what is 
essentially a commercial dispute between Hill's and Betfair, not least when the 
Levy Board will also face substantial costs, to be found from funds that could 
be going towards prize money. Nor should it be forgotten that the decision by 
Hill's to move its internet and phone business offshore means it can write off 
the costs against the significant sums it should be paying to the Levy Board in 
the first place.

Regardless of how much actual money the BHA is putting into this ill-judged 
venture, it will deserve the lion's share of the blame for its inevitable 
failure, because there is simply no good reason to get involved in the first 
place. And 99% of that blame will attach directly to Roy, who appears to have 
made his second dreadful decision over a Betfair matter in less than a year.

It will be recalled that Roy's private equity business, Smith New Court, spent 
millions of pounds buying Betfair shares when the company floated last year. 
This was deeply unfortunate on two levels, first because it made Roy look like 
a hypocrite, given his frequent criticism of exchanges, and second because, at 
the time of writing, Smith New Court's investment – which apparently has not 
been sold – has halved in value.

What is most depressing about this business is not the amount of money that is 
going to be wasted, although that is certainly shameful. It is that it reeks of 
the constant fighting and re-fighting of turf wars that have held racing back 
for so many years.

The BHA was supposed to be a new, inclusive governing body that would put a 
stop to the continuous skirmishing. Instead it has decided to join in. That 
suggests that either Paul Roy or the authority he leads is not fit for purpose. 
Then again, it could be both.
 