
"It's been," Andy Kershaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-kershaw> 
mooted, "quite a journey." He wasn't kidding. Back on Radio 3 after a 
three-year hiatus due to turmoil in his personal life, Kershaw is co-presenting 
Music Planet, the radio off-shoot of BBC1's Human Planet series.

There couldn't be a finer comeback gig for him. You can hear him relishing the 
challenge of bringing places to life for the listener with music and the kind 
of anecdotes and experiences most travellers never quite stumble upon.

At the start of the first programme (available on iPlayer), Kershaw listed 
some of the calamities he's experienced in making the eight shows: "I've hacked 
through mountain jungles in the Solomon Islands, been almost incinerated at a 
rocket festival in Thailand, robbed by officialdom in Kinshasa, survived the 
rigours of a Soviet hotel in Siberia. All to bring you some of the most 
gorgeous music in the world."

What both Kershaw and co-presenter Lucy Duran have is the ability to scratch 
engagingly beneath the surface of places to unearth diverse musical contexts. 
And Kershaw does so with a winning, gruff humour. "Don't be seduced by the 
sweet melody," he insisted, after a lovely burst of music on the Solomon 
Islands. "That was a song about killing people." As he sets off for a shark 
fishing trip ("our attractively pricedRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 3 morning in a boat"), he quips: "I 
hope the sharks are less coy than they were for the TV johnnies."

It's a brilliantly ambitious series that works as a stand-alone set of 
journeys or as a rich, in-depth partner to the television programmes. Either 
way, it's also an unturnoffable reminder of what a talented broadcaster Kershaw 
is, and how much he's been missed. Listen for his insights into the music and 
landscapes, but also his quieter, funny asides. "It really is a hollowed-out 
log," he said of his worryingly low-tech canoe, bobbing precariously in 
shark-infested waters, but Kershaw sounded absolutely at home.
 