
Jeremy Vine <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006wr3p> (Radio 2) doesn't often 
sound terrified of his guests but the reality of Andy and Liz Kershaw together 
in his studio clearly had him worried. "I think this record isn't very cool," 
he said, tentatively playing the Blow Monkeys. He tried to read out one of his 
usual introductions, which are a bit stiff, but you forgive him that. "I didn't 
write this guff!" Andy bellowed from across the desk.

What followed was an extraordinary radio interlude. I've never heard anyone 
speak in ginormous, breathless sentences quite likeAndy Kershaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-kershaw>. They go on for whole seasons. 
You can dip in, out, in again, out again, go for a walk, come back and he's 
only halfway through.

The interview was thrilling to listen to as it sounded so likely to derail at 
various points, but it was also a rather charming, complex study of close 
siblings. I loved the way they refer to each other as "our Andrew" and "our 
Elizabeth", and the way she put his foibles. "Our Andrew is extremely feisty 
and belligerent," she said. In any other context, it would have sounded a 
strong statement. Here, as he huffed and puffed beside her, it was like a 
whisper of kind, sisterly understatement.

The thing is, though, I don't care if Andy Kershaw is a bit of a handful. He's 
one of our finest music broadcasters; so much so that I've had his next 
programme (World Routes on Siberia,Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 3, Saturday) in my diary for weeks. 
Most presenters are tricky people and it's always a delight to come across 
those who aren't (Vine, for one), but really, their lives off-air and the 
tangles they end up in don't interest me. Kershaw's got a bumpily received 
memoir out, and is subsequently doing press. That's all well and good, but I 
want to hear him back regularly playing music that astonishes me and explaining 
its roots. That's his job, and something he does far better than most.
 