 Fan power forced the BBC into one of its most bizarre about-turns last night 
when Andy Kershaw, the cult DJ dumped by Radio 1, was rehired by Radio 3.
Kershaw, the Lancastrian whose late-night slot put world music stars like 
Youssou N'Dour on the map here, was dropped byRadio 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1> in May amid a storm of protest 
about the direction the station was going in.

Controller Andy Parfitt was assailed from all quarters for his "shabby 
treatment of Radio 1's most innovative voice" and pilloried for allegedly 
pandering to the teen market with a diet of boy bands and commercial pop.

As condemnation of the decision grew, Kershaw, who had been angry at the 
graveyard slot he had been forced into after 14 years, refused to host his 
final few shows.

But yesterday Roger Wright, Parfitt's opposite number on Radio 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3>, stepped in to an nounce a new slot 
for the DJ on his World Routes programme beginning this summer.

Kershaw will travel the world for the programme, presented by Lucy Duran, and 
bring back regular reports and recordings he has made on the road.

Signing up Kershaw is a coup for Wright, who has been trying to broaden Radio 
3's appeal.

Kershaw joked last night: "I imagine I'll be coming in once a month with a 
bunch of un popular records, just as I've always done.

"About six months ago I had lunch with Roger Wright and he asked me if I'd be 
interested in doing bits and pieces for him. What convinced me was when he 
said: 'I want Radio 3 to be more than a classical music station'."

He said he knew he had to go with Wright when he told him that the thing he 
most liked about his old show was "that I never know what's coming next".

"That was exactly what the Radio 1 controller hated about my programme," said 
Kershaw.

He has spent the past few months working on a book about his travels, as well 
as doing his World Service programme.

"One of the things I was worried about was would there be a lot of hostility 
from the traditional core audience of Radio 3 - an ex-Radio 1 DJ coming in and 
playing African music?" he said. "I was more worried for Roger Wright than for 
me."

Wright also announced that the playwright Mark Ravenhill, best known for his 
West End play Shopping and Fucking, had been commissioned to write a play for 
Radio 3.

The commissioning of the controversial Ravenhill, who is known for his 
expletive-strewn scripts, highlights Wright's mission to set the genteel Radio 
3 apart from its commercial radio competitor, Classic FM. The play, which does 
not yet have a title, will feature in a season of new works called The Wire.

Wright said yesterday that Ravenhill's work would not be bleeped out. 

"If you commission writers you want them to be themselves, not tell them how 
to write.

"But that's not to say that we're pushing boundaries of taste and decency. 

"If there are a large number of expletives we will probably put a health 
warning on it."

He added: "It's a mature, intelligent, grown-up audience, who should be able 
to make their own minds up."
 