
For someone who made his career writing about and founding media 
organisations, Rafat Ali is surprisingly downbeat about what they can achieve.

“If anything, the Trump election has shown that we are ascribing too much 
value to what media can do,” he says a week afterDonald Trump’s victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
. “It has its role, it has to continue to do its role, it’s even more important 
today. But the view that it will somehow change the world and change people’s 
minds, or give people the right path, it’s just too much to ask.”

He’s not alone in doubting the extent of the established media’s influence 
following an election result which almost no outlet predicted and very few 
supported. But in the post-election autopsy, many commentators have said at 
least some of the blame should be laid at the door ofFacebook and its fake news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
-filled filter bubbles.

Ali shares their concerns, particularly about the “parallel world where people 
have no connection to reality” in which many millions of US citizens appear to 
live. “Just the fact of what they believe about Muslims, [that] Hillary is 
doing this or Obama is doing this. It’s just crazy.”

But he says many of the complaints from those working in TV or newspapers stem 
from an unrealistic belief in their own impact.

“I think that while obviously this is a huge problem, we are trying to get out 
of media way more than it’s capable of giving,” he says. “It’s not like if the 
majority of the media goes away, or a big proportion of the media goes away, 
that suddenly people are going to miss it.”


Ali has first-hand experience of the impermanence of media from paidContent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/21/rafat-ali-contentnext> – his 
first company, which lasted not much more than a decade. He launched the site 
in 2002, taking what was then a relatively novel approach by applying lessons 
from one part of the media, such as the recording industry, to other areas such 
as newspapers, which were grappling with the disruptive powers of the internet.

It was acquired in 2008 by Guardian Media Group for an undisclosed sum in the 
millions of pounds. It was run as a standalone business and Ali stayed until 
2010 before leaving to travel the world for two years. In early 2012,GMG sold 
paidContent to another digital media site, GigaOm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/08/gigaom-acquires-paidcontent>, 
which later that year shuttered the brand and itself closed in 2015.

Meanwhile, Ali had returned from his trip with a plan to apply paidContent’s 
connecting-the-dots approach to the world of travel and in the summer of 2012 
he launched a business calledSkift <http://skift.com/> with travel journalist 
Jason Clampet.

While most of those writing about the travel industry were focused on one 
sector such as airlines or hotels, Ali based his plan on the realisation that 
travellers simply see an end-to-end process of getting around the world. That 
seemed to leave a gap for a media organisation taking a more holistic approach 
while writing in a less stuffy, more accessible way than the established trade 
press.

In the early days, Ali, who operated as Skift’s chief executive, planned to 
use the site’s reporting as a foundation from which to sell data about travel, 
starting with the way it was marketed online. However, things did not go to 
plan, and while trying to drum up investment in 2014, he hit a brick wall.

 “I wasn’t able to raise the round,” he says. “It was the most humbling six 
months of my professional career. We were three months away from running out of 
money.

“We were 10 or 12 people at that point. We had a famous – as in famous in our 
company – moment when we went to Iceland for our first off-site. It was a very 
seminal moment for us as it was supposed to be a celebration of us closing [the 
round].”

Ali and the team tried to work out how to continue growing without any outside 
investment. The answer was to drop plans to sell data and focus on more 
established ways of making money – in Skift’s case, research, events and 
(native) advertising.

Two-and-a-bit years later, Ali says the business is now profitable, with 
double-digit revenue growth heading for upwards of $10m a year within the next 
18 months. Traffic is not huge, around 1.5 million visitors a month, but 
Skift’s priority is its list of email subscribers, which stands at more than 
265,000. The company now employs close to 40 people, mostly at its New York 
headquarters, and is expanding into Europe with hires such as a UK editor based 
in London.

Though he chose to build his second company around travel, Ali did not stop 
wading into arguments about the travails of established media companies, 
including the Guardian. He says most mainstream outlets are operating more like 
“drive-by media, where you hope and pray you show up in a feed”, but he doesn’t 
pretend to have all the answers.

“I don’t have a prescription for any of those people,” he says. “It’s hard 
always, even in our business which is doing very well. People say: ‘Oh my god 
you guys are doing so well’ and I say ‘Yes’, then I look back thinking: ‘Holy 
shit, if they knew how hard it is to build a media company.’ It’s always going 
to be hard.”

And Trump’s victory is going to make things harder, not just for the media but 
also the travel industry, which Ali says is facing a huge challenges from the 
insular ideologies that are taking over western politics.

“I think Trump has already said a lot of things that will enervate people 
coming to the US ... Even if he does half the things he said it will have a bad 
effect on the travel industry.

“His rhetoric stands directly opposite to what the promise of travel stands 
for – the most progressive expression of human curiosity. Fringe is the new 
mainstream. It is worrying for everyone, especially for Europe which sits at 
the centre of immigration issues.”

Is there a link between digital filter bubbles and the new geographical 
isolationism taking hold of western politics? Ali says: “There’s a direct line 
from how we have created a monoculture around ourselves, in many ways as a 
result of digital, that has led to the rise of neo-isolationism and a virtual 
reality which manifests itself in believing in fake news.”

The dispiriting picture Ali paints is tempered by a belief in both the power 
of travel to increase understanding and the more outward-looking and tolerant 
views of younger generations, even if they will take “one or two decades” to 
assert themselves.

“The good news is that the world is travelling more,” he says. “It’s not like 
saying after the first internet bubble burst, ‘Oh the internet is over’. It 
turns out that people continued to use the internet. The number of people 
travelling from [different] parts of the world – China, India, south-east Asia 
– is going to continue to rise.

“Demography, which is changing in the US, is essentially the ultimate foil for 
any kind of isolationism. Same in UK, same in Europe. The young, much as us 
older people like to laugh at millennials, the reality is that they are a ton 
smarter than we were as kids. So that’s the hope. And what else is there to 
hope for?”

CV

Age: 42


Education: 

Aligarh Muslim University, India, Computer Engineering, graduated in 1996 
Masters in Journalism from Indiana University, 2000.

Career: 


Digital reporter Inside.com 2001

Managing editor Silicon Alley Reporter, Venture Reporter 2001-2002

Founder, editor and publisher paidContent 2002-2010

Founder and chief executive, Skift 2012-present



 