
With leading shares still under pressure on Brexit fears and falling oil 
prices, there are finally two risers in the FTSE 100.

Unsurprisingly, with investors seeking the safety of gold and silver, they are 
both precious metal miners. Mexican minerFresnillo is up 2p at 1213p while 
Randgold Resources has risen 5p to 6630p.

Overall though the FTSE 100 is down 89.09 points or 1.4% at 6142.80, while 
European markets are also sharply lower. Germany’s Dax is down 2% and France’s 
Cac is 1.8% lower. ahead of the US Federal Reserve meeting next week, when an 
interest rate rise is unlikely but still cannot be ruled out entirely, the Dow 
Jones Industrial Average is forecast to open around 80 points lower. Mike van 
Dulken, Head of Research at Accendo Markets said:

Equity indices have gone for a dress-down and risk-off Friday, with major 
support levels breached or seeing meaningful tests. This is derived from Asian 
bourses following their stateside peers south as negative bond yields become 
more prevalent, calling into question global monetary stimulus efforts while 
growth and inflation struggle to recover post-crisis. And with event-risk 
related to next week’s Fed policy update and a too-close-to-call UK referendum 
on EU membership the week after, investors are continuing to temper their 
appetite for risk assets into the week-end.

The FTSE 250 mid-cap index has dropped 1.3% but an exception is pharmaceutical 
groupVectura, up 3.6p at 163.1p after the successful completion of its merger 
with Skeypharma. Dr Jens Lindqvist at N+1 Singer said:

The merger between Skyepharma and Vectura, which completed this morning, has 
in our view created a global leader in the development of therapeutic 
respiratory products. The enlarged group has a proven development capability 
across all major drug classes and multiple therapeutic areas, coupled with 
strong expected revenue growth and cash generation from existing commercial 
partnerships. We believe the strategic rationale dwarfs the expected £10m of 
annual synergies and reiterate our buy recommendation.

But Ocado has dropped nearly 6% to 243.3p after this week’s news of the launch 
of Amazon Fresh in London.
 