
Later this month two exhibitions will stir memories of perhaps the most 
rancorous and tragic episode in recent British art history. TheJewish Museum 
<http://www.jewishmuseum.org.uk/Kitaj> in London and the Pallant House gallery 
<http://www.pallant.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/forthcoming/main-galleries/rb-kitaj-obsessions/rb-kitaj-obsessions/about/analyst-for-our-time>
 in Chichester will together stage the first British retrospective of the work 
of RB Kitaj since his suicide in 2007. The shows will also offer the first 
comprehensive look at the artist's painting in this country since a 
controversial exhibition at the Tate gallery in 1994 dramatically changed the 
course of the rest of Kitaj's life, and his art.

That 1994 show, a landmark for a living painter, became known to Kitaj as the 
"Tate war", and letters and documents that have now come to light reveal that 
the phrase was not an exaggeration. What had been planned as the culmination 
and crowning glory of a life's work proved to be something quite different. On 
one side of the battlefield back then were the art critics of the British 
press, who seemed to have lined up to outdo one another in destroying Kitaj's 
claims to attention. And facing them were Kitaj, then 64, and his friends and 
fellow British painters – Lucian Freud, David Hockney, Howard Hodgkin,Frank 
Auerbach <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/frank-auerbach> and others – 
who, letters now reveal, disagreed among themselves about how this savage and 
apparently highly personal broadside might best be countered.

The real casualty of this battle, in Kitaj's eyes, was his beloved wife and 
muse, Sandra Fisher, who died of a brain aneurysm aged 47, two weeks after his 
Tate show opened, and whose death the painter blamed directly on the shock of 
his very public critical humiliation. The fallout from this tragedy led to 
Kitaj's self-imposed exile from his adoptive London, along with his young son, 
Max, back to America, and to a studio in Los Angeles, where he nurtured an 
obsessive loathing for particular British critics that involved splenetic death 
threats and fantasies of violence.

Reading back through the archive of that time, and looking again at some of 
the work Kitaj made subsequent to the 1994 show – compulsive, defiantly erotic 
paintings of his late wife, as well as wild and exacting imaginings of firing 
squads taking aim at a many-headed Brian Sewell and Andrew Graham-Dixon – these 
wounds still feel very much open. MJ Long, the architect, and a friend of the 
painter 
<http://uk.phaidon.com/agenda/architecture/video/2011/march/02/the-architect-mj-long-on-her-friendship-with-rb-kitaj/>
 since the 1960s, says to me now that "there is no doubt that Kitaj went crazy 
for a while over all of it". It was Long's late husband, Colin St John "Sandy" 
Wilson, who tried to co-ordinate the initial response to the critics from 
Kitaj's outraged friends, dispatching letters to Freud and Hockney and the 
rest, correspondence that will be included in the Pallant House show. It was a 
frenzy of activity that continued until events took a far bleaker turn with the 
sudden death of Sandra while Kitaj himself was away in America at the bedside 
of his mother who was also terminally sick.

In the months that followed, Kitaj's grief and anger took on an epic quality. 
"He came to our house that Christmas," Long recalls "and he was in quite an 
extreme state. There was little comfort for him and no way of talking him out 
of it really." Kitaj, always an intense and vividly articulate character, who 
had run away to sea from his home in Cleveland, Ohio at 17 and become an 
important and charismatic fixture in the London art world from the moment his 
first solo show had opened in 1963, ranted with a sense of loss and despair to 
his closest friends. These included his long-time confidantPhilip Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiproth>, who, it seems, partly based the 
outrageous character of Mickey Sabbath, in his incandescent novelSabbath's 
Theater, on the grief-stricken Kitaj – the book is told in the voice of a 
furious and confessional puppeteer driven mad by vividly sexual dreams of his 
lost lover, tortured by a fear of impotence and oblivion, by turns 
contemplating suicide and raging against the dying of the light.

Richard Morphet, who curated the 1994 Tate show, still talks with a degree of 
incredulity and shock at how events drove Kitaj to this kind of state. "Nearly 
20 years on, it is all still too fresh in my mind," he told me last week. "The 
issues still remain crystal clear." Morphet had known and occasionally worked 
with Kitaj for nearly 30 years by the time of the Tate collaboration, and the 
retrospective was the fruition of that friendship.

As a result, Morphet recalls, "I felt the jolt of it almost as much as him, I 
think." The strange thing was, he says, that initially there were actually one 
or two positive reviews of the show. "And the opening itself was a really 
euphoric occasion, large numbers of people from the art world, and a real kind 
of confirmation of Kitaj's dedication over the years. When we went to bed after 
the party there was this sense of pleasure that he was getting his due for all 
of that, and then the following morning this extraordinary cascade of vitriol 
began..."

The reviews, which seemed to grow in ferocity from a fairly hysterical start, 
went on for several days. "The funny thing about it is that, though in mine and 
many people's views the hostility was well over the top and vicious to him as a 
person, nevertheless this was clearly what the individual writers genuinely 
believed," Morphet says. "I think they were sincere in what they wrote. It was 
in a way a nasty accident they all expressed it at the same time."

When Morphet spoke to Kitaj in the days following the show he was "sort of 
disgusted really, very distressed. He never said it but I think this exhibition 
was what he had always wanted and worked towards his whole life. And the 
extremity of the outburst against it was as if to say: this is not valid. His 
whole raison d'etre was trashed."

The main reason for the critics' damning verdict on the show, Morphet 
believes, was what was seen by one as Kitaj's "pseudo-intellectual bullshit". 
Kitaj was an eclectic reader and claimed literary inspiration for much of his 
work from writers ranging from TS Eliot to Franz Kafka to Walter Benjamin. He 
self-consciously rooted himself in an outsider's tradition, of Jewish 
intellectualism, equally obsessed with language and image. At the suggestion of 
Nicholas Serota, the Tate director, Kitaj sought to reflect some of this 
erudition inextended captions 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/kitaj-my-cities-an-experimental-drama-t07298/text-summary>
 to his paintings that explained their inspiration and genesis. To many of the 
critics, who saw Kitaj invading their space, telling them what to think, this 
appeared to be fighting talk. Andrew Graham-Dixon in the Independent called him 
an "inveterate name-dropper... The Wandering Jew, the TS Eliot of painting? 
Kitaj turns out, instead, to be the Wizard of Oz: a small man with a megaphone 
held to his lips 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/art--the-kitaj-myth-the-man-who-would-leapfrog-his-way-into-history-on-the-backs-of-giants-stands-exposed-andrew-grahamdixon-on-kitaj-at-the-tate-1425629.html>
."

There was a great deal more in this vein. Protest as they might, critics like 
nothing more than giving perceived pretension a sound kicking, in the belief 
that it lends their own somewhat esoteric calling a grounded, street-fighting 
quality. Kitaj, the subtext went, had been asking for it with his captions, and 
got what was coming to him.

Morphet was staggered by this personal aggression. "It is ludicrous to suggest 
that Kitaj was just this arrogant figure. The critics seemed to object to the 
prominence he gave in his work to his own ideas and personality... as if he 
were the first artist to foreground himself!" The curator spent a lot of time 
in the galleries observing the crowds at the show and believed, contrary to 
critical opinion, "that people were really gripped by it, and went round at a 
snail's pace because they were so engaged not only by these extraordinarily 
sensual paintings, but also by these texts that accompanied them – those 
captions which caused all the trouble..."

Rereading those critical pieces now, it does seem, as Morphet argues, that 
collectively "some line had been crossed". It was certainly a moment, in any 
case, when the critics decided to judge the man as much as his work, and both 
were found wanting. By the standards of our own free-for-all of vicious 
anonymous blogging and comment, the savaging of Kitaj's reputation does not 
seem particularly extreme – but you could certainly make an argument for it 
being years ahead of its time, a taste of bile to come. The boundary-breaking 
was led by Brian Sewell in London'sEvening Standard, who, under a heading 
"Tales half-told in the name of vanity" had – given his own bearing – the nerve 
to conclude that Kitaj was "a vain painter puffed with amour propre, unworthy 
of a footnote in the history of figurative art". Tim Hilton, also in the
Independent, kicked off with the observation that "Ron Kitaj is an egotist, at 
his best in interviews…" And on it went.

Sandy Wilson, having written to his friend at the show's opening to exclaim 
about the fact he was "able to create what William Blake called 'Emanations'!" 
now found himself in the position of trying to rally support for Kitaj. To this 
end, Wilson drafted another letter, which would take issue in particular with 
Graham-Dixon: "One is compelled to ask why a critic with reasonable claims to 
be taken seriously should indulge in such a bilious assault not only on the 
work, but also more disgracefully on the man himself," Wilson wrote, and 
invited the painters Kitaj had christened the "London group" and beyond, to add 
their signatures to his missive. Some were keener than others. Hockney signed 
up; so did Peter Blake and Leon Kossoff and Michael Andrews; Hodgkin said no; 
Auerbach, whose work Kitaj had championed, and who was a close friend, 
reluctantly agreed, with the caveat that "governments, ministries, committees, 
boards may be impressed by numbers, but if there are several signatories to a 
letter attacking one individual it seems like ganging up".Lucian Freud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/freud> likewise counselled, "Though 
it is often a good idea to write to someone in order to object, agree, question 
or ridicule anything they may have said or done (or even to challenge them to a 
duel or ask them to lunch) I feel it is pointless to gang up on a third-rate 
critic when you don't consider him seriously. As they wisely say in Ireland: 
what do you expect from a pig but a grunt?"

Kitaj himself eventually thought the letter a bad idea, having been told by 
Wilson that "Every minute you spend thinking of Sewell is a victory for Sewell 
and a cause of great distress to Sandra."

His words, to Kitaj's distracted mind, quickly proved more pointed than anyone 
could have imagined. Sandra Fisher, a painter herself, had been Kitaj's 
soulmate since he met her after the death of his first wife, by suicide, in 
1969. Sandra had long been an antidote to his depressive tendencies, friends 
recalled, bringing her native Californian light to his doubt. She had closely 
helped him with the retrospective and was, MJ Long recalls, already feeling the 
strain at the time of the show's opening. "She really didn't look well then," 
Long recalls. "I remember thinking that the whole thing seemed to have taken 
its toll on her." Morphet recalls seeing Sandra after the reviews started 
coming in: "She was very hurt by it all, but also fantastically strong."
 RB Kitaj in New York, 1985. Photograph: Christopher Felver/Corbis 
When he was given the news of his wife's death, Kitaj immediately drew the 
conclusion that the critics had killed her. "They aimed at me and they got 
Sandra instead," he subsequently claimed, to anyone who would listen. Though he 
of course wildly exaggerated any motive on the part of his detractors, there is 
a sliver of medical credence to Kitaj's belief – recent medical opinion does 
acknowledge severe stress, and resultant raised blood pressure, as an 
exacerbating factor in aneurysms of the type that Fisher suffered. The obituary 
in theIndependent noted, without irony: "Her sudden death leaves Kitaj, 15 
years her senior, with a 10-year-old son to raise, just as the suicide of his 
first wife 25 years ago left him with children aged six and 11, children for 
whom Sandra Fisher became mother. The fierce antagonism of newspaper critics 
towards Kitaj's recent late retrospective – in contrast to the response of an 
admiring public – made for a stressful last summer for a woman who will be 
remembered by many for her almost saintly happiness."

Friends tried to encourage Kitaj to abandon the link in his mind between the 
two events, but he was unable or unwilling to. "Your victory over Sewell lies 
in the work you have yet to do," Wilson wrote to him and advised him to read 
the prayers of Søren Kierkegaard and ask for patience and forbearance.

In the event, Kitaj determined on more direct catharsis. For the Summer 
Exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1997, in among the still lifes and daubs of 
favourite pets, he submitted a large painting entitledThe Killer-Critic 
Assassinated By His Widower, Even 
<http://britishartresearch.files.wordpress.com/2012/10/kitaj-the-killer-critic.jpg>
, a composition indebted toManet's Execution of Maximilian 
<http://images.nymag.com/arts/art/reviews/execution061106_560.jpg>, in which 
two figures fire bullets into the engorged faces of a hydra-headed monster, 
whose tongue extends across the picture with the words "yellow press, yellow 
press, kill, kill, kill" written upon it. (The attached price tag was £1m.) The 
painting was displayed next toSandra Three, the latest in his ongoing attempt 
to conjure his wife's flesh, and text which announced his departure from 
Britain.

At the time of the show, Kitaj confessed to one journalist: "Never ever 
believe an artist if he says he doesn't care what the critics write about him. 
Every artist cares. Those reviews of my show were by pathetic, sick, meagre 
hacks. They were about small lives and lousy marriages."Painting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/painting>, he noted, had become a 
means of revenge, a subject which, he claimed, "interests me more and more". 
Richard Dorment, theTelegraph critic numbered among his tormentors, observed 
that: "When I ventured to criticise his work in the past – years before his 
wife's death – Kitaj sent me hate mail so frightening and threatening that my 
wife wondered whether we should turn the letters over to the police." This time 
the fears seemed more genuine.

Germaine Greer, judge of that year's Summer Exhibition, and never a woman to 
shy away from controversy,awarded the £25,000 prize to Kitaj 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/artblog/2008/jan/14/rbkitaj> as 
something of a farewell gift, while noting that "Sandra Fisher survives in her 
husband's work not as a fellow painter, but as Shekhina, the female aspect of 
the deity of the Kabbalah with whom he seeks union. But Fisher was not divine; 
she was very, very human. Once Fisher died, she lost her independent agency and 
became a figment of Kitaj's relentless imagination..."

It was there, in the Californian years that followed, that Sandra stayed. In 
Los Angeles, as recently released documents from Kitaj's archive reveal, his 
life fell into a pattern, motivated, as the painting of the later years shows 
by a hardening of earlier obsessions: into his Jewish identity, the abiding 
absence of his wife, and his ongoing contempt for his detractors. A small 
National Gallery show in 2002 prompted Brian Sewell to revisit the earlier 
criticism, though not in any conciliatory spirit. It had not, he wrote, been 
"'a systematic attempt to cut the painter down to size'. Critics do not enter 
into conspiratorial agreements with each other – they are far more likely to 
lick the arses of such panjandrums as Kitaj than take a common line against 
them." He went on to say that "any embarrassment I feel is on behalf of the 
institutions that nourish the vanity of this now preposterous obsessive 
personality, with his rant and bombast about the Jewish Question, and his wife 
Sandra (a rather better painter than Kitaj once he had begun his slip into 
decline)."

In later years, a woman named Tracy Bartley worked as Kitaj's assistant and 
looked after him, transcribing the notes he wrote every morning at his 
favourite cafe – on the morning walk there he would habitually "talk" to 
Sandra, ask her for guidance – "and then he would return with yellow legal 
pads, notes, manifestos, an unfinished autobiography" before starting to paint. 
Richard Morphet sees in this late work, in which Kitaj often renders himself 
Lear-like, a white beard in the midst of emptiness or chaos, a lonely figure 
full of longing, evidence of "terse, abbreviated, thrilling images, full of 
awareness of himself".

In 2004 he made a self-portrait in which he stares wickedly at the viewer, 
from under a baseball cap, an incarnation of Philip Roth's leering Mickey 
Sabbath. The diary entry attached to that portrait reads: "mid Aug 05. Here I 
am again, after a year or so, still alive, still an irritant. I have 
Parkinson's disease but it's OK so far. I love my cane, draw, study, write (in 
my Coffee Bean [cafe]) every day. The best thing about Parkinson's is my 
addiction to chocolate fudge sundaes. The worst thing is the medication. So I 
don't take it, which drives my neurologists at UCLA nuts. Parkinson's has no 
cure. I give myself five years with 'luck'."

The painting is included in the Jewish Museum show 
<http://www.jewishmuseum.org.uk/Kitaj>, which demands if not rehabilitation of 
Kitaj's work – he has never disappeared from view – then certainly reappraisal. 
Morphet believes absolutely that he will take his place alongside the 
luminaries of the London group: "Freud, Bacon, Auerbach, he certainly belongs 
in that company." Kitaj would, no doubt, have been compelled to know if future 
critics would concur – and perhaps amused to note that his own tormentors might 
have been careful of what they wished for: if they thought his work was 
self-absorbed, what were they to do with the generation of Tracey Emin?

MJ Long spoke to Kitaj a week or so before his suicide, and recalls how he 
seemed more depressed than ever by his growing frailty, the debilitations of 
Parkinson's, and suggesting he was finding it difficult to paint. "It was an 
awful way to die, and especially to know that Max would find him," she says. 
"But he certainly would not have wanted to go on if he couldn't work." Among 
Kitaj's last diary entries was one which read "Failure, failure as always". 
These new, judicious exhibitions, though, may yet tell other stories.
 