
It’s daunting to write about Jane Eyre 200 years after Charlotte Brontë’s 
birth. It’s not just that so many people have read and loved (and, yes,also 
hated <https://litreactor.com/columns/your-favorite-book-sucks-jane-eyre>) this 
book. It’s also the difficulty of understanding that Jane’s intimate, confiding 
voice may not speak to us as directly as we may think.

Among Brontë’s many talents is an ability to make you feel that you are seeing 
the world just as her narrator does. There’s the cosy way she draws us into the 
story with that direct address to “you”, the “reader” whom she invites 
constantly to see what she sees. We fancy we are also seeing a room in the 
George Inn at Millcote, visible to us “by the light of an oil lamp hanging from 
the ceiling”, straining to see the exact same scene under the same flickering 
light as Jane. But it isn’t just what Jane sees that matters: Brontë also takes 
us deep into her head and, seemingly, her soul. Even when she says, “Gentle 
reader, you may never feel what I then felt!” we think otherwise. Her “stormy, 
scalding, heart-wrung tears” seem real, her “agonised prayers” honestly 
accounted, her “dread” clear and comprehensible.

Jane Eyre is April's Reading group book
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/apr/05/jane-eyre-charlotte-bronte-reading-group-book>
Reading Group contributor RabBurnout puts it neatly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/apr/05/jane-eyre-charlotte-bronte-reading-group-book#comment-71900048>
: “The thing is, of course, to read the book oneself, and experience it 
viscerally – it is definitely a book that the reader forms a powerful personal 
response to, I think.”

I got to the end of the novel feeling as if I had shared something with Jane – 
that her experience was mixed into mine and that I had felt as she had felt. So 
it was confounding to reflect again and realise that, of course, I hadn’t fully 
understood her. It wasn’t just that she is an unreliable narrator, often 
concealing her own feelings from herself and her reader; often claiming that 
black is white, that St John is an admirable, good man, that she’s calm and 
unflustered when Rochester knows her heart is beating like a steam piston. It’s 
also that there is much about Jane’s (and by extension, Charlotte Brontë’s) 
world that I don’t comprehend and for which I can’t feel much sympathy.

The most obvious sticking point is religion. There was a fascinating discussion
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/apr/05/jane-eyre-charlotte-bronte-reading-group-book#comment-71942602>
 onlast week’s Reading Group thread  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/apr/05/jane-eyre-charlotte-bronte-reading-group-book>
about how hard it is for us to gauge Jane’s sincerity when it comes to her 
Christian faith, particularly her attitude to her cousin St John’s missionary 
zeal. Is there part of her that remains the proud “pagan” and rebel she 
declares herself to be in the early pages? Does she say one thing and mean 
another when she professes her desire to be subservient to Christian ideals? Is 
her abiding love for Rochester something she maintains in spite of (and in 
opposition to) the Church’s teachings on marriage – or is there a more complex 
set of relationships and internal conflicts going on? Does the mean, religious 
Brocklehurst express a deep truth about men of faith? Or is he more simply a 
bad apple? Is it possible for us, who’ve been lucky enough to have grown up in 
a largely secular society, to feel the deep currents of faith and propriety 
that sway Jane?

That last question prompts another: who are we to judge? Would Jane Eyre (or 
Brontë) think much of my disregard for Christian feeling? Would she think much 
of the accompanying implication that we live in a better, more sophisticated 
age?

How would it feel to argue with either woman about such things? I can imagine 
Jane Eyre opening up a pretty fizzy can of whoop-ass (most of us wouldn’t 
present much challenge after Mr Rochester, after all). But I’m being fanciful – 
if I’ve gone too far, it’s a mark of how real Jane seems and how much life we 
can imagine for her outside the book.

I’m also keen to imagine meeting Brontë on her own terms. We in the present 
have a tendency to patronise those in the past. It’s easy to think we are more 
sophisticated because we now know more about – say – the early history of 
Christianity. Or because Brontë is, of course, ignorant of modern feminist 
theory, or poststructuralism. We can bring readings to her work that she 
couldn’t begin to imagine.

But she could easily turn the tables on us: in 1847, Brontë was a gateway to 
the future (as the fact that we are reading her today so neatly proves). She 
lived in a sophisticated and complicated world, one whose codes and unwritten 
rules, whose morality and intellectual structure, would baffle even the most 
learned among us.

It’s also worth remembering that Brontë would be an unusual case in any age. 
She was a writer of perception, intelligence and stylistic genius. But she was 
also an oddball: curiously old-fashioned – with her borrowing of gothic horror 
tropes and her smouldering Byronic leading man – Brontë was also unusually 
forward-thinking in her depiction of the plight of governesses and insistence 
that intelligent women’s work had value. Crucially, she was an outsider, cut 
off from the main literary circuit in Haworth, far from the great metropolis 
where titans such as William Thackeray and Charles Dickens held sway. Indeed, 
she had once regarded London as a place of unimaginable danger and vice. When 
Brontë’s friend Ellen Nussey visited the city in 1834, Charlotte even wrote a 
letter to her afterwards, expressing her astonishment that Ellen had returned 
“unchanged”.

She was a writer of perception and stylistic genius, but she was also an 
oddball

Even more telling is Brontë’s relationship with Thackeray. She was sharp 
enough to understand his genius, evendedicating the second edition of Jane Eyre 
to him 
<http://hcl.harvard.edu/libraries/houghton/exhibits/thackeray/chapter5/6_6.cfm> 
because of her rich appreciation for Vanity Fair. Unfortunately, she was also 
distant enough from literary gossip to not know that Thackeray had hidden his 
wife away in an asylum (not the ideal recipient for a book about a mad woman in 
an attic). Their meetings were also tinged with confusion: Charlotte was 
initially said to be dumbstruck when she met her idol – and confused when he 
started talking about the scent of cigars, not realising he was making a 
flattering reference to the scene in chapter XXIII where the smell of Mr 
Rochester’s cigar sets Jane aflutter.

Similar misunderstandings abounded when he organised a party in Brontë’s 
honour, in 1849. The trouble this time was that she refused to acknowledge she 
was Currer Bell (the pseudonym she’d used on the early publication of Jane 
Eyre) and would only give sharp, short answers. (“I do and I don’t,” she 
snapped, when other guests tried to ascertain if she liked London society 
women.) Thackeray eventually sneaked out of his own party to go to his club.

Anne, Thackeray’s daughter, later recalled: “This then is the authoress, the 
unknown power whose books have set all London talking, reading, speculating … 
We all smile as my father stoops to offer his arm; for, genius as she may be, 
Miss Brontë can barely reach his elbow … And everyone waited for the brilliant 
conversation which never began at all.” It’s reassuring at least to know that 
Brontë’s contemporaries were just as able as we are to patronise her – and to 
feel that curious mix of intimate understanding and baffled difference.
 