
Consumer products group Reckitt Benckiser has long been a stock market star, 
with investors attracted by its defensive qualities in a volatile world. But 
there are clouds on the horizon for the company, not least the forthcoming loss 
of its exclusive licence in the US for its suboxone and subutex drugs, used for 
the treatment of opiate addiction.

The licence expires on 8 October, and analysts believe the company is likely 
to see generic competition for the products - which account for some 12% of 
group profits - almost immediately. Credit Suisse, while still positive on the 
company overall, pointed out the potential effect. The bank said:

"Such a large and growing profit pool will not have gone unnoticed - generic 
companies already have clearance on the active ingredient in Suboxone. Does 
Reckitt have a 'silver bullet'? We think not. Generic competition we feel sure 
is both inevitable and likely to be pretty much immediate. We see little that 
Reckitt can do to offset this - its slow-release technology won't get clearance 
for three to four years, while brands count for very little (virtually nothing) 
in this field. [Reckitt's] 2009 results may be impacted by the exact date that 
generics go live (a one week delay worth £5m to earnings), but it seems 
inevitable that generics will be in full force by the year end. Thus 2010 
forecasts should include the full impact we believe."

So Reckitt stood out with a 5p fall to £28.18 on a day when the FTSE 100 
jumped 108.78 points to 4346.46, helped by a near 200 point rise on Wall Street 
by the time London closed.

This 2.57% increase was the best one day performance for the leading index 
since 24 April and the first time since the end of May that it has been in 
positive territory three days in a row.

Investors took heart from this week's bumper figures from Goldman Sachs and 
better than expected results from Intel, as well as reasonable US manufacturing 
and inflation numbers. Even another jump in UK unemployment could not dampen 
the positive mood, with analysts pointing out that the number of benefit claims 
grew by less than forecast. Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital Spreads, 
said:

"The FTSE has had a very positive move higher today, catching quite a few 
people by surprise in the process and often such moves can be compounded by a 
sudden rush of investors jumping on board to get in while they can and not miss 
out on any big move higher.

"The rally has been broad based with all sectors benefiting and on some pretty 
solid volumes too. The rate of unemployment in the UK may have risen higher 
than expected, making for a grim headline figure, however the rise in claimants 
was the smallest for a year, which investors took as further indication that 
the worst is over.

"The test for the FTSE will be the resistance seen around 4350-4400 and whilst 
today's rally is encouraging, [can] the FTSE carry on higher to take out 4500? 
There's little evidence to show that it can, considering how it has attempted 
that many times through May and June."

Nevertheless, renewed hopes of economic recovery pushed up metal prices, and 
with an increase in copper production from Kazakhstan - albeit small - in the 
first half of the year, traders were upbeat about the mining sector once more.
Kazakhmys climbed 38p to 678.5p, while Xstrata was up 51.7p to 666p, and 
Antofagasta added 22.5p to 647.5p. News from Rio Tinto that iron ore production 
was up 8% in the second quarter has lifted its shares 85p to 2104.5p, 
notwithstanding the current row with the Chinese over spying claims.

But Hochschild Mining lost 21.25p to 279p as Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan 
Cazenove said they were placing up to 15m shares in the market on behalf of 
director Alberto Beeck, who recently stepped down from his executive role.

Elsewhere Tullow Oil rose 43.5p to 934.5p after Ghana officially approved the 
Jubilee field development plan. Evolution Securities said:

"The Ghanaian government has at last given formal approval to the Jubilee 
Phase 1 Development project following the announcement yesterday from Kosmos [a 
partner in the field] that it had secured loans to fund its share of 
development. This is a case of the paperwork catching up with the engineers as 
the project has been in construction for some time.

"The Jubilee field straddles both the Deepwater Tano and West Cape Three 
Points license blocks offshore Ghana and as result the initial unitisation sees 
Tullow getting 34.7% of the field but with the potential for stake to change as 
the field comes on stream and more data becomes available. The 34.7% is 
slightly below the 37% we had anticipated so, in theory, our fair value for 
Tullow should reduce by around 25p. As we have a target price of 1200p and the 
shares are currently trading at [around] 891p it's a trifle academic at this 
stage especially as the un-risked upside of Tullow's portfolio is substantially 
higher than our risked fair value target of 1200p."

Insurers were wanted as concerns about their solvency faded. And with 
Resolution's recent merger proposal toFriends Provident, up 1.11p to 70.6p, 
there was also a spate of takeover talk.RSA Insurance rose 2.2p to 119.8p on 
suggestions of a 140p a share offer from Italy's Generali. But a spokeswoman 
for the Italian insurer said: "We have not made any bid, and we have no 
interest in this company." She also denied rumours that Generali wanted to buy 
Axa's 9% stake in RSA.

Among the mid-caps Northern Foods, which specialises in own label ready meals 
for Aldi and Marks & Spencer, jumped 7p to 62p after it said first quarter 
sales had climbed 5.5%. Its Fox's biscuit brand was boosted by itsVinnie the 
panda TV advertising campaign <http://www.foxs-biscuits.co.uk/>, which also has 
a presence on Facebook and Twitter.

Pubs group JD Wetherspoon issued another upbeat trading statement but its 
shares slipped 0.5p to 428.5p on profit taking.

The company said sales so far this year - for the first 50 weeks - were up 
5.2% from existing pubs and new openings, helped partly by lower than expected 
costs. Like-for-like sales - excluding new openings - rose by 1.2%.
The fourth-quarter figures were partly distorted by a big promotional push 
last year to encourage drinkers with cut-price offers on food and beer, and 
showed a like-for-like decrease of 0.8%. Still, it expects profits for the full 
year to come in at the top end of expectations.
 