
More journalists have been imprisoned this year by governments around the 
world than at any time in nearly 30 years, primarily because of the crackdown 
in Turkey afterthe failed coup in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey-coup-attempt>.

According to the annual survey compiled by the Committee to Protect 
Journalists (CPJ), there were 259 journalists in jail as of 1 December, and at 
least 81 of those were in Turkish prisons.

All of the editors, writers, cartoonists and photographers detained in Turkey 
are facing anti-state charges, the press freedom organisationsaid in its report 
<https://cpj.org/imprisoned/2016.php>.


Stop the press: Turkey's crackdown on its media goes into overdrive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/29/stop-the-press-turkey-crackdown-journalists-overdrive-since-coup>
It is believed to be the highest number of journalists ever held in one 
country at one time. Dozens of other journalists are imprisoned inTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, but CPJ was unable to confirm a 
direct link to their work.

Some observers, as Elif Şafak noted in a New Yorker essay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/dec/12/the-corrosive-effects-of-jailing-novelists-and-journalists-in-turkey>
, believe the total could be as high as 140.

The CPJ report states: “In Turkey, media freedom was already under siege in 
early 2016, with authorities arresting, harassing, and expelling journalists 
and shutting down or taking over news outlets.”

A state of emergency has been in force in Turkey since the July coup attempt 
and the resulting government crackdown on alleged coup sympathisers has landed 
thousands in jail and forced tens of thousands of people from their jobs.

Western governments, human rights groups and legal experts have repeatedly 
expressed concern over events in the country.

In a two-month period, the Turkish government led by President Recep Tayyip 
Erdoğan detained more than 100 journalists and closed down at least 100 news 
outlets, said the report.

Outside Turkey, the total of 259 journalists in jail around the globe compares 
to 199 at the same time last year. It is the highest number since the CPJ began 
keeping detailed records in 1990.

Those numbers do not include journalists who have disappeared, or who are in 
the hands of non-state groups. For example, the freelance British journalist 
John Cantlie, held by Islamic State, is classified as “missing” or “abducted”.


After Turkey, the worst offender in 2016 was China, where 38 journalists were 
in custody on 1 December. China was the world’s worst jailer of journalists in 
the previous two years.

The report says: “In recent weeks, Beijing has deepened its crackdown on 
journalists who cover protests and human rights abuses.”

Egypt was listed in third place, with 25 journalists incarcerated. Many of 
them have spent years in jail without facing trial. Eritrea and Ethiopia are 
fourth and fifth worst jailers of journalists.

This year marked the first time since 2008 that Iran was not among the top 
five worst offenders. The report points out that many of those detained and 
convicted in a post-election crackdown in 2009 have served their sentences and 
been released.

“Journalists working to gather and share information are performing a public 
service and their rights are protected under international law. It is shocking 
therefore that so many governments are violating their international 
commitments by jailing journalists and suppressing critical speech,” said CPJ’s 
executive director Joel Simon.

“Turkey is at the vanguard of this authoritarian trend. Every day that 
Turkey’s journalists languish in jail in violation of that country’s own laws, 
Turkey’s standing in the world is diminished.”
 