
In England a thousand calculations are made about a referendum on Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> that might never take 
place. Some Conservative MPs talk of little else. Senior Labour figures agonise 
over whether to also offer a referendum of their own. They contemplate making 
such a pledge next month, before their party conference. In stark contrast,in 
Scotland, a contest is under way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence>for a referendum 
that definitelywill take place.

There is no more vivid example of the difference between the two countries 
than the focus on these entirely separate votes. Speak to anyone interested in 
politics in Scotland and there is virtually no reference at all to the 
dangerous game of poker being played in England over a European referendum. 
They are engaged in a more immediate historic battle, one that gets 
significantly less attention south of the border.

There is, though, a common link between those in England frothing with 
anticipation over a poll on Europe and the campaigners in Scotland seeking to 
win next year's referendum. In the nerve-shredding frenzy about whether to call 
them at all, when they should be held, what the question should be, and who 
should be allowed to vote, a key issue is weirdly underplayed: how to win them.

For all the noise in the UK about the possibility of referendums, we rarely 
hold them. When they are staged, no one knows quite what to do. The campaigns 
on both sides of theAV referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av-referendum> were dire. The antis won 
easily, but only because their opponents were so comically poor. Surely, Nick 
Clegg would have given considerable thought about how to win such a campaign? 
After all this was the most significant moment of his career.

He had certainly devoted much time to ensuring there would be a referendum, 
the timing, the question. The campaign was an afterthought, and was incoherent 
when it had any energy at all. Ed Miliband, who was a half-hearted supporter of 
electoral change, did not appear with Clegg. Neither managed to generate any 
excitement over an issue that would have changed British politics for ever.

In Scotland there is already a degree of wary introspection on both sides. The 
Better Together campaign is led by the former chancellor, Alistair Darling, 
calmly authoritative and respected but not one of the more dynamic or 
experienced political strategists.

At one time, Gordon Brown had the popularity, guile and hunger to be the most 
effective campaigner in Scotland. For the first elections to the Scottish 
parliament in 1998 he virtually left the Treasury for a few months to 
successfully revive Labour's flagging campaign. Now he intervenes occasionally, 
but not as part of Darling's organisation. Brown spoke instead at the launch of 
United With Labour. This separate movement emerged when some senior party 
figures in Scotland expressed concern about campaigning with other groups, 
especially the Conservatives. A union leader spoke for a significant section of 
the party at Labour's conference in Scotland: "While I appreciate the 
referendum ... has to have a formal yes and no campaign, most of us in the 
Labour movement have a huge difficulty with any campaign that includes the 
Tories." Senior Liberal Democrats in Scotland worry about Labour's internal 
tensions.

They worry with good cause. There is a small echo of the disastrous AV 
campaign, when Labour's internal differences and those tensions between 
Miliband and Clegg led to a one-sided outcome.

Referendum campaigns in the UK strike oddly discordant notes. We have 
a party-based system, after all. Referendums are advocated or offered only 
because leaders calculate they will benefit their parties, or at least will 
keep them united. But once they are called, elements from the Conservatives and 
Labour, Labour and the Lib Dems, are all expected to work with one another. 
Quite often they find it almost impossible to do so, tribal attachment 
overriding an ambiguous sense of common cause.

What is more surprising is the degree to which the SNP has struggled to adapt 
to the demands of a referendum campaign. Its leading figures spent much energy 
on timing, the question on the ballot paper and securing a reduction in voting 
age to 16. Now that the campaign is under way, concerns are being raised about 
how lacklustre it is and at how unprepared advocates of independence are when 
asked detailed questions about the implications for the economy, public 
services, the BBC and the rest. The surprise is greater because the SNP has 
some very smart strategists behind the scenes, and of course in Alex Salmond 
they have the leader who brilliantly turned Labour's attempt to destroy him 
through devolution into an opportunity to seize power.

But in the context of a referendum campaign, even the deployment of Salmond 
becomes more complex. Evidently he is a partisan figure. How can the leader of 
a party be anything other than partisan, and recognised as such? As a result, 
at least so far, the independence campaign is not sure how much prominence to 
give him or the degree to which he is an unqualified asset as they seek the 
widest possible appeal. Again, there are small echoes of the electoral reform 
referendum. The reformers did not know how to use Clegg, the biggest advocate 
of voting change and then at the height of his unpopularity. Salmond is far 
more popular than Clegg was then or is now, but when leaders are not entirely 
clear how to make their pitch there is usually trouble ahead.

Pollsters in Edinburgh tell me all their data points overwhelmingly to a 
defeat for those seeking independence. One says that soon the only question 
will be the margin of victory for the "no" camp.

But referendums are strangers in the UK, deployed for party advantage, forcing 
parties to work together, each calculating where the outcome will leave them. 
Otherwise brilliant strategists struggle to seize on themes that can give them 
headway, and fall quite easily into traps. Anything can happen in such 
circumstances.

I am not a fan of referendums. Leaders do not offer them out of a sudden 
desire to empower voters. They do so to get their parties out of a hole. What 
neat symmetry that on those occasions when one actually looms into view, they 
have no clue how to fight an effective campaign.

Steve Richards is performing his one-man show Rock'n'Roll Politics 2 at the 
Edinburgh festival <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/edinburgh-festival-2013>
 until 25 August
 