
The rehearing of the British Horseracing Authority’s disciplinary case against 
the trainer Jim Best, who is alleged to have ordered a jockey deliberately to 
stop his horses, has been delayed for a further two months until a provisional 
date of 21 November after Best’s legal team successfully challenged the BHA’s 
attempt to open the case on 19 September.

Horse racing tips: Wednesday 7 September
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/06/horse-racing-tips-wednesday-7-september>
Best, whose stable is based in Lewes in Sussex, was banned from racing for 
four years in April and described as a “dishonest individual who corrupted a 
young man” following the conclusion of the original case against him. The ban 
followed a finding by a disciplinary panel in February that the trainer had 
ordered Paul John, a former jockey at his yard who gave evidence to the 
hearing, not to ride two of his horses on their merits in December 2015.

However, the ban was quashed on appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/13/jim-best-conviction-quashed-british-horseracing-authority-climbdown>
 a few weeks later because of the appearance of possible bias in the 
proceedings after it emerged that Matthew Lohn, the panel’s chairman, had 
undertaken paid work for the regulator over the preceding two years. The appeal 
panel also found that the original panel had not dealt “adequately or at all 
with crucial aspects” of the trainer’s evidence and ordered a rehearing of the 
charges against him.

As a result of the latest delay in establishing a date for the rehearing the 
case will now take place after the publication of a report by Christopher 
Quinlan QC, which will review the operation of the BHA’s disciplinary 
procedures. Best’s legal team had previously suggested that the attempt to 
schedule the rehearing on 22 September was to allow the BHA “one more go at Mr 
Best before it is forced to clean up its act”.

Five days have been set aside for the rehearing, while the new panel appointed 
to consider the case will also convene on 7 October to consider any challenges 
to its makeup from Best’s lawyers.

Robin Mounsey, the BHA’s media manager, said on Tuesday: “The BHA had 
provisionally scheduled a rehearing date for 19 September and a provisional 
disciplinary panel for the rehearing. It was made very clear that Mr Best had 
the opportunity to challenge the timing and the constitution of the panel 
should he so wish and that, in the interests of fairness, any challenges would 
be placed into the hands of the disciplinary panel, rather than the BHA 
executive.

“Such a challenge was considered today by the chair of the proposed panel, 
William Norris QC, who has determined that the rehearing should be arranged 
provisionally for 21 November for five days. Mr Norris also outlined that a 
further hearing should be scheduled for 7 October to consider any challenges 
from Mr Best to the panel’s appointment and composition.

“The BHA has acted appropriately by asking the disciplinary panel to rule on 
any issues related to the timing of the rehearing. We have always said that our 
objective throughout has been to ensure a fair process is followed.”

Meanwhile Jim Crowley started Tuesday as the 2-7 favourite to win the Flat 
jockeys’ championship but the defending champion, Silvestre de Sousa, cut his 
lead in the title race from five winners to only two with a treble from six 
rides at Leicester.

Crowley drew a blank from three rides at Redcar and is now a 4-9 chance to win 
the title for the first time, while de Sousa, who could be backed at 11-4 
before his treble on Hay Chewed (3-1), Chevalier Du Lac (2-1) and Faithful 
Mount (5-1), is now top-priced at 9-4.
 