
A Republican plan to repeal key provisions of the Affordable Care Act would 
leave 32 million people without health coverage and double the cost of 
insurance premiums over the next decade, according to ananalysis 
<https://www.cbo.gov/publication/52371> by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget 
Office (CBO).

The budget office report, released on Tuesday, analyzed the likely impact of a 
Republican proposal approved by Congress in 2015 and vetoed by Barack Obama 
that would repeal major provisions of the healthcare law while leaving other 
parts in place. The estimate does not account for a replacement plan, which 
Republicans have vowed to propose soon.

Democrats turn to American people to protect Obamacare from looming repeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/democrats-obamacare-repeal-bernie-sanders-healthcare>
The report follows a weekend of action by Democratic lawmakers and liberal 
groups to protest against the law’s repeal and adds to the pressure on 
Republicans in Congress to craft replacement legislation that would avoid 
losses in coverage for millions of Americans and disruptions to stability in 
the market.

Over the weekend, Donald Trump promised that a Republican plan would provide “
insurance for everybody 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-vows-insurance-for-everybody-in-obamacare-replacement-plan/2017/01/15/5f2b1e18-db5d-11e6-ad42-f3375f271c9c_story.html?utm_term=.f75ab93b65c7&wpisrc=al_alert-COMBO-politics%252Bnation>
”. He has also demanded that his party immediately repeal the Affordable Care 
Act, known as Obamacare, and pass a healthcare law “simultaneously”.

The CBO report, which was requested by top Senate Democrats, estimated that 18 
million people would lose their insurance and premiums would rise by 20% to 25% 
in the first year following the dismantling of the law. The number of uninsured 
could rise to 32 million by 2026, while causing premiums to double in that 
timeframe.

The report arrived at 32 million people by estimating that 23 million fewer 
people would have coverage through the individual insurance market and 19 
million fewer people would have coverage under Medicaid. These changes would be 
partially offset by an estimated increase of 11 million people who are covered 
through insurance offered by their employer.

“This projection is meaningless, as it takes into account no measures to 
replace the law nor actions that the incoming administration will take to 
revitalize the individual market that has been decimated by Obamacare,” said 
AshLee Strong, a spokeswoman for the House speaker, Paul Ryan.

Democrats seized on the report, arguing that a repeal of the law would throw 
millions Americans off their insurance plans.


“Nonpartisan statistics don’t lie,” the Senate minority leader, Chuck Schumer, 
said in a statement. “It’s crystal clear that the Republican effort to repeal 
the Affordable Care Act will increase healthcare costs for millions of 
Americans and kick millions more off of their health insurance.”

Nonpartisan statistics don’t lie
Chuck Schumer 
Expressing a similar response, the House minority leader, Nancy Pelosi, called 
Republican efforts’ to repeal the law “nothing less than a nightmare for the 
American people”.

“While President-elect Trump promises ‘insurance for everybody’, Republicans 
are moving to destroy the health coverage of tens of millions of Americans and 
drive up costs for millions more,” Pelosi said in a statement. “The GOP plan 
isn’t repeal and delay, or repeal and replace – it’s cut and run.”

Republicans moved quickly with a plan to repeal the law in the first two weeks 
of Congress but have yet to provide details on which parts of the law they will 
dismantle – and what their plan is to replace it.


How Obamacare could be dismantled by Republicans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/17/obamacare-aca-republicans-trump-senate-repeal>
Over the next few weeks, four congressional committees will be working on a 
draft of the repeal legislation. Though Republicans have provided few details 
on this process, they are thought to be using as a framework the 2015 bill 
assessed in the CBO report.

The bill would eliminate the tax penalties against people who do not have 
insurance, the linchpin of the law that is known as the individual mandate. It 
would also eliminate a provision expanding Medicaid eligibility and subsidies 
available to lower-income people to buy insurance through the marketplaces. 
However, the bill does not remove the requirement for insurance companies to 
provide coverage regardless of pre-existing health conditions.

A spokesman for the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, said that the 
report assumes a “situation that simply does not exist and that no one in 
Congress advocates”.

“After years of devastating news about the consequences of Obamacare, I can 
see why Democrats would want to change the subject. But Democrats face a choice 
now: do they agree with their leader and refuse to work together on any reforms 
at all?” said Don Stewart, the McConnell spokesman. “Or do they agree with us 
that doing nothing is not an option, and work with us on a series of 
step-by-step reforms to prevent the scenario envisioned by the CBO report.”

But as Republicans move to unwind the law, they may face a changing landscape. 
According to a newNBC News/Wall Street Journal poll 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/first-read/brink-repeal-obamacare-has-never-been-more-popular-n707806?cid=eml_nbn_20170117>
, the law has “never been more popular”. The poll released on Tuesday found 
that 45% of respondents believe Obamacare is a “good idea” – the highest 
percentage since they began asking the question in April 2009.

Meanwhile, the poll found that half of Americans say they have “little to no 
confidence” that Republican proposals would improve the law.
 