
Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> with attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), who are impulsive, inattentive and unable to sit 
still, should be put on a restricted diet for several weeks to establish 
whether particular foods are the cause, scientists say today.

Certain foods and additives can worsen the behaviour of some children, 
although guidelines from the National Institute forHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Clinical Excellence (Nice) say 
there is no proof that cutting out fatty acids, food colourings or additives 
can help.

A paper published today in the Lancet medical journal establishes that food is 
responsible for ADHD children's erratic and difficult behaviour in many cases, 
although it is likely that different foods trigger behavioural problems in 
different children. The findings are likely to be welcomed by those who are 
concerned about the amount of drug treatment given to children with ADHD.

Researchers from the Netherlands put 50 children with ADHD on a "restricted 
elimination diet" consisting of foods with the least possible risk of allergic 
reaction – a combination of rice, meat, vegetables, pears and water – which was 
tailored to the preferences of each child. A second group of 50 children were 
not put on a diet, but their parents were given advice on healthy eating and 
asked to keep a diary of everything their child ate.

The behaviour of 78% of the 41 children who completed the five-week restricted 
diet phase improved, while the behaviour of those who were not on a special 
diet remained the same.

Researchers then tried adding particular foods high in immunoglobulin G (IgG), 
antibodies known to trigger allergic responses, to the restricted diet. They 
subsequently added foods that were low in IgG – to find out whether blood tests 
for the antibodies could be used to identify foods that trigger ADHD. However, 
63% of the children relapsed and there was no difference in the response to low 
IgG or high IgG foods.

The researchers conclude that – although food sensitivity plays a part in 
ADHD, it is not caused by an allergic reaction.

"We think that dietary intervention should be considered in all children with 
ADHD. This provided that parents are willing to follow a diagnostic restricted 
elimination diet for a 5-week period, and that expert supervision is 
available," say Professor Jan Buitelaar of the Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Centre and Dr Lidy Pelsser of the ADHD Research Centre in Eindhoven.

"Children who react favourably to this diet should be diagnosed with 
food-induced ADHD. They should enter a challenge procedure to define which 
foods each child reacts to, increase the feasibility and minimise the burden of 
the diet. In children who do not show behavioural improvements after following 
the diet, standard treatments such as drugs, behavioural treatments, or both 
should be considered."

British experts welcomed the findings. "This study provides further evidence 
for the potential value of dietary approaches to the treatment of ADHD," said 
Professor Jim Stevenson of the University of Southampton. "It is a condition 
that disrupts family life, interferes with the child's ability to sustain 
friendships with other children and places the child at risk of longer term 
problems with attainment in school. Many parents are reluctant to use a drug 
treatment and it is important that alternatives such as the few foods approach 
can be shown to be effective."

But professor David Daley at Nottingham University's institute of mental 
health said there was more work to do. "Scientifically, I think this paper 
offers excellent evidence about another possible underlying cause of ADHD, but 
it would be premature to conclude such dietary intervention would be of any 
clinical benefit to children with ADHD and their parents. We need to know more 
about how expensive the intervention is, how motivated parents must be to make 
it work, and how easy it is for parents to get their child to stick to the 
diet," he said.
 