
Each era has its defining aura, and the dominant one of these pre-millennial 
years has been jazz's growing intimacy with other idioms, some of which were 
long considered incompatible. My favourite new solo artist of 1998 - young 
American pianistBrad Mehldau <https://www.theguardian.com/music/brad-mehldau> - 
is the most classical-sounding of jazz players, yet the freshness of his 
presence as an improvisor clearly comes from subjecting a classical vocabulary 
of rich nuances to the spontaneity of a jazz attitude, rather than the other 
way around.

 Not before time, the Associated Board of Music Examiners has announced that 
jazz will be on the grade system for the nation's music education. But students 
will have to bear in mind that the essence of jazz is cultivating the ability 
to listen to yourself and summon up your findings, not learning note-for-note 
solos that Charlie Parker blew on the wing in a Harlem sweatbox one night in 
1944 with the narcotics squad at the door, then calling it the classical music 
of the 20th century.

 Just how wide the gap between letter and spirit can still be was revealed by 
Radio 3's thoughtful consolation to listeners during the George Gershwin 
centenary Prom this year. Gershwin's piano solo on the 1924 premiere may have 
been improvised, the commentator admitted, but the audience could rest assured 
that tonight's version would be the real thing - you know, written down.

 The date of composer George Russell's concert at the Barbican - March 6 - 
coincided with the fourth annual Musicalliance convention, a world-music 
conference dedicated to the unconventional. Russell's performance that night 
would have made the delegates' year and is a hot contender for the hair-raiser 
of the entire decade.

 At times fronting a hybrid symphony-jazz band almost 80 strong, Russell 
managed to make his impromptu mix of American, British and French musicians 
sound like a vast rock'n'roll band, a Moroccan folk ensemble, a symphonic band 
playing a hoe-down, a free-jazz group, a jostling crowd of Dixieland 
street-stompers, and many more musical persuasions.

 Seventy-four-year-old Russell, capering like a soberly-dressed Cab Calloway 
in front of his band, and the tumultuous septuagenarian drummers Elvin Jones 
and Roy Haynes told the man with the scythe where to go, but the spoilsport 
stopped off instead at Betty Carter and musician and broadcaster Benny Green. 
Green not only helped people to savour and understand the great jazz-influenced 
Broadway music of the century, and raised the standard of jazz journalism in 
this country several notches from the breathless buffspeak that had mostly 
characterised it before the war, but in making his lugubrious east London 
intonation a fixture on BBC Radio, he was also a pioneer in breaking the 
monopoly of fastidious Oxbridge tones on the network.

 The silencing of Betty Carter deprived live jazz of an irreplaceably acerbic 
wit and an unerring sense of drama and timing that could reach every kind of 
audience, whether it was familiar with her deviously oblique encryption of 
standard songs or not.

 Highlights of the year? There were plenty. American pianist Uri Caine winding 
the great melodies of Gustav Mahler through the wringer of free-jazz, klezmer 
music, electronics and funk. Pianist Nikki Yeoh's virtuosic recklessness. 
Canadian chanteuse Diana Krall's rekindling of the resignation, brief ecstasies 
and quiet desperation of old Broadway love songs. Sonny Rollins, at 68, playing 
a whirlwind of a non-stop two-hour show at the Barbican.

 Trombonist Steve Turre's conch-shells solo with McCoy Tyner's Cuban band 
defied belief. There was Django Bates's standards album Quiet Nights, the 
record he said he'd never make, and Thimar, the virtuosic world-music trio 
featuring saxophonist John Surman, bassist Dave Holland and Tunisian oud and 
lute master Anouar Brahem.

 Keyboard legend Joe Zawinul's returned to Ronnie Scott's for the first time 
since Weather Report, a triumph for a painterly pianist. Young English/Sierra 
Leonian pianist Alex Wilson engagingly launched what he calls Afro-Saxon music. 
The howling two-sax impromptu blues jam between Joe Lovano and Joshua Redman on 
the Oris London Jazz Festival, and Lovano's preceding trio performance were 
unforgettable, as was Portuguese singer Maria Joao's ringing operatic 
falsettos, jabbering percussive sounds, confidingly whimsical lyricism, skewed 
African hi-life, and ferocious, accusing free-scat. And Jan Garbarek came with 
grooves, an almost unthinkable conjunction, celebrating his mid-life 
retrospective, Rites.

 Maybe the last word should belong to Derek Bailey. Just six letters form the 
liner notes for the improv guitarist's engagingly probing solo disc Takes Fakes 
And Dead She Dances: 'Listen.'
 