
My husband Richard Baker, who has died aged 66 of cancer, was a sailor, museum 
attendant, writer and gardener and, for more than 30 years, lead builder of the
Skinningrove bonfire 
<http://www.gazettelive.co.uk/whats-on/family-kids-news/gallery/skinningrove-bonfire-night-fireworks-pictures-10396080>
, east Cleveland.

Thousands flocked annually to his beautiful, enormous sculptures of dinosaurs, 
goblins, ships, castles and more, built from scrap wood at this spectacular 
community event. Richard invited contributions from everyone, whatever their 
abilities, encouraging people to value their addition, as he did. When darkness 
falls on Skinningrove each 5 November, this huge fire is a magical sight. In 
2015, it featured as the Guardian’s Picture of the Day.

The son of a naval officer, Christopher Baker, and his wife, Jean (nee 
Crabtree), Richard was born in Dunfermline when his father was stationed at 
Limekilns. When his father was posted to New Zealand, the family spent three 
years living near Takapuna beach. They returned to Blakeney,Norfolk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/norfolk>, and then settled in nearby Cley. 
Richard went to school in Blickling, then boarded at King Edward VII grammar 
school, King’s Lynn, before embarking on a degress in English and American 
studies at Nottingham University.

On graduating he became a contributor to alternative publications and later he 
wrote about English street life, using Hogarth’s drawings as his starting point.

Richard and I met in 1974 at Theatre Centre, Kensal Green, north-west London, 
where we were both community arts workers. We were briefly engaged in that 
year, but did not marry until 2003. Between 1979 and 1993 we were based in 
Stockton-on-Tees and began visiting Whitby, which we grew to love. We started 
the Skinningrove bonfire along with local people in 1980.

When my work took me around the country, Richard would often find new things 
to do too. He was, by turns, a proofreader, shepherd, barman, beach cleaner, 
clown, busker, musician, roadie, gardener and maker of giant puppets. In 1993, 
we moved to Dawlish, in Devon, but continued to return to the north-east to 
build the bonfire. We finally retired to Whitby in 2007.

Richard was a well-known Church Street character and guide on ghost walks; he 
was in his element as a performing storyteller. He also worked in theCaptain 
Cook Memorial Museum <http://www.cookmuseumwhitby.co.uk/>.

When he saw the replica ship HM Bark Endeavour on its return to Britain in 
1997 it was love at first sight. Richard sailed 1,000 miles as crew on six 
tall-ship voyages, three on the Endeavour replica in the early 2000s.

He wrote poetry until his death, arranging his final pamphlet for distribution 
at his funeral in St Mary’s church, near Whitby Abbey.

Richard is survived by me, and by his brothers, Timothy and Philip, and 
sisters, Diana and Teresa.
 