
Prescriptions of Ritalin for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder have 
quadrupled in a decade, prompting fears it is being pushed on children at the 
expense of alternative treatments and without appreciation of long-term effects.

Figures released by the NHS business services authority to the Liberal 
Democrat MP Tessa Munt reveal the number of prescriptions of methylphenidate 
hydrochloride, the generic name for Ritalin, rose in England from 158,000 in 
1999 to 661,463 in 2010.

Ritalin is a psychostimulant drug most commonly approved for treatment of ADHD 
in children. It is also used to treat conditions such as narcolepsy and in 
certain cases may also be prescribed for lethargy, depression and obesity.

The Association of Educational Psychologists said its members were reporting 
an increase in children with behavioural difficulties being prescribed the drug 
in conjunction with antidepressants, despite the fact there was "little to no 
evidence about the effect which these cocktails of drugs are having on the 
development of children's brains".

The association claims clinical studies show the "beneficial effects of 
psychostimulant medication are not sustained over the long term, necessitating 
stronger and stronger dosages to be prescribed over time" and that it is 
"becoming a common practice for children to be prescribed stronger dosages than 
recommended in the morning as a 'top-up' or 'kickstart' dose so that medication 
lasts the full school day".

Munt, who until recently sat on the education select committee, said there 
were natural alternatives that could help combat ADHD. She highlighted a report 
commissioned by the RSPB that suggested activities in a natural environment 
appear to improve children's symptoms by 30% compared with urban outdoor 
activities, and threefold compared to playing indoors. But Munt said many young 
people were prevented from enjoying the outdoors because of reasons such as 
lack of school playing fields and the distractions posed by video games, 
smartphones and social networking.

"It is extremely alarming that in the decade up to 2010, prescriptions for 
Ritalin quadrupled," she said. "Statistics show that 90% of prescriptions for 
this powerful drug in 2004 were used to combat behavioural problems in 
school-age children. I am shocked that there has been such a huge explosion in 
use."

ADHD is believed to affect between 5% and 10% of schoolchildren in the UK. 
Symptoms include overactive and impulsive behaviour and difficulty paying 
attention. The increase in Ritalin prescriptions appears to mirror the US where 
there was an 83% increase in sales of the drug between 2006 and 2010.

How many children are being prescribed the drug is difficult to quantify from 
official data. Munt said: "Unless the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> collects vital statistical data 
about prescribing habits, no one will know what is happening.

"We hear teachers tell of their students' lack of ability to concentrate, from 
police about increasingly disruptive and antisocial behaviour, and from parents 
unable to control the actions of young family members. We need to show young 
people how to deal with the normal stresses and strains of growing up. 
Resorting to powerful drugs only stores up trouble for the future."

The Association of Educational Psychologists said it believed guidelines were 
not being followed. The guidelines recommend that ADHD medication should not be 
prescribed to pre-school children for the long term.nor in isolation from other 
therapeutic interventions, without consultation But the association said it was 
aware of a substantial increase in the number of children aged under six, and 
in some cases as young as three, being prescribed ADHD drugs. It said an 
informal survey of educational psychology practitioners across the West 
Midlands had revealed there were more than 100 children under six on the 
medication in the area. "This is reaffirmed across the country by our members," 
the association said.
 