
Through the Bosnian fog Ireland gained a tantalising glimpse of the finals. A 
draw and a potentially decisive away goal by Robbie Brady means Martin 
O’Neill’s team go into Monday’s second leg in Dublin withqualification for Euro 
2016 within their grasp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/13/martin-o-neill-ireland-bosnia>
.

They would have had a fair grip on it if they had not conceded to Eden Dzeko 
within three minutes of taking the lead butBosnia-Herzegovina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bosnia-herzegovina> ended the game with 
more regrets and must fear they have let slip their best chance of a first 
appearance in the tournament.

Ireland will be bolstered by the return of the key players who were ruled out 
of this one – Jon Walters, John O’Shea and possibly also Shane Long, who hopes 
to have recovered from a knee injury – and their confidence will be reinforced 
by the way they generally contained Bosnia at a venue where their the hosts 
consider themselves formidable.

Long before kick-off the locals broke out fireworks, flags and throbbing 
chants to generate the atmosphere that convinces Bosnia to stage critical 
matches in a dinky 12,000-seat stadium in the city of Zenica, far from the 
capital, Sarajevo. If that was partially to intimidate the visitors, O’Neill’s 
teamsheet, at least, did not betray any meekness: the Irish manager’s decision 
to include Wes Hoolahan, whose only previous away start in the campaign had 
been in the inevitable win over Gibraltar, suggested a degree of boldness.

England undone by artistry of Spain’s Mario Pérez and Santi Cazorla
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/13/england-spain-friendly-football-match-report>
As it turned out, Hoolahan, his country’s most creative player, was not able 
to exert as much influenced as hoped and, after the Norwich City midfielder was 
substituted in the second half, his club-mate Brady shifted into his position 
and scored, retrieving a punt downfield before cracking a low shot past Asmir 
Begovic in the 82nd minute.

That followed a rare venture forward by Ireland, who spent most of the match 
repelling Bosnia’s earnest but imprecise attacks. Bosnia’s manager. Mehmed 
Bazdarevic, had declared his intention to go for an early goal and his players 
tried to put what he had preached to practice.

From the outset the two wide players, Edin Visca and Senad Lulic, showed their 
zeal to race forward and effectively form a four-man frontline. But Ireland 
were well organised and it was not until the 11th minute that Bosnia managed a 
shot, Miralem Pjanic firing over from the edge of the box after a run and cross 
by Visca.

Three minutes later two Irish defenders collided with each other in their 
eagerness to cut out a corner by Pjanic, leaving Ervin Zukanovic free nine 
yards out, but he fluffed his header. Bosnia were highly driven but not 
particularly polished and there was scope for Ireland to test the solidity of a 
home defence that looked jittery, but the visitors’ passing in the first half 
was sloppy, meaning they enticed further pressure instead. Stephen Ward, the 
Burnley left-back who has barely played for his club this season, was suffering 
at the feet of Visca, who whizzed past him again in the 19th minute before 
crossing to Vedad Ibisevic, who shot into the sidenetting.

Soon after, Ward was booked for pulling the shirt of his tormentor. There was 
no chance of Visca relenting and in the 32nd minute he crossed for Zukanovic, 
whose weak header was saved easily by Darren Randolph.

Maybe it was the tension of the occasion, but the overall quality of play was 
such that the first half could have been seen not so much as a last chance to 
qualify as an argument against expanding the finals to 24 teams.

That was not Ireland’s concern. At the break they had a scoreline they would 
be content to take home, and the crowd’s fervour had turned to anxiety. The 
onus was on Bosnia to plot a route to goal and that would also entail finding a 
way through the thick fog that descended in the second half. Visibility was 
poor but Visca clearly remained the most dangerous Bosnian.

A cross from the winger in the 52nd minute would have given Dzeko a 
close-range tap-in if not for an excellent sliding intervention by Ciaran Clark 
who, along with Richard Keogh, performed well in central defence. Ireland bared 
their teeth for the first time when Brady delivered a deep cross from the left 
and Jeff Hendrick headed just over. Hoolahan, closely tracked by Edin Cocalic 
throughout, was replaced by James McClean after an hour. Moments later Ireland 
contrived to present the home side with their best chance so far, Brady and 
Keogh botching a clearance and allowing the ball to break to Lulic.

Randolph reacted brilliantly, surging off his line to block the forward’s 
shot. Marc Wilson came on for Ward in the 67th minute to bolster Irish 
resistance. Moments later Bazdarevic took off Visca, explaining to puzzled 
Bosnian journalists afterwards that the winger was tired. He replaced Visca 
with the 6ft 6in striker Milan Djuric but Plan B was about to go badly wrong 
for the hosts. Eight minutes from time Brady collected a long ball, turned past 
Toni Sunjic and shot into the net.

The home crowd were silenced, the Irish players rejoiced. But their joy was 
short-lived when Ognjen Vranjes did a fine impression of Visca, hurtling down 
the right and delivering a low cross that Dzeko sidefooted into the net.

Bosnia–Herz v Rep of Ire: Euro 2016 play-off first leg – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/nov/13/bosnia-and-herzegovina-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-play-off-first-leg-live> 