
The American psychiatrist Robert Spitzer, who has died aged 83, took a 
homegrown system for classifying psychiatric disorders to world prominence. In 
1974, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) asked Spitzer to take 
responsibility for a new edition of its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, which had begun in 1952. This new edition, the third, known 
as DSM-3, was published in 1980 and quickly became the “world bible” of 
psychiatric diagnosis.

The DSM acquired increasing importance in those years because of the new 
prominence of drugs in treating psychiatric patients. Before the 1950s, 
psychiatry had few effective drugs. Yet with the opening of the vast new 
cornucopia of psychopharmacology, it did make a difference what agent was 
prescribed: different disorders responded to different treatments. Accordingly, 
which diagnoses were included or excluded in the classification had great 
financial consequences. Billions of dollars in pharmaceutical profits were at 
stake, and some of the diagnoses, such as “major depression”, could be 
profitable indeed.

The third edition of the DSM completely revised the standard diagnoses of 
psychiatry, hitherto dominated by the partisans of psychoanalysis with such 
terms as “psychoneurosis,” “hysteria” and “depressive neurosis”. Although 
Spitzer had undergone psychoanalytic training, based on the principles of 
Freud’s teaching, he had a deep loathing for it and was keen on abolishing its 
influence in American psychiatry. So as he took the helm of the DSM-3 
taskforce, he was determined that psychoanalytic principles be driven out of 
psychiatric diagnoses, and that presumably evidence-based concepts be installed 
in their place.

Spitzer came to this assignment as a member of the biometrics division of the 
New York State Psychiatric Institute, based at Columbia University in 
Manhattan. Born and raised in White Plains, New York, son of Benjamin and 
Esther Spitzer, he graduated in medicine from New York University in 1957, and 
began a career at PI, as the Psychiatric Institute was called, the following 
year. He quickly became an insider in this strategic institution, and was 
called upon to function as a consultant to DSM-2, published in 1968.

However, what the APA had not counted on was that, as head of the DSM-3 
taskforce, Spitzer would preside over the complete recasting of psychiatric 
diagnoses, rather than merely adjusting the semicolons, which is what it had in 
mind in commissioning the third edition: it wanted to bring American 
diagnostics into conformity with a revised system of theWorld Health 
Organisation <https://www.theguardian.com/world/world-health-organisation>. The 
document the taskforce brought forth, very much a product of Spitzer’s driving, 
authoritarian personality, meant a real turning of the page in the history of 
psychiatry. It was the beginning of the end of the primacy of psychoanalysis. 
The DSM-3 diagnostic register recognised virtually none of the Freudian illness 
concepts.

As for the rest, Spitzer and his colleagues behaved as though they were 
starting at ground zero, as if there were no previous diagnostic traditions in 
psychiatry to build on. Spitzer decreed that the classic two depressions that 
psychiatry had always known – melancholic depression and a mixture of lesser 
complaints known as “nerves” – be condensed into a single depressive illness: 
“major depression”. Until DSM-3, psychiatry had recognised a single form of 
anxiety; after DSM-3, there were eight.

Invented from whole cloth were such new diagnostic concepts as attention 
deficit disorder, then known as ADD, later as attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD), and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). These have become 
hugely popular diagnoses; before 1980 they were virtually unknown.

Spitzer did, however, ensure schizophrenia remained a single disorder, and the 
taskforce made no effort to disaggregate chronic psychotic illness into 
different components. He solidified the tradition, begun by the German 
psychiatrist Karl Leonhard in 1957, of treating manic-depressive illness as 
entirely different from unipolar depression (in DSM-3, “major depression”). 
Some have argued that it makes little sense to classify depressive illnesses on 
the basis of polarity, but Spitzer was not really a clinician, and did not have 
the gut sense of a senior psychiatrist that mania, unipolar depression and 
bipolar depression were all pretty well melded together in the same ball of wax.

The legacy of DSM-3 has proved to be highly controversial, and Spitzer’s 
historical reputation depends on whether one views the influence of DSM as 
mainly positive or negative. The pharmaceutical industry found the specific new 
diagnoses highly positive, as drugs could be developed for “major depression” 
or “generalised anxiety disorder”. Many clinicians accepted the authority of 
the APA as conclusive, and brought their own diagnostic patterns into 
accordance with DSM-3, though fewer in the UK have fallen into line.

Yet nagging doubts remained. Collapsing all depressive illnesses into a single 
pot called “major depression” has struck many as reckless, given the clear 
differences in responsiveness to treatment between melancholic depression and 
non-melancholic depression. The continuing subdivision of anxiety into 
microfragments has seemed to some observers absurd, given that all these 
anxieties seem to respond to the same treatments. And lumping the variegated 
world of military post-deployment syndromes into PTSD has been criticised as 
unscientific and unhelpful in finding differentiated treatments.

In 1973 Spitzer led a movement within the APA to remove homosexuality from the 
list of diagnoses. Yet DSM-3 did retain “ego-dystonic homosexuality” – being 
gay but unhappy – as a disease.

If the successive editions of DSM initiated by DSM-3 turn out to be 
scientifically valueless (DSM-5 was launched in 2013), Spitzer’s importance may 
be reduced to having begun the final chapter in the history of psychoanalysis. 
If, on the other hand, they prove to be of enduring value, future generations 
will laud Spitzer as a great psychiatric figure of the late 20th century.

Spitzer’s first two marriages ended in divorce. He is survived by his third 
wife, Janet Williams, and their three children, Noah, Ezra and Gideon; by two 
children, Laura and Daniel, from his second marriage; and by four grandchildren.

• Robert Leopold Spitzer, psychiatrist, born 22 May 1932; died 25 December 2015
 