
Jurors have awarded a University of Virginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/virginia> administrator $3m for her 
portrayal in a now-discredited Rolling Stone magazine article about the 
school’s handling of a brutal gang rape a fraternity house.

The 10-member jury’s decision came after they concluded on Friday that the 
magazine, its publisher and reporter Sabrina Rubin Erdely were responsible for 
defamation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/04/rolling-stone-rape-story-lawsuit-ruling-sabrina-rubin-erdely>
, with actual malice, of former associate dean of students Nicole Eramo in the 
2014 story A Rape on Campus.

Rolling Stone's rape story trial highlights a hardening attitude toward the 
media
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/05/rolling-stone-uva-rape-story-trial-media-lawsuits>
Eramo sued the magazine for $7.5m, claiming it cast her as a villain who 
sought to discourage the woman identified only as Jackie from reporting her 
alleged assault to police. A police investigation found no evidence to back up 
Jackie’s rape claims.

Jurors heard testimony on Monday about the extent to which the story has 
damaged Eramo’s life and reputation before they began deliberating to decide 
how much to award her in damages.

Eramo told jurors that after the story’s publication, she had trouble 
sleeping, feared for her safety and struggled with how to explain what was 
happening to her then-seven-year-old son. One day, she crawled under her desk 
and contemplated suicide as she felt her world come crashing down around her, 
she said. Her husband testified that she told him: “I don’t know that I can 
live anymore.”

“I just wanted to disappear,” said Eramo, who cried throughout much of her 
testimony. “I didn’t know how it was going to be OK.”

She claimed the article prompted the university to move her out of her job as 
an associate dean into a different administrative role that she doesn’t like as 
much because she rarely works with students. When the article was published, 
she was also preparing to undergo a double mastectomy for breast cancer. Eramo 
and her attorneys suggested that the stress she was under could have 
contributed to a post-surgery infection that led to a hospital stay.

“Even the strongest people have a breaking point,” said Tom Clare, an attorney 
for Eramo.

The story roiled the University of Virginia campus, prompted calls for Eramo’s 
resignation and sparked a national conversation about sexual assault at elite 
institutions. Jackie’s story quickly fell apart after reporters from other 
outlets started asking questions and determined that Rolling Stone never spoke 
to the woman’s alleged attackers — or even verified their existence — before 
going to print.

Because the judge determined that Eramo was a public figure, she had to prove 
Rolling Stone made statements with “actual malice,” meaning it knew that what 
it was writing about her was false or entertained serious doubts about whether 
it might be true.

Jurors found that the magazine and its publisher, Wenner Media, acted with 
actual malice because they republished the article on 5 December with an 
editor’s note after they knew about the problems with Jackie’s story. The jury 
also found that Erdely acted with actual malice on six claims: two statements 
in the article and four statements to media outlets after the story was 
published.

Jurors awarded $2m to Eramo for statements made by Erdely and $1m for the 
republication of the article by Rolling Stone and Wenner Media. Rolling Stone 
could appeal the verdict.

Rolling Stone has agreed to pay Erdely’s legal costs and the damages levied 
against her.

Rolling Stone’s attorneys argued throughout the three-week trial that while it 
may have been a mistake to trust Jackie, their portrayal of the university and 
Eramo was fair and accurate.

On Monday, attorney David Paxton told jurors that the magazine was 
“heartbroken” by Friday’s decision and urged them not to be tempted to award a 
large sum of damages in order to send a message to the magazine and the media. 
They’ve already done that with their verdict, Paxton said.

“This was tough medicine to receive,” Paxton said.

Paxton apologized to Eramo, but stressed that Eramo not only kept a job at the 
university after the article was published, but she received a pay raise.

In their damages defense, attorneys for Rolling Stone showed jurors just one 
exhibit: A 2015 Office of Civil Rights report that criticizes the university’s 
handling of sexual assault complaints and specifically mentions that Eramo 
helped to create a “hostile environment” for victims on campus.

Rolling Stone also faces a $25m lawsuit from Phi Kappa Psi, the fraternity 
where Jackie claimed her assault took place. That case is schedule to go to 
trial late next year.
 