
A federal jury on Friday found Rolling Stone magazine, its publisher and a 
reporter defamed a University ofVirginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/virginia> administrator who sued them for 
$7.5m over a discredited story about gang rape at a fraternity house.

The 10-member jury in Charlottesville sided with administrator Nicole Eramo, 
who claimed the article portrayed her as a villain. Jurors found that 
journalist Sabrina Rubin Erdely was responsible for libel, with actual malice, 
and that Rolling Stone and its publisher were also responsible for defaming 
Eramo.

Rolling Stone defamation trial nears end as lawyers say facts of UVA case 
ignored
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/02/rolling-stone-uva-defamation-trial-jackie>
Eramo claimed the 2014 article portrayed her as a villain who discouraged the 
woman identified only as Jackie from reporting the incident to police. A police 
investigation found no evidence to back up Jackie’s claims.

Rolling Stone’s attorneys said there was no evidence that the reporter knew 
what she was writing about Eramo was false or had serious doubts about whether 
it was true.

In a statement on Friday, the magazine apologized to Eramo and anyone else 
affected by the story.

“It is our deep hope that our failings do not deflect from the pervasive 
issues discussed in the piece, and that reporting on sexual assault cases 
ultimately results in campus policies that better protect our students. We will 
continue to publish stories that shine a light on the defining social, 
political and cultural issues of our times, and we will continue to seek the 
truth in every story we publish.”

The jury found that Erdely acted with actual malice on six claims – two 
statements in the article and four statements to media outlets after the story 
was published. Among them was one in which Erdely wrote in the story that Eramo 
had a “nonreaction” when she heard from Jackie that two other women were also 
gang-raped at the same fraternity at the university.

Jurors also found that the decision by Rolling Stone and Wenner Media, the 
magazine’s publisher, to repost the story on 5 December 2014 – with an editor’s 
note acknowledging that there were discrepancies in Jackie’s account – counted 
as “republishing” the debunked story. The magazine did not officially retract 
the story and remove it from its website until the following April.

Jurors will decide at a later date how much to award Eramo in damages.

The jury decision is the latest in a year that brought large judgments against 
other media outlets.

In March, former pro wrestler Hulk Hogan won a $140m invasion-of-privacy 
verdict against Gawker for posting a sex tape of him.Gawker settled with Hogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/02/gawker-media-hulk-hogan-lawsuit-settlement-peter-thiel>
 for $31m this month.

Last month the News & Observer of Raleigh was ordered to pay about $6m in a 
state bureau of investigation agent’s libel lawsuit.

The story about Jackie’s rape set off a firestorm at the university and in 
schools nationwide. Eramo received hundreds of angry letters and emails calling 
her the “dean of rape”, among other things, and faced protesters outside her 
office. The story crumbled after other news outlets began asking questions and 
police found no evidence to back it up. The article was officially retracted in 
April 2015.

It wasn’t Jackie’s job to get the details of her rape correct. It was Rolling 
Stone’s | Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/06/jackie-uva-rape-details-rolling-stone-report>
Over the course of the more than two-week trial, the jury of eight women and 
two men watched 11 hours of video testimony, heard from a dozen live witnesses 
and examined nearly 300 exhibits.

The judge earlier this week dismissed Eramo’s claim that the story, when taken 
as a whole, implied that Eramo was a “false friend” to Jackie. Rolling Stone 
had called that a “critical element” of her case.

Because the judge determined that Eramo was a public figure, she had to prove 
that Rolling Stone made statements with “actual malice”, meaning it knew that 
what it was writing about her was false or entertained serious doubts as to 
whether it might be true.

Eramo’s attorneys argued that Erdely came into the story with a preconceived 
storyline about institutional indifference to sexual assault and intentionally 
disregarded statements and facts about Eramo that didn’t fit that narrative.

They claimed Erdely also ignored red flags about Jackie’s credibility, 
including the changing account of Jackie’s rape and her refusal to let Erdely 
talk to people who could corroborate her story.

Attorneys for Rolling Stone acknowledged that Erdely and her editors made 
serious reporting mistakes, but argued that there was no evidence they acted 
with actual malice.

The magazine’s attorneys said that Erdely and her editors had full faith in 
Jackie until they realized she was no longer credible in early December after 
the story was published. Rolling Stone has agreed to pay all of Erdely’s legal 
costs and any penalties that may be levied against her.
 