
Ghaem Maghami-Karpov, Tehran 2009. White to play.

DK Over the last few weeks we have been looking at the process of elimination 
as a way of finding the correct continuation. Is it appropriate to use that 
method here?

In short, no. The process of elimination is mainly used in situations where 
there is a clear problem that needs solving - one side might be trying to force 
a pawn through in an endgame, or stave off mate when the king is under attack. 
Typically, there would be a limited number of moves to consider, and a 
systematic look at the options is required - just like a computer. In this 
position White does not have a clear goal and there are so many plausible 
continuations that you'd lose on time if you attempted to examine them all. 
Here, we have to think in a more human way, and that means using our experience 
to narrow down the options.

The two strong central pawns would convince me that White should be pressing 
forward and looking for a tangible advantage.

I would first consider a straightforward central advance: 1 gxf5 exf5 2 d5, 
forcing the knight away, 2...Na5, and now 3 Nd4. That knight has a tremendous 
range - the e6 square in particular looks inviting. On the downside, the d-pawn 
is blockaded, and there is a bit of pressure on the c4 pawn. I'll come back to 
this if there is nothing better.

But does White need to commit his central pawns? White has a useful move on 
the kingside: 1 g5. I would like to chip away at the king's pawn cover: 
experience tells me that a central breakthrough will be more difficult to deal 
with when the king is exposed.

But everyone thinks in a different way. In the game, White played 1 c5 bxc5 2 
dxc5 Qf4 3 gxf5 exf5 4 Rbd1. This is another good practical continuation: White 
has created a passed pawn and the rooks control the central files.

Very little actual calculation is involved in the decision on this turn. This 
is all about weighing up positional factors. There is not one continuation that 
is clearly best but, whichever move one chooses, sketching out a plan is 
necessary.

chess@guardian.co.uk <mailto:chess@guardian.co.uk>
 