
Ronald Reagan <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ronald-reagan>, who has 
died aged 93, following complications from Alzheimer's disease, served two 
terms as US president, from 1981 to 1989. He will be long remembered for his 
part in ending the cold war, although what that part was exactly will be long 
disputed.

Perhaps the cold war was certain to end peaceably, rather than in a nuclear 
holocaust; perhaps the dissolution of the Soviet Union was equally certain. But 
it is at least as probable that the rise of Mikhail Gorbachev as Soviet leader 
in 1985, and the presence of the Republican Reagan in the White House, created 
a window of opportunity, which both men, to their credit, took full advantage 
of.

Reagan's presidency also heralded a shift to the right in American politics. 
Partly a cause, partly a consequence, of political realignment, his 1980 
victory over the incumbent president, Democrat Jimmy Carter, was a seismic 
event, which touched off an earthquake similar to those that followed the 
victories of Andrew Jackson in 1828 and Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1932.

Aftershocks of the Reagan earthquake - and the onward march of Republicanism - 
continued to be felt long after his retirement in 1989. In domestic politics, 
then, as well as in foreign affairs, his importance cannot be denied, but, as 
in foreign policy, it will be some time before there is a consensus as to the 
worth of his achievements.

Reagan was born in the very small town of Tampico, Illinois, and grew up in 
another, Dixon, in the same state. He was the younger son of John Edward 
("Jack") Reagan and his wife Nelle Wilson. Jack Reagan, of Irish Catholic 
stock, worked as a salesman in a shoe-shop. He seems to have been a friendly, 
articulate man, and it was he who gave Ronald the nickname "Dutch"; the boy 
thought Ronald was sissy. But Jack was also an alcoholic; much later, Reagan 
often told the story of how, when he was 11, he found his father dead drunk in 
the snow and had to lug him indoors.

The burden of keeping the family together fell on Nelle Reagan. Her attitude 
to her husband was generous: she told her sons that alcoholism was only a 
disease, and she stuck with the sufferer to the last. But she made sure that 
the boys did better, especially Dutch, to whom she was particularly close. She 
saw to it that he graduated from high school and worked his way through 
college. She also inducted him into the Protestant sect, the Disciples of 
Christ, of which she was a zealous member.

He was a boy mad about horses, and remained so: one of his favourite sayings 
was that "there's nothing wrong with the inside of a man that contact with the 
outside of a horse can't put right," and today there are more than a hundred of 
his saddles on display in the Ronald Reagan Memorial Library in California. He 
was a friendly, easy-going youth - some might call him lazy; he was certainly 
anything but bookish. He was too scrawny and shortsighted to become a 
footballer, but he was a promising actor, and his schoolmates voted him Most 
Popular Boy of his year. On graduation from Eureka College, Illinois, in 1932, 
he got a job as a radio sportscaster in Des Moines, Iowa, which he held for 
five years.

Reagan was, at this time, a Democrat, and an enthusiastic admirer of Franklin 
Roosevelt (which he remained). In later years, he explained his shift to the 
Republicans by saying that it was the Democrats who had changed, not him. There 
was some truth in this. To a God-fearing, small-town mid-westerner in the 
1930s, Roosevelt appeared not so much a reformer as a saviour, rescuing 
small-town America from the depression.

Reagan was never going to question the verities of the world he grew up in. 
When the Democratic party became the instrument of those seeking change - 
through welfare intervention and civil rights - he abandoned it. There was an 
element of self-deception (as in so many of his beliefs) in his view that the 
Republican party was committed to his values, deriving from Roosevelt's record 
of social and political reform, rather than to those of big business and 
suburban ambition, but it was not wholly false.

In 1937, Reagan went off to Hollywood to turn his hand to acting. Handsome, 
agreeable and relaxed, he had the attributes that made the fortune of, for 
example, his friend James Stewart. During the second world war, his bad 
eyesight kept him out of the fighting forces, and he passed the years between 
1942 and 1945 making training films for the US Army Air Force First Motion 
Picture Unit. Disappointed not to achieve stardom when peace came, he threw 
himself into the Screen Actors Guild (of which he was president from 1947-52 
and 1959-60) and his serious political education began.

Patiently good-humoured, he proved to be superbly gifted for the fractious 
processes of labour negotiation, and was active in the union for 15 years. He 
began as a conventional Hollywood liberal, but was soon disenchanted by the 
communists in the movie industry and what seemed to him the unduly leftist 
leadership of the American Federation of Labour. He was a staunch cold warrior, 
and enlisted as a secret FBI informant.

This shift to the right accompanied the break-up of his marriage to the actor 
Jane Wyman, whom he had married in 1940, but who was bored by his increasing 
immersion in politics. Four years after their 1948 divorce, Reagan married the 
minor actor Nancy Davis, who shared the views of her own, deeply conservative 
family.

By the early 1960s, Reagan was well-established as a public relations man for 
big business and a fundraiser for conservative groups. His acting career was 
over, but he had great name-recognition, and was becoming well known in 
Californian politics. In 1964, he went national, enlivening the dying days of 
Barry Goldwater's presidential campaign with a television speech which roused 
the converted and reached out beyond them in a way that Goldwater never could. 
The performance impressed the conservative millionaires of California, and, 
with their support, Reagan was elected governor of the state in 1967.

Over the next eight years, he enunciated many of the themes that were to 
characterise his presidency, but was ineffective in turning words into action. 
Those were the years of the golden state's post-1945 boom; everything seemed 
affordable, and Californians saddled themselves with a preposterously lavish 
welfare system and other extravagances, which eventually provoked a major 
taxpayers' revolt when, in the 1970s, the living turned difficult. But by then, 
Reagan had abandoned the governorship for a greater prize.

He and his backers had had their eye on the presidency since 1966. They 
captured it partly because so many competitors destroyed their candidacies by 
crime or incompetence, while others underrated the degree to which Reagan's 
charm could outweigh his age (he was 69 when he was elected president) and 
other drawbacks; but primarily they won because, by 1980, Reagan could combine 
his hold on the conservative vote with an ability to reach out to Democrats and 
former Democrats like himself - "the ones," he said, "who fight the wars, drive 
the trucks and raise the kids, the farmers and firemen, the craftsmen and cops".

This Rooseveltian theme was linked to his cheery promise to make it morning in 
America again - to restore the spirits of a country battered by Vietnam, 
inflation and Jimmy Carter's melancholy moralising. In 1980, Reagan took 51% of 
the popular vote, and carried 45 states, and the Republicans won control of the 
US senate for the first time since 1952.

There followed eight bizarre years (Reagan was re-elected in 1984 with 59 per 
cent of the popular vote and all but one of the states). Helped by his film 
training, he gave an always dignified and warm performance, serenely meeting 
such challenges as increasing deafness, two bouts of cancer, and an 
assassination attempt one year into his presidency, and effortlessly putting 
behind him the gaffes for which be soon became famous - such as his assertion 
that most air pollution was caused by trees.

His personal popularity became so great that it even survived the revelation 
that he and Nancy consulted an astrologer. As Henry Kissinger and others 
noticed, only his speeches and their preparation roused him to hard work, 
though the reward was that he always found the right words for the occasion, 
most impressively at the time of the Challenger space mission disaster in 1986.

Otherwise, he cared very little for the day-to-day management of government. 
His indolence was notorious, so much so that he made jokes about it: "It's true 
that hard work never killed anybody, but I figured why take the chance?"

Appearance to the contrary, however, Reagan knew exactly what he wanted to do 
in his first term, and was shrewd and flexible enough to get most of it. His 
objectives were those of the south Californian business class with which he had 
long allied himself: a large tax cut, a sharply increased defence budget, and 
the defeat of organised labour's pretensions, which was demonstrated by his 
success in smashing the air traffic controllers' strike in 1981. Federal 
regulation was the enemy, and he did what he could to dismantle the legacy of 
Jack Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson's welfare programmes.

His inconsistencies did not faze him: a prophet of the balanced budget and 
cuts in federal spending, he spent more and ran up much larger deficits than 
any president before him. This unplanned Keynesianism produced a long boom, but 
bequeathed grievous problems to his successors. Even more damagingly, it 
persuaded many Americans that they could eat their cake and have it too: since 
Reagan was forever advertising his conservatism, they did not spot the real 
source of their prosperity and, in a damn-the-torpedoes fashion, became 
convinced that it could never be necessary to raise taxes and never be 
imprudent to lower them.

Reagan's inattention to detail, and the hostility of his followers to 
Washington, provided the opportunity for lawbreaking by members of the 
government on a scale never before attained, and there was an endless train of 
resignations, arrests and court cases.

Matters went altogether too far in the Iran-Contra affair, when the White 
House staff (and, almost certainly, the president himself) conspired to sell 
arms to revolutionary Iran, in defiance of declared government policy, and use 
the money to support the insurrectionary forces in Nicaragua, in defiance of 
congressional directives. The chief villain of the piece, Colonel Oliver North, 
was lucky to escape prison, but Reagan himself deserved to be impeached for the 
business. He escaped because few could bear the thought of struggling through 
another Watergate, and, anyway, no one hated or feared him as they had Richard 
Nixon.

Reagan's contradictions were also much on display in his conduct of foreign 
policy. He saw the world in terms of a stark contrast between good and evil, 
and although his vagaries were, to some extent, checked by foreign policy 
professionals (who were among those the Iran-Contra plot was designed to 
circumvent) the drift of policy during his first term was unambiguous.

In the name of anti-communism, every dubious military regime in Latin America 
was propped up, while all leftist movements were opposed. This led to a 
particularly disgraceful line of action in El Salvador and Nicaragua, the 
continuance of the Cuban blockade and a heavy-handed military intervention in 
Grenada in 1983. It was unplanned good fortune that US support of the British 
campaign in the Falklands in 1982 led to the downfall of a murderous regime in 
Argentina.

Reagan and Margaret Thatcher, the prime minister at the time, got on 
excellently. He was attracted to handsome, strong-minded women, and she was 
certainly not immune to the Reagan charm; on his retirement, she said he was 
"the true and perfect gentleman", which chimes well with the remark of another 
conservative lady, Ginger Rogers, that he was "a gentleman whose joy and humour 
lifts all those around him".

It was largely thanks to Reagan that Thatcher acquired such an enthusiastic 
following among American millionaires, and, indeed, by her early announcement 
that Gorbachev was someone the west could do business with, she may have helped 
Reagan to his greatest achievement.

During his first term, he had denounced the "evil empire" of communism, pushed 
for the deployment of the Pershing missile system in western Europe in response 
to the Soviet SS20s, and advocated the Star Wars laser-based, anti-missile 
defence system. All this was in line with US policy in earlier periods of 
crisis, but it was more significant than it seemed at the time that Reagan 
hoped that Star Wars might put an end forever to the nuclear threat.

 It certainly transformed the strategic outlook: the Soviets could not match 
the new US expenditures. Then Gorbachev came to power, the transformation of 
the Soviet system began, and a new era in modern history opened.

Reagan had the wisdom to respond positively to Gorbachev's overtures: indeed, 
when they met at Reykjavik in 1986, he was ready to go a great deal further and 
faster than his advisers liked. He expressed his attitude perfectly in another 
meeting with Gorbachev. "You and I were born in small towns about which 
nobody's ever heard, and no one ever expected anything of either of us ... we 
can do what [the experts] have programmed us to do ... or we can create history 
and do some things that the world will remember in a positive way." Serious 
negotiations began, and culminated in Reagan's 1988 visit to Moscow.

In thus becoming the prophet of permanent detente, Reagan was certainly 
influenced by his secretary of state, George Shultz, and most probably by 
Nancy, who did not want her husband to be remembered as a warmonger. But Reagan 
was nobody's puppet, whatever his appearance of sleepy ignorance, and he will 
be long remembered for his characteristics of boldness and optimism.

He retired happily to his beloved Rancho del Cielo, in California and to the 
$3m Bel-Air house he rented from some admirers. His last major public 
intervention came in 1994, when he issued a statement acknowledging his 
Alzheimer's disease. Even his enemies admitted the courage of his avowal.

He is survived by Nancy, their children, Patti and Ron, and by his adopted son 
Michael, from his first marriage. His daughter Maureen, also from his first 
marriage, predeceased him.

· Ronald Wilson Reagan, politician and actor, born February 6 1911; died June 
5 2004

One for the Gipper

If Ronald Reagan had not risen in politics, he would have been placed in the 
same category of film fame as, say, Dennis Morgan, Wayne Morris or John Payne - 
reliable, all-American leading men, who never made it into the first division.

Once in the White House, he had to suffer from bad actor jokes - particularly 
about being upstaged by a chimpanzee in Bedtime For Bonzo (1951) - but, in 
fact, he was by no means a bad actor, though a rather shallow one. He could 
handle romantic comedy parts with a certain style, and was very good at 
expressing a rugged integrity, best seen in the RKO westerns Cattle Queen Of 
Montana (1954) and Tennessee's Partner (1955).

For most of his screen career - from 1937 to 1952 - Reagan was under contract 
to Warner Bros, where he did what was asked of him as a hero in routine 
adventures, such as Secret Service Of The Air (1938) and Sante Fe Trail (1940), 
in which he portrayed George Armstrong Custer losing Olivia de Havilland to 
Errol Flynn.

In Knute Rockne: All-American (1940), as the dying football player George 
Gipp, he delivered the lines long later associated with him: "When the team's 
up against it, when things are going and the breaks are beating the boys, tell 
them to go in there with all they've got and win just one for the Gipper ..." 
He took the title for his autobiography, Where's The Rest Of Me?, from the 
speech of the character he played in King's Row (1941), who had just had his 
leg amputated.

After the war, Warner Bros gave Reagan star status, though he usually got the 
parts turned down by Humphrey Bogart or Errol Flynn. He was adequate playing 
opposite Virginia Mayo, in The Girl From Jones Beach (1949) and She's Working 
Her Way Through College (1952), but had slightly more gravitas as a district 
attorney prosecuting the Ku Klux Klan in Storm Warning (1951). His limited 
range was revealed in his last film for Warners, The Winning Team (1952), 
playing another sporting hero, baseball player Grover Cleveland Alexander.

As a freelance actor in the 1950s, Reagan turned up in Prisoner Of War (1954) 
as a PoW in Korea, and in Hellcats Of The Navy (1957), with his future wife 
Nancy Davis. His declining movie career was rescued by US television, where he 
hosted the western series Death Valley Days and General Electric Theatre for 
eight years, also finding time to narrate The Truth About Communism.

After a seven-year absence from feature films, he played his first screen 
villain (and last role) in The Killers (1964), Don Siegel's violent version of 
the Hemingway story.

That same year, Gore Vidal, who always insisted on calling Reagan "the acting 
president", failed to cast him in the film of his political play, The Best Man, 
because he thought the actor would be unconvincing as a presidential candidate. 
"If I had cast Reagan in the role," explained Vidal, "it would have sated his 
appetite for the presidency, and we'd be much better off."

Ronald Bergan
 