
Appointing the chair of the BBC Trust Rona Fairhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rona-fairhead> to head the new BBC board 
which will replace it broke the rules on public appointments, a member of the 
culture, media and sport select committee has said.

During a tense committee hearing, incumbent trust chair Rona Fairhead said she 
had been asked first by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport and then 
prime minister David Cameron to become chair of the new board following the 
renewal of the corporation’s charter.

However, SNP MP and former journalist John Nicholson accused Fairhead of 
lobbying Cameron to continue in the role, and said there was widespread concern 
in government that she had been appointed without due process.

“There has been a great deal of controversy about the way in which your 
appointment was made,” said Nicholson. “The cabinet secretary, DCMS and cabinet 
appointments team have complained about the way the appointment was made.”

“The reason they have done so is that the way you were appointed has broken 
rules of due process.”

“This is disturbing because it sets an enormously bad precedent because you 
have been shoehorned into this role without going through the due process 
someone in your position should do.”

The Guardian reported in May that culture secretary John Whittingdale had been 
preparing an “open” recruitment process for a new chair until Fairhead had made 
her case for continuing directly to Number 10.

However, Fairhead denied lobbying Cameron and said she was not subject to a 
competitive process because of the “rigorous” nature of her original 
appointment, similarities between the old and new roles and the need for 
continuity between the trust system and the new unitary board. She said she had 
been happy to continue being chair of the new board, but “equally” happy to 
stand down.

She said: “There was a judgement made by secretary of state and PM that 
continuity was needed … There were clear elements of openness.

Rona Fairhead expected to remain at BBC as head of new governing body
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/bbc-trust-rona-fairhead-new-governing-body>
“My judgment was that the initial process was very full, very rigorous and 
robust, and that’s right. It was their decision to make based on continuity.”

Nicholson said that while he was not questioning Fairhead’s suitability for 
the role, the process by which she was appointed was particularly concerning in 
light of plans for the government to be heavily involved in choosing members of 
the newBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> board. The plans have been 
criticised from a number of sources, including director general Tony Hall.

“All of us believe there should be an open process for appointments. Not least 
since we now know that the sec state wishes to let known to the selection panel 
who the government’s preferred candidates are,” he said.

“Members of the public watching this are going to be very disturbed at the 
lack of independence and transparency.”

A spokesperson for the cabinet secretary said he had not asked the prime 
minister to reverse Fairhead’s appointment. The DCMS and cabinet office 
appointments department had not returned a request for comment at the time of 
publication.
 