
By the year 2010 this government apparently wants to achieve a university 
participation rate of 50% of under 30-year-olds.

In an industry like ours that is facing challenges and change and needs good 
people at the top, I might be taken to task for asking the government to think 
very carefully about this proposal that half of all young people should attend 
university.

It is true that ultra-modern, rapidly changing technology, ever-rising 
customer expectations, the retail revolution and severe competition pose new 
challenges every day for employers and employees in my industry. We have the 
innovation and need the excellence to confront it.

So yes, I need able young graduates, in proportion to the management jobs in 
our business, but I also need valeters, mechanics, technicians, parts and sales 
staff, accounts clerks, IT experts - able young people who we can take on from 
16 or 17, train and develop, and send off to a local college. They do not all 
need a university degree, but they do all need to be enthusiastic, well 
presented and confident in self and work, projecting a good image, capable of 
working on their own and in a team, able to communicate with colleagues and 
customers, adaptable to changing circumstances and able to solve problems. They 
also need good technical knowledge and a high level of competence in their 
chosen discipline.

If these staff develop the desire, in due course, to get a foundation degree 
and go on to higher things and if they are capable, that's positive, but I 
don't want all those young people taken out of our reach. When they arrive at 
21 or 22 with a degree, they still need a lot of training, and by then they are 
very expensive.

I put the question: can the economy of the country afford for these young 
people to be out of the productive labour market for three or four years?

The truth is that skills are needed at all levels to cope with change and 
customer requirements. Many are practical skills that are best learnt both on 
and off the job. There's a lot more to achievement and excellence than a 
university education.

We need to be sure that students and the businesses for which they are being 
trained will fully benefit. The costs look huge and, unless the courses 
undertaken are relevant, then it will be a very expensive and 
counter-productive exercise.

I'm not opposed to more people going to university, but this government needs 
to ensure that the courses relate to future actual jobs and that the process is 
employer-friendly and employer-led, as well as market-driven.

In addition could there please be a guarantee that students are able to read, 
write and add up?

But this is up to schools and parents, not the universities. The Department 
for Education and Skills needs to ensure that the schools deliver young people 
both to further training and to employment with these basic skills, so that we 
can focus on building on their skills through modern apprenticeships and the 
like, and not have to ensure they have them to start with.

However, we must not just focus on the young; any lifting of standards must 
offer an equal opportunity to those in work who can benefit themselves and 
their employers, and hence the country, by improving their skills.

Some industries need more management and supervisory staff, and others need 
employees with the precise training that only a university course can provide. 
But industries like mine, where practical skills are regularly updated, are 
vital to future success. A concentration on university entrance figures must 
not be at the expense of these needs.

Finally, a plea to colleges and universities to make sure that they have 
trained staff to deal with the increased numbers of students. To get the best 
out of our students we need colleges to ensure that lecturers and training 
instructors all have up-to-the-minute skills, are kept up to date with teaching 
methods and have equipment that properly relates to the knowledge and skills 
students need to absorb.

Having spent much of my life promoting training and education I want to be 
sure we get improvement, but get it right.

Alan Clark is chairman of the Motor Industry National Training Organisation 
and of Collier Motor Holdings.
 