
Paul Roy, the chairman of the British Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority>, said 
yesterday that he is "hopeful" that the latest knife-edge agreement on the 
betting levy will also be the last. Racing and the bookmakers agreed a new 
scheme on Friday, just hours before the deadline that would have forced a 
determination by the government, and both sides will now work to modernise and 
streamline the process ahead of next year's negotiations.

In what seems to be an acknowledgement that racing's ambitions for a truly 
commercial funding arrangement are unlikely to be realised, Roy said that the 
Levy Board itself is now fully engaged in modernising the system.

"The whole process is pretty archaic and I think there is room for fundamental 
change," Roy said. "What we want is a proper relationship between racing and 
the bookmakers, and we are all working with the same intention, which is to 
maximise profitability. The bookmaking industry is quite a broad church and you 
could say the same of racing, but Chris [Bell] of Ladbrokes managed to pull his 
side together and we managed to pull racing together and we have avoided a 
determination, which no-one wanted."

An important part of Friday's deal was the BHA's agreement to re-instate 
racing on a number of Sundays early next year which had previously been left 
blank.

"This isn't intended to be a cheap political shot," Roy said, "but the 
bookmakers have consistently talked about other products, whether it be virtual 
racing, FOBTs or whatever, and how racing is lessening in importance, but the 
interesting thing [in the negotiations] was their requirement very much to put 
on more racing."

The key element of the deal from racing's point of view is that the BHA has 
maintained the "headline rate of 10%" of bookmakers' gross profits as the basis 
of their Levy payments. Roy, a City man for 30 years, believes this is 
particularly important in the current financial climate.

"I don't want to sound like a harbinger of doom," Roy said, "but racing needs 
to have a reality check. In my first speech as BHA chairman [in 2007] I said my 
fear for racing was that it had not put on the poundage by growing its customer 
base and ownership and all those sort of things during a period of 
unprecedented wealth creation, and of what might happen when the economy 
entered a downturn."

Roy's colours have been a familiar sight on British tracks in recent years. 
Even he, though, is cutting back on his bloodstock interests. "In 30 years, 
I've never seen the sort of dislocation in the markets that we have now," he 
said.

"I've not been as active at the sales as I have been before," Roy said, "and 
I've probably bought half as many horses as last year, though in part that is 
due to home-breds taking up the slack. I would expect that there will be a lot 
of people in the same boat."
 