
The Royal Society is calling for A-levels to be overhauled to tackle the 
declining numbers of teenagers studying sciences.

Across the UK, just 17% of 16- to 18-year-olds took one or more science 
A-levels in 2009, a report by the society says, and British universities 
produce fewer than 10,000 science graduates each year.

It calls for a broader qualification that would give more teenagers the chance 
to pursue science and maths as part of a wider course of study.

An increasing number of schools do not enter any candidates at all in physics 
or maths, the report finds. In 2009, nearly 500 schools and colleges in England 
did not enter a single candidate in A-level physics, the least popular of the 
three core sciences. The picture is different in Scotland, where 90% of schools 
and colleges put candidates forward for physics.

The report finds a sharp fall in the number of selective schools putting 
forward candidates for physics. In 2005, every private school in the UK had 
physics candidates, but in 2009 that had dropped to 89%. "What makes this trend 
especially worrying is that historically the independent sector has been the 
major provider of physics undergraduates to many of the UK's leading 
universities," the report says.

A decrease in the proportion of further education colleges offering physics 
may reflect the economic pressures they are under not to offer classes for 
small numbers of students.

The report suggests that the decline in provision is due to the difficulty of 
finding new physics specialists to replace teachers who retire. There are too 
few candidates to study science at degree level, which creates a vicious circle 
as there are fewer graduates with the knowledge to be specialist science and 
maths teachers.

Though the actual numbers of teenagers taking sciences in England grew by 8% 
between 2005 and 2009, it fell as a proportion of the age group doing A-levels, 
the report says. The percentage of students taking other sciences, such as 
geology and electronics, declined slightly, from 1.6% of the total age group to 
1.4%.

The report calls for the introduction of an "A-level based baccalaureate", 
which would allow teenagers to study more science and maths alongside other 
subjects.

Professor Athene Donald <https://www.theguardian.com/science/athene-donald>, 
chair of the Royal Society education committee, said: "At a time of economic 
uncertainty, when science and scientists can play a key role in revitalising 
the UK's financial outlook, it is deeply worrying to find that numbers of 
A-level science students are at such low levels.

"There can be no doubt that the lack of science and mathematics specialist 
teachers plays a significant role in the decline in participation in A-levels 
in these subjects."

The report also highlights gaps in the provision of science education at 
university level. "An A-level student who lives in Norwich and wants to study 
physics at university would have to travel to London to do so, or a similar 
distance," it says.

The government's white paper on schools, published last year, outlined plans 
to overhaul A-levels to provide "the depth of synoptic learning which the best 
universities value". Ministers have also introduced a new award at GCSE, the 
English bac, which will be given to students with good passes in a range of 
academic subjects including science.

Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> minister Nick Gibb 
said: "As other countries make vast improvements in science and maths 
education, the UK continues to fall down international league tables and we now 
languish at 27th in the world for maths, and 16th for science.

"The schools white paper reflects the importance this government attaches to 
these subjects by exploring ways in which to attract the best graduates in 
science and maths into the teaching profession as well as improving continued 
professional development for teachers of all subjects.

"We are already committed to looking at new ways to encourage the take-up of 
science qualifications, in particular physics, at all levels."
 