
Cold turkey and "Come on, Kauto!" have been Boxing Day staples since 2006, and 
though Kauto Star is now two months into retirement from racing, the tradition 
may yet endure. The five-times winner of theKing George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> will parade at Kempton 
Park on Wednesday before the feature race of the Christmas programme, but then 
it will be time to step aside and, perhaps, let his little brother take over.

The presence of Kauto Stone in the field for this King George may certainly 
cause some double-takes as casual fans tune in for one of those fixed-point 
events that are an essential part of the holiday season. He is trained by Paul 
Nicholls too, who has just seenKauto Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kauto-star> leave his stable for a new 
career in dressage, and will be ridden by Ruby Walsh – but as Walsh points out, 
the similarities end there.

"The only thing that the two of them have in common is their mother," Walsh 
said at Ascot on Saturday. "Kauto Stone is small and chestnut, Kauto Star was 
big and bay, but it would be wonderful if Kauto Stone could stick his name on 
the King George straight after Kauto Star.

"It's great publicity for racing to have a day and a race like this one that 
people want to watch, and it should be a very good race. It's an open, 
competitive King George but still a very good race, and you'd have to think he 
has a reasonable each-way chance."

Kauto Stone does not have the white blaze down his face that made his 
half-brother so distinctive either, but his career to date has traced a broadly 
similar path to the one followed by Kauto Star in his early days.

Both horses started their careers in France, showing high-class form as 
four‑year-olds, and while Kauto Star was kept to hurdles, Kauto Stone was good 
enough to win a Grade One event over fences two seasons ago. Both horses 
started out their British careers at the minimum trip of two miles, and both 
were fallers in a Champion Chase at the Cheltenham Festival, though Kauto Stone 
fell at the first in last season's renewal while Kauto Star got as far as the 
third in 2006.

"Kauto Stone's quite a small horse and that maybe suited him a little bit 
better, with 10st 7lb on his back or 10st 10lb," Walsh says. "But in his first 
race this season he won at Grade One at Down Royal over three miles in heavy 
ground, so we know that won't bother him and that he gets the trip.

"A lot of the others are doubtful stayers, because they are all running away 
from Sprinter Sacre [the hot favourite for this season's Queen Mother Champion 
Chase at Cheltenham]. For years, horses went back to the shorter trip to run 
away from Kauto Star, now it's the opposite.

"You could say that Long Run is the only confirmed stayer among them, although 
Grands Crus won a Feltham [Novice Chase over three miles]. Junior is an 
out-and-out stayer but he hasn't got the class, but Long Run has won a Gold Cup 
over three-and-a-quarter.

"Riverside Theatre hasn't won beyond two-and-a-half miles, Captain Chris is 
the same, Cue Card too. There are a lot of question marks there and it's going 
to make for a mouth-watering contest atKempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton>. Kauto Stone is an 8-1 or 10-1 
chance, but plenty of those have won a King George and plenty will win it in 
future."

Walsh originally expected to be riding Al Ferof, the Paddy Power Handicap 
Chase winner, in Wednesday's race, until he was ruled out with a leg injury 
last Monday. The Irishman's summary of the chances of the British-trained 
runners is typically succinct, and British-trained is what all the runners will 
be following the news that Sir Des Champs, one of the leading candidates for 
the Gold Cup in March, will stay at home to contest the Lexus Chase at 
Leopardstown's Christmas meeting instead.

The interesting thing about Kauto Stone with regard to the King George is not 
so much his name or even his pedigree, but that he remains a blank canvas over 
three miles. With the ground now heavy in place at Kempton, his stamina could 
certainly come into play on Wednesday and is a fair each-way proposition at the 
current prices.

In terms of a win bet, though, the value may lie with Cue Card, another 
six-year-old who already has plenty of top-class form to his name. His stamina 
is unproven but his class has been evident ever since his victory in the 
Champion Bumper at Cheltenham in March 2010. He looked better than ever in the 
Haldon Gold Cup last time out, and is a very solid bet at odds of around 11-2.
 