
Runners who wear trainers with no cushioning and land on the ball rather than 
the heel of the foot significantly reduce the risk of injury, according to a 
study.

Researchers compared how quickly the force acts when runners’ feet hit the 
ground – known as the loading rate – which has been shown to influence injury 
risk.

Knees, stretching and heel-striking: three running myths debunked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/18/knees-stretching-heel-striking-three-running-myths-debunked>
The study of 29 runners, published in the Medicine & Science in Sports & 
Exercise journal, found significantly lower loading rates for those who wore 
so-called minimal trainers and landed on the ball of their foot, compared with 
people in normal running shoes, regardless of whether the latter landed on the 
heel or ball of the foot.

The lead researcher, Dr Hannah Rice of the University of Exeter, said: “So 
many people use running as a means of reducing the risk of chronic diseases, 
but about three-quarters of runners typically get injured in a year.

“Footwear is easily modifiable, but many runners are misguided when it comes 
to buying new trainers. This research shows that running in minimal shoes and 
landing on the balls of your feet reduces loading rates and may therefore 
reduce the risk of injury.”

Running <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/running> continues to grow 
in popularity but injury rates have not fallen despite decades of research 
aimed at reducing them.

Runners in cushioned footwear tend to land on the heel – known as a “rearfoot 
strike” – while those who run barefoot are more likely to land on the ball of 
the foot – a “forefoot strike”.

Rearfoot strike runners experience an abrupt vertical impact force each time 
the foot hits the ground. The impact force is often missing when running with a 
forefoot strike, but previous research has shown that forward/backward and 
sideways forces can be higher with a forefoot strike, meaning the total force 
is similar.

Total force seems to be similar between foot strikes if wearing modern, 
cushioned trainers. “This seems to suggest that, for runners in traditional, 
cushioned running shoes, foot strike pattern may not matter for injury risk.

“However, we suspected that the same may not be true of runners who regularly 
use minimal shoes, which don’t have the cushioning provided by traditional 
running shoes,” Rice said.

“Our research tells us that becoming accustomed to running with a forefoot 
strike in shoes that lack cushioning promotes a landing with the lowest loading 
rates, and this may be beneficial in reducing the risk of injury.”

Any transition to new footwear or to a different foot strike pattern should be 
undertaken gradually and with guidance, she said.

The research was conducted at the Spaulding National Running Center at Harvard 
Medical School.
“We found that when running in trainers with no cushioning and landing on the 
ball of the foot, the loading rate is lower than when running in cushioned 
shoes, however you land,” Rice said.
“The loading rate is a useful measure, as it tells us how fast the forces are 
acting, and higher values have been associated with running injury. So in 
summary, our paper found that running in shoes that have no cushioning and 
landing on the ball of your foot may reduce the risk of injury in runners.”
Minimal shoes, Rice said, have very little or no cushioning, a heel-toe drop 
of less than or equal to 4mm (0.16 inches), and a stack height of less than or 
equal to 16mm. “This is information which manufacturers and footwear shops 
should be able to provide,” she said.
 