
Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> was 
devastated by the “closeness” between his then-wife Wendi Deng and Tony Blair, 
News Corp’s longest-serving editor has revealed in a new book.


The alleged closeness between the mother of his two youngest children and 
Blair, a man Murdoch had been “financially and politically generous” to, was 
reported to the family by domestic staff, according to Chris Mitchell, the 
former editor-in-chief of the Australian newspaper.


“He was clearly lonely and struggling to sleep at night for the first few 
months after the separation,” Mitchell writes about his employer in Making 
Headlines. “He rang much more often than he had previously. And he was frank 
about his sleep problems, sore back and the hurt he was feeling about what had 
happened between Wendi andTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>.


“It was clear that my boss had been devastated by the closeness he found 
between his wife and his former friend. I never asked what that was, but it is 
clear that his Australian family, alerted by domestic staff, rang the bell on 
whatever was going on when Rupert was out of town.”

Marrying Rupert Murdoch is ‘absolutely wonderful’, says Jerry Hall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/05/rupert-murdoch-and-jerry-hall-hold-second-wedding-ceremony-in-church>
Murdoch himself said something similar in an interview with Fortune magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/apr/10/rupert-murdoch-lachlan-murdoch>
 in 2014. But Blair has always forcefully denied suggestions of an affair with 
Deng and says he will not speak about the allegations. Deng has declined to 
comment. Friends of both Deng and Blair have said they were friends and no more 
and that Blair was a sympathetic intermediary and confidant in a troubled 
marriage.

Mitchell wrote: “It seemed to me at the time that, in the post-phone-hacking 
media world, Rupert’s marriage breakdown was treated vindictively and that a 
man well in to his 80s losing a wife with whom he had fathered two children was 
given no room to grieve for his loss.”

But, Mitchell says, Murdoch is much happier now in his fourth marriage to model
Jerry Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jerry-hall>, “a wonderfully 
grounded Texan woman with a big heart and big personality”.

Mitchell describes Murdoch as “a loving patriarch and husband, not at all the 
caricature so beloved of the leftwing media. And of course there was an added 
benefit to marrying his new bride in Fleet Street. He could yet again thumb his 
nose at the Guardian luvvies who had tried so hard to bring him down with the 
phone-hacking story.”

After 42 years in journalism, most of it working for News Corp Australia, 
Mitchell explains he wanted to provide some balance to the “often hysterical 
discussion” about the Murdoch family and their media empire, which he says are 
often denigrated by the Guardian, ABC and Fairfax Media in Australia.


The Queensland journalist, who edited Brisbane’s Courier Mail and the 
Australian newspaper for 24 years and now writes a media column in the 
Australian, describes his relationship with the media proprietor as not close 
but “friendly and trusting” and says they are of a like mind. “The unvarnished 
truth is that I did not need Rupert directing me,” he says. “All my campaigns 
were my own and they were usually my own ideas. And of course because our world 
views are similar I never ran any of those ideas past Rupert.”

The 59-year-old who retired at the end of 2015 writes very warmly about 
Murdoch, saying his passion for journalism is undiminished well into his 80s 
and his grasp of accounting is unrivalled in the company. “As he left – this 
then 83-year-old who still had the world at his feet – I felt great admiration 
for him and the deft touch with which he had carried 60 years of publishing 
genius,” he writes of a characteristic visit to his office by Murdoch.

The book, published by Melbourne University Press on Thursday, provides an 
insight into the political leanings of his sons Lachlan and James. Lachlan 
worked with Mitchell at Queensland Newspapers when he was 22 and later in 
Sydney as publisher of the Australian.


Mitchell writes that while James is “very progressive”, in particular on the 
issue of climate change, Lachlan is very conservative politically and 
“distinctly sceptical” about the science of global warming.


He recalls a private function at which the former prime minister Tony Abbott 
impressed him by being passionately committed to saving the lives ofAndrew Chan 
and Myuran Sukumaran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/28/bali-nine-pair-executed-indonesia>
, who he believed had been reformed in jail in Bali. The two men, members of 
the so-called Bali Nine, were executed in Indonesia for drug offences. Lachlan 
“argued against Tony’s compassion, saying that Chan and Sukumaran deserved 
exactly what they were about to get”, Mitchell writes.


“As with his views on gun control in the United States, Lachlan’s conservatism 
is more vigorous than that of any Australian politician, Abbott included, and 
usually to the right of his father’s views,” he said.


Mitchell reveals the often close relationship between editors, politicians and 
media proprietors, detailing private parties and dinners at which the political 
and media elite discuss politics and editors are asked for their opinion on 
policy.


He says Rupert Murdoch was keen to find out all about Labor leader Kevin Rudd 
before the 2007 election even though he was a fan of John Howard’s. Mitchell 
relates how he even managed to convince Murdoch to allow the Australian to back 
Rudd in the final editorial of the 2007 election campaign. He says he later 
regretted that decision.


“You know, Chris, despite what all the lefties say about me, I have helped 
elect more than my fair share of Labor governments, and I have often lived to 
regret it,” Murdoch is quoted as saying.


Chris Mitchell memoir reveals six-figure pay rise after giving Rupert Murdoch 
ultimatum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/12/chris-mitchell-memoir-reveals-six-figure-pay-rise-after-giving-rupert-murdoch-ultimatum>
Mitchell takes some time to debunk a claim by historian Robert Manne and 
others that“Rupert Murdoch decided to use his Australian newspapers to destroy 
the government of Julia Gillard” 
<https://www.themonthly.com.au/issue/2013/november/1383224400/robert-manne/why-rupert-murdoch-can-t-be-stopped>
 at a conference in the US in 2010.


Mitchell says the Carmel conference with Australian editors and Wall Street 
Journal editor Robert Thomson, New York Post editor Col Allan and former Sun 
editor Rebekah Brooks was focused on how to maintain the business in the face 
of digital disruption not on a campaign to destroy Gillard.


“Julia Gillard had been persuaded by her more paranoid ministers, treasurer 
Wayne Swan and minister for communications Stephen Conroy, that a perfectly 
innocent gathering of Australian editors at a golf resort outside Carmel, near 
Rupert’s northern California ranch, was the beginning of a carefully 
orchestrated campaign to overthrow the government.


“One session concerned newspaper campaigns, but this was somehow construed by 
the Labor party as a session to discuss a possible campaign against the 
government.”


Unsurprisingly, Mitchell is scathing about Fairfax, saying the only great 
editor was John Alexander who left the Sydney Morning Herald in the 1990s, and 
unfavourably compares it with the culture of News Corp. “Rupert’s subjective 
judgment, clearly the best in the print media world, now holds sway over an 
editor’s fate,” he writes.
 