
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has launched an 
investigation into claims that tens of thousands of girls in remote mountain 
areas, some as young as three months’ old, have been forced to undergo female 
genital mutilation.


The general prosecutor’s office has acted following allegations that the 
life-threatening practice has been taking place “unchecked by the authorities” 
in the republic of Dagestan, Russia’s state-run news agency Tass reported.

Tough prison sentences 'will not end FGM in Dagestan'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/23/tough-prison-sentences-will-not-end-fgm-in-dagestan>
The inquiry comes after the human rights organisation Russian Justice 
Initiative (RJI) released detailed evidence that tens of thousands of girls, 
including some as young as three months’ old, have been subjected to FGM in 
remote mountain areas of Dagestan, a restive Russian republic in the North 
Caucasus region.

The RJI report said the practice had been going on “without any attention 
whatsoever from the authorities”, and that FGM was seen in some villages as an 
initiation ceremony and “necessary to curb a woman’s sexuality”.

Russia’s deputy prosecutor Viktoria Grinya, in a letter published by the 
Russian news agency RIA, had ordered a “rapid response” from the Dagestani 
government “into potential infringements of the law”.

Although there is no law specifically banning FGM in Russia, the practice is 
considered illegal under article 111 of the criminal code of causing serious 
harm to human health. Since the publication of RJI’s report, a bill to 
specifically criminalise FGM has been drafted.

In August, the Dagestani cleric Ismail Berdiyev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/23/tough-prison-sentences-will-not-end-fgm-in-dagestan>
described FGM as a Dagestani Muslim tradition that was a solution to the 
“problem of promiscuity in women in general”.

He was supported by Vsevolod Chaplin, an Orthodox Christian leader, who said 
on Facebook that traditional practices should be allowed to continue without 
interference.

Both men have since retracted some of their statements. Chaplin said: “I admit 
that what I have learned over the past couple of days about this procedure – at 
least in its extreme forms – motivates me to change my attitude.” However, he 
added that a woman’s primary role was to serve her family, and suggested that 
lowering the age of consent should be debated because “the sooner she marries 
the better”.

Dagestan has been the scene of clashes between Russian forces and Islamist 
insurgents since the 1990s and ethnic tensions run high. It is also an area 
where local tribal and Muslim codes often hold more weight than Russian law.

The Guardian has seen interviews conducted by Moscow-based journalist Marina 
Akhmedova, who recently travelled to Dagestan to research FGM in the area. She 
said female cutting was linked to the lack of rights for women in Dagestan, 
their low status within the family and limited work opportunities.

She said many of the women she interviewed talked about the threat of honour 
killings if a girl did not behave according toadats (mountain law). 

“I believe parents use circumcision as a way of protection from honour 
killings. They believe if a woman doesn’t have a clitoris she won’t be 
interested in sex and won’t have it before marriage. The villages support 
killings of such girls.”

Many campaign groups said they were not aware of the situation in Dagestan 
until the report was published. The United Nations Population Fund said Russia 
was not on the radar of the UN organisations that fight to end FGM.

Equality Now welcomed the research but said further work was needed to get a 
clearer picture of the prevalence of FGM in Russia. Stop FGM Middle East said 
it had been made aware of FGM taking place in Dagestan only recently by the 
filmmaker John Chua, who visited the region to conduct interviews.

Meanwhile, some activists claim the RJI report into FGM was politically 
motivated as it was released just weeks before the parliamentary elections.

According to the Moscow Times, presidential human rights council member and 
journalist Maxim Shevchenko called the RJI report “a deeply inappropriate hoax” 
perpetrated by liberal political forces in order to destabilise Dagestan.

A statement issued by Russia’s health ministry said: “The international 
medical community concurs that the so-called female circumcision is a 
mutilating practice and is not anything positive.” Dagestan’s national affairs 
ministry and the local children’s ombudsman issued similar statements.

 