
Russia’s parliament has passed harsh anti-terrorism measures that human rights 
campaigners including the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden say will roll back 
personal freedoms and privacy.


The lower house of parliament voted 325 to 1 on Friday to adopt the “Yarovaya 
law”, a package of amendments authored by the ruling UnitedRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> party member Irina Yarovaya, who is 
known for previous legislative crackdowns on protesters and non-governmental 
organisations.

Snowden, who has lived in Russia since receiving asylum in 2013, tweeted on 
Saturday that the “Big Brother law” was an “unworkable, unjustifiable violation 
of rights” that would “take money and liberty from every Russian without 
improving safety”.

The legislation makes it a crime to not warn the authorities of “reliable” 
information about planned terrorist attacks, armed uprisings, hijacking and 
several other crimes. Expressing approval of terrorism on the internet will now 
be punishable with up to seven years in prison.

The legislation obliges telephone and internet providers to store records of 
all communications for six months and all metadata for three years, as well as 
help intelligence agencies decode encrypted messaging services. Telecoms firms 
have complained that users rather than providers typically possess the 
encryption keys, and that storing this huge amount of information would require 
expensive new infrastructure.

It also appears to take aim at Kremlin opponents and protesters. The maximum 
punishment for extremism, a charge that has been increasingly brought against 
social media users critical of Russia’s involvement in Ukraine, will be 
increased from four to eight years in prison. Encouraging people to take part 
in “mass disturbances” will become a crime punishable by five to 10 years in 
prison.

Another amendment restricts missionary work to specially designated areas, 
drawing criticism from Muslim, Jewish and Russian Orthodox organisations.

The legislation, which was ostensibly adopted as a response to the October 
bombing of a Russian passenger jet over Egypt, will almost certainly be passed 
by the upper chamber and signed into law by the Russian president,Vladimir Putin
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>.

Tanya Lokshina, the Russia programme director for Human Rights Watch, called 
it an attack on freedom of expression, freedom of conscience and the right to 
privacy that gives law enforcement unreasonably broad powers.

“It’s very infamous provision of Soviet law they’re basically re-enacting, and 
it’s problematic because there’s no legal clarity,” Lokshina said of the 
requirement to warn authorities of crimes planned by others. “It’s clearly 
designed for selective implementation.”

A measure allowing Russians to be stripped of their citizenship following a 
terrorist conviction or membership in a foreign army, court or security service 
was removed before the vote.
 