
A few weeks ago, Michael Jordan helped induct Russell Westbrook into the 
Oklahoma Hall of Fame and called himself a fan of the Thunder guard’s game.

Now, Westbrook has accomplished something no one has since Jordan — he became 
the first player with five consecutive triple-doubles since Jordan had seven 
straight in 1989. Westbrook had 28 points, 17 rebounds and 12 assists on Sunday 
night, and theOklahoma City Thunder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/oklahoma-city-thunder> beat the New Orleans 
Pelicans 101-92.

NBA tanking may be traumatic but it works
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/30/nba-tanking-dallas-mavericks>
The Thunder have won all five games during Westbrook’s triple-double stretch, 
and 26 of 28 the past two years when he gets one. Westbrook said he doesn’t 
worry about the numbers.

“I just play, honestly,” he said. “I don’t want to get in a conversation of if 
I’m going to do it every night. I just go out and compete at a high level every 
night, like I’ve been doing since I’ve been in theNBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba>.”

Westbrook is still averaging a triple-double for the season with averages of 
31.0 points, 10.8 rebounds and 11.3 assists through 21 games. It was his 10th 
triple-double of the season and the 47th of his career.

He’s more concerned with the fact that the Thunder have recovered from a rough 
stretch and improved to 13-8. “I just like to win, brother,” he said. 
“Honestly, that’s the most important part. Making sure my guys are good, and 
making sure everybody’s happy with their games, and making sure we win the 
game.”

Enes Kanter had 17 points and 10 rebounds and Victor Oladipo added 15 points 
for the Thunder. Anthony Davis, the NBA’s leading scorer, had 37 points and 15 
rebounds for the Pelicans.

Buddy Hield, who led nearby Oklahoma to the Final Four last season, scored 16 
points in his first game back in the state. The last time he had played in 
Oklahoma, he scored 36 points to help the Sooners beat VCU and advance to the 
Sweet 16. In this game, he made 6 of 12 shots and 4 of 7 3-pointers.

“I haven’t felt like that in a long time,” Hield said. “It’s so great to get 
back in there and get a rhythm and see the ball go through the net. I’ve been 
struggling the last couple games, but I feel more confident.”

Oklahoma City led 49-41 at halftime. Westbrook had 12 points, nine rebounds 
and six assists at the break, and Davis kept the Pelicans in it with 24 points 
and 10 rebounds.

Westbrook threw down a vicious right-handed jam on a drive down the middle in 
the third quarter that gave Oklahoma City a 57-47 lead. He clinched the 
triple-double on an assist to Kanter for a dunk with 2:14 left in the third 
quarter. The Thunder took a 78-66 lead into the fourth quarter.

Hield drained a 3-pointer to cut Oklahoma City’s lead to four with just under 
two minutes to go, but Westbrook’s 3 with 51.3 seconds to go bumped the 
Thunder’s lead back to 99-92.

“We were still right there, and given the opportunity, Russell’s going to make 
a big play,” Pelicans coach Alvin Gentry said. “The big 3-pointer that he made 
was probably the difference in the game,”
 