
Russia has been “a very malign influence” while leading the Syrian peace 
initiative involving Iran and Turkey, the Foreign Office ministerAlan Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan> has said, adding he is not 
convinced Moscow wants to solve the crisis.

Under subtle pressure to tone down the UK’s traditionally tough stance on 
Russia due toDonald Trump’s sympathy towards Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/donald-trump-russia-vladimir-putin-us-election-hack>
, Duncan gave no sign of a change of British course, accusing Russia of waging 
political cyberwars, straying from the truth and undermining the territorial 
integrity of other countries. He said Russia was involved in “a power play and 
a calculated deliberate extension of its sphere of influence”.

Speaking to the foreign affairs select committee alongside Duncan, the Foreign 
Office political director, Sir Tim Barrow, said the UK was not going to support 
any initiative that “does not take account of the needs of the Syrian people 
and an inclusive government”.

Capitalising on the recapture of eastern Aleppo, Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> hosted a joint peace summit with 
Iran and Turkey on Tuesday, in a move that exposes Washington’s current loss of 
influence.

Neil Crompton, the Foreign Office Middle East director, accused Russia of 
changing its rationale for intervention inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and said the dominant defeated forces 
in eastern Aleppo had been moderate fighters and not, as Russia claimed, the 
supporters of al-Nusra, the al-Qaida-linked Syrian group.


He said the number of al-Nusra fighters in Aleppo had been between 200 and 
300, one of the lowest numbers advanced by western powers. “We are talking 
about hundreds, not thousands. The rest are moderate opposition fighters.”

Challenged by Crispin Blunt, the chairman of the foreign affairs select 
committee, that there was a “vanishingly small” number of moderate fighters, 
and instead mainly “various grades of Islamist fighters”, Crompton insisted the 
Russians falsely tried to present all fighters as being linked to al-Qaida.

Barrow said that “the tactics of the regime, including barrel bombs, are in 
our view more likely than not to create radicalisation rather than managing to 
defeat terrorist elements. There is a complex picture that shifts under the 
pressure of the battlefield.”

 Duncan challenged Russian claims that the “utterly heinous” murder of its 
ambassador in Turkey was “the fault of the west”, a claim being made in Russian 
and Turkish media where it is argued that the assassin was a supporter of 
Fethullah Gülen, a Turkish cleric who has been given asylum in the US.

 Duncan said it was undeniable that Russia was using cyber warfare to 
interfere in western democratic politics. “There is no doubt that, using modern 
technology, they are interfering in many parts of the world.”


He said Russia had seriously interfered in recent Montenegro elections. He 
also referred to claims by the CIA thatRussia interfered in the US presidential 
elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/robert-gates-russia-election-interference-donald-trump-hillary-clinton>
, adding: “Quite what the effect was, or exactly what they did in the US, is 
unclear but we have to accept it as a fact that cyber warfare is now a part of 
modern life and the Russians are using it as best they can to interfere in 
politics. That is one of the threats we have to be aware of, and be on guard. 
The world is changing and there are new threats.”

Duncan said the UK wanted respectful engagement with Russia, but he did not 
hold back in his criticism of Russian behaviour in Aleppo: “You probably had 
3,000 civilians killed by Russian activity, a lot of what was destroyed was 
medical activity, including hospitals. At one point half a million [people] 
were under siege, and the Russians were blocking humanitarian aid and the 
ability of people to leave. Nothing can get more severe than that.”


Asked if Russia had committed war crimes in Syria, Crompton said: “If there 
had been deliberate targeting of civilians, that would put them on the wrong 
side of international humanitarian law.”

The UK has asked a UN commission of inquiry to investigate whether war crimes 
have been committed by the Syrian regime or the Russians, and expressed support 
for moves to circumvent the Russian veto at the UN security council by 
convening a meeting of the UN general assembly.

Duncan insisted the UK would offer Russia respectful engagement, and would not 
speak to Moscow in a “hectoring, lecturing or shrill way”.


Barrow, a former ambassador to Moscow, admitted it took time after the 
collapse of the USSR for the UK “to find the right point of balance. I think at 
some point after the collapse of the Soviet Union that there was a presumed 
convergence, an end of history. Well, history did not stop and history looms 
large.”


But the officials admitted that no UK minister had visited Moscow for more 
than a year.
 