
The writer Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, who has died aged 85, achieved her greatest 
fame late in life, and for work she had once dismissed as a hobby – listing 
"writing film scripts" as a recreation in Who's Who. Her original screenplays 
and adaptations of literary classics for the film producerIsmail Merchant 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2005/may/26/guardianobituaries.film> and the 
director James Ivory were met with box-office and critical success. The trio 
met in 1961, and almost immediately became collaborators, as well as close and 
lifelong friends.

Soon after Merchant and Ivory themselves met (in New York), Merchant proposed 
that they make a film of Jhabvala's early novel The Householder (1960). The 
pair then went to Delhi and asked her to sell them the book and write a 
screenplay of it in eight days flat. Over the next five decades, she wrote 23 
screenplays. The collaborations included adaptations of EM Forster's A Room 
with a View (1985) and Howards End (1992), for both of which Jhabvala won 
Academy Awards; and Henry James's The Bostonians (1984) and Kazuo Ishiguro's 
The Remains of the Day (1993). Jhabvala's two Oscars put her in the incongruous 
company of Bette Davis andElizabeth Taylor 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/mar/23/elizabeth-taylor-obituary> – 
journalists reported how odd the gilt statuettes looked in her plain New York 
flat.

She did not care. Her own fiction was what mattered to her, whether or not it 
did to anyone else. This was how it had been since she began writing novels in
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> in the 1950s, feeling: "I was 
at the bottom of a deep abyss. No one read them. But I enjoyed it." The films 
were fun, but: "I live so much more in and for the books," she wrote to a 
friend.
 Julian Sands and Helena Bonham Carter in A Room with a View, 1985. 
Photograph: Moviestore Collection 
She was a brilliant storyteller. Her work darkened towards the end of her 
life: she wrote of deception and self-deception and of time's revenges, the 
twists and turns of an implacable fate that her worst charlatans could 
manipulate to their advantage. Her vision was bleak; her tone austere. But her 
supply of complex characters and subtle, vivid scenes was inexhaustible and she 
caught the ambiguities of human behaviour and the pleasures of the senses in 
precise, perfect words.

Her dozen novels and eight collections of short stories (and other stories 
published in the New Yorker and elsewhere) won Jhabvala the admiration of the 
sternest critics of her time. Raymond Mortimer thought she beat all other 
western novelists in her understanding of modern India. To CP Snow, no other 
living writer better afforded readers that "definition of the highest art", the 
feeling "that life is this and not otherwise". Her literary awards included the 
1975 Booker prize for her eighth novel, Heat and Dust. Merchant Ivory's 1983 
film of it marked their breakthrough from art-house exclusivity to popular 
success.

Jhabvala spoke with an unclassifiable accent in an idiosyncratic drawl. The 
wit, economy and detachment that she achieved in her fiction also played in her 
personality, and there, too, they masked contradictory qualities. Her 
characters surge with violent emotions (which they often suppress) and pursue 
voracious appetites (for food, sex, love) with a relish their creator seems to 
share. Her second novel was entitled The Nature of Passion (1956); there was a 
passion at her own core, too, though it was hard to tell for what.
 Helena Bonham Carter in Howards End, 1992. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/C4 
For writing, certainly. "The only three hours in the day I'm really alive," 
she said of her unfailing morning's work. She continued to write and publish 
until the end: anew short story 
<http://www.newyorker.com/fiction/features/2013/03/25/130325fi_fiction_jhabvala>
 of hers appeared in the New Yorker last month. She did not choose to become a 
writer, she said: "One is just born that way." When she began school and wrote 
her first composition, she was "flooded with my destiny", and – as the words 
poured – with delight. It was 1933; she was six.

She had been born in Cologne into a patriotic German family of assimilated 
Jews. Her maternal grandfather was the cantor in Cologne's biggest synagogue.

One day in 1934 they sat on their balcony overlooking Cologne's main avenue 
and watched the Nazis parade pass. That night, Ruth's parents were arrested, 
then released. Her father, Marcus, a solicitor of Polish parentage, could not 
get her mother, Eleonora (nee Cohn), to leave Germany until April 1939. Then, 
they came to Britain with their son, Siegbert, who later became professor of 
German at Oxford, and Ruth. All Marcus's family – more than 40 people – 
perished during theHolocaust <https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust>. In 
1948, when he discovered how they had been killed, he took his own life.

Jhabvala never wrote of her early life. She never spoke of it in public, until 
1979, when she received the Neil Gunn international fellowship and gave a 
public lecture in Edinburgh. Her chosen subject was disinheritance. Great 
writing such as Gunn's, she said, seems to come from the writer's "ground of 
being", an inheritance rooted in "tradition, landscape and that inexplicable 
region where childhood and ancestral memories merge". She herself had "only 
disinheritance" of this. "I stand before you as a writer without any ground of 
being out of which to write: really blown about from country to country, 
culture to culture till I feel – till I am – nothing." She spoke without 
self-pity: "As it happens, I like it that way."

The refugee found her home in the limitless world of literature. She wrote 
"furiously" through her childhood; within days of arriving in Britain, she was 
writing in English, and graduated in English literature from Queen Mary 
College, London University. Asked later if she had happy memories of England, 
she said: "If it weren't for England, I wouldn't have any memories at all."

In 1951, she married Cyrus Jhabvala ("Jhab"), a Parsee architect whom she had 
met in London, and went to live with him in Delhi. She plunged in "total 
immersion" into India – the jasmine, the starlit nights, the temple bells, the 
holy men, the heat. She bore three daughters, wore the sari and wrote of India 
and the Indians as if she were Indian herself. But her passionate love for 
India changed into its opposite. By 1975, she found she could no longer write 
of it nor in it.

"There need never be a dull moment," she admitted in a rare autobiographical 
piece describing her difficult feelings about India by the time she left it. 
"Yet all my moments are dull. It is my own fault, I know." In this place where 
her beloved family flourished – "my husband is Indian and so are my children" – 
her complicated makeup asserted itself with increasing intensity. "I am a 
central European with an English education and a deplorable tendency to 
constant self-analysis. I am irritable and have weak nerves," she admitted in 
her introduction to her story collectionHow I Became a Holy Mother 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2008/nov/08/ruth-prawer-jhabvala-review> 
(1976).

She went to the US. By then she had collaborated with Merchant and Ivory 
<http://www.merchantivory.com/> on several films with Indian subjects including 
Shakespeare Wallah (1963) and Autobiography of a Princess (1975), her 
favourite. But now her attention, her fiction and their joint projects returned 
to the west, and she took an apartment in New York in the block where Merchant 
and Ivory lived.

So she changed continents three times in her life – and entitled her 10th 
novel Three Continents in 1987. It amused her to liken this to sexual 
infidelity. "Perhaps I'm just fickle by nature and get tired of countries the 
way other women do of husbands or lovers." InNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> she found a sense of homecoming. 
Here were the overheated high-ceilinged, furniture-stuffed apartments of her 
European childhood, with corner delis selling the same pickled cucumbers and 
potato salads she had loved then.

In the latter part of her life, her daughters' marriages (to Indian, American 
and English husbands) meant that they, too, settled in three different 
continents, while Ruth and Jhab established a modus vivendi of dividing their 
time between two. In one of her last collections, East into Upper East (1998), 
her stories travelled between India and Manhattan, as she and Jhab did in these 
years. They were among the best she ever wrote. In the year of its publication, 
she was appointed CBE.

Her husband and daughters – Renana, Ava and Firoza-Bibi (known as Poji) – 
survive her. Her brother died last year. Shortly before her own death, she 
accepted a visit from a rabbi. After performing a blessing, he asked her for 
the best thing she could recall in her life. "Without any hesitation," Ava 
wrote afterwards, "she pointed to papa."

• Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, novelist and screenwriter, born 7 May 1927; died 3 
April 2013

• This article was amended on 4 April 2013. Jhabvala won the Neil, rather than 
Nell, Gunn international fellowship.
 