
Sam Twiston-Davies expects to learn on Thursday whether he will be allowed to 
take part in Cheltenham’s Open meeting, starting on Friday. The jockey, who 
suffered a grade four laceration of his spleen in a fall at Chepstow last 
month, accepts he will not be able to ride in every race this weekend, as he 
would hope to do in normal circumstances, but he would content himself with 
being part of the action during the days that kickstart jump racing’s core 
season.

“I’ve been in the gym every day, I was back riding out last week, the body 
feels great and is coping,” Twiston-Davies said on Monday. “It doesn’t feel as 
though there’s anything wrong with me.”

The 24-year-old is to appear before the BHA’s chief medical adviser, Dr Jerry 
Hill, on Wednesday to present him with medical reports, detailing his recovery. 
If necessary, another CT scan may be taken of Twiston-Davies’ spleen and 
kidneys to assist Hill in his decision, though the jockey has been told his 
organs “won’t look normal for months, despite having healed”.

Jockeys arrested over alleged rape of 18-year-old woman, say reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/07/jockeys-arrested-alleged-rape-18-year-old-woman-swindon-say-reports>
“The plan is to make a strong case. I feel healthy but proving that is hard, 
especially when it’s not about a bone break or something that you can see. I 
was initially told it might take six weeks to get back. By this Sunday it’ll be 
five weeks. I just want to come back, it’s been driving me mad. I’m not 
expecting to ride everything right away. You can’t just jump straight back into 
a job like that.”

Twiston-Davies has missed an especially fruitful period for his main employer, 
Paul Nicholls, who had 29 winners in October and has averaged one per day 
through November. Among the many Nicholls-trained horses entered forCheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham> is Frodon, the 5-1 favourite for 
Saturday’s BetVictor Gold Cup.

The going at Cheltenham is good, the course having had only an inch of rain 
since the end of August, but almost as much is forecast for the next five days, 
according to Simon Claisse, the clerk of the course. He added that the chance 
of running Friday’s cross-country race is “very slim” and would require 
something like 70mm of rain.

One of many trainers hoping the weather will prove at least as wet as is 
forecast is Jonjo O’Neill, whose More Of That is the 8-1 second-favourite for 
the BetVictor. O’Neill said this is the best horse he has trained but 
acknowledged he will be on tenterhooks when More Of That next runs, waiting to 
learn whether a second wind operation will allow him to express that ability.

“I think I’ve improved him a stone and a half,” O’Neill joked at a media event 
here. “No, he’s in great shape. I’m delighted with him at home.”

More Of That has had a tie-back operation, under which cartilage is sutured to 
one side to prevent it from interfering with the flow of wind. O’Neill said: 
“You can’t tie it back too tight because, if you do … We did that with another 
horse, Merry King, and what they tied it back to snapped. He never ran again 
after that.” The trainer added that Merry King is now in use as a hack in 
retirement.

O’Neill said More Of That’s initial tie-back, applied last year, had “slipped 
a little bit. So maybe they tied it a little bit too loose. So they’ve done it 
again; I’ve never heard of this before. Hopefully it’ll work. If it works, 
we’re in business.”

A recurrence of his wind problem was suspected after More Of That was a 
disappointing third in the RSA Chase at the Festival in March, his first defeat 
over fences. He is a general 33-1 shot for the Cheltenham Gold Cup.
 