
 Income from annuities is now so low that some will find they would have been 
better off spending their money rather than saving in a pension. This is the 
sobering conclusion reached by Liberal Democrat MP Steve Webb, who points out 
that smaller pensions may buy just enough income to disqualify a pensioner from 
state benefits, but not to provide a comfortable standard of living.

 Webb's figures go like this: the basic state pension for a single person is 
now worth £66.75. But a pensioner who has no private means to bump that up 
would be given income support of £8.25 a week to take their income to the 
government's new minimum income guarantee of £75 a week.

 Qualifying for this benefit makes them eligible for other state assistance, 
including help with rent and council tax. Altogether the top-up state package 
might be worth a little under £3,000 a year. To buy a private pension for this 
amount, via an annuity, would require a fund of more than £40,000.

 Webb says: 'If you retire this year with less than £40,000 (in a private 
scheme) you probably shouldn't have bothered.' His figures apply to those who 
don't own their own home, because they include an allowance for rent.

Charity Age Concern is already receiving calls from people with small private 
pensions who are disqualified from income support and wonder why they bothered 
to save.Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> lawyer Robin 
Ellison says the level of annuity returns on sums below £100,000 is a big worry 
for the Government as it tries to introduce a stakeholder pension, aimed at 
middle-to-low earners.

 Stuart Bayliss of annuity adviser Annuity Direct says today's new pensioners 
are already questioning the value of their investment. 'When the dads and 
grandads are reacting in this way, we haven't a cat in hell's chance of selling 
[younger] people pensions.'

 Peter Quinton of the Annuity Bureau adds: 'People looking at the predicament 
of those in retirement are saying "is this the best way to save?" or "why even 
bother?".'

 The pension picture is further clouded by doubts over whether even for those 
who can save larger sums, a pension is now the best way to plan for retirement. 
Figures emerging from the industry show that for people who do not get help 
with contributions from an employer, there may be little advantage in a pension 
over other forms of saving.

Is there a silver lining?
 Yes. Returns from annuities are low because inflation is low. This is the 
flip side of the problem encountered by pensioners in the Seventies, who saw 
their incomes eaten away by rising prices. But if inflation stays low, 
pensioners may not be worse off in real terms than they were when annuity rates 
were better but inflation was in double figures.

 But people retiring now, or planning to do so shortly, have been caught in a 
pincer movement by the rapid fall in annuity returns. Few will have planned for 
this by saving more.

 David Riddington of Norwich Union says: 'There has been a dramatic and 
fundamental change in interest rates over the past 18 months. It has happened 
so quickly that it has made it very difficult for people to react.'
 