
As the election <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/general-election-2015> 
approaches there are some recurrent themes: the NHS, immigration, tax and the 
economy. Science and technology don’t get much of a mention, yet they underpin 
a substantial part of our economy and directly or indirectly affect just about 
every part of our lives. A healthy research base in these subjects, the 
consequent impact of this on innovation, plus a strong pipeline of talented and 
well-trained workers with relevant skills is crucially important in keeping the 
UK economically strong. In some senses, it is clear the major parties 
understand this. When pressed, they will admit the huge value science (broadly 
defined) confers, but it is not a subject any of the leaders seem keen to push 
up the political agenda.

It might be argued that science doesn’t need to be mentioned because all the 
parties buy into its importance. Remarks from the leaders of the two main 
parties made inresponse <http://sciencecampaign.org.uk/?page_id=16536> to 
requests for information from the Campaign for Science and Engineering (CaSE) 
might suggest this. David Cameron remarked that he was proud “that the UK is a 
world leader in science and engineering and by investing in infrastructure and 
research… the Conservative party will ensure the UK’s science and engineering 
industry remains one of the world’s best”. Likewise, Ed Miliband paid tribute 
to the excellence of UK science, noting that it was “one of our greatest assets 
as a nation, with an unparalleled record of invention and innovation driven by 
world-leading firms and universities”.

Encouraging words for those active in the field? Maybe, but fine words butter 
no parsnips. Without explicit commitment to secure and sustainable funding the 
community can hardly be reassured. Only the Lib Dems have committed to 
maintaining the ringfence around science funding, ensuring that the“flat cash”  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-23065763>settlement that was 
triumphantly achieved in the last comprehensive spending review will at the 
very least be maintained in line with inflation; others are silent on how the 
UK’s excellence will be maintained. Ajoint statement 
<https://royalsociety.org/policy/publications/2015/stronger-future/> put out by 
the UK’s national academies spelled out key actions needed to facilitate 
world-class research, development and innovation (other disciplines found in 
our universities, not just science, are also fundamentally important in this 
arena). CaSE is quite clear about what is needed, calling on the government to 
“increase investment in research, support STEM (science, technology, 
engineering and maths) education from primary school through to university, and 
set immigration policies that help retain and attract top talent”.

Immigration policy matters. At the moment, the knock-on effect of Theresa 
May’s policy of including students in the immigration cap deters many of the 
world’s brightest from coming to study in the UK. Increasingly, students from 
China and India are opting to apply to US universities at the expense of the 
UK’s. In the past, many of these students chose to stay in the UK after 
graduation (also increasingly difficult for these fresh graduates to do due to 
visa rules) either in research teams in universities or by joining industry. 
The loss of these reduces our talent pool and hence our ability to innovate. 
The CBI and other organisations repeatedly comment on the lack of skilled job 
applicants with the science background employers need and, as made clear in 
last year’sO’Neill report 
<https://www.thersa.org/discover/publications-and-articles/reports/univercities-the-knowledge-to-power-uk-metros/>
, universities are key players in driving innovation.

Innovation is key to the country’s economic health, yet current government 
policies have not facilitated increased spending in either startups or 
established companies. The UK spend on research and innovation as a percentage 
of GDP stands at 1.72%, well below the G8 average and falling ever further 
behind as the government’s own numbers show. Industrial research funding is 
heavily concentrated in a few sectors, notably pharmaceuticals, and areas that 
might have been expected to see substantial investment, such as energy, have 
actually seen a steady decline over decades as government laboratories are 
closed and industry has not thought it profitable enough to step into the 
breach to invest substantially in the research base.

Why do primary schools appear in CaSE’s urgent call above? Young children are 
naturally curious; that curiosity about the world around them needs to be 
stimulated and nurtured. Too easily it can be turned off by poor facilities or 
teachers who lack confidence in teaching scientific concepts. Far too many 
schools lack a teacher qualified in Stem. Even for those who possess such a 
qualification it can be hard for them to keep up to date through continuous 
professional development (CPD): schools cannot always afford to budget for this.
The Royal Society recently called 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/388015/14-1247-science-innovation-strategy-evidence.pdf>
for mandatory subject-specific CPD to overcome this.

Children who lose interest in science early on are not likely to regain it 
later. Furthermore, ideas about careers are set around the time children move 
on to secondary school. For many of them, science – and engineering – will be 
seen as “not for them”. Minorities, girls and disadvantaged children are more 
likely to feel like this, meaning the scientific workforce will continue to be 
far less diverse than the population as a whole. Investment in science 
teachers, in facilities to enable well-resourced experimental science to be 
accessible to all children at primary and secondary schools, and in provision 
of high-quality careers advice from those who understand the relevance of Stem 
skills at tertiary level would be fairly modest investments that could pay huge 
dividends in job creation and increased productivity for the country.

These topics don’t feature in political debates. Perhaps that isn’t so 
surprising given the lack of MPs educated in the sciences to graduate level. 
There are a few medics but the only MP who has practised as a research 
scientist is Julian Huppert, MP for my constituency of Cambridge. A more 
representative House of Commons would contain fewer lawyers and PPE graduates 
and more possessing a Stem background. Lack of diversity matters when it comes 
to good decision-making.

Science does not seem to be regarded as a vote winner nor considered important 
enough to be discussed in candidates’ speeches. Yet future economic growth 
depends crucially on its successful exploitation. Many of the problems that do 
exercise the electorate are intimately linked to a thriving science base: a 
healthy ageing population, energy and food security and a growing economy based 
on tangible goods and not just the service sector. Science deserves more from 
its elected representatives.

Athene Donald is professor of experimental physics and master of Churchill 
College, Cambridge.
 