
Graphene is going to be the 'it' material of the 21st century

Or at least that is what George Osborne hopes. After two Manchester University 
scientists, Konstantin Novoselov and Andre Geim, won the 2010 Nobel prize for 
physics for their graphene research, the chancellor announced in the autumn 
that Britain would be investing £50m in setting up a national research 
programme into the substance. Graphene – a sheet of carbon atoms one atom thick 
– could be used to make everything from touchscreens to plastics cheaper and 
more efficient, say scientists, though such developments may take decades to 
achieve. Certainly much has been made of its potential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/nov/13/graphene-research-novoselov-geim-manchester>
. According to research carried out by James Hone of Columbia University, 
graphene is the strongest material ever measured, some 200 times stronger than 
structural steel. "It would take an elephant, balanced on a pencil, to break 
through a sheet of graphene the thickness of cling film," he told the BBC. 
However, it is the versatility of graphene – a possible source for composite 
materials, electronic components and other goods – that causes the excitement. 
As Geim says: "It is not even one material. It is a huge range of materials." 
Hence the billions that IBM, Samsung and Nokia are putting into graphene 
research, a commitment that puts Osborne's £50m investment into perspective.

Flying faster than the speed of light just might be possible after all

Despite Einstein assuring us a century ago that no moving object could surpass 
the velocity of light, scientists this yearappear to have found an anomaly to 
the rule <https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/sep/24/einstein-e-equals-mc2>
. In September, physicists at Cern in Geneva fired a beam of neutrinos – tiny 
entities that barely weigh anything, and which hardly ever interact with 
anything – to colleagues at the Gran Sasso laboratory 454 miles away in Italy. 
To their considerable surprise, the scientists found the neutrinos arrived so 
quickly, they must have been travelling faster than light, albeit only slightly 
– about 60 billionths of a second quicker. Most experts thought that the 
experiment would be proved flawed when it was repeated. However, a second 
firing of a beam of neutrinos produced a similar result. This leaves Professor 
Jim Al-Khalili, of Surrey University, facing the prospect of an uncomfortable 
new year. The physicist has pledged to "eat his shorts" live on TV if it is 
proved that neutrinos can travel faster than light.

Modern humans have been hanging around Europe for thousands of years longer 
than we had thought

Bones and teeth found in England and Italy have pushed back the dates for the 
arrival of modern humans in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/nov/02/humans-torquay-ice-age> by 
5,000 years or so, researchers revealed. Two baby teeth, found in the Grotta 
del Cavallo, Apulia, and a jawbone fragment, from Kents Cavern, Devon, were 
dated as being 45,000 and 41,000 years old respectively, according to articles 
published inNature. Previously it was thought that Homo sapiens arrived in 
Europe around 35,000 to 40,000 years ago, just when the Neanderthals – who had 
ruled the continent for several hundred thousand years – began to die out. If 
humans were responsible for replacing Neanderthals, they must have worked very 
fast, palaeontologists argued. However, these new dates increase the overlap of 
modern humans and Neanderthals, according to Dr Tom Higham, from Oxford 
University, who led the study at Kents Cavern. "We estimate that probably 
3,000-5,000 years of time is the amount of the overlap," he told the BBC. Thus 
humanity had a comfortable period of several millennia to wipe out the 
Neanderthals, it now transpires.

The female brain lights up in a very special way after an orgasm

Last month, scientists revealed that they had used scanning images to create 
the world's first movie of the female brain as it approached, experienced and 
recovered from an orgasm. The animation showed the steady build-up of activity 
as disparate bunches of neurones flickered into life and then came together in 
a crescendo of activity before gently settling back down again as a test 
subject brought herself to orgasm. According to Professor Barry Komisaruk, a 
psychologist at Rutgers University in New Jersey, whose team carried out the 
research, the findings should lead to treatments that could help both men and 
women who cannot reach sexual climax. Kayt Sukel,whose orgasm was recorded by 
the Rutgers team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2011/nov/16/orgasm-mri-scanner>, told 
theGuardian that she managed to stimulate herself despite having to lie still 
inside the dark, cramped confines of a MRI scanner. "If you move too much 
during an MRI scan you can compromise the data," she said. "It wasn't easy to 
work up to an orgasm but I found it wasn't quite as difficult as I had 
imagined." The earth moved, but not very much, in other words.

The best candidate for finding life on another world has been pinpointed by 
astronomers

Observations by the US space telescope Kepler pinpointed a planet orbiting 
another sun that is the closest thing to another Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/dec/05/exoplanet-kepler-22-b-nasa-earth>
 that has been detected to date. Kepler 22-b is about 2.4 times the size of 
Earth and lies in the so-called "Goldilocks zone" around its home star. In 
other words conditions there are not too hot and not too cold. Indeed, 
scientists estimate that the planet's surface temperature is a relatively balmy 
22C while a year there that lasts 290 Earth days. Astronomers also speculate 
that Kepler 22-b possesses water. "This is a major milestone on the road to 
finding Earth's twin," said Douglas Hudgins, Kepler program scientist at Nasa 
headquarters in Washington. However, prospects for visiting the planet are 
remote. Kepler 22-b is 600 light years from Earth. Even having a radio 
conversation with any inhabitants that it might possess will be frustrating. At 
that distance, a radio message asking inhabitants how they are doing would not 
receive a reply for another 1,200 years.

You can win the Nobel prize even though you are dead

One of the strictest rules established by the committee that implemented 
Alfred Nobel's bequest for the science prizes was the edict that only the 
living receive an honour. "Work by a person since deceased shall not be 
considered," it states. But on 3 October, the Nobel committee announced that 
Ralph Steinman had won the prize for medicine,unaware that the Canadian 
immunologist had died of cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/oct/03/nobel-prize-awarded-dead-scientist>
 the previous Friday. After a quick look at the rulebook, an emergency meeting 
of the Nobel assembly decided the decision should stand as it "was made in good 
faith, based on the assumption that the Nobel laureate was alive". In fact, the 
edict about awards for the deceased was not made until 1974. Before that date, 
a person could be awarded a prize posthumously if they had already been 
nominated before February of the same year – as was the case for Dag 
Hammarskjöld, who won the Nobel peace prize in 1961. Steinman shared his prize 
with American Bruce Beutler and French biologist Jules Hoffmann. All were 
honoured for research on the immune system. Prior to his death, Steinman had 
been treating himself with a therapy based on his own research but died after a 
four-year battle with pancreatic cancer.

Stem cells may not be the great white hope for medicine in the 21st century 
after all

The dream that paralysed people could walk again after injections of stem 
cells suffered a major blow, following the decision by the US biotech giant 
Geron to abandon the first human trial of its kind. Geron said difficult 
economic conditions, which make it hard to raise money, had forced it to quit 
its stem cell work. The decision was a blow to those who thought stem cell 
therapy for humans would soon become commonplace. Four patients had been 
injected with Geron's stem cell therapy, the goal being simply to establish 
whether the treatment was safe. There were no ill effects, but Geron 
acknowledged that the patients had not seen any improvement, even though lab 
tests had given paralysed rats the power to move their hind legs. Researchers 
who are testing stem cells for other conditions, including Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's, are still hopeful of ultimate success.

Mars continues to be a tricky place to reach

Despite half a century of sending probes to the red planet, space engineers 
still have a shaky record of success. Of the 38 Mars missions, 19 have suffered 
some kind of major flaw, a failure rate of 50%. The latest victim of the Great 
Galactic Ghoul – as boffins call the curse of Mars probes – was the Russian 
Phobos-Grunt mission, which was supposed to fly on a 10-month mission to Mars 
after its launch last month. Instead it found itself stuck in orbit only a few 
hundred miles above Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/09/russian-mars-probe-engines-fail>
. Despite all attempts to coax the errant satellite to reboot its computers and 
to relaunch itself towards Mars, its radio emitted only a few, unhelpful beeps 
before conking out. This leaves planetary scientists pinning their hopes on 
Curiosity, the giant mobile science laboratory built by the US, which was also 
launched last month. Set to arrive at Mars in August, six-wheeled Curiosity 
will be lowered from a rocket-powered "sky crane" on to the planet's surface 
and will then trundle over it for several years, drilling samples from rocks 
which it will analyse for signs that the planet once supported life. US space 
controllers say the craft is currently on a perfect course to Mars. So far, so 
good.

Archaeopteryx may not have been the world's first bird

This biological bombshell for the science of bird evolution is the handiwork 
of Xing Xu at Linyi University in China, whose colleagues studied a new
Archaeopteryx-like fossil – called Xiaotingia zhengi – and found the creature 
belonged not in the lineage of birds, but to a group of dinosaurs called 
deinonychosaurs. More strikingly,Archaeopteryx appeared in the same group, 
after their analysis, according to a study published inNature. Deinonychosaurs, 
such as the velociraptor, walked on two legs, ate meat and had vicious 
retractable claws. The finding is tentative, but builds on doubts that have 
emerged over the special status ofArchaeopteryx following the discovery of 
other bird-like dinosaurs over the past decade or so.Archaeopteryx was 
discovered in 1861, two years after Charles Darwin publishedOn the Origin of 
Species. The spectacular fossils of an animal with the feathered wings of a 
bird, but the teeth and tail of a dinosaur, caused an immediate sensation in 
Victorian England, where society was wrestling with the consequences of 
evolution through natural selection. The creature became renowned as the most 
primitive bird on the planet – until now. Certainly, doubts about its status 
are rising, though many scientists remain cautious. As Paul Barrett, a dinosaur 
researcher at the Natural History Museum in London, says: "MaybeArchaeopteryx
 wasn't on the direct ancestral line to birds, but was part of an early 
experimentation in how to build a bird."

And finally, we learned that the Higgs boson really does exist

Well it probably does. Or put it this way, it might just possibly be real. On 
the other hand, it is also possible that it might not exist. After spending a 
decade and around £6bn building the Large Hadron Collider on the Swiss-France 
border in order to smash particles together at colossal speeds and so recreate 
conditions of the early universe, scientists reported this month that the prime 
goal of these efforts – the pinpointing of the Higgs boson, the entity which 
gives all other particles their mass – may have been realised. Two experiments 
on the collider both noted evidence of a particle at a mass of around 125GeV 
being created from their collisions. This could be the Higgs boson, they 
declared. On the other hand it might not be, they added. "There is definitely a 
hint of something around 125GeV but it's not a discovery yet. We need more 
data! I'm keeping my champagne on ice," said Jeff Forshaw, a physicist at 
Manchester University. In other words, the collision data might just be a 
statistical anomaly that could disappear once more results come in. So all we 
have to do is wait for another 12 months and then we should know – one way or 
the other. Something to put in next year's science review, if nothing else.
 