
Amazon’s Go concept store is the perfect example of digital technology doing 
what it does best: getting out the way. The checkout-free shop uses proximity 
sensors, cameras and an app to make the in-store experience so seamless that 
you can literally pick items off the shelf, walk out with them, and have them 
automatically billed to your account.


This simple focus on making the user experience as smooth as possible is a 
sharp contrast to how many marketing teams have tried to maximise in-store 
technology. Conversations around proximity sensors or beacons typically focus 
on actively getting consumers to go out of their way to fulfil a brand’s 
desires, or interrupting them as they use their phone.

It’s a marketing dream that a consumer in the crisp aisle could receive a 
notification on their phone directing them to a new drink three aisles away 
that would go perfectly with their prawn cocktail crisps, and perhaps even 
offer them a trial coupon to entice them. Once there, why not notify them of a 
personalised buy-one-get-one-free offer on a chocolate bar their loyalty card 
data tells us they used to love, but haven’t picked up in a while?

You can see the attraction to marketers who can cash in on the phone in your 
pocket and use it, and all sorts of data, to their advantage. The trouble, of 
course, comes when you start thinking of the consumer experience you’re 
creating. For most people, grocery shopping is at best an enjoyable errand, at 
worse a traumatic experience dragging around kicking and screaming kids. Their 
mission on entering a store is to find everything they want and get out as 
quickly as possible.

No doubt there’s a certain type of person who’d happily bounce across a 
supermarket if it got them the best deals, but for most people the prospect of 
turning shopping into a complex treasure hunt is far from appealing. Similarly, 
just because you’re checking your Facebook newsfeed in the checkout queue 
doesn’t mean you’ll want to abandon your place and head back into the melee 
when an interesting offer pops up.

Digital marketing efforts and platforms need to start by bringing genuine 
utility to people. That’s why the satellite navigation app Waze has gone from 
strength to strength, offering a route-finding service, into which occasionally 
an advert is shown.

Ad-first services still haven’t properly taken off – if consumers aren’t using 
an app to their advantage in their daily lives they’re unlikely to want to 
install it just to interact with your advert. If marketers want to divert 
shoppers around different parts of a supermarket and past their products, they 
need to find a genuinely useful way of doing so. Perhaps the answer is an app 
that can take your shopping list, map out where every item is in the shop, and 
guide you round it like an indoor satnav? It still feels a little 
over-engineered, but perhaps some people would find a use for it and be open to 
having special offers flagged along the journey.

Truthfully, there’s an even bigger lesson to learn: that for the most part we 
need to stop asking people to do anything at all. It’s usually hard enough just 
to make shoppers aware of your product and to stay front of mind when it comes 
time to buying it, let alone wanting to force them through hoops along the way.

Stop asking what we can get consumers to do with digital technology (and 
subsequently which needy messaging and desperate incentives we’ll need to try 
to force them to do it) and start thinking about how digital technology can 
seamlessly get out of their way. Even a platform such as Facebook, which 
seemingly offers an easy way to drive this “engagement”, abandoned its focus on 
this years ago, pointing marketers instead to how it could get their messages 
in front of billions of largely passive users. It’s painful that much of the 
industry is still chasing these vanity metrics or trying to force people away 
from what they want to do, which is to swipe on to the next story in their feed.

It’s definitely a challenge for traditional marketing that consumers are 
turning to mobile and digital screens, and it’s disrupting all industries. The 
mobile phone, for instance, is now arguably the main competitor for chewing gum 
and chocolate sales at the checkout as we choose to stare at it rather than be 
led into other temptations. Yet advertisers need to stay routed in very clear 
laws of marketing and not get led astray by the temptation to try new things 
for the sake of them. You’ll need a lot of people to know your product exists, 
and to think about it when and where it’s available, for it to fly off the 
shelves. It’s a classic challenge that needs a solid creative and media 
response, and it’s a lot more rewarding than trying to chase a shopper round a 
virtual supermarket maze or get them to take your Facebook quiz.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2016/jan/25/content-funding>.
 