
The first MLS Cup final to be goalless after 120 minutes was finally settled 
by a sudden-death Roman Torres penalty, as Seattle won their first everMLS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mls> Cup on a freezing night at BMO Field.

Seattle Sounders win the MLS Cup after penalty shootout – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/10/mls-cup-final-toronto-fc-seattle-sounders-live>
It was fitting that a symbol of Seattle’s defensive resolve should score the 
decisive penalty. For years, Seattle have built a reputation for attacking 
flair that wilts in the play-offs, but their gutsy charge through the second 
half of a difficult season has been built as much on defense as attack, and 
this final was an extreme example of that. Having beaten Sporting KC 1-0 in the 
play-in game with their only shot on goal, Seattle went one “better” in the 
final – becoming the only team in MLS history to not have a shot on target for 
the two hours of regular play.

Toronto’s goalkeeper Clint Irwin was more concerned about hypothermia than 
shots for most of that period, but while he did make one penalty save in the 
shootout, it was his counterpart Stefan Frei, who’d made nine saves throughout 
his team’s rearguard action, who would be celebrating at the end of the game. 
Frei had kept his team in the match with a diving fingertip save from a Jozy 
Altidore header in the second period of extra time and would also save a weak 
Michael Bradley penalty in the shootout to cap an eventful personal evening.

Two hours earlier, Greg Vanney had seemed to signal Toronto’s attacking intent 
from the start, by shifting back to the line up that had started in the first 
leg in Montreal, with Michael Bradley the sole outright protector of the 
defense, and the attack-minded Jonathan Osorio back in the side at the expense 
of Will Johnson.

The hosts duly started the game in a proactive mood, with an early scuffed 
shot from Altidore drifting just past Frei’s far post, to sound an early 
warning. It was followed by a sequence of Toronto corners, as Vanney’s team 
tried to immediately ignite the enthusiasm of the 36,045 capacity crowd.

Not that they needed much encouragement. The game had sold out in three 
minutes, and with Toronto having waited a decade to even host a play-off game, 
let alone a final they were playing in, this postseason run had seen the 
atmosphere in their three home games build to a crescendo before this game 
started. And not even the freezing temperatures (23F at field level for kick 
off, with wind chill off Lake Ontario making it feel more like 10F) could 
suppress the home crowd.

Seattle did their best to stop momentum building on the field though, first by 
slowing the game with fouls, and then by trying to find their way into it with 
quick transitions to try and get Jordan Morris running at Erik Zavaleta. 
Zavaleta is notionally the weakest part of the Toronto back three, though it 
was hard to guess during the early running as he held his ground against the 
young US international.

Toronto were the more threatening team in the first half. Other than some 
hopeful flicks forward by the busy Valdez, Seattle were not making a lot of 
clear chances, while Toronto were doing a lot of decent work in Seattle’s half, 
without forcing many clear chances of their own, or doing much with the ones 
they did make.

Altidore had scored in every play-off round coming into the final, but looked 
a less sure presence in the first half, passing up a few decent chances, 
including a back post header at the half hour mark. Frei fumbled it, and took 
two touches to claim the ball, but Altidore should have done better.

He remained determined, though, and nearly helped open the scoring early in 
the second half as he forced Alonso off the ball on the edge of the box, to 
allow Osorio to poke the ball to the right for an overlapping Sebastian 
Giovinco to have a free shot. He hit it fiercely but it sliced just wide of the 
post to ripple the side netting.

With the game at 0-0 going past the hour it might have been understandable for 
Toronto to tighten up, in anticipation of Seattle’s customary habit of late and 
telling goals. But the hosts kept probing, looking for a telling pass, and high 
up in the main stand Seattle’s 2000 strong contingent of traveling fans looked 
anxious rather than expectant at that stage, especially when Valdez limped out 
of the game in the 73rd minute, to be replaced by Ivanschitz.

It burned another substitution for Seattle, who’d already replaced the injured 
Friberg with Alvaro Fernandez. Some version of these changes might have been 
coming anyway, as Schmetzer reshuffled his attack to push Morris up to center 
forward, but the circumstances were hardly ideal.

For their part, Toronto brought on Johnson and Benoit Cheyrou for Osorio and 
Cooper, as Vanney anticipated the attrition of extra-time, and possibly another 
decisive interception from Cheyrou, who had scored the winner against Montreal 
after just 92 seconds on the field.

No such immediate return this time round, though there was still time for one 
more of the heroes against Montreal to have a chance to make a difference. In 
the 92nd minute Nick Hagglund got up to head an outswinging Michael Bradley 
corner goalward, and a lunging Altidore was inches from connecting decisively 
as Frei scramble to cover.

Extra-time had more grit than grace, as it became clear that a single chance 
would probably be enough to win an engrossing but never wide open game. Toronto 
kept pushing forward, Seattle kept clearing their lines, inelegantly but mostly 
effectively.
In the final 15 minutes, the tension mounted as the game got more ragged, and 
both teams had chances, though the best fell to Toronto. Ricketts screwed a 
shot just wide from near the penalty spot after a clearance fell right to him, 
and then Altidore forced that brilliant full stretch save from Frei, as his 
looping header across goal looked bound to drop in.

In between those chances Seattle’s veteran utility man Brad Evans had come on 
for a cramping JMorris, as both teams limped towards penalties – Giovinco had 
already seen his flickering performance ended by injury at the end of the first 
period of extra time. Now there were players visibly cramping or clutching 
hamstrings all over the field in the dying minutes, but all the substitutes had 
been used. And finally, there was no more running, just the long walk to the 
spot.

After five penalties, the teams were level at 4-4. Sudden death, and Justin 
Morrow’s penalty cracked back off the underside of the bar. Up came Torres, 
with a no-nonsense short run up and finish. The Sounders may not have been 
pretty, but they were finally the champions.

Toronto: Irwin; Hagglund, Moor, Zavaleta; Morrow, Osorio (Johnson 77), 
Bradley, Cooper (Cheyrou 84), Beitashour; Giovinco (Ricketts 103), Altidore

Seattle: Frei; Jones, Marshall, Torres, Mears; Roldan, Alonso; Friberg 
(Fernandez 66), Lodeiro, Morris (Evans 107); Valdez (Ivanschitz 73)
 