
Let us talk about the ideal writing days, because the litany of days thrown to 
the wind by my main job of the last 20 years, taxi-driver to my three kids, is 
another story altogether. We live high up in the Wicklow mountains, not too far 
from the house of those very Bunburys mentioned by Ernest inOscar Wilde’s play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde>, as signifying a place far 
far from the city and nestling in a state of remote unavailability. So there 
was a lot of driving as well as writing. However, having to do something other 
than writing is very good for writing, I think. It creates that desk hunger.

Those ideal days begin when I have managed to survive that awful waiting 
period with a novel when you are writing, but also crossing out crossly, 
beginning again, floundering, panicking, blushing in the privacy of your 
workroom. My workroom is a small chamber in an old rectory where once the 
sitting rector wrote his sermons, walking down on Sundays to his church at the 
gates to deliver them to the hopefully grateful parishioners. This must have 
been production and criticism on a very rapid scale. Sometimes I think of those 
vanished rectors, usually young men as the parish was poor and remote, and the 
tiny room can get a little crowded with them. I am never sure what they would 
make of my no doubt scandalous productions.

I fearlessly took to the drink for the period of writing the book, since in 
the evenings it was difficult to calm down

But the gods maybe have pity at last on the poor author sequestered there, 
struggling with his book, and eventually a serviceable first line is rendered 
from the heavens. The whistle-tune, the birdsong of the book. The relief is 
immense, and that strange and uncharacteristic courage to proceed descends. I 
often think of the soldiers standing in trenches in the first world war, 
waiting to go up the ladders, some of them, as they would say themselves, 
pissing their trousers with fear, but not showing the fear for fear of spooking 
a comrade beside them. I seek to borrow a tiny tincture, a vaccine of that sort 
of courage. When I beganDays Without End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/28/days-without-end-by-sebastian-barry-review>
, for instance, I had the thought that I could really make a mess of it – I 
might even self-sabotage it. I sat there with beating heart and blushing again. 
But my next thought mysteriously was, “but I won’t do that”. Then somehow it 
was not only easier to get on with it, but infinitely more joyful.

Strange, strange, joyful days, when one thing follows another with the 
vibrating intimacy of a heart’s-friend telling you something. When Thomas 
McNulty, the teller of the book, is telling me first. And I am surprised by 
what he says, and trying faithfully in that compact of strange friendship to 
get it right, really to set down as accurately as a human being can what he is 
imparting to me. The wildness and violence of the battles he goes through with 
his beloved man, Handsome John Cole. His love for him, and his love for their 
“daughter” Winona. All the chaos and horror of what he needed to tell me in 
order paradoxically to present a defence of life itelf, of being alive – the 
mere and absolute grace of being alive in time. And in that period of writing, 
I felt more alive than a writer has any right to be, in truth. There is a 
strength in you then like the effect of a Roman wine, it is all very 
inexplicable and maybe ancient, and so it should be.

I am not a drinking man by vocation but I fearlessly “took to the drink” for 
the period of writing the book, because in the evenings it was difficult to 
calm down, even sitting, lurking, by a lovely Wicklow fire of ash-wood. Yes, 
yes, you start with a glass and move on gradually to a half-bottle. By 
Christmas I suppose I was a sort of novice drunkard, and since the book was now 
finished, I gave up the drink in fright like a very devotee of Fr Matthew, the 
famous temperance priest. Yes, I dried out, and took to running daily again, 
and have been running ever since, faithfully, sober, and with a certain 
nostalgia for my old drinking days, and high gratitude to Thomas for the little 
book he lent me.

• Days Without End, published by Faber, is shortlisted for the 2016 Costa 
novel of the year award.
 