
January marks the end of the silly season for teachers and administrators, and 
an opportunity to talk about something else for the coming months – no, not 
Christmas, that other winter-term tradition: Ucas.

Friday 15 January was the final deadline for the majority of university 
courses and sixth form staff can now shut the blasted acronym away in their 
filing cabinets until August when A-level results come in and the saga starts 
afresh.

But while I have come to expect the botched personal statements and the 
frantic last-minute submissions, another trend which has seriously added to my 
workload in recent years is the over-involvement of parents.

We are entering an era of helicopter parenting at its worst. The micromanaging 
of reluctant applicants, dragged by their mums and dads through the admissions 
process frustrates and depresses me. I want to feel that our students are 
excited about university and are prepared for the experience, but neither is 
possible so long as their parents keep muscling in.

This is best exemplified by the father who I discovered was writing their 
son’s personal statement. It might have remained undetected if he hadn’t 
emailed to ask if he had done a good job of remodelling the original. He 
hadn’t; the enthusiasm and subject knowledge is best conveyed by the applicant, 
rather than their pushy parents. Stifling my exasperation, I explained that the 
school could not approve an application completed by a parent. The task was 
swiftly redirected to its proper owner so that he could express his 
indifference in his own words.

Unfortunately, this is not unusual. Once a parent contacted my colleague to 
check that it was OK to fill in the Ucas form for his daughter, who had limited 
internet access and was “very stubborn”. The teacher replied that for data 
protection reasons only students are allowed to create a Ucas account. The 
advice was that the student should contact me to guide her through the process 
– on her own terms. She never made an application. It was clearly her father’s 
dream, not hers. I was relieved that we had intervened and given control back 
to the student who would have otherwise been packed off to university like a 
naughty child.

Another student filled in a small part of the Ucas application and then 
explained their mother would complete the remainder (university choices and 
all). Good old Mum. Will she be shacking up with you in halls too? At first I 
dismissed this, incredulous. Surely he would do it himself or realise that he 
didn’t want to apply? But no, I ended up dealing with his bewildered parents 
who, unsurprisingly, found it almost impossible to complete the task by proxy.

How I wish I had tackled this with the student straight away. The ordeal 
rolled on for weeks with a barrage of emails and calls from the parents about 
every aspect of the process. Liaising with both parents and students is like 
working in duplicate and the inefficient trinity of applicant, parent and 
professional very nearly had us miss the deadline.

At the less outrageous end of the spectrum, my colleagues and I have been 
busier than ever this year nursing parents through the process. We struggle to 
respond to all the messages from them. In fact, we are so busy fielding 
requests from parents that the nuts and bolts of our job – dealing with the 
students themselves – is sidelined. Check through Emily’s form and get it sent 
off? Oh, hang on – another email from her mum asking why her application hasn’t 
reached Ucas. Better quickly reply to that first. I’ve spent an hour on the 
phone so that one father could be taken through the Ucas form line-by-line on 
his son’s behalf.

All this hand-holding seems unnecessary given the glut of resources available. 
Ucas publish their ownParent guide 
<https://www.ucas.com/sites/default/files/ucas-parent-guide-2016-entry_0.pdf>, 
as do most universities, withSouth Wales even providing a special magazine 
<http://www.southwales.ac.uk/study/parents-guide-university/receive-copy-parentspace-magazine/>
. The need for support at school level ought to have diminished, but instead we 
have nurtured a culture of dependence.

Our students are also more prepared for the application process than ever 
before – they should not need all this additional input. There are assemblies, 
mock interviews, visiting speakers and residential open days to guide them. The 
Ucas website, with its writing frames and linkedvideo tutorials 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/UCASonline> is extraordinarily comprehensive. The 
contrast with my own experience a couple of decades ago, where we were sat down 
with a pen and a couple of sheets of A4, is considerable.

The unfortunate truth is that parents’ good intentions can be 
counterproductive. When I come to write a reference, it is hard for me to 
celebrate the candidate’s organisational skills, drive and self-reliance, when 
I know Daddy did their form for them. And the Ucas application is more than a 
form; it is an exercise in planning, decision-making and self-evaluation: a 
rite of passage. Universities may not identify a candidate who has been babied 
at admissions level, but they will certainly stand out when the real work 
begins.

I am a parent and I understand the desire for your child to succeed; I feel it 
too. But this over-parenting does nothing for young people’s self-esteem and 
belittles their ability to achieve simple tasks and make sensible decisions for 
themselves. I owe it to universities to bring them students who are fully 
signed up to the adventure, not parent-pecked loafers who can’t be bothered to 
do the application.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 