
The scene plays out as I open my eyes to the light of day. I’m screamingly 
aware that my bedfellow is neither one of the kids nor Harry the cat. Patently 
it’s not even my bed. Beside me is a woman who has either avant-garde skin tone 
PJs with pink spots or is naked. I stare at the ceiling in both shock and 
unintentional tribute to Billy Crystal’s pose from When Harry Met Sally, as he 
wakes up to the horror of having slept with his close friend, played by Meg 
Ryan. With full consciousness comes great guilt at my first sex since Helen’s 
death and I cry like a baby.

So runs the script, but not the truth. I don’t wake up at all because we’ve 
not been to sleep, having spent the night, as Keats wouldn’t say, “hard at it”. 
Better still, or massively worse, I’m sure for some fellow widowers whose grief 
has taken a different trajectory to mine, it was absolutely bloody marvellous. 
Far from guilt, I feel like the bloke in Ice Cold in Alex longing for a cold 
beer while enduring days in the desert who finally gets to lift the icy glass 
to his lips. Well, I’ve been lifting warmer things to mine in the last few 
hours and do so again, so missing two of the trains home I should have boarded.

I’m away from home at a school reunion. “Come this year, Adam. You’re not 
working, so no excuses. I’ve been asking you for years. Bloody come!”, Tom had 
exhorted. I’ve ducked these dinners on the basis that the people I liked in the 
past I still see – they’re called friends – but the rest I wouldn’t choose to 
travel to meet again. More dubiously the mantra “hated them then, hate them 
now” holds true. However, Tom and his wife, Gail, have been kind and supportive 
and I agree to go.

As it turned out, I really enjoyed the reunion’s chat and camaraderie; my 
senses sharpened by low expectations and I suspect the sheer relief of a night 
off from my widower cares and bleeding practicalities.

Over dinner, by chance or by Tom’s unsubtle hand, I’m sitting directly 
opposite Lucy – possible the only single woman in the room anything like my age 
in what is a very male-dominated environment. After a slow start, we get on 
well, not in the same academic year but with enough common ground to kick 
things off and ease my way into chatting someone up (is it still called that?) 
for the first time in 27 years. We are getting on like a house on fire in a 
giggly, daft way.

Then the killer question comes, “So do you have kids?” OK, so not the married 
question but maybe my lack of wedding ring answers that. “Yes, I have two kids 
at home, which makes being away all the more of a treat.” Cheesy but stay with 
me on this, it really had been a long time. “So they live with you, not their 
mother?” Lucy asks. Momentarily, I’m tempted to lie, claim to be divorced as 
I’ve seen first-hand how being told that the man they’d previously quite 
fancied is a widower, works like a bucket of Harry Potter’s Polyjuice potion 
transforming any woman instantly into my mother.

But I’m not Judas and won’t deny any facet of Helen’s life or death. So I pour 
cold widower-water on to the rising heat of Lucy’s interest, “No, I’m afraid my 
wife died last year.” Even as I say it, the words sound odd. I hadn’t distanced 
Helen’s death into another year before.

The effect is also new; Lucy is moved but not maternal. Later, we’re surprised 
to be in the same hotel and less surprised when we end up sharing the same bed 
for a night of the sort of exercise I’ve not experienced for some time this 
side of hot yoga, downward dog an’ all. My lips are sealed at this point; being 
nominated for a bad sex literary award would be humiliating enough were I 
writing fiction.

Was it was fun? Absolutely. Would I do it again? Certainly. Should I tell 
anyone? Definitely not.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 