
When it comes to worrying about the underrepresentation of women in science, 
especially at higher levels, are we stuck in the past?

A paper published on Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences <http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2011/02/02/1014871108.full.pdf+html>
 suggests that we are. Researchers Stephen Ceci and Wendy Williams from Cornell 
University in the US reviewed 20 years of data on gender discrimination and the 
status of women in the sciences. They argue that too much attention has been 
focused on apparent sexual discrimination when women apply for new jobs, 
funding or to be published in journals.

Instead, Ceci and Williams believe that women are more likely than men to make 
personal choices – many of which may well be constrained – that prevent them 
from progressing to more senior levels (eg time off to raise children, 
following a spouse, caring for parents). They argue that focusing on 
discrimination at application stages may represent a costly red herring and 
that resources should be redirected towards education and policy changes that 
reflect the challenges faced by women interested in building a long-term career 
in science.

In 1997, an iconic paper on sexual discrimination in the various application 
stages of a scientific career was published in Nature. In'Nepotism and sexism 
in peer-review' 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v387/n6631/pdf/387341a0.pdf>, Christine 
Wennerås and Agnes Wold from Göteborg University in Sweden set out to 
investigate why women were being awarded significant percentages of PhDs but a 
smaller chunk of postdocoral research posts and a much smaller still proportion 
of senior posts. Was it simply that women were less productive, or less 
ambitious, or were they subject to discrimination?

In the peer review system of the Swedish Medical Research Council, applicants 
submit a CV, a bibliography and a research proposal which are then scored by 
reviewers. When Wennerås and Wold subjected these reviews to scientific 
scrutiny they found that female applicants received consistently lower scores.

Highly influential as this report has been, Ceri and Williams note how hard it 
has been to replicate these results. Indeed, when it comes to hiring, there is 
some evidence that in maths-intensive fields, women are interviewed and hired 
for academic posts slightly in excess of their representation at PhD student 
level.

This does not mean that female scientists are not subject to sexual 
discrimination, but perhaps it is a more institutional form of prejudice. The 
structures and culture of science may tend to be less favourable for women (and 
this may make scientific careers less flexible for men too).

In her blog, 
<http://occamstypewriter.org/athenedonald/2010/11/09/what-women-think-first-thoughts-on-the-athena-survey-of-science-engineering-and-technology-2010/>
 Athene Donald pulled out some interesting results from last year'sAthena Survey
 <http://www.athenasurvey.org.uk/uk_results_2010.pdf>, a study of experiences 
of progression through science careers. For example, more men than women seem 
to be aware of "women in science initiatives" in their own department. Most 
importantly, perhaps, women are far more likely to lack knowledge about 
promotion procedures, and male academic staff are more likely to be appraised 
as a matter of course than women, which can also effect promotion. These are 
cultural issues, but ones that managers must be aware of if they are to make a 
long-term scientific career available to all.

A personal reflection 
<http://sciencecareers.sciencemag.org/career_magazine/previous_issues/articles/2011_02_04/caredit.a1100011>
 by former biochemist Kathy Weston published in Science Careers last week noted 
with some cynicism the type of freedom provided in "what was touted as a 
meritocracy". Yes, a scientist may be allowed to work whenever they like on 
whatever they find interesting, but "'whenever you like' often translates into 
'all the time,' and 'interesting' is a matter of who you're talking to."

Weston also believes she would have been able to run her lab very successfully 
if she had been permitted to job-share with a close female colleague, who also 
had two young children. As Ceci and Williams stress in their conclusion, 
universities need to find ways of offering part-time scientific posts.

Science is an incredibly competitive career. If you want to nab one of the 
scarce long-term posts, not only will you need to keep an eye on promotion 
procedures, you will need to put a huge number of hours in, and may well have 
to be prepared to work abroad.

This is sometimes seen as a positive test: only the most devoted make it 
through. But human lives are more complex than that, and there is nothing wrong 
with a scientific work force made up of people with passions outside their 
labs. Indeed, one might even see it as a healthy state of affairs for any 
profession, and one most likely to foster the sort of culture of imagination 
and innovation that draws people into the field in the first place.
 