
A Chinese container ship hit a wall of the new lane of the Panama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama> Canal, a Canal Authority official 
and a local ship agent said on Monday, the third such incident since the 
expanded waterway opened one month ago amid design concerns.


 Thomson Reuters ship tracking data showed the Xin Fei Zhou, owned by China 
Shipping Container Lines, was anchored outside the canal after a photograph 
published bythe maritime online news site gCaptain.com  
<http://gcaptain.com/containership-damaged-in-panama-canals-new-locks/>showed 
the vessel with a sizeable gash in its hull. The ship agent said it was 
undergoing repairs.

 The latest incident comes after two other vessels have reportedly made 
contact with the newly expanded canal since the $5.4 billion projectwas 
inaugurated on June 26. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/26/panama-canal-first-ship-sails-through-newly-expanded>

 The expansion, which triples the size of ships that can pass through the 
waterway, has drawn criticism from industry groups that claim its design makes 
the transit of larger ships unsafe for the vessels and workers.

 The Panama Canal Authority said its operations team was investigating the 
latest incident.

 The Lycaste Peace, the first LPG tanker to pass through the new section of 
the canal, ripped off a fender during a collision in late June, causing some 
minor damage to the railing of the ship, according to a source familiar with 
the incident.

 The Panama Canal Authority did not respond to a request for comment about the 
Lycaste Peace.

 The Authority has confirmed that the Cosco Shipping Panama, the container 
ship that made the inaugural journey through the canal, also made contact with 
its fenders, which a spokesman for the Authority said was normal.

 A representative for MC-Seamax Management Limited, the manager of the Cosco 
Shipping Panama, said it suffered no damage.

 While contact with fenders may occur in transit, the three events together 
are likely to renew concerns about the safety of moving expensive vessels 
through the expanded canal, which experts say has less space for manoeuvers 
than the original locks.

 The International Transport Workers’ Federation commissioned a study of the 
expansion in response to safety concerns of its members. Among other issues 
identified in April, the study found the dimensions of the new locks were too 
small for safe operations and that the design left little room for error.

 The Panama Canal Authority dismissed the study’s findings.
 