
Dear Clive,

What a pity that you, and landowners in general, want to deny the public the 
simple ability to wander harmlessly away from public paths, on certain types of 
uncultivated land (mountain, moor, heath, down and common).

Don't you realise that people need to be able to enjoy that wonderful feeling 
of freedom to go where they will with the wind in their faces, to enjoy a view, 
or ancient monument? They also need to know that they are allowed there, 
without fear of being turned off for trespassing - which is why we are calling 
for a new law to clarify our rights and responsibilities, as well as those of 
the landowners and occupiers.

The government has made it clear to landowners that in order to avoid 
legislation they must volunteer access which is permanent, covers all four 
million acres of uncultivated land, is clear and certain for the public, cost- 
effective, of good quality and capable of being monitored and enforced. As we 
predicted, landowners have so far been unable to volunteer more than a tiny 
amount of access which meets these targets.

 Yet you go on arguing that voluntary access is the answer, which flies in the 
face of reality. Relying on the goodwill of landowners provides no certainty to 
the public and any access given - of which there is precious little - can be 
taken away at any time. On the other hand, legal access will be shown on maps, 
with common-sense restrictions so that people will not interfere with 
legitimate interests. Surely you can see that this is beneficial all round?

Kate Ashbrook 

Dear Kate,

Aren't we both really after the same thing - more walking in the countryside? 
Your approach is not the most practical way of achieving it.

These days the countryside is a more complex place than when the Ramblers' 
Association came into being. Lots of different types of people not just 
ramblers, now have a stake in it. For example, there are far, far more members 
of the RSPB than there are ramblers. Don't the interests of ramblers need to be 
balanced with those of birdwatchers, for whom indiscriminate rambling across 
open country would wreck their enjoyment of wildlife? To landowners, the 
countryside is a workshop. Most are delighted to share its beauty with others, 
as long as they are not left too much out of pocket. Naturally they prefer to 
provide voluntary access agreements, which can be modified as farming practices 
change, than permanent ones. A huge number have done so. Look at the Country 
Landowners' Association's access register on the Internet.

Remember, too, that the great majority of walkers do not want unfettered 
access over moorland (marching across heather is tough). They want paths that 
take them in circular routes past attractive scenery, interesting habits and 
perhaps a pub or two.

As for a bill in Parliament, it would never become law. Moorland, downland, 
heathland, etc. would all require a legal definition, which does not exist. The 
Government would have to produce new maps. Landowners would be entitled to 
expensive compensation. The Treasury wouldn't have it.

But you would get almost everything you want by cooperation.

Clive Aslet

 Dear Clive,

If you would leave the rarefied atmosphere of the Country Life offices, you 
would discover that most landowners are not 'delighted to share its beauty with 
others'. Ramblers who are out and about in all sorts of countryside know that 
this is a load of rubbish. There must be hundreds of Private, Keep Out signs 
for every one that says Welcome, as a morning's walk - do try it sometime - 
will show you.

Even more ludicrous is your claim that the entries on the CLA's web-site 
register prove that landowners are sharing the land with the public. The 
register consists overwhelmingly of permissive paths, which can be withdrawn, 
hedged about with restrictions as to route and time (one is available only in 
bluebell time), facilities (eg riding and shooting) which have to be paid for, 
plus some freedom-to-roam sites which the public already pays for as part of 
official stewardship schemes.

Don't let the CLA con you into believing that they have suddenly become 
pro-access. They have felt the hot breath of legislation on their necks and 
have created the so-called access register in the hope of heading the 
Government off. And don't let the CLA tell you what ramblers really want by way 
of walking routes; oddly enough we know what we want better than they do.

Kate Ashbrook

Dear Kate,

Maybe the reason you see so many Keep Out signs is that you go looking for 
them. It would be daft of landowners not to find ways of accommodating the 
public. Soon the visiting public will be the best crop they can raise.

Obviously not all landowners are angels. On the other hand, some walkers leave 
gates open, drop litter and let their dogs worry sheep. But the great majority 
in both camps - excluding, perhaps, the Ramblers' Association - are perfectly 
reasonable.

I cannot understand your objection to permissive footpaths. I would like to 
see many more paths in the country. Does it really matter if these paths are 
not absolutely the same each year, providing the total mileage in any area 
continues to rise? If some mechanism could be found whereby landowners did not 
feel that permissive footpaths would inevitably turn into statutory ones (as at 
present), the access issue would be solved overnight.

Our crowded, intensely used countryside needs flexibility. The demand for an 
unfettered right to roam, instead of a greatly increased network of paths, 
smacks of fanaticism. I am sorry you did not answer the point, but how many 
hospital beds would you be prepared to sacrifice for a small number of rambling 
zealots to pick their way over heather? Equally, what happens to the fishermen 
right-to-roamers will drive from the riverbanks?

Clive Aslet

Dear Clive,

now you need a lesson in law - there is already a perfectly good mechanism to 
prevent permissive paths becoming statutory. And what's this 'unfettered right 
to roam'? Odd that somebody unconnected with the CLA should regurgitate their 
myths so uncritically. As I've explained: we want freedom with restrictions 
which respect all interests and which penalise errant members of the public as 
well as landowners who bar the legal way. And we're not talking about 
riverbanks. You deliberately misconstrue what I am saying.

You want me to mention money. There's no need for general compensation to 
landowners for the new freedom-to-roam law, although grants for improving 
access facilities and charging for car parks, etc would be okay. Your reference 
to hospital beds is presumably facetious. Greater access means more exercise, 
which means greater health and fewer hospital beds.

'Flexible' is a euphemism for landowners' veto; walkers need certainty and 
confidence. Our national opinion poll showed that the 'small number of rambling 
zealots' who want freedom-to-roam legislation is 85 per cent of the population.

Kate Ashbrook

Dear Kate,

Kate, stop rambling for a while and take up yoga. Develop a calmer and less 
antagonistic perspective. Understand that there are others in the world apart 
from ramblers. You cannot expropriate other people's rights without 
compensation; nor would there be any practicable means of bringing errant souls 
to book.

Only a tiny proportion of the millions who walk in this country are members of 
your extremist association. Your approach resembles an industrial dispute of 
the 1970s. The world has moved on; so has the countryside. With good will, the 
wishes of many different groups wanting to use the countryside can be 
accommodated. Your letters do not exude goodwill.

Reassess your objectives. If what you really want is greater access for the 
largest number of walkers, that will be achieved through constructive 
discussion with landowners and other country groups. You would seem to prefer a 
shouting match.
 