
Dear Andrew, 

 The Dome is a national joke - a party tent stuck out on a toxic little 
peninsula of estuary London, waiting to be filled by an assortment of 
wow-factors that has all the appeal of an early learning centre. Nobody, save 
the committee-bound stuffed-shirts responsible for the sorry spectacle, is 
remotely impressed by the fakery that is being arrogantly passed off as 
futurism. And everybody (barring these Conran corporates) thinks that the £750 
million price-tag flips the comedy into tragedy.

 Do not rest assured that the brow-beating TV advertising will brainwash us 
into thinking that this theme-park-cum-trade-fair is an appropriate way to mark 
the new millennium. It won't. Centurial celebrations are about people not 
museums, shared experiences not showy gestures. We ought to be rejoicing in the 
multiple voices of contemporary Britain, not muffling them beneath a monolithic 
and grandiloquent national statement.

 I'm not sure who will be more disappointed come D-day: those conceptually 
marooned in 1851 or 1951 who are looking to Greenwich to feed their misplaced 
nostalgia for a Britain that was once Great, or those who imagine that a 
button-pushing tour through the colon of a two-headed giant will somehow 
transport them into a new-fangled world of tomorrow.

 Yours sincerely, 

Marina Benjamin, author of Living At The End Of The World (Picador)

 Dear Marina,

 Come on, the Great Exhibition of 1851 and the Festival of Britain in 1951 
attracted millions and celebrated much of what made Britain 'great' back then. 
But this is now. The Dome is about the possibilities of the next millennium, 
celebrating British creativity as it is now but in a world that has moved on 
from 'grandiloquent national statements'. It is precisely because there is such 
an incredible variety of ideas and talents being put to work to realise the 14 
different zones in the Dome that you won't get the complete picture until you 
go there in 2000.

 It is true that the site of the Millennium Dome was once a 'toxic little 
peninsula'. Derelict for over 20 years, it has now been cleaned up and brought 
back into productive use. New parks, gardens, a millennium village with new 
homes, a school and a health centre plus a hotel, shops and leisure activities 
will see the site transformed. The regeneration is bringing new life and jobs 
to an area blighted by years of neglect. It will leave a lasting legacy.

 It is true that the millennium is about people. That is why we are seeking to 
engage everyone in projects and programmes around the UK. The Millennium 
Experience Company is not just involved in building the Dome but is responsible 
for a range of other projects around the UK. The Learning Experience - our 
education programme - will reach every school and college; the Millennium 
Festival Fund will allow communities all over the UK to mark the millennium in 
a way that is appropriate to them; and projects such as Marks and Spencer's 
Children's Promise will allow everyone to make their contribution to the next 
millennium by donating their last hour's earnings from this millennium. It is 
time to make a difference.

 Andrew Parry, Greenwich Liaison Manager, New Millennium Experience Company 

 Dear Andrew, 

What I hear you saying is, trust us, have faith, wait and see. Aren't these 
the very assurances you and the Government refuse to accept from the Jubilee 
Line management? If they're not good enough for you, why should they be good 
enough for the rest of us? People balk at the Dome's contents because they 
don't appreciate being patronised by learning zones; they can get their fill of 
interactive ABC at the Science Museum. Besides, they understand that British 
creativity is much more than the sum of our design and entertainment industries 
even if you don't. Building model villages does not regeneration make. That 
only happens when governments tackle homelessness, overhaul rail networks, 
invest in education and training. Without such old-fashioned regenerative 
policies, nothing genuinely new will ever emerge and the 21st century will 
begin as wearily as ours is ending.

 Whatever 'lasting legacy' you claim to be creating is confined to a pinpoint 
on the national map. I call that tokenism.

 As for the national programme you're so boastful about, you neglected to 
mention that its total budget is £50 million. With the Greenwich jackpot 
ringing in at nearly £600 million, I can only assume that the rest of Britain 
is in for a very thin time of it. Such blithe centralism on the part of a 
Government committed to devolution and greater regional autonomy simply will 
not do.

 Yours sincerely,

 Marina Benjamin

 Dear Marina,

 You may already be aware that Greenwich is the 'home of time', from which the 
world's time zones are measured. Creating the focus of the nation's millennium 
celebrations in Greenwich gives the celebrations international significance. 
The British Tourist Authority has estimated that the benefits to the UK economy 
of foreign visitors to the Dome will be between £500 million and £1 billion.

 Greenwich was chosen as the site for the Dome following a national 
competition involving 61 sites around the country. This combination of its 
association with time and the opportunities for regeneration made Greenwich the 
only sensible location. We share your view that education and training are 
important to regeneration. That is why we have made £1 million available to 
support local labour and training schemes.

 We also have an education plan involving local schools and colleges. There is 
also a £31 million Single Regeneration Budget programme in the area designed to 
improve skills, create jobs and develop businesses.

 Before you criticise the amount of money being spent on national projects, 
you should include the £100 million festival fund. And don't forget that the 
£400 million National Lottery grant for the Dome is only 20 per cent of the £2 
billion being spent by the Millennium Commission. While the Dome is the focus 
of the nation's celebrations the opportunity is there for everyone to 
participate.

 Andrew

 Dear Andrew,

 So the truth is out at last. You're spending £2 billion, not £750 million, on 
millennial celebrations. Is that really the price you put on boosting the 
nation's morale? How sad. I can think of dozens of more modest ways in which 
public money might have been used to give people a festive injection of 
national pride. Oh, but I forget: it's the rest of the world we're showing off 
to. Britannia may no longer rule the waves, but we're still Masters of Time. 
That's the most fatuous New Labour spin I've yet heard.

 Greenwich's historical significance is all the more reason to erect something 
permanent on the site - a monument, an artwork, something dignified. It would 
not perhaps attract the hordes of tourists you so assiduously court, but it 
might give us pause for thought. Compared to the Dome's sensory overload, a 
spot of quiet self-examination might do some of the work of moral reckoning the 
year 2000 demands. The millennium is about moving forward with self-awareness, 
and an understanding of what needs to be left behind.

 It's not time to make a difference, it's time to get real.

 Marina Benjamin

 Dear Marina,

 I am dismayed by your negativity. Our research shows that the vast majority 
in this country want to mark the millennium with a meaningful celebration. They 
also feel that they personally can 'make a difference'. We are 'getting real'. 
The Millennium Experience will give people a range of opportunities to 
participate. The response from the 300,000 or so visitors to our visitor centre 
in Greenwich is overwhelmingly positive. Are you in danger of losing touch with 
the general public on this one? There was never any secret about the £2 billion 
being spent on millennium projects around the country. When the Lottery was set 
up by the last Government, money raised was earmarked for five good causes - 
celebrating the millennium was one.

 The Millennium Experience is just one of many projects. Others range from the 
Lowry Centre in Salford to new village halls and cycle routes. They will all 
leave a lasting legacy. The Dome will remain at Greenwich long after the 
Millennium Experience has closed. It will be an icon for London in the same way 
that the Eiffel Tower is for Paris - another structure which has confounded its 
detractors - and will continue to boost the regeneration of east London long 
into the third millennium Yours, Andrew
 