
Working full-time after the age of 40 is not good for the brain. Doing more 
than three days a week once you reach this age can damage your ability to think.
A paper from the Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research 
<https://www.melbourneinstitute.com/downloads/working_paper_series/wp2016n07.pdf>
 says that, while working up to 30 hours a week is good for the brains of the 
over-40s, do any more than that and it goes downhill. If you were to work 60 
hours a week, your cognitive ability would be worse than that of someone who 
didn’t work at all. Still, on the plus side, you would have more money than 
them.

The researchers used data from more than 3,000 men and 3,500 women who 
completed the nationalHousehold Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (Hilda) 
<https://www.melbourneinstitute.com/hilda/> survey. The survey tested the 
ability to read words aloud, recite lists of numbers and match letters and 
numbers in a speed trial. Testing reading is a measure of the “knowing” part of 
ability, says lead author Prof Colin McKenzie, while the other two tests 
capture fluid intelligence – the “thinking” part of ability that includes 
memory, abstract reasoning and executive reasoning.

This lowering of scores in those aged over 40 who work full-time doesn’t fit 
with the idea that working for longer helps people stay mentally sharp, or with 
the notion of “use it or lose it”. So, should those who can afford to work less 
from the age of 40 reduce their hours?

The solution

Most of us have to keep working full-time. But does it matter what sort of job 
you do? Is your ability to think preserved,as some research suggests 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12735080>, if you have an intellectually 
demanding job? The Hilda survey doesn’t ask questions about the quality of 
work, and McKenzie says it’s hard to tell: “It’s very difficult to identify the 
causal effects of the type of work on cognitive functions. People may be 
selected into certain occupations according to their cognitive abilities.”

It’s also not clear why working more than 30 hours is not good for your brain, 
while fewer hours is beneficial. McKenzie says that work can be a double-edged 
sword. “While work can stimulate brain activity, long working hours can cause 
fatigue and stress, which potentially damage cognitive functions. Full-time 
work (40 hours a week) is still better than no work in terms of maintaining 
cognitive functioning, but it is not maximising the positive effects of work,” 
he says.

Results may also vary between countries, depending on how much holiday people 
can take each year. It’s hard to control for all the factors that might bias a 
study such as this (including choices around the hours worked and the type of 
work), but it makes the idea of working full-time until the age of 67 – which 
the government aims to bring in between 2026 and 2028 – even less appealing.
 