
When my second child was three months old (the elder is four), I found out by 
accident that my boyfriend of 10 years has been cheating on me online for at 
least three years; he has admitted to email relationships with three separate 
women. He has been setting up secret accounts, exchanging fantasies, photos and 
has had virtual sex with two other women via Skype (masturbating – he says it 
wasn’t that great in practice).

It has been two years since I found out, since then we haven’t had sex and 
counselling hasn’t really got us anywhere. I like to think everyone deserves a 
chance, but I also think once a cheater, always a cheater.

I read the emails and the fantasies he expressed included sex with an older 
man, sex with a transvestite, threesomes and acting out rape with a woman. He 
has since admitted to masturbating compulsively since he was a small boy, and 
phoning gay chat lines when he was younger. He has psoriasis and body issues 
and has blamed his behaviour on unaddressed anxiety and depression.

I’d have left him immediately if we didn’t have two young kids, but I feel my 
inability to forgive is going to break up our family. He has genuinely done 
exactly what you would hope for in this situation: never blamed me, given me 
access to his phone and emails, sought separate counselling and he has been 
trying to address issues he would have avoided before. How can I find a way to 
forgive him? Or should I accept we need to break up our relationship and 
therefore our family?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 