
When Tamara Hassan was doing A-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> at college, the expectation was 
that she would go to university. But after visiting a careers fair, and 
stumbling across some information about vocational careers, she began to look 
into the alternatives.

Now 19, she is about to start a customer services apprenticeship, but wishes 
she'd known about her options earlier. "I had never really heard about 
apprenticeships," she says. "I was never told there were other routes out 
there."

Her experience is not unusual. A recent study carried out by the careers 
websiteNot Going To Uni <http://www.notgoingtouni.co.uk/> found that out of 
1,774 university graduates, three quarters had not been told about vocational 
routes and apprenticeships while at school or college. More than half said they 
would have taken a vocational qualification if they had known about them.

With almost 1 million young people currently unemployed, it has never been 
more important for students to have information on a range of career routes – 
and not just university degrees.

But following the closure of the Connexions service in 2011, responsibility 
for careers information, advice and guidance has passed to schools – without 
any additional funding for delivery of services – with varying levels of 
effectiveness.

Another blow has been the removal of the requirement for schools to provide 
pre-16 work experience, says Karen O'Donoghue, president of the Career 
Development Institute, the professional body for careers development 
practitioners.

"Provision [of careers advice] is absolutely patchy," says Brian Lightman, 
general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders. "We are 
aware of some very good practice, but lots of schools are really struggling." 
Changes to the school-leaving age – due to rise to 17 this year and 18 by 2015 
– make good, early careers advice "all the more important", he adds.

But Spencer Mehlman, managing director of Not Going to Uni, says some teachers 
are unaware of the range of opportunities available to their students. "A lot 
of teachers who are now having to promote careers advice and guidance on top of 
their teaching role do not necessarily know where to look to find this 
information," he says.

Young people wanting to explore their options can find out about 
apprenticeships via theNational Apprenticeship Service 
<http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk/> website, which lists vacancies. They can 
also get help online, via email and telephone from theNational Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>, which replaced 
Connexions last year.

But many educators and careers professionals feel this doesn't go far enough 
and is certainly no replacement for the face-to-face support young people badly 
need.

School careers adviser Susan Burke has responded by setting up her own website 
to provide careers information and advice specifically for young people.

"It's a strange situation, there's so much choice for young people out there – 
university, gap years, apprenticeships – but just at a time when there is this 
choice, bang, careers advice is gone."
 