
Lazy Sunday mornings are becoming a thing of the past for the upper echelons 
of Westminster.

On what was once the traditional day of rest, an expanding audience of more 
than 2 million people is tuning in to TV’s array of political chatshows – with 
Sky adding a new competitor to the field this weekend.

Seizing the Sunday morning political agenda will be Theresa May, who is to 
give her first big interview of 2017 on the first episode of Sophy Ridge on 
Sunday, which launches onSky News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> 
at 10am.

May’s appearance is a coup for the new programme, which will go head to head 
with ITV’s Peston on Sunday, and follows TheAndrew Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> Show on the BBC at 9am.

Ridge’s show, which will feature a regular “on the road” slot to show how 
politics is affecting those outside the Westminster bubble, promises to 
investigate how decisions made by the political elite affect the public.

Robert Peston, political editor for ITV News, whose Sunday morning show 
launched in May 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/29/itv-robert-peston-bbc-andrew-marr-sunday-politics>
, welcomed the competition from Sky and said he saw the launch as a sign of 
increased interest in politics: “My view is that the changes the country is 
going through are as important as anything we have seen since the 1979 general 
election and the election of Thatcher and arguably more than that. If you are 
in the media business, you need to invest in politics.”

Sunday is still the only day of the week when television news, long accused of 
following the agenda set by the day’s newspapers, gets to set the agenda for 
the week ahead.

Peston says political shows follow the “antique shop model” where more than 
one show increases the buzz: “If there’s only one on the street, no one bothers 
to turn up, but when there’s five in a row, people think there’ll be something 
to see.”

Yet Peston’s Sunday morning ratings suggest live viewers are not the only key 
to a programme’s success. The Sunday night repeat of the show, which goes out 
straight after the ITV late news, typically attracts more than twice the 10am 
audience.

Peston on Sunday, not back for another week, enjoyed its highest overall 
viewing figures whenBoris Johnson appeared to talk about migration 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38200112> on 4 December. Almost 300,000 
watched in the morning after Johnson had also appeared on Marr, and another 
756,000 watched after 10pm. The final weeks of the show attracted more than 1m 
viewers each.

Ridge’s show, which replaces a longer news programme hosted by Sky’s Dermot 
Murnaghan 
<https://corporate.sky.com/media-centre/news-page/2016/sky-news-unveils-new-schedule>
, is not expected to attract more than a small fraction of the average Marr 
audience of nearly 1.7m viewers.



Yet when all three Sunday morning politics shows are combined with Andrew 
Neil’s Sunday Politics, significantly more than 2m people are tuning in to the 
nation’s politicians instead of lying in.

And despite traditional television viewing in steady decline, ratings for news 
and current affairs programming enjoyed a fillip last year, especially on a 
Sunday.

The Marr show, which attracted average audiences of 1.4m in 2015, saw a 15% 
improvement overall in its average audience in 2016. On 26 June it attracted 
the highest audience since it launched in 2005 when 2.7m viewers watched Marr 
discuss the results of the EU referendum with Hilary Benn and Iain Duncan Smith.

Traditionally, the BBC beast – relatively unchallenged until 2016 – starts the 
year by interviewing each of the party leaders, often starting with the prime 
minister.


A BBC spokesperson denied that May’s decision to appear on Sky’s sofa was 
anything other than a recognition that she had already appeared with Marr in 
the autumn: “The Andrew Marr Show has seen its biggest audience ever in the 
last 12 months. The prime minister has been on the show twice since September 
and we continue to discuss with her team an alternative date for her to come 
onto the programme in the near future.” The Marr show was the first political 
programme May appeared on after being appointed last year.

The shows are increasingly using Facebook and Twitter, with all employing 
social media journalists to promote and share short clips.


Peston, with almost 800,000 Twitter followers – and even a separate spoof 
account for his hair <https://twitter.com/robpestonhair?lang=en-gb> – knows how 
important social media is, particularly for attracting younger viewers.

At 32, Ridge is a generation younger than her male rivals on ITV and the BBC. 
The former political correspondent for the now-defunct tabloid News of the 
World and ex-Sky News senior political correspondent has 75,800 Twitter 
followers, and willfollow her show by going straight ontoFacebook Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/facebook-live-social-media-live-streaming>
 to interact with the audience.

“Sophy on Sunday will bring a fresh approach to Sunday morning broadcasting,” 
said John Ryley, head of Sky News,when the show was announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/sophy-ridge-on-sunday-programme-launch-sky-news>
. “This will not be a show that reports from the Westminster bubble, but will 
be investigating how decisions made by the political elite affect the public 
and their lives. Sophy is an exceptional talent, and I know she will offer a 
new perspective on the political week for our customers across the UK and 
beyond.”

Politics on Sunday: how many are watching?

• The Andrew Marr Show, BBC One, 9am – 1.5m (live)
• Peston on Sunday, (below) ITV, 10am – 270,000 (live), 830,000 (repeat)
• Sunday Politics, with Andrew Neil, BBC One, 11am – 830,000 (live)
• Murnaghan, with Dermot Murnaghan, Sky News (last show aired in December) – 
150,000-200,000
Average recent ratings taken from Broadcasters’ Audience Research Board 
overnight figures and Sky
 