
At Sky’s sprawling campus near Heathrow, Sky News’s energetic chief, John 
Ryley, is beaming as he proudly points to the channel’s new “glass box” studio, 
which juts out into thin air a storey above the open-plan ground-floor atrium.

“We are making the biggest investment since Sky News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> began in 1989,” he says. “At a 
time when certain observers say the future of live rolling news is moribund and 
dead, the glass box is a very good illustration of Sky challenging the status 
quo. It is a manifestation of the future of non-stop journalism. A very good 
physical embodiment of what we are about”.

The custom-built studio also provides a symbol of the contrast in fortunes 
between Ryley’s news empire, which he has run for 11 years, and his former 
employers at the BBC.

Martin Baron: 'We took Donald Trump seriously from the beginning'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/30/martin-baron-we-took-donald-trump-seriously-from-the-beginning>
Until July, when director general Tony Hall guaranteed its future, speculation 
had been rife that the BBC News channel might be axed or merged with the BBC 
World News channel to help find the hundreds of millions in savings the BBC is 
being forced to make over the next few years.


Does Ryley think his counterpart at the BBC, the head of news James Harding, 
should have axed the news channel to help find his division’s £80m share of the 
savings?


“I think competition is good so I’m pleased we have a competitor,” says Ryley, 
after a significant pause. “Daily journalism can be a very tough business. I do 
feel if I’m honest that over the last 18 months that the BBC News channel has 
lost a bit of its life and vitality. But they’ve made a decision that they are 
putting their editorial focus into their jewels, the [BBC Radio 4] Today 
programme and the BBC Ten O’Clock News.”


He can’t help adding one more dig at Auntie, where he began his career as a 
graduate trainee in the late 1980s, saying he felt the Today programme was a 
“little slow on the uptake” on the airport attack in Brussels this year.


“We were lucky, we had our correspondent Alex Rossi at the airport at the time 
which gave us a distinct advantage,” he concedes, before adding: “The BBC has 
fantastic journalists but they have to cut their costs accordingly.”


Sky has made its own job cuts, with a number of senior journalists and 
on-screen presenters leaving, including Sunrise’sEamonn Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/13/eamonn-holmes-cut-off-mid-sentence-sky-news-sunrise-farewell>
,Andrew Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/04/sky-news-anchors-leave-shipandrew-wilson-lorna-dunkley-samantha-simmond>
, Lorna Dunkley, Samantha Simmonds and Jeremy Thompson, who retired saying it 
wastime to make space for “young talent” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/06/sky-newss-john-thompson-to-retire-to-make-space-for-young-talent>
.

Is there a hint of ageism creeping into a Sky which, like most media 
organisations, is looking at a younger, cheaper, digital future?


“We have to sometimes as leaders of news organisations make tough choices 
[about] where we invest our money,” Ryley says. “The quality of our journalism 
is really important and I’ve decided to invest our money in specialist 
journalists. We are not at all ageist.”


He points to the likes of Dermot Murnaghan, Adam Boulton and Kay Burley who 
are “about” his age (54) or older.


So would he be interested in Mark Austin (58), who after 30 years is leaving 
ITV News, where Ryley worked prior to joining Sky in the mid-1990s?

Avoiding any direct comment on Austin’s departure, let alone the possibility 
of getting him on board, Ryley cagily keeps his options open: “We are always on 
the lookout for bright talent, young or old.”


He thinks recent changes at ITV News, which began a little over a year ago 
with Tom Bradby’s elevation to News at Ten anchor, were needed given Sky has 
become what he believes is the “second biggest newsbrand in the UK” over the 
past 10 years.


“I quite admired ITN and the News at Ten team at ITV for trying to do 
something different,” he says. “And I think Tom Bradby and his people tried to 
do things differently and therefore I applaud it.”


A visit to see the glass box is an interesting experience. It puts you in the 
position of an observer of those working on floors above and below, yet also 
exposes those within to the outside world, much like a fish in an aquarium.


During breaks, presenters and visitors need to be wary of the occasional 
low-orbit loops of the cameras that circle the set from above. One presenter 
jokes that the steel frames holding the cameras could do with rubber protectors.


Ryley characterises the creation of the new studio as part of a wider 
“reinvention” of Sky News which also includes “getting our act together with 
apps and our mobile approach”.


“The only way to achieve longevity is to go through renewal,” he says. “Ten to 
15 years ago people would have thought of Sky News as purely and only a 
breaking news service with big red straps across the bottom of the TV. Nowadays 
I feel you need to do much more than that. TheTV news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tvnews> channel is the backbone, the 
production core, that generates content for all the different outlets, whether 
it be mobile, supply to commercial radio or Snapchat.”


Ryley says people were at first “sneery” of Sky’s push on to Snapchat, but it 
has become a “serious place” for news in terms of numbers – 3 million people 
accessed Sky content on Snapchat Discover on the morning of the Brexit vote.


He says that by the end of this year Sky will have achieved 1bn views on 
social media, and on mobile weekly viewing is 5.1m, up 18% year on year.


When pressed, he admits that like most publishers a relationship with web 
giants such as Facebook can be a two-edged sword, an attractive distribution 
platform but with questionable revenue returns.


For example, he says Sky supplies Facebook Live content three times a day but 
it is “early days” on how much revenue will come of it.


“I think it has yet to play out,” he says. “We along with other news 
organisations will need to take a hard think about it.”


He also comes armed with a bit of news. Sky News has found a new studio to 
service the City after it was forced out of London’s Gherkin this year.


The operation, home to the weekday evening business show Ian King Live, was 
moved to Sky’s Westminster location at Millbank Studios, which some observed 
might make it trickier to attract some City guests.


Sky has struck a deal with none other than News Corporation, controlled by 
Rupert Murdoch (who through Fox is Sky’s biggest shareholder), to set up a full 
studio in the so-called “Baby Shard”.


Ryley says that despite the landlord being family – the building is home to 
the Times, Sunday Times, the Sun and Dow Jones – Sky paid “pretty good money to 
get in there”.


The proximity to the Murdoch-owned news organisations brings us to one of the 
big questions hanging over the long-term future of Sky News. Before Fox was 
forced to give up on its attempt to take full control in 2011, plans had been 
hatched to spin-off the loss-making channel to address concerns about media 
plurality

Does Ryley worry about what happens if rumours of Fox mounting another 
takeover bid for Sky turn out to be true?

“I’m an optimist,” he says. “I don’t worry about the future of Sky News. Sky 
and Fox have a very strong history of investing in news. Rupert Murdoch has 
invested in journalism at the Times for a very long time, and invested in 
journalism at Sky. So I don’t worry about the future.”

CV

Age: 54


Education: Eastbourne College, 1975-1980; Durham University, 1981-1984

Career:


BBC News graduate trainee, 1987-1989

Producer, BBC Nine O’Clock News, 1989

Producer, ITN News at Ten, 1989-1992


ITN assistant programme editor, 1992-1995

 Sky News executive producer, 1995-2000

Sky News executive editor, 2000-2006 

Head of Sky News, 2006-present 
 