
As Christmas gets nearer shoppers stuck for ideas will be thinking of turning 
to that old standby, the gift card. Such cards and vouchers – in either 
plastic, paper or digital form – have long been a go-to option for shoppers 
with tricky-to-buy-for loved ones – the industry is now worth £5bn a year.

But gift cards have their downsides, one of which is that there is no 
guarantee they will be honoured if the retailer goes bust. They are undeniably 
convenient, however. Here we outline the pros and cons, and what you can do if 
you receive an unwanted gift card.

Virtual vouchers 
Buying a gift card or voucher used to involve almost as much effort as 
purchasing a gift: you needed to go into the relevant store and purchase one 
over the counter. But consumers are increasingly able to do this online, and 
the recipients can use them both in-store and over the internet. Several big 
brands, including Marks & Spencer, now sell “e-gift cards” or “e-vouchers” as 
well as physical gift cards.

Paper or plastic gift cards accounted for more than 80% of the vouchers issued 
in 2015, according to industry trade body the UK Gift Card & Voucher 
Association (UKGCVA), but it says digital cards are on the rise.

The modern alternative to gift vouchers and cards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/nov/29/alternative-gift-vouchers-gift-cards>
Delivery charges 
If you are going to send a physical gift card look out for delivery charges. 
Some retailers will charge extra for delivering cards of a higher value, 
despite it being the same piece of plastic. For example, John Lewis charges £2 
to deliver a gift card with a value of £10-£50, £3 for between £50.01 and 
£99.99, and £5.75 for £100-plus.

Amazon, however, doesn’t charge any more if you select a physical rather than 
virtual card, and M&S charges £3.50 for standard home delivery, though it 
offers free delivery when you spend more than £50.

Retailers who do charge say the cost is to cover the extra value being sent 
and insured by special delivery with Royal Mail. Others are technically 
covering that cost for you, as you will still be protected if you can prove a 
card is lost or damaged. This is because Royal Mail covers all items sent by 
post, but the level of protection depends on the delivery method.

Packages sent by standard post – either 1st or 2nd class – that are lost or 
damaged are only covered up to the value of £20, while the more expensive 
special delivery option covers up to £500. This is the same level of protection 
you would get if you were sending the card yourself by post, but if you are 
sending high-value items then Royal Mail lets you purchase extra consequential 
loss cover starting from around £4.

What if the company goes bust? 
There have been several high profile company failures in recent years, which 
have left people with gift cards they can’t use. There is no set rule on the 
status of gift cards in the event of a company going bust. It tends to be up to 
the retailer or administrator, but generally you will be low down – or at the 
bottom of – the pecking order of creditors.

Cash will only be eaten by inflation, but gift cards can expire – around £300m 
go unspent each year

For example, when HMV went into administration in January 2013 the company at 
first refused to accept vouchers before later backtracking. When BHS followed 
suit shoppers with gift vouchers were only allowed to use them as part-payment 
for goods.

Hannah Maundrell of comparison website Money.co.uk says: “Vouchers can switch 
from being a great gift to worthless in seconds if the retailer goes bust. 
There’s a chance you might not be left out of pocket, but you need to be quick. 
Some retailers accept gift vouchers for a while after entering administration, 
but you might be limited to in-store purchases and could need to spend a 
certain amount to redeem them.”

The best way to avoid this is to spend the vouchers as soon as you receive 
them. If, however, the retailer refuses to cash a voucher the person who bought 
them may be able to recoup their value from their bank through a “chargeback” 
claim if they paid by debit card.

If the voucher was worth more than £100 and bought on credit card they could 
also make a section 75 claim. Maundrell says: “If neither scenario applies 
there’s only one option: making a claim with the administrators. Don’t be too 
hopeful, you’ll be bottom of the list for payouts, and even then you’re likely 
to get a fraction back at most.”

You could instead consider buying someone a multi-store gift card that lets 
them choose from a number of brands. One of the best-known is theOne4all gift 
card <https://www.one4allgiftcard.co.uk/> – but watch out for the fact that 
after 18 months the card imposes a 90p-a-month “inactive balance charge” which 
will continue to swipe money off it “until such time as the balance on the card 
is zero”.

Watch out for expiry dates 
While cash can be eaten by inflation, a bigger risk with gift cards is that 
they expire – around £300m of them go unspent each year, according to the 
UKGCVA. Vouchers for experiences such as an afternoon tea typically need to be 
redeemed within a year, but can be extended for a charge. Those for goods tend 
to last longer, says Gail Cohen, director general of the association. “Gift 
cards generally have expiry dates of not less than 24 months from date of 
purchase. It is down to the retailer to decide if they want to have an expiry 
date policy,” she says.

You will usually find expiry dates and conditions displayed on the back of the 
card with a link to the general terms and conditions. Some vouchers, such as
Theatre Tokens <https://www.theatretokens.com/>, have no expiry date.

What to do with unwanted gift cards 
If you receive an unwanted gift card there are marketplaces on which to sell 
them. You can list cards on eBay or dedicated platforms such as Zeek. The 
latter lets users buy and sell unwanted physical or digital cards or vouchers 
worth between £10 and £500 at a discount. For example, if you received a card 
from Sports Direct but are more into technology, you could sell your card and 
instead buy a discounted iTunes voucher. Alternatively, you could just sell it 
for cash.

To sell a voucher on Zeek you have to fill in the required details, and may 
have to upload a photo. The brand must have at least five branches to qualify, 
so you can’t use it for online retailers. You set your own discount to attract 
buyers, but bear in mind that for each sale you make you will be charged a 
processing fee of 7% of the card’s value (minimum £3).

Cards typically sell within a day, according to Zeek, which offers buyers a 
60-day 100% money-back guarantee if a card is inactive, has an inaccurate 
balance or wasn’t received within 30 days.

By comparison, eBay charges the seller a 10% processing fee, but there is no 
guarantee of a sale.
 