
It has been 10 years since the Socceroos last played in Newcastle, but for the 
locals, it was well worth the wait. Two quick-fire goals for the home side 
inside the first 15 minutes, and the crowd could sit back, relax, and watch the 
match unfold.

The Socceroos played smart, efficient football with occasional glimpses of 
flair. From the opening moments the attitude of the team was positive and 
engaging, however after taking the two-goal lead the Socceroos stayed compact 
and, for the most part, were uninspiring.

They certainly weren’t the more skilful of the two sides – the afro-haired 
little No10 Omar Abdulrahman alone probably possesses more imagination in that 
sweet left foot of his than the entire Socceroos starting XI. Late in the first 
half, for example, Adbulrahman casually jinked and weaved through the tightest 
of spaces, leaving Mile Jedinak and Trent Sainsbury in his wake. Barely two 
minutes later, Mathew Leckie stumbled – by generous ricochet as much as design 
– through the UAE midfield before losing control of the ball and crashing 
unceremoniously into the centre-back, Mohanad Salem.

Australia see off United Arab Emirates to reach Asian Cup final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/27/asian-cup-australia-uae-match-report>
No, the Socceroos aren’t artists. But for now, who cares? As Ange Postecoglou 
said after the match, they’ve scored the most goals of any team, they’ve 
created good opportunities and the crowds have responded well to their 
proactive approach. Leckie and Robbie Kruse might not possess the fanciest 
feet, but their value to the team is in their defensive work as well as in 
attack.

Perhaps the most positive outcome of this match was for the football community 
in Newcastle. All the talk of this Asian Cup has been about legacy. Major 
football tournaments in this country are few and far between, and the Asian Cup 
is by far the biggest in Australia’s history.

In the months prior to kick-off, plenty of work was done to engage the Asian 
communities living inAustralia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>
, while relationships have been cultivated by FFA with government and business 
groups and the Asian Football Confederation. On last night’s evidence, one of 
the unexpected legacies might be the boost for football in the Hunter region.

Ten years is a long time in anybody’s books, and although they weren’t treated 
to a classic, hosting a Socceroos semi-final was a rare privilege for 
Newcastle. With the vast majority of players, financial muscle and expertise in 
the metropolitan areas of the Eastern Seaboard, regional Australia has never 
been a priority for the administration of the game.

The timing couldn’t have been more perfect. These are trying times for 
Newcastle – the Jets are firmly entrenched in the lower reaches of the A-League 
ladder, with chief executive, chairman and owner all gone or on the way out. If 
any area urgently needs a boost, it’s Newcastle. Despite the fact the Jets are 
utterly, utterly dire, they still have decent membership and crowd numbers.

Loyalty like this, sometimes, needs to be rewarded. Built on the foundations 
of working-class miners, football in Newcastle has as rich a tradition as 
anywhere else in Australia, and the locals are proud of it. Inside Hunter 
Stadium, a banner was unveiled on the Ray Baartz Hill, a tribute to a local 
legend andone of the unluckiest Socceroos 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/soccer/ray-baartz-reflective-over-stolen-opportunity-20140429-zr1ma.html>
. From a decent vantage point, you can see the Newcastle Showgrounds, where 
football has been played since before the war.

Asian Cup semi-final: Australia 2-0 UAE – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/jan/27/asian-cup-semi-final-australia-v-united-arab-emirates-live>
There’s not been a lot of glory in Newcastle football, however. From Newcastle 
KB United to Adamstown Rosebuds, Newcastle Breakers, United and Jets, the 
region’s national league sides could hardly be called powerhouses, and success 
has often been in staying afloat rather than winning trophies.

But the Asian Cup promised Newcastle five matches, and the community has 
repaid the faith. The council, despitethe jibes from the local newspaper 
<http://www.theherald.com.au/story/2695959/topics-go-team-kuwait/>, was one of 
the few to formally adopt a second side. Before last night’s match, I spoke to 
a local man wearing a half-half Palestine-Australia kit that he bought in the 
car park after the opening match between Palestine and Japan. He’s loved all 
three group stage games, but seeing the Socceroos, of course, is the big one.

For the tournament organisers, having the game in Newcastle rather than, say, 
Sydney, was a financial loss-maker with just over 20,000 squeezing into a 
reduced-capacity stadium. But with eight pages dedicated to football in the 
local paper on the day of the game, and a no-nonsense win for a hard-working 
town – this can only be seen as a massive boost for the region.

The importance of the Socceroos making the final cannot be understated. A 
dream final now looms between the host nation and South Korea, who boast one of 
the largest migrant communities in Australia. In truth, the Local Organising 
Committee could hardly have scripted it better if they’d tried. Regional, 
metropolitan and multicultural Australia have all been engaged.

“It’s been great for our game,” said coach Ange Postecoglou after the match. 
“It would have put a dampener on it if we weren’t in the final, and for us to 
be there is a good way to end a fantastic tournament. You know, we can always 
dream, if we win it, it will be one of the biggest games for our code and our 
country.”
 