
I’m wondering, is it OK, hypothetically, for a child to lick the sole of her 
shoe? What about, just for argument’s sake, eating a cigarette end in a park? 
And where, as a general rule, do we stand on licking sticks? In other words, 
sometimes I feel there isn’t enough hand sanitiser in the world to keep a small 
child clean. All these questions go through my mind as I prepare to speak with 
microbiologists Marie-Claire Arrieta and Brett Finlay, whose book for parents, 
Let Them Eat Dirt, has turned my world on its head.

The book is a rallying cry to parents to put down antibacterial wipes, throw 
out sterilising tablets and start making mud pies. Underpinning it is not a 
vague nostalgia for simpler times, but scientific evidence that our modern 
obsession with hygiene is playing havoc with our health. Our war on dirt, they 
say, may be responsible for the surge in chronic, non-infectious diseases in 
developed countries which, the authors argue, are our “modern day bubonic 
plague”. While countless lives have been saved by battling infectious diseases 
with better hygiene, disorders such as obesity, asthma, coeliac disease, 
allergies and autoimmune diseases are surging.

According to new research, this could all be because of the microbes in our 
guts. We have 10 microbes inside us for each one of our body cells – the 
smallest forms of life on earth. Over the phone from his home in Canada, 
Finlay, professor of microbiology at the University of British Columbia, 
explains that despite this, we have spent years trying to kill microbes such as 
bacteria. “We have been having a war against microbes for 100 years because 
they cause infection. If you look at the mortality tables – even for 50 years 
ago – it’s mainly infectious diseases. And by bringing in clean water, clean 
food, vaccines, antibiotics, handwashing and sanitation, we have done a great 
job getting rid of them.”

Now, however, there is evidence that while a small number of microbes are 
responsible for infections, others play a vital part in keeping us healthy. Not 
only do they help us digest food but also they are essential in helping our 
immune system to develop. By trying so hard to wipe them out “we have been 
depriving our body of a normal developmental process”. Finlay calls the 
discovery that we should be nurturing our microbes a “major revolution of 
medicine”.

Microbes are thought to help train our immune system because when it 
encounters a harmless microbe, the immune system learns to ignore or tolerate 
it. If children’s exposure to these microbes is limited, then their immune 
systems remain immature and won’t learn to tolerate harmless microbes – or 
react to disease-causing microorganisms.

For Arrieta – an expert in microbiota in asthma, a lecturer, and also a mother 
of two children aged five and three – this discovery caused a revolution in her 
home life as well as in her lab. “I was a classic microbiologist who was super 
keen to make sure everything is clean,” she says. “But after reading study 
after study I saw a transformation in the way I behaved between my first and 
second children.”

While exciting findings have been coming thick and fast, including Finlay and 
Arrieta’s own work showing there is a short window of time in which microbial 
changes in a baby’s gut can have long-term consequences in the lungs – we still 
don’t know if microbes are a cause or effect of diseases.

“We know microbes are different in obese children, for instance,” says Finlay. 
“But is that because they are eating differently or driving it?”

Despite this, he believes we know enough to start taking action and it’s never 
too early to begin.

One of the eye-catching pieces of advice is for parents to consider swabbing 
their newborn with vaginal secretions after a caesarean section – a practice 
known asseeding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/17/vaginal-seeding-c-section-babies-microbiome>
. Coming through the birth canal means the baby’s mouth, eyes, nose and skin 
are covered with the mother’s vaginal – and even fecal – microbes. It may sound 
less than pleasant, but these microbes help the baby’s immune system, milk 
digestion and can protect against infections.

Scientists think this may be why children born via C-section have increased 
risks of asthma, obesity, autism and coeliac disease for example. To counteract 
this, some hospitals insert a piece of sterile gauze into the mother’s vagina 
before birth, removing it before the C-section and then rubbing down the infant 
with it.

“It’s not for the faint of heart,” says Arrieta (and some doctors say it could 
causeinfection 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2016/02February/Pages/Vaginal-seeding-may-put-newborns-at-risk-of-infection.aspx>
), “but as strange as it may sound it’s what happens with every baby delivered 
vaginally. If I had had a C-section, I would do it.”

Breastfeeding, too, is thought to improve the growth of beneficial microbes 
while for bottle-feeding parents, Finlay and Arrieta’s advice is to relax on 
the sterilising (although the NHS still advises it).

Arrieta recalls: “With my first child I sterilised everything my baby came 
into contact with and then I realised the American Pediatric Association 
doesn’t recommend that, while other studies show it increases the risk of 
allergies and asthma.”

Arrieta points out: “A child who breastfeeds constantly will be latched on to 
skin which, microbiologically speaking, is very dirty. Don’t sterilise 
everything that comes into contact with your child’s mouth, within reason.”

In fact, the one piece of advice Arrieta offers mothers is to forget the adage 
“Cleanliness is next to godliness.”

“One thing I don’t do any more – and wish others would stop – is carrying a 
hand sanitiser gel. For camping, or for times when there is no soap and water, 
it’s fine. But for anything else they are overused. Now I think, I don’t need 
to disinfect my child or the surfaces they are in contact with.”

So eating cigarette ends in the park could be a good thing? Not exactly. 
Public places – from buses to trains to shopping centres – allow infections to 
be passed on easily. “It’s not the same when they play outside in a forested 
area and a neighbourhood playground where half the kids have a cold,” Arrieta 
warns.

If a baby drops a dummy in a train station, she explains, it needs a wash but 
in the countryside it is fine to give it a quick wipe. Or, better still, stick 
it in your mouth to clean it (in a study of 184 families, 65% of babies whose 
parents cleaned their dummies like this had a significantly lower risk of 
developing allergies at 18 and 36 months).

Some of their rulings will have children cheering – kids should be outside 
often. They should be allowed to be barefoot and dirty. Touching insects, 
plants and mud is celebrated. And the microbiologists think that not only are 
mud pies great, they even suggest letting any kids in your family give you a 
mud facial. Getting a dog is also encouraged because children exposed to dogs 
before they are a year old may have a decreased risk of developing asthma and 
allergies (“Cats have no effect because they don’t lick your face,” says 
Finlay).

It’s not that all hygiene should be abandoned, says Arrieta, but parents could 
ease up. “Hand washing is important – after the bathroom or before eating, or 
playing with someone sick, or if you are sick. But the rest of the time it is 
less so and it can be detrimental.”

One of the most frightening and fascinating aspects of the book is the effect 
antibiotics can have on our microbes and on children’s health. And the authors 
warn parents to be more cautious about using them. Finlay says antibiotics 
“carpet bomb” microbes – wiping out infections and beneficial microbes alike. 
So far scientists have worried mainly about overuse of antibiotics leading to 
resistant superbugs, such as MRSA, but multiple courses of antibiotics in the 
first year of life can also lead to a higher risk of asthma, while their use is 
also linked to increased risks of obesity and type 2 diabetes.

One of the most important things parents can do, says Arrieta, is look after 
their child’s diet. “What you eat is not only feeding you, but feeding your 
microbes – a variety of fibres, vegetables and fruit and starch. Going back to 
whole wheat, brown rice and other grains which were used frequently 100 years 
ago.”

White flour and sugar, she explains, don’t make it through to the lower 
intestines where so many microbes work their magic.

Finlay says that their advice is simple: “When I was a kid you knew we had had 
a good day if the dirt ring round our bath was huge. Let your kid roll around 
in the dirt, get a pet – don’t swaddle them in a sterile cloth. Most microbes 
are our friends not our enemies.”

Let Them Eat Dirt by B. Brett Finlay and Marie-Claire Arrieta is published by 
Windmill Books, £12.99. To order a copy for £10.65, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/let-them-eat-dirt.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846
 