
FRANCE
There were some huge snowfalls early last week – 60cm fell in the Paradiski 
area on Tuesday, for example – giving great powder skiing. Unfortunately later 
in the week mild temperatures turned the snow to rain. There have been 
fantastic conditions, which have not been undone by rain in Chamonix though, 
with 20cm of new snow on Tuesday followed by a further 45cm on Wednesday.

AUSTRIA
In Austria many resorts got snow and rain at the same time, bringing great 
skiing to the upper slopes, but heavy and wet conditions lower down. The west 
of Austria, including Ischgl, St Anton and the other Arlberg resorts, got about 
20cm on Tuesday and a further dusting on Thursday morning.
It’s due to be sunny today, but with cloud and more snow in the next few days.

SWITZERLAND
New snow fell across the country last week. Wengen’s snow statistics still 
look poor, with a maximum depth of 45cm (the same as some Scottish resorts) but 
apparently the slopes are actually skiing well. More snow is forecast this week 
– Zermatt is predicting 30cm in the next five days.

ITALY
The best skiing in Italy continues to be in Cervinia where 20cm arrived on 
Tuesday and Wednesday. La Thuile and the Aosta valley are also benefiting from 
lots of fresh snow. Most resorts are forecasting another 10cm in the next few 
days.

USA AND CANADA
Great new snowfalls in the eastern US resorts, with temperatures below -10°C. 
Stowe received staggering amounts with between 76 and 99cm. Colorado and the 
Western resorts got snow too, but more like 10cm. In Canada, Whistler has had 
mild weather, but is still skiing well up top, while the east coast has 
remained bitterly cold but without any significant precipitation. More snow is 
predicted for both countries this week.

REST
Andorra got snow on Tuesday and Thursday last week, giving good piste skiing, 
but there’s still limited off -piste. In Spain only Baqueira Beret got snow 
(5cm) but the other resorts are skiing reasonably. Scandinavia has been very 
cold, so pistes are hard, but there’s lots of snow about. Bulgaria’s main 
resorts got about 20cm last week, while Scotland has reasonable snow cover, 
with more forecast today.

* Data courtesy of the Ski Club of Great Britain (skiclub.co.uk) 
<http://www.skiclub.co.uk>.
 