
Before Sophie Dishman even started her social work degree at the University of 
Sunderland, she was tapping into her uni’s dedicated social media groups. “The 
uni had Facebook groups for freshers and for students who were staying in 
accommodation. I used both to meet a lot of new people before I started, 
including two of my flatmates – so it wasn’t too awkward when I moved in,” says 
Dishman.


Whether it’s Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat or Instagram, social media is a means 
to discovery, not only once you arrive at university – when you can head up 
societies, keep in touch with family and even run protests via your profile – 
but before you even choose which university you’ll be going to.

Matt Horne, digital marketing and social media officer at Newcastle 
University, says students can get a head start on which societies to join by 
checking out their Instagram and Facebook feeds, rather than waiting for the 
freshers’ fair. It can help with accommodation choices too, he adds: “Search 
YouTube for your university and ‘accommodation tour’, and there’s a good chance 
somebody will have done a guided tour of their halls, including information you 
won’t get on an official tour. It’ll give you a real feel of where you may end 
up living.”

On the academic side, many unis have Facebook groups for halls, WhatsApp 
groups for courses and LinkedIn groups to discuss modules. “Some lecturers are 
open to connecting on LinkedIn, or have Twitter profiles to follow that give 
you a flavour of what your course will be like when you start,” says Horne. “We 
have lecturers at Newcastle who run lecture roundups and revision Q&As through 
Twitter, which you can eavesdrop on to get a feel for course content.”

However, there’s a word of advice to heed regarding oversharing on social 
media. “Once images are out there, even on private channels, they are out of 
your control, so it’s sensible not to share anything that you wouldn’t want to 
become public later,” says Rhiain Temple, editor at social media agency We Are 
Social.

‘I had a Skype interview from a Croatian holiday camp’ 

Philip Bailey managed to secured his University of Greenwich place from a 
resort on the Croatian coast

Philip Bailey, now in his first year on the University of Greenwich’s BA in 
landscape architecture, was on a road trip to Croatia when he received an email 
from the University of Greenwich asking to see his portfolio. “I remember being 
in the back of the car trying to organise it all and send it over,” says 
Bailey, who had applied throughClearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> to study at the university.

Liking his work, the university asked for a face-to-face interview the 
following week, but Bailey wasn’t due back in the UK for a fortnight or so. 
“They suggested a Skype interview, which was cool,” he says. “I was in a 
holiday camp on the coast near Pula [in Croatia], so I had my interview with 
the head of the department as I sat in the on-site restaurant. Thankfully, I 
passed the interview. It was good to know I had somewhere to study.”

In the run-up to getting on the course, Bailey also used the university’s live 
chat facility to find out anything he wanted to know. “I preferred to use that 
as it was more casual and easier than ringing up and waiting on the phone.”

He took a “long-winded route” to Greenwich, he admits, quitting Coventry 
University when he failed a module on the architectural technology course he 
was studying. It was then that he found his true vocation – gardening. “I 
really got into it after getting a job looking after the lawns at Clare 
College, Cambridge.” It was this newfound interest that spurred Bailey on to 
apply to the University of Greenwich last year.
 