
Korea Republic are now just 90 minutes away from breaking their 55-year Asian 
Cup drought with their semi-final win eliminating a spirited but ultimately 
outclassedIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iraq>.

Goals from Lee Jeong-hyeop and Kim Young-gwon early in each half in Sydney 
quelled any Iraqi hopes of reprising their storied Asian Cup victory of 2007.

The pair were meeting for the first time since the semi-final of that same 
tournament when the Pim Verbeek-coached Koreans were edged on penalties by Iraq.

The odds heading into this encounter were in favour of the better-credentialed 
Koreans who had an extra day’s rest, while Iraq were faced with the challenge 
of putting the mental and physical strain of their two-hour epic against oldest 
foes Iran behind them.

So too, Korea had not lost in the knockout stage – other than on penalties – 
since 2004. Not that Korea could look too much to history for inspiration. They 
have not been crowned Asia’s best since 1960, this despite a record 
eight-successive World Cup qualifications.

Iraq were missing Yaser Kasim due to suspension, that blow coming after the 
Swindon Town team-mate of Socceroo Massimo Luongo had proved himself an 
important midfield cog both in defence and going forward for Iraq. In attack, 
Younus Mahmoud was offered only modest support at times, but the match-winner 
from that unlikely win in Jakarta eight years ago was animated even by his 
standards, and looked primed to continue his role as team talisman.

That this was a clash of cultures was clear, but so too was there a distinct 
clash of style. Iraq’s nerve-shredding win over Iran in the quarter-final was 
all heart and instinctive reaction. Korea, in contrast, have arguably proven 
themselves the most disciplined side in the tournament under the firm hand of 
German coach Uli Stielike. Indeed, the clunkily-monikered Taeguk Warriors 
entered the match as the only team yet to concede a goal.

Within seconds an early chance fell Korea’s way as Han Kyo-won narrowly failed 
to get a head on a deep cross, raising the decibel levels amid some lingering 
pre-match rain. Not that the hefty and excitable contingent of Korean and Iraqi 
fans needed any encouragement. Any relatively innocuous movement over halfway 
was invariably met with wild excitement from the 36,053 crowd, the largest for 
a match not involving Australia at the tournament.

An early caution for Korea captain Ki Sung-yueng was fully deserved and 
evidence that referee Ryuji Sato of Japan was not going to entertain extra 
latitude for the occasion – an accusation levelled at some referees last year 
at Brazil 2014 during the business end of the tournament.

Both teams seemed keen to make an early impression, but it was Korea who 
secured the all-important opening goal. Forward Son Heung-min, scorer of both 
goals in the quarter-final win over Uzbekistan, was given far too much time to 
line up a shot as he bore down on the Iraq penalty area, but his fierce effort 
was adroitly palmed over the crossbar by goalkeeper Jalal Hassan.

Within a minute Korea had the lead. Full-back Kim Jin-su’s free-kick from the 
sideline was delivered with perfect flight and trajectory between goalkeeper 
and the pack of players camped inside the penalty area allowing Lee Jeong-hyeop 
the chance to glance his header inside the far post. It was undoubtedly a move 
performed countless times over recent weeks on the training field. The 
phlegmatic Stielike remained impassive aside from a small fist pump, as 
pandemonium broke out all round him.

Despite the goal, or perhaps because of it, the match continued to be open and 
up-tempo. Free-kicks from wide areas for Korea continued to be an outlet to 
goal as the east Asians dominated two-thirds of possession in the first half.

The second period opened with a return of the drizzle, while a reckless foray 
outside the penalty area by Korea goalkeeper Kim Jin-hyeon was defused with 
more luck than good management. But any impetus provided to Iraq was soon 
extinguished as Korea doubled their lead.

A seemingly innocuous high ball was inadequately dealt with by the Iraq 
defence, and central defender Kim Young-gwon sweetly fired a low shot past 
Hassan from the edge of the penalty area with all the conviction of a regular 
goalscorer.

Iraq were now facing a near-insurmountable hurdle, but that is just how they 
like it. Korea briefly threatened a third, but for a lengthy period midway 
through the second half it was Iraq who looked more likely to score.

Marwan Hussein joined Mahmoud in the forward line but Iraq could find no way 
through an imperious defence. A half-hearted penalty claim by an increasingly 
desperate Iraq seemed to be the catalyst for an Iraq-flag wielding spectator to 
invade the pitch seemingly in the direction of the referee. There was some 
tension in the stands, but in truth the sting had long been taken out of the 
game.

“This is a big victory for us because it is the first time in 27 years we have 
been in the final,” said Stielike. “The execution of our set-pieces has not 
normally been so good. We saw against Iran, that Iraq conceded two goals from 
set-pieces. Sometimes it goes well for us, like today.”

Stielike was unequivocal about which team Korea will meet in Saturday’s final. 
“I have no doubt that we will meet Australia. For me there is no doubt about 
that. They are the best team in the tournament. The extra day’s rest is very 
important, if you saw how the players finished the match against Uzbekistan.”
 