
Malcolm Allison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/oct/15/malcolm-allison-obituary>

Mike Summerbee, played for Manchester City when Allison was manager

Malcolm changed football by making us train like athletes. He was way ahead of 
his time. He had us on running machines with massage-based fitness at Salford 
University in 1965. He was a great character and a very sociable man. We worked 
hard for him and we were exceptionally fit, but we could enjoy ourselves and he 
went along with that. He was a great psychologist; he knew how to crack the 
whip and we respected him, but he could also handle players as individuals and 
get more out of them.

Under Joe Mercer and Malcolm the club came from nothing to be very successful 
in a short time. Manchester was buzzing then, it was a special era, we all had 
a great time and Malcolm was there with us. I wouldn't change it for anything. 
He was a lovely person, just an amazing man. He was possibly the greatest coach 
this country ever had."

Malcolm Allison, football manager, died 15 October, aged 83

Sir Alec Bedser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/apr/05/sir-alec-bedser-obituary>

Micky Stewart, Surrey cricketer

I knew Alec Bedser as a fellow Surrey player and a great friend for over 50 
years. Without a doubt, he was the finest fast-medium pace bowler I have known 
in the game. He delivered his inswingers and legcutters with incredible 
accuracy so that when perched close in at short-leg – in the bat pad position – 
I never felt in the slightest danger. He was a big man with a big heart and as 
strong as a lion. This strength and stamina helped him capture his 1,924 
first-class wickets in 15 years including 236 wickets in 51 Tests. Over the 
years many times Ken Barrington and I were asked the same question: "Who was 
the best bowler you played against?" Our reply was exactly the same, Alec 
Bedser in the nets.

These days, Alec would have been described as "awesome", "a legend" and "an 
icon" and that certainly wouldn't have gone down well with Big Al. He could 
never understand unnecessary fuss and could never accept the way the game is 
played and covered by the media today.

On his retirement, when serving as an England selector for seven years and 
then another 13 years as chairman, he put in just as much dedicated work as he 
did into his bowling. Alec loved the game of cricket and gave it great service. 
He was indeed a legend and an icon – but I wouldn't tell him that.

Sir Alec Bedser, cricketer, died 4 April, aged 91

Alex Higgins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jul/25/alex-higgins-obituary-snooker-champion>

Ken Doherty, snooker player

Alex Higgins was my hero and the reason I wanted to be a snooker player. I got 
to know the man first when I was an usher at the Benson and Hedges Championship 
[at Wembley] in 1987.Alex Higgins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-higgins> said to me: "If I ask you for 
an orange juice that means I want a vodka and orange. If I ask you for a vodka 
that means a double. And so on." By the end of the night, it was trebles and 
quadruples. He was great company, and my lasting impression of him was in the 
week before last Christmas when we shared a train journey from Killarney to 
Dublin for about three and a half hours.

We played cards and shared a little bottle of rum and some coke – he had taken 
the glass from his hotel and had this in his pocket. The funny thing was, he 
won the money off me, he won about £30, but he didn't take it off me. I knew he 
needed it and I tried to give it to him but he just wouldn't take it from me. I 
was trying to force it into him but he got off the train. That was the last 
time I saw him.

Alex Higgins, two-times snooker world champion, found dead 24 July, aged 61

Andy Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/oct/25/andy-holmes-obituary>

Martin Cross, part of the gold-medal winning coxed fours in 1984 Olympics 

The decision of the British team to wear black ribbons as a mark of respect to 
Andy Holmes during the finals of the world championships in New Zealand last 
month speaks volumes about his impact on the sport. Most of the 2010 British 
team never knew this tough yet unassuming man, yet they understood that his 
achievements, in winning back-to-back Olympic Golds in 1984 and 1988, were the 
rock upon which GB Rowing's current success was built.

More than that they knew that Holmes's self-belief in submitting himself to a 
tougher training regime than anyone thought possible brought the best out of 
Steve Redgrave, so making it possible for other British rowers, like Matthew 
Pinsent, to follow in Holmes's footsteps. Until I rowed and trained with Andy, 
I had thought I was "hard" – he made me look at myself and think again. Without 
him, I would not be an Olympic champion: thanks and goodbye Andy.

Andy Holmes, rower, died 24 October, aged 51

Andy Ripley

Clive Rees, former London Welsh, Wales and British Lions wing

What a player, what a giant of a man. Andy had spirit in abundance, driven 
from a fire within, piercing intellect that questioned everything around and 
beyond him and was oft-times a bit of a philosopher, pondering and 
contemplating complex issues with a compassionate soul and a heart full of 
humanity. He was also the softest, nicest person I ever shared a room with. At 
our training village in Stilfontein he took time out to adopt an abandoned, 
blind kitten. His room was chaos. Saucers of milk and cat scat were everywhere 
and he had a special compartment made in his kit bag for transporting the tiny 
creature. After a few days Willie John McBride discovered that Andy was 
intending to increase the touring party to 31. He fixed Andy with his legendary 
Ballymena glare and told him the cat would not be a member of the party. This 
was a Lions tour! Reluctantly Andy advertised the forlorn little animal in the 
local paper and interviewed dozens of people to secure the best home for the 
kitten. What a lovely man.

Adapted from Voices From The Back Of The Bus 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781845965921>
 (Mainstream Publishing)

Also lost this year

Keith Alexander 53, Macclesfield Town manager

Enzo Bearzot 83, Italian football coach, led Italy to victory in 1982 World Cup

Harry Carpenter 84, commentator

Avi Cohen 54, footballer

Laurent Fignon 50, cyclist and twice winner of the Tour de France

Dick Francis 89, jockey and author

Moss Keane 62, Rugby union player, winner of 51 Ireland caps

Nodar Kumaritashvili 21, Georgian bobsledder

Bill McLaren 86, rugby union commentator

Paddy Mullins 91, racehorse trainer

Terry Newton 31, rugby league player

Andy Ripley 62, rugby player

Tom Walkinshaw 64, motor racing entrepreneur and Gloucester rugby club chairman

Peter Warr 72, racing driver and Lotus F1 team principal
 