Two teams qualified from the Euro 2016 group stage without conceding a goal. 
Germany are one; who are the other?  Italy  Poland And they were both in the 
same group.  Switzerland  France How many of the 24 teams at Euro 2016 won all 
three of their group games?  None Italy were on course for a 100% record until 
Robbie Brady showed up.  One  Two  Three Who was talking about what when he 
said: 'I hope [they] do not produce condoms'?  Novak Djokovic on Head, whose 
racquet strings kept breaking at Queens  Fernando Santos on his Portugal 
defence, which let Hungary slip through to score three goals against them  
Xherdan Shaqiri on Puma, who make the shirts Switzerland are wearing at Euro 
2016Shaqiri joked about the kit after four players' shirts were ripped in their 
match against France.  Michael Phelps on his own company, whose goggles were 
leaking in his Olympic warm-up races Only 10% of the population is left-handed. 
What percentage of Wimbledon singles titles have been won by left-handed 
players?  1%  4%  23% Rod Laver, Jimmy Connors, John McEnroe, Goran Ivanisevic 
and Rafa Nadal are all left-handers  35% Lionel Messi scored his 55th goal for 
Argentina this week, breaking whose record?  Diego Maradona  Gabriel Batistuta 
Batistuta has a much better scoring rate: 54 goals in 77 matches to Messi's 55 
in 112.  Hernán Crespo  Gonzalo Higuaín Spain's defeat to Croatia was their 
first at a European Championship for a long time. Who was the Prime Minister 
when they last lost a match at a finals?  John Major  Tony Blair And the UK was 
still in the EU.  Gordon Brown  David Cameron Who said: 'Man of the match 
award? I'd split it in 11 pieces, one for each team-mate. That's how I see 
football'?  Gareth Bale  Andrés Iniesta The man can do no wrong.  Michael 
O'Neill  Gylfi Sigurdsson What does Titans linebacker Derrick Morgan want the 
NFL to investigate?  The existence of UFOs  The popularity of Donald Trump  The 
medical benefits of cannabisMorgan said: 'The NFL has a responsibility to look 
into it, to delegate time and money to research this for its players. Given how 
much influence that the NFL has on society, I think it would help the greater 
good. There's a lot of people suffering and a lot of people that can benefit 
from cannabis as a medical treatment.'  The Adnan Syed case discussed on the 
Serial podcast Which team was dumped out of the Copa América Centenario after a 
7-0 defeat?  USA  Mexico Mexico 0-7 (SEVEN) Chile  Venezuela  Colombia Who 
said: 'I don't go to the gym, if I did it will slow me down. I don't go in for 
weights or anything like that'?  Tyson Fury  Jamie Vardy Vardy was asked about 
his diet after he was pictured holding a tub of nicotine pouches and a can of 
Red Bull.  Wladimir Klitschko  Lionel Messi  You got…  Challenge your friends 
Submit answers  