
One of the greatest mishaps that can befall the seasoned traveller is to leave 
behind, in the hotel room, some cherished possession.­­­­­­­­­ My second trip 
to Newfoundland was far worse – or should that be better? Like Tony Bennett in 
San Francisco before me, I left my heart.

The province of Newfoundland and Labrador, and its capital St. John’s, don’t 
look like much on paper. Newfoundland is a sparsely populated rocky island with 
topsoil too poor for many crops, once blessed with such a superabundance of cod 
that its first European settlers reported that “the sea is covered with fish, 
which are caught not merely with nets but with baskets”, but now served mostly 
as part of a resurgent local and sustainable food scene. And yet …

Why this Londoner fell in love with Halifax, Canada
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-cool-canada/2016/sep/09/why-this-londoner-fell-in-love-with-halifax-canada>
There’s something about its position at the farthest eastern extreme of 
Canada, with nothing but 3,000 miles of unbroken ocean between you and Ireland, 
that moves the soul to poetry. That, and the whales that disport themselves 
just off the coast, so close that you need no boat tour to watch them; and the 
icebergs that in late spring drift stately by, no two alike yet so much part of 
everyday life that locals will row out to chip off chunks with which to freshen 
their drinks.

There’s something about the island life that fosters a tight-knit feeling of 
community, where everyone stops to pass the time of day and no one locks their 
doors. Yet this island is in no way insular; locals welcome every stranger as 
if they were potential neighbours-to-be. A surprising number of small business 
owners I met out there had become just that – visitors who had extended an 
intended brief stay forever. With flights from London taking just five and a 
half hours, it’s not hard to imagine the population growing.

And there’s something about St. John’s itself. Its houses are painted in 
cheery pastel pinks and blues and yellows, like a Hollywood set designer’s 
vision of the perfect, prim coastal town. Yet its nightlife centre, George 
Street, has more pubs and bars per square foot than anywhere in Canada; its 
musicians are renowned throughout the nation for their skill; and its 
restaurants are, bizarrely for such a small city, in the vanguard of Canada’s 
dining revolution.

Raymonds restaurant has been voted the country’s finest, its bearded chef, 
Jeremy Charles, espousing a simple philosophy of fresh-caught seafood – 
sometimes caught by him or his staff that morning – and locally foraged berries 
and mushrooms that grow in abundance near the town. In his wake, other venues 
have raised their game: names to look out for include The Reluctant Chef, 
Adelaide Oyster House, Basho, Mallard Cottage, and Raymonds’ cheaper sister, 
the Merchant Tavern.

What’s there for the visitor to do? A walk up to the top of Signal Hill; a 
gawp at the Rooms art gallery and cultural centre; a stop at the quirky 
Newfoundland Chocolate Company; a visit to the Quidi Vidi Brewing Company by 
the beautiful Quidi Vidi lake; a long hike along the East Coast Trail; a 
foraging or food tour with Cod Sounds.

But really, if you have to ask that question, you’re missing the point. St. 
John’s is not about what to do. It’s about how to be.

For more information and inspiration, see explore-canada.co.uk 
<https://uk-keepexploring.canada.travel/?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=native_advertising&utm_campaign=uk_2016_p&utm_content=pd_advertising_st+john+overview>
 