
One of the best ways to increase the reach of your content is to encourage 
your audience to share it themselves. Since many social networks prioritise 
content posted by users over that posted by brands and many users have 
developed an aversion to explicit marketing, creating sharable content has 
become a major part of the marketer’s role.

But, in such a saturated online space – where brand content competes with 
content from friends, family and colleagues (not to mention other brands) – 
getting eyes on your content is difficult.

So what can marketers do to make their content stand out?

So-called industry best practice can only get you so far. Since so many other 
companies will be following precisely the same guidelines, the profusion of 
best practice techniques has only made competition fiercer.

There’s a need, then, for progressive marketers to break the mould. 
Unconstrained experimentation can lead to wildly unpredictable results. But, 
with the right framework, strategic experimentation is what makes an average 
marketer a great one.

Science can provide marketers with just this framework. The more social media 
has penetrated our lives, the more scientists have begun to study how we use it 
and how it affects us. This means that a wealth of social media research 
literature exists, and some of this is directly relevant to today’s marketers. 
Indeed, some of it describes the mechanisms that make people decide whether or 
not to share content.

In this article we will look at just one element – motivational factors – 
which plays a role in the consumer’s decision to share.

Motivational factors and sharing

The reason social media exists and the reason it’s so popular is because of 
the way it facilitates communication between people. This may sound trite. But 
it’s something that brands should keep in mind: social media does not exist 
primarily to help marketers sell their goods.

That said, used correctly, social media could be a brand’s greatest asset. 
Part of this means understanding your audience, engaging with them on their own 
terms, and opening up a dialogue with them. With this achieved , brands will be 
in a position to create content that resonates with their audience and which, 
therefore, consumers will feel compelled to share.

All of this is made easier if you know why people use social media and what 
they are seeking to get from it.

The New York Times Customer Insight team recently surveyed 2,500 moderate to 
heavy online sharers and found that the most common reasons people share 
content are:

 * Cause/issue awareness (84%) – by sharing content related to the issues they 
care about social media users are able to get the word out about the things 
which are important to them. 
 * Developing 0nline relationships (78%) – sharing content can help people 
create and sustain relationships with other social media users who share their 
interests. 
 * Self-fulfilment (69%) – when a piece of shared content is well received by 
others, the user who shared it will often feel happy, involved and connected. 
 * Defining oneself to others (68%) – sharing content that people feel is in 
tune with how they feel about themselves (their opinions, tastes and ideals) 
helps them sculpt their online identity. 
 * Network value (49%) – when users feel that a piece of content is 
particularly valuable (whether humorous, insightful, shocking, novel, etc) they 
feel that by sharing it they are improving the experience of their network.

Additionally, the researchers created six personas of online sharers, defined 
by emotional motivations, desired presentation of self, role of sharing in 
life, and the value of being the first to share:

 * Altruists – likely to share via email, altruists hope that the content they 
share is helpful, reliable and thoughtful. They also have a strong desire to 
stay connected. 
 * Careerists – by sharing content that relates to business interests, 
careerists (who most commonly use LinkedIn) wish to build a network using 
valuable, intelligent content. 
 * Hipsters – by strongly identifying with the content they share, hipsters 
use the most popular social networks to share cutting-edge, creative content, 
and are often the first to do so. 
 * Boomerangs – using social media to provoke a reaction, boomerangs enjoy 
watching the reactions of others, as well as validating their own points of 
view through positive engagement. 
 * Connectors – using social media to stay organised and connect with others, 
connectors share content creatively and in a relaxed fashion if they feel it 
will bring them closer to those they know. 
 * Selectives – resourceful and careful, selectives choose the most 
informative and thoughtful content before sharing it with certain specific 
people (often via email). 
By analysing their social media following, marketers are able to use this 
research to identify which personas belong to their audience and why they are 
motivated to share content. This will help them create content that’s more 
likely to resonate with their followers and which they will be more likely to 
share.

This is just one example of how current research can be used by marketers to 
increase the quality of the content they produce and how they present it.

If you’d like to find out more about how marketers can use science to enhance 
their marketing efforts, our newThe Science of Shareable Content 
<http://www.storyscience.co.uk/the-science-of/the-science-of-shareable-content/>
whitepaper goes into more detail about the mechanisms that make consumers share 
content. You can download the whitepaperhere 
<http://www.storyscience.co.uk/the-science-of/the-science-of-shareable-content/>
.

We are a pioneering team of scientists, storytellers, and strategists obsessed 
with brining science to the art of brand storytelling. To find out more about 
StoryScience,visit our site. <http://www.storyscience.co.uk/>


This advertisement feature is paid by Outbrain <http://www.outbrain.com/uk>, 
supporters of the Guardian Media and Tech Network’sPublishing and Platforms hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/digital-content>.
 