
Millions more working-age people may have to wait until their 70s to retire 
after the government launched an official review of the state pension age, 
Labour and financial experts warned.


The exercise will consider whether to change the state retirement age from 
April 2028, the point at which it will have reached 67 for men and women, 
potentially affecting people under the age of about 55.

John Cridland, the former director general of the CBI, was appointed to act as 
the independent reviewer of the pension age and will look at whether the 
pension age should continue to be linked to rising life expectancy.

The Office for Budget Responsibility has already forecast that on current 
trajectories of life expectancy, the state pensionable age could reach 70 by 
the mid-2060s, but Labour and financial experts have warned that it could come 
sooner than expected.

Tom McPhail, the head of retirement policy at the financial services firm 
Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “We fully expect state pension ages to go up faster 
than currently planned, and those joining the workforce today are likely to 
find themselves waiting until their mid-70s to get a payout from the state 
system.

“This is simply a function of the big jumps we continue to see in life 
expectancy, which the state pension can’t hope to support without costs 
spiralling out of control.

“Whatever decisions they make, the government needs to make sure they 
communicate them very, very clearly so individuals can plan their retirement 
savings with some certainty about what they will get from the state, and when 
they will get it.”

The state pension age has already been going up on a gradual basis from its 
longstanding level of 60 for women until it reaches the male level of 65. From 
2018, it will rise on a phased basis for men and women until equalising at 67.

Owen Smith, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said: “People are right to 
worry that the terms of this review may suggest that the Tory government is set 
to speed up rises in the state pension age, throwing into chaos the retirement 
plans of millions of British workers.”

Cridland said: “I am delighted to be the first independent reviewer of state 
pension age. I look forward to meeting many stakeholders, hearing the views of 
experts and the experience of organisations working in this area to help shape 
the review. I know how important this issue is, and will consider all the 
evidence to ensure that we have a state pension age fit for the future.”

The review is due to report in time for any changes to be considered by George 
Osborne by May 2017.

Caroline Abrahams, a director of Age UK, said the charity looked forward to 
contributing to the review and believed it was essential that further increases 
in to the state pension age should not be based on life expectancy alone.

“When reviewing the state pension age we would ask John Cridland to take into 
consideration health and employment opportunities, as well as giving people 
plenty of notice ahead of any change to their state pension age to avoid any 
surprises when it comes to retirement,” she said. “We know that many women were 
unaware of previous changes and now face sharp rises in their state pension age 
with little time to change their plans.”

Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> minister Ros Altmann 
said: “As our society changes, it is only right that we continue to review 
state pension ages and take into account the relevant factors to make sure that 
the state pension is sustainable and affordable for future generations.”

Paul Green, of retirement specialists Saga, said that Altmann, a former 
director-general of the group, must avoid the mistakes of the past.

“Reviews to the state pension age are understandably very emotive,” he said. 
“While many people recognise the need to extend working lives for those that 
are able, there has been repeated criticism of the speed in which previous 
changes have been introduced.

“Many people, particularly women, had made plans for their retirement and felt 
that they weren’t notified of the changes early enough – leaving them with 
little to no time to make alternative plans to fund their retirement.”

The review was announced on the same day as it emerged that Osborne is likely 
to abandon plans to bring in a flat rate pension relief of as low as 25% 
because it would be too politically difficult.

Many Tory MPs would be fiercely opposed to the plans that would give lower 
earners more relief but mean higher earners having to pay significantly more, 
potentially creating a distracting new row over the at a time of Conservative 
tensions over the EU.

However, David Gauke, the financial secretary to the Treasury, suggested there 
still could be some changes in the budget, saying the government would seek to 
make sure “the costs of pensions tax relief are targeted in the right 
direction”.

The Department for Work and Pensions is in charge of the review of the state 
pension age but any changes would almost certainly be looking to create savings 
for the Treasury as well.

Setting out the terms of the pension age review, the government said it wanted 
to “ensure that the state pension remains sustainable for generations to come” 
and set out its aims as achieving “affordability, fairness, and fuller working 
lives objectives”.

Campaigners are currently pressing ministers to ease the pain of changes to 
the retirement age for some women in their mid-50s, who argue they have had 
insufficient warning that they will have to wait longer to get their state 
pensions.
 