
People who start work at 16 and pay national insurance all their working life 
could be allowed to take their state pension at an earlier age than those who 
go to university, according to an official report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/state-pension-age-independent-review-interim-report-with-questions>
 into the future of the state pension.

Sixty-year-olds could also be given early access to a reduced state pension, 
picking up £120 a week rather than the £155.65 currently awarded to 
65-year-olds, according to an interim report by John Cridland, the former 
director general of the CBI, who was appointed to act as the independent 
reviewer of the state pension.

But Cridland stepped back from making firm proposals, instead raising a wide 
number of options for discussion ahead of final recommendations next spring.

From April 2028, the state pension age will rise to 67, then increase again to 
68 between 2044 and 2046. Further improvements to longevity suggest that the 
state pension age could continue to rise towards 70, but Cridland’s report 
warns about the impact this could have, particularly on carers.

He paints a picture of retirement where a generation of 90-year-olds are being 
cared for full-time by family members in their early 60s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/02/elderly-filial-carers-uk-old-people-children>
 – presenting serious issues for any government that continues to raise the 
state pension age.

'We had no choice': number of elderly filial carers on the rise in UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/02/elderly-filial-carers-uk-old-people-children>
“If any changes are made to state pension age, this is likely to have a 
disproportionate impact on certain groups [such as] carers, people with 
disabilities, the self-employed, ethnic minorities and women,” the report said.

It added that the UK was already on course for the “highest retirement age of 
OECD countries” and suggested more should be done to bridge the gap between a 
decline in employment participation after the age of 63 and the start of the 
new state pension age at 67.

Cridland said: “The future of the state pension age is a hugely important 
issue for this country. It must be fair and sustainable, and reflect changes in 
society. My interim report provides an insight into my developing thinking and 
poses a number of questions.

“Whatever recommendations I decide to make in my final report, they will be 
underpinned by the importance of effective communications about the state 
pension age. People need to be able to plan effectively for their own 
retirement.”


The cost of the state pension system would rise from 5.5% to 7.1% of GDP by 
2044, said Cridland, although he highlighted how the rising burden must be 
attributed not just to improving longevity but also the controversial “triple 
lock” which guarantees rises in payments for pensioners.

Earlier this year the outgoing pensions minister argued the triple lock should 
be dropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/30/state-pension-triple-clock-doubts>
to save billions of pounds for better causes. Richard Parkin, head of pensions 
policy at investment group Fidelity, said: “The triple lock is clearly 
expensive and has to be questioned, as maintaining this will simply drive the 
state pension age higher. It is important we have inflation protection that 
reflects pensioner experience but this seems to clearly take aim at the policy.”

The Cridland report appears to rule out a separate state pension age for 
different regions of the UK, even thoughlongevity varies markedly across the 
country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/11/figures-reveal-huge-inequalities-in-health-and-longevity-across-uk>
. For example, in Scotland men can expect to live two and a half years less 
than men in England.


But the report said such an approach would be impractical. “Some commentators 
have suggested that an alternative to a universal state pension age increasing 
with life expectancy would be to provide people with a state pension age based 
on individual circumstances (for example place of birth) … such an approach is 
likely to be impractical and introduce new issues and new unfairness.”

One of the more eye-catching ideas floated by Cridland is around early access 
to the state pension, particularly for those who start contributing through the 
tax system at an early age.

“This would allow people with a high number of national insurance qualifying 
years to claim their full new state pension prior to state pension age. For 
instance, with 50 qualifying years as a benchmark, a person who started work at 
16 could become entitled to state pension at 66 rather than at state pension 
age.”

Individuals could also gain access to the state pension years before the 
formal state pension age, although at the cost of a much reduced income.

“This would allow people to claim a reduced state pension early – so for 
example at age 60 a person claimed their new state pension that was valued at 
£120 a week (rather than £155.65 a week now). Apart from the normal annual 
uprating this amount would not be increased again,” said the report.

Pension experts welcomed the suggestion that workers should have greater 
flexibility in accessing the state pension early.

Kate Smith, head of pensions at Aegon UK, said: “We believe everyone should 
have the option to take their state pension from their early 60s at a reduced 
level. With state pension age scheduled to keep increasing, we need a permanent 
solution for those who simply aren’t able to work into their late 60s because 
of job demands or health concerns.”
 