
Andrew Tyrie has been a superb chairman of the Treasury select committee. His 
waspish interrogation style also set the tone for the parliamentary commission 
on banking standards, which he also chaired and which delivered strong 
recommendations on how to inject some much-needed personal accountability into 
the industry.

HSBC scandal caused horrible damage to bank's reputation, says chairman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/25/hsbc-scandal-horrible-damage-reputation-chairman>
Not all parliamentary committees have displayed similar financial fluency. In 
2007, well before Tyrie’s time, the Treasury committee embarrassed itself with 
some disgracefully under-informed questioning of a crew of private equity 
bosses. Tyrie’s committees, by contrast, have been skilful in getting to the 
bottom of various catastrophes and scandals, from RBS to HBOS to Barclays to 
the Co-op Bank.

But before May’s general election, which may spell the end of Tyrie’s tenure 
as chairman, he has one last job: call Stephen Green to give evidence on HSBC’s 
Swiss shambles. There is no need to wait to see if the public accounts 
committee summons him.

Lord Green, chief executive and then chairman of HSBC from 2003 to 2010, was 
the sorely missed presence at yesterday’s session. Stuart Gulliver, chief 
executive since 2011,squirmed as he explained why he used to channel his bonus 
through Panama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/22/swiss-account-secret-of-hsbc-chief-stuart-gulliver-revealed>
 to prevent his Hong Kong colleagues seeing his bank account.

But Gulliver wasn’t a main board director of HSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> between 2005 and 2007, 
which is the relevant period for the allegations that the Swiss private bank 
enabled its clients’ tax evasion. Gulliver joined the board of the Swiss 
subsidiary in late 2007 but the clean-up operation, he assured the MPs, started 
soon afterwards.

Current HSBC chairman Douglas Flint, the other witness, was on HSBC’s board as 
finance director and duly delivered predictable lines about sharing “collective 
responsibility”. But when asked about who was directly responsible for what 
appears to have been shocking lack of oversight of the Swiss operations, Flint 
was vague. Chris Mears and Clive Bannister, the heads of the private bank at 
the time of the scandal, should bear some responsibility, Flint said, but 
relationship managers in Switzerland should be held most accountable.

These were classic “blame the deputies” and plead “collective responsibilty” 
lines that have infuriated Tyrie in the past – and rightly so. His banking 
standards commission designed rules, subsequently adopted, to make senior 
bankers responsible for specific functions. The reforms were intended to 
demolish what Tyrie has called the “accountability firewall”.

But, if Tyrie wants to get beyond the firewall in the HSBC Swiss case, the 
committee will have to hear from the man at the top at the time – Green.

Flint explained that proper due diligence was conducted on Republic and Safra, 
the two banks that were bought in 1999 to become the core of HSBC’s private 
banking operation. Control and compliance systems were put in place, he said. 
But what was not explained was why and how local Swiss managers were then able 
to depart from HSBC’s “base line” of good banking and do their own thing.

Flint’s inability to give a full account is, perhaps, understandable. As 
finance director, he was not “approximate”, as he put it, to the Swiss bank; 
nor, in those days, did he have a role in compliance. But Green, as ultimate 
group boss and a director of the Swiss bank, was definitely in pole position.

Calling Green to give evidence would not be an idle exercise. Tyrie should be 
intrigued to know if Green would have been more vigorous in demanding good 
behaviour in Switzerland if he had been operating under the new regime on 
senior accountability. In other words, would Tyrie’s invention have made a 
difference? It’s an important question.

If Green is to appear, Tyrie needs to move quickly before parliament rises. 
Get on with it – and display traditional independence by ignoring the fact that 
Lord Green is a Tory peer and a general election approaches.

AO World cools optimism after last year’s mighty error

We believed our own hype. That seems to be gist of AO World’s confession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/25/ao-world-shares-plummet-appliance-retailer-profits-warning>
 that the “extra publicity” associated with its flotation a year ago generated 
a boost in sales that turned out to be fleeting. A return to normal conditions 
– ie, when shifting fridges generates few headlines – has “impacted the 
year-on-year growth rate.” Cue a one-third plunge in the share price.

AO World’s flotation was grossly overpriced at £1.2bn, as said here at the 
time: back then, the business was making bottom-line profits of only £6.8m. But 
it’s a mighty error for a company to mistake a temporary whoosh in sales as the 
start of a trend, which seems to be what happened.

The worst part is that chief executive John Roberts was bullish only six weeks 
ago, saying he was “confident of meeting full year expectations.” Now top-line 
profits in the UK will be £16.5m, which AO describes as “slightly below” 
forecasts but house broker JP Morgan Cazenove calls a material miss of 22%.

A lot can happen in the world of fridge-freezers in a month and a half, of 
course. But the moral of this tale is that AO seems to be highly sensitive to 
incremental sales. A small miss in turnover caused a bigger hit in profits. 
That ought to alarm investors, regardless of Roberts’ claim that AO has merely 
encountered “a bump in the road.” At 50 times UK top-line earnings, the shares 
still look wildly over-valued.
 