
It’s the parties, drinking games and other fun stuff that grab the headlines. 
And yet, despite rumours to the contrary, most university courses actually 
require a serious amount of study.


That workload can be a major step up from school days – both in intensity and 
complexity – but many are so relieved to be on a course that they forget to 
prepare themselves for the new academic regime.

“I never gave it much thought and was just happy to be there,” says Tim 
Hartley, who is studying at the University of Nottingham. “I never considered 
how hard I’d have to work until I arrived.”

There are no teachers, no constant revision tests; there’s no one to tell 
students off if they don’t turn up to tutorials and no parents to help fill out 
forms.

So students will have to be flexible, relying upon themselves and their 
organisational skills to ensure they get the most from their course.

“University is all about building independence and resilience,” says Claire 
Huxham, senior tutor in the Faculty of Arts at the University of Bristol, “but 
this doesn’t mean going it alone.” Support networks, such as study skills 
workshops, buddy systems and peer mentoring, are vital in helping students 
adapt from school to university learning.

“These can provide a safe and welcoming space to gain confidence, sustain 
motivation, share ideas and talk about seminar content,” she says. “We often 
see first years worried about the quality of their work and where they stand in 
relation to their new peers. It’s OK to see what works and what doesn’t. 
Feedback isn’t a one-way street, but an opportunity to get involved with your 
subject and find your academic voice.”

Independence haze

Dr Emma Thompson, Southampton University’s Learn with US Transition leader, 
believes students know they are entering a new world of independence and 
self-reliance, but may be hazy on the details.

“Most students are aware they will have to be more self motivated, organised 
and timetabled,” she says, “but it also helps to have a greater understanding 
of the difference between the style of lessons at school and those at 
university, where lectures are more didactic and perhaps slightly less 
interactive.

“Students should see lectures as a starting point, rather than a source of all 
their information. And it’s necessary for students to do a lot more work 
themselves around their contact hours.”

Depending on the course you’re taking, you could have a full, heavily 
timetabled day – on engineering or medicine, for example – or, if you’re 
reading English literature or history, have very few lectures and tutorials but 
bundles of reading to tackle. “University can be hard and may not feel like 
this wonderful experience that it’s painted to be,” adds Thompson. “Even for 
the most gifted students this may be the first time they have come across 
something really difficult.”

As for parents, they can help by encouraging debate and critical thinking, 
rather than expecting their child to accept all they hear. Respect is 
fundamental, but it’s OK to question the foundations of what is being taught.

“Give your child the space to solve their own problems,” says Huxham. “Let 
them know you’re always there, but empower them in their decisions. Let them 
ask questions and let them find the answers, instead of telling them what to 
do.”
 