
Heading for a first … partnership with students

This week I chaired the Neil Stewart Associate's Enhancing the Student 
Experience conference in central London. It was striking that at a time when 
there is so much dispute and debate about the future of the higher education 
sector, there was so much consensus from the speakers about the importance of 
partnership with students and the rejection of student consumerism.

In his first speech as the new chair of the 1994 Group, Professor Michael 
Farthing <http://www.sussex.ac.uk/vc/profile215232.html> (also vice-chancellor 
of the University of Sussex) set out in explicit terms the need for students to 
be seen as partners in their educational experience and how the academic 
community needs to be reinforced. This was a remarkably similar message to Liam 
Burns, president, National Union of Students, who has been consistent in his 
complete rejection of student consumerism, but also set out some provocative 
yet not unreasonable requests for what students should be entitled to in the 
new era. Burns was quick to point out that simply consulting students more 
didn't equate to a partnership arrangement, but that co-sign off on documents 
like the student charter, the university strategic plan or budgets would really 
signify progress.

The cynics may argue that the keenness of the sector to belatedly start 
re-emphasising the importance of partnership is rather late. As now they've got 
their higher fees, they hope that talk of partnership will avoid litigation and 
even higher student expectations.

But whatever the motivation, it seems that the real debate about student 
partnership isn't a case of adding a couple of extra students on to committees, 
but rather identifying new ways to genuinely place new powers in the hands of 
students.

Heading for a Fail … Fee waivers

On Monday, National Student Money Day <http://www.studentfinance2012.com/> 
organised by theIndependent Task Force on Student Finance 
<http://www.studentfinance2012.com/> went some way to trying to ensure that the 
facts behind the new funding arrangements for higher education were better 
communicated to young people looking at applying to go to university in 
September 2012. Headed up by Martin Lewis, no fan of the new system, but 
determined to ensure that lingering financial myths are busted and informed 
decisions can really be made on how much a graduate may truly repay.

However, one of the most contentious arguments within higher education right 
now is the balance between fee waives and bursaries. The unlikely alliance of 
Martin Lewis, NUS and Simon Hughes have all strongly made the case that 
bursaries should be preferred over fee waivers. Yet government policy borne out 
of their ridiculous assumption that the average fee would be £7,500 has forced 
the hand of many universities to lower their fee, and most have done this by 
reducing the bursaries they offer and instead offered fee waivers.

The truth is that fee waives are largely a con. Accepting that the monthly 
repaying in the new system is the same if you are at a university charging 
£6,000 or £9,000, it means that a fee waiver is a complete slight of hand. A 
reduction in theory only, but if 40% of graduates will never pay back their 
loan in full, it means that fee waivers have only the most marginal benefit to 
graduates, and absolutely no benefit to current students whatsoever.

I am increasingly concerned that the biggest issue for recruitment and 
crucially retention is now the money in the pockets of students and their 
ability to pay for accommodation, books and food. This is a point Burns has 
been making strongly since starting as president of NUS in July. As we rapidly 
approach the introduction of the new funding system, the headlines are likely 
to be stolen by the drop in applications, but subsequent analysis about whether 
bursaries can aid with recruitment and retention is equally important.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist. He was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at@AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 