
An academic high-flyer, Sophie Dalby achieved top A-level grades and offers of 
places from five universities. But much to the surprise of staff at her school 
– who had expected her to go to university – she chose to take up an 
apprenticeship with accountancy firm BDO instead.

Her decision was largely motivated by the recent rise in tuition fees (now 
around £9,000 a year in many institutions). "It's put a lot of people off," she 
explains. "The scheme I am on is equivalent to a degree, so I will be fully 
qualified by the time I am 23. Unlike a degree, everything is paid for; we are 
training quicker and learning the skills employers are after."

Huge government investment in apprenticeships (around £1.5bn in the past year 
alone) means there are now more apprenticeship opportunities for young people 
in a growing number of sectors, ranging from supply chain management to 
agriculture.

And far from being an alternative route for those who aren't academic, 
apprenticeships offer learning and career opportunities for all young people.

While apprenticeships start at level 2 (GCSE equivalent), higher level 
apprenticeships (HLAs), which are equivalent to degree-level qualifications and 
beyond are increasingly commonplace.

Last year, there were 3,700 HLAs available (up by 67.6% on the previous year), 
and for school-leavers in 2013, HLAs will span 41 subject areas.

Dalby is working towards a new level 7 (master's degree level) HLA developed 
by the professional services firm PwC, in partnership with other businesses in 
the financial sector. It covers accountancy, auditing and tax and is the first 
to provide a work-based route to chartered professional status.

Other newly launched HLAs include a degree-level course in management 
accounting (due to be launched in September), a level 4 course in legal 
services, and a degree-level space engineering qualification.

The global engineering company Siemens is also embracing HLAs, offering 
courses in engineering, project management, business administration, IT and 
finance. The firm currently has 300 apprentices across all levels, 80 of whom 
are working towards HLAs.

"School-leavers bring a new dynamic," says Joanne Gogerly, finance and 
commercial skills consultant at Siemens. "They're not afraid to question, 
they're fantastic to work with. They're just as talented as some of the 
graduates."

The skills minister, Matthew Hancock, has praised the growth of HLAs and said 
he wants to see more programmes being developed: "It should be the norm that 
students either go to university or on to an apprenticeship scheme when they 
leave school."

Following National Apprenticeships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/apprenticeships> Week (an annual 
celebration of the impact apprenticeships have on individuals and businesses) 
in March, employers across the UK have pledged to recruit around 13,600 more 
apprentices at all levels.

A recent study of 500 employers carried out on behalf of the National 
Apprenticeships Service found that employers in England rate higher level 
apprentices as 15% "more employable" than those who took alternative routes. 
Notably, they were ranked higher than people with degrees.

BDO currently has 50 young people on its HLA programme across audit, tax and 
other areas. After two years, they will be awarded a level 4 (degree 
equivalent) apprenticeship with a further three years' study leading to level 7 
(master's level).

Alana McCrosson, student recruitment manager at BDO, says there may eventually 
be a 50:50 recruitment ratio between graduates and apprenticeships.

"We're still bringing in lots of fantastic graduates, but the school-leavers 
are more than capable of working at the same level. They get the exact same 
career, the exact same qualifications and the exact same long-term options."

Is university worthwhile?


Alexandra Causer,18, Canterbury

I was going to go to university, but I wanted to be sure I'm making the right 
decision before I commit, so I've deferred my place until next year. It's so 
expensive and there are no job guarantees afterwards, but I do like the idea of 
the university experience, especially the socialising.

Sophie Mason, 16, Liverpool

I'm interested in fashion design, so I want to do a degree in London. I want 
to experience living somewhere different and be near all the fashion shows. I 
don't like the idea of getting into debt, but you don't have to pay it back 
until you're earning a certain amount – and that could be years away.

Finn Guthrie, 18, Faversham

Personally, university is not for me. I've already been promised a tattoo 
apprenticeship but first I'll do an art foundation course to refine my drawing 
skills. I find university tuition fees extortionate and off-putting. Don't get 
me wrong, there's a lot you can gain from university – but for certain careers 
it's not necessary.

Aaron Sher Gill, 15, Luton

I want to get the best job possible and I believe university provides you with 
the education to do so. I also enjoy studying, but I'm not sure what I'll do at 
university yet. People say university is expensive, but I think it's an 
investment in your future.

Interviews by Victoria Adley
 