
The full panoply of science fiction – from space opera to parallel worlds to 
dystopian futures – is represented on the shortlist for this year's Arthur C 
Clarke awards for the best SF novel of the year, announced this morning.

Past winners Gwyneth Jones and China Miéville both make the line-up. Jones is 
shortlisted for Spirit, a space opera reimagining of The Count of Monte Cristo, 
and Miéville for The City and the City, a crime story with a twist: the city in 
which a murder has been committed exists in the same physical space as another. 
Kim Stanley Robinson is shortlisted for Galileo's Dream, which blends 
historical biography with a far-future story of life on Jupiter's moons, Adam 
Roberts for his tale of aliens invading 1946 Russia, Yellow Blue Tibia, and 
Chris Wooding for space opera Retribution Falls. The shortlist is completed by 
Marcel Theroux's Far North, set on a post-apocalyptic Earth.

"It's a very strong selection and quite varied, reflecting science fiction 
publishing in this country," said chair of judges Paul Billinger. "There are 
novels from people well-known in the genre – Miéville, Robinson and Roberts – 
but what they have written is not perhaps standard SF; they don't have space 
ships, but these books are clearly SF."

Jones, who has been nominated five times for the Arthur C Clarke and won for 
her novel Bold As Love, said she was "surprised and amused" to be in the 
running again with Spirit. "If you've seen a copy of Spirit you'll know it has 
a really trashy, baroque sci-fi cover, which is not at all fashionable wear for 
the stylish SF novel of today," she said. "It's a big, gothic, romantic 
interplanetary adventure, with several varieties of weird aliens. It's the 
first full-length space opera I've ever written, and I decided to do it just 
for fun: but Arthur C Clarke novels are supposed to be literary and serious."

She decided to write the novel, she said, because she's loved Alexandre 
Dumas's original since she was a child. "It's definitely not the first time 
this has been done in SF, but I felt there was room for a 21st century version, 
with a female 'Count'; and I had a lot of fun with that idea," she said. "Space 
opera is also, ironically, a great place to showcase the big, strange things 
that are going on in real-world science. In Spirit that means the concept of 
information space, and the really 'out there' idea that you can get one set of 
information to end up somewhere else, somehow without traversing the space/time 
between. Admittedly, so far this has only been done in the lab with a photon or 
two at a time, but I did not make it up."

The award was originally set up after a grant from Clarke himself, with the 
aim of promoting British science fiction. "It's good to have a judged award," 
said Jones. "It gives unlikely candidates, and outstanding works from small 
presses, a chance to shine, which otherwise they might not get. And it's good, 
particularly for an inward-turned genre like SF, to have an award that brings 
in a breath of fresh air. When a highly regarded mainstream writer is 'up for 
the Clarke' (such as Margaret Atwood, Marge Piercy, Amitav Ghosh, and this year 
Marcel Theroux) hopefully that inspires SF fans to take the bold step of 
reading something different."

The winner, to be selected by a judging panel of Chris Hill and Jon Courtenay 
Grimwood for the British Science Fiction Association, Francis Spufford and 
Rhiannon Lassiter for the Science Fiction Foundation and Paul Skevington for 
the science fiction news website SF Crowsnest.com, will be announced on 28 
April and will receive £2,010. The inauguralArthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward> was won by Margaret 
Atwood for The Handmaid's Tale in 1987. Other winners include Geoff Ryman, 
Amitav Ghosh and last year's Song of Time by Ian R MacLeod.

The shortlist:

Spirit by Gwyneth Jones

The City & The City by China Miéville

Yellow Blue Tibia by Adam Roberts

Galileo's Dream by Kim Stanley Robinson

Far North by Marcel Theroux

Retribution Falls by Chris Wooding
 