
Sue Perkins and Mel Giedroyc have confirmed they will stop hosting the Great 
British Bake Off when it moves to Channel 4 next year.

In a statement on Tuesday, the pair condemned the decision to move the popular 
show from the BBC after a dispute over money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/12/bbc-loses-great-british-bake-off>
 and said they were “not going with the dough”.


Is the Bake Off deal all about the dough?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/13/bake-off-deal-all-bbc-channel-4> 
Perkins and Giedroyc had both spoken previously of their desire for the baking 
competition to remain at theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, which 
has been home to the show since it began in 2010.


Neither they nor the judges, Paul Hollywood and Mary Berry, were consulted 
during the negotiations over its future. After the talks collapsed on Monday 
afternoon, Perkins tweeted the BBC statement which expressed the hope that Love 
Productions, which makes the show, would reverse their decision.


Bake Off is the BBC – and Britain – at its best | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/16/bake-off-is-the-bbc-and-britain-at-its-best>
Perkins and Giedroyc said in a statement. “We made no secret of our desire for 
the show to remain where it was.”

The Great British Bake Off disaster: why the BBC got burned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/13/the-great-british-bake-off-disaster-why-the-bbc-got-burned>
Their decision to step down will be a huge blow to Channel 4, which agreed a 
£25m-a-year deal to broadcast the show. Perkins and Giedroyc’s chemistry and 
saucy, innuendo-laden presenting style are considered a key part of Bake Off’s 
popularity.


“The BBC nurtured the show from its infancy and helped give it its distinctive 
warmth and charm, growing it from an audience of 2 million to nearly 15 
[million] at its peak,” the pair said. “We’ve had the most amazing time on Bake 
Off, and have loved seeing it rise and rise like a pair of yeasted Latvian 
baps. We’re not going with the dough. We wish all the future bakers every 
success.”


Perkins and Giedroyc met when they were students at Cambridge University in 
the late 1980s and were members of the Footlights drama group. They presented 
Channel 4’s comedy talk show Light Lunch, which was moved to a primetime slot 
in 1999 and renamed Late Lunch. In 2015, they were given their own ITV chat 
show.

Their departure raises the question of whether Hollywood and Berry will also 
choose to leave the show after this series. Hollywood has spoken in the past of 
his loyalty to the BBC.

“I’ve said, I think the girls have said as well, we want to stay with the 
BBC,” he said during a Top Gear appearance in June. “As far as Mary, Mel, Sue 
and myself, we want to stay with the BBC.”


Berry has kept largely quiet on the matter but said on Monday that “anything 
that happens is nothing to do with my choice”.

 A spokesman for Love Productions said: “We would like to thank Mel and Sue 
for bringing their own unique humour to the tent over the past years and we 
respect their decision not to be part of the Bake Off team on Channel 4.”

The news was greeted with an outpouring of dismay from former Bake Off 
contestants. Richard Burr, who took part in the 2014 series, posted on Twitter: 
“Without Mel and Sue it just isn’t Bake Off. Channel 4 has just bought a tent.”


Another 2014 contestant, Martha Collison, said: “Well that’s the end of that. 
Mel and Sue are the true stars of the show – irreplaceable.”


John Whaite, the winner of the show in 2012, described it as “very sad news”.

“They’re wonderful girls who made the show what it is. Now, I’m not feeling so 
hopeful,” he said.


The BBC is understood to have offered £15m – double its previous terms – to 
keep the show, but baulked when Love Productions demanded an estimated £25m a 
year.


The broadcaster described Bake Off as a “quintessential BBC show,” adding: “We 
made a very strong offer to keep the show, but we are a considerable distance 
apart on the money. The BBC’s resources are not infinite.”

As well as a disagreement over money, it is understood that Love Productions 
was keen to move Bake Off to a home where it could expand the commercial side 
of the programme.


“Unfortunately, we were unable to agree either a fair valuation, nor were the 
BBC able to provide the necessary comfort for the future protection of such a 
distinctive and much-loved television series,” the company said in a statement.


The show’s ratings are likely to take a hit when it moves to Channel 4. The 
launch episode of the current seventh series drew a record audience of 10 
million viewers to BBC1. Nearly half the total television viewing audience 
tuned in to watch the new batch of 12 contestants try their hand at making 
jaffa cakes.

Channel 4’s most popular shows, such as Gogglebox, draw in regular audiences 
of just 5 million.

However, Toby Syfret, a media expert at Enders Analysis, said that even if 
Channel 4 drew less than half the audience that Bake Off had on the BBC, it 
would still prove financially beneficial.

He estimated that advert and media buys would bring in about £3m per episode, 
with each series currently made up of 11 episodes.

“If Bake Off gets even half the success on Channel 4 that it got on the BBC, 
it will more than cover itself,” Syfret said. “Channel 4 are likely to charge 
premium rates in terms of airtime, in the region of £50,000 to £100,000 for 
30-second slots, even if it just gets audiences of around 3 million. And if 
Bake Off draws in 5 or 6 million then that will be another step up.

“It doesn’t have to get anything like the audience it had on BBC1 to be 
successful and make back the £25m it spent.”
 