
Harlem's Holcombe Rucker Memorial Park isn't the prettiest of locations. Yet 
for 44-year-old Buddhist Beastie Boy, turned documentary-maker, Adam "MCA" 
Yauch, the asphalt rectangle in Manhattan is just perfect.

"It's the Mecca of basketball," explains the gravel-throated New Yorker. It's 
here that in Yauch's new documentary, Gunnin' For That #1 Spot, that America's 
top 24 NBA-bound high school ballers do battle against each other, before 
endorsement contracts render them all media-trained and inaccessible. Set up by 
high school sports magazine Rise in 2006, the "Elite 24" competition would, 
thought Yauch's friend associate editor, Kris Stone, be an event worth 
documenting on film.

"I thought that, if these guys did succeed," Yauch explains, "it would be cool 
to see them early on. You won't ever get that access to see them that age 
again."

Gunnin' follows them first in class, at home and on the court, before shooting 
their arrival in New York and their game at the Rucker. It's a deft sports 
movie with a great soundtrack, a deadpan portrait of talent on the verge of 
greatness, and a fine addition to Adam's body of work.

Yauch directed the majority of the Beastie Boys' music videos and put together 
the band's 2006 live movie, Awesome, I Fuckin' Shot That! He's the oldest, most 
politically aware of member of the rapping trio. While Mike D was launching 
clothing labels and Adam Horowitz was courting Hollywood starlets, Yauch went 
to find himself in Tibet, returning to campaign for the country's independence.

Yauch now oversees his own recording studio and film distribution business, 
Oscilloscope Laboratories. The likes of Bad Brains and MIA have graced 
Oscilloscope's recording booths, while Gunnin' aside, Oscilloscope Pictures 
plans to distribute Flow, a documentary about the coming water crisis, and 
Frontrunners, about high school elections.

Though mainly a sports film, Gunnin' isn't without political nuance. The 
director selected players not only for their skill, but also because of their 
varied backgrounds. "They were different," he says, "financially, racially, 
geographically."

There's Baltimore's Donte Greene, whose rundown neighbourhood could have 
easily served as a backdrop for The Wire. Then there's Oregon's Kevin Love, 
nephew of the Beach Boys' Mike Love and son of former NBA forward, Stan Love. 
Local hero, Lance Stephenson, from Coney Island, NY, is all the more 
remarkable, when you consider that he was only 16 when the film was shot.

"These kids travel around, live in different cities and play for different 
coaches, it's a strange world. On one level they're ordinary, on another 
they're have a whole crew of people around them, positioning them."

While the players in Gunnin' were ineligible for sponsorship when the game was 
shot, four of the eight featured joined the NBA in 2008. At one point, the 
game's commentator, fellow hip-hop and basketball fanatic, Bobbito Garcia, 
jokes that they're watching two teams of future millionaires.

"But I don't even think he's joking," says Adam. "If they do well, they could 
be offered $50m contracts from Nike."

After all this real-life drama, Yauch himself is keen to direct a narrative 
next, yet he's on a tight schedule, not least with Beasties-related plans. The 
band are getting ready to go back into the studio, while there are plans to cut 
a movie to accompany the instrumental BBs album The Mix-Up, as well as a vocal 
version.

"I don't know what's going to get finished," Adam admits. 

"There was a project of other people doing remixes; MIA worked on one, and 
Snoop Dogg did one and Jarvis Cocker did one. If we get enough we'll put them 
out as an album, and if we don't we'll put them out as singles."

There was a time when this kind of multi-tasking would have been beyond Yauch 
and co. These days, however, he knows how to keep a number of balls in the air.
 