
Surgeons have criticised Theresa May after she became the first prime minister 
to back anNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> organisation’s plans to 
ration treatment to patients who smoke or are significantly overweight.


The Royal College of Surgeons said Downing Street was endorsing an “arbitrary” 
scheme that would condemn people needing a new hip or knee to suffering pain 
for a longer period.

NHS patients told to lose weight and quit smoking or face operation delays
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/nhs-patients-told-to-lose-weight-and-quit-smoking-or-face-operation-delays>
The college, which represents 14,000 surgeons in England, said the 
controversial money-saving policy in the Vale of York, which will force 
patients to wait up to a year for operations they require, would cost the NHS 
more in the long run.

“We are very disappointed that NHS England and No 10 seem to be backing this 
arbitrary policy, given emerging local NHS sustainability and transformation 
plans have yet to be given a chance to make planned short and long-term 
savings,” an RCS spokesman told the Guardian.

“Policies that target smokers and obese patients only delay patient care, and 
it is hard to see how it will ultimately save any money, as patients whose 
treatment is delayed will, in most cases, present later, often with even worse 
outcomes.”

The British Medical Association (BMA), which represents doctors, also 
criticised the Vale of York NHS clinical commissioning group (CCG) policy and 
said it amounted to “rationing on the basis of poverty”, because many of the 
smokers or obese patients likely to be affected would be from poor families.

The RCS spoke out after a Downing Street spokesman made it clear on Tuesday 
that the government had no objections to the plan. The apparent U-turn comes 
weeks after the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, reiterated to MPs that he 
opposed rationing and would step in if local NHS organisations made the “wrong 
choices” in the provision of care.

The Downing Street spokesman said the CCG in North Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> “has been very clear that there 
is no ban and no blanket policy.

“People who fail to meet certain criteria will not be denied their operation. 
Clinicians will give advice to patients and it is right that they do so. 
Procedures for patients will be based on the best interests of the patient’s 
health. They won’t be denied the operation,” he said.

The CCG denied that the new approach amounted to a total ban on all such 
patients having a knee or hip replacement. “There is no ban in place. NHS Vale 
of York CCG has introduced new criteria which asks patients with a body mass 
index of 30 or above to lose weight before surgery and those recorded as a 
current smoker to quit smoking for at least two months,” said Dr Shaun 
O’Connell, its clinical lead and a local GP.

However, the CCG’s policy makes it clear that both types of patients will face 
long waits for surgery from January. Someone with a BMI of 30 or above will 
either have to reduce it to below 30 or lose 10% of their body weight, 
otherwise their surgery will be postponed for a year. Similarly, smokers will 
have to stop lighting up for at least two months or see the procedure they need 
postponed for six months.

Critics claim the policy is unfair, unrealistic and will condemn patients to 
prolonged suffering, including pain, lack of mobility and discomfort, because 
of being denied a new hip or knee.

The surgeons and the BMA fear that No 10 and NHS England’s backing for Vale of 
York’s plans will encourage some of the other 208 CCGs – each of which decides 
how the NHS budget in that area is spent – to implement similarly tough 
restrictions.

Dr Richard Vautrey, a GP in West Yorkshire and the deputy chair of the BMA’s 
GP committee, said: “I’m most concerned that NHS England has approved these 
proposals to effectively ration services as a method of cost-cutting, but 
dressing it up on clinical grounds.

“This is further evidence of a postcode lottery with care simply being based 
on an area’s ability to fund services, rather than real clinical need applied 
consistently across the country.

“While we recognise that there are some benefits to reducing the risk of 
surgery by not being a smoker and not being overweight, there are many patients 
who will find it very difficult to reduce their weight or cut down on their 
smoking, but who would need and benefit from surgery, and they would be put at 
significant disadvantage.

“In many ways, this could also be seen to be rationing on the basis of 
poverty, because it tends to be the poorest in society who struggle with their 
weight and who struggle to stop smoking, and that is not something a CCG should 
be doing,.”
 