
Anne Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/annebronte> is the only member 
of her immediate family whose grave is not at Haworth, the village where the 
Brontës lived from the year of her birth, 1820. She is buried at Scarborough, 
where she went in May 1849 in a last-ditch hope of recovery from tuberculosis, 
and lies in a cliff-top cemetery overlooking the sea she loved.

Apart and alone in death, quiet and reserved in life, the youngest Brontë has 
also been the one people are least likely to be able to name, “the other 
Brontë”, lurking in the shadow of her more famous siblings, Charlotte and 
Emily. At the time when the trio broke into print with a joint collection of 
poems (published in 1846 under the androgynous pseudonyms, “Currer, Ellis and 
Acton Bell”), both Charlotte and Anne were hitching a ride on Emily’s superior 
talent; in the next year, as novelists, it was Charlotte who enthralled the 
reading public withJane Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/16/charlotte-bronte-bicentenary-birth-jane-eyre-by-sarah-waters-margaret-drabble-jeanette-winterson>
, and Emily who disturbed it withWuthering Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/16/emily-bronte-wuthering-heights-100-best>
. Anne’s tale of a pious governess,Agnes Grey, seemed dull by comparison. “It 
left no painful impression on the mind,” one reviewer said, crushingly, “some 
may think it leaves no impression at all.”

Separating a Brontë from the family context is hard to do, but ever since 
the first separate biography of Anne in 1959 by Winifred Gérin, a cult within 
the cult has grown of Anne as the connoisseur’s choice among the sisters. There 
is plenty to admire in this supposed literary wallflower. It was Anne who, in
Agnes Grey, addressed issues of female self-worth and autonomy before Charlotte 
jazzed up the same themes inJane Eyre, and Anne who powered on through the 
commercial failure of her first novel to write about the horrors of living with 
a man on the skids (based on her brother, Branwell), urging an important moral 
message on “the young and thoughtless traveller”. It was Anne, the least 
neurotic or peculiar inhabitant of the parsonage, who bucked the family trend 
and stuck at a job she hated for five years, who understood Emily best, got on 
with things unobtrusively, was tenacious, loyal and dutiful.

The playwright and journalist Samantha Ellis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/samanthaellis> is the latest to promote 
Anne Brontë’s excellence, which, as a recent convert from Emily fandom, she 
does with neophyte fervour. As with her last book,How to Be a Heroine, Ellis 
weaves her thoughts on literature into a personal narrative, this time taking 
stock of her life and achievements aged 40 as she edges hesitantly towards 
emotional commitment and marriage. “If ... I can arrive at any kind of truth 
about Anne, what will I learn?”

Ellis mines Anne’s poems, two novels and five surviving letters for clues, and 
finds a woman of penetrating intelligence and courage, whose riposte to critics 
on the question of the sex of “Acton Bell” was superbly pithy: “I am satisfied 
that if a book is a good one, it is so whatever the sex of the author may be.” 
She is good on all aspects of Brontë’s bravery in her works and her relentless 
self-questioning in private, as in a marginal note in her bible: “What, Where, 
and How Shall I Be When I Have Got Through?” This echoes through Ellis’s 
account of her own questioning of focus and priorities, all assiduously tagged 
to the research for her book. Might she end up living in Haworth, like 
uber-Brontë biographer, Gérin? Probably not. “Anne realised that at some point 
you have to stop living in someone else’s stories and write your own.”

But being a fierce partisan, even temporarily, makes Ellis an unreliable 
guide. She chooses to downplay severely one of Anne Brontë’s most significant 
attributes, her piety, though faith got Anne through things that her siblings 
couldn’t endure, and fuelled her sense of social justice and self-worth. Every 
member of the Brontë family had a distinctly different set of beliefs, and Anne 
was drawn strongly to the low-church Moravians in her teens, later adopting a 
carefully customised form of universalism. Unlike any other member of her 
supposedly religious family, she died expressing sincere happiness in an 
imminent meeting with her saviour.

In a cherry-picking mood, Ellis adopts an astonishingly negative view of elder 
sister Charlotte

In the same cherry-picking mood, Ellis adopts an astonishingly negative view 
of elder sister Charlotte. The sniping starts in the introduction and runs 
right through to the last page: Charlotte is always “snide”, “sneering”, 
“tetchy” or “finagling”, having embarked on a lifelong campaign of bullying and 
mean-spiritedness. Ellis wants to punish Charlotte for her suppression, after 
Anne’s death, ofThe Tenant of Wildfell Hall 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tenant-of-wildfell-hall-460240.html> on 
grounds of it having been “an entire mistake”, but was Charlotte’s misguided 
action really proof of perfidy, as Ellis sees it, a conscious effort to tip the 
balance of posterity’s judgments her way? Is it credible that Charlotte was out 
to ruin Anne’s reputation rather than protect it, when it was only Charlotte’s 
belief in their talent that got Anne, Emily and herself into print in the first 
place?

In even trivial ways, Ellis’s partiality colours the whole body of evidence. 
She chooses not to believe the story about Emily beating her dog Keeper, is 
very selective about facts and ignores any nuances that might compromise her 
characterisations. She thinks Charlotte’s letters to Robert Southey, for 
instance, which seemingly accept his view that “literature is not the business 
of a woman’s life”, are “straightforward” and frank. They aren’t. She also 
can’t see that Charlotte’s speech by a character called Wiggins in her 
juvenilia is a joke aimed against Branwell. “Anne is nothing, absolutely 
nothing,” Charlotte has Wiggins say. “How did Anne feel when she read this?” 
Ellis asks ponderously, “and did she worry about it when, a year later, she was 
sent off to study at Roe Head, where Charlotte would be one of her teachers?”

Sally Wainwright’s bracing characterisation of Anne in her recent TV drama To 
Walk Invisible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/30/to-walk-invisible-review-a-bleak-and-brilliant-portrayal-of-the-bronte-family>
 got quickly to the heart of the author’s intelligence and sympathy, but did so 
by eliminating the factors which, in life, prevented those qualities from being 
readily evident; the intense reserve, the plainness, the speech impediment, the 
habitual near‑silence. Non-fiction needs to be less idealistic. Publisher 
George Smith’s impression was of “a gentle, quiet, rather subdued person”, 
whose “manner was curiously expressive of a wish for protection and 
encouragement”; Charlotte spoke of “a sort of nun-like veil” over her sister’s 
feelings, rarely lifted. To ignore these testimonies is to miss the essence of 
Anne Brontë’s life, the huge gulf that existed between how she felt and how she 
behaved, how she lived and what she wrote. Her “art of life” was to conduct 
most of it in writing.

• Claire Harman’s Charlotte Brontë: A Life is published by Penguin. Take 
Courage is published by Chatto. To order a copy for £14.44 (RRP £16.99) go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/take-courage.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 