
People will soon be able to take up to £500 out of their pension pots 
tax-free, as long as they spend it on financial advice. The governmentthis week 
unveiled details 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-government-advice-allowance-to-make-retirement-planning-easier>
 of the “pensions advice allowance” that will be available to millions of 
people well in advance of their retirement.

It is possible that people as young as 45 could be eligible for the scheme, 
which will be in addition to the normal 25% tax-free lump sum you can take out 
of your pot from age 55. We look at what is proposed and what sort of advice 
£500 can buy.

What’s happening?

An individual will be able to withdraw the money and use it to pay for advice 
on all the financial products they hold that will contribute towards their 
retirement income, such as pensions and any other savings and investments such 
as Isas. This proposal was unveiled in the March budget, and on Tuesday 
ministers announcedhow they think it should work 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/introducing-a-pensions-advice-allowance/introducing-a-pensions-advice-allowance-consultation>
. The government says: “Individuals using the pensions advice allowance would 
still be entitled to the same tax-free lump sum as at present when they 
ultimately come to take their pension benefits.”

Who’s eligible?

It’s almost certain that only those with a defined contribution (aka money 
purchase) pension will be able to access the new allowance. However, if you are 
one of many people who has had several different jobs over the years and has 
both defined contribution and defined benefit pensions, you will be able to use 
the allowance to pay for advice on all of your pension assets. Defined benefit 
pensions include final salary and so-called career average schemes.

Some of the crucial details have yet to be decided - for example, how old you 
will have to be to take advantage of the allowance. A public consultation has 
been launched and will run until late October. At the moment ministers are only 
saying the allowance will be available before the age of 55 to encourage people 
to engage with their retirement planning early.

When is this coming in?

It will take effect from April 2017.

How will it work?

Unbiased claims that people who take advice can get an extra income of £3,654 
every year of their retirement

You will be able to use the cash to pay for any type of fully regulated 
financial advice – ie, personalised advice that may well include specific 
recommendations about products. This advice might be face-to-face, online or 
over the phone. Services that only provide general guidance will be excluded, 
and the adviser you use must be authorised and regulated by theFinancial 
Conduct Authority <https://www.the-fca.org.uk>.

One downside is that pension providers will not be required by law to offer 
this facility. They will be encouraged to, but won’t have to.

How will I access the cash?

To meet the rules, the money will need to be paid direct from the pension 
scheme/provider to the financial adviser. Tom McPhail, head of retirement 
policy at investment and pension firm Hargreaves Lansdown, says an individual 
would be able to instruct their pension provider that they had engaged a 
particular adviser, and would authorise the provider to make a payment to the 
adviser.

So if Mr Smith has a pension pot of £40,000 and decides to take £500 of 
advice, then that’s the amount withdrawn from his fund. There would be no tax 
deducted – his pot would simply be reduced to £39,500.

The main incentive for an individual is that they are, in effect, getting 
advice tax-free, so for a basic rate taxpayer it’s effectively cost them £400, 
while for those on a higher rate, the cost is just £300. This money could also 
be used as a contribution towards advice that costs more than £500.

Do I just get one allowance?

The government is considering letting people use the allowance more than once. 
That means you could use it to help pay for more advice if your circumstances 
change a few years down the line.

What sort of advice can I get for £500?

According to the government, face-to-face financial advice costs £150 per hour 
on average, and that for pension/retirement planning, you might be looking at 
up to nine hours, which would add up to £1,350. But people whose affairs are 
simple won’t need that long, and some will be happy to go with an online or 
phone-based service, which will probably be cheaper.

McPhail says that when it comes to face-to-face advice, “£500 is probably at 
the lower end of any advisory transaction. Most advisers will not engage for 
much less than that, simply because of the fixed costs involved in taking on a 
new client.”

For example, Hargreaves Lansdown’s minimum charge for a retirement 
consultation is £495 plus VAT. For that, you get a consultation with an adviser 
– which might be over the phone – and a report containing recommendations. But, 
given that £495 is the minimum, that assumes the individual’s needs are very 
straightforward and can be dealt with fairly quickly and easily. People with 
complicated affairs might be looking at spending several thousand pounds – but 
if that secures a much better income in retirement, that might represent 
excellent value for them.

Are there cheaper services?

The leading mutual LV= (Liverpool Victoria) has an online service called 
Retirement Wizard which provides fully regulated advice. It says people 
approaching retirement are able to get a personalised retirement advice report 
for £199, with recommendations on the specific financial products they should 
buy, and phone support if necessary. However, you have to be within three 
months of wanting to access your pension and have a maximum pot of £150,000. 
For an additional £499, LV= will make all the arrangements and set up your 
retirement plan.

What about free advice?

The government’s free Pension Wise <https://www.pensionwise.gov.uk/> service 
might be able to help if you are 50 or over and have a defined contribution 
pension. It provides “guidance” –not regulated financial advice – face-to-face, 
over the phone and online. It’s a 45-minute chat that will help you understand 
the information you need to make a decision, but it won’t tell you what to do. 
For example, it won’t recommend any financial products or providers.

Fifty local Citizens Advice delivery centres 
<https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/about-us/how-we-provide-advice/advice-partnerships/pension-wise/>
 provide face-to-face Pension Wise appointments at 500 locations across England 
and Wales, whilethe Pensions Advisory Service 
<http://www.pensionsadvisoryservice.org.uk> runs the phone-based sessions. To 
find out more go toPensionwise.gov.uk <https://www.pensionwise.gov.uk>

Why should I seek advice?

Professional adviser search website Unbiased <https://www.unbiased.co.uk/> 
claims that people who take advice save on average £98 more every month and 
receive an additional income of £3,654 every year of their retirement, based on 
a pot of £100,000.
 