
Having to compete with huge businesses blessed with far greater wealth and 
buying power, higher profile, unimaginable marketing budgets and armies of 
people may seem daunting. But size isn’t everything, according to Alasdair 
Inglis of small-business marketing consultancyGrow 
<http://www.wearegrow.com/marketing-consultancy/>. In fact, being small can 
provide competitive advantage, he argues.

“Speak to small-business owners and you’ll find they believe they can compete 
– and many are winning the battle,” he reveals. “Smaller firms can be more 
agile. They can make decisions more rapidly. They can create, test and launch 
new products quicker. Just look at thenew businesses that are disrupting 
various markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/series/the-disruptors>, 
out-flanking much larger organisations.”

Matter of trust

Crowdfunding and other solutions can mean lack of finance no longer restricts 
smaller businesses, says Inglis, which can also access the talent they need as 
and when required. “Small businesses now have an incredible opportunity to 
compete thanks to the ease and low cost of online marketing and selling. Some 
people running small businesses know as much about online selling and using 
social media as those working in top London agencies.

“There’s an energy and creativity among UK entrepreneurs and small businesses. 
People buy into that. Often consumers trust small businesses more than some 
large companies, who aren’t as close to their customers. Many consumers prefer 
to buy from small, independent businesses.”

Customer focused

Ian Corbett describes his Caversham-based business, Goldcrest Travel 
<http://www.goldcrest-travel.co.uk>, as a “tiny independent travel agency that 
doesn’t use social media, has an embarrassingly bad website and has never 
advertised in its 16-year history”. However, he adds: “We’re highly successful.”

This is no mean feat, with less than a fifth of UK holidaymakers 
<https://c0e31a7ad92e875f8eaa-5facf23e658215b1771a91c2df41e9fe.ssl.cf3.rackcdn.com/general/HOLIDAY_HABITS_REPORT.pdf>
 (pdf) now booking overseas holidays in person at high street travel agencies, 
compared to about 60 per cent ten years ago. Names such as Thomas Cook, Kuoni 
and Thomson dominate high street market share, so how does Corbett succeed? 
“Our holidays cannot be booked online nor by larger high-street agencies 
relying on information popping up on their computer screens,” he replies. “Our 
bookings are complex, tailor-made, multi-centre trips guided by years of 
experience. Others don’t get as excited about such things as we do,” he smiles.

As Corbett stresses, his business is fiercely independent. “We’re very careful 
when choosing tour operators. We’re swayed by their knowledge and commitment to 
quality. They’re small independent specialists like us, and specialising is a 
key reason for our success. Another is we’re extremely customer focused. We’re 
driven by wanting to give our customers a wonderful holiday experience every 
time. Our customers recommend us to their friends and family – which proves 
that we must be doing most things right.”

Quality and consistency

Based near Bath on a 1,000-acre organic dairy farm, Marshfield Farm Ice Cream 
<http://www.marshfield-icecream.co.uk> was set up almost 30 years ago. At full 
capacity, enough ice cream to fill 31 bathtubs can be produced every hour. Now 
sold in more than 3,500 independent outlets, award-winning ice cream in 25 
flavours is made within a converted cowshed from fresh organic milk produced 
onsite by Marshfield’s 250-strong dairy herd.

So, how does the business compete against market heavyweights such as Walls, 
Ben & Jerry’s and Häagen Dazs? “We don’t compete head on,” concedes founder 
Will Hawking, who co-owns Marshfield with his wife, Dawn. “They have higher 
brand profile, their products are popular, their distribution channels are well 
established and they have huge budgets.”

Hawking says Marshfield’s success largely comes from finding its own niche. 
“You must try to be number one within your own small part of the market. 
Quality and consistency are fundamental, while remaining competitive on price.” 
Smaller businesses can also tailor their offering to their local market and 
foster closer relationships with customers, he adds. “Despite our increasingly 
globalised, online world – people still buy from people,” he stresses.


“If you offer quality at the right price, many consumers prefer to buy from 
smaller businesses. We’ve invested heavily in our equipment and products to 
ensure quality. Using organic milk has been another important factor. And what 
we say is what we do. People can even visit us in the summer to see our ice 
cream being made. Authenticity can carry you a long way.”

Often large businesses don't pass savings they receive to the customer, 
meaning smaller businesses can compete on price

Personal touch

James Vincent’s family has lived in the picturesque Wiltshire market town of 
Bradford on Avon for five generations. After the original hardware shop (with 
origins dating back to 1856) closed in August 2013, Vincent reopened the 
business as J Alex Brown some months later.

With business partner Matthew Webb, Vincent also co-owns Avonfield Gardens 
<http://www.avonfield-gardens.co.uk> garden centre in nearby Hilperton. “Why us 
rather than the large DIY and hardware chains? Firstly, we’re well known and 
trusted. Customers know they’ll get no-nonsense advice and the right solution.

“If a customer needs something that’s not widely available, we’ll still try to 
order it for them. In large shops sometimes, the attitude is ‘if you can’t see 
it on the shelf, you can’t have it’. Our suppliers can sell us single items – 
we’re not confined by having to buy in bulk.”

Vincent doesn’t accept that small firms can’t compete with large businesses on 
price highlighting that often large businesses don’t pass the savings they 
receive from buying in bulk to the customer. “With a lot of everyday stuff 
we’re cheaper, because we pass on discounts while maintaining our margins. And 
we offer a wider range of branded products – we’re not confined to selling what 
we’re sent by some buyer somewhere.”

Vincent also believes that honesty is the best policy. “A supplier might let 
us down occasionally, but if you’re honest and explain to customers, you retain 
their trust. As soon as a customer walks in, there’s eye contact. We greet 
everyone and we’re attentive without being intrusive. We’re here to help them. 
I’ll even drop stuff off for free on my way home in my car, if it helps them. 
We offer a very friendly and personal service – the way things used to be.”

Authenticity and passion

So, what final words of advice does marketing expert Inglis offer to small 
businesses seeking to beat large competitors? “Don’t try to imitate them,” he 
replies. “Be who you are, be authentic – be different. Have a story that 
connects with customers – always stay close to them. Have a world-class brand, 
too, because being small is no excuse for being unprofessional.”

Inglis says it’s impossible to overstate the importance of having a friendly 
and personal approach to your customers. “Large businesses spend a fortune on 
training trying to emulate this, it’s where you can really set yourself apart. 
Show customers that you care. And never lose your passion. It’s why many people 
start their own business in the first place and often the thing that customers 
like best about small businesses.”

Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed with Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx>, sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
 