
I was trouble at school. "Like a monkey at the zoo, Giles is intent on 
displaying himself from his least flattering angle," said one teacher in my 
term report, a document strewn with words like "disruptive" and "unfocused". 
Thank God this was in the early 80s, otherwise I bet someone would have 
suggestedRitalin <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ritalin>. For, since the mid 
80s, society has decided that adolescent trouble-making is some sort of medical 
condition. We have given it a scientific-sounding classification,ADHD 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder/Pages/Introduction.aspx>
, securing a sense that a messy adolescence is pathological, some sort of 
chemical imbalance. Thus the scientists are called in to reinforce generally 
conservative norms of appropriate behaviour. In the US, between 1987 and 2007, 
there was a 35-fold increase in the number of children being classified as 
having some form of mental deficiency.

Of course, there are alternative narratives of my trouble-causing. I hated 
school because I wanted to live by a different story to the one proposed by the 
British public school system. Or, maybe, I preferred having fun to reading 
Chaucer. That may be a less noble account, but hardly pathological, or in need 
of some medical classification. But deviation from social conformity is 
increasingly seen to be something in need of a pill. In the UK in 1999, there 
were 158,000 prescriptions written for Ritalin. In 2010 it was 661,463.

The same thing has happened with depression and drugs like Prozac; though 
calling it depression is already to classify a particular kind of experience as 
something quasi-medical, thus leading one to think in terms of medical 
treatment. Sometimes I am just sad. Sometimes pissed off. Sometimes smothered 
in darkness. But we often lump all these experiences together simply because 
pharmaceutical companies have developed a certain sort of treatment. And, once 
you have a hammer in your hand, it is convenient to see every problem in terms 
of its being a nail. We have found the solution, now let's make the problem fit 
the solution we have available. It's a form of reverse engineering.

It is significant that psychoactive drugs were originally developed for other 
purposes. Drugs such as Thorazine, Miltown and Marsilid were developed in the 
50s as ways to treat infections. But they were also seen to have mood-altering 
side-effects – though scientists had no idea why or how. So, as several writers 
have pointed out,"instead of developing a drug to fit an abnormality an 
abnormality was postulated to fit a drug" 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2011/jun/23/epidemic-mental-illness-why/?pagination=false>
. Thus we are encouraged to think of our problems in terms of the lucrative 
solutions to problems we didn't know we had. In this way, the pharmaceutical 
companies are responsible for the very conditions they propose to alleviate

Forget the fact that some people are miserable because they are struggling on 
zero-hours contracts, or have lost their partner or have been watching the news 
too much – if we translate misery into some sort of chemical imbalance then 
someone can make big money out of it. But unhappiness is often a perfectly 
proper response to the state of the world. If you have a shit job or a shit 
home life, being unhappy is hardly inappropriate. At best, many of the drugs we 
are popping only deal with the symptoms of all this, not the causes. At worst, 
they pathologise deviations for normalcy, thus helping to police the 
established values of consumer capitalism, and reinforcing the very unhappiness 
that they purport to cure.

Yes, there are some for whom happiness can be reclaimed by doing a bit more 
exercise or being more sociable. This sounds healthier than pills. But for 
those for whom these are not solutions, let's not make it worse by insisting 
upon the compulsory happiness of the smiley face. For, like the drugs, this can 
be just another way of shutting people up.

Twitter: @giles_fraser <https://twitter.com/giles_fraser>
 