
Southwell and its Fibresand surface are not to everyone’s taste, but I yield 
to no one in my devotion to the track and its resistance to Tapeta and 
Polytrack. Not, of course, that there is anything wrong with either, but for as 
long as Southwell sticks to the sand, there will be horses that love it and, 
just as important, plenty that don’t.

The result, of course, is that many races here have several previous course 
winners in the field, but those that have spent time racing elsewhere can 
sometimes be overlooked.

Horse racing tips: Tuesday 10 January
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/horse-racing-tips-january-10-tuesday>
Mithqaal, for instance, could well start at odds-on for the one-mile handicap 
this afternoon, having powered clear to win on his Fibresand debut over seven 
furlongs at Southwell a few days before Christmas, and his dirt pedigree 
suggests he will be well suited by the surface.

There are four more previous course winners in the field, all of them 
successful at today’s trip, and Mithqaal’s short price means that several are 
available at attractive odds.Vivat Rex (2.20) is the pick of them, however, at 
around 11-1, as the market seems to have considered his most recent success 
here, in a seven-furlong claimer, and forgotten about his impressive victory on 
his only previous start at Southwell, in March 2015.

Vivat Rex was racing from a 5lb lower mark than today’s, and powered seven 
lengths clear of his field in a good time. That was the high point of his 
career to date, he remains unexposed on Fibresand and may prove to have been a 
very shrewd claim by Conor Dore after his latest start.

Space War (3.50) is interesting on the same card for broadly similar reasons. 
Mick Easterby’s 10-year-old has run 23 times since his only previous start at 
Southwell, a comfortable success off 62 back in May 2015. He is thoroughly 
exposed but anything close to that form would give him an excellent chance 
today at around 9-2.

Men United (12.45) has been running consistently of late and has an obvious 
chance earlier on the card, while at Wolverhampton,Mahican (3.10) is the 
outsider of the field and has a long absence to overcome but would have a solid 
chance if fit enough on his first run for Jennie Candlish.

The only jumping of the day is at Lingfield, where Casse Tete (1.00), a 
relative of the brilliant two-miler Azertyuiop, is a fascinating runner for 
Gary Moore on his British fencing debut.Heroes Or Ghosts (2.00) was second to a 
horse who went on to run well in the Sussex National last time out and could 
get off the mark over fences today, whileSteel City (2.30) is interesting in 
the handicap hurdle with promising claimer Daniel Sansom taking off 10lb.
 