
Today’s TV races

Sandown serves up a half-portion Grand National as its main betting event on 
Saturday. Nineteen ageing chasers will line up for the Veterans’ Series Final, 
all of them capable of landing the prize if somewhere close to their best.

Dynaste and Rocky Creek among familiar names to contest Veterans’ Final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/dynaste-rocky-creek-familiar-names-veterans-final>
Of course, the game will be working out which of them is still sufficiently 
motivated to have a proper cut at this contest, which may turn into a slog if 
the overnight rain is as heavy as forecast. Frosts this week could also turn 
the ground into more of a test than a description of “good to soft” would 
indicate.

That’s good news for Cloudy Too (3.00), whose four wins on a heavy surface 
mark him out as tough but by no means quick. Speed was not the main issue in 
last year’s renewal of this contest and the ability to keep on plodding may 
again be the most valuable asset.

Cloudy Too is in sufficiently good heart this winter to have won over hurdles 
for the first time in four years. He wasn’t quick enough for Gas Line Boy at 
Kelso last time but is 11lb better off with that rival and will relish the 
greater emphasis on stamina this race seems sure to provide.

His rating of 140 is just 1lb higher than when he was a 15-length winner of 
the Peter Marsh last January and 8lb below the mark from which he won the 
Rowland Meyrick in 2013. This could well be the day to catch him and 14-1 makes 
plenty of each-way appeal.

Saint Are also looks overpriced at 20-1 for such a classy sort, who is also 
now close to his last winning mark. His season has been a non-event so far but 
we are approaching the time of year at which he typically recovers his form.

1.50 Sandown Since winning this race last year Bold Henry has achieved nothing 
but is only 4lb higher and could easily bounce back to winning ways at 8-1 or 
so. He showed up well for a fair way on his Cheltenham reappearance, an outing 
that was probably needed. By the look of his rivals, this could be run at a 
fair pace, which would help.

2.05 Wincanton The ex-French Walk In The Mill may have taken a year to 
acclimatise, judging by the improvement he showed when scoring on his 
reappearance at Exeter in November. A few extra pounds won’t stop him on that 
evidence.

Horse racing tips: Saturday 7 January
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/horse-racing-tips-7-january-2017>
2.25 Sandown Capitaine was impressive at Ascot but this race may require a 
return to the sort of testing surface which did not suit him so well at Haydock 
in his previous outing. The grey could end up as a sitting duck forFinian’s 
Oscar, a really promising animal on the strength of his Hereford romp last 
month, his hurdles debut.

2.40 Wincanton A winning pointer some three years ago, Clondaw Banker seems 
sure to show improvement now that he goes over fences, his handicap mark being 
based on his hurdles form. He comes from the Nicky Henderson yard that is doing 
much better with its chasers than a couple of seasons back and his fitness can 
probably be taken on trust for this first run in nine months.

3.15 Wincanton A stylish winner at Carlisle in December, Above Board looks 
leniently treated for this handicap debut. Jonjo O’Neill has not been sending 
out many winners but this one looks hard to oppose.

3.35 Sandown The dry autumn was no help to Cloonacool, who may be seen in a 
better light this time. He has won from higher marks over hurdles and fences. 
The combination of first-time blinkers and Paddy Brennan taking over in the 
saddle could make a difference.
 