
Even by the standards of the Grand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> this year’s race looks 
extraordinarily competitive and it was a struggle to get the short-list down to 
a single-figure number of horses. The best solution may be a young improver on 
a handy, low weight in the form ofThe Last Samuri (5.15).

He is one of two horses in the race that left Donald McCain’s ailing yard at 
the end of last season but it would be rather unfair to suggest that was the 
moment at which The Last Samuri’s career took off. He was a prolific winner for 
McCain, too, and has simply continued the progress he seemed likely to make. A 
year ago, when he was winning for his former trainer around Kelso, he looked 
the right type for this race.

Grand National 2016: a horse-by-horse betting guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/08/grand-national-2016-horse-by-horse-guide-runners>
The handicapper would like to stick another 12lb on his back, in light of his 
easy success at Doncaster last month. But the weights for the National had 
already been fixed and, with only 10st 8lb to carry, The Last Samuri has a 
golden opportunity.

The dangers are led by Sir Des Champs, runner-up in the 2013 Cheltenham Gold 
Cup before being struck down by a tendon injury. He has dropped to an 
attractive weight after a couple of midwinter flops on ground he may not have 
enjoyed and Willie Mullins reports that his last piece of work was quite 
impressive.

It was most interesting to see the alacrity with which Ruby Walsh switched 
from his original booking, on Boston Bob, to ride Sir Des Champs after the 
owner’s retained jockey opted for First Lieutenant. As it turns out,Walsh 
misses the race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/08/nina-carberry-replaces-ruby-walsh-grand-national-sir-des-champs>
 but Sir Des Champs should give Nina Carberry a good spin.

Goonyella would be in danger of getting outpaced if the forecast overnight 
rain does not materialise. But he is perhaps the strongest stayer in the field 
and always seems to come good at this time of year. If he gets a clear run 
through, he will surely be staying on more doggedly than anything else from the 
final fence.

At 50-1 The Romford Pele is the most plausible outsider, having looked a 
likely candidate for this until losing his way a couple of years ago. There was 
quite a bit of promise in his last two runs over hurdles and he could cause a 
shock here if able to cope with these much bigger obstacles.

Of those that did not make my 1-2-3-4 I am most worried about The Druids 
Nephew, deprived by a late fall of probable victory in last year’s National. 
But he is higher in the weights this time and his recent form has not been so 
encouraging.

Saint Are, last year’s runner-up, will surely go well again, though a softer 
surface this time does not look like good news for him. Many Clouds has a 
better chance of a repeat success than most National winners but it is hard to 
escape the feeling that there will be something to outspeed him from the last.

Grand National 2016: sweepstake kit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/08/grand-national-2016-sweepstake-kit>
Saturday’s best bets, by Chris Cook

2.25 Devout followers of Mullins endured a surprising number of reverses here 
on Friday butYorkhill should get them back on track. He is unbeaten in three 
over hurdles and the form of his Neptune win at Cheltenham is easily good 
enough for this.

3.00 Douvan is a lovely beast but am I going to back a novice chaser at 1-6? I 
am not.Alisier D’Irlande is a most interesting alternative, having won his last 
two over fences by wide margins, leaving no limit on the ambitions he could 
hold as a chaser. He would be three from three over the bigger obstacles if he 
had not fallen four out on his debut.

3.40 There are a couple of horses in this that could give Thistlecrack some 
sort of competition, at least as far as the home turn, but he won with such 
authority at last month’s Festival that it is quite a stretch of the 
imagination to see him beaten here.

4.20 A series of mistakes in the Betbright Chase last time put Roc D’Apsis on 
the back foot but he stayed on well to be third. He gets in here on the same 
handicap rating and should be very competitive if he can smarten up his jumping 
in this marginally less competitive event.

Do post your tips or racing-related comments below.
 