
10.30am Mullins confident of huge run from Vautour in Gold Cup

Tony Paley: Willie Mullins has said he expects a “huge run” from Vautour in the
Cheltenham Gold Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham-gold-cup> 
next Friday.

Mullins thinks last season’s impressive JLT Novice Chase winner is coming to 
the boil nicely ahead of the Festival which starts on Tuesday.

The County Carlow handler told the Sun: “Vautour has done far better work this 
week than he has in the last three [weeks]. That tells me he should go for the 
Gold Cup. Every year at Christmas Vautour disappoints us a bit, and every year 
he improves in the spring and for the hill at Cheltenham. This year looks no 
different. We expect a huge run.”

Friday’s best bets, by Greg Wood

Horse racing tips: Friday 11 March
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/10/horse-racing-tips-friday-11-march>
The Friday before Cheltenham is never likely to make much of a contribution to 
the annual betting turnover figures, but there are a few interesting and 
competitive races on the jumping cards this afternoon, not to mention the 
traditional pre-Cheltenham oddity that is the Grand Military Gold Cup at 
Sandown Park.

The Brock Again (4.25) looks like the most solid bet on the card at the Esher 
track. He has had a stop-start career since joining the Paul Nicholls stable in 
the autumn of 2014 and is probably one of the lesser lights in the yard, but he 
has taken well to chasing in two attempts to date and has scope for further 
improvement. He is just 3lb higher in the weights after his first success over 
fences at Taunton last month, giving him an obvious chance to follow up.

Bon Enfant (3.50) was clear of the remainder when second behind Pinnacle Panda 
at Sandown last time out and should be capable of sufficient progress to 
overcome a 6lb rise in the weights.Starving Marvin (2.40) has every chance in 
the novice hurdle earlier on the card, while on the Polytrack at Chelmsford 
City,Noble Deed (7.15) could be the answer to a fiercely competitive sprint 
handicap. He has hit a hot streak since Christmas with two wins already this 
year, and the time of his latest success at Lingfield suggests a 5lb rise will 
not be enough to stop him.

Tipping competition - resumes next week

Congratulations to NotThePubThePark, who held on to win this week’s truncated 
competition on a final score of +7. The top scores were:

NotThePubThePark +7

Steve Ellis +6.76

lcprestes +6.13

Lindsey6677 +5.13

TheVic +4.79

Bigboozer +4.17

hubertfarnsworth +4.17

Mulldog +4.13

NotThePub, you should have received an email from us about arranging your 
prize. If no email has arrived, please tell us through the comments facility 
below.

Next week, it’s that Cheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival> you may have heard of. 
As usual, we’ll be running separate tipping competitions on each day of the 
Festival, Tuesday to Friday. Whoever does best on each day will win a £50 bet 
from BetVictor, who have kindly agreed to stump up the prizes. That gives you 
four shots at winning something, although, of course, the endless glory will be 
worth rather more to you than the prize itself.

We hope to see you back here on Monday, when Talking Horses will largely 
consist of excited, pre-Christmas chatter. To travel hopefully is better than 
to arrive.
 