
Today’s TV Racing

Jump racing will make a poignant return to Kempton this afternoon, just days 
afterplans were announced for the track’s closure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/kempton-park-set-to-be-bulldozed-housing-jockey-club-plans>
.Doesyourdogbite (2.40) may prove himself to be one of the last Kempton 
specialists by following up his course win from Boxing Day in the Lanzarote.

A modest handicapper on the Flat, where he started with Andrew Hollinshead, 
Doesyourdogbite is now unbeaten in three over hurdles. It might have been 
expected that he would do well in his new discipline, as a half-brother to 
Ainama and Dark And Dangerous, who were both useful novices and ran to a high 
level at this particular track.

Kempton Park set to be bulldozed for housing under Jockey Club plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/kempton-park-set-to-be-bulldozed-housing-jockey-club-plans>
Doesyourdogbite beat 14 rivals on his handicap debut here, making up plenty of 
ground in the straight. He looks the type to cope well with a step up in class 
and another 6lb may not stop him from producing a career best. He’s on offer at 
11-2.

Modus has been threatening to win a good handicap hurdle and perhaps this step 
up in distance will do the trick. He was disappointing at Ascot, though, and 
it’s starting to feel like a long time since he actually got his head in front.

At 12-1, a better alternative may be the progressive and lightly-raced Lord Of 
The Island, who wasn’t done with when falling at Exeter last time. He took a 
knock to the head from a backmarker that day and it is to be hoped the 
experience hasn’t taken a toll on him. Otherwise, he’d make each-way appeal at 
12-1, with this step back up in trip likely to help.

1.50 Warwick This is a race for sloggers but class has shone through in some 
cases, with Rocky Creek and Black Hercules on the roll of honour.Mystical Knight
 looks good enough to join them on that list, having been given his chance in a 
Grade One at the end of his hurdling season. A dual-winning pointer two years 
ago, he made a predictably good start over fences at Hereford last month, when 
a first-time tongue tie may also have helped, and he looks the type that 
Rebecca Curtis does well with.

2.05 Kempton Doubts exist about all four runners here and Vaniteux is the 
least disconcerting. He may have needed his November return and was giving 
plenty of weight away when third of 11 at Cheltenham last time. This step up in 
trip in a small field around here might suit him well over fences and he has a 
12lb pull for three lengths with Quite By Chance on their November form.

2.25 Warwick A Pertemps qualifier, this one is on its way to being as 
competitive as the final in March.Lough Derg Leader may prove the one with most 
in hand over the assessor, having scooted up on his handicap debut at Doncaster 
in November, despite the race seeming to unfold in a way that would not suit. 
He should appreciate the extra emphasis on stamina here. His Herefordshire 
trainer, Tom Lacey, is worth following in handicaps just now.

Horse racing tips: Saturday 14 January
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/horse-racing-tips-saturday-14-january>
3.00 Warwick Peregrine Run might be the best of these, judging by his 
Cheltenham win in November, but these ground conditions seem unlikely to suit. 
No similar doubt exists aboutGeordie Des Champs, who is three from four over 
hurdles and still has considerable scope to climb the ranks. His first defeat 
in a jumps race came last time when he couldn’t give weight and a start to a 
well-treated winner on his handicap debut but that was still a fine effort.

3.15 Kempton Silvergrove peaked with an all-the-way success over this course 
and distance in February, at which point he was still fairly new to the yard of 
Ben Pauling. He ran well again at the Festival but has lost his way this season 
and seemed not to relish a first spin over the National fences last month. 
Aidan Coleman rides for the first time and this might be a good time to catch 
the nine-year-old, now that he tackles a more winnable contest.

3.35 Warwick Good luck to Willy Twiston-Davies, who hasn’t ridden in a race 
over fences since May 2012 and must return to the job in this 20-runner 
handicap. As if that weren’t enough to worry about, he’s on a horse that seems 
quite likely to start favourite. I don’t share the market’s enthusiasm for 
Ballycross, who remains a maiden over fences, and will go instead with the 11-1 
shotViva Steve. This one looked talented but was only an occasional winner for 
Mick Channon. Fergal O’Brien improved him to win at Ayr in November, in a 
first-time tongue tie, and I believe there will be more to come off this 7lb 
higher mark.
 