
Today’s best bets, by Chris Cook 

Forgive me, Flat purists, for beginning with faraway Perth (faraway if you 
live in England, anyway) when there’s quality action on the Rowley Mile. But 
there’s an unexpectedly good novice hurdle in prospect up there, with both Moon 
Racer and Ballyandy making their debuts over timber.

These are the two most recent winners of the Cheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival> Bumper. I would think 
this must be the first time consecutive winners of that race have made their 
hurdles debut in the same race (Moon Racer having missed nearly all of last 
season with injury), though I shall leave it to even geekier types to actually 
check that.


Moon Racer has the better bumper form, which explains why the market gives him 
the edge. Being a perverse sort, however, I shall be opposing them both. It’s 
always seemed to me that the correlation between flashy bumper horse and 
quality hurdler is a lot weaker than most punters imagine.

Ballyandy has a full brother (Megastar) who won the Aintree bumper before 
compiling a 1/10 record over hurdles. Moon Racer’s only sibling is 1/12 over 
hurdles (though he also failed to win a bumper, so it’s not like they’re the 
same animal).

Predictably, the market has almost no interest in anything else in the race but
Wakea (3.20) looks a live runner to me at 9-1. He was good enough to win off 95 
on the Flat for Jeremy Noseda and ran fourth in the Sagaro last year before 
winning two of his three hurdles starts so far for Irish-based trainer Karl 
Thornton.

He lost one of those wins to a positive test for an anti-inflammatory and 
still looked a work in progress when scoring at Clonmel a fortnight ago, though 
his jumping was improved on what he showed in May. “He was in no way wound-up 
and will come on a tonne for it,” Thornton said.

At Newmarket, Escobar looks a false favourite in the Tattersalls Stakes, for 
all that he was still green when landing the Washington Singer last time and 
will doubtless be straighter. I’m not convinced the form of that race adds up 
to a great deal and there might be more potential in Aidan O’Brien’s
Whitecliffsofdover (3.40) at 5-1. 

It’s just over a year since this son of War Front fetched $1m at auction in 
Kentucky. He was given a gentle introduction in June in a race won by a more 
fancied stablemate, Intelligence Cross, a subsequent Group Three winner. 
Whitecliffsofdover might have been called the paddock pick that day according 
to the Post.

He duly hosed up in a Naas maiden next time when stepped up to this distance. 
Again, the form is weak but he’s on a strong upward curve. O’Brien is on a 33% 
strike-rate with his juveniles in Britain this year.

At 11-2, William Hunter (4.50) is the nap in the 12-furlong handicap, having 
really come to himself since midsummer. A strong-travelling sort, he may 
actually be helped by the step up in class and I think there’s plenty more to 
come. He’s only up 5lb for quite a convincing Ascot success and may be on his 
way to the November Handicap.


We are no longer able to continue with competitions every week, but they will 
still run in the biggest weeks (Cheltenham, Aintree, Royal Ascot, Glorious 
Goodwood and maybe one or two others, as well as the Christmas quiz).


We’ll still have a Talking Horses each day for tips, analysis and news, so we 
very much hope you’ll join us to chew over whatever racing happens to be going 
on and post your tips or racing-related comments below.

 