
Ludlow’s card could not escape the overnight frost and was abandoned this 
morning, but the news is better from West Yorkshire, where Wetherby’s 
seven-race card over jumps has passed an inspection and will go ahead as 
planned, albeit with one fence — the last open ditch in the back straight — 
omitted in all chases.

The novice handicap chase is the most valuable race on the card, and probably 
the most interesting from a punter’s point of view, as it is currently betting 
to a margin of just 3%. None of the seven runners can be dismissed out of hand, 
as even Shanroe Santos, the 11-1 outsider of the field, had form over hurdles a 
couple of years ago that would give him every chance off today’s mark, butWhat 
A Moment (1.35), who makes the long trip from David Pipe’s yard, looks the 
safest bet at around 4-1.

What a Moment has progressed steadily since being switched to fences at 
Aintree in October, and won at the second time of asking at Cheltenham’s Open 
meeting. He was only fifth at Chepstow last time but that was a competitive 
race and the seven-year-old was barely three lengths behind the winner. He can 
run off the same mark today and has the useful claimer David Noonan, a winner 
on three of his last 10 rides, taking 3lb off his back.

The mares’ handicap hurdle is also competitive, with five of the seven runners 
arriving off the back of a win last time out.Midnight Silver (1.05) might 
appreciate some rain at Wetherby this morning, but she improved for a step up 
to this trip last time out and Richard Johnson may be able to set his own pace 
on Jamie Snowden’s runner. She’s 11-2.

Gleaming Girl (6.45) has plenty to recommend her on the card at Wolverhampton 
this evening. Somethingthrilling is currently odds-on for this fillies’ 
handicap over an extended mile, but she is 12lb higher than for her last start 
in a handicap, while the 4-1 shot Gleaming Girl has been dropped 1lb since 
finishing third here just after Christmas. That was her first run since August 
and her earlier win at Newcastle off a 5lb lower mark than today’s was recorded 
in a useful time for the grade.

Yasir (7.15) is into the veteran stage and making his 64th start on the Flat 
today, but he has plenty of form at Wolverhampton and is the most reliable 
proposition in the stayers’ handicap. A similar remark applies toChoral Clan 
(3.00) at Kempton, while, on the same card, Consulting (4.30) can build on an 
improved performance when dropped to six furlongs last time out.
 