
Most unusually for a Saturday, there will be no live racing on terrestrial TV 
today, Channel 4 having made its exit from the sport at Kempton on Tuesday, 
four days earlier than scheduled. Racing UK has therefore decided to make a 
free offer of today’s action from Newbury and Warwick, which will be available 
on Sky (channel 432) and Virgin Media (channel 536), and will also be streamed 
live on racinguk.com.

Our preview of the best races on New Year’s Eve begins with Newbury’s Challow 
Hurdle, which could fall toCultivator (1.50). Nicky Henderson’s five-year-old 
needs to improve on his third place in Sandown’s Neptune last time but has 
scope to do so, having only taken himself out of the reckoning with a late 
mistake that day.

After the way he ran in snatches, it was quite impressive that he got into the 
argument at all. Natural progression, plus the addition of Noel Fehily, might 
be enough to get him home in front this time but I also expect that the removal 
of the hood he has been wearing will help him keep in touch through the early 
stages. The 9-1 seems too big.

Horse racing tips: Saturday 31 December
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/horse-racing-tips-saturday-31-december>
1.15 Newbury At the bottom of the weights, the progressive Yanmare looks the 
one to be with here, having stayed on dourly to win all three of his starts in 
handicap company. This looks a manageable step up in class and this galloping 
circuit ought to show him in a good light. The concern would be that something 
in front may keep going too strongly for him to catch, particularly since he is 
without his regular jockey, Jamie Bargary, replaced by Gavin Sheehan, whose 
record over fences this season is only modest.

1.40 Uttoxeter Disappointing in novice hurdles, Pure Vision came to life on 
his handicap debut at Lingfield recently, with a tongue tie back on for the 
first time since his bumper days. An 8lb hike is by no means harsh and he may 
be hard to beat here.

Paul Nicholls is ready for trainers’ title ‘scrap’ with Colin Tizzard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/paul-nicholls-ready-horse-racing-trainers-title-scrap-colin-tizzard>
2.15 Uttoxeter A useful hurdler who may derive significant benefit from the 
switch to fences,Rock Gone seemed on his way to victory at Newbury when taking 
a late fall on his most recent start, in March. He comes from the Richard 
Newland yard which now seems to be hitting form.

2.25 Newbury The ex-French Cepage was so impressive on his British debut, over 
this course and distance a month ago, that he still looks handily treated after 
a 13lb rise. There are a couple of useful sorts in opposition but they may have 
to find better opportunities.

3.00 Newbury Having his second run since joining Gordon Elliott and his first 
with a tongue tie,Kings Bandit was going well when coming down at the 
third-last at Navan a fortnight ago. Even with another 3lb, he makes most 
appeal here, though Geordie Des Champs is by no means poorly treated for this 
first foray into handicaps.
 