
Today’s best bets, by Chris Cook 

Today’s Talking Horses is brought to you by the 6.30am train to London, which 
has excellent wifi, for once. You can keep your three days of quality jump 
racing at Cheltenham, what I really do for kicks is attend appeal hearings in 
the dungeon below the offices of theBritish Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority>.

Today’s contest should be a tense affair, if everyone turns up. It concerns 
the controversial finish to a handicap on the day of the Racing Post Trophy at 
Doncaster, in which Banditry finished strongly but just too late to catch 
Laurence, having been hampered by the winner as he was starting his run.

To me, it seemed an especially bad example of stewards being unwilling to 
intervene and change a result when they ought to have done so. But what may 
make the hearing all the more compelling is that the jockeys involved are Ryan 
Moore (Laurence) and William Buick (Banditry).

Here’s hoping for a keenly fought battle of wits, with perhaps some harsh 
language thrown in. On the other hand, perhaps they’re both too busy to be 
there, now that the good Flat racing is finished in this country for the year. 
But it’s going to be a bit of a nonsense if they try to hold this hearing 
without either of the riders.

As a side issue, Banditry came out four days later and won at Chelmsford. Had 
the Doncaster stewards awarded their race to him, he’d have had a penalty at 
Chelmsford that may have changed the outcome, so connections of the runner-up 
there may be aggrieved if Banditry’s people win their appeal today.

Anyway, the rest of you will have to make do with the tussles taking place on 
actual racetracks. The most interesting bit for me will be the seven-furlong 
handicap at Chelmsford tonight in whichVincenzo Coccotti (7.25) is 9-1. 

This American-bred passed through a couple of yards before getting to Ken 
Cunningham-Brown, who recently brought him to a peak with a strong-finishing 
success at Wolves. The gelding is only 4lb higher and ready for this step up in 
class. The extra furlong at this tight circuit ought to help and I hope to see 
an irresistible surge from him up the straight.

At Towcester, Jimmy The Jetplane (3.15) may make all around a track where his 
trainer, Kim Bailey, does well. This eight-year-old was helped by first-time 
cheekpieces when getting off the mark over fences at Sedgefield last time. He’s 
7-2.

I’m often inclined to favour potential over proven form but Ballyhill (2.35) 
should be favourite to beat Moscato in Ludlow’s introductory hurdle, rather 
than second in the betting at 2-1. He carries a penalty for a slick Hereford 
win on his hurdles debut but I don’t think that’ll be enough to give his rival 
the edge. Moscato looked a work in progress when third in a small field at 
Ascot last time. I can quite believe that this grey, who won off 87 on the 
Flat, will also win races over obstacles but I don’t think he’s a 6-4 shot for 
a race like this.
 