
Today’s best bets, by Chris Cook 

Oh rats, Lingfield has been frozen off, which means no jump racing today. I 
suppose we should all just be grateful we haven’t had more of such issues this 
winter but I’d worked myself into a bit of a lather over one of my picks there 
and now it’ll just be another thing to ponder on my deathbed: would that yak 
have won at Leafy? Chiz chiz chiz.

Anyway, we have plenty of all-weather action to tide us over, including a 
Wolves card which is surprisingly busy with interesting runners. First up is
Tranquil Daze (3.30) in the sprint handicap and very popular at 2-1. 

David Brown’s three-year-old didn’t show much in maiden races but suggested he 
can win one of these in his handicap debut around here in November, staying on 
into fourth after being green / keen. He’ll know more again and has been 
dropped 2lb, which allows him into this slightly lower grade. He’s well drawn 
to take a handy early position.

Adam Kirby is always worth looking for in winter al-weather races and he may 
have landed on a winning saddle half an hour later, when he’ll be aboardDandy 
Flame (4.00). This one has improved for the switch to William Haggas from Jose 
Santos, while still being a bit frustrating. The extra furlong could prove 
decisive. Again, he’s popular at around 2-1.

You can get 11-4 about Born To Finish (5.00), which seems very fair, in view 
of his comfortable success last time, his first run since a breathing op. He’d 
dropped a fair way in the weights before that and I think he’ll have more to 
give under a penalty.

If you prefer bigger prices, 8-1 about Oriental Relation (4.30) isn’t bad. 
He’s three from nine at Wolverhampton and did well to win there from stall 10 
last month. I’m not too fussed about his Southwell flops either side of that. 
He’s only 2lb higher today and much better drawn, which is important for this 
drop from six furlongs to five.

At Chelmsford tonight, there’s a sprint handicap in which the running styles 
of those involved suggests a pace battle. In the circumstances, 8-1 aboutUpavon 
(6.45)might be on the big side, considering he is the type to finish strongly 
from off that pace, provided he hasn’t blown the start as badly as he sometimes 
can. Blinkers go on for the first time in what looks like an attempt to prevent 
exactly that problem.

 