
Today’s best bets, by Chris Cook 

One of the things I already like about ITV Racing is its enthusiasm for 
archive footage. Today, to markthe passing of Brian Fletcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/brian-fletcher-grand-national-winning-jockey-red-rum>
, they’ve tweeted footage of his 1974 Scottish National success on Red Rum, 
which apparently the jockey said wasthe best win of his career 
<https://twitter.com/itvracing/status/819863601406214145>. 

What fun to see Red Rum being opposed at the final fence by John Oaksey, of 
all people, on Proud Tarquin!Horse racing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/horse-racing> history is made up thousands 
of delicious moments like this one and you have to make them available, at the 
very least, for new people thinking about taking an interest in the sport. If 
you let those people understand they’d be joining something with a past to be 
proud of, they’re so much more likely to step over the line into our world.

Sedgefield’s card has bitten the dust, alas, but we still have Huntingdon, 
where I’m interested by the 12-1 aboutFollowmybuttons (2.20). He is not what 
you’d call a safety-first bet, having fallen by halfway on his only previous 
run over fences and having also had a significant bout of pneumonia earlier in 
his career which may or may not be relevant to the fact that he bled on his 
reappearance this season.

What I like about him is his powerful performance to win a Towcester maiden 
hurdle in May, the first time he wore a tongue tie. He was described then by 
his trainer, David Arbuthnot, as “an out and out chaser” and will probably 
prove well handicapped if he can actually clear the fences this time. Leighton 
Aspell, riding for the first time, is just the man to produce some ability from 
such a beast, if any ability exists.

Nicky Henderson loves a right-handed, flat track offering decent ground in 
midwinter, so of course he has some fancied runners on this card. But I’m not 
convinced that O O Seven is leniently treated for this first foray into 
handicaps and he might struggle to give 16lb toMad Jack Mytton (3.20). 

From the Jonjo O’Neill yard that is winning only occasionally just now, Mad 
Jack has a couple of bits of hurdle form from last season to suggest that he 
can win off this mark in the right race. He’s a full-brother to The Game 
Changer and a half to Johns Spirit, both Graded winners over fences, so there 
must be plenty of hope that he can improve again for this switch to the larger 
obstacles. He’s drifted out to 9-1.

Nothing good ever seems to come of tipping at Lingfield but 5-2 about 
Nonchalant (3.30) isn’t bad. Having dropped 35lb from the initial mark he 
earned in his Dermot Weld days, this grey made almost all from a wide draw at 
Wolverhampton last week and is only 1lb higher now.

Aled Beech, the claimer who rode him for the first time that day, is back 
aboard and they have a handier draw in one if the plan is to go forward once 
more.
 