
Two former winners will line up at Kempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> for the race that used to be known 
as the Racing Post Chase but the one I fancy found one rival too good when he 
ran in it last year.Le Reve (3.35) is having another productive season and Lucy 
Wadham’s charge could go one better at odds of 9-1.

The main thing you should keep in mind about Le Reve is that he needs to be 
turning right during his races. All six of his wins have been at right-handed 
tracks, including his authoritative success at Sandown three weeks ago, for 
which he has been raised a very manageable 5lb.

Horse racing tips: Saturday 27 February
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/26/horse-racing-tips-27-february-2016>
That leaves him just 3lb higher than when he was second in this race last 
year. Rocky Creek, a borderline Grade One performer at his best, bounded away 
from him that day but his form since has been disappointing.

Le Reve has perfectly legitimate excuses for his flops this season, two at 
left-handed tracks and one when needing his reappearance run. He put up a good 
effort here in January to be second to Kruzhlinin, who had been rejuvenated by 
a change of stables.

Thomas Brown has a lot of potential, now that he steps into handicaps, while 
Ruben Cotter would be a contender if fighting fit for this first start in 10 
months. Roc D’Apsis has his stamina to prove but appears on the upgrade and is 
possibly being overlooked unfairly at 20-1.

Saturday’s best bets, by Chris Cook

1.45 Lingfield With Muthmir expected to need this comeback run, Russian Soul 
is an interesting option at a big price. This eight-year-old comes from an 
in-form Irish yard and finished strongly to score at Dundalk last week, 
improving his excellent Polytrack record.

2.00 Kempton Gibralfaro’s defeat of Connetable at Ascot last month looks 
really smart in light of that rival’s subsequent win over Rayvin Black and 
Peace And Co. Three hurdling debutants from the Nicholls and Henderson yards 
make this a race to watch without an interest, however.

2.20 Newcastle Draytonian was running a big race on his handicap debut at 
Kempton’s Christmas meeting before making a critical blunder three out. He has 
lots more unexplored potential than these rivals, though Minstrels Gallery is 
certainly respected.

2.35 Kempton The Paul Nicholls string seems in better health generally than 
whenMon Successeur was well held at Cheltenham last time. Even that was a 
respectable effort in a tough handicap, as he was involved to the second-last. 
He looks the pick of these novices, though The Saint James undoubtedly has 
improvement in him.

2.50 Newcastle Portrait King remains well treated but I have become a little 
bored of giving him chances after he failed to get involved in the Welsh 
National.Cork Citizen appeals at the each-way odds of 16-1, having run above 
his rating on his recent debut for David Pipe. This marathon test may suit.

3.05 Kempton This is a step up in class and a change in direction for Winter 
Escape, whose first two wins were at Doncaster, but he looks all class and is 
hard to oppose. His trainer, Alan King, has won this race three times in the 
past 10 years.

3.20 Lingfield Grendisar goes well for Adam Kirby and the pair may step up on 
the six-year-old’s second place in this contest last year, when only the classy 
Tryster was too good. There was no obvious fluke about his victory last time 
over Festive Fare and he can confirm that form.

Post your tips or racing-related comments below.
 