
Today’s best bets, by Chris Cook 

I was just a teensy bit gutted to see that Empire Of Dirt won the Troytown 
yesterday, given that he was my long-range fancy for theGrand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> but as yet unbacked in that 
capacity. His Aintree odds will now be shorter, of course, but I almost feel 
they should be longer because of what yesterday’s success will do to his 
handicap mark.

Having won the Plate at the last Cheltenham Festival, he was easily going to 
be high enough in the handicap to be sure of a place in the National. I thought 
that Gordon Elliott, who inherited him in the summer from Colm Murphy, would 
probably not try anything ambitious until April, with the aim of getting him 
there on about the same rating.

But of course Elliott loves the Troytown, which he has now won three years in 
a row. The National will be the next plan but, having won at Navan, Empire Of 
Dirt can expect a mark in the mid-150s for Aintree.

That’ll give him 11st or thereabouts, the sort of weight with which you can’t 
win a National unless you’re Gold Cup class or very nearly. He might be that 
but I’d have preferred to be backing him on 10st 7lb.

Life goes on, to Plumpton, in fact, where Romain De Senam (1.25) is an 
exciting chase debutant in a four-runner race for Paul Nicholls. It’s more than 
a year since this ex-French type actually won anything (a juvenile hurdle at 
Wincanton) but there’s plenty of engine under his bonnet, as he showed when 
second in the Fred Winter at the Festival.

That race was won by his more fancied stablemate Diego Du Charmil, who was 
given a more attacking ride. The amount of ground Romain De Senam made up from 
two-out was simply enormous and he was beaten by a diminishing head.
I don’t hold it against him that he was stuffed by Apple’s Jade at Aintree in 
a soft-ground race at the end of term. Chasing was supposed to be his game and, 
at 11-4, I’m betting he’s going to be good at it today, especially in receipt 
of 12lb from the favourite, Top Notch. The latter loves the mud but the 
GoingStick reading suggests it’s drier at Plumpton than you’d expect for the 
time of year.

With that point in mind, I’ll give another chance to Neil Mulholland’s Very 
Extravagant (2.00) in the following handicap hurdle. Her winning run came to an 
end at Cheltenham a fortnight ago but heavy rain turned the going against her 
and she’ll be grateful for this step back down in class. She’s 6-4.
 