
Today’s best bets, by Chris Cook

I had an exchange with racing’s ruling body yesterday which revealed as much 
about their approach as anything uncovered by the Jim Best story last year. I 
had gone to the British Horseracing Authority to ask about the Jockey Club’s 
plans to close one of its tracks (Kempton) and redistribute the fixtures among 
its other venues, including the very important and prestigious King George VI 
Chase.

I repeated my suggestion from four years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/aug/05/hereford-issue-bha-act> 
that the BHA ought to insist, in the case of any racecourse being closed, on 
its fixtures reverting to the ruling body to be redistributed as it saw fit, 
rather than as the racecourse group wished. This, I said, would be a useful 
means of discouraging groups from closing tracks. I was taking it as a given 
that we all see racecourse closure as A Bad Thing.

The BHA briefing note came back: “It would be entirely inappropriate and 
possibly illegal for us to act in this manner. Racecourses are independent 
commercial bodies. The BHA does not have a mandate, or right, to put in place 
measures to prevent independent commercial bodies from opening/closing their 
assets.”

As you may possibly be aware by now, I’m no great fan of unfettered 
capitalism, which seems to me to involve a simple transfer of power from those 
in authority to those with money. Racing is full of people who are to the right 
of me on the political spectrum and it’s no great surprise to find some of 
those people running the BHA.

What is a surprise is that the BHA isn’t the least bit interested in putting 
in place the most modest deterrent against racecourse closure. My suggestion 
would, after all, be no more than a deterrent and the BHA, having reclaimed 
fixtures from the closed track, would still be able to hand them all back to 
the relevant group if it felt that was justified.

The point would be to assert that the sport should have a controlling say over 
the consequences of racecourse closure. It is clearly in the wider interest of 
racing to assert this and there is nothing admirable in weakly leaving the 
matter in the hands of whoever happens to own the tracks. As things stand, a 
track’s fixture list can become more valuable than the track itself, making the 
track extremely vulnerable.

It is, in my view, a shocking abdication of responsibility that racing’s 
ruling body will not act, in these circumstances, to give the tracks any kind 
of protection from a closure that would suit the group but not necessarily the 
sport. And what on earth do we gain from being so laissez-faire with the fabric 
of our great game? We are badly led.

Speaking of terrible decisions, I’m taking a chance on the stamina of Raktiman 
(2.50)in today’s North Yorkshire Grand National at Catterick, in view of a 
GoingStick reading of 8.3 that suggests a surprisingly dry surface for the time 
of year. He comes from the yard of Sam England, whose 23% strike-rate in 
handicaps this season is a wonder to behold.

The last time he ran at Catterick, in February, Raktiman hosed up by 10 
lengths from a mark only 4lb below the one he has today. He couldn’t sustain 
that form in better races for the rest of that season but has worked his way 
into form again, judging by his second place at Fakenham last time, bested only 
by a Twiston-Davies youngster.

Doing Fine was my first thought for this race but he’s skinny at 4-1, whereas 
Raktiman could easily run better than odds of 25-1 anticipate. I’m also keen on 
Alto Des Mottes at 18-1, having tipped him for the race last year when he was 
five lengths clear at the last from the same rating as he has today.

The interesting one at Leicester is Bells ‘N’ Banjos (2.10) at 12-1. Now 
seven, he seems to have lost his enthusiasm since winning easily in a handicap 
hurdle 14 months ago, with the result that he has come back to a beatable mark.

This is his first run since moving from Warren Greatrex to Fergal O’Brien and 
his first over fences, in which sphere he might prove handily treated. I’m 
prepared to take a chance on the necessary revival.

The case for Mister Bob (3.00) at Newcastle requires less imagination and I’m 
surprised he’s 6-1, having won over this course and distance from a similar 
mark on his penultimate outing. He was “nearest finish” after a steady early 
pace last time and I fancy Tony Hamilton, riding him for the first time, to 
maximise his chance.
 