
School students applying to university may be disadvantaged because their 
teachers’ views on what to write in a Ucas personal statement can be “a world 
apart” from what admission tutors want, according to theSutton Trust 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/>. 

Research, conducted by the trust, found that the views of Russell Group 
admissions tutors on what makes a good personal statement differed from what 
teachers believed would impress them. The trust places the blame for this on 
universities, warning they must provide more information about what they are 
looking for from students.


Dr Steven Jones, author of the research, says: “The advice and guidance that 
some young people receive at school when composing their personal statement may 
not reflect the content and style expected by admissions tutors at the UK’s 
most selective universities. Applicants need to be given a structured programme 
of advice that emphasises academic suitability.”

When asked to mark the same 44 personal statements, the teachers, who worked 
in state schools, gave just 10 of the statements the same grade as admissions 
tutors. While 20 statements were marked as one grade different, 13 were given 
marks two grades apart and one statement was marked differently by three grades.

Commenting on the same extract from one student’s personal statement, a 
teacher thought it “showed clear enthusiasm for law”, while an admissions tutor 
felt it was “empty” and that the “weak attempt to definite law wasted space and 
provided no useful information about the applicant”.

In another example, which included lots of medical information, the teacher 
thought that it was “too much” and “too long and impersonal”. In contrast, the 
admissions tutor felt that it was an “excellent analysis”.


Truthful university applications: our favourites so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/25/truthful-university-applications-our-favourites-so-far>
Sir Peter Lampl, chairman of the Sutton Trust and of the Education Endowment 
Foundation <https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/>, says: “Today’s 
research shows how important it is that students get good advice about their 
personal statements, which are a key part of the application process to 
universities. The views of teachers and admissions tutors can be a world apart, 
so it is vital we ensure that teachers, students and parents are all well 
informed about what universities want in the statements.”

The Sutton Trust recommends that universities be more transparent about the 
way they evaluate personal statements, to ensure that students of all 
backgrounds have access to the advice they need.


Dr Wendy Piatt, director-general of the Russell Group, says: “Our universities 
make it clear on their websites and in other materials that personal statements 
are primarily an opportunity for applicants to show their academic interests 
and reasons for wanting to study a particular subject.

“We agree with the Sutton Trust that it’s very important students receive 
high-quality information, advice and guidance, including on writing personal 
statements. Our universities give lots of help and advice to teachers, 
especially those working in deprived areas.”

The research follows statistics released by the Department for Education (DfE) 
<http://home.bt.com/news/uk-news/university-access-gap-widens-between-rich-and-poor-teenagers-11364034940272>
, which showed that the gap between the proportion of rich and poor teenagers 
going to a top university is widening. It also showed that those from a black 
ethnic background were less likely to go to a leading university than other 
ethnic groups.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 