
This is the time of year when I’ve forgotten I have a writing day. Not 
forgotten it intellectually, but forgotten it in my body, which has fallen into 
that other rhythm: of household things, family, children and grandchildren and 
parents, sociability, planning. My writing self waits – I really want to say, 
though it’s a cliche, in the wings. I like the picture the cliche conjures, of 
a sociable self performing noisily, exaggeratedly, on a pantomime stage with 
painted backdrop and familiar old props – Christmas tree, pile of presents, 
table heaped over and over again with papier-mache stage food, everyone wearing 
the same old paper hats they wore last year. And in the midst of all the noise 
and laughter and melodrama (the predictable fallings-out and weepy 
reconciliations) a glimpse of another silent self, hanging about backstage more 
or less patiently, a kind of phantom at the pantomime, waiting to get back to a 
different kind of work.

For long years, before I was published, when I was writing and writing and not 
managing to “breed one work that wakes” – to borrow Gerard Manley Hopkins’ 
wonderful, terrible words (“why must / Disappointment all I endeavour end?”) – 
that secret self waiting in the wings was a haunted, fugitive, shamed figure. I 
couldn’t do it, and I couldn’t not do it. Bizarrely and inexplicably, if I 
couldn’t write, then somehow my other life, the real one, wasn’t quite real 
either. The two selves – the performer and her shadow – turned out to be 
inseparable. Each needed, for her own real life, the reality of the other one.

I know some writers, if they are in the middle of a novel, think about it all 
the time, they’re seized and possessed by it, until it almost blots out for 
them their other, daily lives. But it’s not quite like that for me. Of course 
when I’m in the thick of writing, working on a novel or a story day after day, 
then I am thinking about it a lot, I’m absorbed in it. Some of my best ideas 
come in the bath, or in bed just after I’ve put the light out; I have to put 
the light on again, apologising, and get out of the bed to fetch my notebook. 
These aren’t usually ideas for sentences, or images; they’re more likely to be 
the shapes of things that could happen, or must happen, to my characters. There 
is a dreamy moment just before sleep carries me away, when imagination is 
especially good at foreseeing, feeling its way to the true next thing. What 
would he do, after that had happened? What would become of her, after she found 
out? How might that next scene unfold?

The unfinished novel feels like a room shut up inside me: I’m aware of it but 
don’t open the closed door to look inside

Once I’ve left the novel alone for a few days, however, I stop moving around 
inside its spaces of possibility. The unfinished novel feels like a room shut 
up inside me; going about the business of my other life I’m aware of it but 
don’t open the closed door to look inside, though I keep its key in my pocket, 
fingering it sometimes to remind myself. And then the day comes – unremarkable 
to anyone else, remarkable to me – when I sit down to my novel again at last. 
Huge trepidation. At first I can’t remember being the person who chose these 
words, this story; I can hardly remember what it was I wrote just before I left 
off. When I read the novel through, I may see from the cool distance that comes 
with separation that it’s all wrong: too prosy and dull, or too exposed and 
raw, or fake.

But let’s suppose it’s all right, it’s alive enough for me to begin again 
where I left off. I write at a little table in the bedroom: I’ve always feared 
that a dedicated study could overwhelm the spark which seems to depend on 
accident, a sideways approach, a kind of calculated carelessness. I might read 
a few sentences of something brilliantly good (Elizabeth Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/feb/07/elizabeth-bowen-charles-ritchie>,
Alice Munro <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-munro>, Shirley Hazzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview19>
) to build a bridge across the threshold into writing. Then work begins. Such 
hard work, such a joyous freedom: welding the words together, bringing 
something new into being. A paradoxical mix of extreme strained effort with 
dreamy relinquishment. My real life can go and lie down for a while. My other 
real life has taken over.

• Bad Dreams and Other Stories by Tessa Hadley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tessa-hadley> is published by Jonathan Cape 
on 26 January.
 