
People used to say they weren’t going to see Adam And The Ants for the band, 
but for the audience. We were so taken in by it all that we used to throw 
ourselves into each other. For a 16-year-old who had no experience whatsoever 
of dingy nightclubs, it took me to another level.

I got into the punk scene quite late. Two girls at my sixth-form college got 
me interested. I was studying sciences (my mum thought I was going to be a 
doctor), and they were arts students who had dyed hair and dressed unusually. I 
was drawn to eclectic characters, so I got chatting to them in the canteen and 
they invited me to gigs at theRoxy Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/oct/24/artsfeatures4>. One of the 
first times I went, I ended up on stage with a bass guitar around my neck just 
banging the strings with a Coke can.

My first Adam And The Ants gig was the most incredible, life-changing 
experience. The band were into bondage and sadomasochism; one of their songs 
was called Beat My Guest, and I got drawn into how physical it was. I used to 
come home covered in cuts and bruises, and my mum worried I had been mugged or 
run over. I used to say, “No, no, I’ve just been dancing and having fun.”

This photograph was taken at the Marquee Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/may/14/arts.artsnews> at the height of 
their popularity. I knew the other people in the frame from the scene. We were 
all so young. I was 16 and the guy next to me, Duncan, was only 14. I saw him 
last year at an Adam And The Ants concert at Wembley Arena; we didn’t have much 
to say to each other. Someone once asked, on seeing this photo, whether it was 
children’s night, but the truth is no one bothered to check your age back then. 
They just wanted your 50p, which is what it usually cost to get in.

We didn’t take drugs in those days or have any other stimulus beyond some 
watered-down lager. It was the music and the power of the performance that made 
us behave like that. It was like a performance of fake agony. When you had 
someone screaming “Beat me, beat me”, you entered this trance-like state. We 
were trying to express ourselves.

It was very rare for a photographer to be at these gigs, largely because of 
the potential damage to their camera. Many punk rockers hated having their 
picture taken, so if they saw a photographer they might attack them or destroy 
their camera. I certainly don’t remember anyone taking pictures that night, but 
he must have gone incognito to get intimate shots like this.

The first time I saw this photograph was around 10 years ago when someone on 
Facebook contacted me about it. Apparently it has been used in various punk 
magazines and featured in a history of punk by the NME. In 2010, it was used in 
an Alexander McQueen campaign.

I am 56 now, and looking back, I feel proud of the fact that I was there for a 
momentous occasion in British culture. We were helping to break down barriers 
and create something new. It’s a point in my life I shan’t forget in a hurry.

• Interview by Abigail Radnor.

Are you in a famous photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com 
<mailto:thatsme@theguardian.com>.
 