
The Hive by Bee Wilson John Murray, £7.99

Never particularly strong on biology, it was not until relatively late in life 
- around the time this book came out in hardback, when I read some of the 
reviews - that I discovered the precise mechanics of bee reproduction. Somehow 
my biology teachers never got round to telling me the final stages of the 
honeybee drones' lives. I vaguely knew that they did nothing much all year 
round (the bees, that is, not my biology teachers), knowledge kept on a 
life-support machine by my acquaintance with PG Wodehouse's Drones club in 
Mayfair, playpen of the idle rich; but I did not know that when those fortunate 
enough to mate with the queen finally did so, their genitals were torn off and 
they died. It is, one cannot help thinking, one hell of a way to go, and adds a 
certain piquancy to Wodehouse's choice of name.

Thanks to this book, though, I am now considerably better informed about the 
bee. By the time I reached the foot of page 12, I had looked up and actually 
said aloud: "Bees are the most amazing animals on earth" to anyone who cared to 
listen. "When a worker feels dirty," writes Wilson, "she stamps her legs, and a 
nearby bee will recognise the signal and clean her, especially on that 
hard-to-reach spot between the thorax and the abdomen." It takes a considerable 
degree of confidence with the subject to be able to use the words 
"hard-to-reach" in this context, I find. For a moment you may feel, as I did, 
that part of Wilson's research for this book involved turning into a bee for a 
few days. (And, while I am at it, I should say that none of Wilson's reviewers 
whom I read was immature enough to point out the delightful felicity contained 
in the fact that she is actually called Bee. I am. And she mentions it 
gracefully herself in her introduction. It's short for Beatrice.)

You pretty soon realise that there is no dull fact about bees, whether we 
regard them for themselves, or for the metaphorical uses to which they are put 
by social commentators. The greatest bee expert who ever lived, François 
Hubert, was blind. As for the insects as symbol, bees have been used to endorse 
monarchism, republicanism, hard work ("non nobis" - "not for ourselves" do we 
work, runs the tag along many Renaissance images of hives) and indolence. 
Maffeo Barberini, whose coat of arms had originally been three horseflies on a 
blue background, upgraded the insects to bees in time for his accession to the 
papal throne as Urban VIII.

Wilson is particularly good on Mandeville's Fable of the Bees, which proposed 
that it was in fact society's vices, rather than its virtues, that propelled 
wealth; and she doesn't mind at all that the metaphor doesn't really have 
anything to do with bees at all.

As for what the bees produce, Wilson can be transported. She eats an almost 
scary amount of honey and after a while you might feel like doing so too, at 
least until you get to the bit about the potentially lethal effects of honey 
made from the flowers of rhododendrons. As for the preservative properties, 
these are amazing. Honey can keep a corpse in fairly good nick for thousands of 
years (treat the "best before" date on the lid of your jar with scorn); in the 
1930s, a man whose finger was severed almost all the way through - it was just 
hanging on by a skin flap - had it wrapped in place with honey. It grew back 
again, bone and all, "as if by magic".

And then there are the bee-keepers, those quiet, contemplative, retiring souls 
who walk amid the maelstrom of the hives with imperturbability. This is 
well-advised. You do not want to be a bustling person always waving your hands 
around in the air when dislodging honey from a comb.

There is only one omission that I spotted. Wilson does not allude to the great 
discovery by the late Peter Cook: that bees are funny. How she can write about 
bees without once thinking of Cook's invention, the Holy Bee of Ephesus, which 
buzzed around our Saviour on the cross, I do not know.

· To order The Hive for £7.99 with free UK p&p call Guardian book service on 
0870 836 0875.
 