


1) Alex Higgins <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y3C-9E7XUAo&t=8m23s>

The 1989-90 snooker season would go down in history as the one to blow out the 
Hurricane. In October 1989, late one evening at the Rothmans Grand Prix in 
Reading,Alex Higgins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-higgins> unleashed 
a torrent of abuse at two officials, grabbed a journalist by the throat, and 
threatened another with a heavy glass ashtray. The following March saw him 
insult Dennis Taylor and his family at the World Cup final, before threatening 
to have his genial fellow countryman shot by paramilitaries the next time he 
visited Northern Ireland. And then there was his capitulation in the World 
Championship at Sheffield, where he lost 10-5 to the journeyman Steve James in 
the first round. Higgins responded to defeat by remaining in his chair as the 
Crucible emptied, draining a few triple vodka and oranges.

"Two dozen spectators opted to stay in their seats just to confirm Barry 
Hearn's brutal but accurate observation five years previously that people 'like 
watching the process' of Alex Higgins falling apart," wrote Bill Borrows in his 
superb biography of Higgins, The Hurricane. "They could watch a drunk, lonely 
middle-aged man sat in the corner of a pub for free, but they would pay to 
watch Alex Higgins." Members of the audience plied him with more booze. "He let 
them," continued Borrows. "He was in the mood … The lights went out and then he 
went to his dressing room, put on a bow tie, and made his way to the press 
conference. It was estimated that he had dispatched 27 shots of vodka during 
the game. As he walked along the corridors backstage at the Crucible, rage 
overtook him. He was too drunk to stop it."

Upon entering the press conference, Higgins crumped his fist into the stomach 
of WPBSA press officer Colin Randle, who was holding the door open for him. He 
then sat down and delivered a rambling, only vaguely coherent retirement 
speech. "Well chaps," began the rigmarole, "I would like to announce my 
retirement from professional snooker … I don't want to be part of a cartel. I 
don't want to be part of a game where there are slush funds for everybody… If 
Derek Jameson, for instance, can leave the News of the World and go to Sky TV 
there has to be a place for me in this life… There are an awful lot of people 
running about this world who put their kids through certain schools, feeder 
schools, grammar schools, and you get absolute tossers doing jobs for 
exorbitant money, well, I don't really want to be part of it… You can shove 
snooker up your jacksie, I'm not playing no more and it's not sour grapes, 
nothing, it's the truth … I wish Cecil Parkinson and Maggie Thatcher would do a 
probe into snooker, then we would find out the real truth. The Hurricane 
doesn't want to be part of this tripe, no disrespect to northern people because 
I like tripe… I'm not going to break the cue because I like the cue, but it is 
a corrupt game… Rock on Tommy…"

All of which was grimly amusing then. And remains grimly amusing now, until 
you recall this act of professional suicide came only eight years after 
Higgins' two defining successes at the 1982 world championships –that 69 break, 
and winning the title itself, stellar achievements to be ranked in that order – 
and remember how the poor man, his life ravaged after sinking too many of 
Snooker's Special Steadiers, ended his days earlier this year.



2) Jim McLean <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D_kNwsui1JY>

The stubborn genius who turned the second biggest club in Dundee into a 
European force was used to winning arguments, even when he was in the wrong. 
This is best illustrated by an incident one half time at Parkhead in 1980, when 
Jim McLean laid into his goalkeeper Hamish McAlpine for conceding a penalty 
kick. "Jim went for me," recalled McAlpine years later. "He virtually accused 
me of throwing the game. That was enough for me. I took off my boots and my 
strip, told him he could take over if he wanted and that I wasn't going back 
out til he apologised, and then I jumped into the bath and just lay there." 
After a 20-minute soak, with the referee going spare, McAlpine was eventually 
dragged out of the tub by his team-mates and forcibly dressed. "I gave up and 
ran out onto Celtic Park soaking wet and without the apology I knew would never 
get anyway."

But McLean was in his pomp then, and could get away with calling the tune. 
Twenty years later – after managing the Arabs to a Scottish league 
championship, two league cups, five Scottish Cup finals, a European Cup 
semi-final and a Uefa Cup final, plus a Scottish Cup as chairman – McLean was 
seeing out the dog days of his 29-year involvement with the club. Having just 
watched United capitulate 4-0 to Hearts, a result which rooted the side to the 
bottom of the nascent 2000-01 SPL table, a crowd gathered outside Tannadice to 
demand McLean's removal from the board. They'd get their wish, but not quite in 
the manner they expected.

Inside Tannadice, McLean was about to find out that he was no longer able to 
dictate terms. Pugnacious from the outset, he told BBC Radio Scotland reporter 
John Barnes that the protestors would "be sorry that I won't be walking away 
from this … Every one of the directors have supported the club probably longer 
than the people standing outside … There's no doubts at all that managers must 
stand up and be responsible for their results, that is there job … managers 
that have been here recently have failed to deliver what we hoped … if it's me 
that's to blame for that, there's no doubts at all that getting rid of me, 
it'll be great when that happens both for me and for the supporters because all 
the ills will be cured ... if I'm passing the buck, I'm passing the buck. I say 
it again, there is no way I am walking away from this situation."

At which point McLean, having been asked whether the manager Alex Smith could 
turn it around, took two stepsinto a situation, accusing Barnes of asking a 
"stupid question", announcing that he "wouldn't fucking answer it", and 
attempting quite literally to button the reporter's lip. McLean resigned with 
immediate effect, an inglorious – but somehow apt – end to a career which saw 
him from the start battling against the odds.

3) Joe Kinnear <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i_NQqnc_ue0>

The greatest Newcastle United managerial outburst will forever be Kevin 
Keegan's infamous Middlesbrough-supporting "love it" monologue, as his team's 
title challenge crumbled spectacularly to dust during the 1995-96 run-in. But 
Joe Kinnear tried his level best to match it. And though his blunt 2008 attack 
on journalists from the Mirror and the Express was never going to usurp 
Keegan's Shakespearian meltdown in the pantheon, it was on its own terms an 
arguably better salvo.

This is because, unlike Keegan, Kinnear was at all times in control of his 
mind. The opening is a technical masterpiece. Piqued at reports suggesting he'd 
sent the players home on his first day as Newcastle manager, Kinnear launched 
the greatest opening conversational gambit in the history of All Press 
Conferences, enquiring as to the identity of Simon Bird, the Mirror's 
north-east football man. When Bird identified himself, Kinnear was straight to 
the point. "You're a cunt. OK? I've said it to your face. All right." A 
strange, calm voice of reason (in his own head), he then efficiently moved onto 
other business. "Niall Hickman? Fuckin' aht of order. Absolute fuckin aht of 
order, you are. And if you do it again…"

What followed was a ten-minute barney, the two journalists fighting their 
corner against the angriest cockney seen on Tyneside since Jack Carter 
travelled north to avenge the death of his brother. And yet, majestically, the 
three men maintained a strange level of decorum throughout, the tone set by 
Bird's pat response to Kinnear's opening blast: "Thank you."

4) Walter Smith <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dG27qGTMXa4&feature=related>

Keegan, Kinnear, Giovanni Trapattoni at Bayern, Big Ron on Sky, there have 
been some corking football outbursts all right. But sometimes less is more. In 
1994, after Rangers were bested at Ibrox by AEK Athens in the Champions League, 
BBC reporter Chick Young suggested Basile Boli and Brian Laudrup were "big 
disappointments" on the European stage. Smith went thermonuclear, pointing out 
that Boli had a European Cup winner's medal – having scored the winning goal in 
the 1993 final – and Laudrup was a former AC Milan regular, using the sort of 
peppered language not heard since Alexei Saylerecorded the B-side of Ullo John 
Gotta New Motor <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fJBq4IudXy8>.

But what is perfect about this is Smith's seven seconds of quiet, malevolent 
seething – in this clip, 1min 43 to 1min 50sec – every tick of the watch making 
Begbie from Trainspotting look more and more like Balamory's PC Plum. Young, in 
a whole world of pain already, falls totally to pieces afterwards. "It's 
side-splittingly funny watching Chick getting done over," said a BBC source 
when the footage became a viral hit years later. Friends and colleagues, eh.



5) Jim Mora <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-oSFYxDGKy8>

Of course the problem with football – the soccer kind – is that coaches 
rarely, if ever, tell it like it really is. Not so in NFL. In 1987, New Orleans 
Saints head coach Jim Mora decided to come clean after a miserable defeat by 
the 49ers, walking out to face the press and opening his post-match press 
conference with the frank line: "Well, what happened was, that second game we 
got our ass kicked. In the second half, we just got our ass totally kicked." 
The rant would become memorable because Mora went on to describe his team's 
display as "horseshit", but for us, it's his opening candour that really 
impresses. And that fact that, continuing on his riff, the coach honourably did 
one the day after.

And yet this wasn't Mora's finest hour. Five years later, in charge of the 
Indianapolis Colts, he embarked on a tirade of self-hatred in the wake of a 
thumping loss to the San Francisco 49ers, suggesting his team would be 
incapable of beating a high-school side. Once complete, a particularly dim 
reporter followed up by asking if the Colts were nevertheless capable of making 
the play-offs. Mora's spluttering reply – he repeats the question "pla-yoffs?!" 
three times, first in audible italics, then in bold comic sans, then as a 
scrolling marquee – would be a thing of true comedic beauty.

6) Hal McRae <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kamDqL-AGzI>

We conclude with Kansas City Royals coach Hal McRae losing the place 
completely in 1993. This is a full-on thundering breakdown. Snapping at an 
innocuous question, McRae calls time on the press conference. Events snowball 
quickly. Within six seconds of his decision to truncate the interview, he is 
shovelling tape recorders across the room. Another 20 seconds elapse before a 
beverage is lanced into the air. Five more seconds tick by, during which McRae 
divests his desk of various office accoutrements. A phone is hurled against a 
wall, the coach spinning through a full 360 degrees to attain maximum purchase. 
Journalists flood out the room, one bleeding from the face.

Like all the best tirades, McRae's meltdown finishes pathetically, a textbook 
comic denouement. After a blast of garden-variety pointing and swearing, the 
coach pauses and turns on his heel, suggests that the cowering hacks "put that 
in your pipes and smoke it", and shuffles off into his office for, surely, a 
period of solemn regret and intense self-loathing.
 