
Few writers evoke the notion of 'comfort' like PG Wodehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse>. Whether the lost upper-class 
Edwardian world of Bertie Wooster and the Drones club, or the pastoral haven of 
Blandings Castle, his work conjures a timeless myth of quintessential 
Englishness. The last 12 months have seen him flourishing in the popular 
imagination to an extent perhaps unmatched since the height of his success in 
the 1930s. There's been theBBC adaption of Blandings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/jan/21/pg-wodehouse-on-screen-blandings-tv>
, the BBC4 biopic Wodehouse in Exile,Sebastian Faulks's Jeeves and the Wedding 
Bells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/06/jeeves-wedding-bells-sebastian-faulks-review>
, and the West End adaptation of the 1938 novelThe Code of the Woosters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/02/jeeves-and-wooster-west-end>. 
All of which have introduced him to a new generation of readers, as well as 
reminding the rest of us why re-reading him is such a delight.

The Code of the Woosters is among the most widely read Jeeves novels, and one 
of his best. Bertie Wooster and his "gentleman's personal gentleman" Jeeves 
must reconcile newt-obsessed Gussie Fink-Nottle with "droopy, blonde, 
saucer-eyed" Madeline Bassett; help Aunt Dahlia to deprive Sir Watkyn Bassett 
of an antique silver cow-creamer; unite Stiffy Byng and her secret lover, local 
curate and Bertie's old school friend 'Stinker' Pinker; and thwart the violent 
inclinations of Sir Roderick Spode by uncovering the mysterious "Eulalie". 
There's also the requisite theft of a policeman's helmet. The Code of the 
Woosters pushes Wodehouse's trademark convoluted plotting to the limit; Bertie 
has been in the soup before but, as he says to Jeeves at the beginning of the 
story, "this one wins the mottled oyster".

What makes Wodehouse wonderful, though, isn't the preposterous lunacy of the 
plots, or even the easy nostalgia of the setting; it is his prose. At the core 
of all of his stories is the surprise of language at its most flexible, fresh 
and fun. For Wodehouse, the sentence is an excise in versatility – the 
unexpected word, the unusual image, the etymological shift ("if not actually 
disgruntled, he was far from being gruntled"). The anarchic combination of high 
diction, erudite allusion, upper-class metropolitan slang and informal 
abbreviations should be incongruous, but instead is enchanting.

That apparent dissonance, the intangible mix of 'high' and 'low' culture, 
could be seen to define Wodehouse. It is hard to think of an author more 
closely associated with a certain kind of elitism than he is now. His stories 
are anchored in an Edwardian society of inherited wealth and aristocratic 
authority, and his allusions presume a certain level of 'cultural capital' on 
the part of the reader. But this was not the case at the time of writing. 
Wodehouse's literary medium was commercial magazines, and he perceived himself 
as a middlebrow writer. He wrote in 1957: "I go in for what is known in the 
trade as 'light writing' and those who do that – humourists they are sometimes 
called – are looked down upon by the intelligentsia and sneered at".

Yet the Jeeves stories have the narrative complexity of Dickens's Great 
Expectations: Bertie might be 'mentally negligible', but he is nonetheless a 
highly accomplished narrator. He's both the errant young man in spats and the 
consummate omniscient storyteller, able to put himself in the third person and 
literally step outside of the situation.

It is here that the characteristically Wodehousian definite article comes into 
its own. Slang it may be, but it also speaks to something essential about his 
method of characterisation. It is most often used in reference to body parts 
where you would expect a possessive ("moved the hand", "licked the lips") and 
seems to me a distancing technique at moments of intense emotion which imbues 
the characters with a distinct aura of vulnerability – a form of British 'stiff 
upper lip' which makes the characters, and their situations, seem somehow real, 
even when they are absurd.

Which emphasises something often overlooked about Wodehouse's stories – 
innocent, charming, naïve even, they may be, but safe they are not. Whether 
it's Bertie being hounded by innumerable aunts and the terrifying prospect of 
marriage, or the perennial threats to Lord Emworth's beloved Empress, the 
levity of tone lifting the stories is never at the expense of an essentially 
human predicament.

His women are, admittedly, less rounded characters, but the servants are as 
well realised as the masters (and certainly more in control!). Even in his 
depiction of Sir Roderick Spode, leader of the 'Black Shorts' and clearly an 
allusion to Oswald Mosley, humour never reverts to satire. Evelyn Waugh once 
described Vile Bodies as "rather like aPG Wodehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse> novel, all about bright young 
people", but Wodehouse lacks the edge of Waugh. Guy Bolton, who collaborated 
with Wodehouse on several of his plays, called him "quite simply, the most 
humane and kind man I have ever known".

And that, as Bertie says in The Code of the Woosters, is the ultimate refuge 
underlying any Wodehouse novel: "I wonder if you have noticed a rather rummy 
thing about it – viz. that it is everywhere. You can't get away from it. Love, 
I mean. Wherever you go, there it is, buzzing along in every class of life".
 