
Much mirth ensued recently when Jeremy Corbyn’s crack publicity team issued a 
photograph of the dear leader with a compressed quote from his speech: “We now 
face the task of creating a New Britain from the fourth industrial revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2016/nov/22/what-are-cyber-physical-systems-and-why-does-jeremy-corbyn-care>
– powered by the internet of things and big data to develop cyber physical 
systems and smart factories.” Wait, what?

One may be forgiven for suspecting that Corbyn had not a clue what he was 
uttering, but the “fourth industrial revolution” is an actual thing, at least 
according to some analysts. The first was steam-powered; the second electrical; 
the third the birth of the computer age; and the fourth – which some argue is 
just a continuation of the third – is the era of wearable gadgets, 3D printing, 
gene editing, machine intelligence and networked devices such as street lights 
full of electronic sensors, orsmart fridges that order eggs  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jan/11/homes-fooddrinks>when 
you’ve run out. The dream of networking ordinary objects with cheap processors 
and wireless communication comes under the rubric of“the internet of things” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/12/will-the-internet-of-things-sacrifice-or-save-the-environment>
, which is (or ought to be) short for “the internet of things that should not 
be connected to the internet”. Inevitably, some bored teen will hack your smart 
fridge to flood your kitchen while you’re away; the more urban infrastructure 
is computerised, the more vulnerable it will be to cyber-attack. The “smart 
city” is the hackable city.

Nevertheless, many think this sort of thing is going to happen one way or 
another. So how will we manage? EnterKlaus Schwab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/klaus-schwab>, founder of the World 
Economic Forum, with this slender book laying out the challenges and 
opportunities that await us. I say “book”, but it is written more in the 
bullet-point language of a thinktank report, with very little discursive 
argument, opinion or illustration. It is composed in the deadening language of 
executive jargon, addressing “leaders” who want to know how to navigate an era 
of “exponentially disruptive change”. “For some companies,” Schwab writes, 
“capturing new frontiers of value may consist of developing new businesses in 
adjacent segments, while for others, it is about identifying shifting pockets 
of value in existing sectors.” (This could have been true at any time in the 
last century.)

As usual, this high-management style contains much fashionable vacuity (we 
should avoid “linear thinking”, it says, which is meaningless however you 
interpret it), and also a weird kind of imagistic brutality – the “gig economy” 
companies such as Uber orTaskrabbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/23/gig-economy-silicon-valley-taskrabbit-workers>
 are “human cloud platforms”, as though the serfs who work for them are 
euphoric angels playing harps on a bed of cumulonimbus. To complete the style, 
just add a heavy dose of tech-utopian boilerplate, such as the claim that 
“digital technology knows no borders”, which of course it does: witness
Facebook’s recent decision to comply with China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/facebook-mark-zuckerberg-napalm-girl-photo-vietnam-war>
’s censorship laws so it can operate there.

To be fair, Schwab shows in an appendix that he does know that the idea that 
“digital technology knows no borders” is simply false, and throughout he is 
careful to be even-handed about the upsides and downsides of every technology 
he discusses. Artificial intelligence might be super-useful, or it might 
constitute “an existential threat to humanity”. Biotechnology might cure all 
diseases, or it might create a schism of bio-inequality. The overall problem is 
that this is basically all Schwab does: describing some future development or 
its opposite and essentially asking: “Is this brilliant? Or is this terrible?” 
The purchaser of such a book might expect the author to have a reasoned opinion 
on the matter.

Instead, Schwab offers policy recommendations, which – perhaps by design – are 
vague enough to be useful to a politician of any stripe. On the future of 
employment, he allows that “human cloud” workers might find themselves engaged 
in “an inexorable race to the bottom in a world of unregulated virtual 
sweatshops”. So what to do? Schwab writes sagely: “The challenge we face is to 
come up with new forms of social and employment contracts that suit the 
changing workforce and the evolving nature of work.” Oh, right, got it.

A general opinion is finally expressed right at the end, and it is an 
admirably humane one, as far as it goes. We should remember, Schwab writes, 
that “all of these new technologies are first and foremost tools made by people 
for people”. Indeed, the book climaxes with a rather lovely plea for everyone 
to work together in a “new cultural renaissance” that apparently will depend on 
some kind of cosmic spirituality. The fourth industrial revolution might lead 
to a dehumanising dystopia, Schwab allows soberly. On the other hand, we could 
use it “to lift humanity into a new collective and moral consciousness based on 
a shared sense of destiny”. That would certainly be nice.

Yet this uplifting message is arguably undermined by the implicit politics of 
the book’s vocabulary. The key term in all this is “adapt” – as in, the alleged 
necessity for everyone to adapt to the totally new world that technology will 
create around us. The idea that we all must adapt is seldom challenged, but it 
is really a veiled update of social Darwinism, according to which the people 
who survive the coming robot deluge will by definition have been the fittest 
all along.

The call to adapt, indeed, implies that the changing circumstances Schwab 
foresees are something like inexorable forces of nature. But of course they 
aren’t: they will be the results of decisions taken by legislators, regulators 
and others in power. An alternative idea would be for citizens to engage in 
and, if necessary, challenge such decisions, rather than meekly adapt to 
whatever their masters decide the world should be like. That would really be 
democracy in action, and might even deserve the name of revolution.
 