
An ancient river. The journey upstream of some impressionable young men into a 
mysterious, challenging interior. An inevitable reckoning at the source. 
Finally, the terrible return to reality. Here, surely, is pre-Edwardian English 
fiction at its classic finest.

But this is not Heart of Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/23/heart-of-darkness-conrad-review>
, and the river is not the Congo. Actually, it's the Thames, and the narrator 
is not Marlow but J, or Jerome, K Jerome. Published in 1889, 10 years before 
Conrad's novel,Three Men in a Boat (To Say Nothing of the Dog), is one of the 
comic gems in the English language. An accidental one, too. "I did not intend 
to write a funny book, at first," said its author.

Humour in literature is often not taken as seriously as it deserves. 
Nevertheless, there are a few seriously funny books that remain great for all 
time.Three Men in a Boat is one of these. Ostensibly the tale of three city 
clerks on a boating trip, an account that sometimes masquerades, against its 
will, as a travel guide,Three Men in a Boat hovers somewhere between a 
shaggy-dog story and episodes of late-Victorian farce.

What's it all about? Jerome K Jerome would probably say his masterpiece was 
"about one hundred and fifty pages", but I would argue thatThree Men in a Boat 
is about the cameraderie of youth, the absurdity of existence, camping 
holidays, playing truant, comic songs, and the sweet memories of lost time. You 
could also read it as an unconscious elegy for imperial Britain. Did I omit to 
say that it also features a dog named Montmorency? In short, like all the 
finest comic writing, it's about everything and nothing.

Jerome K Jerome is more or less forgotten now. He was a jobbing freelance 
literary journalist who had just got married and needed to provide for his wife 
and family. Encouraged by his new wife, Georgina, Jerome intended his account 
of a boating holiday to be a popular travel guide for a booming market. In 
late-Victorian England there was a vogue for recreational boating on the Thames 
between Kingston and Oxford. This was the golden age of theHenley regatta 
<https://www.hrr.co.uk/>. Rowing boats, steam launches, even the occasional 
gondola: in the Season, up to 800 vessels a day passed through Boulter's Lock 
near Maidenhead. Here was an audience for a new river guide. In fact, Jerome's 
descriptions of Hampton Court, Marlow and Medmenham are all that survive from 
the original plan for a travel book.

But something funny happened on the way to publication, perhaps because it was 
first serialised in a magazine. Jerome's discursive comic voice took over. The 
river journey he makes with his friends George and Harris (and Montmorency) 
becomes the narrative line on which he hangs a sequence of comic anecdotes 
loosely associated with the journey upriver.

Jerome's themes are airily inconsequential and supremely English – boats, 
fishing, the weather, the atrocities of English food and the vicissitudes of 
suburban life – perfectly pitched in a light comic prose whose influence can be 
detected later in the work of, among many,PG Wodehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse>, James Thurber, and Nick Hornby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/nickhornby>. My favourite Jerome set piece 
is the episode with the tinned pineapple.

The three mariners have had a long, hard day on the river. They reach their 
evening mooring, dog-tired and ravenously hungry. When George unearths a tin of 
pineapple chunks "we felt" writes Jerome, "that life was worth living after 
all". They were, he says, all of them exceedingly fond of pineapple. As the 
anticipation begins to build, he delivers the most perfect sentence in a book 
already buoyant with light comedy. "We looked at the picture on the tin," 
writes Jerome; "we thought of the juice."

Then they discover that they have no tin-opener. What follows is a passage of 
comic genius spun from nothing more – or less – than the banality of everyday 
life. Read it. This passage ("a fearful battle") comes as the brilliant climax 
to chapter 12.

Three Men in a Boat is one of those rare classics that seems to come, as it 
were, out of nowhere, and to defy the odds. Jerome K Jerome later wrote a hit 
West End play,The Passing of the Third Floor Back, but he never recaptured the 
mood of careless comic joy that aerates the pages of his immortal masterpiece.

A note on the text

Three Men in a Boat began life as a travel commission for the magazine Home 
Chimes.

Its author later described what went wrong: "I did not know I was a humorist," 
he confessed. "The book was to have been 'The Story of the Thames', its scenery 
and history… I never got there. It seemed to be all 'humorous relief'. By grim 
determination I succeeded, before the end, in writing a dozen or so slabs of 
history and working them in, one to each chapter, and FW Robinson, who was 
publishing the book serially, promptly slung them out… From the beginning he 
had objected to the [since lost] title , and halfway through I hit uponThree 
Men in a Boat, because nothing else seemed right."

Jerome sold book publication rights to the Bristol publisher, JW Arrowsmith, 
who had been having a big success with a three-and-sixpenny single-volume 
series (including work by Arthur Conan Doyle and Anthony Hope), a new 
phenomenon which had begun to supplant the great Victorian "three-decker" 
novels. The Education Act of 1870 had created a new mass readership, and Jerome 
was eager to reach this new audience. On publication, however, it seemed as if 
his cunning marketing plans had gone awry. He had not allowed for the critics.

Jerome's fascination with bank clerks and "the lower orders" was denounced up 
and down. "One might have imagined," he later wrote inMy Life and Times, "that 
the British Empire was in danger. TheStandard spoke of me as a menace to 
English letters; and theMorning Post as an example of the sad results to be 
expected from the over-education of the lower orders…"

To be specific, the reviews ranged from the vitriolic to the merely hostile. 
The use of slang was condemned as "vulgar" and the book as a whole abused as a 
shameless appeal to "'Arrys and 'Arriets" – sneering critical terms for 
working-class Londoners. The magazinePunch dubbed Jerome K Jerome "'Arry K 
'Arry".

Typically, the reading public paid absolutely no attention. Three Men in a Boat
 went on selling in vast numbers, defying gravity. It was also promptly pirated 
by unscrupulous American publishers. In Britain, Arrowsmith told a friend: "I 
pay Jerome so much in royalties, I cannot imagine what becomes of all the 
copies of that book I issue. I often think the public must eat them."

The first edition appeared in August 1889, and remained in print until March 
1909, when, after the sale of some 200,000 copies, a second edition appeared. 
In his introduction to this printing, Jerome states that he had probably sold 
another million (pirated) copies in America.

The book was also translated into many languages. The Russian edition was 
particularly successful and became a standard school textbook, possibly as a 
documentary account of life in the heart of the capitalist empire. Since its 
publication,Three Men in a Boat has never been out of print. I'm unashamedly 
fond of it, and chose it as my "desert island" book on BBC Radio 4 in 2000.

Three more by Jerome K Jerome

Idle Thoughts of an Idle Fellow (1886); Three Men on the Bummel (1900); The 
Passing of the Third Floor Back, stories (1907), the play (1910).
 