
There's something cruel about the fact that the occasions when most writers 
are dragged blinking into the light, away from the security of their computer 
screens, they are also made to feel supremely nervous. They are placed in 
competition with their fellows, they are told they are within one step of 
getting something that will both make their career and land them a shitload of 
cash. Convention then dictates that they should try to appear blase and none 
too hopeful about that prospect. All of which probably explains why so much 
cheap wine is consumed at literary prize giving events.

The Arthur C Clarke awards 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/28/lauren-beukes-arthur-c-clarke-award>
 is always slightly different, however. Contrary to popular image, science 
fiction writers are actually far better at coping with the glare of flash bulbs 
and stares of eager readers than most. Perhaps it's the convention circuit and 
the close-knit world of fandom that makes most of them adept at handling 
enquiries. Perhaps it was just an unusually media-savvy shortlist this year, 
but I spent most of the evening feeling fairly dazzled, even if I sometimes got 
the impression that (like any writers) the contenders would rather have been at 
home writing dialogue than actually speaking.

Before the ceremony, most of the talk centred around the absent shortlistee, 
Tim Powers,the author of Declare 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/jun/05/eric-brown-science-fiction-roundup>
. By all accountshe is an extraordinary man 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_Powers>. From a journalistic point of view I 
even began to hope that he might win. There are many great stories about his 
colossal brain, about his disregard for his manuscripts (one, apparently, was 
eaten by a rabbit), and about his long association withPhilip K Dick 
<http://www.philipkdick.com/> – which apparently include plenty of the danger 
and excitement hanging out with such a wayward drugged-up genius might entail.

But that's not to detract from the rest of the contenders. The award organiser 
Tom Hunter joked that someone had described it to him as "one of the most witty 
and diverse the Clarke has ever produced", but there was clear pride in the 
selection. Every year the Clarke award makes a stronger and stronger case for 
the breadth, depth and originality of SF in the UK. It was hard to begrudge the 
triumphant note in the celebration of the award's 25th year. In fact, it was 
easy to celebrate – not least because the thing that everyone seemed most 
pleased about was the fact that the winning book is to be displayed in the 
British Library's forthcomingOut of this World SF exhibition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/mar/24/science-fiction-exhibition-british-library>
. "The British Library!" said Tom. "How cool is that?" I guess there is some 
potential for a sarcastic answer, but if you value books it isn't likely to be 
the one you give. And this was an audience that loved their books.

The whittling down of the 54 submitted books to a shortlist of six and the 
choosing of the winner was reported to be a difficult process. Or, as head 
judge John Courtenay Grimwood put it, "surprisingly enjoyable – a masterclass 
in herding cats". When Zoo City was announced as the winner, however, it seemed 
to me to get universal acclaim. Any disappointment I might have felt about Tim 
Powers not winning quickly disappeared when the author Lauren Beukes strode 
onto the stage, with a disconcertingly realistic sloth draped around her 
shoulders, and apologised that she had no speech because her brother had nicked 
it but explained, fists pumping that it basically said: "Curse you McDonalds!"

The book, too, is witty and bold. Beukes was wearing a mock sloth because her 
lead character, Zizi, is accompanied by one at all times. In a dark twist on 
Philip Pullman's daemons – anyone who commits a crime has to wear "a spirit 
critter". These animals naturally mark their wearers out as undesirables and 
they are forced to live in the Zoo City, an underworld slum. Zizi writes scam 
letters to cover her debts and also earns extra cash from her talent at finding 
things – a talent that soon lands her in the midst of an investigation to track 
down a creepy teen singer that has so many shadows and pools of darkness that 
it reminded me of no less a talent than the hard man of hard-boiled,Ross 
MacDonald 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/aug/01/ross-macdonald-crime-novels>.

Zoo City is partly inspired by the real Johannesburg district of Hillbarrow. 
"It was once the most cosmopolitan area of Johannesburg, where all the 
restaurants were," South African Buekes told me after the ceremony. "Then, for 
a while, it became boho central, with drugs and racial mixing – which of course 
was frowned upon by the apartheid regime. Now it's impoverished but trying to 
pull itself up again, and you get this incredible mash of people from all walks 
of life."

Buekes spent a lot of time meeting and talking to these people. And to do 
that, she had to employ someone she called "a fixer", who she had to persuade 
"not to bring his gun". A fixer, she explained, is a facilitator: someone who 
knows the area, knows the people, can translate the various languages that they 
speak and, crucially, can tell when there's danger – as he did the time he 
stopped the conversation she was having with a "well dressed, well spoken, 
apparently nice guy", shouted "get in the car, right now" and whisked her away.

For research alone she deserves commendation. As someone said to me on the 
night: "It isn't exactly a Hampstead novel." And that's another reason to be 
glad that the Clarke award has brought it into the light.
 