
The high arts of literature and music stand in a curious relationship to one 
another, at once securely comfortable and deeply uneasy – rather like a 
long-term marriage. At the securely comfortable end of the emotional spectrum 
we have those zeniths of song, the German lieder tradition, and high opera. In 
the best examples of both forms words and music appear utterly and indissolubly 
comingled. However, at the other end of this spectrum we have those kinds of 
music that attempt to be literary – so-called programme music – and those forms 
of literature that attempt, either through descriptive representation or 
emulation, to aspire to the condition of music. It is not my wish to denigrate 
works of these type, nevertheless there does seem to me to be an inevitable 
compromise – deterioration even – when an art form, rather than proceeding 
entirely sui generis, finds its ground in another form's practice.

I myself am a latecomer to the serious appreciation of serious music – apart 
from jazz, which in the hands of practitioners such as John Coltrane or 
Thelonious Monk rises to the inventive musicianship and self-enclosed 
expressiveness of the greatest that small-ensemble classical music has to 
offer. Still, there comes a point in everyone's life when it's time to largely 
put away such childish things as electric guitars and harmonicas, and it may be 
precisely because I was in my 40s when I began to really hear symphonic music 
that I have approached the form altogether untrammelled by received ideas about 
it – a fancy way of admitting complete ignorance. There's this, and there was 
also an intuition I had that my own practice as a novelist – when, that is, my 
mojo was properly working – had far more in common with how composers conceive 
of the symphonic, than it did with the lit-crit – let alone the "creative 
writing" – view of how it is writers actually write.

The search for motifs, or themes, the creation of an alternative world in 
words, the struggle for authenticity of narrative voice, the counterpointing of 
different protagonists' views – these are key artistic objectives shared by the 
novelist and the symphonist, and not to anything like the same degree by other 
musical and literary practitioners. Indeed, I'd go further: the symphonist and 
the novelist have more in common with each other than they do with others 
working in their own respective art forms. Why this isn't widely recognised, 
is, I think, a function of the essentialist fallacy that expects 
words-about-music to do the same thing as music alone, and music-about-words to 
do the same thing as words alone.

By any literary standard, Strauss's Till Eulenspiegel or his Don Juan do 
little in the way of hitting the narrative and characterisation buttons – nor 
do these tone poems succeed in accurately representing the worlds they aim to 
depict in the way that even a bad novel might do. To be fair, such 
hybridisation as Anthony Burgess enacted in hisNapoleon Symphony: A Novel in 
Four Movements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780393009644/napoleon-symphony>
 is conversely musically unsatisfying – while as literature, it's 
near-unreadable. On the whole novelists, rather than – as Burgess rather 
heroically attempted – recreating the structure of the classical symphonic 
form, usually confine themselves to describing the impact of music on the 
individual or collective psyche. This, it strikes me, is also a blind alley: 
for every reader who finds EM Forster's Albert Hall concert scene inHoward's End
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780141182131/howards-end>
 an incisive portrayal of minds in the sway of music, there's another who feels 
it utterly misses the point. While Proust's invention of Vinteuil's sonata, 
"the little phrase" of which so transfixes Swann inRemembrance of Things Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9781840221466/remembrance-of-things-past-v>
, may be effective as a literary trope, its persistent recurrence only ever 
summoned up in this reader a petulant desire actually to hear what the bloody 
thing sounded like.

No, I think it is in the realm of pure praxis that the forms really speak to 
one another, and to understand this we have to look at their close parallel 
development. The symphony owes its origins to the opera overture, which was 
then calved off – as it were – and inseminated by the already-mature sonata 
form so that it acquired its morphology of three and then four interrelated 
movements. This process took place – non-coincidentally, in my view – at 
exactly the same time the novel was in its inchoate form. However, while I 
don't see any necessary correspondence, say, between the symphonies of Stamitz 
or Gossec, and the novels of Aphra Behn orSamuel Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/samuel-richardson>, there is a 
practical affinity: during the late 18th century, just as the symphony 
orchestra had no settled constitution, so the epistolatory novel was in the 
process of establishing what might be termed a unity of narrative voice as well 
as an effective chapter-based structure.

That both forms reach their apogee in the 19th century – and in very similar 
ways – seems to me a function of their sharing the same artistic aim: to 
simultaneously enact the most complete possible world-in-words (or 
world-in-notes), while also actualising the creative personality itself. For 
the 19th-century symphonist, the sonic cosmos he created needed to be 
internally consistent, while at the same time expressing his unique spirit – 
functions undertaken, respectively, by harmony and melody. In the great 
19th-century realist novels similar aims find their outlet in the assumed 
equivalence of the writer with the impersonal narrative voice. This 
sleight-of-mind induces in the reader a conviction of the authenticity of the 
events described and the sincerity of the describer – harmony and melody again.

At the twin peaks of the 19th-century novel and symphony there is an 
overarching confidence about what the forms can do, a sense of their totalising 
capability. In the symphonies of Beethoven and Brahms, or the novels of Tolstoy 
andGeorge Eliot <https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeeliot>, there is 
little insecurity about the potential of their form – no neuroticism, no 
insinuating irony. God remains relatively securely in his world, and the 
novelist or composer remains equally secure in his or her ability to interact 
with it in the service of producing aesthetic effects. Of course, there's 
trouble on the horizon – how could there not be? – but for now the 
enlightenment conception of progress stays in lockstep with the advance of both 
art forms.

The disconcerting tritone – an interval of three whole notes between tones – 
which Alex Ross in his magisterial history of 20th-century classical musicThe 
Rest Is Noise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/music/9781841154763/the-rest-is-noise-listening-to-the-twentieth-century>
 identifies as the clarion call of dissonant modernity, has its literary 
equivalent in the uneasiness that begins to infiltrate the characterisations 
of, for example, Henry James or Marcel Proust, and the structural devices of 
Joseph Conrad or Gustav Flaubert. Psychological realism, inflected by the 
sexual depth charge of Freudianism, is about to kill the reliable old narrator 
stone dead, while the great buttery sound-swaths that the other Gustav,Mahler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gustav-mahler>, is plastering on to his 
gargantuan symphonies disconcertingly suggest in their very sweetness that you 
shouldn't altogether believe they are butter.

Mahler, whose soundscape already includes generous soupçons of quotation and 
allusion – postmodernism, if you will – also prefigures the formal dissolution 
of the symphonic form. His oft-trumpeted personal preoccupation with 
"resignation" and death itself is at once a quest for the plot that has 
definitively been lost, and an acute awareness that après him comes a dissonant 
deluge. Some may bemoan that vandal Schoenberg and his 12-tone flummery, but I 
find a straightforward honesty in the response of classical music to the 
modernist moment. Schoenberg himself attempted only one symphony, and that is 
scored for a chamber orchestra the composition of which Gossec would have been 
familiar with. Elsewhere, on the fringes of the musical foment, the response of 
symphonists is either to become self-consciously recherché – the folkloric 
romanticism of Sibelius or Dvorak – or, like the 20th century's most prolific 
symphonist, Shostakovich, to fashion a paradoxical postmodern authenticity, in 
which the artist is seen to be at once far more and much less than the sum of 
his borrowings. However, for the most part, by the middle of the 20th century 
the symphony has been comprehensively abandoned by serious composers in favour 
of forms that don't demand a search for organic unity where they no longer 
believe any to exist.

If only the same could be said for the novel! Certainly, western literature 
had its own sustained modernist moment, but whileVirginia Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/virginia-woolf>, James Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/james-joyce> and others may have 
responded with fidelity to the death of the old gods by fashioning a prose 
fiction that dealt with the phenomenon of individual consciousness in a chaotic 
world, it didn't catch on. Be that as it may, in my viewUlysses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9781840226355/ulysses> 
stands at the very point where the novel and the symphonic forms approach 
nearest to one another. Steeped in music himself, Joyce saturated his magnum 
opus in all the effects of a great symphonist – its prose, like music, happens 
in a continuous present; he deploys colour as a modal effect with unrivalled 
consistency; the rhythm of his punctuation is integral to the meaning of his 
sentences rather than a bothersome adjunct; and perhaps most significantly of 
all, the entire work is conceived of as a grand exercise in the contrapuntal, 
as the psyches of Leopold Bloom and Stephen Dedalus call and respond to one 
another.

To read Molly Bloom's great gush of resigned affirmation with which Ulysses 
ends and then set it beside the equally self-actualising fatalism in which the 
final adagio movement of Mahler's ninth symphony (marked on the score "very 
slowly and held back") culminates, is to feel yourself in the presence of 
artistic twins whose birth is separated by only a few years. However, while 
concertgoers still crowd out auditoria to listen raptly to one musical twin, 
hardly anyone makes it throughUlysses nowadays. Instead, novelists have 
fulfilled their readers' desire for the old cosy certainties by turning their 
backs on the experimental truth and taking refuge in the apparent harmony of 
the past.

One of the bestselling literary novels of last year, Jonathan Franzen's Freedom
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780007318520/freedom>, 
self-consciously models itself on Tolstoy'sAnna Karenina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780199536061/anna-karenina>
 and toddles realistically along like modernism never happened. It's as if a 
contemporary composer were to rescore theEroica, making the melodies more 
saccharine and the harmonies more schmaltzy, then premiere it at the last night 
of the Proms to rapturous applause from the musical cognoscenti. To complete my 
trope at the outset: for a century or so the symphony and the novel made love 
to each other, quite beautifully. But now its artistic partner has died, the 
novel, instead of moving on, lies there in the dark summoning up past pleasures 
while playing with itself in a masturbatory orgy of populism.

Will Self will be talking at greater length about music and modernism as part 
of theNotes & Letters festival 
<http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/whats-on-book-tickets/curated-weeks/notes-letters> 
at Kings Place at 5pm on Saturday 8 October.
 