
It is the sort of stock market behaviour that leaves lay observers scratching 
their head.Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> reported a £4bn 
loss, with £13bn of bad loan write-offs, and its shares surged; Standard 
Chartered, which has had a relatively good war, unveiled an increase in profits 
and dividends but had its shares sharply marked down because it embarked on a 
$1bn fundraising to take advantage of opportunities in emerging markets.

What's going on? Well, the market isn't keen on cash calls, so Standard 
suffered from that, but the broader context is the bulls of bank shares are 
betting that now is the time to start anticipating economic recovery. Their 
arguments, simply put, are these: first, the government has stabilised the 
sector; second, bank shares suffered most in the downturn so should be among 
the biggest beneficiaries when the economy picks up; third, we are two years 
into the crisis and the tide is beginning to turn.

It's all a bit previous. As I keep saying, it's only a matter of months since 
Royal Bank of Scotland's ability to keep its branches and cash machines open 
hung by a gossamer thread. If Barclays had not carried on doing business with 
it, the fallen Edinburgh giant would not have been able to do so. Indeed, RBS, 
which just scraped into profit with £7.5bn of bad debts, sounded a much more 
cautious note than Lloyds, warning that its operating performance might not 
improve for a couple of years.

Although the worst of the pure financial crisis is now behind us - we still 
have a banking system, thank goodness - uncertainty remains. There are two main 
reasons to be wary of believing in the GreatBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Escape: unemployment and 
indebtedness. Joblessness is a lagging indicator, suggesting there is plenty of 
pain to come on that front. Unemployment is running at more than 7% now and is 
forecast to reach 10-12%, around the peaks of the 1980s.

It could be even worse. The Eighties slump was concentrated in traditional 
heavy industry; this one is across the board. Debt - consumer, corporate and 
government - is running at very high levels; there will have to be some serious 
deleveraging. The low interest rate environment is making the debt burden 
easier to bear, but there are problems ahead when interest rates rise again, 
possibly a year or 18 months from now. Banks face hefty bad loan write-offs for 
some time to come. Even leaving that aside, they cannot pat themselves on the 
back about a recovery before they have restored lending at sensible levels to 
small and medium sized firms. The small business sector is a major employer and 
restoring confidence there is a key element in any revival.

The banks' fortunes are obviously harnessed to the economy as a whole. There, 
the signals are contradictory, not least because of the fragmentation of 
Britain's crunch economy. Those still in receipt of a salary or pension and 
without burdensome borrowings are in many cases better off due to lower 
interest rates and cheaper prices. That contrasts sharply with those in 
negative equity, heavy debt or who have lost their job. And, despite a flurry 
of headlines last week hailing the end of the recession, Bank of England 
governor Mervyn King feels it is too early to breathe sighs of relief, pumping 
a further £50bn into the economy through quantitative easing.

This discussion is trickier because the definition of recovery is to some 
degree subjective. If it assumes a return to pre-crisis conditions, that is 
nowhere in prospect. If it is taken to mean the very worst is over, the 
recovery probably has begun. But half the banks are still on life support and 
the economy is still receiving transfusions of cash. It's going to be a long 
convalescence - and we can't rule out a relapse.
 