
Things were pretty bleak here in January. I got slammed with two major 
deadlines. Two regular clients, whose payments covered the mortgage and my 
health insurance premium, were late, and when I asked where my money was, they 
informed me that those payments would be even later because of the holidays – 
after, of course, those two big bills were due. To make things even worse, I 
was then socked with an unexpected $630 medical bill – due immediately.

 And then, arching over this mess, a good friend wound up in the ICU. When I 
thought of him, and the terror his family faced if the odds the doctor gave him 
were accurate, I felt overwhelming guilt for even worrying about my problems. 
And then the cycle started all over again.

 I was, to be blunt, a mess.

 So what did I do, after pounding my head against the deadlines while glancing 
at the smartphone on my desk for updates from the hospital?

 I closed my laptop, closed my office door, fired up Netflix, and played 
solitaire.

 Yes, solitaire. Not on my computer or my phone, but with playing cards. Over 
and over again, I dealt out those piles from one to seven, then tried to get 
them to stack up on top of aces in the proper order and suit. I haven’t done 
this since I was a teenager, when I spent my summers at the Jersey shore. 
Solitaire was sometimes the only quiet, sibling-uninvolved activity available 
on days that it rained.

Slapping cards on to my dining room table has become a way to disconnect and 
tune out. It’s reminded me that the ultimate outcome – of anything – depends a 
bit on skill (whether I take the red four to put on the black five from my deck 
or the table) and chance (the shuffle). I can control some things but not all, 
and finding out the result takes time. One-player card games are called 
patience games. I can see why. They force you to have some.

 But my affinity goes beyond that, says Dr Joel Ingersoll, a clinical 
psychologist and certified master coach. Playing the game with real cards 
rather than on a screen adds to the stress-quelling quality of the game. This 
and other hands-on activities “distract us from stress and focus us on a task” 
he said. “It’s quiet, it’s focused, it’s movement, it’s using our eyes and 
concentrating our hands, so we’re really doing the opposite of what stress does 
to us, which is overstimulating and overwhelming.”

 I’m not alone in trying to find a tactile way to ease stress. While playing 
solitaire hasn’t become a hot new trend, adult coloring books have. Penguintold 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/24/books/looking-back-at-2015-in-book-publishing.html>
 the New York Times that illustrator Johanna Basford’s coloring book Lost Ocean 
has sold more than 16m copies in 40 countries, and now has more than 1.3m 
copies in print in the US (and of course more adult coloring books have sprung 
up in its wake. My mom got one for Christmas).

Ingersoll also points to the popularity of franchises like Pinot’s Palette, 
where people paint and drink wine; or the resurgence of knitting; or the fact 
that, in the depth of my stress, I also bought a new cross-stitch kit, as being 
part of the same phenomenon: doing something physical to help put our minds at 
ease, or at least focused on an activity we steer.

 “Most people struggle with stress because they feel like something is out of 
their control,” he said. “Any of the activities we’ve been talking about give 
us a feeling of control and mastery, which is critical to reducing stress.”

 These activities also give us something physical back when touch screens have 
taken so much away. You can’t slam down a phone anymore. No need to put a key 
into a lock: an access card unlocks the door; a key fob starts your car. Alarm 
clocks don’t need to be smashed back into snooze – if you even have an alarm 
clock that’s not part of your smartphone.

 I’m not about to go out and buy an old fashioned alarm clock, but at least 
with a deck of cards, I can get a little bit of that tactile, physical 
experience back, one that keeps me from constantly checking my phone. It’s made 
me step away from screens and concentrate on something a little mindless for a 
while.

 In The Penguin Book of Patience, David Partlett writes: “Patience is the 
mental equivalent of jogging: its purpose is to tone the brain up and get rid 
of unsociable mental flabbiness.” I’m a runner, so I get that. I never thought 
I’d find the same kind of equivalent in a free deck of cards, but I’m so glad I 
did.
 