
Every now and again the London Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup> and its German 
rival Deutsche Börse like to announce that they are merging – and last week it 
happened again.

This time Deutsche Börse shareholders are expected to receive 54.4% of the 
combined company, which, as the latest deal is being spun in Brexit-obsessed 
Britain as a “merger of equals”, presumably means that LSE investors will get 
the same.

This week we should receive further details about how the PR team is in line 
for a Nobel prize for this ground-breaking piece of mathematics but, even if 
not, there will be a chance to make LSE bosses squirm on Friday as they appear 
in front of the City for the group’s full-year results.

Obviously the LSE numbers are going to be completely overshadowed by another 
attempt by these companies to get together. They first agreed to merge in 2000 
before a rival bid for the LSE from Sweden’s OM Gruppen scuppered the plan. The 
Swedish offer was then rejected anyway.

The LSE then turned down a formal £1.3bn offer from Deutsche Börse in January 
2005, but this time it does sound keener – even though LSE boss Xavier Rolet is 
set to retire and his Deutsche Börse counterpart, Carsten Kengeter, is set to 
take the equivalent role at the combined group.

Developing.

More feng shui at Barclays


Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> chairman John 
McFarlane likes rearranging stuff.

His adherence to feng shui means he’s supposedly ditched the bank’s fleet of 
black executive cars and replaced them with a set of silver limousines 
(apparently silver or grey vehicles bring greater harmony to their users), but 
what he really likes doing is shuffling chief executives.

He ousted Andrew Moss as chief executive at Aviva before he had even arrived 
full-time as chairman, but seemed to be slowing down at Barclays, where he 
waited about three months after taking the chair to whack Antony Jenkins. That 
might be why few believe him when he insists he hates the nickname “Mack the 
knife”.

Anyway, having eased Jenkins out last summer, the City gets its first view 
this week of the figure McFarlane put in his place: Jes Staley, the American 
former investment banker who arrived from JP Morgan at the end of last year.

McFarlane has promised to allow Staley to get on with his job – which some 
might say is a novel approach – and so far the bank seems to be trying to 
suggest that he will be continuing with Jenkins’s strategy. Until that plan 
gets rearranged.

Glencore gets out of a hole?

They used to say that Ivan Glasenberg, boss of 
commodity-trading-giant-cum-minerGlencore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/glencore>, was the world’s canniest 
trader – but that was before he exchanged his £6bn paper fortune for one worth 
around £1.5bn.

He actually got down to his last billion at one point after – among other 
things – a heroic overpayment when acquiring miner Xstrata and the subsequent 
collapse of world commodity prices, which have combined to causeGlencore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/glencore> shares to slump to about 130p 
from a float price of 530p.

Anyway, with Glencore about to announce its full-year results this week, the 
notion that these chaps might need to rediscover their stellar trading 
reputation is coming back into vogue. Profits from the mining division have 
evaporated, meaning that an unprecedented 76% of earnings came from the group’s 
trading activities in the first half of last year. That percentage is likely to 
rise when the numbers are announced on Tuesday, when Glasenberg will also 
update the market on how he is getting along with reducing the group’s debts.

None the less, Glencore’s shares have performed well in 2016, and it is 
starting to feel like Glasenberg wants to rehabilitate his City image: he has 
also traded spinmeisters.
 