
On 13 January 1898, the Parisian daily L’Aurore carried what quickly became 
one of the most celebrated letters in literary and political history. Written 
by Émile Zola under the heading of “J’Accuse”, it was an immensely long open 
letter addressed to the president, in which he not only accused the French 
establishment, and particularly the highest levels of the army, of obstruction 
of justice and antisemitism, but named those generals he considered most 
culpable. What had prompted the outburst was the recent guilty verdict for 
treason handed down to a Jewish artillery officer,Captain Alfred Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jun/26/alfred-dreyfus-affair-ruth-harris>
, who was believed to have passed military secrets to the German embassy. Zola, 
along with many others, maintained that Dreyfus had been convicted on the basis 
of forged documents, and that the real culprit was another officer,Major 
Esterhazy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferdinand_Walsin_Esterhazy>.

In the modern age of celebrity it is easy to forget the heightened public 
attention once enjoyed by bestselling writers and commentators. Zola was then 
at the peak of his popularity, feted not only in France but in the 
English‑speaking world for his long-running saga, some 20 novels grouped 
together under the title of Les Rougon-Macquart, in which he chronicled the 
lives of several generations of one family under the second empire. But Zola 
was also controversial, and not everyone admired his earthy portrayals of the 
poor and the downtrodden in French society. Henry James spoke of the “monstrous 
uncleanness” of his interest in such things. Attacks on him, vituperative and 
alarming, filled the papers. One called him a “fool, a peacock, a vice-monger … 
a smut fancier”. The Dreyfus affair had already split France into two warring 
camps: nationalists, Catholics and monarchists on one side, liberals, 
socialists and republicans on the other. Zola’s letter stoked the fire.
 An antisemitic contemporary cartoon depicting Émile Zola, “Le Roi des 
Porcs”. Photograph: Association du Musee Emile Zola 
In writing “J’Accuse”, Zola’s intention was to be prosecuted for libel, so 
that new evidence to exonerate Dreyfus and inculpate Esterhazy could be made 
public. His plan failed. Zola was indeed prosecuted but Dreyfus’s case was not 
reviewed and the captain remained on the infamousDevil’s Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/dec/04/france.prisonsandprobation>.

Found guilty, liable to be fined and sentenced to a year in prison, Zola fled 
to England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/28/emile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london>
. It is this brief period, from February 1898 to the summer of 1899 – during 
which time Dreyfus’s guilty verdict was overturned and the end of Zola’s own 
trial was postponed, so he was able to return to France – that Michael Rosen 
explores in his book. It is both a lively picture of a disputatious literary 
age, and a portrait of an orderly, controlling middle-aged man, whose 
invariably woebegone expression stares out of photographs. Often, he wears 
a flat cap-like hat. He never smiles.

Zola's invariably woebegone expression stares out of photographs. Often, he 
wears a flat cap-like hat. He never smiles

When Zola reached Victoria station in the cold and rain of an English winter 
he was 58. He had no luggage and spoke no English and was unable to mime his 
way into buying new underpants. The scandal of the Dreyfus affair and his part 
in it was such that his whereabouts were a constant source of interest to the 
newspapers on both sides of the Channel. He took a room on the fifth floor of 
the Grosvenor hotel, which made him think of a prison, before moving first to a 
house in Wimbledon, then to a suite in a hotel in Norwood, fretting that the 
French authorities would track him down and send someone to serve papers on 
him. It was all a far cry from an earlier visit to London, when he had been 
sumptuously housed and dined happily with the leading literary figures of the 
day. He felt abandoned, an outcast.

The son of a Venetian engineer who had built the dam at Aix-en-Provence 
<https://structurae.net/structures/francois-zola-dam/photos>, Zola had made his 
way up through publishing and political journalism before embarking on his 
prolific career as a novelist. He was married to Alexandrine, who had once been 
alingère, a woman who looked after household linen and underclothes; and, most 
importantly, he was also living with Jeanne, who had herself come into the Zola 
home as alingère, and was the mother of his two children. While the liaison had 
threatened to break up his childless marriage, Alexandrine proved accommodating 
and the two menages co-existed, Zola spending his nights and mornings at home 
and his afternoons with Jeanne and the children. Just when he found time to 
write his many books is not clear.

Zola was a man of fastidious habits. As someone accustomed to regulating every 
aspect of his existence, the unpredictability of exile was abhorrent. We know 
much about his daily routine because he was an assiduous letter writer to both 
of the women he called his wives, and was often visited by his translator, 
Ernest Vizetelly, who himself wrote a book about the author’s London sojourn. 
Predictably, Zola loathed English food, complaining bitterly and mystifyingly 
that meat, having been cooked, was often washed. Rosen is good on details: the 
particular nibs Zola fitted to his pens, the photographs he took as he cycled 
mournfully through the deserted streets of Norwood.
 Alfred Dreyfus on his release from prison and restoration to the French army. 
Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
Predictably, Zola loathed English food, complaining bitterly that the meat, 
having been cooked, was often washed

Soon after arriving in England, having written no fiction for 11 months, Zola 
embarked on a new series of novels, Les Quatre Évangiles. It was to be another 
intimate saga of French life, extolling large families, free thinking and 
republicanism. As in his earlier novels, he drew on recent sociological data 
about the declining birth rate, the depopulation of France, contraception and 
foundling hospitals, hoping once again to stir up public outrage and thus 
transform French society.

In France, the socialist leader Jean Jaurès 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean_Jaur%C3%A8s> took up Dreyfus’s cause and 
Esterhazy confessed. A new court martial overturned the guilty verdict, and 
though pardoned rather than declared innocent, Dreyfus was able to return home. 
Zola too now set off back to Paris and his two households. His political 
liberality did not, however, extend to women: ever insistent that his son, 
Jacques, should excel at school, he was content that his daughter, Denise, 
become a “good little wife”.

And there his orderly if unconventional life might have continued. But on 29 
September 1902 Zola and Alexandrine were poisoned by carbon monoxide from a 
blocked flue in their bedroom. There was talk of murder, but nothing was ever 
proved. In due course, Zola’s remains were moved to lie beside those ofVictor 
Hugo <https://www.theguardian.com/books/victor-hugo> and Alexandre Dumas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alexandredumaspere> in the Panthéon. Rosen, 
better known as a children’s writer, has an added interest in the story. 
Towards the end of the second world war, his great-uncle was on the same train 
to Auschwitz as Dreyfus’s granddaughter.

Zola’s gesture was undoubtedly brave and it brought to the forefront long 
simmering questions about prejudice and persecution in French society. But 
antisemitism did not, of course, die with the justice finally accorded to 
Dreyfus. Rather, it went underground, only to flourish vigorously again in the 
1930s and during the Vichy years.

• The Disappearance of Émile Zola: Love, Literature and the Dreyfus Case is 
published by Faber. To order a copy for £13.49 (RRP £16.99)go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/disappearance-of-zola.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 