
Jackson Pollock <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jackson-pollock> was 
­carrying on one night at Jack the Oysterman's fish restaurant on Eighth 
Street, blasting the lot of them, the art crowd partying there after Willem de 
Kooning's first solo show. But who to yell at particularly? Who needed 
harpooning most?

Spotting Gorky – Arshile Gorky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/arshile-gorky> – standing to one 
side, sharpening a pencil, he lunged across ("Arshile": what kind of name was 
that?) and let him know, right between the eyes, just what he thought of him 
and his paintings. Gorky barely blinked, just went on shaving his pencil, each 
stroke of the penknife ending closer to ­Pollock's straining throat as he 
thought what to say. Then it came. "Pardon me, Mr Pollock," he said, looking 
down at him. "You and I are different kinds of artist."

In the mythology of the New York school and the advent of abstract 
expressionism this was a freeze-frame moment. Pollock the contender was 
sticking it to Gorky who, being a generation older, an immigrant of obscured 
origins, represented the derivative, the unassimilated, the surrealistic and 
indeed, it could be sworn, the doggone un-American. Someone told Pollock to 
shut up and he went off, muttering. But the situation remained: native growth 
versus foreign taint. And as it happened, the one-man debut of Gorky's friend 
the Dutchman De Kooning, celebrated that April evening in 1948, was to be 
eclipsed if not outclassed the following year when a still scowling Pollock 
posed for Life magazine in front of the tumbleweed whorls ofSummertime (1948) 
and was awarded the headline: "Jackson Pollock: Is he the greatest living 
painter in the United States?" By then Gorky had been dead for a little over a 
year.

He was found hanged in a shed, leaving a note that read "Goodby all my loved" 
or, some said, "Goodbye My Loveds". His wife Mougouch had left him, taking the 
children; he had lost some paintings in a studio fire; he had cancer, he had 
had a colostomy and he had recently broken his neck in a car ­accident.

Gorky, dead at 46 (or maybe he was only 44: dates vary), died at the time when 
he stood as good a chance as any of being singled out as the greatest living 
painter in the land. His timing was lousy, from a career angle, dropping out as 
he did just when champions were needed to implement the idea of world-beating 
American painting falling into line with the cold-war ­vision of America's 
brave new free-world hegemony. Having spent two decades catching on to the 
coat-tails of style he had developed a tentative yet expansive originality. 
Certainly, had he survived his despair, he would have rated higher among the 
founding fathers of later 20th-century American art.

As it was, the basic difference between Gorky and Pollock was a difference of 
direction. Pollock had headed east from Wyoming through the dustclouds of US 
regionalism in the wake of that vastly gung-ho mural painter Thomas Hart 
Benton; Gorky, the Armenian immigrant, had sailed the ocean to New York, 
reinventing himself along the way: listed in the Museum of Modern Art's 15th 
anniversary exhibitionArt in Progress, 1944, as "American, born Tiflis, Russia, 
1904", his was, in all but essentials, an assumed identity.

He told people he was a nephew (or cousin) of Maxim Gorky, unaware presumably 
that the Russian Gorky had been born Alexei Maksimovich Peshkov. He himself was 
Vosdanig Adoian, born, most likely, not in 1904 (or 1905 as he also made out) 
but in 1902, and not in Tiflis nor in Kazan, or Gorki or Nizhni Novgorod, but 
in Khorkom, a village on Lake Van near the eastern border of Ottoman Turkey. 
His father had emigrated to the United States in 1908, leaving wife and 
children who in 1915 fled from the Turks to Yerevan in Russian Armenia. His 
mother died of starvation in 1919. In 1920, after a nine-month journey to Ellis 
Island by way of Athens and Constantinople, Vosdanig and his sister Vartoosh 
lived with their father, briefly. Within a year he moved on, began taking art 
lessons and took to calling himself Arshile Gorky.

Cultural handholds for someone suddenly landed from afar in Providence, Rhode 
Island, were not easy to grasp. Decades later Clement Greenberg, the 
pundit-in-chief of the 50s American art ascendency, talked about "the 
provincialism that had been American art's historic fate"; that being so, and 
having been dealt by fate a ­doubly provincial hand, Gorky resolved to identify 
not with Armenia, nor America in isolation, but with European influences. After 
an initial Sargent phase and a dash or two of impressionism he moved on to the 
moderns. Having come so recently from Over There, he had little difficulty in 
concocting an impressive provenance, letting it be known that, being "Russian", 
he had studied under Kandinsky and, progressive that he was, had trained widely 
within the School of Paris. Soon he was teaching.

Mark Rothko, a student of his at the New School of Design in Boston, found him 
bossy but not implausible given what seemed to be a pretty good working 
knowledge of, particularly, Cézanne and Picasso. That he painted apples and 
pears à la Cézanne and terracotta-coloured women in Picasso's statuesque style 
of the early 20s, was to his credit. You could learn so much from magazine 
reproductions. Having been "with Cézanne", he said in 1932, "now naturally I am 
with Picasso". By then he was deep into painting a series of double portraits, 
based on a photograph, showing his boyhood self standing beside the seated 
figure of his mother, paintings demonstrating not so much a coming to terms 
with ­tragedy as an iconic reconciliation of where he had come from with what 
he was now making of himself.

In 1929 Gorky got to know De Kooning, his almost exact contemporary (assuming 
he was born in 1904), and they shared a studio for a while. HisPortrait of 
Master Bill, in which the young painter sits back in "the creation chamber", as 
he called it, with an air of genial but byzantine detachment, sealed the 
association. "He knew lots more about painting and art," De Kooning recalled. 
"He had an uncanny instinct for all art . . . an extraordinary gift for hitting 
the nail on the head. We became very good friends." Both were attuned to cubism 
in all its varieties, but Gorky was the one to urge caution. When De Kooning 
tried for novelty Gorky would say, reprovingly, "very original". Gorky's idea 
was to help oneself, do likewise and pass it on. That way provincialism could 
be infiltrated. Similarly, when opportunities arose to earn a little working 
for the government-funded Public Works ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Project, he talked of opening 
"new vistas" to people at large. His mural for Newark Airport (Administration 
Building), unveiled in 1937, was a hand across the ocean to his then exemplar 
Fernand Léger, a profusion of flattened tubes and vents.

Two years later, in May 1939, Gorky became a US citizen. In attitude however 
he remained resolutely internationalist. He spoke up for Picasso'sGuernica when 
it was exhibited in New York that September and was foremost among the minority 
of artists who welcomed to New York fellow artists evading the war in Europe. 
Of these the surrealists were most resented. De Kooning, for one, objected to 
their cliques and airs and fashionability. Gorky, though, was charmed, 
especially by Roberto Matta, whose biomorphic vistas, busy with linear stuff 
shooting off in all directions, ­triggered a fresh and, at times, Disneyish 
spookiness in his work. This earned him the approval of André Breton, the 
self-ordained pope of surrealism, who saw in Gorky a well-versed recruit to the 
ranks of those who kept faith with the gospel of ambiguity in all things, not 
least rhetorical ambiguity. As he said, writing his equivalent of a character 
reference, "The marvels of the earth a hundred feet high, the marvels of the 
sea a hundred feet deep, have for their witness only the wild eye that when in 
need of colours refers simply to the rainbow."

Hitting the big time with Breton, Gorky was in his element, relating back to 
his sources and origins, imaginary or otherwise, loosening up, marrying myth 
and Connecticut. His "Garden in Sochi" series, he explained, harked back all 
the way to "The Garden of Wish Fulfillment and often I had seen my mother and 
other village women opening their bosoms and taking their soft and dependable 
breasts in their hands to rub them on the rock. Above all this stood an 
enormous tree all bleached under the sun the rain the cold and deprived of 
leaves. This was the Holy Tree. I myself did not know that this tree was holy 
but I had witnessed many people whoever did pass by that would voluntarily 
strip off their clothes and attach this to the tree." Besides spending weeks 
upstate, drawing vegetation, he began teaching ­camouflage at the Grand Central 
School of Art. It was perfect for him: the idea of an art of deception and 
concealment, forms dissolved or overlaid with perplexities for a greater good.

Even here there was deliberation. In Waterfall, 1943, an arrow sported by a 
figure straight out of Miró points downwards at an array of flows and 
obstructions, landscape turning sour and collapsing into gloriously unkempt 
profusion. "Opposed to this vision of destruction is the vision of creation," 
he wrote, echoing Victor Hugo's "appearances dissolve and re-form", the 
novelist's recipe for inky doodling that now translated into the surrealist fad 
of automatic writing.

"Gorky was a quite well known but rather derivative painter for 15 years 
before he found himself in about 1943," wrote Alfred Barr, founder-director of 
the Museum of Modern Art. That small waterfall he found on the Housatonic 
River, New Milford, Connnecticut, and the flowers and insects he came upon at 
Crooked Run Farm, Virginia, fed Gorky's appetite for animation within ground 
cover. Suddenly he flourished. But still he worked as though retracing his 
steps. Nothing was as spontaneous as he made it seem. As Cy Twombly, one of his 
most distinguished successors, observed, "Gorky would copy a drawing into a 
painting." Always, whatever the scale, however colourful the polymorphic hubbub 
in a painting might be, he had been there before with his sharp pencil, marking 
the score.

"As he is in no sense a draughtsman, they must be appraised as doodlings for 
psychological rather than formal interest," said Artnews, in March 1947. "The 
visitor will be fascinated or bored in proportion to what these very personal 
forms signify to him." Breton, for one, was in no doubt.The Liver Is the Cock's 
Comb, he said, was "one of the most important paintings made in America". 
Exhibited in the surrealists' swansong show (for the time being) in Paris, at 
the Galerie Maeght in 1947, it was, and remains, a wonderful mishmash of 
diverse origins.

Four years after the end in the shed in Sherman, Connecticut, by which time De 
Kooning, Rothko, Clyfford Still, Barnett Newman, Robert Motherwell and, most 
famously, Pollock were encountering success to an unprecedented degree, Art 
Digest ran an article: "Gorky: Was He Tops or Second Rate?" That's not the 
question. Where Pollock, especially, changed the game, drizzling and hurling 
his liquids, attacking the painting from all sides, stooping over its automatic 
complexities then hauling it off the floor to grace a wall, to me Gorky was 
more a Walt Whitmanesque figure, more the "Noiseless Patient ­Spider" that 
"launch'd forth filament, filament, filament out of itself", more the spinner 
of dreams, stood to one side: "Ceaselessly musing, venturing, throwing, seeking 
the spheres to connect them."

"I am glad that it is about impossible to get away from his powerful 
influence," De Kooning wrote in loyal ­reproof to the editor of Artnews a few 
months after Gorky died. "As long as I keep it with myself I'll be ­doing all 
right. Sweet Arshile, bless your dear heart."
 