
I love my father. He’s kind and caring.

He grew up in a rural family of boys. He learnt from his father, who in turn 
learnt from his father, that expressing emotion didn’t coincide with his 
maleness. Not only was vulnerability not a choice, it just wasn’t an option. 
Things were left unsaid. The masculine ego left seemingly fortifiable. They 
were a generation of men strong and powerful but emotionally detached.

When I was 18, I started to feel tired. It was this unending languor, clouding 
my emotions, hiding my motivation and affecting my concentration. I felt 
permanently drunk. At the same time, I started to become uneasy; butterflies in 
my stomach and panic became the norm.

“You’re in the middle of a major depressive episode,” my psychologist told me 
during my first appointment. Here, I cried for the first time. At 18, I 
realised that I had perfected the art of hiding, concealing, and building the 
perfect facade. As a male, I felt, vulnerability wasn’t an option for me.

Highest Australian suicide rate in 13 years driven by men aged 40 to 44
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/09/highest-australian-suicide-rate-in-13-years-driven-by-men-aged-40-to-44>
“You need to learn how to talk to your parents,” she said. I didn’t know how 
to do that. At this point, I recognised that I had never properly learnt how to 
access my sadness, let alone to verbalise this to my family.

It was awkward to tell my father that I wasn’t okay. At first, he struggled to 
access his own emotions with me. It took a lot of learning, from both sides, to 
communicate with one another as we’d both been groomed not to speak. When I 
needed him, though, he was there for me.

A close friend of mine recently told me that he had been feeling sad. We were 
in my car; I had started taking anti-depressants at this point. “One could say 
it was depression,” he half-smiled, still unable to confirm it for himself. He 
seemed tense. He told me that he’d gone through bursts of sadness for years, 
even though he had no reason to feel this way. It was true; he was well liked, 
had a large network of friends, had done very well in school and had a 
promising career. From the outside, his life seemed perfect. Sometimes, though, 
a reason doesn’t need to exist. Together, in that car, we were silent 
wanderers, guided by our unknown concerns.

Initially, he told me, he could only talk about the black cloud when he was 
drunk and refused to think about it when he was sober. He thought the black 
cloud would pass. He was too embarrassed to talk about his sadness. He never 
dared to tell his family; it made him feel uncomfortable. Besides, he had a 
carefree reputation to uphold; to him, weakness was prey.

He told his mates down at the pub after our encounter in the car, about his 
bursts of sadness. His mates paused. They were visibly awkward. “Oh, that’s 
weird,” said one of them, before they pushed the conversation aside. This 
bruised my friend’s confidence. His sadness was merely swept under the rug from 
then on, and this made him more confused.

It’s not necessarily his friends’ fault, though. We have taught, and are 
continuing to teach, young boys in Australia that emotion is not okay. We are 
teaching young boys that intimacy between one another should be feared. They 
are taught that this would make them seem gay. Subsequently, to combat this 
inherent homophobia, the thought of two males in a close friendship must be 
humoured and justified within society in order for masculinity to be 
maintained. In a society where women value the bonds between each other, why 
doesn’t the same apply for men?

This mentality ultimately extends into adulthood, perpetuating a culture in 
which manliness does not seem to correlate with the sharing of emotion. At this 
point, it is important to note that suicide is roughly three times higher in 
Australian males than females. Why is it that we wait to speak about a man’s 
depression until it is too late? Reaching out and valuing our male friendships 
shouldn’t need to be accompanied by a joke. Alas, we have truly grown up into a 
society in which males fear sharing emotion with one another.

'As boys, we are told to be brave': men on masculinity and mental health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/24/as-boys-we-are-told-to-be-brave-men-on-masculinity-and-mental-health>
So, for the boys who are afraid to embrace emotion and for the boys who feel 
with no tears, let’s rid the fear of talking. For the men who feel silenced and 
for those who have already succumbed to their black cloud, let’s discuss the 
importance of emotion. For my friend shunned by fear and for my own 18 year-old 
self, let’s talk about mental health and anti-depressants. Let’s just talk. To 
speak of pain is to overcome struggle, and to advocate the truths of those 
still ostracised by the screaming mask. It’s this open and honest dialogue that 
is helping so many. It’s helping me.

As someone who takes anti-depressants, I’ve come to realise the importance of 
emotional vulnerability within such a hyper-masculine culture that prides 
itself on strength and invincibility. Let’s ask boys and men alike how they are 
feeling, behind the performance. There is strength in susceptibility, too.

“You’ll be right” isn’t enough anymore. No one deserves a black cloud.
 