
As the drought stretched on, as years passed and horse racing faded in 
popularity, it became a commonplace to hear that the sport “needed a Triple 
Crown winner”.

A horse that could win the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness, and the Belmont 
would invigorate the sport, some thought. It would bring much-needed attention 
from casual fans, whose imaginations and attention would be captured by horse 
racing’s beauty and excitement, and maybe those people would then become 
customers, attending the races, watching on television, and generating the 
betting revenue essential to the sport’s survival.

A year after the first Triple Crown winner since 1978, has there been a 
“Pharoah effect”? Did the rapture that accompaniedhis win last June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/06/american-pharoah-triple-crown-belmont-stakes>
 and subsequent campaign carry over after his retirement?

American Pharoah the best Triple Crown winner? He's the most important anyway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/07/american-pharoah-the-best-triple-crown-winner-hes-the-most-important-anyway>
It is virtually impossible to isolate individual factors in the increase or 
decrease in horse racing’s business. Weather affects attendance, and racetrack 
figures are notoriously suspect, thought to be inflated by track executives or 
an indicator, as in other sports, of tickets sold and not of actual attendees.
Handle <http://www.sportingcharts.com/dictionary/sports-betting/handle.aspx>, 
too, is influenced by weather and track conditions, along with the number of 
betting interests in a given race or on a given day.

It’s difficult, then, to account for the declines in announced attendance, 
handle, and television ratings for this year’s Kentucky Derby, which had seen 
year-on-year gains for several years running. Was the general public’s appetite 
for racing satiated by the Triple Crown last year? Did the undefeated Nyquist 
lack the charisma ofAmerican Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah>?

If so, how then to account for the increases in attendance and handle, both of 
which set records, at the Preakness? Television viewership, too, rose for the 
Preakness, compared to last year.

Drops at Belmont this year would be expected; a Belmont Stakes without a 
Triple Crown attempt — and without even the Kentucky Derby winner — can’t 
compare to a Belmont Stakes with the Triple Crown on the line. A comparison to 
2013, though, the last year without a Triple Crown try, shows increases in both 
attendance (26%) and handle (12%).

It’s important to note, though, that since 2013, the Belmont Stakes card has 
been revamped to include more graded stakes races — nine this year, five in 
2013 — and the New York Racing Association has billed the weekend as the “
Belmont Stakes Racing Festival 
<https://www.nyra.com/belmont/events/belmont-stakes-racing-festival/>”, 
marketing it as a multi-day event that offers concerts and upscale hospitality 
experiences in addition to horse racing. And beginning last year, NYRA switched 
to the tickets-sold model of attendance, rather than reporting the number of 
people that actually show up at the track. The 60,114 announced on Saturday 
night may well indicate the number of seats purchased, but it seems higher than 
the number of people who attended.

Initial numbers from NBC indicate that viewership for this year’s Belmont was 
below that of 2013, and media coverage of this year’s race was substantially 
less than it was last year, even in the New York area.


American Pharoah makes history by clinching first Triple Crown in 37 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/06/american-pharoah-triple-crown-belmont-stakes>
Beyond the three Triple Crown races, US Thoroughbred racing has seen some 
encouraging year-to-date economic indicators. Though the number of races has 
declined 5.52%from last year, along with the number of race days (down 6.33%) 
and number of starts (down 4.03%), handle has risen 2.09%, a little over $95m.

The woes of US horse racing are myriad, and the primary challenges facing the 
sport’s growth vary depending on whom you talk to. For some people, it’s high 
take-out. For others, it’s the grimy perception (and sometimes reality) of the 
racetrack environment. Short fields, too many race days, competition from other 
types of gambling, the complexity of past performances, the high prices of data 
and barriers to accessing it, unsavory impressions of how the horses are 
treated, suspicions about cheating, too few people who want to own horses — 
each has its supporters who think that their theory is the No1 problem that 
needs to be addressed.

It’s an awful lot for one horse – in the form of American Pharoah – to combat, 
especially one whose racing career lasted barely a year. And of course, there 
are plenty of people who disputed the idea that the sport needed a Triple Crown 
winner at all and contended that the effects of one would be negligible.

For the last few months we’ve seen a lot of American Pharoah commemorations; 
just last week, the New York Racing Association hosted a Q&A with his owners 
and trainers two days before the Belmont Stakes. NBC featured a segment on them 
during the Belmont Stakes telecast. Newspapers continue to cover the horse, 
focusing now on his breeding career. He will continue to generate clicks for at 
least a little while longer, though for how long beyond that remains to be seen.

Has there been a Pharoah effect? In hearts and minds, almost certainly, and 
that’s not insignificant. But for the health of the industry, it’s also, almost 
certainly, not enough.
 