
I’m a Reporter, Get Me Into There! 

Neither Channel Ten nor ITV Studios Australia want to talk about it, but they 
have enlisted the help of the media in a rather unusual way to make I’m a 
Celebrity Get Me Out of Here! a success.

Ten has paid for a contingent of Australian reporters to fly to South Africa 
and report on the show – luxury accommodation and all expenses paid, of course. 
The Sydney Morning Herald’ssenior writer Peter Munro 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/tv-and-radio/inside-the-jungle-camp-of-i8217m-a-celebrityget-me-out-of-here-20150130-132jah.html#ixzz3Qj8FND7b>
 is there, and has filed stories and interviews from the jungle set as well as 
a first-person piece on his exploits in the game reserve in his underpants. 
Tucked at the end of the report is “Peter Munro travelled to South Africa 
courtesy of Network Ten”. While Fairfax tells its audience the reporter is on a 
junket, we can’t see any acknowledgment from News Corp or TV Week. Holly from 
TV Week is filing on the romances the contestants left behind and those that 
are developing in the jungle, as well as tweeting excitedly about the action in 
the show.


The News Corp reporter Shannon Molloy is said to be being replaced by the 
entertainment reporter Jonathan Moran when his tour of duty is over. We asked 
Ten and ITV if the transcription service would remain up and running for the 
run of the show, expected to be six weeks, but they declined to tell us.

Now, it is not uncommon for the networks to fly journalists interstate to 
cover events or make set visits – even the ABC does it. It is essential to get 
coverage for your show as no one has the budget for travel anymore. (I went to 
the Big Brother set in 2002 on the Gold Coast when it was screening on Ten, for 
example.) But sending a bunch of scribes overseas for an extended stay takes 
the practice to a whole new level. The line between news and entertainment just 
became a lot more blurred.
TV WEEK (@TVWEEKmag) 
#ImACelebrityAU <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ImACelebrityAU?src=hash> EP 
Stephen Tate and Holly from#tvweekmag 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tvweekmag?src=hash> on set today! 
pic.twitter.com/yBD7Wnjly4 <http://t.co/yBD7Wnjly4>
 <https://twitter.com/TVWEEKmag/status/561444085098360833> January 31, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/TVWEEKmag/status/561444085098360833> 
The jungle show appeared to be a triumph on day one when it pulled the biggest 
audience Ten had seen for a long time, 1.1 million. By day two, when it was in 
competition with the juggernaut that is My Kitchen Rules on Seven, it had 
dropped to 755,000. On Tuesday night it was 685,000. But with the genius 
casting of former Brady Bunch star Maureen McCormack (Marcia Brady) the show is 
pretty entertaining and well-produced and should still do well for Ten.

The Age deletes Bruce Jenner blunder

The Age has been forced to apologise and delete a tweet after posting an 
insensitive remark about the Olympian and Kardashian family member Bruce Jenner 
who is reportedly undergoing a transformation to live as a woman. The Age 
Twitter account used the phrase “Jenner Bender” when linking to its report and 
was jumped on by critics on Twitter. “Apologies to those offended by our Bruce 
Jenner tweet. Feedback noted. No offence was intended. We have deleted the 
tweet.”
 Kris and Bruce Jenner in Las Vegas in 2009. Photograph: Dan Steinberg/AP 
ABC takes chunk out of news

Budget cuts to the ABC late last year didn’t just mean cuts to staff. (About 
90 people took a package and have left already, and there are more to come.) It 
also meant, surprisingly, that radio news bulletins were chopped in half from 
10 minutes to five minutes duration across every network except Triple J. Apart 
from the early morning bulletins at 7am and 7.45am, radio news is just five 
minutes long, which some ABC staffers say is shorter than the commercial radio 
bulletins. The way this saves money is in staffing, and Aunty was able to lay 
off radio reporters, producers and editors across the states and make the radio 
newsreaders write and produce their own bulletins.

We got our hands on an internal memo about how to make this new cut-price news 
work. Include “less detail”, staff were told, and keep reports to just three 
paragraphs with a short grab of no longer than 15 seconds. “We will have to 
maintain context – a difficult balance,” management helpfully adds. “A story 
which in the past would have rated a wrap may not do so now,” the memo says.

What this means for listeners is they are less likely to hear audio from the 
scene, whether it be the reporter telling a story or a grab of Tony Abbott. 
Newsreaders will throw to grabs of audio without any input from the reporters. 
Sources say with stories confined to just three paragraphs reporters are less 
likely to be sent out to cover events. Fewer reporters on the ground will have 
an impact on local radio shows on Sydney 702 or Melbourne’s 774 or Brisbane’s 
612 which rely on crosses to reporters who have covered an event for an 
eyewitness view.

New boss for Four Corners

As we tipped last month, Sally Neighbour has been appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/21/the-weekly-beast-the-australian-gives-the-abc-the-budget-it-wishes-it-had>
 executive producer of Four Corners, and will take over from the veteran 
producer Sue Spencer when she leaves in March. “I am thrilled and honoured to 
be taking over the reins at Four Corners,” Neighbour said. “It is an enormous 
privilege and challenge to become EP of Australia’s finest and longest standing 
public affairs program.” Her departure means finding a replacement for 7.30, 
which joins the list of programs looking for a new boss: Foreign Correspondent 
and Australian Story. The Australian Story executive producer Deborah Fleming, 
who set up the brilliant program in 1993, has resigned.

Back to Four Corners: Neighbour has a strong personality and some Four Corners 
staffers are more than a little perturbed at the prospect of having the crack 
investigative reporter as their boss. We predict even more movement in the wake 
of this announcement.
 There is more movement at the ABC. Photograph: Dan Peled/AAP 
Nine and Seven go head to head over Sydney siege specials

Channels Seven and Nine are still playing cat and mouse over their respective 
Lindt cafe hostage stories to be aired on Sunday night. They have each paid 
tens of thousands of dollars for exclusive rights, even as the inquest is still 
under way. Nine has signed up eight hostages and Seven has six, but Seven 
claims it has footage no one else has because of its location opposite Martin 
Place. Nine says this is nonsense. Trying to get to air before Nine, Seven 
announced Seven News – Inside the Siege: The Untold Story had been programmed 
for 6pm – in the news slot. A few days later Nine announced Special Report: The 
Siege Survivors would screen on Sunday but left out the small detail of what 
time. This fight for ratings could go down to the wire.

A taste from Nine’s release focuses on Fiona Ma, 19, student and cafe worker: 
“It was Fiona’s sixth shift at the cafe. She was going to switch shifts with 
her sister but decided against it the night before. That morning her pants 
hadn’t dried from washing, so she contemplated being late for work, but decided 
instead to show up on time with damp pants.”

 Hostages flee the Lindt cafe in Martin Place. Photograph: Photograph: Joosep 
Martinson/Getty Images/Guim 
Lateline running late

With all the ABC shows returning in the past few days, some of us were 
wondering where Lateline was. Because Lateline is being transformed from an ABC 
to an ABC News 24 program it will return with a “refreshed” format and a new 
set – but not until March. A spokeswoman said more details about the show would 
be announced closer to the launch.

Another set that has been rebuilt is the Q&A backdrop. The reaction on Twitter 
was mixed: there were those who said it looked like the set of Star Wars and 
others who likened it to QI. Others said it was too busy and some even said 
they shouldn’t have wasted the money. For the record, the set was built 
in-house on a modest budget and after seven years the Q&A lounge room was due 
for a makeover.

Frozen circulation

With newspaper circulation in freefall, papers are always trying to move extra 
copies not just with good stories but with clever marketing and giveaways. News 
Corp’s Sunday Telegraph has historically been the master of this, using 
everything from caps to plastic toys to entice the buyers. Now News Corp 
Australia has partnered with Disney to give away 14 Read to Me Storybooks and 
CDs of Disney classics such as Bambi, Peter Pan and Snow White. But we reckon 
this Sunday’s giveaway of a Frozen book with the Sunday Telegraph, Sunday 
Herald Sun, the Sunday Mail and others will prove to be the most popular, even 
though the Frozen craze is getting a little old.

Jones heads north

Beware Queenslanders, Alan Jones enjoyed his intervention in the state 
election so much he is coming back for more. FairfaxRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> Network’s 4BC has announced that 
from this week Jones would be a fixture on 4BC’s daily schedule, with The Alan 
Jones Hour broadcast from midday every weekday.
 Broadcaster Alan Jones. Photograph: Mike Bowers 
Asian Cup boost

A final word on the Asian Cup, which is understood to have cost the ABC $1.25m 
in broadcast rights. Despite a mauling from News Corp for daring to bid for the 
TV rights and snatching them away from SBS, the total cost has been worth it 
when the ratings are taken into account. From figures we’ve seen here at the 
Beast, the cost of each match the ABC broadcast – and there were six – was just 
$208,000. Not bad when you consider a Socceroos match usually has a price tag 
of $1m.


 