
Time is running out. After all, you might be forgiven for thinking that if you 
haven't read Proust in this millennium, you're probably not going to in the 
next. Consequently, alongside herd dieting, saving, decorating and 
match-making, this year could see the rise of some rather angst-ridden 
speed-reading. Presumably that's why Penguin are busy repackaging the century's 
classics into nattily-designed little 'Essential Penguins', taking you from A 
Clockwork Orange to One Hundred Years of Solitude.

 But if readers are compelled to put their houses in order, so are publishers, 
and there the theory breaks down. It's a cut-throat business, and if 
end-of-year results are normally a fraught affair, think what the pressure to 
make a decent bottom line at the end of the millennium will be like. And what 
about all those authors desperate to feel they've achieved something in the 
dying years of the century, whose manuscripts are currently pouring into 
publishing houses? All in all, it seems unlikely that 1999 will spare any more 
rainforests than its recent predecessors, so here are a few highlights to look 
out for.

 Turning first to fiction, An Equal Music, Vikram Seth's first novel since A 
Suitable Boy, appears in April from Orion, setting themes of loss and chance 
against a background of music and its sustaining influence in our lives. April 
also sees Jonathan Cape launching Salman Rushdie's The Ground Beneath Her Feet, 
another musically-inspired novel which reworks the myth of Orpheus, but this 
time with rock'n'roll. Groovy. Amongst the other big names hoping to make a 
splash in the next few months are Annie Proulx, who publishes a collection of 
short stories centred around Wyoming, Close Range (Fourth Estate, June), 
Michele Roberts, whose novel Fair Exchange (Little, Brown, January) draws on 
the lives of Mary Wollstonecraft and William Wordsworth and John Updike, with 
Bech at Bay: A Quasi-Novel (Hamish Hamilton, January), who gives us further 
chapters from the life of the 'moderately well-known' Jewish-American writer 
Henry Bech. Meanwhile, Peter Ackroyd returns to the land of make-believe with 
The Plato Papers (Chatto & Windus), published in April. But the novel is also a 
departure, as Ackroyd opts for a setting 2,000 years in the future, in which an 
orator lectures London's citizens on the bizarre behaviour of their ancestors.

 Also expected to be big are Andrew O'Hagan's Our Fathers (Faber, March), in 
which a dying man meditates on his relationship with his grandson and his work 
as a builder of tower-blocks, A L Kennedy's Everything You Need (Jonathan Cape, 
June), Bernice Rubens's I, Dreyfus (Little, Brown, February), Lawrence 
Norfolk's In the Shape of a Boar (Hodder, September), and the new novel from 
Marie 'Pig Tales' Darrieussecq, My Phantom Husband (Faber, July). Meanwhile, 
those monitoring the pulse of new fiction should look out for Bo Fowler's 
second novel, The Astrological Diary of God, published by Cape in April, Nathan 
Englander's For the Relief of Unbearable Urges (Faber, May), short stories 
inspired by the history of orthodox Jewish communities, and The Paraffin Child 
by Stephen Blanchard (Chatto & Windus, June), the third novel from the author 
of the brilliant Gagarin and I.

 For those who want to combine a knowledge of the lesser-known classics of 
British literature with a taste of avant-garde writing, look no further than 
Picador's re-issue of B S Johnson's The Unfortunates, published in April. 
Presented in a box, with the text divided into 27 sections designed to be read 
in random order, the novel is the most famous work of the experimentalist who 
committed suicide in 1973 at the age of 40. The introduction is by Jonathan 
Coe, currently at work on a biography of Johnson. A final tip: look out for 
Robert Irwin's Satan Wants Me (Dedalus, March), the latest delight from the 
author of the orientalist fantasy Prayer-Cushions of the Flesh.

 Three literary critics also publish books this year, perhaps the most famous 
(or notorious) being Umberto Eco, whose Serendipities (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 
February) ranges from the search to discover the language spoken by Adam and 
Eve to the medieval myth of Prester John. Meanwhile, Harold Bloom argues that 
Shakespeare's ability to describe human thought and emotion in completely new 
ways has shaped our understanding of what it is to be human. Shakespeare: The 
Invention of the Human is published by Fourth Estate in March. And James Wood 
explores the link between literature and belief in The Broken Estate (Cape, 
January).

 Thirty years after the publication of The Female Eunuch, Germaine Greer 
reassesses the state of battle in the gender wars, and finds much for feminists 
still to fight for in The Whole Woman (Transworld, March). Feminism might well 
come under the knife in Robert Conquest's Reflections of a Ravaged Century: The 
Reign of Rogue Ideologies (John Murray, September), in which the author argues 
that Big Ideas have been our downfall and the cause of many of the disasters 
that have befallen us.

 A Very Big Idea Indeed is the subject of Steve Jones's Almost Like A Whale 
(Transworld, May), which sees the geneticist and author of In the Blood 
updating The Origin of Species, no less. What happens when genetic engineering 
really gets into its stride is explored by the team who created Dolly, the 
happily cloned sheep, in the rather cheekily titled The Second Creation 
(Headline, May), by Ian Wilmut and Keith Campbell, with Colin Tudge. Other 
science titles include Fermat-biographer Amir Aczel's Probability One (Little, 
Brown, March), Measuring the Universe: The Quest to Quantify Space (Headline, 
March) by Stephen Hawking's biographer Kitty Ferguson, and a new book from John 
Gribbin, The Birth of Time (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, March). If you really don't 
have time for all this, turn to the 'Get a Grip On' series from Seven Dials 
Press (also a part of the mighty Orion), and master evolution, genetics and 
astronomy in less time than it takes to work out who's doing what to whom in 
EastEnders. Available from April.

 The usual raft of biographies includes several people doubling up: Andrew 
Lycett and Harry Ricketts both have a crack at Rudyard Kipling, for example, 
whilst political editors Paul Routledge (Gordon Brown's biographer) and Donald 
Macintyre attempt to pin down Peter Mandelson. Presumably, they're hoping that 
sympathy for the embattled former minister will lead to the growth of a cult of 
personality. Either that, or the books will feature Hello!-style pictures of 
that house. Well, you never know. More likely candidates for adoration include 
Catherine Cookson (Constable, June), whose life is celebrated by Kathleen 
Jones, Nelson Mandela (HarperCollins, May), captured by the arch-anatomist 
Anthony Sampson and Anne Frank, the subject of Roses From the Earth by Carol 
Ann Lee (Viking, June). Among those who have chosen to speak for themselves are 
Man United supremo Alex Ferguson, whose autobiography appears in September from 
Hodder, and Alec Guinness, who makes A Positively Final Appearance in April 
(Viking).

 One set of memoirs throws light on one of the most disturbing and brutal 
episodes in 20th-century history. The Good German of Nanking: The Diaries of 
John Rabe (Little, Brown, January) tells us how the manager of the local 
Siemens factory stood firm against the invading Japanese Army in Nanking in 
1937. Rabe saved between 250,000 and 300,000 lives, and at one point had over 
600 Chinese camped in his house and garden alone. From the atrocities of 50 
years ago to those of distressingly recent times, in New Yorker writer Philip 
Gourevitch's We Wish To Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed With Our 
Families: Stories of Rwanda (Picador, March).

 Much forthcoming history centres on the iniquities of war, and our burgeoning 
perceptions of what really went on. Official Secrets: What the Nazis Planned, 
What the British and Americans Knew by Richard Breitman (Allen Lane, January) 
draws on newly declassified documents to shock us with how much the Allies knew 
and failed to avert about the Third Reich's plans for world domination and mass 
extermination. Tzvetan Todorov's Facing the Extreme: Morality and Heroism in 
Auschwitz and the Gulag (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, March) finds evidence for the 
survival of compassion and grace in a series of extraordinary concentration 
camp stories. An incredibly intimate story is told in Rachel Lichtenstein's 
Rodinsky's Room (Granta, June), written in collaboration with Iain Sinclair, in 
which London's Jewish East End is movingly reconstructed through the prism of 
one man's chaotic life.

 The quirkier side of history comes out in three books. Pushkin's Button by 
Serena Vitale (Fourth Estate, February) tells the story of the Russian poet, 
the French soldier who shot him in a duel over Pushkin's wife, reputed to be 
the most beautiful woman in St Petersburg. More human weakness in Anna Pavord's 
The Tulip (Bloomsbury, January), a social history of the flower that - 
apparently - has driven men mad for centuries. Finally, Nathaniel's Nutmeg by 
Giles Milton (Hodder, March) rather gives away its ambitions for Longitude 
status in its sub-title: How One Man's Courage Changed the Course of History.

 Finally, if all this just makes you want to escape into a bit of top- quality 
travel writing, you will welcome a new book from Eric Newby, Departures and 
Arrivals (HarperCollins, May). Far more relaxing than either Jeremy Seal's The 
Snakebite Survivor's Club (Picador, February), which takes us on a terrifying 
odyssey of the world's deadliest snakes, or Miranda Sawyer's Park and Ride: 
Travels in a Suburban Land (Little, Brown, June), which journeys through Middle 
England from Croydon to Swindon. Black Mamba or Milton Keynes: it's a 
terrifying choice.

 To order a copy of any of these books, throughout the year ahead, call 
Guardian CultureShop on 0500 600102.
 