
Your editorial “Britain is becoming mean and narrow-minded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/22/theresa-may-defence-of-british-liberal-values>
” (Comment) asked: “What has happened to us?” There are many reasons, of 
course, but politicians and the media must bear most responsibility.

The coalition’s austerity measures, aimed mostly at the least fortunate, had 
the backing of the rightwing media that convinced millions that those in need 
of help were, in fact, “scroungers”. Television programmes that focused on the 
subject received extra publicity in the tabloids, while the callousness of 
government policies and the valuable work done by immigrants in the economy 
were ignored.

Rather than focus on true-to-life drama that might have enlightened viewers, 
the BBC, frightened by Tory politicians’ threats to its very existence, 
concentrated its dramatic output on inaccurate historical soap operas, that 
falsified the view of our past.

Add to this the government’s appalling attitude towards those escaping from 
wars, torture and extreme poverty, its concentration of investment in the 
south, the obvious electoral wheeze of Osborne that was the “northern 
powerhouse”, the policy of selling weapons to dictatorships regardless of their 
intended use and you get a society where fairness is nonexistent and that looks 
backwards to a fictitious glorious past.

When a politician emerges who promises change based on ethical policies, and 
who doesn’t treat the voters like mugs, he is not only attacked by the 
rightwing media, but by the newspapers leaning to the left, which for some 
reason see him as too different from the Tories to win an election.

Is it any wonder not only that the lies of politicians led to Brexit, but that 
Britain is in danger of being “swept along by a dangerous politics of hate”?
Bernie Evans
Liverpool

Your editorial puts its finger on a dangerous pulse, a darkening situation 
that could easily spiral into something a lot worse. It is a pity therefore 
that it repeated current rhetorical pieties with the claim that “the referendum 
resulted in a popular mandate that cannot be ignored”.

If it were true that 52% voted Leave it might have a point. In fact, 37.5% of 
the electorate voted Leave. This is not by any stretch of a clear mathematical 
mind a popular mandate.

Leaving aside constitutional matters about the status of referendums, what we 
have is a minority mandate based on a parody of the first-past-the-post system 
of our elections to parliament. Surely referendums should determine the popular 
majority will on a different basis to this, as happened in Scotland in 1979. If 
the referendum was a union ballot for strike action, the result would be 
declared invalid under current Tory trade union legislation. In this light, 
Tory pieties about respecting the will of the people are obviously hypocritical 
and inconsistent. There is no need to piously respect minority opinion in this 
way. When will a newspaper editorial be brave enough to follow this logic to 
its appropriate conclusion?
Peter Seddon
Brighton

The woman who felt the “nasty party” image was electoral poison now sees toxic 
rhetoric as a winner. The referendum was an electoral ploy intended to enhance 
David Cameron’s power base and his place in history. Theresa May’s honeymoon 
blandishments are now exposed as duplicitous and meaningless. By the next 
election, with the ruinous extent of Brexit damage felt, not just by the few 
but by the many she publicly courted, she might regret giving full rein to her 
personal ambitions. Having created a mean-spirited Britain she should expect no 
mercy.
Carolyn Kirton
Aberdeen

 