
Consider two of the biggest stories in Britain today. Sir Philip Green faces 
calls to be stripped of his knighthood and remains in parliament’s firing line 
over the collapse of BHS, which handed hundreds of millions of pounds to Sir 
Philip’s family even as its pension scheme blackhole grew ever wider. Now that 
the company has died, around 11,000 of its employees face an uncertain 
retirement. Bad enough, buteven worse off are the 130,000 people expecting a 
pension from the old British Steel <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-36482658>
, now Tata Steel. Whatever happens to this behemoth, those people stand to lose 
a quarter of their retirement incomes. And members still working and paying 
into the scheme will lose an average of 40% of their benefits under the 
Conservative government’s proposals, according to figures calculated for the 
BBC. The devastation that will inflict on thousands of blameless families, from 
Tyneside to Port Talbot, is unimaginable.

Two exceptional hard-luck stories? If only. They are more likely to be a 
glimpse of the future that lies ahead for many other employees. Analysis 
published this week shows thatBritain’s biggest companies paid out five times 
more in dividends last year than they contributed to their pension schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/16/top-uk-firms-paid-five-times-more-in-dividends-than-into-pensions>
. Tesco, BAE Systems and Centrica were among the giant firms that, according to 
the actuaries at Lane Clark & Peacock, paid more to shareholders than they set 
aside for retirees. Of the entire FTSE-100 index, 56 companies are running 
deficits on their defined-benefit pension schemes – yet the majority of them 
could have made up that shortfall “relatively easily”, say the analysts. They 
chose instead to give the money to the fund managers.

Put this in context. The British are forever being told that a pensions crisis 
is looming. Research by the EU published in 2009 showed thatBritish pensioners 
are worse off than their counterparties in Romania 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1202378/Our-elderly-worse-Romanias-British-pensioners-poorest-Europe.html>
. The former pensions minister, Ros Altmann, has called for a parliamentary 
inquiry into company schemes. Pension fund managers are warning, not 
unreasonably, about the impact that the lowest interest rates in 5,000 years 
will have on the returns they can get for retirees. Yet a big part of the 
problem is surely that businesses have their priorities skewed.

This is one of those bits of research that goes to the heart of what’s wrong 
with contemporary British capitalism. Consider it a metaphor: faced with a 
choice between saving for the future of those who have given years and decades 
in service to their employers, or handing some money to those who may have 
taken a paper stake for the most fleeting of moments, big British business 
favours the fast-buck merchants, every time. That doesn’t just explain the 
underfunding of pension schemes – it accounts for low business investment, the 
reliance of the private sector on the government to pay for research and 
development in things such as graphene, and the long squeeze on workers’ pay 
that set in long before the banking crash.

Under company law, shareholders go right to the back of the queue of dibs on a 
business’s assets, after pension scheme members. But the big shareholders are 
the ones who get the face-time with the bosses, and executive pay is closely 
tied to share prices. Sure, pension savers are shareholders in other companies 
– but the number of big-fee-claiming middlemen standing between them and their 
assets is large enough to make that link thin indeed.

Two obvious things can be done. Pensions holidays were always dangerous – now 
they should be made illegal. Second, as consultant John Ralfe argues, companies 
must guarantee their pension schemes. In the case of BHS, such a change would 
have put the Greens on the hook for the pensions – even without the 
intervention ofFrank Field <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field>. 
Such changes will upset the financiers and the more irresponsible executives. 
They will put the kibosh on a few mergers and acquisitions. But big British 
business has its priorities wrong. It should be compelled to get them straight.

• This article was amended on 24 August 2016 to clarify that estimates of 
losses members of theTata <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> Steel 
pension scheme could incur were calculated for the BBC.
 