
Robin Hunicke, the CEO of San Francisco-based game studio Funomena, is kind of 
worried. We’re standing in a corner of the Los Angeles convention centre amid 
the cacophany of the E3 games expo. Metres away, a large crowd has gathered 
around the game she has brought to show off. It is called Wattam. It is not a 
typical E3 game. There are no guns, there is no dark, cyberpunk imagery. On the 
screen a small group of apples is being chased by a toilet.

“I’m the first to say: ‘I don’t know if you’ve noticed, but the person running 
this company has no idea what she’s doing,’” says Hunicke. “I’ve never been a 
CEO before, I literally have no experience in marketing or PR. I have a very 
weird feeling about being on camera. I may not be the best person. I may not be 
cut out for this job.”

When Hunicke was growing up, she wanted to be a painter. Later, as an 
undergraduate, she got into writing and poetry – but her next move was somewhat 
tangential: she studied programming at postgraduate level and then got a job as 
a game designer at Electronic Arts. She worked on the Sims series and the 
acclaimed puzzler Boom Blox before joining That Game Company to produce the 
beautiful PS3 adventure, Journey. Her career has been a zig-zag of roles on 
amazing inspirational projects.

I first met her in 2009. She played Journey in front of an audience 
<https://vimeo.com/32054342> during Nottingham’s GameCity festival; people 
huddled together on the floor in the huge tent on the old market square and 
watched silently. It was wonderful, emotional and fascinating. It was also 
typical of Hunicke, one of the most interesting speakers on game design that 
I’ve ever interviewed, to share her game in this way – as a collective 
experience. Some people were moved to tears.

Robin Hunicke on Journey, AI and games that know they're games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2011/dec/06/journey-preview-robin-hunicke-interview>
Wattam is an eccentric puzzle-exploration game set in a series of surreal 
seasonal environments. Players take on the role of a mayor whose planet has 
been devastated by a mysterious apocalyptic event, and now he’s all alone. 
However, he quickly manages to create some flower people by squeezing rain from 
the clouds, and then, by holding hands with them and creating a long chain of 
friends, he is able to set off a fireworks explosion under his hat that creates 
new characters. In this way, he re-populates his world.

This is unmistakably the work of Keita Takahashi, creator of the gorgeous 
PlayStation <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> 2 classic 
Katamari Damacy and PSP cult favourite Noby Noby Boy. Working with Funomena, he 
has brought the same psychedelic artistic sensibilities to this beguiling new 
project. The Katamari games involved rolling a ball of objects round the world, 
drawing in larger and larger components until you have a whole planet. This use 
of interesting mechanics based around collection and environmental interaction 
also underpins Wattam. Here, you’re able to take control of any character on 
screen, whether it’s a flower, an apple, a tree or a piece of sushi, and then 
try to help them create shaky “human” pyramids with other strange inhabitants. 
The more you join together, the bigger the explosion. But it’s not a 
destructive explosion, it’s an explosion of joy and friendship.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOs8l7Zho2L4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOs8l7Zho2L4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOs8l7Zho2L4&media=>
 Wattam E3 trailer 
Takahashi was playing with his two-year old son when the idea for Wattam 
materialised. The two of them were building towers with wooden blocks, but they 
got bored of that and decided to start introducing other objects – a camera, 
some cutlery, a glass of water – to the tower. It was at that point that 
Takahashi’s son became really engaged. Breaking the rules, then watching the 
whole thing come crashing down, was the real fun.

“Keita sent me a picture of the concept, a drawing he’d done on the top of a 
cardboard box in crayon,” recalls Hunicke. “There were different characters, a 
circle, a square, a spoon, a fork – and in the first prototype we made, we had 
all these knife, spoon and fork people and a plate person, and when we’d show 
it to kids, and they’d go nuts.”

Funomena took on the project, partly because it looked amazing, but also 
because it symbolised Hunicke’s hopes when she set up the company with tech 
director Martin Middleton, who wrote Journey’s innovative peer-to-peer 
networking system. “We wanted to build a place where people like Keita – people 
who have a family to support – can earn a living wage, have healthcare, and 
have an environment where they can do the kinds of games they want to do. We 
wanted a place where people can be open.

“Game development is an uncertain thing, you’re only ever one milestone away 
from getting cancelled. It’s really performative, there are a lot of unknowns. 
When you start making a game like this, you don’t really know if you’re going 
to find it. It’s like getting in a boat and sailing off to where you think an 
island is, but then there’s a huge storm, and eventually you find the island – 
but how many of you are left in the boat – and how crazy are you?”

Wattam is a perfect mix of craziness and sense; of playful imagery and serious 
intentions. At first you’re just mucking about, exploring the landscape. But 
then you realise that each character has its own special ability that can be 
used to solve simple puzzles or unlock new characters. For example, throw the 
poop character into the toilet character and a golden poop character comes out. 
Yes, this is a game with anthropomorphic toilets and poops. One of the first 
“boss” characters is a sad pillow that makes everyone else fall asleep. 
However, you can use the coffee bean person to wake everyone up and allow the 
pillow to be part of the group.

The player isn’t told any of this, you just work it out by playing and 
experimenting. “It’s kind of halfway between the structured gameplay of 
Katamari and the open-world playspace of Noby Noby Boy,” says Hunicke. “If you 
want to play the game to unlock all the awesome characters and see the story, 
which is how I play, you can do that. But if you want to play like Keita, which 
is just to see if you can break it, you can do that, too.”

“But it really is about how you play with the system rather than having a 
system designed specifically to give you a feeling of achievement. You have to 
find the achievement yourself.”

Importantly, the game can be played co-operatively with another person, each 
of you switching between different characters and trying to help create larger 
explosions. As you progress, you open up new areas of each of the four seasonal 
hub worlds. In the spring environment, I sit playing with Keita for a while and 
he unlocks a football pitch area. When we go on it, a little score display 
opens up and a ball bounces on to the screen – so now we’re able to play a game 
of footie – except he’s controlling a mushroom and I’m a turntable. Oh, and you 
can also switch control to the goals themselves and have them wander off. It’s 
just gorgeously silly and fun andinvolving. 
 The game has a huge variety of characters to unlock and play about with, each 
with its own quirks and abilities Photograph: Funomena 
I ask Hunicke about the supposed culture war that’s opened up in games, 
between the “hardcore” industry and the indie community. She happily describes 
herself as a hippy, but also appreciates the value of allowing players to 
inhabit powerful avatars like Kratos in God of War. She’s fine with that. “The 
market is a lot broader than what you see day to day,” she replies. “It’s up to 
us as the people pushing the boundaries in the indie space to be ambassadors to 
the broader audience, and to the people on the other side making these larger 
games. A game like Journey can do really well, a game like Wattam can surprise 
the show floor at E3 – it’s totally possible.

“If you have someone in your company, who’s been working on your Call of 
Shooty franchise and they’re really excited to create a game they can share 
with their young daughter, let them. Like Ubisoft did with Child of Light. The 
more that larger studios can support these efforts, the better. True, they may 
not be as profitable as a giant game, but they are the spirit of the industry, 
they’re the way we move forward. No one would have given money to Notch for 
Minecraft – now look! That kind of effort comes from a genuine love for the 
medium itself – and you can’t say that only this tiny niche of indie developers 
has that love –everyone in the industry has that love. So together, how can we 
use our differences constructively to amplify what we do?”

Is Journey a game or a piece of interactive art?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2012/mar/15/journey-game-or-interactive-art>
After Wattam is completed, there’s no grand plan on what to do next. Funomena 
has another project – Luna – on the go, and the team is very interested in 
virtual reality and children’s games. You get the feeling that, despite her 
reservations, Hunicke and her crew will instinctively know what to go for. It 
may not work, but it will be interesting and worthwhile, and it will be crafted 
with care. Wattam is a game about connecting people, about how love cures, 
about how you need your strong friends to support your weaker friends. I guess 
the only question is, can a modern studio really build around ideas like this?

“I’m really not that great at thinking through all the long-term ramifications 
of a business strategy,” says Hunicke. She looks over at Keita who is lounging 
on a bean bag, happily showing off the game to an endless stream of fascinated 
if bewildered E3 attendees. “However, Iam good at saying: ‘Hey, let’s print 
some T-shirts and give them away at E3, even though it’s going to cost us a 
bunch of money.’ I mean, that seems like a good investment, something for the 
fans who have come all this way to see the game.

“I want to be that person. I want to be the person who says: ‘Take this $20 
T-shirt for free because you came to give us a hug.’”

Wattam is a PlayStation exclusive and is due for release next year
 