
Walk in a nutshell 
This walk takes you out of Haworth, the village where the Brontë sisters lived 
and wrote, along pathways they walked and through the moorland that inspired 
them. Beginning near the church that holds the family vault, you walk up to the 
Brontë waterfalls, described byCharlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> as "fine indeed; a perfect 
torrent racing over the rocks, white and beautiful," then up again to Top 
Withens, the supposed setting of Wuthering Heights. The Pennine Way is followed 
for part of the return and the walk ends at the parsonage where the Brontës 
lived and wrote, now an excellent museum.

Why it's special 
The Brontë sisters lived most of their short but fruitful lives in Haworth. In 
1847, Charlotte published Jane Eyre, Anne published Agnes Grey and Emily 
published Wuthering Heights, but within eight years all three had died, 
outlived by their father. This walk, especially combined with a visit to the 
Brontë Parsonage Museum, really brings their milieu to life. Although there is 
no evidence that the now ruined farmhouse on Top Withens was the inspiration 
for Heathcliff's dwelling, locals and the Brontë Society say Emily was most 
likely thinking of its moorland setting when she wrote about Wuthering Heights. 
Describing it, she wrote: "One may guess the power of the north wind blowing 
over the edge, by the excessive slant of a few stunted firs at the end of the 
house; and by a range of gaunt thorns all stretching their limbs one way, as if 
craving alms of the sun."

Keep your eyes peeled for 
A stone at the waterfalls known locally as the Brontë chair. Also, part of the 
open moorland on the way to the falls is renowned for the birds that breed 
here, including curlews, golden plover peregrines and merlins. Between 
mid-March and mid-July the birds court, make nests in the heather and grass, 
lay eggs and raise chicks.

But bear in mind 
Wear good walking shoes, preferably boots, and take a waterproof in case of 
rain. Remember, "wuthering" is a Yorkshire word for stormy weather.

Recover afterwards 
Weavers Restaurant on West Lane close to the Brontë Parsonage has two AA 
rosettes and serves traditional British regional cooking using local 
ingredients in comfortable surroundings. 01535 643822

If it's tipping down 
Fans of The Railway Children can ride the Keighley and Worth Valley steam 
railway, used in the film, down to the Railway Museum at Oxenhope.
kwvr.co.uk <>

How to get there

By car 
Leave the M62 at junction 24 and take the A629 north towards Keighley. Turn 
left at the crossroads on to the A6033 before taking the B6142 on the right, 
signposted for the village centre. A pay and display car park is at the top of 
the village next to the Brontë Parsonage.

By public transport 
Keighley is the nearest mainline train station to Haworth. From Keighley, 
buses 664 and 665 run regularly to the Brontë Parsonage. Alternatively, Haworth 
may be reached by steam train from Keighley. The service operates almost every 
day in July and August, and weekends in other months. Haworth village is a 
short walk from Haworth station. Exit the station, over the railway footbridge 
and straight up the cobbled lane. Regular buses also run from the Spar opposite 
the station.

Step by step

1. Start at the tourist office on the main street. With your back to the door, 
you will see a cobbled alley on your right.

2. Go up the alley and turn to the left. Go through a gate into the churchyard.

3. There is a signpost: "Public Footpath to Penistone Hill and Oxenhope". Go 
through the churchyard, down steps and turn right. Go through a gate on to an 
enclosed footpath and follow it to a junction with a path on the right.

4. Turn right and follow a path to a road. 

5. Cross the road and turn half-left on the track. 

6. When you reach a fork, go right. Cross another gravel track by the 
sculptures of books half buried in the ground and over two dirt tracks. Just 
past picnic tables a signpost points right by a large boulder.

7. Turn right and walk to another road. 

8. Cross to the signpost on the other side of the road. Some 50m further is a 
broad, stony track where there is a farm gate and a cattle grid with a kissing 
gate between them. Go through and follow this track with the wall on your right 
for over 2km. The wall ends and is replaced by lower, tumbledown ones.

9. Continue down some steps to the stream, where you can see the waterfalls. 

10. In front of you is the Brontë bridge.

11. Cross the bridge and climb a steep bank to a kissing gate. 

12. From here the path curves up left. It joins a wall and you have to go 
through a squeeze stile in a corner.

13. It leads on directly to a ladder stile. 

14. You pass a signpost where paths meet before crossing two streams at their 
junction by stepping stones.

15. Continue up the path to reach a wider paved path by some ruins and a 
signpost.

16. Turn left and in a few minutes you will reach Top Withins. 

17. From Top Withins retrace your steps to waymark 16. 

18. Instead of turning to the right, stay on this paved path, part of the 
Pennine Way. After 1.5km, at the end of some farm buildings, the track divides.

19. Take the left fork. The path is wide and gravelled. You come to a cattle 
grid.

20. Continue ahead over the cattle grid. Shortly after this the track is 
surfaced and leads down to a road junction in the village of Stanbury.

21. The large boulder has the village name on it. Continue through the 20mph 
zone, passing a school, several pubs and lots of buildings with character. At 
the far end of the village you come to the 40mph signs.

22. Take the turning on the right and cross the reservoir. At the very far end 
on the left is the access road to some waterworks.

23. A path, surfaced at first, leads from the access road, going uphill to 
join a road. Turn left when you reach it and use a footpath on top of an 
embankment on the left of the road. A road joins from the right and you then 
reach a T-junction. Turn right and soon go over a squeeze stile on the right.

24. Go through and follow the path which goes to the left and is partly paved. 
It leads to a small gate in a corner.

25. The path continues along the back of some houses and comes out on a 
cobbled street by the Brontë Museum. Keep straight on to the church.

26 The Parsonage is on the right. Turn left in front of the church and you 
will be back in the alley that leads to the main street and the tourist office.

• Register <http://www.walkingworld.com/contributor/join.asp> with Walking 
World <http://www.walkingworld.com/home/index.asp> to obtain instructions, OS 
maps and a downloadable digital mapping file to export into a portable gps 
system about thewalks featured in this series 
<http://www.walkingworld.com/home/index.asp?nid=93>
 