
The sporting excitement of the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic games is now a 
distant memory, and our attention has long since shifted back to the ups and 
downs of our own generally unathletic lives. After such a lavish celebration of 
physical achievement it can be quite a come-down. But from a certain point of 
view, it’s strange that the physical prowess of humanity should be cause for 
celebration at all. By the standards of the rest of the animal kingdom, Usain 
Bolt’s performance is nothing to shout about. Is it not baffling that the 
athletic elite should receive such adulation when it’s in the mental sphere 
that our species excels?

Such thinking neglects the enormous influence of the drive to move on the 
evolution ofHomo sapiens, an influence that extends far deeper than the famous 
freeing of our hands and their opposable thumbs that occurred when our 
ancestors became full-time bipeds. Indeed, the opposable thumb itself likely 
developed as an adaptation to safe movement in the trees tens of millions of 
years before our forebears hit the savannah. But more importantly, our 
psychology is still adapted for a life on the move, even in the least energetic 
among us. Understanding how may help us to live more joyful lives.

The most well-known psychological movement-driver is surely the runners’ high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/nov/06/ultrarunning-ultimate-runners-high>
 – a sense of well-being and euphoria that can be engendered by endurance 
running. These feelings used to be attributed toendorphins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/21/watching-a-sad-films-boosts-endorphin-levels-in-your-brain-psychologists-say>
, but we now know that chemicals called endocannabinoids (eCBS) are largely 
responsible. Named after their resemblance to the active ingredient of 
cannabis, eCBs are powerful pain-killers that additionally cause the release of 
the neuro-modulator dopamine in the brain.

Dopamine is usually described as a “reward chemical”, whose evolutionary 
function is to give us an emotional hit when engaged in activities that are 
likely to improve our reproductive success. The runners’ high makes perfect 
sense in this light. Our African ancestors probably used a persistence hunting 
technique – running after their prey for hours until it dropped from exhaustion 
– as do some hunter-gatherers today. A feel-good dopamine incentive was 
undoubtedly vital in maintaining the required pace.

Unfortunately for many of us, a high level of aerobic fitness is a necessary 
precondition of the runners’ high. Attempting a prolonged run without it causes 
a build-up of lactic acid and the activation of our emergency emotional 
overrides long before the eCBs kick in, and we just feel grim. However, there 
are gentler ways of using movement to get a dopamine hit.

In recent years a range of techniques have been developed to find out exactly 
how dopamine’s emotional bribery works in animals. Fast-scan cyclic voltammetry 
uses electric currents delivered through carbon-fibre electrodes inserted into 
the brain to measure changing dopamine concentrations over split-second 
timescales. The method of optogenetics lets an experimenter tinker with an 
active animal’s dopamine levels, by first infecting it with a genetically 
engineered virus that causes dopamine-secreting cells in its brain to become 
light-sensitive; these cells can then be controlled with flashes of light in 
implanted optic fibres.

Both of these techniques were recently used by Arif Hamid and colleagues 
<http://www.nature.com/neuro/journal/v19/n1/abs/nn.4173.html> at the University 
of Michigan to see how dopamine influences the behaviour of rats. The rats in 
question were trained to carry out what was essentially a treasure hunt: a 
sequence of movements guided by visual and auditory cues, which if followed 
correctly resulted in the delivery of food. Hamid found that the dopamine 
concentration in the brain increased sharply every time a rat registered a cue 
and embarked on the next stage of the sequence. If the dopamine concentration 
was artificially increased using fibre optic implants, the rats showed a 
greater propensity to begin the hunt, and learned the meaning of the cues more 
rapidly.

These results tell us that dopamine’s role is more nuanced than was once 
thought. Rather than acting as a general reward, it appears to be a specific 
motivator of motion, encouraging an animal to work for what it wants. But 
motion alone is not enough. The correlation between dopamine release and the 
presentation (and learning) of unexpected cues indicates that active 
exploration – a pursuit with obvious adaptive value – is the key stimulator of 
its release.

The upshot of all this is that you don’t have to be a distance runner to 
experience the dopamine high. Walking will do as long as it’s used to explore, 
so full sensory engagement – present moment awareness if you will – is a must. 
This will come as no surprise to hunter-gatherers: engaged locomotion is what 
they do all the time, and many anthropologists have noted the emotional rewards 
they draw from their wanderings. But in our civilised world of cars and 
sat-navs, in which personal exploration on foot seems pointless, most of us 
seriously underestimate the pleasure that the simple act of movement might 
bring.

So why not find the time to go for a wander every now and again, minus 
navigational technology and rigid destinations. With luck, you’ll soon discover 
that the ancient joy of motion is still very much ours for the taking.

Matt Wilkinson’s Restless Creatures, published by Icon Books, is available for 
£8.19through the Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/restless-creatures-441842.html>.
 