
Remember the curious affair of the blue and black dress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters/2015/feb/27/the-dress-blue-black-white-gold-vision-psychology-colour-constancy>
? Or perhaps it was gold and white to you. For a few days last year the 
photograph of the dress that looked one colour to some and different to others 
was all people could talk about. Blue dress people wondered what the hell was 
wrong with gold dress people – who were in turn bemused that blue dress people 
just couldn’t see it.

As a young Labour voter passionate about Corbyn, please don't patronise me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/23/why-young-voters-favour-jeremy-corbyn>
Almost a year on from the first stirrings of Corbynmania, that’s pretty much 
where Labour is now. Some will see in this week’sVice documentary on Jeremy 
Corbyn <https://news.vice.com/video/jeremy-corbyn-the-outsider> a sweet man 
battling against fearsome odds, saying things they’ve waited a lifetime to hear 
from Labour. Others will see only amateurishness, and the same old rambling 
speeches he’s been making forever. One sees gold. Things couldn’t be bluer for 
another. And no, this isn’t a piece about who’s right. It’s an attempt to 
understand how reasonable people can look at the same dress and see utterly 
different things.

What’s refreshing about the Vice documentary is that it did what mainstream 
media doesn’t do enough and took Corbyn seriously as an object of study, a 
phenomenon to be unravelled. It was a reminder of how rarely we see the view 
from inside the camp, as opposed to the view from external critics or distant 
groupies.

The very idea of seeking to understand Corbyn’s victory is a slightly loaded 
one, given that many Corbynites barely think it needs explaining. As far as 
they’re concerned, the right man won, and the only mystery is that some people 
still don’t get it – something too conveniently blamed on media bias against 
him.

I won’t dwell on the ugly way Corbyn’s supporters booed the BBC’s Laura 
Kuenssberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/02/labour-booing-jeremy-corbyn-strategy>
 on Thursday just for asking a question, or onCorbyn’s unpleasant personal 
attack 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/corbyn-pans-uk-jewish-journalist-for-coverage-of-anti-semitism-claims/>
 on Jonathan Freedland over his excellentrecent column on antisemitism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/18/labour-antisemitism-jews-jeremy-corbyn>
.

Journalists haven’t accounted for our failure to see Corbyn coming or 
understand the devotion he inspires

But even the Vice reporter, a self-professed Corbyn voter, got short shrift 
the minute he started asking tough questions. The impression is of a man who, 
having only recently emerged from obscurity, has never experienced the scrutiny 
senior politicians take for granted – and who resents it.

The idea that a hostile media is responsible for all his woes, however, is 
fanciful.Sadiq Khan won the London mayoral vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/sadiq-khan-elected-mayor-of-london-labour>
 despite the city’s Evening Standard cheerleading for his opponent. David 
Cameron became Tory leader over the dead body of the Daily Mail. There comes a 
point where leaders have to start accepting responsibility for their own 
mistakes, not blaming the papers. But that doesn’t mean we have no questions to 
answer.

It’s striking that while pollsters who misjudged last May’s general election 
have openly analysed and debated where they may have gone wrong, journalists 
haven’t accounted nearly so publicly for our failure to see Corbyn coming or 
understand the devotion he inspires.

Having been a lobby reporter for 12 years, followed by observing Westminster 
from a safer distance for the past six, I do think bias is part of the answer. 
But not the bias you think. Journalists are not out to destroy Corbyn because 
he threatens to bring down the neoliberal elite, or because they’re all Tories, 
or because they live in a bubble of groupthink. (The lobby is overly male, pale 
and Oxbridge-educated, but insofar as I ever knew my lobby colleagues’ private 
political leanings, they were a much more mixed bag than you’d probably find 
walking down your street.)

It’s more that most journalists – rightly or wrongly – simply don’t expect 
Corbyn to win an election. And the lobby has an instinctive bias towards 
winners – people who either wield power, or might soon.

At its worst, that can mean lazy reporters giving an easy ride to powerful 
gatekeepers in return for access. But mostly it just means journalists 
gravitate towards politicians who are likely to have an impact on readers’ 
everyday lives or who can help them understand what’s happening behind closed 
doors. People, in short, who make news because they make things happen.

Thus ministers floating even a half-formed idea tend to command the front 
page, because they could feasibly turn it into reality. But a minor party 
that’s never likely to govern keeps seeing its painstakingly crafted press 
releases spiked, because these ideas are probably doomed to exist only inside 
someone’s head and most readers are drawn to stuff that actually touches their 
lives.

Lobby hacks will fight to get space for these more unusual stories, and 
occasionally even win. But the overall effect is that interesting but niche 
ideas get squeezed out, and minority parties are starved of oxygen. 
Unwittingly, the news agenda can end up rather like a sagging mattress where 
everything naturally rolls towards the middle, leaving voters on left and right 
with less orthodox views feeling excluded and ignored.

They might be wrong about why this happens, or deluded about how popular their 
ideas would actually be if given more airtime. But they feel airbrushed out of 
the conversation, and frankly they’ve got a point. The surprise is perhaps that 
it’s taken so long for their frustration to find an outlet.

The other effect of a journalistic bias towards winners, however, is that you 
tend to assume other people share it. Everything I ever learned covering 
politics suggested Corbyn wasn’t a winner – not just because of his ideological 
isolation but because of who he was.

He wasn’t a Michael Meacher or a Ken Livingstone or a Diane Abbott, 
leftwingers talented and ambitious enough to be offered frontbench jobs even 
when the prevailing wind was against them. He wasn’t a media-savvy John 
McDonnell. When you wanted a perspective from the left, there were better 
people to ask. He wasn’t even the left’s first choice to run.

And so to many commentators, his victory just didn’t compute. It made no 
sense. We treated it like a glitch in the system, almost a mistake.

Time may or may not prove it to be both those things, but in retrospect we 
could have been more curious about why those who backed him did so; we should 
be asking even now whether and why they still feel the same. (For every shrill 
social media warrior there are dozens of perfectly nice, normal people who 
backed Corbyn. They’re a lot more fun to ask.)

Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> is not 
Donald Trump. But both are popular phenomena poorly understood – and in both 
cases, just shouting at people that they’re wrong has proved spectacularly 
useless. Asking themwhy they think what they think may not change anything 
much. But the conversation is sure as hell overdue.
 