
Evelyn Waugh <https://www.theguardian.com/books/evelynwaugh> once said that 
journalism was the enemy of the novel, and urged all novelists who were serious 
about their art to get out of newspapers as soon as they could afford it. 
Perhaps only a writer and satirist so alert to the corruptions of newspaper 
life could have written a book as sublimely entertaining as Waugh’s tale of 
nature columnist William Boot, an innocent abroad, like many of his 
protagonists.

Subtitled “a novel about journalists”, Scoop is the supreme novel of the 
20th-century English newspaper world, fast, light, entertaining and lethal. 
Remarkably, it’s a satire revered among successive generations of British 
hacks, the breed so mercilessly skewered by Waugh, a one-time special 
correspondent for theDaily Mail. Even in the age of online journalism, with 
many old practices facing extinction, its insights into the British press 
remain sharp, pertinent and memorable.

It was Waugh’s experiences in Ethiopia, during the Abyssinian crisis of 
1935-36, that provided the raw material for a wicked romp through the more 
absurd byways of Fleet Street in the 1930s. Actually, in its combination of 
farce and pathos,Scoop derives less inspiration from Ethiopia than from the 
world of Waugh’s brilliant early fiction such asDecline and Fall and Vile Bodies
.

But there is a difference. As Cyril Connolly wrote in Enemies of Promise: “The 
satire of Evelyn Waugh in his early books was derived from his ignorance of 
life. He found cruel things funny because he did not understand them, and he 
was able to communicate that fun.” Later, Waugh’s comic vision would mature and 
darken into books such asBrideshead Revisited and the Sword of Honour trilogy. 
So, published in the late 30s,Scoop is a kind of farewell to his beginnings as 
a literary enfant terrible.

As Scoop opens, it’s the other Boot, John, a self-serious literary novelist, 
author of Waste of Time, who is introduced as the confidant of Mrs Algernon 
Stitch, a classic Waugh hostess from Mayfair. It’s La Stitch’s dinner party 
gossip with Lord Copper, the megalomaniac press magnate, and proprietor of the 
Daily Beast, that inspires the blunder that will animate the plot: the 
herbivorous Boot at large in the surreal mayhem of Ishmaelia’s civil war.

Waugh had already satirised colonial Africa in Black Mischief (1932), and 
Boot’s adventures occur within the privileged bubble of the foreign press corps.
Scoop, as its title suggests, is a satire not on colonial sideshows, but on the 
eternal quest for breaking news, the endless competition between the Brute and 
the Beast. It remains celebrated in newsrooms across the English-speaking world 
for its portraits of Lord Copper, Mr Salter, and the thrill-seeking foreign 
correspondent, Jakes, together with those deathless hacks, Corker and Pigge.

Many of these caricatures might remind some readers of Waugh’s debt to 
Dickens, butScoop remains fiercely modern. So little has really changed. The 
six words of “Up to a point, Lord Copper” conjure a marrow-freezing universe of 
corporate fear. Most famous of all, there’s the glorious parody of the 
“feather-footed” vole questing through the “plashy fen”, a pointed reminder of 
the deep sentimentality always to be found in the Street of Shame.

A note on the text 


Scoop was published by Chapman & Hall in 1938, and almost at once there was a 
quest for models. Fleet Street folklore says that William Boot was based on 
William Deedes, and that Lord Copper derives from Lord Northcliffe and Lord 
Beaverbrook. In fact, for the origins of all Waugh’s characters, the truth is 
probably more complicated.

Scoop was made into a BBC serial in 1972 and also a television film scripted 
by William Boyd in 1987, starring Denholm Elliott, and directed by Gavin 
Millar. The fictional newspaper owned by Lord Copper inScoop has also been the 
inspiration for the title of Tina Brown’s online American publication, the 
Daily Beast.

Three more from Evelyn Waugh 


Decline and Fall (1928); A Handful of Dust (1934); The Loved One (1948).

Scoop is available as a Penguin Modern Classic (£9.99). Click here to buy it 
for £7.99 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/scoop-3.html>
 