
Two growth figures from last week tell the essential story. Though the Mail, 
Guardian and Mirror still marched upwards with combined (print, mobile, laptop 
and tablet) readership figures year-on-year, adding more millions to their 
monthly reach, the shooting star in the Press Premier League was your old mate 
theSun: up from 13m in 2015 to 24m last month on the back of a tenfold increase 
in mobile readers. For 1.6m, read 16.5m.

Staggering stuff – or, at least, it would be if there wasn’t the simple 
explanation that November 2015 was the month MrRupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> cancelled his last 
announcement and ordered theSun paywall knocked down (plus a reworking of the 
site). Which has all worked out well enough – save perhaps for one dimension 
the National Readership Survey doesn’t assess: money in the bank from 
advertising, which is fundamentally what’s left once you cancel the 
subscription approach.

Over to that second growth figure, as calculated by Enders Analysis. Digital 
advertising in 2017 set to grow by 12.7%, another mobile surge (almost hitting 
£10bn a year). But where does it go to, my lovely? Some 90% of growth lands 
straight in the pockets of Facebook and Google. What goes up simply doesn’t 
come down in the right places.

• Paul Dacre, master of the Mail, is resigning after eight years as chairman 
of the editor’s code committee. He’s going because the august assessor of the 
Independent Press Standards Organisation said eight was two years too much. 
And, post-Paul, the team he leaves behind is launching a big public 
consultation on the terms of the code itself (just as Ipso’s rival, Impress, 
has done). Peace in our time, perhaps? You wouldn’t think so as Dacreblasts 
Impress as a “joke body” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/01/paul-dacre-to-step-down-as-chair-of-journalists-code-of-practice-committee>
 and reiterates his contempt for “so-called liberals who insidiously conspire 
to manacle press freedom”. But he’s going, going, gone: in every sense, a hard 
exit act to follow.
 