
If you grew up in the US, you’re probably familiar with the Ouija board. 
Whether you’ve seen it used in movies like The Exorcist or huddled around it 
with some friends at a seance, the mysterious talking board has long captivated 
us with its promise to connect the living and the dead.

And though the board is a fixture in American pop culture, very little is 
known about where it came from. According to the historian Robert Murch, the 
history of the Ouija is as mysterious as the workings of the board itself. 
Murch has spent years tracing the history of America’s favorite seance tool and 
we asked him to tell us a little bit about what he’s learned so far.

Ouija: Origin of Evil review – dark side of suburbia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/23/ouija-origin-of-evil-review> 
After the civil war, spiritualism exploded in America

The mass deaths in the civil war created a widespread desire to contact the 
dead, and mediums began marketing their services in major cities around the 
country. “Everyone lost a father, a son, an uncle, a grandfather, a cousin,” 
Murch said. “Death touched everybody in a way that had never happened in the 
US.” According to Murch, many families had to grapple with the bodies of their 
loved ones never being recovered and spiritual devices like the Ouija board 
answered questions that no one else could. “They gave people peace of mind 
because they couldn’t get answers any other way.”

The name Ouija comes from a rooming house in Baltimore

Like Band-Aid or Kleenex, the trademarked name Ouija is now generally used for 
all talking boards. But the name was coined by Helen Peters, a medium who was 
using the board with her brother-in-law Elijah Bond one night 1890 in 
Baltimore. When she asked what they should call it, the planchette spelled out 
“Ouija”, which the board told her meant “good luck”.

The building where Peters named the board is now a 7-11 convenience store, 
which has a plaque commemorating the event on the wall.

Peters got the first patent on the Ouija board but the business was soon taken 
over by the American entrepreneur William Fuld, who began to market the board, 
especially in national catalogues like Sears.

“Ouija – The Magic Game. Remarkable, interesting, and mystifying game. Great 
mirth and making game for parties. Apparently answers questions concerning 
past, present, and future,” reads one ad in the Sears catalogue.

“We would not be talking about the Ouija Board today had it not been for the 
brilliant marketing of William Fuld. He just knew how to change the story, 
retell it,” Murch said.

Helen Peters, ‘the mystery lost to history’

As the board’s popularity, and profit, increased, most of the early investors 
sought to highlight their role in the creation of the Ouija board. But Helen 
Peters wanted nothing more to do with it after the board caused serious damage 
to her family.

When some civil war family heirlooms went missing from Peters’ home, Peters 
asked the Ouija board who had taken them. According to Peters’ grandson, the 
board indicated a member of the family. “Half the family believed it and half 
the family said ‘bullshit’, including Helen,” said Murch. The event created a 
conflict that was never resolved, and tore the family apart.

After the fight, Peters sold all of her stock in the company. “Until her dying 
day, she’s telling everyone: don’t play the Ouija board because it lies,” Murch 
said.

The mysterious death of William Fuld

William Fuld had his own Ouija-related family troubles. In 1919, he cut his 
brother out of the business and the two never spoke again. That year was a 
particularly good one for sales following a world war and a flu epidemic. In a 
1920 article, the New York Times compared the popularity of the Ouija board to 
that of bubble gum, and in 1927 the Baltimore Sun reported that Fuld had 
personally made $1m from sales of the board.

He continued to open new factories, building the largest – a 3-story building 
in Baltimore – after the Ouija board itself told him to “prepare for big 
business”.

In early 1927, he went up to the roof of the building to supervise the 
replacement of a flag pole. According to the Baltimore Sun, “he was standing 
near the edge of the roof, grasping an iron support of the pole to study 
himself, the workmen said, when the support suddenly pulled away and he toppled 
over backward.”

As in a movie, Fuld initially grabbed hold of the sill of an open window, 
which suddenly closed, sending him crashing down to the sidewalk below. He 
broke several ribs, but was expected to survive, until a bump in the road on 
the way to the hospital sent one of the fractured bones through his heart and 
he died.

His family continued to run the business until 1966, when they sold it to 
Parker Brothers, which was later bought by Hasbro, whose website warns: “Handle 
the Ouija board with respect and it won’t disappoint you!”
 