
There is a slot in Norman Foster's numbing schedule, a schedule that even 
Heathrow air- traffic controllers might find hard to track. Duration: one hour. 
Location: Foster and Partners HQ, Battersea, London. The traffic is averaging 
around six miles per hour; Foster speed is typically 600, but don't be late. 
Not because Foster, the most precise of men, will throw a wobbly (he won't), 
but because the time will quickly be re-allocated and he'll be off, on the 
wing, and possibly piloting his own jet, to Shanghai, Hong Kong, Berlin or 
anywhere else in the world a Foster building is rising. You'll be forced to 
circle his bank of PAs before making a second approach to land at his gleaming 
and chastely monumental Thames side office.

 Foster will ensure contact is made from wherever he lands, if simply to 
continue a train of thought he set out on the day before. His mind is full of 
lines and junctions; it's highly original and as restless as his slight, trim 
frame, which is either in transit or just changing position every five seconds 
as he tries to sit. He covers a huge range of subjects in minutes, none 
superficially.

In fact, Sir Norman Robert Foster KBE OM is never much at ease in a chair; he 
is much happier walking briskly, or jogging, or skiing, from point to point. At 
63, he is a ball of energy rolling up what he decribes as a 'learning curve'; 
he is probably the most driven and certainly one of the most successful people 
on PlanetArchitecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture>.

 Blink, and here is Foster calling on a satellite-linked portable phone from 
inside the striking new glass dome of the Reichstag in Berlin, where he is 
formally handing over the new parliament building to the German president. It 
is one of the most important architectural projects of the age and a commission 
he won against stiff international competition.

 'We've just unveiled the Reichstag eagle,' he says, having flown a couple of 
hours before to Berlin from Stuttgart where he had been signing off designs for 
a new range of aluminium furniture at the famous Thonet factory (earlier 
designers this century include Marcel Breuer, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and Le 
Corbusier). 'I'm looking up at the dome from the senate,' he says. 'I see 
daylight refracting through an installation of 365 mirrors. Up above - the 
equivalent of 30 storeys - I'm watching people walking up and around the two 
helical ramps that lead to the restaurant and viewing gallery at the very top. 
What you'll see here is the people walking, climbing above the politicians paid 
to serve them. The people are the masters here, not the politicians. That's 
what the building says.' This is a remarkable moment by any standards. A 
working class British architect from Levenshulme - a two-up, two-down red-brick 
suburb of Manchester - brought up in the blitz, designs not just the 
parliament, but the symbol by which the new united German democracy is to be 
known to the world.

 The Reichstag is particularly important for Foster. Best known for his mostly 
brilliant, machine-like, one-off buildings, he has rarely had to tackle such 
complex design, environmental, political and emotional issues as those 
associated with the Reichstag. they might have weighed down a lesser architect 
to the point of creative paralysis.

 The Reichstag was the muscular late 19th-century baroque home of the Second 
Reich. It was torched in 1933 by the Nazis, most people think. This act of 
arson declared the old order dead. The new order, the Third Reich, emerged from 
the ashes. Although clumsily rebuilt as government offices after Berlin fell in 
1945, the Reichstag stood forlornly for many years as a symbol of united and 
nominally democratic government. That the Germans chose a British architect to 
redesign it is extraordinary.

 At the key interview stage of the competition, it was Foster rather than the 
Germans who asked the questions. Did they know how much energy the Reichstag 
used? How much could they save? Why did they write the brief in the way they 
did when clearly it hadn't asked all the right questions? As David 
Chipperfield, a former associate at Foster's company, says, 'Norman has an 
inquisitorial mind.' Such presence of mind could, of course, discourage a 
potential client. But Foster is astonishingly well-briefed and, like a 
first-rate barrister, knows how to present a convincing case.

 But then, there has never been an architect like Foster. With his 
ever-growing team he produces sleek, sophisticated buildings on time, on 
budget, that are, more often than not, far ahead of most of their 
contemporaries. If Foster is a wealthy man today (said to be worth £40 million; 
annual salary approximately £500,000), it is through the production over the 
past 30 years of a stream of sophisticated and sometimes superb buildings that 
nobody else could have achieved.

 The list includes the two corporate headquarters that made his name in 
Britain and then the world - the Willis Faber Dumas building in Ipswich (it 
looks like a grand piano made of sheer, black glass) dating from 1975, and the 
Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank, completed in 1986 and, at the time, the world's 
most expensive and inventive building. The former is already Grade I listed. 
The latter, although dwarfed by such stratosphere-scrapers as I M Pei's Bank of 
China, remains one of the most intelligent and impressive of all tall buildings.

 On the way from Ipswich to Berlin, Foster has nurtured such gems as the 
Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts (1977) at the University of East Anglia, 
Norwich; IBM's Technical Park (1979) in Greenford, Middlesex; the much-liked 
new terminal at Stansted Airport (1991), Essex; the Mediatheque and arts centre 
(1993) in the heart of Nimes; the generous stations of the new Bilbao Metro 
(1995); the award-winning American Air Force Museum (1997) at Duxford; and the 
spectacular Chek Lap Kok airport built on an artificial island south of Hong 
Kong which opened last year.

 However, his work, or the buildings that have been completed under his name, 
have not always been perfect. He has an increasing number of critics who feel 
that Foster and Partners, with its staff of 500, is overstretched creatively 
and that Foster is, today, more of a lucrative commercial brand than an 
architectural studio on a par with the century's best.

 Certainly, some recent buildings have lacked the sureness of touch that has 
characterised the studio at its best. The Glasgow Conference Centre and the new 
Law Library at Cambridge (much criticised for being noisy) come to mind, while 
initial designs for the Greater London Authority building have a long way to 
go. Yet serious mistakes have been few and far between.

 Few people now remember the flat-roofed houses at Milton Keynes; despite 
drawing on aircraft technology, they were later forced to wear traditional 
pitched roofs to keep them weatherproof. And then there were the silver panels 
that clad the Sainsbury Centre; these had to be replaced. the building was 
experimental and risks were taken. Today, this beautiful arts centre is in 
pristine condition. There is more than a hint of jealousy or sheer bafflement 
in most of the criticism aimed at Foster's office.

 There are currently some 80 projects on the Foster computer screens, from a 
new factory and headquarters for the Maclaren motor racing team at Woking, 
Surrey to the replanning of Trafalgar Square, via the world. Little wonder, 
then, that headquarters at Battersea is open 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
No one has to work that long, but many of the young things in black polo-necks 
who line the long desks like workers in a latterday, high-tech Manchester mill 
look as if they might.

 The Foster office is famously hard-working and there are those who find it 
all too much. yet young architects know that to have 'Foster and Partners' on 
their CV is more or less a guarantee of future employment around the world. 
Although, inevitably, there is a relatively high turnover among young 
architects, Foster's five principal partners have been with him for well over 
20 years.

 'Norman is hardly a conventional boss,' says a former partner. 'Some people 
describe him as a control freak, yet he inspires loyalty. He's a hard person to 
get to know closely, but no one, I think, can doubt the purpose of his drive. 
He wants the very best from himself and everyone else 100 per cent of the time. 
His standards are meticulous and probably too high for most people to realise 
365 days a year.' Despite being described as essentially shy and a loner, he 
has an engaging personality. If he gives you his time, you get 100 per cent of 
it. His clients feel this too. As Chipperfield says, 'Norman hasn't a cynical 
bone in his body. He probably doesn't know what the word means.' Foster has 
been at the top of his profession for so long - since he was awarded the Royal 
Gold Medal, architecture's most glittering prize, in 1983 - that fellow 
professionals and younger architects are somewhat daunted by a persona that 
appears cold and detached. If anyone seems to represent the image of the 
super-cool, unfeeling technocrat, the ultimate player in a sleek corporate 
world of air-conditioned boardrooms and private business jets (he flies a white 
Cessna Citation), then surely it is him.

 This, though, misses the point and the man. none of the inspirational 
buildings and nothing like the scale, success and influence of Foster and 
Partners could have been created without a deep and abiding enthusiasm. And a 
certain ruthlessness. Foster is, despite appearances, a romantic. He is also, 
despite the knighthood, the Order of Merit, the Royal Gold Medal, the honorary 
awards and professorships, an outsider. He puts it down to his upbringing as 
much as to his mature character.

 'My parents, Robert and Lilian, were warm and loving. I was an only child,' 
he says. He was also, by his own admission, a dreamer and bullied at school. 'I 
always felt different and retired into the world of books, and, of course like 
many boys was fascinated by aircraft, locomotives and machinery. Manchester was 
one of the workshops of the world at the time, so it would have been hard not 
to be.' The local library (in Levens- hulme) was a sanctuary. 'That's where I 
first discovered the buildings of Frank Lloyd Wright and Le Corbusier's Towards 
A New Architecture. I was always doodling, always looking at buildings. I 
wanted to be an architect, but this seemed an impossibility. Dad worked as a 
machine painter at Metropolitan Vickers, the engineering and locomotive works 
in Manchester; Mum always worked too. She was dark (Foster has brown eyes) and 
said she came from a gypsy family. Perhaps she did.' Foster, who was born in 
1935, left school at 16 and took a job as a clerk at Manchester Town Hall. The 
work was as dull as Alfred Waterhouse's neo-Gothic building was inspiring. 
Foster found plenty of time to sketch and was commissioned to draw for local 
architects and a local estate agent. After two years' National Service 
(electrical and radio engineering with the RAF), he was recommended for a place 
at Manchester University to study architecture. With no A levels he was 
ineligible for a grant. Unlike most of his contemporaries, he had to work his 
way through college. Having toughened up in recent years (he enjoyed martial 
arts), he worked as a bouncer at a local cinema. He also did night-shifts 
making crumpets at a local factory.

 He was learning how to fire on all cylinders 24 hours a day. He was, in fact, 
as unlike a conventional English architectural student - then, as now, very 
much a product of well-to-do, professional middle-class families, public 
schools and laid-back, good manners - as the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank is 
from a run-of-the-mill office block. He won prizes for drawing (he still 
sketches fluently and compulsively, filling hundreds of notebooks, which he 
keeps). One early prize was £100 from the Royal Institute of British Architects 
in 1957 for a drawing of a windmill. It appeared in the Architectural Review, 
the first column inches of the yards of coverage he would get in the press over 
the next 40 years.

 Prize money, awards and scholarships allowed him to travel. 'My sketchbooks 
of those years', he says, 'are full of everything from Tuscan hill towns to 
Palladian villas and barns in Norway.' What you see at this early stage is a 
passion for the buildings architects lump together as 'sheds': barns, aircraft 
hangars, traditional Swiss houses. Foster's genius, in later years, was to 
marry such traditional structures to sophisticated new materials and high 
technology, to create what are effectively barns of the aerospace age.

 The connection between barns and modern materials, Victorian Manchester and 
the world of Nasa, high technology and Buckminster Fuller, the US inventor who 
was to work with him for many years, had yet to be made. It clicked into place 
when Foster won a postgraduate scholarship to Yale in 1961, probably the most 
important prize he won. At Yale he met Richard Rogers and discovered while on 
vacation, touring with his new pals in a VW Beetle, the west coast architecture 
of Charles Eames, Pierre Koenig and Ezra Ehrenkrantz, the purity of Mies van 
der Rohe (in New York and Chicago) and the lightweight structures of Fuller.

 It was in this heady, ultra- modern and super-refined mix that Foster began 
to work out the architecture that was to make him more famous than the 
Californians who so inspired him. The US was a modern, open world free from 
overt class distinction, snobbery, narrow-mindedness and a slavish attachment 
to history and heritage. Asked to a make a film for the TV series Building 
Sights about his favourite building, Foster chose a Boeing 747. This was a 
homage not just to the aerospace industry that has so inspired him, but to the 
big-spiritedness of US design, the American belief in getting things up and 
flying, of taking on daunting challenges in the belief that they will succeed.

 Yale was the key to Foster's superstardom. Here, at last, in Richard and Su 
Rogers and Carl Abbott were kindred spirits, and a university school 
brilliantly staffed and open all day, every day. After the strictures, 
austerity and stifling social conventions of late-fifties England, this was 
true liberation. In this cultural stratosphere the boy from Manchester with his 
head in the clouds and the writings of Le Corbusier and Frank Lloyd Wright came 
down to earth.

 Richard Rogers, two years older than Foster, played a key role in his rise. 
Born into a cosmopolitan, art-loving world, Rogers was also gregarious, 
fun-loving and a brilliant communicator. The two future kings of high-tech who 
were to dominate British architecture in the 1990s were as unlike as a pint of 
Boddington's is from a bottle of Barolo. Yet the synergy and rivalry between 
them generated a new movement that brought British architects to the attention 
of the world in a way they hadn't been since the turn of the century.

 Back in the UK, Foster set up Team 4, a kind of architectural pop group with 
Richard and Su Rogers and Wendy Cheesman, whom he married in 1964. There was a 
fifth member: Georgina Wolton, Wendy's sister, who was, at the time, the only 
fully qualified architect among this close-knit group. It was an idealistic 
set-up, the office run from one room in a shared north London flat.

 From its first commercial break, the Reliance Controls Factory in Swindon 
(1965), Team 4 thought wide, bold, radical and global. The Reliance Controls 
building was the first truly modern 'shed' and a groundbreaker in many ways. 
Its architecture insisted that management and workers shared the same space. 
With British industry still living in a monochrome 'I'm All right Jack' world 
in 1965, this was a major achievement.

 More than 30 years later, Foster still works in the same room (a very big 
room with peerless views of the Albert Bridge and the Thames beyond its 
cinematic windows) as the rest of his team. He also lives above the shop, in a 
vast penthouse that looks and feels much like any other Foster project.

 Like most pop groups of the mid-sixties, Team 4 didn't last long, yet is 
remembered with affection. It played its role in the modernising of British 
architecture. It changed the image of the architect from a bow-tie-wearing 
chump in a tweed jacket puffing on a pipe into a fashionable figure whose 
boundaries were global rather than local. The supergroup era followed: the 
Richard Rogers Partnership (Richard Rogers is now Lord Rogers of Riverside); 
and Foster Associates. Rogers and Foster, despite unfounded media assertions, 
remain the best of friends. The only other British architect to rival their 
fame was Sir James Stirling, who died in 1992.

 The early years of Foster Associates, however, were not exactly plain 
sailing. Some of his most imaginative schemes - a new civic centre for 
Hammersmith in west London and a space capsule-like Hampstead home for himself, 
Wendy and their four sons (two adopted) - were turned down. At the time of the 
Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank commission in 1979, by which time the practice was 
running on a wing and a prayer, Foster told his close friend, the artist Brian 
Clarke: 'It's not so bad. I could get rid of the car (a Porsche 911) and the 
helicopter and buy an absolutely state-of-the-art mountain bike.' The bank was 
built. The fees rolled in. Wendy, meanwhile, fell ill with cancer. She died, 
having tried various natural treatments, in 1989. It was a miserable end, and 
there was much acrimony over the estate between Foster and his sons. In 1991, 
to the surprise of colleagues and friends, he married Begum Sabiha Rumani 
Malik, former wife of Andrew Knight, a well-placed newspaper executive and 
friend of Foster. Famously, Malik brought a case against HM Customs for 
'slander by conduct' after she and her daughter were, as she believed, badly 
treated by customs officers at Heathrow Airport.

 While few officials would make the grade at charm school, the prosecuting 
counsel's description of Malik as 'an insufferable snob' was met with stifled 
laughter in the Foster office. A woman of good intentions, the first Lady 
Foster was nevertheless very much at odds with its ethos. The couple are now 
divorced. She has notably disappeared from his entry in Who's Who.

 Foster has since fallen happily in love and in 1996 married Elena Ochoa, a 
beautiful and vivacious Spanish psychiatrist. At one time, she was the star 
presenter of Spanish TV's Hablemos del Sexo (Let's Talk About Sex) for which 
she was stuck with the nickname La doctora del sexo (Dr Sex). A good-humoured 
woman, the real-life Dr Ochoa regrets nothing, and has given a baby daughter, 
Paola, and great warmth to Foster, which friends, colleagues and acquaintances 
agree has made him more accessible than he has previously felt able or wished 
to be.

 A few years ago, Philip Kerr adapted Foster as the thinly disguised lead 
character of his clever, high-tech thriller Gridiron. The character is a 
highly-driven, cold, utterly selfish monster who designs a building that thinks 
for itself; the book ends with virtually everyone involved, including the 
architect, getting squashed to death. Foster was not amused.

 happier now than he has been for many years, Foster has begun to become more 
politically aware, or perhaps more politically forward. His ability to woo 
politicians of all persuasions from around the world has been a distinguishing 
and enviable characteristic. He seems to have been able to play the trump card 
of the disinterested professional, like a doctor or barrister. His own politics 
remain enigmatic. He seems at his confident best when dealing with powerful 
mayors of European cities like Nimes and Barcelona rather than with the more 
nebulous and less personal politics of British towns and Westminster. His 
instinct is, however, rather old-fashioned, philanthropic and even Victorian.

 Although not a natural populist like Rogers, and never able to work a room 
anything like as efficiently, Foster genuinely believes, as a Manchester lad 
made good might well do, that everyone deserves the best. He neither fits into 
conventional British 'society' nor is he a snob. Just as he aims to produce the 
best from himself and his team in every project, so he wants everyone, whatever 
their background, to have the chance to rise to the same, and even higher, 
standards. He is not your huntin', fishin' and shootin' type and does nothing - 
except work hard at what he does best - to ingratiate himself with polite 
society. He is, in any case, far too busy for that sort of palaver.

 Busier than ever, in fact. Since his marriage he has started to sit down and 
design in a way that he hasn't for some time. In recent years he has seemed 
more of a chief executive than an artist. it is probably true that when he has 
been acting as more of an international salesman and roving diplomat than a 
designer, and while he has been making new sense of his private life, his very 
particular eye has been off the ball. He is a very talented designer and needs, 
at this stage in his career, to bring his skills to bear on the many buildings 
that bear his name.

 There is every sign that he is doing just this. It is not simply the shadow 
of the Grim Reaper that is concentrating his mind: all being well, Foster, a 
very fit man, should live and work for a long time yet. Even so, he has 
employed a publisher to prepare his complete works and is well aware of his 
place in history. Foster wants to be up there with this century's immortals - 
Le Corbusier, Mies, Louis Kahn, Frank Lloyd Wright - and is almost there.

 Few would doubt his overall efficiency, his proven skills and the power of 
his darting and original mind. He has done such things as very few lads brought 
up in Levens- hulme could have dreamed of. What he might want now is to spread 
his creative wings, to think less about size, scale and efficiency as measured 
in numbers, and more about how to fuse his undoubted talent with the sense of 
poetry or lyricism he knows he can see above the clouds that shroud the 
everyday world of architecture and place-making.

 That he can reach the stratosphere is evident in his sketchbooks. During our 
interview in Battersea the pages of one fell open to reveal not just some very 
sophisticated drawings of some hyper-tech wonder, but a drawing of a Norfolk 
windmill, sketched from memory, that takes the viewer back some 40 years to the 
moment Foster first took wing. The naivety and curious innocence that friends 
and colleagues remark upon are still there. And these qualities are worth more 
than all the gold medals the architectural profession can mint. They are the 
gifts of artists.

If Norman Foster could stop moving for more than a second, he would see them; 
but then, if he had, he would never have been SirNorman Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/norman-foster> OM, one of the world's 
most lauded architects.

He's gone from this. . . to create this in Hong Kong. . . and now this in 
Berlin.

 Norman Robert Foster Born: Redditch, June 1, 1935. 

 Education: University of Manchester (Dip Arch 1961); Yale University School 
of Architecture. Married: 1964 Wendy Ann Cheesman (died 1989) four sons; 1991 
Begum Sabiha Rumani Malik (divorced); 1996 Elena Ochoa.

 Career: Founded Team 4 Architects 1962; Foster Associates 1967; Foster and 
Partners 1992; collaborated with Buckminster Fuller 1968-83.

 Major projects: Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts, Norwich 1977; Hong Kong and 
Shanghai Banking Corp, Hong Kong 1986; Kings Cross London master plan 1988; 
Millennium Tower, Tokyo, 1990; Terminal Zone, Stansted Airport 1991; Bilbao 
Metro System 1995; Reichstag, Berlin 1998.

 Awards: Royal Gold Medal for Architecture 1983; Gold Medal, French Academy 
1991; Knighted 1990; RA 1991; Order of Merit 1997.
 