
As someone from Russia, which has been ruled by an alt-right autocratic regime 
for 17 years, I have the privilege of being able to convey messages from the 
future to my friends in the US andEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

The first message is about Trump’s racism and xenophobia. The president-elect 
and members of his team are accused of spreading hatred towards Muslims, Jews 
and Hispanics. The outrage is justified, but if Trump is to become a successful 
alt-right autocrat, he will soon neutralise this criticism by co-opting 
numerous representatives of these communities into his camp, and indeed the 
government.

For someone like Trump or the Russian president, Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, xenophobia is only a means 
of mobilisation, not an end in itself, like it was for Hitler. They have no 
qualms about embracing someone they hated just a second ago. Trump and Putin 
are ecumenical nationalists.

Putin’s approach is a good example. He has always been able to reach out and 
find support among Muslims, Jews,Chechens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/putin-nominates-ramzan-kadyrov-to-remain-chechen-leader>
 and even part of the LGBT community. But while Putin’s version of nationalism 
is truly non-ethnic and non-racist, it is just as vicious and radical as the 
nationalist movements that took over much of Europe in the 1930s.

Putin created a version of modern nationalism that I and many others in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> call “nashism”. It comes from the 
wordnashi, which means “our folks” and was used by Putin and his alt-right 
predecessors in the 1990s to define supporters and their enemies, who would 
naturally fall into the category of “not ours”. They included everyone who 
disagreed with the system. Some were minority activists, but mostly they were 
straightforward Russian liberals of non-exotic origins and walks of life.


In the same vein, I can see how Trump can appeal to African-Americans, Jews 
and Hispanics. I met members of these communities at Trump rallies while 
driving through the midwest swing states the week before the election, and I am 
now writing from Brighton Beach, a Russian-speaking Jewish district of New York 
that is overwhelmingly and vehemently pro-Trump.

Their advantage is that they are not bound by logic or intellectual decency

The local residents, mostly ageing Soviet-era immigrants who have switched 
from voting Democrat to Republican in the past 10 years, love the new 
president-elect for the same reason their former compatriots in Russia love 
Putin: he makes them feel great and important again, while legitimising their 
hatred towards liberals.

The likes of Putin and Trump don’t create ethnic movements, they create gangs 
in which the only criterion that really matters is whether you are “with us” or 
“against us”, whether you are ready to insult or hurt the “others” no matter 
who they are and what you used to feel about them. They are mob artists, they 
are majoritarians or – translating the latter term into Russian – Bolsheviks.

Their advantage is that they are not bound by logic or intellectual decency. 
Their constituencies have short attention spans, and don’t notice when their 
leader switches from hating to praising and co-opting a certain group. That’s 
what Putin has done with former Chechen independence fighters, who are now 
playing a key role in his machine of terror.

The anti-Trump marches held by the opposition in New York last weekend were 
all about minority rights, but I am not sure to what extent everyone present – 
the crowd included many radical left-wingers – is united on values, such as 
democracy, rule of law, government transparency and internationalism. Trump’s 
spin doctors will have no problem breaking up this movement, pitting its 
diverse components against each other, the same way Putin did with theBolotnaya 
Square protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/06/vladimir-putin-presidency-violent-protests-moscow>
 in 2012.

With their old-school rhetoric and linguistic taboos, left-wingers and 
liberals look obsolete against Trump and Putin, who both represent a very 
modern, sophisticated and media-savvy political movement. To beat him, Trump’s 
opponents need to start everything anew and unite under more universal, and 
unifying, slogans.


A version of this article first appeared on the blog FullofBias.com 
<https://fullofbias.wordpress.com/2016/11/15/letter-from-the-future-on-trumps-racism/>
 