
Charlotte Bronte’s name is, by nature, synonymous with Jane Eyre. So much so 
that a friend of mine didn’t find out until very recently which was the author 
and which was the author’s creation. Yet the celebrated novelist unsurprisingly 
pennedmore than just the tempestuous tale of Mr Rochester and Jane. The first 
book Bronte ever wrote - a book turned down by essentially every publishing 
house in Britain and remaining unpublished until after her death - was The 
Professor.

Reading it, you can clearly see why the slim volume failed to gain sponsorship 
where Jane Eyre would later succeed; it focuses possibly too much on mundane, 
ordinary people and commonplace events – no secrets sequestered in attics here. 
As a novel, The Professor is undoubtedly the more humble, self-effacing cousin 
of Jane Eyre, yet I loved it all the same. Perhaps it’s because I too am 
terminally mundane and ordinary, and - in some narcissistic sense - relish the 
fact that a person like me could have the events of their lives documented and 
mused upon. Perhaps it’s because imperious William Crimsworth and the reticent 
Frances serve as the perfect antidote to the “amber-eyed” and “aquiline-nosed” 
smirking YA protagonists. Either way, I adored the way in which Bronte managed, 
with the lightest of touches, to make the banal beautiful, to add significance 
and weight to the barest scrap of a moment.

Endearingly unafraid to have a happy ending, this book also felt strikingly 
relevant to the present day. The European setting and the debate between the 
very nationalistic Frances with her ineffable pride in Britain and one Mr 
Hunsden, who sees himself more as “a citizen of the world” flitting freely from 
country to country, seemed to relate very strongly to the present discussions 
surrounding the results of the EU referendum. I’m almost sorry to mention it, 
because I myself am sick to death of hearing the media pounce on the latest 
political manoeuvres, but it offered an interesting route into examining what 
Europe meant to me and my identity away from the rhetoric and spin of 
Westminster.

The narrative charts the experiences of marginalised William Crimsworth, 
brought up by aristocratic relations but then cut off after refusing to go into 
the church. Scorned and injured by his estranged brother, William finds himself 
in Brussels working as an English professor for a boys boarding school and – 
later – teaching some lessons in the girls boarding school next door. Here he 
will meet friends and (gasp) foes, finding enough trials and troubles to keep 
the story engaging and enough happiness to ensure that reading it was 
pleasurable.

To tell any more would be to spoil the story, but suffice it to say that I 
found this book charming; I loved the quiet strength and whimsy of Frances, and 
even managed to sympathise with William, despite some disturbing references to 
the inferiority of Flemish people and Catholics that may – I’m hoping – have 
been purposefully used to reveal prejudices in his character. The brief 
appearances of the aforementioned Hunsden were also a highlight, loveable in 
all his brusque and obstinate nature. Overall, I would definitely recommend it 
to anyone who appreciates Bronte’s probing, perceptive prose or the joy of 
retreating into a different time and a different place.

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/professor-7.html>  