
From smart cities to the internet of things (IoT), virtually every aspect of 
the modern world is becoming closely connected.

The extent to which we rely on our devices and the exchange of information 
means new systems are needed that not only handle far greater bandwidth, but 
that are capable of being deployed to cover areas that were previously 
unreachable.

The potential benefits for business are huge, with faster and more reliable 
connectivity not only enhancing how firms interact with customers and each 
other, but also lending itself to greater flexible working among staff.

The arrival of 5G

One development that many industry observers believe could be revolutionary is 
5G. Following on from 4G, the fifth-generation mobile network is in its early 
stages of development and is expected to be rolled out between 2020–25.

Any tech that contributes towards the next phase of mobile connectivity is 
covered by the term 5G. And although there are still no set standards or 
specifications, theGSMA <http://www.gsma.com/> – a trade body that represents 
global mobile operators – has outlined eight key criteria, stipulating minimum 
requirements for speed, capacity and energy in order for something to be 
considered 5G.

According to Ofcom 
<https://www.ofcom.org.uk/about-ofcom/latest/media/media-releases/2015/6ghz>, 
once operational 5G could provide between 10–50 Gbps (gigabit per seconds) in 
download speeds (as compared to the 5–12 Gbps of 4G), and although most experts 
expect it to be at the lower end of the range, that would still mean you could 
download an HD movie in seconds.


But rather than simply being faster than the current 4G, it will also allow 
more devices to access the web – an essential requirement if the IoT is to take 
off – meaning it could be transformative for business.

Raj Sivalingam, executive director of telecoms for techUK 
<http://www.techuk.org/>, the trade association for the tech sector, says: “The 
potential of the IoT, particularly in the enterprise environment, has been 
hugely debated but its impact is almost certainly still undervalued.

“Mass deployment across sectors will boost efficiency and safety with 
pre-emptive fault correction; enable automatic reporting of accidents and allow 
real-time asset tracking, reducing crime and increasing productivity, to name 
just a few benefits.”

One potential bottleneck for 5G is spectrum availability – or lack of it. 
Radio frequencies for both 3G and 4G are already overcrowded. The provision of 
a new bandwidth will require widespread cooperation between operators, 
manufacturers and governments.

Infrastructure is also an issue, says Sivalingam. “Making the leap to 5G 
mobile services and getting more fibre into the fixed telecommunications 
networks will require substantial amounts of investment.

“We need the government and industry stakeholders to work to shift the UK from 
good levels of connectivity to great levels so that we continue to attract 
investors and startups, and to foster innovation from within the UK.”

Cognitive radio

One possible solution is cognitive radio. An adaptive radio and network 
technology, it can sense and respond to its operating environment and 
automatically tune itself to the best available frequencies, this makes it more 
reliable in extreme locations where signals are weak, potentially providing 
dependable, robust connections that are not hampered by interference or 
geography.

Finland-based KNL Networks has developed a system using the technology that 
uses short wave radio to transmit internet access to sites in remote locations 
ranging from oil rigs to polar research stations. KNL Networks CEO Toni Linden 
says: “We can provide similar connectivity to those from satellites but with a 
terrestrial radio system. Our radios receive the whole spectrum all the time, 
so rather than scanning, real-time broadband receiving is going on. Thus we can 
see and measure everything that’s going on in the spectrum and we can maintain 
the network connectivity that way.”

The tech opens up the possibility of providing seamless connectivity anywhere, 
giving business reliable online access to markets in parts of the world that 
have otherwise been unreachable. It could also enable media and other companies 
to broadcast without the need for expensive satellites.

Quantum key distribution

It’s not just data transmission, speeds and connectivity that pose challenges 
in the future, but the safety of that data too. Cybercrime is ranked alongside 
terrorism as among themost serious threats to the UK 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/62484/Factsheet2-National-Security-Risk-Assessment.pdf>
 [pdf], and with data now the lifeblood of modern business, securing that data 
is of paramount concern. One technology that could provide the answer is 
quantum communications.

Conventional encryption relies on sending a decryption key alongside your 
secret data. The receiver then uses that key to decode your secret information. 
But problems arise because hackers can also copy this key and steal your data.

Quantum key distribution (QKD) is different because it encodes this key on 
light particles called photons, and an underlying principle of quantum 
mechanics means that a hacker trying to read or copy such a key would 
automatically alter its state, effectively leaving a hacker fingerprint so the 
sender and receiver know their information security had been breached.

China recently launched a quantum satellite to further research into this 
technology, with the hope of developing anuncrackable communications network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/16/china-launches-quantum-satellite-for-hack-proof-communications>
.

In the UK, the Quantum Communications Hub is part of a national network of 
four hubs led by the universities of Birmingham, Glasgow, Oxford and York. 
Director Tim Spiller says: “We are developing quantum communications 
technologies along a number of different directions, notably short-range free 
space QKD, where the transmitter could be in future mobile phones, and 
chip-to-chip QKD through optical fibre, where the chips could be in future 
computers and other devices.”


With two thirds of British business falling victim to cybercrime 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/two-thirds-of-large-uk-businesses-hit-by-cyber-breach-or-attack-in-past-year>
 in the past year the need for better encryption is clear.

Several companies currently offer commercial quantum key distribution systems 
include ID Quantique, MagiQ Technologies, QuintessenceLabs, SeQureNet and 
Toshiba, although its high cost and limited range means mainly banks and 
governments are its main users, with mainstream adoption still some way off.

Spiller added: “Certainly it would be desirable to improve the size, weight, 
power and cost points of current technologies and our work in the hub and 
elsewhere is addressing all these factors.”

Paul Lee, head of technology, media, and telecommunications research at 
Deloitte, highlighted a number of improvements which he expected to see coming 
down the line, including improved mobile antennae and base stations, as well as 
improvements to fixed networks such asG.fast 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-37705435> that would enable copper cable 
to operate at much higher speeds.

“As they get steadily faster, new services emerge to exploit these greater 
speeds, which then requires the deployment of even faster networks. This tail 
chasing has been going on for decades and won’t stop in 2017.”

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 