
The above image of Emily Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/emilybronte>
 – endlessly reproduced – is less a portrait, more an icon. Intense, fierce, 
inward, solitary, elusive and unknowable: the young author ofWuthering Heights 
in profile is of a piece with her first, and only, novel.

Her elder sister's work – Jane Eyre (no 12 in this series) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/09/100-best-novels-jane-eyre> – 
hypnotises the reader through the calculated force of its tone, its "suspended 
revelations", and its hints of suppressed eroticism. It builds, slowly, to a 
poignant climax in which, finally, its protagonists are redeemed, though not in 
a way that's conventional.Wuthering Heights, by contrast, plunges impetuously 
into a wild and passionate exploration of love in all its destructive 
manifestations.

Brontë's narrative – fragmented, discordant and tortuous – revolves 
obsessively around a single, explosive transgression, and the theme of jealousy 
in the lives of Heathcliff and Catherine, before making a calmer return to the 
theme in the often neglected second half.

Where Charlotte comes from the puritan tradition of John Bunyan (no 1 in this 
series) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/23/100-best-novels-pilgrims-progress>
, Emily is the child of the Romantic movement, and both sisters are steeped in 
the gothic. However, it is Emily who takes the bigger creative risks. The first 
reviews ofWuthering Heights were mixed. Critics who had been swept away by Jane 
Eyre did not know what to make of it. For a long time it was judged to be 
inferior. Readers who loveJane Eyre are sometimes less enthusiastic about 
Wuthering Heights. And vice versa. I've included both in my list because their 
influence on the English imagination, and on subsequent English-language 
fiction, has been incalculable.

Looking back, it's clear that where Jane Eyre comes out of a recognisable 
tradition, and is conscious of that affiliation,Wuthering Heights releases 
extraordinary new energies in the novel, renews its potential, and almost 
reinvents the genre. The scope and drift of its imagination, its passionate 
exploration of a fatal yet regenerative love affair, and its brilliant 
manipulation of time and space put it in a league of its own. This is great 
English literature, the fruit of a quite extraordinary childhood.

To look forward, I think we can say that the work as we know it of Thomas 
Hardy, DH Lawrence, and even Rosamond Lehmann would have been impossible 
without it. As a portrait of "star-cross'd lovers" it rivalsRomeo and Juliet. 
There is also something operatic about its audacity and ambition. No wonder 
film-makers, song writers, actors and literary critics have been drawn to 
reinterpret its story.

And then there are its quieter pleasures. Like Hardy and Lawrence, Emily 
Brontë has an uncanny eye and ear for the natural world. When Lockwood visits 
Heathcliff's and Cathy's graves at the end of the novel, the poetry in the 
voice is Brontë's:

"I lingered round them, under that benign sky; watched the moths fluttering 
among the heath, and hare-bells; listened to the soft wind breathing through 
the grass; and wondered how any one could ever imagine unquiet slumbers, for 
the sleepers in that quiet earth."

Magic.

Wuthering Heights was published three months after Jane Eyre in December 1847. 
A year later, Emily was dead, from consumption, aged just 30. Charlotte wrote 
later: "Stronger than a man, simpler than a child, her nature stood alone."

A note on the text


Wuthering Heights, A Novel by Ellis Bell, was published by Thomas Newby in 
December 1847, three months afterJane Eyre. Several reviewers, impressed by the 
force of the book, believed it had been written by a man. After her sister's 
death,Charlotte Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> 
edited a revised second edition, the text that is generally followed today.

A letter from Newby does survive which seems to suggest that Emily Brontë had 
begun to write a second novel, though the manuscript has never been found. If 
she had started a second novel, she was prevented by consumption from 
completing it. She died the same year in which Wuthering Heights was published, 
aged 30.

Other Emily Brontë titles:


Poems (1846)
 