
Politics 

Andrew Rawnsley's Servants of the People was the heavyweight of the year; 
Julia Langdon's biography of Mo Mowlam also raised No 10's blood pressure, 
while everyone was sick to death of New Labour sleaze by the time Geoffrey 
Robinson's memoirs were published. Michael Heseltine and Paddy Ashdown won 
plaudits for sanctimony disguised as revelation. But for exposing the true 
venality and insecurity of power, there could be only two winners.

Alan Clark Diaries: Into Politics 
Buy it at BOL <http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,502454390,00.html> 

The tip of my penis is numb, there are bags under my eyes, but I feel 
strangely randy. Why don't the blondes ring? Those Wurzels in Plymouth do go 
on. They don't even like Enoch. I should get a new constituency. Lost a fortune 
at backgammon, but had lunch with Margaret and Ian. Passed over again. Think 
I've got cancer.

Journals of Woodrow Wyatt: Major to Blair 
Buy it at BOL <http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,502088996,00.html> 

Rupert ignored me. Must be more obsequious. Morton's suggesting Prince Charles 
had an affair with Camilla. Ridiculous. Must write something to that effect. 
The Royal Household has congratulated me on my perspicacity. Norman Lamont, 
what a genius. He's my friend. He's been sacked. He's not my friend. I love 
Maggie. She's been mistreated. Don't think I've got cancer.

Father and Son 

The new genre created by the family credited with creating almost every 
literary genre since the 1950s, including ones they haven't.

Letters of Kingsley Amis, edited by Zachary Leader 
Buy it at BOL <http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,502412215,00.html>

My dear Philip, Sorry not to have written earlier, been up to my neck in the 
Taffy novel. Hv dn bggrll. My wife has left me. Punishment for not wanting to 
fuck her. Didn't even want to fuck the Penguin publicity girl. It's me. I'm 
piling on the pounds. Must be the booze. Bored after a few pages of Mart's 
latest.

Experience by Martin Amis 
Buy it at BOL <http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,501022002,00.html>

I write to commemorate my father. There will be no point scoring, apart from 
Julian and Eric, and if I name drop it is only because I always have. This is 
no ordinary autobiography, rather a journey through the unconscious. It is here 
in the writerly "un" that Delilah and I met. How blessed I am to be able to 
have relationships that transcend the need to spend time with my children.

Turkeys 

The best turkeys are always those from whom so much more was expected. 

Honeymoon by Amy Jenkins 
Buy it at BOL <http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,502414165,00.html> 

There hasn't been a day when I haven't thought about the love of my life. And 
now I'm getting married to Ed. We get along all right, even though he's not my 
type. OHMYGOD. The love of my life is in the same hotel and is on honeymoon. It 
could be straight out of Noel Coward. In fact, it is. "Let's elope in a 
helicopter," he says. We go to Mexico. "You're not there for me," I say later. 
"But I'm here," he counters. "But not there." "Meet the love of my life," I 
tell the girls on my return. In walks Ed.

Down Under by Bill Bryson 
Buy it at BOL <http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,502428940,00.html> 

Australia is very, very big. Americans know next to nothing about it and as 
I've got a contract to write a feature for a magazine, I might as well do a 
book, too. Sydney looks kinda nice, but I can't stay as I've got a train to 
catch. Two hours in third class is enough, so it's back to first. Look, here's 
Perth. Hmm, that might have been Melbourne, and Adelaide museum would have been 
neat if I could have spared the day to wait for it to open.

Fiction 

Despite offerings from Julian Barnes, AS Byatt, Muriel Spark, Margaret Atwood 
et al, most reckoned it was a mediocre year. There were two novels, though, 
which did get talked about.

How the Dead Live by Will Self 
Buy it at BOL <http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,502424748,00.html>

I hate my fucking junkie daughter, Natty. I hate my other daughter, Charlie. 
Fuck. I've just fucking died. I'm now in fucking Dulston, the fucking suburb of 
the dead, with Lithy, my fossilised miscarriage, and Rude Boy, my 
seven-year-old car-accident victim. Jesus. Fucking Natty's on and off the scag 
and got herself up the duff. I'm going back. Natty's OD'd. I'm fucking done for.

White Teeth by Zadie Smith 
Buy it at BOL <http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,501018632,00.html> 

Archie tries to top himself and fails. He's that kind of guy and he lives in 
that kind of north London multicultural borough. Why should his identity crisis 
be more important than anyone else's? He marries Clara, a black woman 30 years 
his junior, and they have a child, Irie, who is also a nerd and so doubly 
marginalised. Irie loves Millat Iqbal, an Islamic militant. Millat starts to 
reckon he's a gangster, while his twin Magid returns from Bangladesh an 
Anglophile. Everyone is very multicultural and very fucked up.

And phenomenon... 

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by JK Rowling 
Buy it at BOL <http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,502427310,00.html>

Harry, Hermione and Ron assembled in the Great Hall at Hogwart's. "For the 
first time in hundreds of years the Triwizard cup will be held here," said Prof 
Dumbledore. Harry represented Hogwart's. His scar burned after two challenges. 
Voldemort was at hand. The Quidditch pitch was transformed. "Wow," said Harry 
on page 636. "Kisses, deaths, battles, ghosts and resurrections. I could do 
with a year off."
 