
2014 was the year of the team. Germany became world-beaters with a goal 
created by one substitute and finished by another.Lionel Messi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi>, the great player who was 
pitted against the great team, was left to scratch his head at the end of the 
World Cup final as he collected the player of the tournament award and the 
Germany team huddled together for photos with Angela Merkel. Messi flickered 
into life occasionally at the World Cup, but if football’s greatest tournament 
proved anything, it is that teams win trophies.

So, where do we go with our annual list of the 100 best footballers in the 
world? We could put 11 Germans at the top and be done with it, but part of 
football’s appeal is its ability to remain both perfectly simple and 
deliciously debatable. Honouring theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> winners would do a 
great disservice to some of the greatest players to have kicked a ball, so we 
have assembled a cast of 73 experts from 28 nationalities to choose our third 
annual list of the world’s top 100 footballers.


This year’s panel of judges is larger than ever, with Hernan Crespo, Gilberto 
Silva, Slaven Bilic and Dietmar Hamann leading the voting. The full list of 100 
players will be revealed over the next few days, with No 100-71 coming on 
Sunday, No 70-41 on Monday and Nos 40-11 following on Tuesday, before the top 
10 is announced on Christmas Eve.

One of the big challenges for the judges this year is to work out how many 
World Cup stars deserve a place on the list. Should James Rodríguez be the 
highest new entry? Do Tim Howard, Daley Blind, Guillermo Ochoa and Keylor Navas 
warrant inclusion? Should any England players make the top 100? And how should 
the Costa Rica, Colombia and USA players who produced such united team 
performances be honoured?


If the World Cup was a love letter to the value of teamwork, the other great 
event of the year, the Champions League final, showcased the power of the 
individual, and specifically, the individual’s individual:Cristiano Ronaldo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo>. He was not the best performer 
on the night - that honour went to Angel Di María, who also played his part in 
the World Cup final - but, despite performing below his usual standard, 
Ronaldo’s naked torso became the face of the final.

Ronaldo is a great team player in the sense that he gives his team-mates a 
goal a game, but his mentality is always that of a man on a mission. He is not 
content to be on the winning side; he has to make his mark. The old college 
football coach Red Russell made his name with the quote “winning isn’t 
everything, it’s the only thing”, but Ronaldo sees things differently. Winning 
isn’t enough for Ronaldo; he needs to contribute and dominate.

While his team-mates were celebrating the goals that won Real Madrid’s tenth 
European Cup, Ronaldo made his way back to the halfway line and waited 
impatiently for the game to resume. If anything, their goals were inconvenient; 
rather than having the ball at his feet in the opposition’s box he was forced 
to retreat to the centre-circle for kick-off. He was playing in his city, in 
his final, and he needed to score his 17th goal in a 13-game competition to 
make the occasion his own. The night was not to be over until the finely 
chiseled man had flung off his shirt and flexed for the cameras.

That ruthless and relentless desire to score goals and stamp his authority on 
every occasion is the source of his greatness. He wasn’t happy thatReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> had conquered La Decima until 
he had scored his goal. Those are the standards he sets for himself.

The chapter in Alex Ferguson’s autobiography entitled “Cristiano Ronaldo” 
begins with the sentence: “Cristiano Ronaldo was the most gifted player I 
managed.” But, as his former manager understands well, Ronaldo is not made 
great by his talent. He has made his talent great by working incessantly to 
improve. When asked what aspect of Ronaldo’s game he would include in the 
perfect footballer, Rio Ferdinand said he would choose his mentality. His 
brain. His drive. His desire to win a European Cup, captain his country at a 
World Cup and then return to his club and score 32 goals before Christmas.

The Guardian published a story about Ronaldo’s goalscoring exploits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/25/cristiano-ronaldos-remarkable-real-madrid-goalscoring-record-in-full>
 a few months ago. We have tried to update the page every time he breaks one of 
his own records, but it’s a fool’s errand; he will only break them again and 
render the words outdated. We have revised the story in September, October, 
November and December but if you look at it now it’s a few goals short. We are 
dealing with a special player here and we are not the only ones who cannot keep 
up with him.

Ronaldo’s performances this year have defied all common sense but he is not 
the only record-breaker in our midst. Lionel Messi became the most prolific 
goalscorer in the history of La Liga and theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> in the same week last 
month. The same week. It’s just ridiculous.


Messi has topped our list for the last two years but has he done enough to 
hold off Ronaldo’s charge? Could Ronaldo overtake Messi but miss out to one of 
the German World Cup winners? We will find out what our experts think on 
Christmas Eve, but in the meantime, we want to know who they should have 
picked. Please, be our guests.

Who are the world’s top 100 footballers in 2014?
 