
Tim Pears’ new novel, the first in a trilogy, is a slow read. Not because it 
lacks suspense, but because the pleasure of it lies in taking in the language 
and the setting – the West Country, in 1911 and 1912 – and in reading it like a 
long poem, with each chapter a stanza. I did worry that Pears was steering 
toward the much-ploughed ground of the first world war, but we don’t get there 
by the end of volume one. Instead, he successfully camouflages a romance in the 
dialect of the farmers and horsemen of the time as they make their way through 
the agricultural year, task by rigorous task; the natural world is sometimes 
antagonistic, sometimes beautiful, but always alive with detail – insects, 
birds, weather, crop conditions. Pears is famous for this, immersing the modern 
urban reader in what he or she is missing out on in the countryside.

The protagonist is Leo Sercombe, often known as “the boy”. Leo is maybe the 
same age as the protagonist of Pears’ first novel,In the Place of Fallen Leaves
. No birthdays are acknowledged in the passing of the year, so Leo might not 
know exactly how old he is, but he is single-minded, close-mouthed and 
observant. At one point, a friend asks him why he never smiles. He doesn’t say, 
or he can’t say. Until the very end, he is exceptionally good at keeping out of 
trouble, and trouble is all around – in the first chapter, Pears reminds the 
reader of how dangerous life was a hundred years ago: “The smith’s elder son, 
the one with the livid scar across his cheek that drew your eyes to it, reached 
in his pliers and drew the iron tyre out of the furnace, white hot.” Leo takes 
advantage of the fact that he is a younger child, a little more overlooked than 
his talkative sister, Kizzie, older brother Fred and cousin Herbert, who have 
more responsibilities. The boy has a vocation, which is horses, and an 
avocation: exploring the natural world. That he doesn’t do well in school, and 
isn’t in charge of anything, that everyone else has more work than they can 
handle are all to his advantage.

Pears captures the point of view of a boy who has lived in the same place his 
whole life, unaware of the larger world

The estate where the Sercombes live and work is described through a series of 
closeups – the stables, the front door, a hidden staircase, an attic nursery. 
They believably convey the point of view of a boy who has lived in the same 
place his whole life and hardly ever thought there might be a larger world 
(though there is a lovely set piece in the spring of the second year, when 
everyone goes to an animal market to auction two of the horses). The romance 
part kicks in, not when Leo is befriended by Miss Charlotte, the master’s 
daughter, who shares his passion for horses, but when Leo comes to understand 
that he has to leave, on his own. Because a romance must be a quest, not a love 
affair.

The Horseman is not precisely a “horse book” – Pears excavates the Sercombes’ 
1912 training methods with the same sort of detailed and objective tone that he 
uses when he talks about the other work they must do, but the methods will come 
as no surprise to enthusiasts. Horse books usually explore how a rider finds a 
horse (often a rogue), how a rider trains the horse (always a special 
connection), how the horse and rider go on to perform the impossible (National 
Velvet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/06/national-velvet-enid-bagnold-rereading>
). Leo’s talents mean that he is destined to be a professional: to go from 
horse to horse, doing what he must do, connecting temporarily and with more 
insight than those around him, then moving on.

As a protagonist, Leo is worth observing, but he is not especially 
sympathetic. Miss Charlotte is just about the only other character he interacts 
with. Pears’ habit of setting Leo so firmly in his environment has a downside 
as well as an upside – it’s easy to lose sight of him, which turnsThe Horseman 
into more of a tableau vivant than a narrative. And it is not as though the 
early 20th century hasn’t been thoroughly mined by English writers already. But 
Pears specialises in going his own way and doing the unexpected, so I am ready 
for volume two.

• Jane Smiley’s latest novel is Golden Age (Picador).To order The Horseman 
(Bloomsbury) for £14.44 (RRP £16.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/horseman-464117.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 