
All this film’s irony and ambiguity are showcased in the title, though Birth 
of a Salesman was an alternative that occurred to me. The Founder is an 
absorbing and unexpectedly subtle movie about the genesis of the McDonald’s 
burger empire. There is an avoiding of obviousness that resides in its clever 
casting of not-immediately-dislikableMichael Keaton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/18/michael-keaton-interview--on-his-career-before-birdman-im-shocked-and-thankful-that-ive-gotten-away-with-everything>
 as Ray Kroc, the needy, driven, insecure marketing type with the predatory 
surname who masterminded a nationwide franchising for the original California 
hamburger restaurant in the 1950s; finally taking it away from its owners and 
revolutionary fast-food pioneers, Dick and Mac McDonald, played by Nick 
Offerman and John Carroll Lynch.

Keaton is never the cartoon bad guy, not even at the very end. His moonfaced 
openness makes him look like a giant, middle-aged baby, wide-eyed with optimism 
about the world. He looks like the kind of unemployed comedian who might earn a 
buck playing scary clown Ronald McDonald – who is not in fact mentioned in the 
film.

Related: Why a film celebrating McDonald's is the perfect start for Trump 
cinema 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/03/why-a-film-celebrating-mcdonalds-is-the-perfect-start-for-trump-cinema>

The film’s first act is careful to show Kroc sympathetically; screenwriter 
Robert D Siegel and directorJohn Lee Hancock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/12/mcdonalds-movie-john-lee-hancock-the-founder-biopic>
 cleverly set up Ray’s early struggle, his genuine ecstasy on discovering the 
McDonald brothers and his acumen in seeing the global potential of their little 
burger joint. And is it so wrong to call him the Founder? After all, the 
corporate-franchised experience of going into McDonald’s anywhere in the world 
is what Kroc envisioned and effectively founded. Along the way, the film shows 
us something about postwar entrepreneurial capitalism, innovation, corporate 
expansion and intellectual property rights. It even casts an oblique light on 
the new age of Trump.

Keaton’s Kroc is a hardworking man who’s always on the road, driving from town 
to town, exasperated by slow and erratic service at the drive-ins where he gets 
lunch, while his bored wife (a thankless role for Laura Dern) stays at home. 
Ray is trying to sell restaurant managers a new five-spindled milkshake machine 
– which makes five times as much as the usual single-spindle model – and 
crucially sell them on the concept that an increase in supply creates its own 
demand through market stimulus. The poor guy gets doors slammed in his face all 
over the country. But not in California, where a couple of bright, cheery 
brothers, Dick and Mac McDonald, have created an extraordinarily efficient 
fast-food system in their burger restaurant with no plates, no cutlery, no 
tedious wait times. They want six or eight of Kroc’s five-spindle milkshake 
machines. They don’t have to create demand. They’ve already got more than they 
can handle.

Ray listens to their story and is electrified by their innovative genius and 
American can-do. He positively insists on setting up a franchise operation for 
them. Too late, the poor McDonald brothers realise that this pushy fellow has 
pulled off what might be America’s first corporate takeover.

Like the young Donald Trump, Kroc is a huge fan of self-help and 
how-to-win-friends-and-influence-people type stuff. Alone in his scuzzy hotel 
rooms, he listens to a motivational LP which intones the words of Calvin 
Coolidge: “Nothing in the world can take the place of persistence, talent will 
not, nothing is more common than unsuccessful men with talent …” It was the 
McDonald brothers who had the talent. Kroc was the one with the persistence. 
Yet that, after all, is a kind of talent.
 Sold out? … John Carroll Lynch, left, and Nick Offerman as the McDonald 
brothers in The Founder. Photograph: Daniel McFadden/AP 
Also like Trump, Kroc’s wealth is to be founded on land and real estate, not 
burgers. He finally understands the importance of buying the land for his 
franchise outlets. And like Trump, he becomes an early connoisseur of branding 
and market identity. To the brothers’ astonishment, he takes out a copyright on 
their solidly reassuring name. And he finally returns to his supply-over-demand 
theory: America didn’t know it wanted or needed an identikit burger joint until 
he gave it to them.

Yet for all this, The Founder has a very different effect to, say, Morgan 
Spurlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/18/rats-review-horror-documentary-morgan-spurlock-discovery-channel>
’s gonzo documentarySuper Size Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_Film_of_the_week/0,4267,1300818,00.html>
 from 2004, which set out to show America’s Big Mac habit as nasty and 
damaging. However bad Kroc’s behaviour in this film, and however poignant the 
innocence of poor Mac and Dick, the actual customers of the restaurant are 
never shown as anything other than happy. Perhaps we are invited to see all 
this as the inevitable, rough business of market forces.

Crucially, Keaton’s Ray does not see himself as a sociopath or a narcissist 
but as the Capraesque hero of a feelgood underdog drama. He thinks he is the 
little guy making good. Yet by the end, we have seen quite another side to him.

•The Founder is released on 20 January in the US and 17 February in the UK.
 