
In June British Airways premiered a TV advert 
<http://www.thedrum.co.uk/news/2012/06/19/british-airways-olympics-ad-tells-brits-not-fly-during-london-2012>
 intended to ram home its status as the "official airline partner" of the 
Olympics and Paralympics: 61 slightly alarming seconds, in which airliners 
taxied around the streets of London, and we were treated to the consummately 
postmodern trick of advertising masquerading as non-advertising: "Stay at home, 
support Team GB," ran the tagline.

The soundtrack, strangely enough, was the Clash's London Calling. There it 
was, heavily edited, blasting out in the midst of union flags and a vision of 
the capital restored to its swinging London-ish pomp, despite the fact that its 
lyrics suggested the exact reverse: "phoney Beatlemania has bitten the dust … 
we ain't got no swing … London is drowning, and I live by the river."

What to do? Wring your hands? Or acknowledge that this particular die was cast 
when the same band'sShould I Stay Or Should I Go was used by Levi's 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5tBop3IKBdQ> jeans in 1991, and accept that 
popular music has long been an absurd carry-on in which hardened meanings are 
as transient as success, and it's axiomatic that nothing is sacred? Any 
lingering view to the contrary surely died in 2000, when Nick Drake's 
impossibly sadPink Moon was captured by Volkswagen 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BIOW9fLT9eY> and used to advertise its Cabrio 
range, soundtracking a gang of hipsters marvelling at the night sky, motoring 
to a party and then putting the car in reverse and deciding to marvel at the 
night sky again – as usual, bohemia as reimagined by unutterable squares.

Last week, however, there came news of one person who wanted nothing to do 
with any of this.The Beastie Boys' Adam Yauch 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-19206509> died of cancer in May, 
having played his part in the creation of 25 years of music that any ad exec 
would pay millions to get hold of. We now know that his will contained one very 
interesting clause: "Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, in no event may 
my image or name or any music or any artistic property created by me be used 
for advertising purposes."

Now, it would be easy to view this as one more act of self-righteousness from 
a group who often seemed to specialise in them. [With an estate valued at 
around $6m, and guaranteed royalties from his group's biggest-selling records 
that will swell his posthumous earnings, Yauch could afford such a stance – 
unlike the thousands of musicians who, with their industry nosediving, 
sometimes seem to sell their souls in order to eat. In Britain, moreover, any 
sniff of moralism from TheBeastie Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beastie-boys> has long been met with the 
retelling of a tale from 1998, when the same people who had created Licensed To 
Ill — a brilliant album, but also home to some of the most sexist lyrics ever 
written — placed themselves on moral high ground to which they had no right, 
contacting the Prodigy and requesting them to desist from playing a largely 
instrumental track titled Smack My Bitch Up ("what a pious bunch of cunts," 
said The Manic Street Preachers' Nicky Wire, and he had a point)]

.But this move really counts for something. It chimes with much the same 
stance taken by Radiohead, Beck and REM. There are echoes of the statement 
issued by the surviving Beatles whenNike used the original recording of 
Revolution to sell trainers <http://www.pophistorydig.com/?p=702>, and the 
argument that they "wrote and recorded these songs as artists and not as pitch- 
men for any product". Even if you're a musician stuck a few hundred rungs down 
the ladder, knowing that the music industry is on its uppers and the use of 
your music in an ad might get you through another year, it's not a bad ideal to 
bear in mind. If you're lucky enough to break big, it should be imprinted on 
your brain.

The trouble is that holding the line against the blurring of creativity and 
advertising can now look almost impossible. Sponsorship is ubiquitous, as 
proved by this coming weekend's annual V festivals – two days of promotion for 
the Virgin group, who push their trains, mobile phones and the rest – and 
Scotland's T in the Park, which pushes the great contributions to that 
country's culture and public health of Tennent's Lager. Jack Daniel's whiskey 
now pays for bands to do intimate gigs in the their hometowns (because, 
notwithstanding its parent company's annual revenues of $3bn, its brand is all 
about "roots"). By way of an illustration, consider the case of the White 
Stripes' Jack White, who pledged to restore music's soul and wound up writing a 
song for Coca-Cola entitledLove Is the Truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/apr/28/arts.advertising>, which was 
nice.

And once a musician is dead, God help them – not least because, while US law 
gives the estates of dead stars control over the use of their image, in the UK 
no approval is required. With Yoko Ono's say-so,John Lennon's image has been 
used to sell Citroen cars 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1255446/John-Lennons-son-defends-mother-allowing-Citroen-use-images-father-car-ad.html>
. Most mind-boggling of all, in 2008, a portrait ofIan Curtis of Joy Division 
<http://www.punknews.org/article/27898/sid-vicious-ian-curtis-billie-joe-armstrong-to-pitch-converse-in-new-campaign>
 apparently wearing a pair of Converse trainers (a brand owned by Nike) was 
hurled around the globe. Did a man whose songs include Atrocity Exhibition and 
Dead Souls actually wear Converse? Even if he did, would he have been 
comfortable being reduced to selling them? There again, who cares?

Actually, I do. As I've acknowledged before, moaning about the state of pop 
music at the age of 42 is probably a futile and undignified thing. But if my 
ongoing sadness about the plight of such a beautiful, democratic form comes 
down to one thing, it is this: the washing away of all meaning, so that most 
contemporary musicians apparently have no language with which to convincingly 
sing about the world, and their forebears end up as nothing more than poster 
boys (and girls) for other people's very marketable notions of cool. To argue 
against all this may sound hopelessly naive; in such a dire financial climate 
for musicians, it also implies any future Beatles or Beastie Boys probably 
having to endure long years of penury, which is easy for me to advocate. But I 
stand by the basic point: to even start to avenge music's bland-out requires 
one thing – musicians distancing themselves from the machine, and returning to 
the noble ideal of art for art's sake.

Which brings us back to the Clash, a song from the London Calling album 
entitled Death or Glory, and a golden Joe Strummer couplet: "Every gimmick 
hungry yob digging gold from rock'n'roll / Grabs the mike to tell us he'll die 
before he's sold." His contention, aimed at himself as much as anyone, was that 
principles soon dissolve into mere poses, and the fast buck is always grabbed, 
sooner or later. ButAdam Yauch <https://www.theguardian.com/music/adam-yauch> 
proved otherwise. "I might stick around or I might be a fad / But I won't sell 
my songs for no TV ad," went a Beastie Boys song titled Putting Shame in Your 
Game. As it turns out, he meant it. And how great is that?
 