
Nintendo announced all the details of its Switch console on Friday morning, 
revealing a 3 March launch date 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/nintendo-unveils-long-awaited-switch-game-console>
 and £280 price tag. But what about the games? Everyone was expecting a new 
Super Mario title and perhaps a remaster of ElderScrolls V: Skyrim – and those 
were certainly delivered. But what else has been confirmed?

Here are the titles we’re most looking forward to. 


Legend of Zelda: The Breath of the Wild
 Legend of Zelda: The Breath of the Wild Photograph: Nintendo 
Now confirmed as a launch title, the latest adventure in the legendary series 
will see Link exploring a lushly detailed open-world version of Hyrule. A whole 
new range of weapons and a new survival feature, requiring players to forage 
for food in order to stay healthy, adding grit to the familiar Zelda experience.

Splatoon 2
 Splatoon 2 Photograph: Nintendo 
We were fully expecting a version of Nintendo’s family friendly team-based 
shooter – but not a full sequel. Splatoon 2 adds new weapons and modes, plus a 
portable multiplayer option, allowing you to indulge in local eight-player 
battles wherever you are.

Ultra Street Fighter 2: The Final Challengers
 Ultra Street Fighter II Photograph: capcom 
The classic Street Fighter experience is returning with new characters 
(including the brilliantly named Evil Ryu and Violent Ken) and a choice of 
old-school pixel art graphics or a new modern look. There is also a unique 
control option for the Joy-Con pads, allowing seamless two-player action.

Super Mario Odyssey
 Super Mario Odyssey Photograph: Nintendo 
An all-new Super Mario adventure set in a vast sandbox world, with a huge 
array of scenic styles judging by the demo shown at Nintendo’s announcement 
livestream. Mario will also be able to throw his cap for a variety of uses. 
It’s rare that you get to use the phrase ‘interesting hat-throwing mechanic’ in 
a game preview.

Super Bomberman R
 Super Bomberman R Photograph: Konami 
At last, the brilliant Hudsonsoft maze blasting game is returning to a major 
console, courtesy of Konami. Up to eight players will be able to take part in 
local-multiplayer challenges. the only thing we’re worried about is the news 
that it’ll be 3D. Super Bomberman should always be 2D. Hopefully that’s an 
option.

 Xenoblade Chronicles 2
 Xenoblade Chronicles 2 Photograph: Nintendo 
The revered role-playing adventure series will come to Switch with an entirely 
new hero, on a journey to Elysium. Tetsuya Takahashi, the executive director on 
the original Xenoblade Chronicles, is guiding development, but little else is 
known beyond theteasing trailer <https://youtu.be/sJuiTw6nk7A>.

Shin Megami Tensei – new title

Again, not much information is available about this new instalment in the 
post-apocalyptic role-playing series. We know from the trailer that it’s using 
the Unreal Engine 4 technology so it’ll look very different to Shin Megami 
Tensei 4: Apocalypse on the 3DS.

New game from Bravely Default team

All we have about this upcoming role-playing adventure is the tweet from 
Nintendo, but look at those lovely visuals – a sort of tilt-shift pixel art 
style, mixed with the sort of anime panache you’d expect from the team behind
Bravely Default <http://bravelydefault.nintendo.com/> on the 3DS. 

Minecraft

Once again, all we have is a tweet, this time from 4J Studios, the developer 
responsible for the console versions of the block-building game. We’re hoping 
for Joy-Con support that lets you mine and/or chop down trees with an actual 
chopping motion!
 