
Somewhere in your town, probably in a chilly corner of your library, if you 
are still lucky enough to have one, is a child. They are by themselves, 
bespectacled probably; not wearing the trendiest clothes. And they are reading 
and reading and filling their head with nothing else but books and words and 
new worlds. They have a dream; that one day books will be their life. It seems 
unlikely, but there it is. And it is wonderful.

And somewhere else in your town, in a kitchen that is perhaps a little too 
small, there is another child. And this child is frowning furiously at a recipe 
book and getting under everyone’s feet and they are cooking and cooking and 
putting flavours together and hoping things work out. They have a dream, too; 
that one day food will be their life. And it is also wonderful.

Nadiya Hussain  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/12/bake-off-winner-nadiya-hussain-muslims-britain>
, the winner of 2015’sThe Great British Bake Off, has achieved that dream, and 
she is amazing. But I am here to stick up for the other kid, because those kids 
are the writers. Nothing against baking, by the way. I love to bake; I’m not 
even that bad at it. I am also under absolutely no illusion that I would be 
allowed to compete in theGBBO final while someone else did the tricky bits in 
the wings.

It’s hardly a new phenomenon, celebrities turning up out of the blue with 
novels what they have most definitely wrote. Maybe it’s particularly upsetting 
me this time because I’m a fan. Hussain is just so brimful of talent; of 
happiness and grace and skill. From a traditional Muslim background, she grew 
up in Luton and ended up being universally loved and baking for the Queen. Does 
she really need to put her name to a novel, too, when there’s only so much 
shelf space to go around?

What’s the book like? It’s perfectly competent, as well it should be, as the 
“helper or “consultant” or whatever we’re supposed to call them these days is 
the highly talented Ayisha Malik, author of the funny and sparkySofia Khan Is 
Not Obliged 
<http://www.thenational.ae/arts-life/the-review/book-review-sofia-khan-is-not-obliged-shes-also-not-exactly-the-muslim-bridget-jones>
, a smart and acerbic romcom about a young woman writing a book on Muslim 
dating.

In The Secret Lives of the Amir Sisters there are four sisters: a caring 
homebody Meg-from-Little Women type in Farah; a housebound fragile Beth 
in Fatima; a free-spirited artistic Jo in Bubblee; and a troublesome 
mischievous youngest Amy in Mae. I was hoping for insights into a culture I 
don’t understand as well as I’d like, but the main thrust, overall, is that big 
noisy religious families are all more or less the same, which, while 
undoubtedly true, didn’t add much for this Irish/Italian Catholic.

But does she really need to put her name to a novel, too, when there’s only so 
much shelf space to go around?

The book treats cousin marriage as a cultural norm (Farah and husband Mo are 
cousins, and another potential suitor is Mo’s brother Malik, who arrives from 
Bangladesh and whom Fatima likes the look of, particularly when he points out 
how similar her hands are to their shared grandmother’s). It is often funny, 
and gradually reveals a bunch of family secrets that one could easily knock up 
in the back of a recipe book while waiting for a loaf to prove. There is a 
little baking in the novel, incidentally, but rather more Primula cheese and 
mashed-up prawns.

If you want to read warm-hearted sagas about second-generation immigration, 
Meera Syal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/04/the-house-of-hidden-mothers-meera-syal-review>
is a wonderful novelist. If you want to read a brilliant book about four 
sisters,Little Women is still in print. If you like sisters and cooking, try 
the marvellousLike Water for Chocolate. Or read Ayisha Malik’s book: it’s huge 
fun.

In the end, I think the worst thing about this is that it feels greedy. Not 
the good greedy that makes you learn to make delicious things and grab life 
with both hands, defy expectations, all the things which Hussain has done so 
admirably. Books are a zero sum game. If you’re reading one, you can’t be 
reading another. And this surefire seller, promoted at every literary festival 
you’ll attend this year, just feels like yet another chance snatched away from 
that kid whose library is closing down.

• Jenny Colgan’s latest novel is Christmas at Little Beach Street Bakery 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/christmas-at-the-little-beach-street-bakery.html>
 (Sphere).The Secret Lives of the Amir Sisters is published by HarperCollins. 
To order a copy for £12.99 (RRP £11.04) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/secret-lives-of-the-amir-sisters.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 