
I would like to thank Gaby Hinsliff for writing her article in Saturday’s 
Guardian (The media don’t hate Jeremy Corbyn. It’s a lot more complicated than 
that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/03/media-dont-hate-corbyn-labour-leader-victory-not-understand-his-appeal>
, 4 June) and at least starting a conversation about the relationship between 
Jeremy Corbyn, his supporters and the media.

I was present at Corbyn’s speech last Thursday. I went because I wanted to 
hear what he had to say and to judge for myself whether he was being 
characterised fairly by the media. He clearly is not. What got reported was not 
what he said about remaining in and reforming the EU, but audience reaction to 
Laura Kuenssberg. Some people hissed. I did not, and I don’t support it as a 
form of communication. However, what the media have been doing is far worse 
than hissing and booing; they have been sneering, dismissive and contemptuous 
of someone who won a clear mandate to lead.

Gaby Hinsliff says journalists have failed to understand Corbyn and his 
support. I agree. I rejoined theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party to vote for him because he 
was the only anti-austerity candidate. The fact that he is not a slick and 
polished performer is not a problem – it is a welcome relief after the 
“charisma” of Blair. I am not a “Corbynista” – whatever that is – and am not 
interested in a cult of personality. For me it is much more serious – about 
people’s lives, their future, and the opportunity to be involved in the 
democratic process which his candidacy offered.

Hinsliff talks about reporters’ “instinctive bias towards winners” and seems 
to have decided that Corbyn is not one – despite the fact that he won the 
leadership contest against the odds. “Instinctive” suggests some kind of 
journalistic gut feeling, but it is a bias towards established power elites, 
internalised as “natural”. I suppose I would be one of those “nice, normal 
people” she mentions who must have voted for Corbyn. I did so because it seemed 
the best chance for a leftwing alternative, a daunting task for anyone because 
some of the most virulent opposition comes from within the Labour party itself, 
particularly from the MPs. Having been an ex-member for decades, I am once 
again an active supporter; I canvassed for Sadiq Khan recently, not so much for 
him, but in a reaction to the negativity and smears directed against him. So, 
as Hinsliff says, it is complex; but the press would do well to use their 
intelligence rather than their instinct to reflect the complexity and the 
unpredictability of politics.
Jo Millett
London

• Jeremy Corbyn has been criticised for keeping a low profile in the remain 
campaign. Last Thursday, your front page led with comments made by GMB leader 
Tim Roache and included short, selected quotes from the speech Corbyn was due 
to make that day (Corbyn urged to speak up on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/01/jeremy-corbyn-pro-immigration-case-eu-referendum-gmb-union-tim-roache>
, 2 June). I scoured Friday’s paper for the follow-up report and found a few 
column inches on your double-page EU referendum spread, which was otherwise 
dominated by David Cameron’s appearance on Sky News. Even this almost 
nonexistent coverage of the Corbyn speech concentrated exclusively on the BBC’s 
Laura Kuenssberg (plus photo) being hissed when she asked him a question (
Labour boos for Kuenssberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/02/jeremy-corbyn-supporters-boo-bbcs-laura-kuenssberg>
, 3 June). It’s little wonder that the public is allegedly unsure what the 
Labour party’s position is on the referendum given the failure to take an 
interest in a speech by the Labour leader unless a negative slant can be put on 
it. Stronger in Europe may want Jeremy Corbyn’s “voice to be heard” but the 
press obviously have other ideas.
Karen Barratt
Winchester

• When Tony Blair says “I’m not sure I fully understand politics right now” 
and Gaby Hinsliff’s colleagues think that Corbyn’s election “made no sense”, 
perhaps they weren’t listening closely enough. Didn’t they hear the crash of 
2008; the demonisation of those who did least to cause this; the unjust 
enrichment of the already super-rich? All the way back to the waste of North 
Sea oil; the wrecking of UK manufacturing, coal and steel; the failed 
privatisations; the corrupt practices and failures to deliver in contracted-out 
services; the failure to build houses and the cruelties of the private rental 
sector; the concentration of power and the democratic deficit; the blind 
obsession with “the market” and all the other indignities inflicted on the 
long-suffering mass of ordinary people in this country. It is quite astonishing 
that those professionally involved in politics should be so deaf. It is no 
wonder that people seek solutions in extremes when the mainstream has so 
copiously failed.
Roy Boffy
Walsall

• Gaby Hinsliff writes: “Journalists are not out to destroy Corbyn because he 
threatens to bring down the neoliberal elite, or because they’re all Tories, or 
because they live in a bubble of groupthink”. Which begs the question: why are 
they out to destroy him then?
Bruce Paley
Castle Morris, Pembrokeshire

• Gaby Hinsliff considers that “for every shrill social media warrior there 
are dozens of nice, normal people who backed Corbyn” who should be asked why 
they did. Since we consider that we fit this characterisation, may we attempt 
to answer this query?

There seems to be an assumption by the media that the rush to join Labour in 
order to vote for Corbyn was mainly by the young and politically ignorant part 
of electorate, simply motivated by the novelty and contrast to the usual Labour 
voices. Has anyone tried to estimate what proportion of the newer Labour 
membership consists of those, like us, who abandoned a long-standing membership 
over the Blairite New Labour years from despair over the drift towards the 
uncritical acceptance of neoliberalism (the last straw often the invasion of 
Iraq)? Some of us saw a light at the end of the tunnel with Ed Miliband’s 
leadership, and rejoined over that period, but evidently the light was too far 
away.

We understood why the postwar enthusiasm for political change was eventually 
unable to survive the rationing and austerity of those difficult years, despite 
the good things that had been achieved: the setting up of the NHS, the repair 
of war-damaged houses and the building of new ones, and introducing secondary 
education for all, for instance. We remember our regret at the time that (some 
of?) the trade unions rejected the opportunity to take part in the running of 
the newly nationalised industries, preferring to maintain their distance from 
the management in defence of the workers.

Many aspects of the economy benefited from the changes that ensued in the 
1950s. It takes a long time for the culture of a political party to change, and 
the birth of New Labour was necessary before Labour again had a substantial 
period of government. But again, the leadership of the party has become fixated 
on policies that were necessary for the period of transition, and they are now 
not sufficiently alert to the need to apply curbs on the excesses of 
neoliberalism.

We are appalled by the way the parliamentary party has turned against the 
overwhelming membership of the party. Corbyn does not come across as a wild 
revolutionary in his weekly email reports, but rather as a cool observer of 
what needs to be done to improve life and the economy in Britain today. Perhaps 
what we are looking for is a combination of his talents with the ability of an 
Obama to inspire the electorate.

It is only fair to confess that we are both economics graduates (1950 vintage) 
and great admirers of Keynes, and of Piketty, though by no means practising 
economists. Keynes knew what needed to be done when the country is trapped in 
austerity and hovering on the brink of depression. Even the IMF has seen that 
light.
Ailsa Land
Emeritus professor, LSE
Frank Land
Emeritus professor, LSE

• Why did Corbyn get elected to lead Labour? Gaby Hinsliff says that 
journalists “rarely … see the view from inside the camp”. Within my own 
constituency party many activists supported Corbyn. They turned their backs on 
Blair/Brown mainly because they were sick of seeing a public battle between two 
party leaders and their gangs. Members were equally reluctant to promote any 
leading member of the Miliband frontbench, who had tamely and inexplicably 
acquiesced in the Cameron-Osborne lie about a car crash, what Paul Krugman has 
called “the nonsensical proposition that [Labour’s] supposed fiscal 
irresponsibility caused the crisis of 2008-2009” (The austerity delusion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/apr/29/the-austerity-delusion>
, 29 April 2015). Miliband’s weak-kneed team allowed this blatant falsehood to 
become a universally accepted truth. None of them could be rewarded.

For Labour supporters Corbyn’s main qualification was that he was untainted. 
That’s why so many Labour MPs resent his election, a sentiment understandably 
reflected in the media.
David Butler
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 