
Is your phone the first thing you look at in the morning? Do you spend your 
lunch break mindlessly scrolling on social media? You’re not alone. According 
to recent statistics, adults in the UK spend an average of8 hours and 41 
minutes a day on screens <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-28677674> – 
that’s more time than they are asleep. We spend a total of25 hours a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/04/more-than-a-third-of-uk-internet-users-have-tried-digital-detox-ofcom>
 online; that’s up from 9 hours a week in 2005.

It’s clear that this ‘always on’ trend is only going to increase, as the 
demands of modern life are so closely connected with our use of technology. 
It’s therefore more important than ever to step away from our screens 
sometimes. And that includes when we’re at work. Not only will it improve 
relationships within the team, but it’s also proven to help reduce stress and 
improve mental health.

Stick to office hours

Encourage employees to switch their email off after work ends, unless the 
business demands an ‘always on’ presence. A culture with high expectations to 
monitor and respond to emails during non-work time may prevent employees from 
ever fully disengaging from work, leading to chronic stress and emotional 
exhaustion in the long run.

Less emails, more conversation

With so much of our days spent sat at our computers, it’s easy to forget about 
the importance of interaction on a more human level with colleagues and 
customers. It’s also easy to slip into an email-first process, when a quick 
conversation could do the trick – and is more likely to iron out any issues 
straight away. If your business requires you to be on the pulse culturally, 
it’s a great idea to start the day with a brainstorm or workshop to bounce some 
ideas around and discuss how your business can fit in with current trends.

Reclaim lunch breaks

Too often lunch breaks are spent scrolling the Internet and never really 
stepping away from our emails. Even if it is once a week, a group break out of 
the office is a great morale booster, whether it’s a team pub lunch on a Friday 
or a series of office events throughout the month. Everyone loves a bake sale!

No phone zones

Spending all day sitting at a desk in front of a screen is unavoidable for 
most modern business owners, so try to allow yourself to switch off at home. 
Create no phone zones – at the dinner table or in the bedroom – and give 
yourself some time each day to decompress away from technology. Yoga, 
meditation and mindfulness are great practices to consider – twenty minutes a 
day can do wonders.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx> sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
 