
 I was once travelling to work on the London Underground when I noticed that 
the attractive young woman sitting opposite me was reading a copy of Alan 
Clark's first book, The Donkeys.

This was his youthful analysis of incompetent British generalship in the First 
World War ("lions led by donkeys", as the Germans put it), the book which first 
brought him fame - and the attention of Lord Beaverbrook - as well as inspiring 
Joan Littlewood's ironical musical, Oh, What A Lovely War!

At least, so Clark legend had it. But I had never managed to obtain a copy. 
"Where did you get that book?" I blurted out. She blushed and I knew instantly 
that it was a personal gift from the author, who later accused me of "trying to 
pick up my secretary on the tube". Which is, of course, exactly what he'd have 
done, as the Diaries make gleefully plain.

What is the fascination about a former junior minister of romantic and 
reactionary views that warrants Colin Spector's film, The RealAlan Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark>? It will reveal that, 
surprise, surprise, not all the Diary entries are true - they create what his 
Etonian chum, publisher Anthony Blond, calls "a wonderful fiction called Alan 
Clark".

But why should we care? As the programme shows, Clark was never a very 
important figure in the government. Far from it. His beloved Margaret Thatcher 
made him a junior minister in Employment, so her wily chief whip John Wakeham 
explains to camera, because he advised her that he would be more trouble 
outside the tent than inside.

In this, Wakeham was mistaken. Spector's film charts a pattern of ministerial 
incidents ("accidents" would be too kind a word) from drunkeness at the 
Dispatch Box to the Matrix Churchill arms-sale affair which should have 
finished him.

"If he can survive this, he can survive anything", thought Archie Hamilton, 
whose job as army minister Clark coveted, none too subtly. Worse, the film 
confirms what some of us suspected at the time. Though Mrs Thatcher liked and 
admired her swashbuckling courtier (around her he behaved "like a slightly wet 
pussycat", reports Tory MP, Nicholas Soames), she had no intention of promoting 
him to cabinet.

No, the fact of the matter is that Alan was, in the affectionate description 
of Anthony Blond, "a prize shit". But, oh, how much more fun to have around 
than most of this film's middle-aged, male interviewees - stuffed shirts, whose 
watery eyes gleam with, alas, only vicarious pleasure over his conquests, his 
cars, his caddish behaviour. The monster once invited me out for a curry and 
manoeuvred me into paying even though he'd just sold Papa's Turner. The rich 
are like that.

But fun and a desire to shock (probably to disoblige his terrifying parents) 
mingled with ambition and vanity to produce diaries that will still be enjoyed 
in 100 years. Clark was nowhere near as important to British defence strategy 
as the great Samuel Pepys, but he shares with his fellow scribbler proximity to 
great events, an eye for detail and a redeeming willingness to make a fool of 
himself in print, particularly over those two basic impulses, sex and money.

That's why we liked him and forgave him for the kind of crude transgressions 
which made Enoch Powell (much cleverer, but not very human) the pariah he 
remains among the progressive classes. The very fact that Clark was a bit of a 
card, not taken too seriously except (sometimes) by himself, made him far less 
dangerous - "an upper class Alf Garnett", as this film explains.

Students of sibling rivalry will enjoy the score-settling cameo provided by 
Clark's younger brother Colin, so different that he once passed up a chance to 
have Marilyn Monroe. Alan's moving description of the death of Papa - Lord 
Clark of Civilisation - was actually his brother's brutal moment of final 
triumph, Colin claims. Ho hum.

But the conspicuous absentee from Spector's piece is the quietly formidable 
Jane Clark, the diarist's Lolita whom he married at 16 ("she's so young I can 
mould her"). The groom was 30 and looked surprisingly callow in his morning 
suit, an Ian Carmichael lookalike. We also learn that Alan persuaded Jane to 
change her own name, Caroline, to his mother's.

A very bad case of distant-mother fixation, especially since Clark consciously 
aped his father's womanising self-absorption. But Jane mark II managed to 
provide the stability the spoilt boy needed to become something: a diarist who 
will undoubtedly be read for pleasure down the years. Not a bad memorial, that, 
more impressive even than the 600 matrons who joined Kensington and Chelsea 
Conservative Association when they heard the retread might get the seat.

When Clark died of a brain tumour in 1999 the family kept it a secret until 
they had him safely buried in the grounds of Saltwood. "How's Alan?" a reporter 
rang to ask, with the corpse awaiting the undertaker. "Not as well as we'd 
like", replied cool Jane. Amen to that.
 