
As a political philosopher I’ve long been fascinated by the parable of the 
workers in the vineyard (Matthew 20: 1-16). What? You’ve forgotten it? Let me 
remind you.

A landowner hired some workers in the early morning, promising each a denarius 
for the day. Later he hired some more, and later still even more. At the end of 
the day he paid each one a denarius, irrespective of how long they had worked. 
Naturally those who had worked all day complained, but the landowner replied, 
to paraphrase: “How much did I promise you? How much have I paid you? Then shut 
your moaning mouths.”

It is a brilliant story for reflecting on issues of desert, fairness, freedom 
of contract, legitimate expectations and exploitation. If the landowner could 
afford to pay every worker one denarius, then how much is he making out of 
those who toiled all day?

It is psychologically rich, too, illustrating that happiness seems to depend 
on comparisons with others as much as one’s own life. There might also be a 
business studies analysis to be done. Why didn’t he engage the correct number 
of workers for the job in the first place, or is it better in the long term to 
employ a small number of people and hire more during the day if need be?

A little while ago, I was playing with the idea of using the parable in my 
teaching. The moral of the story, though, had escaped me, so I went back to the 
gospels to check.

It was a bitter disappointment. Apparently it doesn’t matter when in your life 
you embrace Christianity, for all will be rewarded equally in the Kingdom of 
Heaven. The last will be first and all that. What on Earth was I to do with 
that idea?

Finally, though, I think I have found a use. Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions>. I write while negotiations about 
reforms to the universities superannuation scheme are reaching a conclusion. 
The parable of the workers in the vineyard could almost be renamed the Parable 
of the Workers in the USS Final Salary Scheme.

Under current arrangements, from which I benefit, our pensions are determined 
by two factors: how long we have been in post and our final salaries.

Unlike the workers in the vineyard, it does matter how long we have worked – 
but it doesn’t matter whether we have been paid at our final salary level for 
decades, or just a few years. We will get the same reward in the Kingdom of 
Pensions. To simplify, if a staff member has worked for 40 years, their pension 
will be equivalent to half their final salary.

The scheme is reasonably generous, although not as generous as it looks as few 
academics these days acquire 40 years of service. Importantly, though, it gives 
employees certainty about their benefits. When life expectancies were lower, 
and salaries more closely regulated, it worked well.

However, with rising life expectancy and a competitive university environment, 
this has changed. The international transfer market has made it increasingly 
common for those in demand to bargain for a large rise late in their careers, 
precisely to increase their pensions. This puts a burden on the pension scheme, 
which hasn’t been funded by earlier contributions at a proportionate level.

A final salary scheme cannot finance itself under these circumstances, and 
despite understandable protests, has to give way. In the case of the university 
scheme we will move to a combination of a “career average” and “defined 
benefits” scheme, albeit leaving previous entitlements intact.

Changes do not always affect everyone equally. In this case the worst affected 
will be those promoted later in their career, who therefore have a lower 
average salary than others at the same final point.

And who are these people? Typically (though not exclusively) they are women 
with children whose research careers slowed when their children were young. If 
we didn’t have reason enough already, a career average pension scheme makes it 
imperative we ensure that male and female salaries are comparable at every 
career stage.

Jonathan Wolff is professor of philosophy at University College London and 
dean of arts and humanities
 