
Every Friday the 13th, Mammon demands another teenbait horrorshow with which 
to befoul multiplexes. Here we find former indie spirit Stacy Title (Let the 
Devil Wear Black) schlocking out, possibly explaining the incongruous Rilke 
quotations and alt-rock T-shirts adorning this otherwise artless shambles, 
a Candyman shorn of all subtexts. Three blandies install themselves in 
ominously spacious student digs and – after aeons of poking about that 
suggest Scream never happened – inadvertently summon the titular fiend, a 
Poundland Voldemort whose name spawns a handy dual-action mantra-cum-strapline: 
“Don’t think it, don’t say it.” (To which some wag has doubtless already 
appended “Don’t see it.”)


Even at its copout conclusion – blatantly shilling for sequels – there’s 
marked editorial confusion as to how this bogeyman presents, beyond the usual 
loud farts on the soundtrack. (The students’ coughing and hallucinations could 
as likely be a result of carbon monoxide poisoning.) Half-hearted digging into 
Old Bye Bye’s genesis occasions direly acted flashbacks and meetings with 
expositional librarians, but curiously not the gore young adults might in good 
faith have paid to see. There’s not a memorable kill in these 96 minutes, and 
one fatal shotgun blast leaves behind only a light grey smear, as though the 
effects team had popped out for Hobnobs.

Title’s other notional wows include a cameo from the same Hollywood great who 
signed up to be molested by a monkey in 1996’s Dunston Checks In, but the 
ensuing huffing-and-puffing proves typical of a film more often unintentionally 
amusing than jolting in any way. It’s the kind of stopgap, date-dependent junk 
where an establishing shot of a college campus cues several bars of a composer 
trying to remember how The Social Network sounded, and where the students 
pursue their nemesis via a search engine called “Search”, because nobody 
associated with the project elected to surrender a single bright idea in return 
for their paycheque.
 