
All hail to Team GB. A gold medal to Clare Balding as best, and best-paid, 
presenter. She’s the Laura Trott of Olympics broadcasting. Another gold to 
Hazel Irvine, the calmest, best-informed anchor going. And – amid the usual 
cacophony of carping – a silver endurance medal for theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> itself, which kept most things on track 
in resilient form. We got what we paid for.

Big lessons? Only one. The athletes made their medal hauls on the back of 
ruthlessly targeted lottery funding. Succeed and you get more money. Fail and 
you’re out of the running. Team GB, in short, was defined, underpinned and 
buoyed by choices. And if that’s the best way in front of camera, then how does 
it rate on the studio floor and in the back offices?

An answer, appropriately enough, emerged last week under cover of much 
golden-couple rejoicing. It’s one of thelast of the doomed BBC Trust’s reviews 
<http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/our_work/nations_radio_news/summary_report.pdf>
 before Ofcom takes over – and it reaches to the heart of our national 
broadcasting bind. Simply: when we turn on a radio or TV set in Scotland, Wales 
or Northern Ireland, do we get what we want?

Yes, says the trust. Or possibly no. On the one hand, satisfaction levels are 
relatively high. On the other, they could be higher – especially north of the 
border. “Perceptions of the BBC in Scotland have traditionally been less 
positive than in most other parts of the UK, due to a complex mix of reasons, 
some cultural.” Which, being interpreted in non-review jargon, means you either 
want Scottish independence or you don’t – and no amount of banging on about 
“impartiality” will convince Alex Salmond (who was sounding off again last 
week) or his “highly engaged” supporters that fairness and balance can sit 
astride this ancestral fence. Hiding-to-nothing territory by standards 
impossibly set.

Furthermore, many of the cultural extras that can mean a lot are clearly on 
life support. For one thing, “language plays an important part in the history 
and cultural heritage of all the devolved nations, and indigenous minority 
language programmes are highly valued by their speakers and those who 
appreciate their cultural content. The BBC provides content in Welsh, Gaelic, 
Irish and Ulster-Scots on TV, radio and online.” But, for another thing, “while 
[the stations’] potential audience is small, it is also demographically very 
broad. The extent to which minority-language TV and radio services can be used 
by family groups who do not all speak these languages adds further complexity.” 
You’re not even broadcasting in the same language to a family sitting on the 
same sofa.

It’s a shrinking and increasingly age-related mini-market, in short. And, 
talking of shrinkage, let’s mention the fact that “older people are generally 
more interested in news about their nation [while] younger listeners are 
particularly likely to consume BBC and commercial music stations and newer 
digital music services. This has contributed to pressure on the stations’ reach 
and hours of listening, as well as their typical age profile”.

So “the stations’ challenge is how to continue to reach a broad audience 
without weakening their distinctive, speech-led offer”. Maybe, instead of 
insisting on separate talk and music channels, there might be ways of mixing 
the two. Radio 2 Plus 4. Think about it, chaps.

And meanwhile, remember that “all BBC TV and radio services are facing a 
challenge from the audience shift to online consumption. The BBC will need to 
offer more of its content online, including on mobile and social media, in 
order to continue to deliver its public purposes to a broad audience. However, 
it will also have to maintain the quality of its TV and radio offer as these 
media remain important to many adults.”

What? More online and social media? Didn’t the BBC and the trust just promise 
less of that, less trampling on newspaper and other commercial media patches 
last review time around?

But that was then and this is now. The GB bit of Team GB doesn’t seem so easy 
when victory against a heaving, squeezing government promises only shrunken 
survival rather than medals. Keeping nations together when a separation of 
media – look out for a tartanSix O’clock News – sets them further apart. And 
remember, the BBC couldn’t find the cash to keep future Olympics to itself. The 
trouble with keeping everyone happy is that you can’t. Unless, of course, Clare 
Balding is available to play supreme ref one more time.
 