
It is unacceptable that the inhumane benefits system continues to devastate 
the lives of many people who are already suffering illness (In excruciating 
pain ... but still apparently fit for work, 26 October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/fit-for-work-disability-cuts-bureaucracy-daniel-blake>
). Not only do the deliberately dysfunctional work capability assessments and 
catch-22 bureaucracy cause immense distress and humiliation to individuals, as 
portrayed brilliantly inKen Loach’s film I, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/i-daniel-blake-review-ken-loach-film-benefits-system>
, but this punitive system makes little economic sense.

Having worked for years with people suffering from mental health problems and 
seen how the Tories have piled on the pressure through cuts to support services 
and reducing access to benefits, it is unsurprising that more people are 
reaching crisis point and need hospital admission. MentalHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Act assessments continue to 
increase. More demands are made of an overstretched and underfunded NHS. This 
is highly expensive compared with the cost of providing necessary benefits and 
support to help someone to continue to live with self-respect, as a 
contributing member of the community. The benefits system is causing ill people 
to feel desperate and worthless by depriving them of the practical means to 
live and has become another means of promoting an ideology defined by exclusion 
and inequality.
Liz Udall
Carshalton, Surrey

• Lots of people must know victims like John in Aditya Chakrabortty’s article, 
but is there something that can be done? A dossier of thousands of examples to 
drop in the lap of the secretary for work and pensions would be a start. Also 
the directors of Maximus,Capita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> et al should be required to 
account for the treatment of their clients. The abuses and inaccuracy of the 
records can scarcely be accidental, they clearly happen so often. If the 
companies try and pass the buck to the DWP, they should be required to show how 
and where the government instructs them to act as they do; they are paid from 
the public purse and should be accountable to the public.
Joseph Oldaker
Nuneaton, Warwickshire

• For some years I worked as a volunteer adviser for Citizens Advice Bureau. 
Tales such as John’s were commonplace. It seemed to me then, and even more 
forcefully now, that if a person was deemed fit for work by a government 
agency, then it should be incumbent upon that agency to find that person a 
suitable job. Meanwhile, the disputed benefit should continue to be paid. After 
all, employment and support allowance was supposed to be a way of helping 
people into work, not a device for finding excuses to cut benefits.
Roy Boffy
Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands

• We both watched I, Daniel Blake and cried. Can we suggest that this film is 
shown at the House of Commons and that it be compulsory viewing for every 
member of the parliamentary Labour party. It might just remind them what they 
were elected to fight against and stop them indulging in the destructive, 
internecine squabbling that has occupied them for 12 months or more. Should 
Messrs Cameron and Osborne be reflecting on what their legacy might be, perhaps 
they could be invited along as guests.
David and Ann Jones
Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire

• Am I the only person not to like I, Daniel Blake? First, the story: there 
was none – unemployed man has problems with his welfare benefit, meets single 
mum, is about it. Then there’s the profile of Daniel Blake. He’s a widower, a 
tradesman and an artisan; he’s friendly to his black neighbour, he’s got pride 
in his neighbourhood and, most importantly, he listens to classical music and 
Radio 4. God bless us, he’s halfway to being a Guardian reader already. Now we 
appear to have the “deserving benefits claimant” and “undeserving benefits 
claimant”.

Over the past 30 years I’ve signed on numerous times and the one-dimensional 
portrayal in the film of being on the dole didn’t help the drama. In fact it 
became the drama: the story centred around the labyrinthine workings of 
“benefit land” – and for those who have ever been on benefits, no surprise 
there. And when the story did try to make an appearance in the film, it became 
comical. Daniel, after a spell at the Job Club, ends up with a CV written in 
pencil which looked as though he was wearing a boxing glove when he wrote it.

Most of Ken Loach’s films have been very good – especially, Raining Stones 
<http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/raining-stones-1994> and Riff-Raff 
<http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/riff-raff-1993>. But I, Daniel Blake lacked 
any real understanding of the subject. I believe this was because of Ken and 
his writer knowing they were pushing at an open door. We are facing the most 
reactionary and class-based government in living memory. There is a great deal 
of confusion and uncertainty on the left. The unstinting support for I, Daniel 
Blake is, I believe, a comfort blanket; something to prove those on the left 
are doing their bit to understand the “less fortunate”. Recognising his plight 
and getting upset with Daniel Blake’s predicament could be seen as a badge of 
honour. If you want to see working-class life in the raw, try Jim Allen’s 1978 
TV play,The Spongers <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Spongers>. 
Frank Kenny
Liverpool

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 