
Colin Tizzard’s best season became better still when his Theatre Guide ran 
away with the Betbright Chase here, just a few hours after the stable’s Gold 
Cup contender, Cue Card, shone in an exercise gallop before racing started. “To 
win a £100,000 race like that is beyond our expectations,” the trainer said in 
the winner’s enclosure, beaming like a man who cannot believe his luck.

Wearing a similar expression was Paddy Brennan, who was so far clear on the 
run-in aboard Theatre Guide that he had time to face the crowd and flourish his 
whip in triumph. “This is your lucky race,” someone told him, it having been 
Brennan’s third success in seven years. “It’s my lucky racetrack,” the jockey 
said, thinking of his King George win on Cue Card here on Boxing Day.

“It’s a privilege to be in these colours,” Brennan said. “Only for Bob Bishop, 
who’s no longer with us, I wouldn’t be in these colours. I’ll be forever 
grateful to him.”

Bishop shared ownership of Theatre Guide, Cue Card and others with his wife 
until passing at the age of 83, four days after the King George.

Brennan’s first act on dismounting from Theatre Guide here was to embrace Jean 
Bishop, whose relish for the sport is such that she was on the gallops at
Tizzard’s Dorset stables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/25/colin-tizzard-seeks-to-crown-his-career-with-cue-card-in-cheltenham-gold-cup>
 to watch exercise work at 7am twice this week. “It’s very sad,” she said, 
reflecting on the loss of her husband since she was last here, “but we move on 
and I’m sure he’s watching us. He wouldn’t want us not to do anything. I bet 
he’s saying, go on, go and enjoy it.”

This was a competitive Betbright, run from the outset at a daring pace that 
took its toll on Ziga Boy, Rocky Creek, Virak and others who helped to force 
it. Brennan allowed Theatre Guide to coast into the argument from halfway and 
things looked very promising indeed for them at the turn for home, with only 
the tiring Le Reve ahead of them.

Even so, the way Theatre Guide bounded clear was eye-opening, particularly in 
the context of a horse whose sole success in his previous 11 starts was a 
dead-heat in a four-runner event. Tizzard pointed out, however, that the horse 
had shown his quality in being placed in two Hennessys and it seems rather a 
pity that he is not entered in the Grand National, apparently at the insistence 
of Mrs Bishop, who is not a fan of the race.

Cue Card wins King George VI Chase at the fourth attempt after thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/26/cue-card-wins-king-george-vi-chase>
As enjoyable as this victory was, Cue Card was the most significant horse 
these connections brought here and in his case the impressive detail was how 
lightly he wore the rigours of this season, when he has won three of the most 
prestigious steeplechases. Brennan partnered him in a spin around the track and 
told Tizzard: “This is the fittest horse here. He’s better than he was before 
the King George.”

Later, the jockey said: “He’s obviously had a good break, he’s come back today 
and felt unbelievable. He felt like a two-year-old, he felt fresh, he looks 
great in his skin. Just counting down the days.”

Cue Card is on offer at 6-1 for the Gold Cup a fortnight on Friday.

With Cheltenham in mind, perhaps the other significant performance here was 
that of Zubayr, who won the Adonis on his hurdling debut and was immediately 
said by his trainer, Paul Nicholls, to be “the mirror of Zarkandar”, who won 
this race five years ago before adding the Triumph Hurdle at the Festival.

Zubayr is now second-favourite for this year’s Triumph, due to take place 
about two hours before the Gold Cup.
 