
I have worked for the Post Office as a counter clerk for over 28 years. I’ve 
thoroughly enjoyed it and always wanted to serve the public, but the feeling 
among colleagues in thePost Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> at the moment is one of 
disappointment and demoralisation.

We desperately want the public to get behind and support our endeavours as we 
try to prevent the downgrading of this treasured institution – which is why 
Monday saw the first offive strike days this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/post-office-workers-to-strike-for-five-days-in-lead-up-to-christmas>
.

None of us want to be in this position and can ill-afford to be losing money 
in the build up to Christmas, but we have been through extremely difficult 
periods of change over the past few yearsand are desperate to shine a light on 
the continuing devaluation of the Post Office brand led by senior management.

The issue over pensions is of particular concern to us

I have been involved in campaigning against the closure of many crown post 
offices in my local area in north London. We have recently suffered the closure 
of the Holloway Road crown office and four more are threatened. These losses 
make us fear for the customers in these communities, and they are being echoed 
throughout the UK with a series of closures and cuts that are described by our 
employer as “transformation”.

Post Office employees have seen cuts and attacks on our pensions and our terms 
and conditions, while the business maintains an intransigent attitude towards 
our union. The issue over pensions is of particular concern as my colleagues 
and I face ever bleaker prospects for retirement.

We are disappointed and concerned that the government has tried to influence 
and impose a negative public perception on myself and colleagues by claiming 
that we are“showing contempt for ordinary people” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/19/no-10-accuses-striking-workers-of-contempt-for-ordinary-people>
. We have been serving the public for many generations and only wish to serve 
for many more years to come. This will become more difficult, of course, if the 
closure of crown offices continues to gather pace. We consider ourselves the 
“ordinary” people who have dedicated our lives to serving others. We would 
argue that it is the government that is showing utter contempt for communities 
and working people and the rights they are entitled to in employment and 
retirement. The accusations levelled at us by the government are a distraction 
from the reality we face.

Post Office strikes to go ahead after talks break down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/post-office-workers-to-strike-for-five-days-in-lead-up-to-christmas>
The fact that senior managers are incentivised to reduce the number of crown 
post offices without any dialogue with the union and consideration for the 
public is both troubling and depressing. This is outrageous because this is a 
state-owned business that everyone has a stake in, yet the government is 
standing aside and letting the industry wither on the vine.

I have dedicated half of my life to the Post Office and serving the public and 
yet at 56 years of age I find myself facing the prospect of being forced out of 
work and facing an uncertain and stressful future. That is what it is like 
working for the Post Office today. Please support us.
 