
The former vice-chairman of the BBC Trust has expressed alarm about the 
“brutal” way Theresa May effectively reversed David Cameron’s decision to 
reappointRona Fairhead <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rona-fairhead> as 
chair of the corporation.

Fairhead stepped down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/13/rona-fairhead-to-stand-down-as-bbc-chair>
 on Tuesday after May indicated she would have to reapply for the job of chair 
of the new BBC unitary board, four months after Cameron renewed her contract. 
The former prime minister askedFairhead to stay on as chair of the BBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/06/rona-fairheads-appointment-as-head-of-new-bbc-board-broke-rules-says-mp>
 during the corporation’s transition to being governed by a powerful single 
board.

Diane Coyle, a former Treasury adviser and vice-chair to Fairhead on the 
trust, said: “I think it is an extraordinary turn of events so late in the day 
to change the arrangement for the transition.”

Speaking on BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 4’s Today 
programme, she said the timing was a “bit strange”.

She added: “It is a very short period now before we are supposed to have the 
new structure in place and the white paper has not been published yet, and 
there is a lot of work to do after that ... The process is always pretty 
brutal, the way politicians and the way officials doing their job go about 
these things never use the same kind of respectful processes that occur in the 
private sector.”

Coyle said she was concerned about the independence of the new board, most of 
whose members will be appointed by the government.

She said: “What worries me now, is after all the erosion of BBC independence 
over the past 10 years or so, with top-slicing raids on the licence fee and the 
raid for the over-75 licences ... it is really important that this new 
structure has a truly independent chair and truly independent set of 
non-executives.”

May’s decision to open up the appointment process to other candidates was 
backed by Damian Collins MP, acting chair of the Commons select committee for 
culture, media and sport.

He said: “I don’t think it was right that Rona Fairhead was offered the job in 
the first place in the way that she was. We felt there should be a proper 
process of appointment where other candidates could be considered.”

He added: “Being chairman of the new unitary board is effectively being 
chairman of the BBC, or chairman of this great global media company. Being 
chairman of the trust is being chairman of the regulator. And they are 
different roles and I think have different skill sets.”

Collins insisted that an open recruitment process would help protect the BBC’s 
independence.

He said: “Many people would have said that ‘Rona Fairhead was offered the job 
of being chairman of the BBC behind closed doors privately by David Cameron. 
Was that done to just buy her agreement to the abolition of the trust? Was that 
done because she was David Cameron’s friend?’ People can’t say that any more. 
Whoever is the new chair of the BBC will have been appointed by a proper 
process.”

Coyle objected to Collins’s suggestion that Fairhead had not been recruited 
properly when she was originally made chair of the trust. She said: “I think 
you are being unfair to her in saying she has never been through any public 
process. She has.

“In an ideal world you would always have a proper open process for any of 
these major public service roles. But it is bit of a fiction. I hope the select 
committee can use its authority to make sure that the process is now completely 
transparent and open. But the truth is that the appointment to be chair of the 
BBC, whatever its governing body structure, has always been a political 
appointment.”
 