
Theresa May has finalised her new government with dozens of junior ministerial 
appointments, one of which was to make Alan Duncan a deputy to Boris Johnson 
weeks afterhe mocked the new foreign secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/david-cameron-says-jeremy-corbyn-should-resign>
 as “Silvio Borisconi”.

Of the 69 junior government and whips jobs announced on Sunday morning, 15 
went to women, a slightly lower proportion than the near third of female 
appointments in the cabinet.

It followed another, smaller set of announcements on Saturday evening, which 
saw Dominic Raab, a strong supporter of May’s vanquished opponent Michael Gove, 
sacked as justice minister, and Anna Soubry, a prominent remain backer, lose 
her role as business minister.

The larger-scale Sunday reshuffle kept a number of Tories in their posts, 
among them the sports minister Tracey Crouch, the welfare reform minister Lord 
Freud, and the schools minister Lord Nash.

Among the more prominent appointments was the return to government of Duncan, 
removed in 2014 as junior international development minister. The veteran Tory 
MP was a remain supporter, and shortly after the EU referendum he ridiculed 
Johnson’s capabilities at prime minister’s questions.

Duncan, referencing the disgraced former Italian prime minister Silvio 
Berlusconi, asked David Cameron: “Would you educate the house from your 
experience as prime minister on how in terms of their country’s reputation and 
success he would compare the undemonstrative competence and dignity of Angela 
Merkel with the theatrical and comical antics of Silvio Borisconi?”


At the time Johnson was seen as Cameron’s most likely successor, only to exit 
the Tory leadership race when Gove, his key ally, stood against him. Now Duncan 
and Johnson will work together at the Foreign Office.

Amid the chaos in Nice and Turkey during his first days in office, Johnson 
found time towrite a column for the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/07/16/brexit-frees-us-to-build-a-truly-global-britain/>
 in which he argued that Brexit did not mean a withdrawn global role for the 
UK, but a country “more outward-looking, more engaged and more active on the 
world stage than ever before”.

He wrote: “We cannot leave Europe in the proper sense of that word – that is 
geographically, emotionally, culturally impossible; and we will remain key 
players in all kinds of intergovernmental cooperation with our European friends 
and partners. But we can and must respect the people’s will, and extricate 
ourselves from the EU.

“And that gives us a chance not just to do new trade deals, but to think of 
ourselves once again as a truly global Britain using our unique voice – humane, 
compassionate, principled – to do good around the world, and to exploit growth 
markets to the full.”
 