
Younger generations are being told to prepare to wait even longer for their 
pensions, with former minister Steve Webb suggesting that the retirement age 
for a state pension willrise to 70 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/28/pension-age-may-be-about-to-rise-again-says-former-minister>
.

I can understand why some policymakers seeking to cut the costs of state 
support for pensioners are attracted to the idea of continually raising pension 
ages, but I believe this is potentially damaging to certain social groups.

Related: Pension age may be about to rise again, says former minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/28/pension-age-may-be-about-to-rise-again-says-former-minister>

The justification for such an increase is based on forecasts of rising average 
life expectancy. But just using average life expectancy as a yardstick ignores 
significant differences in longevity across British society. For example, 
people living in less affluent areas, or who had lower paid or more physically 
demanding careers, or started work straight from school, have a higher 
probability of dying younger. Continually increasing state pension ages, and 
making such workers wait longer for pension payments to start, prolongs 
significant social disadvantage.

The state pension qualification criteria depend on national insurance 
contributions. Normally, workers and their employers make contributions that 
can amount to around 25% of their earnings. Even now, a significant minority of 
the population does not live to state pension age, or dies very soon 
thereafter, despite having paid significant sums into the system. By raising 
the state pension age, based on rising average life expectancy, this social 
inequality is compounded.
 ‘Just reforming state pensions is not the best way to cope with an ageing 
population.’ Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
Increasing the state pension age is a blunt instrument. A stark cutoff fails 
to recognise the needs of millions of people who will be physically unable to 
keep working to the age of 70, because of particular circumstances in their 
working life, their current health, or environmental and social factors that 
negatively impact on specific regions of the country.

Related: 'Basically a huge tax increase': readers on proposed pension age rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/28/basically-a-huge-tax-increase-readers-on-proposed-pension-age-rise>

State pension unfairness is even greater, because those who are healthy and 
wealthy enough can already get much larger state pensions than others who 
cannot afford to wait. If you can delay starting your state pension until 70 – 
assuming you either have a good private income or are able to keep working – 
the new state pension will pay over £200 a week. But if you are very ill, 
caring for relatives, or for whatever reason cannot keep working up to state 
pension age (now 65 for men and between 63 and 64 for women) you get nothing at 
all.

In fact, just reforming state pensions is not the best way to cope with an 
ageing population. It is important to rethink retirement too. Those who can and 
want to work longer could boost their own lifetime incomes and future pensions, 
and also the spending power of the economy and national output, if more were 
done to facilitate and encourage later life working. Having more older workers 
in the economy, especially given the demographics of the western world, is a 
win-win for all of us. Even a few years of part-time work, before full-time 
retirement, can benefit individuals and the economy. But this should not be 
achieved by forcing everyone to wait longer for a state pension and ignoring 
the needs of those groups who cannot do so.

There is no provision, for example, for an ill-health early state pension, or 
for people to start state pensions sooner at a reduced rate. Politicians have 
entirely ducked this question but such a system would acknowledge the 
differences across society. There are, surely, more creative and equitable ways 
of managing state pension costs for an increasingly ageing population, using 
parameters other than just the starting age.

Related: Figures reveal huge inequalities in health and longevity across UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/11/figures-reveal-huge-inequalities-in-health-and-longevity-across-uk>

Indeed, raising state pension ages has already caused huge hardship to many 
women born in the 1950s. These women believed their state pension would start 
at 60, but many discovered only recently they will need to wait until 66. Many 
women have no other later life income, therefore they are totally dependent on 
their state pension.

Rather than just considering increasing the pension age, the government could 
consider having a range of ages, instead of one stark chronological cutoff. 
Allowing people an early-access pension, possibly reflecting a longer working 
life or poorer health, could alleviate some of the unfairness inherent in the 
current system. Increasing the number of years required to qualify for full 
pensions could also help.

Raising the state pension age is rather a crude measure for managing old-age 
support in the 21st century.
 