
Willie Mullins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins> saddled two 
more Grade One winners here on Saturday in his pursuit of the jump trainers’ 
championship, but was reminded too that he has not yet cornered the market in 
outstanding National Hunt performers, as Thistlecrack recorded a brilliant 
success in the Liverpool Stayers’ Hurdle.

Tom Scudamore set out to make all the running on the 2-7 favourite and with 
the exception of a slight mistake at the second-last, horse and rider cruised 
to victory just as smoothlyas they had in the World Hurdle at the Cheltenham 
Festival last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/thistlecrack-wins-world-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
. “I’ve had harder days walking the dog,” Scudamore said afterwards, and Colin 
Tizzard, Thistlecrack’s trainer, must now decide whether to leave the 
eight-year-old in a division he completely dominates, or steer him towards a 
chasing campaign next season with the Cheltenham Gold Cup as the ultimate aim.

Brilliant Thistlecrack wins World Hurdle at the Cheltenham Festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/thistlecrack-wins-world-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
“He’s head and shoulders above the rest of them,” Tizzard said. “I thought he 
looked better again today. He never came off the bridle. He’s so good at this 
discipline, so brilliant, but he looks like he’d jump a fence as well and the 
biggest race in the country is the Gold Cup. That would be a draw, no doubt. If 
we go, we’ve got to go nearly now. The more he wins so easily like that, I 
don’t know if it makes it easier or harder [to decide].”

Thistlecrack is already the 10-1 third-favourite for next year’s Gold Cup 
without jumping a fence in public, in a market headed by this season’s winner, 
Don Cossack.

Yorkhill also added a Grade One victory at Aintree to his Cheltenham success 
in the Neptune Novice Hurdle, but was forced to dig a little deeper than 
expected on the way to a two-and-a-quarter-length defeat of Le Prezien in the 
Mersey Novice Hurdle.

Paul Townend replaced the injured Ruby Walsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/08/nina-carberry-replaces-ruby-walsh-grand-national-sir-des-champs>
 aboard Yorkhill, who pulled hard for his head in the early stages and tugged 
his way to the front with nearly a mile still to run. The 30-100 favourite was 
then clumsy over the second last, and took a stride or two to respond when 
Townend asked for a final effort with half a furlong to run.

“Paul had a horrible ride,” Mullins said. “I think we’ll put a different nose 
band on the horse next time. He was just too free and there were not enough 
other horses in the race to give him cover. I was amazed that after pulling so 
hard he still won. He must have a huge engine.

“He looks Champion Hurdle material, but he could easily go novice chasing next 
season. We’d rather go Champion Hurdle or Arkle Trophy [over fences] than the 
World Hurdle. When Ruby got off him after winning at Cheltenham, he said: ‘This 
horse could win the Arkle with his mouth open.’”

Yorkhill remains the 3-1 favourite for the Arkle Trophy next March, while he 
can also be backed at 10-1 for the Champion Hurdle. Townend completed a 
short-priced Grade One double when Douvan, this year’s Arkle winner, 
effortlessly extended his unbeaten run since joining the Mullins yard to nine 
races, including five starts over fences this season.

Douvan has started at odds-against only once during his winning run, and was 
again a short-priced favourite at 2-13. He cantered home 14 lengths clear of 
The Game Changer, but while it looked like an exercise gallop, Mullins will now 
wait before deciding whether to run Douvan again this season, at Punchestown 
later this month.

“It’s hard for Paul getting up on him for the first time in a race like that, 
and knowing that there was a frontrunner there that was going to take them on,” 
Mullins said. “He had to try and balance it out and he did it very well. Paul 
said that when he gave him an inch of rein, he couldn’t believe how much he 
just lengthened his stride and breezed into the lead. I’d love to bring him to 
Punchestown, but we’ll see whether it’s too close. It might not be fair on him, 
but at the moment, everything is open.”
 