
João Maria Gusmão and Pedro Paiva/Clare Rojas, Birmingham

A first and very welcome UK exhibition of the work of renowned Lisbon-based 
duo João Maria Gusmão and Pedro Paiva. Gusmão and Paiva present silent films 
which come across as strange poetic ponderings; austere landscapes are stage 
sets for distinctly absurd rituals. Elsewhere, deserts are focused in 
disorientating slow motion or multiple exposure; a man observes the sky through 
a hole in his shoe; and a stone skimming across a lake takes on the slow grace 
of planetary movement. Influenced by the "recreational metaphysics" of the 
innovative Lisbon poet Fernando Pessoa, the work is both melancholic in mood 
and generously playful in spirit. The installation is here accompanied by 
American artist Clare Rojas's mock-naif painterly reveries.

Ikon Gallery, to 21 Mar

Robert Clark

Charles Avery, London

A Charles Avery exhibition is never short on wow factor. He has dedicated his 
life to realising a world in his head called The Island, in drawings, sculpture 
and text. There have been looming, bald-headed, elephant-nosed monsters; 
two-headed cobras; and a taxidermy anomaly with a wolf's head, llama's body and 
giant chicken feet. His nuances of character turn these playful journeys into 
something truly compelling. This latest instalment features Avery's largest 
drawing yet. Covering an entire gallery wall, it depicts the port town of 
Onomatopoeia, gateway to The Island and a bustling introduction to Avery's 
unique vision.

Pilar Corrias, W1, Fri to 31 Mar

Skye Sherwin

The Walls Are Talking, Manchester

The Whitworth permanent collection houses an internationally acclaimed 
collection of wallpapers. With this exhibition of wallpaper works by renowned 
contemporary fine artists, the gallery sets its collection within a less 
reassuring context. Wallpapers are taken to be innately comforting, so here an 
array of artists – including Sonia Boyce, Damien Hirst and AA Bronson – tend to 
infiltrate the niceties of the medium with hints of domestic confusion and 
conflict. The wilfully eccentric work of Niki de St Phalle never did have much 
truck with familial sobriety, while Robert Gober's work introduces violence 
into domestic suburbia in a similar gleeful spirit to the films of David Lynch.

Whitworth Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Gallery, to 3 May 

Robert Clark

Destroy All Monsters, London

When Destroy All Monsters played their first gig at a comics convention they 
were shunted off after 10 minutes, yet 30 years on, the Michigan noiseniks 
exert a cult magnetism. The band began with frontwoman Niagara; Carey Loren, 
co-curator of this exhibition of their archive with James Hoff; and artists Jim 
Shaw and Mike Kelley. The Stooges' Ron Asheton and one-time MC5 bassist Michael 
Davis later joined, steering DAM's aggressive mix of sci-fi and psychedelic 
rock in a more punk direction. Here, posters, fliers, drawings, magazines and 
records testify to their unruly energy.

Space, E8, to 20 Feb

Skye Sherwin

Jordan Baseman, Gateshead

Through misalignments of film fragments and interview voiceover, Jordan 
Baseman sets up a series of portraits that leave you with an uneasy sense of 
the fragilities of self-identity. Insider Man juxtaposes the bragging of a 
gangster conman with an innocent-looking 1977 film of a beautiful young woman 
dancing with her friends. Nasty Piece Of Stuff contrasts speedy film fragments 
of present-day Soho nightlife with plaintive accounts of the 1960s gay scene. 
The use of talking heads is an innately convincing technique that Baseman 
deliberately undermines with reconstructed images from archival footage.

BALTIC, to 9 May

Robert Clark

Dexter Dalwood, St Ives

Dexter Dalwood's paintings are full of absent ghosts. Some are well known, 
like Sharon Tate, who haunts the white couch and blood-orange decor in his 
rendering of an empty 1960s living room; others less so. Brighton pier, seen 
via a ragged window, could be the daily view of the IRA's 1984's Grand Hotel 
bomber; it's an era channelled in a pink and blue shellsuit palette. This is 
history painting, reinvigorated by way of a subjective lens. It's with this 
personal, collagist approach that Dalwood has selected works from the Tate 
Collection, shown alongside a survey of his own paintings. References to the 
moon landings, the Rolling Stones and Sam Peckinpah's Straw Dogs collide with 
works by Picasso, Howard Hodgkin, Roger Hilton and more. They're all dated to 
1971, the year Dalwood turned 11, and make for an energetically bumpy ride 
through the cultural currents and political upheavals of the recent past.

Tate St Ives, to 3 May

Skye Sherwin

Shona Illingworth, Wolverhampton

Shona Illingworth's film Balkaniel is a study of the remote area in the 
Scottish Highlands in which she grew up. Yet, far from an autobiographical 
study, the work evokes varieties of collective cultural memory, the contrasting 
ways in which different inhabitants of the landscape identify with its 
idiosyncratic character and atmosphere. As the artist says, "For the locals, 
this area is the centre of the world, for the military it was the frontline, 
and for the 'incomers' it is the edge of the world." A silent sequence of RAF 
bombing is set against the natural grandeur of a stormy sea, while a lone 
adolescent girl is filmed wandering the deserted landscape like a forlorn 
sleepwalker. It's a moody and moving work.

Wolverhampton Art Gallery, to 1 May

Robert Clark

Arshile Gorky, London

Arshile Gorky <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/arshile-gorky> is 
remembered as one of abstract expressionism's frontrunners. Yet the canvases he 
is most celebrated for only emerged in the last few years of his short, sad 
life. Delving into troubled memories of his Armenian homeland, his rich, earthy 
palette is full of burnt oranges and mustard yellows, washed-out greens and 
smudgy browns, while his abstracted forms judder from the lush to the twisted. 
His artistic career was something of an impersonation act. Embodying the 
American myth of reinvention, he escaped persecution from the Turks, claiming 
to be a celebrated European artist on arrival in the States. There he learned 
to paint, emulating the styles of others, assuming the guises of impressionism, 
cubism, surrealism and more. In this retrospective, what could have felt like a 
crash course in cultural history reveals a drawn-out artistic evolution, full 
of curious contradictions and creative leaps.

Tate Modern, SE1, Wed to 3 May

Skye Sherwin

• This article was amended on 8 February 2010. In the original the details for 
the Arshile Gorky exhibition previewed above stated that the show takes place 
at Tate Britain, SW1 - it actually takes place at Tate Modern, SE1. This has 
been corrected.
 