
My Noir, Manchester

Film noir's hard-boiled loners certainly suit late-night viewing, so what 
better way to start this celebration of double crosses and femmes fatales than 
a 24-hour "noirathon". Starting with Billy Wilder's Double Indemnity (paired 
with an exhibition), the weekend marathon brings classics old and new, from Out 
Of The Past to Brick, ending somewhat aptly with The Big Sleep, plus special 
events such as writer Walter Mosley talking about the adaptation of his Devil 
In A Blue Dress (16 Oct).

Cornerhouse, Sat to 29 Dec

Urban Wandering: Film And The London Landscape, London

Like the capital itself, this promising season is sprawling, eclectic and 
difficult to get a handle on. It's a survey of the changes the city has 
experienced postwar, via a myriad of media, but above all, cinema. The guest 
list is a who's who of the psychogeographically inclined: Iain Sinclair, Will 
Self, and a great many writers and film-makers accompanying their work – Mike 
Leigh with Naked, and Barney Platts-Mills with Bronco Bullfrog. Screenings 
range from uniquely London dramas to documentaries, essay films, architectural 
material and choice obscurities such as Studio Ghibli master Hayao Miyazaki's 
canine Sherlock Holmes cartoon.

Barbican, EC2, Wed to 2 Oct

Cambridge Film Festival

True to its academic foundations, the city's ever-growing festival (150 films 
this year) is more interested in new discovery and broadened knowledge than 
red-carpet glitz – though you get the best of both with the opener: a new 
biodoc of homeboy Stephen Hawking, with the professor in attendance. The 33rd 
edition of the festival continues with another high-profile title in the guise 
of Kevin Macdonald's new near-future war movie How I Live Now. But there's much 
more to discover here from around the world, with documentary, music and 
horror, and strands on eastern Europe, Catalonia, forgotten German auteur 
Roland Klick and young US directors. Plus there's a new initiative showcasing 
the work of global first-timers and outdoor cinema offerings, including Edward 
Scissorhands.

Various venues, Thu to 29 Sep

Encounters, Bristol

Something of a pilgrimage centre for emerging artists and future talent 
spotters, this well-established festival gives you a cornucopia of short and 
animated film, as well as pointers as to what could come next. The bulk of the 
films are divided into digestible programmes (shorts at the Watershed; 
animation at the Arnolfini), but there are also specialities, such as a focus 
on Switzerland, which includes a pop-up "Cine-Chalet" and a live soundtracking 
event by the Young Gods' Franz Treichler. Industry veterans such as Aardman's 
Peter Lord will share advice and talk about how they put together films like 
The Pirates! In An Adventure With Scientists!

Watershed & Arnolfini, Tue to 22 Sep
 