
The high-spirited crowds who annually cram the enclosures here for the King 
George VI Chase <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> have 
enjoyed many memorable performances over the years, and most of the greatest 
names in National Hunt history are gold-leafed on to the race’s roll of honour 
a few yards from the winner’s enclosure.

When it comes to a single, breakthrough performance, however, a moment when an 
exceptional racing talent announced its arrival in the King George itself, 
there may have been nothing to match Thistlecrack’s performance here on Monday 
since Desert Orchid won his first King George as an unconsidered 16-1 chance in 
1986.

Brilliant Thistlecrack smooth winner of King George VI Chase at Kempton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/brilliant-thistlecrack-smooth-winner-king-george-vi-chase-kempton-horse-racing>
The grey, who went on to win the King George four times in all, was one of the 
outsiders 40 years ago because few expected his two-mile speed and 
front-running style to extend all the way to three miles. As it turned out, 
Desert Orchid set off in front and never came back to his field, writing the 
first significant chapter in one of the sport’s most popular stories.

Thistlecrack <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/thistlecrack>, too, made much 
of the running, having set off at a furious speed over the first couple of 
fences. He also dotted his flawless round of jumping with several leaps that 
left the crowd – and his opponents – gasping for breath.

A flying jump at the third-last was one of Desert Orchid’s trademarks in his 
King George victories but Thistlecrack seems to have a different signature 
fence. He stood so far off from the second, the first open ditch, that he was 
almost outside the wings, and did so again, to even more impressive effect, 
when he jumped it as the 11th next time round, prompting a ripple of applause 
from the enclosures.

By that stage Thistlecrack was bursting with confidence as he attacked the 
fences and, while Cue Card, last year’s winner, did his best to make a race of 
it with his stable companion, Thistlecrack soon broke his resistance, surging 
away on the long run to the third-last and allowing Tom Scudamore to take as 
much time as he needed to negotiate the last three obstacles.

The buzz around the track after Thistlecrack had crossed the line continued 
all the way back to the winner’s enclosure. The senses of many in the crowd may 
have been slightly dulled by two days of festivities but few were so far gone 
that they could not appreciate the special performance of Colin Tizzard’s 
eight-year-old, or start to speculate immediately about how he will fare in the 
Gold Cup in March.

Odds-on quotes about Thistlecrack for the Gold Cup were circulating before 
Scudamore had returned to weigh in and, while there is some 5-4 available in 
places, that says more about the uncertainties of jumps racing and keeping a 
horse sound over the winter months. If he lines up at Cheltenham, he seems sure 
to be an odds-on chance.

First Tizzard is likely to steer Thistlecrack towards the Cotswold Chase at 
Cheltenham at the end of January, when he can gain more experience of the track 
that will stage the Gold Cup a few weeks later.

Cue Card was a faller in last year’s Gold Cup, just as he was working his way 
into contention with a £1m bonus – for winning the Betfair Chase, King George 
and Gold Cup – up for grabs. His attempt to land the same treble this year came 
unstuck behind his stablemate n Monday, and barring a mishap, it is very hard 
to imagine him reversing the form at Cheltenham in March.

“I just wanted to put him in the right position and let him do the rest,” 
Scudamore said afterwards of Thistlecrack. “That’s the 11th time I’ve ridden 
him now and Colin is great to ride for because he just lets you get on with it.

“Paddy [Brennan] knows Cue Card, and I know mine, and we basically knew what 
each of us was going to do. Maybe next time he takes Thistlecrack on, Paddy 
will try something else, but on this occasion we both came into it on top form 
and both are fantastic racecourses. But on this showing, Thistlecrack is a bit 
better.

“He was landing so far out the other side of the fences. You just know you’re 
on something very special and you just know that, whatever you ask him to do, 
he’s going to keep on delivering. He’s got pace and speed and everything.

I thought it was as fast as he was ever going to go over the first couple of 
fences.

“There were a couple of occasions where he got a little keen on me but all the 
way through I could do what I wanted. I was on the best horse and that makes 
life a lot easier.”

Thistlecrack showed the same blend of speed, class and stamina on the way to 
his exceptional victory in the Stayers’ Hurdle at Cheltenham nine months ago 
and the ease with which he has translated his rich natural talent to the bigger 
obstacles is another sign that Tizzard is now the main challenger to his 
near-neighbour and 10 times champion Paul Nicholls among National Hunt yards.

Tizzard remains a 5-1 outsider to topple Nicholls from the summit this season 
but his one-two in the King George, along with a fortunate 33-1 success with 
Royal Vacation in the Grade One Kauto Star Novice Chase, took his haul for the 
afternoon past £200,000.

It is not quite game on yet but it is possible to sense that, ever so slowly, 
the balance of power is beginning to shift.
 