
Thistlecrack and Cue Card, the two biggest stars in Colin Tizzard’s Dorset 
yard, will go head-to-head in theKing George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> at Kempton Park on 
Boxing Day after Thistlecrack, a novice with only three starts over fences, was 
confirmed on Monday as an intended runner in the feature event of the Christmas 
programme.

News that Thistlecrack will take on his stablemate is a huge fillip to this 
year’s King George, following thescratching of Coneygree, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/coneygree-miss-king-george-vi-chase-poor-workout-josses-hill-thistlecrack>
 the 2015 Gold Cup winner, on Sunday afternoon after he failed to show his 
usual sparkle in a gallop. Thistlecrack was a hugely talented hurdler last 
season but is still in the early stages of his chasing career and had an 
alternative engagement in the Grade One Kauto Star Novice Chase on the same 
card on Monday, for which he would have started at long odds-on.

Instead Thistlecrack will challenge Cue Card, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/cue-card-betfair-chase-haydock-colin-tizzard-paddy-brennan-king-george-vi-chase-kempton>
 last year’s King George winner, in one of steeplechasing’s most prestigious 
events – on his fourth start over fences.

“Both sets of owners want to go for it,” Tizzard said here on Monday. “Cue 
Card has done it before andThistlecrack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/thistlecrack> has never beaten a horse as 
good as Cue Card yet. You can guess as much as you like but so long as they 
jump round clear it will be fine and may the best one win.

“It was [Thistlecrack’s owner] John Snook’s dream to give up the World Hurdle 
route to come and run in big races. One more race [against novices] won’t make 
any difference to him. He jumped superbly at Newbury [last time out in 
November] and we’ll school him on Wednesday morning.”

Thistlecrack proves a daredevil in Cheltenham pursuit of Festival fame
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/thistlecrack-cheltenham-festival-colin-tizzard-taquin-de-seuil-horse-racing>
Cue Card remains the favourite to win his second King George, at a top price 
of 6-4, but Thistlecrack is close behind him in the betting at 13-8 and it is 
then 12-1 bar the two, underlining the extent to which Tizzard’s contenders 
stand out on form.

Monday’s race now promises to be a fascinating duel between Cue Card and 
Thistlecrack and their respective jockeys, Paddy Brennan and Tom Scudamore. It 
could also mark the moment when Cue Card’s attempt to land a £1m bonus for 
winning the Betfair Chase, King George and Gold Cup is snuffed out by a horse 
who lives two boxes down the barn at the Tizzard family’s stable – on the other 
side of Native River, the favourite for the Coral Welsh National on 27 December.

“Cue Card is still officially rated 2lb higher than Thistlecrack,” Joe 
Tizzard, the trainer’s son and assistant, said on Monday. “Thistlecrack hasn’t 
taken on anything like Cue Card, even in his hurdling days. But I don’t know 
which one’s going to finish where. I don’t have a clue.

“There’s still nothing that could live with Cue Card on the gallops at home. 
They wouldn’t ever go together but I rode both of them on Saturday morning and 
Cue Card I had a job to hold. Thistlecrack is more like you have to wake him up 
and then he really wakes up when he gets to the races.

“When we were saddling him at Newbury last time, we thought he was 
half-asleep. We genuinely haven’t got to the bottom of Thistlecrack. I don’t 
know how good he is or how good he could be. I thought his performance at 
Newbury was as good as I’ve ever seen a novice and it’s just great for us that 
we can run them against each other. We don’t have a favourite, so we don’t mind 
which way round they finish. We’ll just be as proud as punch of them.”

The Tizzards’ operation has a stranglehold on the two biggest prizes on the 
British programme at Christmas, withNative River, the Hennessy Gold Cup winner, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/native-river-thistlecrack-colin-tizzard-newbury-hennessy-toys-horse-racing>
 heading the market at 6-1 for the Welsh National, with Theatre Guide and 
Viconte Du Noyer also prominent in the betting.

“Native River has come out of the Hennessy really well and jumps and stays 
very strongly,” Joe Tizzard said. “It’s been a very dry autumn and perhaps in 
other years, when it was very soft ground, we wouldn’t have done, but we’ll 
have a crack at it.

“Theatre Guide ran poorly in the Hennessy and so we put blinkers on him at 
Cheltenham [next time] and he ran a super race to get up on the line. This is 
the obvious target for him, he’s been placed in two Hennessys and gets the trip 
well, and he’ll have the blinkers on again to keep him sharp.

“There’s no reason why he shouldn’t nick a place, and you’d have high hopes 
for Viconte Du Noyer as well if you scrap his last run in the Becher Chase [at 
Aintree]. He didn’t attack the fences at Aintree, he didn’t take to them, as 
simple as that.”

Joe Tizzard was once a regular jockey for Paul Nicholls, the champion National 
Hunt trainer in 10 of the last 11 seasons, and his father’s yard appears to be 
the only one capable of preventing Nicholls from making it 11 out of 12. At 
present, the gap between the two is just over £400,000 in prize money. A 1-2 in 
the King George and victory in the Welsh National would bridge it in the space 
of 24 hours.

“We’re spoilt at the moment,” Tizzard said. “These are the sort of horses 
we’ve been working hard to get all of our careers, and they’ve just come along 
now.

“We’re probably 60 horses light to be really competitive with him, but we’ve 
got a lot of Saturday horses, which is what has put us into second position and 
is keeping us there or thereabouts.

“We need to win all the big ones, all the way through the season, which means 
we need an awful lot of luck. But I’m enjoying the banter with Paul, telling 
him that we’re getting closer all the time, and I’d love to send him a text 
message on the 27th to ask him if he’s nervous or not, if we’ve bagged them 
both.”
 