
A crowd of nearly 40,000 provided a telling soundtrack to the card here on 
Saturday, from the gasps that went up as Thistlecrack, the Gold Cup favourite, 
jumped around the chase course for the first time to the wall of noise as 
Taquin Du Seuil and Village Vic battled to the line in the BetVictor Gold Cup. 
It was Taquin Du Seuil, a well-backed 8-1 chance, who got up to win by a head, 
but one of the abiding images of the day for most punters will surely be 
Thistlecrack’s jump at the first open ditch.

Colin Tizzard <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-tizzard> can be 
planning for no more than six or seven starts to turn Thistlecrack into a Gold 
Cup winner in his novice season, and two of those are now in the book. His 
jumping here on Saturday ranged from careful to bold and, at times, veered 
towards recklessness, not least at the fifth, where he took off much too early 
and dragged his back legs through the fence.

It was a similar story at the seventh, the next open ditch, but Thistlecrack’s 
confidence grew as the race went on and his exceptional engine eventually 
carried the 1-7 favourite to a convincing success.Thistlecrack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/thistlecrack-wins-world-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
 remains favourite for the Gold Cup in March at around 7-2, and his accelerated 
education towards the Festival next March promises to be the season’s most 
compelling storyline.

“The fences are getting in the way a bit at the moment,” Tizzard said, “but 
the more you practise something, the better you get.

“I think he definitely got better when he pushed on with a circuit to go. He’s 
a big, strong horse and he can stand off and he can get in deep. If we’re going 
to go big after Christmas he needs a bit more experience racing. He needs 
another run and then we can see where we’re going to go at Christmas.

“If you don’t get nervous or apprehensive with a horse like this you must be 
stone cold dead, it’s fantastic to be part of him. We’re on a learning curve. 
Go racing with him, that’s what we need to do.”

The next step in Thistlecrack’s education is likely to come on Newbury’s 
Hennessy card on the last Saturday in November and, depending on his 
performance there, a run in the King George VI Chase at Kempton on Boxing Day 
remains an outside possibility.

“He is just a bold fellow and the first couple of open ditches, he has 
probably come out of my hands and taken off slightly earlier than ideal,” Tom 
Scudamore, Thistlecrack’s jockey, said. “He has landed on the other side and 
that is all that matters.

“The further he has gone, the better he has started to jump and over the last 
few fences, he was electric. Job done and another step in the right direction.”

Paul Hanagan sacked as No1 rider to prominent owner Hamdan al-Maktoum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/11/paul-hanagan-sacked-number-one-jockey-hamdan-al-maktoum-horse-racing>
Taquin Du Seuil carried 11st 11lb up the hill to victory in the BetVictor Gold 
Cup, and was cut to around 14-1 for the Grade One Ryanair Chase at the 
Festival. Jonjo O’Neill’s nine-year-old took the JLT Novice Chase at the 
Festival in 2014, but this was only his second success since.

“It helps that he really likes this place, and I think he is better than a 
handicapper,” O’Neill said. “We’ve always thought he would do well over three 
miles or further, but it hasn’t worked out yet.”

There was a spectacular melee at the 12th fence in the preceding race, as the 
riderless Le Reve veered across the obstacle at the head of the field and 
brought down Cogry, Racing Pulse and Midnight Prayer.

Nico de Boinville, the regular partner of the 2015 Gold Cup winner Coneygree, 
suffered a suspected upper-arm fracture after being unseated from Le Reve. 
Coneygree is due to make his seasonal debut in the Betfair Chase at Haydock 
Park next Saturday.

“I’m led to believe it’s an upper-arm fracture but I’m trying to get hold of 
Nico at the minute,” Nicky Henderson, De Boinville’s main employer, said on 
Saturday evening. “It looks like he will need surgery, which is not good news,”

Defi Du Seuil is quoted at around 14-1 for the Triumph Hurdle in March after a 
very comfortable success in the opening race on the card. Philip Hobbs’s 
three-year-old cruised home under Barry Geraghty, and while Dino Velvet was a 
faller at the final flight when only a couple of lengths behind him, Defi Du 
Seuil was going so well at the time that the result was not in doubt. “He’s 
only a juvenile but he’s got plenty of scope and I’d say his future lies over 
fences,” Geraghty said. “I suppose it’s possible he could be a Triumph Hurdle 
horse, but you only have to look at the strength of this race and that will 
tell you how good he is so far.

“He’s a good type of horse and the right type to get better as he goes on but 
whether he’d be good enough for a Triumph, it’s a bit too early to say.”
 