
The young Thomas Hardy was determined to make a living out of literature. But 
the market was crowded, and he had no influential connections. For years he 
struggled to find a voice that would sell. What finally brought success was the 
“partly real, partly-dream country” that he created from his lifelong 
association with rural Dorset. The imagined Wessex that emerged from his novels 
of the early 1870s –Under the Greenwood Tree, Far from the Madding Crowd 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/far-from-the-madding-crowd-11.html> – 
appealed to a nostalgic appetite for vanishing pastoral traditions among the 
urbanised population of Victorian Britain. He wrote about the country, but his 
popularity was a product of the city.

Mark Ford’s absorbing new study argues that our wish to see Hardy as a man of 
Dorset has distracted us from his formative life as a Londoner. InJude the 
Obscure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/07/100-best-novels-jude-obscure-thomas-hardy>
, Jude Fawley ponders the sensitive “nervous motion” of his cousin Sue 
Bridehead, making her quite unlike the stolidly rustic women he had known as a 
child. “London had done it, he supposed.” The vortex of London, with its 
unpredictable opportunities and competitive pressures, was also the phenomenon 
that made Hardy.

Architecture, not fiction, was what first took him to live in the capital. His 
father was a builder, and a respectable career as an architect seemed to the 
family a natural progression for their talented boy. Hardy had been apprenticed 
to a local architect in Dorchester for five years when he arrived in London in 
1862, at the age of 21. It was as an assistant architect in the thriving 
offices of Arthur Blomfield that he found work. A dedicated self-improver, he 
combined his daily duties with an intensive programme of reading, visiting 
museums and galleries in order to study paintings, attending concerts, operas, 
plays and church services, playing the violin, taking lessons in French, and 
writing poetry. He lost the Christian faith of his youth (though not what he 
termed his persistently “churchy” tastes), and moved closer to a radical 
hostility to the settled hierarchies of class and money. His growing 
disaffection meant that he had no inclination to pursue fashionable social 
connections, and he would in any case hardly have had time for them.

London gave Hardy useful openings, but his indeterminate social status 
continued to shadow his life

Some of Hardy’s activities in these early years were, as Ford remarks, 
wilfully eccentric – such as his “peculiar attempt to rewrite the book of 
Ecclesiastes in Spenserian stanzas”. Such a project was unlikely to win fame 
and fortune. Attempts to publish his poetry came to nothing, and it began to 
look as though recognition as an architect was a more realistic prospect. He 
won first prize in two competitions, one for the design of a country mansion, 
and another for an essay on the topical subject of the “Application of Coloured 
Bricks and Terra Cotta to Modern Architecture”, which won the Royal Institute 
of British Architects’ silver medal. Hardy was clearly gratified by these 
accolades, but they were not what he really wanted. His unrelenting pursuit of 
a cultural education became an obsession that brought him to the point of 
collapse. Exhausted and apparently defeated, in 1867 he returned to Dorset and 
resumed work as an architect with his first employer.

The five years Hardy spent in London might have put paid to his chances as a 
writer. But he was quick to recover health and hope, and to profit from what he 
had learned in the city. He had come to understand that novels, not poems, 
offered the best chance of a literary career. The modern discontents that he 
had encountered in London gave him a subject. His first novel,The Poor Man and 
the Lady, was a protest against the rigid prejudices that had frustrated his 
aspirations. It did not find a publisher, but readers’ reports were 
encouragingly respectful.

Hardy had acquired another reason for perseverance, for Emma Gifford, his 
future wife, was convinced that he had a prosperous future as an author. He had 
to prove that she was right before he could embark on marriage. With 
characteristic resolve, he began to turn out novels with astonishing 
regularity, gradually making his way towards an acknowledged position in the 
literary world. His first published book,Desperate Remedies 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/desperate-remedies.html>, was designed to 
cater for the urban taste for sensation fiction.Under the Greenwood Tree 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/under-the-greenwood-tree-5.html>, a stronger 
novel, came out in the following year, and began to explore the possibilities 
of a rural setting.A Pair of Blue Eyes appeared in 1873, when Hardy was 33, and 
its modest success gave him the confidence to become a full-time writer. The 
next novel,Far From the Madding Crowd, made his name. Hardy was able to marry, 
and moved with his new wife back to London.

This achievement did not make his view of city life either straightforward or 
sunny. London gave him useful openings, but his indeterminate social status 
continued to shadow his life. He joined clubs (his mother had once thought of 
advancing herself by becoming a cook in one of the capital’s smart clubs), and 
appeared in gatherings and salons where he met literary luminaries of the day –
Robert Browning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/may/06/browning-poetry-bicentenary-dickens>
,Alfred Tennyson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alfred-tennyson>, Henry 
James <https://www.theguardian.com/books/henryjames>. But he made no effort to 
cut a dash. The journalist Douglas Goldring recalls an incident at a party held 
in the house of Ford Madox Ford:
 The Hardy Tree at St Pancras church, London. As an architect’s apprentice, 
Hardy instructed the gravestones be repositioned around the tree after a 
railway line was built over part of the churchyard. Photograph by Graeme 
Robertson 
I remember seeing a little, quiet grey old man wearing a red tie, who turned 
out to beThomas Hardy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomashardy> … The 
conversation among the lion cubs in our neighbourhood was no doubt very 
brilliant and very ‘literary’ but suddenly there came the usual inexplicable 
hush. It was broken by Hardy who, turning to an elderly lady by his side, 
remarked, with shattering effect, ‘And how is Johnny’s whooping cough?’

It was in the company of women that Hardy felt most at ease. As his marriage 
soured, his old habit of “falling in love with all and sundry” re-emerged. 
Women were, like Hardy, often caught in ambivalent and constrained situations, 
and their difficulties always engaged his sympathies. As women formed a 
significant proportion of the novel-reading public, his capacity to identify 
with their point of view was among the reasons for the high level of interest 
in his books. His final novels,Tess of the D’Urbervilles and Jude the Obscure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/07/100-best-novels-jude-obscure-thomas-hardy>
, confront the divided values that left women torn between the virtues of 
tradition and modern varieties of freedom.

Tess Durbeyfield is destroyed by the sexual muddles and hypocrisies that Hardy 
had known in his romantic entanglements with women in London. Her tragedy is 
compounded by the vivid contrast between her rural innocence, tainted by the 
legacy of a fallen aristocracy, and the urban perspectives of those who pass 
judgment on her behaviour. Sue Bridehead is a woman whose enlightened thinking 
fails to equip her for the ruthless realities of contemporary society. She too 
is judged, and condemned. Both novels interpret the innocence of a rural past 
and the freedom of an urban future as matters of illusion. Their helplessly 
trapped protagonists cannot flourish in either world.

Tess Durbeyfield is destroyed by the sexual muddles that Hardy had known in 
his romantic entanglements with women

As resilient in old age as he had been in his youth, after this bitter finale 
to his fiction Hardy returned to the poetry that had been his first literary 
passion. He excelled in both genres, a feat that very few writers have managed 
(Rudyard Kipling, Stevie Smith, perhaps Sylvia Plath). His later years were 
rooted in Max Gate, the sturdy house he built for himself in Dorset in 1885, 
but regular and extended visits to London continued to be a part of his yearly 
routine.

Ford, who is both an academic and a distinguished poet, gives full weight to 
the innovative qualities of thought and language that connect Hardy’s poetry 
and fiction. What makes his book remarkable is its compelling analysis 
of Hardy’s sustained difficulty in selling images of the pastoral to urban 
readers who were wistfully eager for its deep continuities, while reflecting 
the far-reaching transformations he had experienced in his years as a “literary 
man about town”. It was a tension he was never able to resolve, but it was what 
gave his writing its enduringly uneasy substance.

On his death in 1928, an odd tussle over the funeral arrangements seems to 
reveal the depth of the separation. Some, including his widow, thought it 
appropriate for Hardy to be honoured by interment in Westminster Abbey’s Poets’ 
Corner. Others thought the ceremony should take place, as he had planned, in 
the Dorset churchyard where the family plot was to be found. Finally, and 
somewhat grotesquely, he had two funerals. His body was laid to rest in the 
Abbey, while his heart simultaneously took its intended place in Dorset. He was 
divided to the very end.
 