
April 1968. New York. The barricade was in place. Metal filing cabinets piled 
on top of the university president's mahogany desk, to which heavy chairs were 
tied with rope, locking the barricade against the ornate oak doors. The first 
blow of the axe split the centre door panel, the second gouged a hole big 
enough for a cop's hand to appear, wearing a white protective glove. The hand 
withdrew and further savage blows of the axe completed its work. Of liberation. 
The seven-day student rebellion and occupation of Columbia University was about 
to be busted.

I ran upstairs to the top floor and took the film out of my cine camera, put 
it into a tin and sealed it with tape before dropping it from a window into the 
bushes below, unseen by the ranks of armed police waiting to free the 
university from the pagan forces of anarchy. Soon I was walking through the 
splintered wooden doors with the other students, to be arrested. Eagerly the 
cops opened my camera to expose the incriminating film to the light. No film. I 
collected it the following day. A week later I was flying back to England with 
20 hours of film that would later become The Fall, and be shown for the first 
time at the Edinburgh festival, the last film I would make about the so-called 
Swinging 60s.

So what truth do my films add up to, now, 32 years later? Sixties London was a 
daunting place, its soul raped by an imperialist culture hellbent on dumbing it 
down to a spiritless faith in a world of objects. We became objects ourselves, 
coerced by the media to consume more, more, more. Desire junkies. Thing junkies.

I hope my films are more than a mere interrogation of the frivolous fable of 
the 60s, the antics of a pop music-loving generation letting their hair down 
and having fun as never before. The truth is, my films are not about me or 
London. They are about America.

There was a breathtaking optimism in the International Poetry Incarnation at 
London's Royal Albert Hall, June 11 1965 - electricity in the air and ecstasy 
in the hearts. As Allen Ginsberg read, one young girl rose to her feet and 
began moving slowly in a weird twisting dance, a marvellous moment. This 
vignette and others that characterised the whole crazy, joyous atmosphere was 
caught in Wholly Communion, a film that in intention and feeling prefigures 
Monterey Pop and Woodstock.

I'd gone to a poetry reading at Better Books (the famous underground shop on 
Charing Cross Road) to listen to Allen Ginsberg, having read Howl at Cambridge. 
Thirty people turned up, and by midnight, stoned out of our minds, the poets 
and various followers decided to rent the Albert Hall, invite Corso, 
Ferlinghetti, Vosnesensky, Yevtushenko and William Burroughs. Philip Larkin was 
not on the list. Nor Stevie Smith. Only Americans could be so brash as to 
imagine they could fill the Albert Hall with worshippers of hitherto unheard 
Beat poetry.

Fearing - and perhaps wanting - a total fiasco, I was eager to attend the 
event. Seven thousand people came, 2,000 were rejected - the first great hippie 
happening in London, the first indisputable manifestation of the so-far 
unacknowledged counterculture. Who were all these people emerging from their 
Brontë-lined closets to listen to a bunch of stoned Americans? I shot 40 
minutes of film, edited them to 33. The film won the gold medal at Mannheim 
film festival and was shown prime time on German TV, in English. A BBC hack 
declared it the worst film the institution had ever been offered.

Andrew Oldham phoned me, somewhat piqued I didn't know who he was. "I'm the 
manager of the Rolling Stones," he said. Oldham sent a limousine. Was it true 
that I could film without lights or tripod, I could be invisible, not interfere 
with events as they happened, not intrude and falsify reality? Yup. That's me. 
Three days later I was filming the unlikely lads on tour in Ireland, envious of 
the erotic, pagan power they had over their nubile audience.

At Mannheim, Josef von Sternberg (defending me against the claim that I'd made 
the Stones look drab and inarticulate) asserted that in 30 years time, Charlie 
Is My Darling would be the only film to survive; a faithful record of the 
times. Was it an unreliable portrait of a gaggle of scruffy English guys from 
the London School of Economics who pissed in garages and played pubs in 
Richmond, a lead singer with bruised swollen lips from too much fighting or 
sex, girls in mini-skirts faint ing in pools of urine? Then Peter Brook asked 
me to film a Living Theatre play he was improvising with his actors and some 
poets, called US, a "documentary" play aimed at revealing our tacit involvement 
with the Americans in the Vietnam war. Counterculture in Britain did not start 
with mini-skirts and pop music but with the Aldermaston march, Vanessa Redgrave 
and the Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation (for whom I was covertly editing 
films smuggled out of north Vietnam).

The resulting film, Benefit of the Doubt, along with Tonite Let's All Make 
Love in London, were shown at the New York film festival in a double bill, 
called The London Scene. Tonite was the hit of the festival. Two thirds of the 
audience walked out of Benefit of the Doubt, disgusted at seeing the Royal 
Shakespeare Company challenging the waging of an ideological war by a military 
industrial complex in rural Buddhist Vietnam.

Tonite was also about America. Swinging London became a fact because Time 
magazine said so. But as I fantasised in the novel of Tonite Let's All Make 
Love in London - a "novel" about the making of Wholly Communion - Time's take 
on London was a CIA manoeuvre designed to make British counterculture appear 
inconsequential and impotent. The CIA buy out Encounter magazine and are as 
hellbent on buying out the left in Britain as they were in bombing it out of 
Vietnam.

In April 1968 I was filming the occupation of Columbia University, sleeping 
rough with the students. And on May 5 Benefit of the Doubt opened in Paris. 
Peter Brook and his actors attended the first night but the film was abandoned 
two days later. So much for bloody revolutions. The cinema was behind the 
Sorbonne barricades; the woman in the box office was tear-gassed.

In Columbia I had filmed with the students, dreaming of a better world, being 
together in a way that seemed daring and right. I was warned to leave America - 
they were after my film, which I'd prudently hidden in a fridge in a friend's 
flat. Suddenly, film and reality were becoming indistinguishable. Arriving back 
in London, the headlines greeted me: Bobby Kennedy shot dead. I had filmed a 
whole day with him, three weeks before. Had I killed him? Had I made it 
necessary with my films - celebrating him, exposing him - that he be shot? Shot 
on film, by film . . .

I had a nervous breakdown. Didn't speak for three months. The Fall opened at 
the Edinburgh film festival. The device of cutting all but a few frames from a 
sequence, printing them as "stills" to give a stop-go effect was no mere 
gimmick but absolutely right for suggesting the alienation, the unreality, the 
edgy beauty, the instability, of that bright, ephemeral, syncopated world. 
Raymond Durgnat generously described my new technique. But I had been trying to 
change the world, not the language of cinema. I felt defeated, betrayed by 
film, my own film most of all.

So I went off alone to the desert. Arabia, Pakistan, the Arctic tundra, 
pursuing the myth of the wanderer, becoming the falcon I was hunting. Later, 
writing novels like The Risen, the inner story of the falcon (another take on 
myself and my past), I tried to recapture and celebrate some of the wonder of 
first discovery, amazed to have survived in such an impalpable, spectral world. 
Others seemed to experience it as solid and tangible - trapped though they were 
in the prison house of reason; which we anarchists in the 60s had tried so hard 
(yet failed) to bring to ruin.

· Peter Whitehead: The Complete Retrospective 1964-69 is at the Other Cinema, 
London W1 (box office: 020-7734 1506), from November 29 to December 1, and at 
the Cube Cinema, Bristol (box office: 0117 907 4190), from December 13 to 15.
 