
Before Fidel Castro’s interment in a Santiago cemetery this morning, there 
have been eulogies by leftwing presidents, football stars and famous singers. 
But to understand the true significance of the revolutionary’s death, it is 
more revealing to wander down a rutted alley in the little-known Havana suburb 
of San Miguel del Padrón.

Florida's Cubans take sober look at ties with homeland after post-Castro party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/florida-cubans-fidel-castro-trump>
This is the home of the Torres family, a die-hard clan of Fidelistas whose 
ideological leanings are evident from the name of their dog, Putin, to the 
blanket coverage of events mourning Castro on the television. They have signed 
the book of condolences, sent a representative to the memorial service at the 
Plaza de la Revolución, and turned up to watch the start of the four-day 
funeral procession.

To anti-communist critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/fidel-castro-policies-dictator>
 in Miami, they are among the millions of Cubans dismissed as gullible pawns of 
a state propaganda machine. But talk to them for more than a few minutes and it 
is evident that they have very practical reasons for admiring Castro and their 
views are anything but homogeneous.

Wealth, race, and particularly age complicate how the island’s 
commander-in-chief is remembered.

The elderly matriarch, Nora Torres, sets the ideological baseline for her 
family. Now an 86-year-old great- grandmother, she has supported Castro since 
he was a rebel fighting the military dictator Fulgencio Batista.

Born in a small village near Santiago, Torres grew up as one of 10 poor black 
siblings who lost both their parents to disease before she was 21. In 1956 she 
and her husband moved to the Sierra Maestra to open a hairdresser’s, but their 
new home quickly became a battleground, forcing the couple to dig a bomb 
shelter in their yard. Everyone in her neighbourhood clandestinely supported 
the guerrillas, providing them with beds and food, darning their clothes and 
nursing the wounded.

“If anyone had caught us, we would have been killed. We did it anyway because 
we were tired of the abuses by the army,” she recalled, describing how 
Batista’s troops killed two young men in the village, slashed her brother with 
a machete, and often robbed local homes and shops.

In 1959, when the rebel army won, she joined the throngs in the streets 
cheering “Viva Fidel” and “Cuba Libre”. “I must have shouted the same slogans 
millions of times since then,” she laughs. In the years that followed, the 
changes came thick and fast. “We got what we wanted – an end to abuses by the 
army, and the start of a government that helped us.” She moved to the 
revolutionary town of Contramaestre, worked in the reconstruction of a 
hospital, and then in 1962 – when all the men were mobilised during the Cuban 
missile crisis – she joined the millions of women who moved into the workforce.

Political turbulence has often resulted in hardships over the past 50 years. 
Like many, she sometimes went hungry after the 1962 crisis and during the 
shortages of the “special period” in the 1990s after the fall of the Soviet 
Union. Today the shelves are still often empty. “Over the years, we have faced 
many difficulties and our country has decayed in many ways. But we can’t say 
that it is Fidel’s fault. Some of those who surrounded him thought only of 
themselves. That’s not revolutionary. They had a lot and they wanted more.”

She would rather count her blessings – a brick house in the capital with 
electricity, running water and a television, as well as free healthcare and 
education for her five children and 11 grandchildren. Without Castro, she 
believes it would have been impossible to live to this standard: “His greatest 
legacy is in education, health and equality. We – the blacks – were 
discriminated against by the whites. Today we are all treated the same.”

Torres is certain things would be much worse without Castro. “You can never 
forget someone who has only done good for you. That’s how I will remember him. 
I’m very thankful for the revolution. It has given opportunities to my children 
and enabled them to have good professions.”

Look at Fidel Castro’s legacy from a fair perspective | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/look-at-fidel-castro-legacy-from-a-fair-perspective>
Her son, Ernesto Pérez Torres, has fuzzier memories of revolution, though – as 
a university-educated agronomist – he is a product of its benefits.

He was four years old when battle raged on the Sierra Maestra. He can remember 
air force attacks and being forced to flee to the mountains on horseback. After 
the revolution, he was among the first generation to enjoy free universal 
education to university level.

When he was 17 his town sent him to Havana to study as an agronomist. His 
lecturers included experts from the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. He became 
a teacher, joined the Communist party and often went to hear Castro’s speeches 
in the Plaza de la Revolución. “His speeches filled me with hope. He was a 
teacher and he shared his doctrine with us,” he recalls. “Today I still 
consider myself a revolutionary. For me, it is about not being passive in the 
face of evolution. We should gather information, be studious and seek new 
knowledge. We should transform our personality and educate ourselves so we can 
stand as a moral and ethical example.”

But he acknowledges that communism’s shortcomings were all too obvious after 
the disintegration of the Soviet bloc. “There was no soap. There was no 
toothpaste, so we had to brush our teeth with salt. And there were many other 
shortages,” he recalls. To get by, the government encouraged small-scale 
private businesses. “We adapted. We used the backyard to grow food and raise 
chickens and pigs.”

Like most Cubans, Ernesto – now 62 – provides for his family by doing multiple 
jobs. He moonlights as a driver and carpenter and sells handicrafts. With this 
extra cash, he roughly triples the 600 pesos (£24) monthly salary he gets as 
vice-president of an agricultural cooperative. Even so, it is often a struggle 
to get by.

The younger generation is less willing to endure such hardships. Several of 
Torres’s grandchildren are studying English so that they can migrate to the US 
or elsewhere. Thanks to Cuba’s education system, they have the skills to make 
it overseas, where they can earn far greater salaries.

Eyewitness: Buenaventura, Cuba
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/picture/2016/dec/03/eyewitness-buenaventura-cuba>
Ernesto’s daughter, Elizabeth, gets about 900 pesos (£36) a month as a fully 
qualified paediatrician. She has already been overseas once – to work in 
Venezuela for two years. She is now thinking of a move to Brazil.

“I am grateful to the revolution. Our humble family have achieved a great 
deal, thanks to the opportunities it created. All of us are university 
graduates. In other economic systems that wouldn’t be possible,” she says. “But 
I’m a very independent person. I do all I can for my family. If I can earn more 
for them elsewhere, I’d do it.”

Many young Cubans never saw Castro in person. He spent most of his last decade 
ensconced at home in the suburbs of Havana. Instead, they came of age under the 
government of his brother, Raúl Castro, who has introduced modest market 
reforms, opened up travel opportunities and restored diplomatic relations with 
the US.

This has raised expectations of greater openings: many now want a better 
economy, fewer restrictions on their activities, a faster, cheaper internet, 
and a chance to choose their leader. However, they also don’t want to lose the 
benefits of a socialist nation. Compared with neighbouring countries,Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> has a literate and healthy population 
with little fear of crime and a strong sense of community. The key to a 
successful future will be to maintain the best of Castro’s legacy while 
discarding the worst.

María Isabel Pérez, another of Nora’s granddaughters, completed her law degree 
a few years ago. She is paying the government back by doing several years of 
work as a local government official. But her goal is to defend people in civil 
rights cases.

Now 24, she has just had her first child, but still loves dancing to reggaetón 
and the music of the 1960s. Although she only once heard Castro in person, she 
joins her parents and grandparents in lamenting his loss.

“Fidel was the leader of the revolution. Thanks to the changes he introduced, 
my family was able to develop,” she says. “I hope the people who are in power 
will press forward in the way he wanted. I am worried, but I hope we can 
continue on the path set by Fidel.”
 