
Mobile provider Three is to run a 24-hour adblocking trial in the UK in the 
first step towards removing ads for all its customers.

The company is planning to contact customers and ask them to sign up for the 
trial, which will take place in mid June.

Three claims it wants to introduce adblocking to improve customer privacy, 
reduce data costs and provide a better experience accessing the web on phones. 
The company said advertisers should pay for the data costs associated with ads, 
but that it isn’t trying to get ads removed completely.

Three UK chief marketing officer Tom Malleschitz said: “This is the next step 
in our journey to make mobile ads better for our customers. The current ad 
model is broken. It frustrates customers, eats up their data allowance and can 
jeopardise their privacy. Something needs to change.”

Almost half of those planning to use an adblocker say they just don't like ads
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/27/adblocking-ads-kpmg-report-uk-block-ads>
“We can only achieve change by working with all stakeholders in the 
advertising industry – customers, advertising networks and publishers – to 
create a new form of advertising that is better for all parties.”

Despite Three’s insistence it wants to work with the companies that are 
showing its customers ads, many publishers will view the move as an all-out 
attack on their businesses. Most newspapers and digital-only news organisations 
hope online ads on mobile devices will help offset falling revenues elsewhere.

Adblocking <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ad-blocking> on mobile remains 
far less popular than on desktop computers and laptops, but the introduction at 
network level could immediately wipe out the revenue publishers make from a 
large chunk of their audience. Three is the UK’s fourth largest mobile operator 
with more than 10 million customers.

The technology Three is using is provided by Israeli company Shine, which is 
also reportedly working with Three to introduce adblocking in Italy. Shine is 
already delivering network level blocking for Jamaican mobile company Digicel.

Though the trial is the first attempt at network level adblocking in the UK, 
any attempt to take it further is likely to face a legal challenge under 
competition rules and from those concerned about the level of privacy intrusion 
Three would have to carry out on its customers to block ads.
 