
The Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> has printed a full 
apology to five scientists for three articles that wrongly suggested tobacco 
companies funded their research into e-cigarettes.

The newspaper had already apologised to one scientist named in reports, Clive 
Bates. However, four others, including theformer government adviser David Nutt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-nutt>, last week said they were due 
an apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/23/anti-smoking-experts-to-sue-times-for-claims-of-tobacco-payouts>
. At the time, all five said they would sue the newspaper for defamation. They 
have not decided whether to abandon the lawsuit following the apology.

Nutt welcomed the apology but criticised the “commercial interests and 
ideologues” he said were behind the article.

“We are pleased that the Times has capitulated on this matter, but would have 
been happier if it had not indulged in this reckless reporting, which smeared 
the reputations of leading anti-tobacco academics,” he said.

“The battle to reduce the harm from tobacco is gradually being won, but it is 
being fought against commercial interests and ideologues like those who were 
behind these articles.”

The original stories and a leading article were published on 12 October with 
the headlines “Tobacco giants fund vaping studies”, “Scientists wooed in charm 
offensive” and “Smoke in their eyes”.

One of the articles claimed that Cancer Research UK had criticised scientists 
who “accepted thousands of pounds from tobacco companies to carry out research 
into e-cigarettes”, and included a panel titled “Academics making a packet”.

As well as Nutt and Bates, it named Profs David Sweanor, Riccardo Polosa and 
Karl Fagerström.

The online versions of the articles have since been removed and replaced with 
the apology, which says the five were “internationally respected for their 
longstanding global work to reduce smoking and their work on the issue of 
nicotine harm reduction”.

It adds: “Our report and panel ‘Academics making a packet’ implied that these 
experts had received funding for research into e-cigarettes. We accept that 
this was wrong and their work has not been tainted by the influence of tobacco 
industry funding. We apologise for our errors and omissions, and for the 
embarrassment caused.”

Sweanor, who works at the Centre for Health Law, Policy and Ethics at the 
University of Ottawa, told the Guardian the group had not yet decided whether 
to continue with the defamation suit. Despite what he described as lasting 
damage to his reputation, Sweanor said the main priority was moving on.

“The interest is in simply getting it behind us,” he said. “My view is that I 
would just let it go. You just have to move on and do good work, and people 
forget the bit of character assassination.”

The Times declined to comment on the apology.
 