
Cue Card is the longstanding favourite for the King George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase>, the Boxing Day 
contest which forms the heart of any racing man's Christmas, but he goes there 
with a significant cloud hanging over the form of his Dorset stable, which will 
have had only one runner in the previous 12 days.

Colin Tizzard, Cue Card's trainer, electrified what would otherwise have been 
a routine media visit there on Monday by declaring a virus was affecting his 
horses and would probably persist for the rest of the season.

That appears not to have been mere loose talk, since Tizzard has had a single 
runner over the past week and took no part in the valuable cards at Ascot and 
Haydock on Saturday. But he was reluctant to repeat his comments when reached 
by telephone, denying that he had closed down his stable and offering geography 
as the reason for his absence.

"We've got 20 to run between Boxing Day and New Year," Tizzard said. "It's 
just that there's not been that much racing, not local to us, anyway. We've got 
Chepstow, Taunton, Exeter, Wincanton, all our local meetings are on in the next 
week and we'll be there." Still, the trainer had two runners at Ascot on the 
equivalent day last year and two more at Haydock, where his Cannington Brook 
won the Tommy Whittle Chase.

Tizzard appears to have been surprised by the extent of the media coverage of 
his initial "virus" comments, which dominated theRacing Post's front page the 
following day. He gave the impression on Saturday that he regretted airing the 
matter – through comments like: "We've had a bug about, there's no two ways 
about it, and we will have a few more … We don't want Cue Card coughing on 
Christmas Day, do we?"

That was plainly a bit of gallows humour but Tizzard is now playing it 
straight. "He's done all his fast work. He seems in very, very good form and, 
if there was any more rain, I wouldn't be worried at all.

"I'm not concerned about his stamina. I think we put that [doubt] to bed the 
last time."

That last time was Cue Card's surprise victory in the Betfair Chase at Haydock 
a month ago, a giant-killing victory for the Tizzards in an event normally 
dominated by the established powers of jump racing, Paul Nicholls andNicky 
Henderson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nicky-henderson>. The trainer's 
son, Joe, was the winning jockey and, when asked how much that meant to him, 
Tizzard Sr lost control of his emotions live on Channel 4.

Having been the victim of ceaseless leg-pulling by his male acquaintances ever 
since, he is likely to be more collected if Cue Card takes him back to the 
winner's enclosure atKempton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> Park 
on Boxing Day. And Tizzard, who has dozens of fine animals at his Sherborne 
base, is only a relative underdog, but it would still be a popular outcome if 
he were to break the Nicholls/Henderson lock on the King George that has 
excluded all others for seven years.

This year's race counts as a serious challenge to the old order, because the 
second-favourite, Dynaste, is also trained away from the country's biggest two 
yards, at David Pipe's base in Devon. Pipe gives little away but reports 
Dynaste to be so well that he wishes the race were this Sunday.

"It's a hell of a race," said Nicholls, who has two live chances in Thursday's 
renewal and declined to express a preference for either.

"Silviniaco Conti, I'd be thrilled with all the rain, because it'll make it a 
test of stamina on that track, which would suit him. Al Ferof's very well, a 
bit of an unknown on the trip but I don't see it being a problem."

Henderson, meanwhile, kept a low profile on Saturday with four unplaced 
runners, the sort of afternoon of which there have been too many for the 
Lambourn man this season. But the trainer said thatLong Run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/long-run> was "as good as we can get him" 
while he would like to run Riverside Theatre, if the owners can be persuaded.

Long Run, last year's King George hero, has been beaten a total of 62 lengths 
in his two starts this term and is widely discounted. Henderson, however, 
reports that he worked "really well" on Saturday and is openly hopeful of a 
return to form.
 