
Richard Chartres, Bishop of London
The Prime Minister <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/prime-minister-3.html> 
(1876)

In the interviews preliminary to my selection for training as a priest I was 
asked if there was a particular clergyman who had inspired me. “Dr Grantly of 
Plumstead Episcopi,” I replied and indeed my first love of Trollope came from 
wandering in his company through the lanes of Barsetshire. But the novel I am 
enjoying in this period of pre-election frenzy isThe Prime Minister.

The prime minister of the title is a Liberal who sits in the House of Lords. 
In another contrast to our own time the level of service which could be 
expected of the Post Office in 1875 is astonishing. There is mention of a 
letter written by the Etonian crook Ferdinand Lopez, posted in central London 
at 3am and received in the rural depths of Herefordshire in the evening of the 
same day.

The political theme in the novel is interwoven with the story of Emily Wharton 
and the blackguard Lopez, who is even subjected to the ignominy of being 
blackballed from Trollope’s favourite club, the Garrick. Emily, who has led a 
rather sheltered existence, finally hears the financial facts of life from a 
victim of Ferdinand Lopez’s disastrous sub-prime guano speculation. Her 
informant from Ponders End explains: “They goes and buys things they haven’t 
got the money to pay for and then waits to see if they’ll turn up trumps. Isn’t 
that gambling?”

The book contains some of Trollope’s most extensive excursions into the realm 
of political ideas. Lord Brock, a thinly disguised picture of Lord Palmerston, 
may have preferred “men to measures” but the Duke of Omnium expounds the creed 
of a conservative Liberal, which Trollope claimed as his own. He wanted to 
advance towards greater equality without ever quite getting there in a way that 
might discommode his present style of life. The Duke also had an enthusiasm 
which is represented in the novel as a somewhat cranky obsession – the 
introduction of decimal coinage.

Trollope’s world, like ours, is full of anxiety. His Barchester is continually 
invaded by London and by the power of the media exemplified by the pitiless 
Quintus Slide, the master of character assassination by innuendo. Trollope, by 
contrast, encourages us to believe that all people are to be treated gently.

Andrew Davies
He Knew He Was Right 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/he-knew-he-was-right.html> (1869)

While we were rehearsing my BBC adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2001/nov/12/broadcasting> of The Way We Live 
Now <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/way-we-live-now.html>, I got talking to 
one of the actors,Oliver Ford Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/dec/18/oliver-ford-davies-portrait-artist>
, a tremendously knowledgable Trollope enthusiast. I asked him if he knew of 
any other Trollope novels with a comparable edge and intensity, and he 
suggested I look atHe Knew He Was Right, a book I’d never heard of.

I did, and I was immediately hooked. Its central theme is the corrosive power 
of jealousy and it is a deliberate take on Shakespeare’sOthello. Louis 
Trevelyan has everything he could wish for: plenty of money, a respected place 
in society, and a beautiful wife, Emily, who is as much in love with him as he 
is with her, with whom he has a much-loved infant son. What could go wrong? 
Everything. Louis becomes obsessed with Emily’s friendship with a certain 
Colonel Osborne, an older man with a reputation. The friendship happens to be 
innocent, but it unmans Louis, who orders Emily to break it off. Understandably 
offended – after all, what has she done wrong? – Emily refuses. (If the 
principal subject is jealousy, the secondary theme is the power play within a 
Victorian marriage.) Things go from bad to worse. Louis snatches the little boy 
and takes him to Italy, where he is utterly wretched. His obsession gradually 
destroys his health and his sanity. It’s all pretty gut-wrenching, and so far 
from Trollope’s usual genial worldliness that one wonders what life experience 
inspired it.

Antonia Fraser
Can You Forgive Her? <http:> (1865)

During the dark days of the war, I noticed that all the grownups were reading 
green leather volumes with gold lettering on the cover. I asked my mother what 
it was all about and I thought she replied: “It’s the trollop: he cheers us all 
up.” As it happens, I did know the word “trollop”, possibly through my 
favourite Harrison Ainsworth. Therefore I could quite see why a merry wench 
with oranges in her apron and other gifts to bestow, might cheer everyone up. 
(At the same time I took note that men could be trollops too). Naturally, my 
next step was to read one of these jolly works, helping myself from the green 
row in my parents’ bookcase.

At which point I fell in love. The book I had picked out at random was Can You 
Forgive Her?: instantly Lady Glencora Palliser became my heroine. She was not 
exactly a role model, being uneducated, impulsive, tousle-haired, addicted to 
the love rat Burgo Fitzgerald and, in later volumes, a marvellously anarchic 
wife to the prime minister. After all, who could resist Burgo? I quote: “He was 
one of those young men with dark hair and blue eyes, who wear no beard and are 
certainly among the handsomest of God’s creatures”. I feel moved when I 
contemplate the scene when the broken Burgo, living abroad because he has 
gambled everything away, has to be rescued from his debts by Glencora’s austere 
but chivalrous husband, Plantaganet Palliser, future Duke of Omnium: on 
condition the wastrel remains in a small German town where there is no public 
gaming-table.

There are six Palliser novels: the so-called “politicals” (as opposed to the 
Barsetshire series, although characters do overlap). I read the whole lot every 
two or three years and now understand the welcome conviviality they bring.

Roy Hattersley
Phineas Finn <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/phineas-finn.html> (1869)


Anthony Trollope’s Palliser novels teach us very little about the real stuff 
of politics. Programmes and policies are what make the political world go round 
and in five long volumes – six ifThe Eustace Diamonds 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/eustace-diamonds.html> counts as part of the 
series – Plantagenet Palliser rises from backbencher to prime minister without 
showing much interest in either.

Trollope knew that he “could not make a tale pleasing, chiefly or perhaps in 
any part” by politics. But he built his stories of “love and intrigue, social 
incidents and a dash of sport” against a background of, usually confounded, 
parliamentary ambition. Sitting in the press gallery – still smarting from his 
defeat in the bruising Beverley byelection – he became an expert on political 
conduct, motives and manners. In consequence he became the master of the 
brilliant glimpse.

None of the Palliser series has more love and intrigue than Phineas Finn, The 
Irish Member. Finn, elected to parliament thanks to the support of a peer with 
a rotten borough at his disposal, spends more time falling in love than in the 
House of Commons. The objects of his affection are all members of society and 
usually both rich and “already spoken for”. In one case his intrusion into an 
already established relationship results in him fighting a duel. The 
circumstances of his resignation from the government – disagreement over Irish 
tenant rights – is not only one of Trollope’s rare excursion into “issues”. It 
is an even rarer example of Trollope admitting that honour is not unknown on 
the green benches. The need for romance is satisfied by Finn choosing to marry 
for love rather than the fortune of a banker’s widow who wanted to finance the 
resurrection of his political career.

But Phineas Finn is also packed with glorious little revelations that expose 
tricks of the parliamentary trade which are still in common use. “In spite of 
his assumed fury, the gentleman was not irate. He intended to communicate the 
look of anger to the parliamentary reports of his speech and he knew from 
experience that he could succeed in that.” And the journalists who are happy to 
be deceived? They are represented by Quintus Slide whose motto is “If it is 
true I have every right to publish. If it is not I’ve every right to ask the 
question.” O tempora. O mores.

Philip Hensher
Orley Farm <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/orley-farm.html> (1862)

Orley Farm was the novel of Trollope’s that most of his contemporaries 
admired, and it’s a book of immense, cumulative power. Like everyone else, I 
love the Trollope of easy charm and amusement in absurdity, but the books of 
his I find most compelling are the analyses of processes. The wheels ofOrley 
Farm grind slowly, and the complexity of its story is designed to daunt the 
reader. The lawsuit on which the story turns, as Orwell said, must be the most 
detailed in fiction, and it draws the reader in slowly, with its quality of 
objective clarity. A woman may have forged a signature, years before, for the 
best of reasons; she has made an enemy in a way that ought to be harmless; his 
revenge is enabled, and completely out of proportion. What is the law here? 
What would the weak and fallible people like the result to be? The novel is 
full of exquisite little sketches of humanity, like the commercial travellers 
insisting on their rights in an inn against an intruding lawyer. There is the 
best, and most amusing account of a miser’s meal when the lawyer first visits 
the hopeful heir. The novel doesn’t strive for warmth or charm, for once, but 
its world is shaped by a lucid and interested account of good and bad behaviour.

The fascination of the book is in the rigid purity of principles, against 
which human beings tremble, quail and shudder. Trollope thoughtOrley Farm was 
flawed because it reveals the truth of the matter too early. I think it adds to 
the terror of the novel that, after a certain point, there is no escape from 
the facts, only a frightening possibility that above the demands of justice 
stands a still crueller set of demands, called duty.Orley Farm is, in the end, 
an unusually adult fiction.

Alan Johnson
Barchester Towers <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/barchester-towers.html> 
(1857)

It was, I think, Trollope’s long career as a post office surveyor that first 
attracted me to his books. I was enthralled as much by his methodology as his 
literary reputation; rising at the same unearthly hour as I did to deliver the 
Queen’s mail, he’d begin writing at 5am. By the time he left home to begin 
“surveying” (whatever that was) he’d completed his daily quota of 3,000 words.

Telling the truth about this system undoubtedly damaged his reputation among 
those who believed artistic genius involved no process other than waiting for 
inspiration to saunter along in its own good time.

Trollope’s literary genius is, in my view, unquestionable and never more 
apparent than inBarchester Towers. Henry James said that Trollope had “ a 
complete appreciation of the usual”. So much of what he writes about seems 
muted and undramatic. Yet the reader is gripped as tightly by the apparently 
humdrum goings on in Barchester as by any murder mystery. His characters are, 
at least, comparable with Dickens (his great contemporary) with less 
eccentricity. Is there a better villain in Victorian literature than the 
Reverend Mr Slope, with his hair “always formed into three straight lumpy 
masses, each brushed with admirable precession and cemented with much grease”? 
Or a more noble hero than the quiet and unassuming Mr Harding? Through Eleanor 
Bold, Trollope provides a deep insight into the position of women in Victorian 
society.

Above all, politics pervades this story as much as in any of the Palliser 
novels. Its clergymen are tossed around in the clash of ideas. Low church 
battles high church. The Oxford Movement is on the attack; the German Higher 
Criticism attracts and repels in equal measure. There is no mention of Darwin 
and it was only after I’d read this magnificent book that I realised why. It 
had been published two years beforeThe Origin of Species 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/origin-of-the-species.html>. Barchester’s 
clergy had yet to face their most formidable challenge.

Kwasi Kwarteng
Phineas Finn <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/phineas-finn.html> (1868)

Trollope has always been a controversial writer. Not in the sense of being a 
provocative or particularly radical novelist, but people have always argued as 
to how good he is. One of Trollope’s problems was that he told everyone his 
working methods. He got up very early every morning and wrote from 5am to 8am. 
He then went to his day job in the Post Office. He wrote with amazing facility, 
churning out 47 novels in 35 years.

Of all his political novels, I would argue that Phineas Finn is the most 
engaging. It tells the story of a young man, the only son of a successful Irish 
doctor, who ends up in London studying law. A lacklustre student, the young 
Phineas is charming and handsome. He makes many prominent friends, including a 
politician, Barrington Erle, who suggests he stands for parliament.

Finn gets duly elected and starts a parliamentary career with a maiden speech 
that is a bit of a fiasco. After various scrapes and attempts to woo 
appropriate young heiresses, Finn returns to his Irish roots and becomes a 
fervent supporter of a new bill enshrining tenant’s rights. The governing 
party, of which Finn is a member, does not support the bill. Finn resigns on 
principle and retires from politics.

This novel shows all the craziness of mid-Victorian politics and the 
superficial way in which politics was connected to grand society. Trollope 
exposes all the ambitions and social neuroses of a world obsessed with status, 
influence and power. Being mid-Victorians, social status was everything to the 
characters in the book, which is peppered with absurd, aristocratic figures who 
have little to recommend themselves but high birth and fortune. There is no 
sense in which merit or application have anything to do with the governance of 
Britain. The charm of the narrative derives from the fluency with which 
Trollope tells a story, and the sheer improbability of many of the plot lines.

Victorian readers would have loved the glamour and charm of a social and 
political world to which they had absolutely no access. Today, we can learn 
about that world from Trollope’s engaging novels, of whichPhineas Finn is 
probably the most representative, as far as the political novels, are concerned.

Ferdinand Mount
Cousin Henry <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/cousin-henry.html> (1879)

How quick Trollope is to grasp a place. He can land anywhere in the British 
Isles and make a novel out of it. There’s no milieu he cannot get the hang of: 
the cathedral close, the Mayfair mansion, the Irish cabin. InCousin Henry, he 
captures the rural society of South Wales (one of the many areas he roamed in 
his days at the Post Office). It’s a story about a missing will and two not 
very attractive characters: Henry Jones, a miserable London clerk who inherits 
the estate of Llanfeare in Carmarthenshire under the will of his uncle Indefer 
Jones, and Isabel Brodrick, a proud and prickly girl who is her uncle’s 
favourite but whom he has disinherited because he thinks the estate ought to go 
to a male heir, until having second thoughts on his deathbed. After coming to 
Llanfeare, Cousin Henry finds the new will but lacks either the ruthlessness to 
destroy it or the honesty to reveal it. He just sits in his uncle’s dismal 
little book-room, frozen with terror, trying to avert his gaze when in company 
from returning to the fateful volume.Cousin Henry is a wonderful book about 
being frightened.

Trollope evokes Welsh small-town life with brilliant economy: the suspicious 
servants at Llanfeare, the gossip of the attorneys and drovers in the Bush Inn 
at Carmarthen, Mr Owen the curate who Indefer says won’t do for his niece 
because his grandfather kept the Lion at Pembroke (both pubs still exist).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F11%2Fanthony-trollope-200th-anniversary-writers-favourite-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428595490730%2F3e7e1cdb-0950-4257-a2ff-1c487910a1e9-1408x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=To%20celebrate%20Anthony%20Trollope%E2%80%99s%20200th%20anniversary%2C%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourite%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F11%2Fanthony-trollope-200th-anniversary-writers-favourite-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=To%20celebrate%20Anthony%20Trollope%E2%80%99s%20200th%20anniversary%2C%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourite%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F11%2Fanthony-trollope-200th-anniversary-writers-favourite-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428595490730%2F3e7e1cdb-0950-4257-a2ff-1c487910a1e9-1408x2040.jpeg>
 Trollope writes with ‘a gripping terseness’ inCousin Henry. Photograph: 
Rischgitz/Getty Images 
Trollope is written off by his critics as a prosy, ambling sort of writer 
churning out his 3,000 words a day. But inCousin Henry he writes with a 
gripping terseness – I noticed one page that contained scarcely a word of more 
than one syllable. Trollope’s special excellence is in conveying mixed, 
unstable characters such as most of us are. By comparison, the great fictional 
monsters like Casaubon and Widmerpool seem one-dimensional. Far from occupying 
a comfortable middlebrow shelf, the best of Trollope’s novels secrete a rare 
moral poetry. To say that beneath a bluff exterior he has the finest of 
feminine sensibilities is an old-fashioned way of saying that he writes 
intensely human novels of the sort that today are mostly written by women.

Andrew O’Hagan
The Way We Live Now <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/way-we-live-now-4.html> 
(1875)

Trollope brings the operations of English society on to the page like nobody 
else. His characters are less colourful than Dickens’s and less fine than Henry 
James’s, but they come from life, andThe Way We Live Now is as fresh as this 
morning’s newspaper. Augustus Melmotte, the chief financier in the novel, has 
as much insolent, bonus-seeking arrogance as aFred Goodwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sir-fred-goodwin> and a Bernie Madoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bernard-madoff> combined. The vulgarity 
of his ambition, however, is no match for the ugliness of the social prejudice 
surrounding him. People fall over themselves to befriend him, then to shun him, 
and the novel reveals the mechanisms of social class and how they are greased 
with money and oiled with pretension.

Set between Marylebone and Pall Mall – with outings to Islington and Suffolk – 
the book is essentially a London novel about the decay of honesty. Of all his 
works, this, to my mind, is the greatest outing for Trollope’s art, where the 
relationship between capital investment and old family money is the major 
theme. He shows how love and marriage can be mere parasitical sub-relationships 
to this one, and how even the smallest successes can be got by swindles. 
Trollope wrote it quickly, yet we see human nature at work in a maze of 
plausibility. James spoke of the author’s “complete appreciation of the usual”, 
and that is the dominant force in this moral book. We see the young Sir Felix 
Carbury falling drunk through the streets of the West End, fresh from a bath of 
sleaze. We see newspaper editors and parliamentarians shaping reality to suit 
their opportunism. The “We” of the title is not everybody: it is the people who 
find other people simply usable, and Trollope’s satire is extensive. “Lady 
Monogram cared nothing for Melmotte’s villainy, as regarded herself … She had 
but a confused idea of any difference between commerce and fraud.”

But no good novel is an editorial. The Way We Live Now is a masterpiece of 
modulated prose, where every image and every line adds to a tapestry of moral 
degeneration. The private clubs and the drawing rooms of the period were 
well-inhabited and studied by the author, and he transformed the particular 
energies of his day into something universal. The book is a huge comment on 
present iniquities and a beautiful revelation of the kinds of greed that may 
hide in entitlement.

Anthony Quinn
The Prime Minister <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/prime-minister.html> (1876)

The Prime Minister is to my mind the most enjoyable of Trollope’s six Palliser 
novels (1864-80). Its fusing of the personal and the political is masterly, and 
its dramatic texture feels finer-grained than any other in the sequence. It is 
set – plus ca change – in the years of a coalition government, though it is 
impossible to imagine its leader, the Duke of Omnium, aka Plantagenet Palliser, 
permitting a “photographer” to enter his kitchen. It seems highly unlikely that 
the Duke himself ever set foot in there. These are troubling times for Planty 
Pall, whose principled reserve revolts against the sneaky compromises and 
dishonesties that coalition politics entail. It further dismays him that his 
sociable wife Glencora should throw open Gatherum Castle to entertain on an 
extravagant scale and set the gossip-mill turning when she makes a favourite of 
Ferdinand Lopez, a shady political chancer who has just married into wealth. 
Glencora’s tipping Lopez the wink about standing for the borough of 
Silverbridge, long in the Palliser pocket, sets a fuse that will run down to 
calamity.

Around this double-headed plot Trollope creates a living fresco of 
mid-Victorian society from high to low. His characters by now seem like old 
friends, especially those who had crossed swords in earlier books, such as the 
Irish politician Phineas Finn and the scurrilous journalist Quintus Slide of 
the People’s Banner. Quintus Slide: has any newspaperman in fiction ever been 
better named? Trollope was a genius at naming, and in fact I did him the 
dubious honour of pinching one from this book – a minor political bully, Du 
Boung – for a novel of my own.

Let me confess: I owe my love of these novels and of Trollope to television. 
As a 10-year-old in 1974 I was mesmerised by the serialization ofThe Pallisers 
in 26 weekly episodes (adapted by Simon Raven) and still have the Radio Times 
magazine special with its cover front of Susan Hampshire as Lady Glen. When I 
read the novels themselves years later I still pictured its characters as I 
recalled them from the screen – so Stuart Wilson would forever be Ferdinand 
Lopez, Phillip Latham the PM, Donald Pickering the raffish Dolly Longstaffe, 
and wonderful Barbara Murray, who died only last year, Madame Max. I am more 
grateful than I can say to the BBC and producer Martin Lisemore for sparking 
not merely an interest in Trollope but the earliest stirrings of a reading 
habit.

Michael Symmons Roberts
The Warden <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/warden-5.html> (1855)

I had the wrong idea about Trollope for years, based on a cursory scan of his 
work in my 20s. I had him marked as a low-wattage Dickens, lacking edge and 
passion. When I was asked by Radio 4 last year if I’d be interested in 
dramatising some of the Barchester novels, I took it as a cue to test my 
prejudice by giving him some proper attention.The Warden is where Barchester 
begins, so it’s where I began too.

The warden himself is Septimus Harding, a gentle elderly clergyman who devotes 
his life to the care of 12 retired working men at Hiram’s hospital, an alms 
house established by the wealthy John Hiram centuries before, funded by his 
legacy. It’s an arrangement that works for Mr Harding and his charges, but when 
a young reforming doctor questions the financial arrangements, the orderly life 
of Cathedral Close begins to unravel. Dr John Bold believes that the Warden’s 
annual stipend is too high, and that the patients of Hiram’s Hospital are 
underpaid. With reforming zeal he sets out to correct this injustice.

The brilliance of Trollope’s storytelling lies in his ability to twist and 
turn your allegiances as a reader, page by page. There are no villains from 
central casting here (unlike some of Dickens’s) and the fact that Dr Bold is 
engaged to marry Rev Harding’s daughter Eleanor means the stakes are high for 
all concerned. It is a brilliantly spun story, and its central themes are as 
urgent as ever. The effects of money – its absence or presence – on people’s 
lives is at the heart of the current election campaign, but not many 
contemporary novelists write this well about it. Trollope had seen his family 
slide from wealth to poverty, and that experience informs his work. When Dr 
Bold takes his campaign against Mr Harding to the popular press, Trollope 
offers a compelling and prescient account of the burgeoning power of popular 
opinion mobilised against an individual. It’s a 19th-century version of the 
self-righteous attacks described in Jon Ronson’sSo You’ve Been Publicly Shamed. 
Essentially, it’s a book about public and private morality, about the 
possibility and definition of human goodness. I can’t think of a better time to 
read it.

Joanna Trollope
Miss Mackenzie 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/290274/> (1865)

This is certainly one of Trollope’s least assuming novels, concerning, as it 
does, an unremarkable spinster who, having lived a life of Victorian female 
usefulness to others, suddenly appears to have come into real money – enough to 
embark on a life of independence at last. The money also makes her, for the 
first time in her quiet life, an object of considerable attraction, to three 
suitors as well as a classic 19th‑century evangelical group, whom Trollope 
treats with the kind of ingenious mockery more usually associated with Jane 
Austen.

But there is far more to the novel than just the narrative, and what it 
reveals about the Victorian gender hierarchy. Trollope confesses, in his 
autobiography, that he was trying to write a novel in which the final pairing 
off had nothing to do with love, and that this proved impossible. In fact, his 
authorial feelings are conflicted as he is plainly on his heroine’s side, yet 
fails to provide her with any male character whom either he, or we, as readers, 
can feel is even halfway good enough for her. Margaret Mackenzie develops in 
both strength and grace as the book progresses, but her eventual choice of 
husband remains a distinct disappointment, and a lacklustre choice, even if she 
declares herself well satisfied by it.

What is so fascinating about the subtext of the novel is that Trollope clearly 
wanted to break convention, both as a novelist and a man, but the prevailing 
opinions of his day proved too strong for him, just as they did for his 
heroine. But that doesn’t prevent this novel from suggesting and portraying all 
manner of intriguing things, particularly from a female perspective 150 years 
later, and containing some wonderfully sharp characterisation, particularly of 
rampant insincerity.

It also has two of the best set pieces in all Trollope – a terrible dinner 
party given by Mrs Tom Mackenzie and a truly dreadful charity bazaar in aid of 
the orphans of black soldiers who had died in what Trollope calls “the American 
war”. If he were a less genial writer as a whole, one might describe both set 
pieces as merciless...

AN Wilson
The Last Chronicle of Barset 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/last-chronicle-of-barset-2.html> (1867)

Trollope fails many tests for me – I do not find him rereadable, as all my 
truly favourite novelists are. He is sentimental and slapdash; when you read a 
name like Parson Quiverful, you yell, “Try harder, Trollope!” Sentimental 
without (unlike Dickens) the ability to make me cry. And yet, and yet. Like the 
creators of really good soap opera, he can start a fairly trivial trail and 
make you absolutely obsessed with discovering the outcome: Lady Mason’s very 
understandable decision to forge the codicil in her husband’s will, to benefit 
her son (Orley Farm <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/orley-farm.html>), or Mark 
Robarts’s stupid willingness to guarantee the bills of the spendthrift Mr 
Sowerby (Framley Parsonage 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/framley-parsonage.html>) that lands him 
page-turningly close to bankruptcy.

My wife and I once sat up all night reading aloud The Eustace Diamonds 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/eustace-diamonds.html> – we could not sleep 
until we knew whether Lizzie Greystock got the necklace. The most agonising of 
these dramas, for me, is contained inThe Last Chronicle of Barset. Mr Soames, 
Lord Lufton’s agent, drops a cheque. Poverty-stricken and absent-minded, though 
honest, Parson Crawley picks it up and uses the proceeds to pay his bills. 
Never mindThe Archers <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers>. 
Victorian England ground to a halt in 1866-67, wondering how this almighty fix 
would resolve itself. Sermons were preached about it. I probably exaggerate 
when I say there were questions in the House of Commons, but the story obsessed 
everyone, and, of course, Crawley is that wonderful mixture of stiff-necked and 
admirable which leaves you in doubt, until the very end, about what really 
happened. In the end, it comes to involve nearly all our old friends in 
Barsetshire. The scene in which Mr Crawley answers back Mrs Proudie is one of 
the best in all Trollope: “‘Peace woman,’ Mr Crawley said, addressing her at 
last. The bishop jumped out of his chair at hearing the wife of his bosom 
called a woman” ... This almost prepares us – but nothing could prepare us – 
for that woman’s really moving end. Did I say Trollope could not make me cry? I 
had forgotten the scene when the former Warden, whose dilemma over Hiram’s 
Hospital began the series of Barsetshire tales – opens a drawer and looks at 
his long-neglected violin.

Jesse Norman

The Way We Live Now <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/way-we-live-now-4.html> 
(1875)

You might expect a politician, and especially one in the midst of a general 
election, to choose one of Trollope’s great political novels:Phineas Finn 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/phineas-finn.html>, perhaps, or Can You 
Forgive Her? <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/can-you-forgive-her.html>. Like 
them, my choice is a cracking read. But it has even greater contemporary 
relevance.

The Way We Live Now tells the tale of the rise and fall of Augustus Melmotte, 
against the backdrop of the rampant city speculation of the 1870s. Melmotte is 
a super-financier, who appears from nowhere and quickly sets about seducing the 
British establishment. In so doing he triggers a myriad of interlocking 
subplots.

The penniless Lady Carbury is desperate for her feckless boy Sir Felix to 
marry Melmotte’s daughter. An American, Hamilton Fisker, wants him to finance a 
new railway line from Salt Lake City to Veracruz in Mexico. Melmotte, now an 
MP, spies in this scheme an unmissable opportunity to separate gullible 
investors from their cash. Only Fisker’s nephew Paul Montague seems to stand in 
his way. But both Sir Felix and Paul have their secrets …

So why do I love it? Well, who wouldn’t love such a fast-moving and bitingly 
satirical plot, let alone one that also examines the nature and causes of 
financial dishonesty? But, lest this seem too pious, the book is lifted above 
the merely moralistic by three things. The first is the artistry with which 
Trollope unfolds the action, moving from ambiguity and shadow to devastating 
clarity as Melmotte’s grand swindle finally unravels.

The second lies in the personal, social and financial detail that Trollope 
carefully accumulates in order to depict that gilded age, and Melmotte’s final 
crash, in such an utterly persuasive way. And the third is the brilliantly 
drawn character of Melmotte himself, a monstrous figure who strides through the 
narrative with tremendous brio, to its final and inevitable climax.

And behind all this is an unnerving reflection: that once dishonesty leaves 
the everyday behind, once it becomes magnificent and all-embracing, it can 
somehow cease to be what it is. Those around it lose their sense of proportion; 
they can be dazzled, or bought off.

Human nature is at once fragile and unchanging. And that’s not an irrelevant 
thought, as we look back at the financial scandals of the past few decades.
 