
To Kill a Mockingbird has topped a list of the most influential books written 
by women, with Liberty director Shami Chakrabarti describing Harper Lee's 
1960 novel as "the book that introduced many of us to our belief in human 
rights".

The selection of 20 titles was voted for by the public after the Baileys 
women's prize for fiction launched a campaign to find the novels, by women, 
"that have most impacted, shaped or changed readers' lives".

After contributors including Mary Beard and Joanna Trollope chose their own 
most influential title, thousands of men and women voted for their own 
selections, with Lee's story of Atticus Finch, the lawyer who defends a black 
man accused of raping a white woman, taking the top spot.

"With human rights under attack the world over, the enduring appeal of Harper 
Lee's great tale gives hope that justice and equality might yet triumph over 
prejudice," said Chakrabarti, who was also announced as chair of the judging 
panel for next year's Baileys prize.

Chakrabarti had chosen To Kill a Mockingbird as her own most influential read 
by a female author, calling it "particularly significant for me but also for 
generations of lawyers", as "it's the book that made many of us want to be 
involved in the law" and "the book that introduced many of us to our belief in 
human rights".

Lee's novel was also picked by singer Sharleen Spiteri, who said that reading 
it was "my first romance with a book". She added: "I wanted to be Scout and was 
pretty obsessed with her as I was a real tomboy growing up."

Beard had selected Jane Eyre, and Trollope The Towers of Trebizond by Rose 
Macaulay, saying that she had read the 1956 book "every decade" and that: "I'll 
read it aloud to anybody who will stand still long enough to be read to."

The top 20 list of influential titles by women, unveiled on Tuesday, ranges 
from classics to children's literature, and from science fiction to romance.

Margaret Atwood's story of a dystopia where women are treated as possessions, 
The Handmaid's Tale, sits in second place, ahead of Charlotte Brontë's Jane 
Eyre and JK Rowling's Harry Potter books.

Little Women by Louisa May Alcott also makes the cut, as does Dodie Smith's 
I Capture the Castle, Donna Tartt's The Secret History and Sylvia Plath's The 
Bell Jar.

Lionel Shriver was picked for We Need to Talk About Kevin, Margaret Mitchell 
for Gone with the Wind, Daphne du Maurier for Rebecca and Toni Morrison for 
Beloved, a title selected as a personal pick by Lady Amos. "I couldn't put it 
down," she said when the campaign was launched. "I come from a country, Guyana, 
which is where a lot of slaves were shipped. It's an important part of my 
history."

The top 20 most influential books by women, as voted for by the public:

1) To Kill a Mockingbird – Harper Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harper-lee>

2) The Handmaid's Tale – Margaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood>

3) Jane Eyre – Charlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte>

4) Harry Potter – JK Rowling

5) Wuthering Heights – Emily Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/emilybronte>

6) Pride and Prejudice – Jane Austen

7) Rebecca – Daphne du Maurier

8) Little Women – Louisa May Alcott

9) The Secret History – Donna Tartt

10) I Capture the Castle – Dodie Smith

11) The Bell Jar – Sylvia Plath

12) Beloved – Toni Morrison

13) Gone With the Wind – Margaret Mitchell

14) We Need To Talk About Kevin – Lionel Shriver

15) The Time Traveller's Wife – Audrey Niffenegger

16) Middlemarch – George Eliot

17) I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings – Maya Angelou

18) The Golden Notebook – Doris Lessing

19) The Colour Purple – Alice Walker

20) The Women's Room – Marilyn French

• This article was amended on 31 July 2014. An earlier version incorrectly 
described Rose Macaulay's The Towers of Trebizond as a children's book.
 