
Tom Morgan was given a rough ride as he offered his expert testimony to the 
Jim Best rehearing on Tuesday, as a member of the panel appeared unwilling to 
accept one of his key points. Morgan, a former Irish champion jump jockey, said 
he did not think Paul John had given stopping rides to the two horses at the 
centre of the case but flagged up what he believed were signs of fatigue in the 
jockey’s efforts.

John claims he stopped both Echo Brava and Missile Man when they ran in 
December, acting on the instructions of Best, a Lewes-based trainer who 
employed him. Best denies the charge and is defending himself at a hearing 
expected to last all week.

Jockey Paul John gives colourful account as BHA’s Jim Best case reopens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/paul-john-jim-best-british-horseracing-authority>
Morgan summed up John’s ride on Echo Brava by saying: “He’s an inexperienced 
jockey on an inexperienced horse, getting carted. The horse was in control of 
the jockey.” Asked what he would have expected to see if this had really been a 
stopping ride, Morgan said: “He’d have to break the horse’s stride at some 
stage but he didn’t. If anything, he was encouraging the horse forward.”

John claims he went wide in order to make his horse cover as much ground as 
possible. Morgan pointed out that, because of the layout of the rails at 
Plumpton that day, John had followed the best racing line for much of the time 
and that most other jockeys in the race had followed a similar route.

Morgan saw no evidence of the horse being ridden into the bottom of hurdles, 
as John had claimed. In reference to two air shots with the whip which John had 
described, Morgan said one had connected with the horse while the other was 
mere waving of the whip to encourage Echo Brava. He pointed to three moments in 
the first half of the race where he said John’s legs had given way, asserting 
that was a sign of the rider being tired. John had claimed those were “show 
bumps” to make it look as though he was trying.

Horse racing tips: Wednesday 23 November
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/horse-racing-tips-wednesday-23-november>
William Norris QC, one of three panel members and a former amateur jump 
jockey, repeatedly pressed Morgan about the effort made by John, asking: “Tell 
us where you see the horse coming off the bridle, if it does.” Morgan said that 
had happened “halfway down the back straight”, describing John as nudging the 
horse there, and added that the jockey’s use of the whip at the home turn also 
indicated Echo Brava was off the bridle. Norris’s doubts seemed to persist and 
he told Best’s barrister, Jonathan Laidlaw: “That’s a concern we have as we 
look at this film.”

Other points made by Morgan seemed to get a better reception. He noted that 
John had, at times, grabbed the neckstrap while riding both horses, “which 
suggests to me this jockey doesn’t have much confidence in his horses”. He 
pointed out the undulating running rail at Towcester in support of his 
contention that the uneven ground had caused Missile Man to become unbalanced 
and that John had not produced that effect, as the rider claims.

Earlier, John was challenged by Laidlaw about a selfie he had texted to Best 
in which the jockey was giving the ‘v’ sign to the camera. Laidlaw suggested 
the text, sent in the evening after John’s ride on Echo Brava had got him in 
trouble with the stewards, amounted to evidence of the jockey’s general lack of 
respect. John countered that it was sent in response to a now-deleted text from 
Best, in which the trainer claimed he had told him: “Well done for getting the 
feed cart today. That’s what you’re going to be doing for the next two weeks 
while you’re banned ha ha.” The hearing continues.
 