
I first met Toni Morrison <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/tonimorrison> about 
15 years ago, to talk about her seventh novel,Paradise 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradise_%28novel%29>, an encounter I remember 
largely for its number of terrifying pauses. Morrison, in her late 60s then, 
was at the height of her powers, a Nobel laureate with a famously low tolerance 
for journalists and critics, and a personal style as distinctive as her prose: 
silver dreadlocks, sharp, unwavering eye contact and a manner of speech – when 
she did speak – that, to her annoyance, people were wont to call poetry.

Now she sits in her publisher's office in New York, the city laid out beneath 
her. She looks as grand as ever, but there have been changes. It is right after 
lunch when, says Morrison, she is accustomed to napping. Guiltily?

"Not any more! At 81, I don't feel guilty about anything." (As she will 
explain, she appears here in role asToni Morrison, as distinct from Chloe 
Wofford, her birth name and real self.) "So there!" Throughout the afternoon 
she is gloriously, unexpectedly giddy.

It is hard to believe Morrison is 81. She started late, her first novel, The 
Bluest Eye <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Bluest_Eye>, written when she was 
39 and a senior editor at Random House. As a result, she is not pegged 
particularly to any generation of writers and since her subject matter is 
largely historical, or rather, concerned with the handprint of history on the 
present day, it gives her a kind of timelessness. Her characters are heroic and 
flawed, mythic and real, "unavailable to pity" she has said – vehicles for 
remembering, even, as Morrison wrote inBeloved 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2006/jul/08/fiction.tonimorrison>, when 
"remembering seemed unwise". Chance would be a fine thing, these days, she says.

"There's nothing inside that's 81. It's just the changes in the body. And the 
memory. I don't remember where the keys are. Or as my son says, 'Ma, it's not 
that you don't remember where you put the keys, it's when you pick up your keys 
and you don't know what they're for.' Thank you, son." She laughs long and 
loud. "Everything that happened in the first 50 years of my life isdazzling and 
memorable. It's amazing, how the past is so clear. And the present is…" She 
bats a hand in the air.

Her latest novel, Home, is set in the aftermath of the Korean war and 
coincides with that sentimentalised period of American history that Morrison 
remembers rather differently. "I was trying to take the scab off the 50s, the 
general idea of it as very comfortable, happy, nostalgic. Mad Men. Oh, please. 
There was a horrible war you didn't call a war where 58,000 people died. There 
wasMcCarthy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_McCarthy>."

In Home, Frank, a veteran experiencing delusions brought on by post-traumatic 
stress disorder, and his sister, Cee, mutilated in a medical experiment, find 
their way home to a town called Lotus, which as teenagers they did everything 
to escape. It is a classic Morrison setting, a hardscrabble town with no 
redeeming features, redeemed nonetheless by the topography of love.

All are variations on Lorain, Ohio, <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorain,_Ohio>
 where Morrison grew up, one of four children of a steel-worker and a 
housewife. Morrison can see both her parents in her character, her father's 
attitude of "disdain", her mother's openness. She always felt superior, she 
says, a superiority born of opposition, the gut push-back against low 
expectation, although she suspects it was also just in her from birth. She was 
a child of the 1940s, when segregation laws were still in place, but Morrison 
was self-possessed and inclined to speak up.

"Other people thought that I wrote well, when I was at school. And I remember 
one teacher showed some little essay I wrote to subsequent classes, as an 
example of really flawless writing. But the grade he gave me was B. So I asked 
him: well, if you think it's so great, why do I have a B? And he said, 'You 
misspelt raspberry.'" She throws back her head in laughter. "Howdo you spell 
raspberry?"

On the rare occasions Toni Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tonimorrison> chooses to focus on criticism, 
it is this she comes back to: that before her work even "gets out the gate" it 
has already been taken as representative – of her race, of her gender – so it 
becomes less a novel than a sociopolitical statement. Morrison is fine with 
sociopolitical readings of her work, but the artist in her rebels against it 
being the only reading, particularly when her novels are held up against some 
preconceived notion of what, as a black woman, she "should" be writing about.

She felt this very strongly when she sat down to write The Bluest Eye. She 
would not, she decided, try to "explain" black life to a white audience. She 
would not write from the position of outsider to her own experience. She took 
issue with, for example, the title of Ralph Ellison's famous novel,Invisible Man
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Invisible_Man>; as she told the New Yorker in 
2003, "Invisible to whom? Not to me."

She wanted to write from within. It was the era of "black is beautiful"; 
everywhere she looked in New York, the black power movement was promoting that 
slogan. It struck her both as true – "of course" – and at the same time, 
ahistorical and reactive. "All the books that were being published by 
African-American guys were saying 'screw whitey', or some variation of that. 
Not the scholars but the pop books. And the other thing they said was, 'You 
have to confront the oppressor.' I understand that. But you don't have to look 
at the world through his eyes. I'm not a stereotype; I'm not somebody else's 
version of who I am. And so when people said at that time black is beautiful – 
yeah? Of course. Who said it wasn't? So I was trying to say, in The Bluest Eye, 
wait a minute. Guys. There was a time when black wasn't beautiful. And you 
hurt."

The idea for a novel about a black girl made to feel so ugly by the culture 
around her that she prays for blue eyes, came out of an encounter Morrison had 
as a child. A fellow classmate confided to her the same dream of blue eyes, 
which, even as a 12-year-old, struck Morrison as grotesquely self-loathing. She 
remembered it. "I wanted to know how she got to that place."

She had not herself suffered any such moments. She was Chloe Wofford then; 
Toni was a nickname that came out of her baptismal name, Anthony (after St 
Anthony), which she took at 12 when she joined the Catholic church. She knew 
who she was and puts it down to a combination of class – in her town, they were 
all poor together, black, white, Polish, Spanish – living in the same streets 
and attending the same high schools. Her parents were also fiercely resistant 
to outside influence. For a while, her family was on food aid, or "relief" as 
it was then known, a word Morrison finds preferable to today's language. "I 
liked that word. Because it was, like, it's just a pause. You're going to be 
all right, it's just 'relief'. And I remember my mother got some cornmeal or 
something and it had bugs in it. She wrote a letter to Franklin D Roosevelt. 
And his office answered! And the woman who dealt out this crap came to see my 
mother, and my mother said, 'You're giving us food with bugs in it?!' She was 
the type who tore eviction notices off the door."

Her father didn't trust anyone from outside. When Morrison was in her early 
teens, she got a job as a domestic in a white family's house. Looking back, she 
is inclined to think her white employer had a point when she yelled at her for 
being useless at the job. "I was so stupid, I'd never had a vacuum cleaner, my 
mother used a mop! And she had a very elaborate stove, which I didn't know how 
to use." At the time, she says, she took it very personally and ran home in 
distress. Her mother told her to quit, but she wanted the two dollars a week. 
Her father gave her a long, stern lecture that has stayed with Morrison all her 
life.

"He said, 'Go to work, get your money and come home. You don't live there.'"

She repeats it, slowly, with the air of revelation. "Go to work, get your 
money, come home." She was not obliged, he said, to live as they saw her in 
their imagination. Later, when Morrison was bullied at school, it had little 
effect on her, she says. "A little Italian boy called me an Ethiopian. 'Hee hee 
hee, you Ethiopian, you.' I went home and said to my mother, 'What is that?' 
And she said, 'It's a country in Africa.' And it was sort of like,what? He 
obviously thought it was a great insult." Morrison, dry as ice, says, "It was 
not impressive."

This attitude has, at times, landed her in trouble. "It limits you. It makes 
you insensitive to certain things, that later in life you should be sensitive 
to." She never took drugs, she says, not even as a teenager when everyone 
around her was smoking dope. "I did not want to feel anything that did not 
originate with me. Because the big deal, as they described it, was that it made 
you feel so good. I did not want to feel something that was dependent on it. I 
want to feel what I feel. What's mine. Even if it's not happiness, whatever 
that means. Because you're all you've got."

When she started The Bluest Eye she was the single mother of two boys, living 
in Syracuse, New York. She rose at 4am every morning to write before work. If 
she felt discouraged, she thought about her grandmother, who had fled the south 
with seven children and no means of support. Any existential panic – about her 
income, her prospects as a writer, her availability as a mother – evaporated in 
the face of daily necessity.
 Morrison with her sons, Harold (left) and Slade, in the 1980s. Photograph: 
Getty Images 
At one level, says Morrison, it was terrifically simple. "I was young. I 
started writing when I was 39. That's the height of life. The real liberation 
was the kids, because their needs were simple. One, they needed me to be 
competent. Two, they wanted me to have a sense of humour. And three, they 
wanted me to be an adult. No one else asked that of me. Not in the workplace – 
where sometimes they'd want you to be feminine, or dominant, or cute." She 
smiles. "The kids didn't care if I did my hair, didn't care what I looked like."

She had married Harold Morrison, an architect, after meeting him at Howard 
University in Washington DC and they had divorced six years later, leaving her 
with two sons, Harold and Slade. At Random House, she was first an editor in 
the textbook division and later, moved to offices in Manhattan, a fiction 
editor. She was supported at home by a network of women friends, who helped her 
with the kids, and some of whose fiction she published. As Morrison has said, 
"We read about how Ajax and Achilles will die for each other, but very little 
about the friendship of women."

The Bluest Eye had been published in 1970 and three years later she published 
Sula <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sula_%28novel%29> – the first time, she 
says, she really felt she was finding her voice. Nothing much can distract her 
when she's writing, she says, although aftershe won the Nobel prize in 1993 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1993/>, celebrity 
came close. And, she supposes, "the times I didn't write, maybe I was in love. 
Or beloved. Somebody was" – she bursts into laughter – "making me the object of 
love. It's not bad. It's short, but not bad."

Why short?

"I mean, you can't keep that up. Look, five years I spent on some books. I 
suppose you could love somebody for five years. Maybe. I don't mean lust. You 
can do that for ever. But I mean really love them, the way you say you love 
children. I don't know. But that means I would have to remember all the times I 
was in love." She bursts out laughing. "Oh, gaaaad."

Does she see that as a cost?

"It didn't cost anything. To me. Everything outside, cost. I had to do 
something, be somewhere. There were certain things I could do with ease. Teach. 
And read books. And write them. And that area seems very natural to me. Things 
outside it, except with very, very, very close friends, are a little bit of an 
act. I mean, not in a bad way. Social."

Game face.

"That's right. And I have separated those people. Myself is kind of split. My 
name is Chloe. And the rest is… that other person. Who is able to feel, or 
pretends to feel, or maybe really feels, or at leastreacts to celebrityhood. "

Morrison's novels are often described as difficult, or poetic, neither meant 
as a compliment, and it drives her crazy. She writes at ground level, she says, 
in the vernacular of a people – poor, black – who, if their speech is 
unfamiliar to white readers, is not on the novelist's head. It is an overlooked 
fact that in some ways her novels are very conventional; The Bluest Eye is also 
a coming-of-age story; Sula is a romance.

Morrison spent three years thinking about Beloved before writing a word. It is 
based on the true story ofMargaret Garner, 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Margaret_Garner> an escaped slave who killed her 
daughter rather than return her to slavery. As a novelist, it required her to 
pull off a seemingly impossible feat – to show how the condition of slavery 
exists outside of every human system, even language itself. "There's no 
language. And you have to have it. Or try. It always fails." She smiles. 
"Metaphor is clarifying, until it's overused, of course." It won the Pulitzer 
prize in 1988.

When Morrison was 17, she had tried out a thought experiment. She had just 
started college in Washington DC, "where they still had those signs in the 
buses. 'Coloureds only' and so on. And there was one place downtown where 
a black person could go into the ladies room. And we all knew which one it 
was." On the news, she had seen footage of some white mothers in the south 
trying to turn over a school bus with black children in it. "I didn't know if I 
could turn over a bus full of little white kids. I didn't know if I could feel 
that… fury. And I tried very hard to. This is what I did: I said suppose… 
horses began to speak. And began to demand their rights. Now, I've ridden 
horses. They're very good workers. They're very good racehorses. Suppose they 
just… want more. Suppose they want to go to school! Suppose they want to sit 
next to me in the theatre. I began to feel this sense of – 'I like you, but…'; 
'You're good, but…' Suppose they want to sleep with my children?!" She's 
laughing heartily now. "I had to gooutside the species! But it worked, I could 
feel it. You know; don't sit next to me."

What did she do with that insight? Morrison shrugs. "Nothing. I told somebody. 
A white person. And she was appalled. Not at what I had done, but it felt to 
her as if I was saying something about her. And I wasn't. I was trying to say 
something about how you can enter into that field. Because otherwise it doesn't 
make sense."

Anyway, she says, "The real thing is how we move forward. I was describing 
that thing of a mixed neighbourhood, of shared misery and shared joy. We were 
citizens. I mean we, African-Americans, were second-class citizens, but anyway, 
hopeful people. And then after the war we became consumers. Happiness in 
acquisition. And now we are only taxpayers. I'm going to givemy tax dollars to 
those people?! If I'm only a taxpayer, I'm very upset. That's a different deal. 
A citizen has some connection to his neighbourhood, or his state or his 
country. The taxpayer doesn't."

There was a period, she says, when things got a lot better. A couple of 
decades of "sanity". When Obama was elected, Morrison says, it was the first 
time she felt truly American. "I felt very powerfully patriotic when I went to 
the inauguration of Barack Obama. I felt like a kid. The marines and the flag, 
which I never look at – all of a sudden it looked… nice. Worthy. It only lasted 
a couple of hours. But I was amazed, that music that I really don't like – God 
Bless America is a dumb song; I mean it's not beautiful. But I really felt 
that, for that little moment."

Now every other week from the stump Newt Gingrich  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/newt-gingrich>refers to Obama as the 
"food-stamp president" 
<http://www.businessweek.com/news/2012-01-25/gingrich-calling-obama-food-stamp-president-draws-critics.html>
;Mitt Romney  <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mitt_Romney>accuses him of wanting 
to turn America into a "welfare state" 
<http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2012/01/mitt-romney-launches-fresh-attack-on-president-obama-dubbing-him-the-great-complainer/>
. Morrison does not take this language to be racially neutral. "Oh, that's very 
deliberate. Welfare, food stamps; gangs. They have a whole vocabulary of code. 
Some overt, come covert." She finds it "hateful", but beyond that embarrassing 
– "Really embarrassing for my country."

Look, she says: "I used to think there was a Republican attitude and language 
that, although I vehemently disagreed with it because I thought it was 
fraudulent, it wasn'tdumb. It made some sort of sense. If you really and truly 
think that the United States isfree, and capital is free – none of that's true, 
but if you really believe it – you can develop an argument that's not 
embarrassing. But they don't do that any more. They use coded words. Did you 
see that the other day –Rick Santorum said 'the man in the Whitehouse is 
a government nig – uh?" <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IgrhJSAaYIc>

Yes, he says he misspoke. Morrison bursts out laughing. "He said he didn't say 
that! They used to say 'government nigger' when black people got jobs in the 
post office, stuff like that. And that's what he was saying. And earlier he 
said, 'I don't want to take your money and give it to bla – people 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/01/03/rick-santorum-entitlements-black-people_n_1181212.html?ref=politics>
.' He catches himself right at the vowel. Man. I guess it was worse in South 
Africa before Mandela, but I can't do it any more." She sighs. "At some level, 
you know, it hurts. It really hurts."
 Morrison in 1985. Photograph: Corbis 
Morrison was once the mother of teenage boys; has the Trayvon Martin killing  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/trayvon-martin>revived memories for her? "It 
has. There were instances, when they were teenagers. Being stopped in the car, 
and given a ticket because you had tinted glass or something. Little bits and 
pieces of police harassment that happened to be light because we were not 
living in New York and also – and I did not even tell them this, because I 
didn't know to – but they always said 'sir' to the police. Yes sir, no sir. I 
don't know where they got that from, but it worked."

How the case is handled from now on, she believes, may open up a dialogue on 
institutional racism in the US. "They keep saying, we have to have a 
conversation about race in this country. Well, this is the conversation. We'll 
see if it plays out, if it makes a difference in terms of not just the hate 
crime thing, but the law. It's not like it is on television. The police are 
ill-trained and they're corrupt, and they're protected, and that's what they 
do. All over. I don't mean all police, but the system itself is protective. So 
yeah, they're going to lie. [George Zimmerman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/mar/30/trayvon-martin-george-zimmerman-florida>
's] father calls up, the ex-magistrate? He calls up. Then the state prosecutor 
comes to the police station to talk and the lead detective wants to arrest the 
guy and he says no. And now we're getting the demonisation of the kid. He was 
this, he was that, he wore his pants down."

Morrison finds herself thinking increasingly about the past, the dazzling 
memories of the first 50 years.

Home is bright and sharp and brutally real. When she sits at her desk, 
Morrison says, everything else disappears. "I feel totally curious and alive 
and in control. And almost… magnificent, when I write." The book is dedicated 
to her son, Slade, who died 18 months ago and in the face of whose death she 
found herself wordless. She could not work. She could barely speak and didn't 
want to hear comforting words from others.

"What do you say? There really are no words for that. There really aren't. 
Somebody tries to say, 'I'm sorry, I'm so sorry.' People say that to me. 
There's no language for it. Sorry doesn't do it. I think you should just hug 
people and mop their floor or something."

She tried to read a few books by writers about the death of their children but 
they annoyed her in the same way the comforters did. "Books that have been 
written about the death of a child, but are all about the author. And people 
who were trying to soothe me, were trying to sootheme. I never heard anything 
about him. They say it's about the living, it's not, it's about the dead."

She doesn't want "closure", she says. "It's such an American thing. I want 
what I got." Morrison gathers herself up. "Memory. And work. And" – she starts 
to laugh – "some more ibuprofen."•

• Home by Toni Morrison  <>is published on 3 May by Chatto & Windus, priced 
£12.99.Desdemona <https://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=12869>, 
a concert about Shakespeare's Desdemona and her African nurse Barbary, created 
by Morrison, Malian singer/songwriter Rokia Traoré and theatre director Peter 
Sellars, is at the Barbican, London EC2, on 19 and 20 July.
 