
The Republican chair of the Senate foreign relations committee said on Friday 
that the incoming Trump administration should not and would not “tear up” the 
2015 Iranian nuclear agreement, but rather focus on enforcing the deal more 
strictly.

“In spite of the all the flaws in the agreement, nothing bad is going to 
happen relative to nuclear development in Iran in the next few years. It’s just 
not,” Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee told journalists on Friday morning.

In tweets and other comments throughout his campaign, Donald Trump repeatedly 
attackedthe deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-deal-18-days-in-vienna>
 by which Iran accepted curbs on its nuclear activities in return for sanctions 
relief from the international community, and which represents the cornerstone 
of Barack Obama’s foreign policy legacy.

Atomic agency leader warns of disaster if Trump tears up Iran deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/atomic-agency-leader-warns-disaster--donald-trump-tears-up-iran-deal-iaea>
 Last week, Trump referred to it as “the horrible Iran deal” and portrayed it 
as “the beginning of the end” in the Obama administration’s relations with 
Israel.

“Stay strong Israel, January 20th is fast approaching!” he tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/814114980983427073>, implying his 
White House would take a radically different course after inauguration.

Although Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has publicly portrayed 
the agreement reached in Vienna in July 2015 as a betrayal, Israeli officials 
have said privately that an imminent US abrogation could be destabilising and 
is not a priority from their point of view.

Corker, a central figure in the Republican party, took the same line on Friday.

“The Iran deal from my perspective was flawed. It was not negotiated in a good 
way, because as almost all of us know, so much leverage was given up on the 
front end,” the foreign relations committee chairman said.

“At the same time,” Corker added, “you’ve got a choice. You can come in and 
figuratively tear it up ... and you can create a crisis on the front end by 
doing so. Or you can understand that we have lots of challenges to deal with 
around the world.

“What you can do instead is to begin to radically ensure its being implemented 
properly,” he added.

Corker has been criticised by hardline Republican opponents of the deal for 
failing to kill it in the Senate in 2015.

On Friday, the senator pointed to Iranian infractions of the accord, such as a 
slight excess in its stock of heavy water that accumulated temporarily last 
year, above the level stipulated in the agreement, and missile tests that were 
not covered by the agreement but representeddefiance of a UN resolution 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-iran-missiles-un-idUSKCN0ZN2JV> that called 
on it to refrain from such ballistic tests for eight years.

Corker said the new administration should “push back” on such violations and 
on alleged Iranian support for extremist groups in the Middle East, 
destabilising the region.

“Over time, if the Iranians hang themselves and the UN security council show 
themselves to be feckless in actually implementing it – those would all be 
reasons for the US to not be part of the agreement anymore,” the senator said. 
“But tearing it up at the front end, in my opinion, is not going to happen. 
Instead, we will begin to radically enforce it.”
 