
Tens of thousands of people are set to receive compensation averaging £2,100 
apiece following an investigation into the latest pensions mis-selling fiasco.

With insurance companies still clearing up the mess caused by dodgy sales of 
personal pensions a decade ago, it has now emerged that up to 110,000 people 
who have bought private top-up pension plans may also have been given duff 
advice.

A report out this week from the chief financial services watchdog reveals that 
problems involving these policies, which are sold as add-ons to company pension 
schemes, may be much worse than originally suspected.

The investigation focused on free-standing additional voluntary contributions 
(FSAVCs) which are sold by insurance companies and independent financial 
advisers.

Contributions you make to these attract tax relief at your highest rate. But 
what many employees do not realise is that they would probably be better-off 
making extra contributions to their company scheme rather than going down the 
private top-up road.

All occupational pension schemes must give members the opportunity to make 
additional voluntary contributions (AVCs). You simply sign up for the AVC 
scheme provided by your employer.

AVCs and FSAVCs are very similar. But in-house schemes tend to offer a much 
better deal because the charges are usually lower - the employer tends to meet 
the administrative costs. Also, buying AVCs does not incur the costs of using 
an independent financial adviser.

This can have quite an impact on the returns. Actuaries Bacon & Woodrow 
compared the performance of an average AVC with an average FSAVC, based on a 
contribution of £50 a month over five years, and found that the AVC had grown 
£556 more than the FSAVC - to £4,221 compared with £3,665.

This week, the Financial Services Authority estimated that firms will have to 
review between 57,000 and 110,000 of the 1m FSAVCs sold since April 1988. That 
means up to one in nine of all FSAVCs could involve people having been given 
unsuitable advice. It reckons the total compensation bill could hit £241m, way 
above initial predictions.

Who is likely to be affected? 

The regulators say they have found no evidence of wide spread mis-selling. But 
they have identified four specific categories of policyholder who are likely to 
have lost out:

Those whose company scheme adds extra cash to employees' contributions to the 
AVC. Some match pound for pound. People persuaded to pass up an offer like this 
and take out an FSAVC instead will almost certainly be due compensation because 
they were effectively giving up the right to free money. It is estimated there 
could be 15,000 to 35,000 cases in this category. Likely average compensation: 
£6,000.

Those whose company scheme provides other subsidised means of enhancing their 
pensions. Again, they may have missed out on 'something for nothing'. Estimated 
number of cases in this category: 25,000-50,000. Likely average compensation: 
£4,000.

Those who belong to the armed forces occupational pension scheme. This is a 
generous scheme where pension benefits build up quickly because people in the 
forces tend to retire relatively young. Paying into an AVC or FSAVC can 
sometimes put people at risk of breaching Inland Revenue maximum funding rules. 
Estimated number of cases in this category: 12,000-15,000. Likely average 
compensation: £4,800.

Those who bought a personal pension while waiting to join the company pension 
scheme, and who were told this could be converted into an FSAVC later. 
Estimated number of cases in this category: 5,000-10,000. Likely average 
compensation: £3,600.

When will compensation be paid and in what form?

Firms have been set a deadline of November 30, 2000 for clearing up all their 
cases. By then, everyone who has lost out should have received an offer of 
compensation. 'Priority' cases - for example, those who are already drawing 
their pension - will be dealt with first.

Those hoping for a nice big cheque they can blow on whatever they wish will be 
disappointed. It is likely that in the majority of cases, the compensation 
(representing the amount of loss) will be credited to the FSAVC policy. In some 
cases, the company may offer to reinstate the individual into the in-house AVC 
scheme.

Does all this mean all FSAVCs are bad?

While in most cases an FSAVC will be more expensive than an in-house AVC, the 
private top-up plans do have several advantages, according to some experts.

They can give you access to a wider choice of funds than offered by the 
company scheme, so they may suit people with particular requirements as to how 
their money is invested.

They also offer greater flexibility than an AVC; you can carry on paying in to 
your FSAVC even if you change employers.

I might fall into one of those categories. What should I do?

There is no need to take any action until the insurer or financial adviser who 
sold you the FSAVC contacts you, says the FSA.

If you are impatient to know more, it may be worth contacting them now and 
asking for more information about your case.

The FSA has published a free factsheet, FSAVC Pension Top-ups - Were You Badly 
Advised?. For a copy call 0800 917 3311.

Whatever you do, don't just stop paying into your FSAVC, says the regulator. 
'You may lose out financially if you do. If there is a special reason why you 
think you need to stop paying in, contact the firm or adviser who sold you the 
FSAVC first for advice.'
 