



1 Keylor Navas, Costa Rica

Costa Rica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/costarica> were the surprise 
package of the World Cup, topping a group including Italy, Uruguay and England, 
before eliminating Greece and falling to Holland in the quarter-finals after a 
penalty shootout. That improbable run would not have been possible without a 
series of exceptional performances by their goalkeeper, Keylor Navas. The then 
27-year-old won four man-of-the-match awards during the tournament – the same 
number as Lionel Messi – and afterwards joined Real Madrid, who triggered a 
release clause in his Levante contract by forking out around £7.9m. But Navas 
has yet to become first choice at his new club, making only four appearances 
this season as Madrid keep faith with Iker Casillas, who endured a hellish time 
at the World Cup and was thought to have left his best days behind him. But it 
seems Casillas remains Saint Iker at the Bernabéu. It is to be hoped Navas’s 
best is not behind him already.

2 Guillerma Ochoa, Mexico










Another goalkeeping World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> star currently on 
bench duty. The charismatic Mexican announced at the end of the last season 
that he would not renew his contract at Ajaccio, where he enjoyed three 
successful years. That prompted an outpouring of affection and good wishes from 
the French side and his performances in Brazil led to him being linked to some 
of Europe’s biggest clubs, notably Barcelona and Liverpool. He eventually 
signed for Málaga, where he has failed to dislodge Cameroon’s Carlos Kameni 
from the No1 spot. He has not made a single appearance this season and is 
reported to be unhappy on the sidelines. Rumours of another transfer are 
already circulating, with Liverpool again featuring prominently in such 
stories. Simon Mignolet has been warned.

3 Yacine Brahimi, Algeria







Supremely nimble and creative, the 5ft 9in former France youth international 
emerged as one of the most exciting midfielders of the last World Cup as he 
embroidered Algeria’s play with style and smartness. Porto showed their usual 
shrewdness by prising him from Granada for around €6.5m after the tournament, 
with several bigger clubs seemingly hesitant because of the player’s lack of 
height. Brahimi has since added himself to the long list of players who have 
gone on to prove that size does not matter and the 24-year-old has continued to 
thrill for his Portuguese club, scoring a fabulous Champions League hat-trick 
against BATE Borisov and starring in the win over Athletic Bilbao. He is one of 
the best attacking midfielders in the world and was recently named African 
player of the year.

4 Joel Campbell, Costa Rica







The player who famously could not even find himself in a box of Panini 
stickers before the World Cup commenced went on to become one of the 
outstanding players of Costa Rica’s run to the quarter-finals. And Arsenal fans 
were looking forward to welcoming the 22-year-old back to the Emirates after 
work permit problems had forced him to embark on three loan stints elsewhere in 
recent years. Arsène Wenger seemed eager to give him a chance, making it clear 
that the player would not be sold in the summer and insisting that he “loves” 
the forward. This season, however, Campbell has been given only the one start, 
in the Capital One Cup defeat to Southampton, and is reported to be 
increasingly bemused as to why the club kept him.

5 Bryan Ruiz, Costa Rica







The forward spent most of last season being jeered by Fulham fans who cited 
him as infuriating evidence of Martin Jol’s misplaced trust in has-beens. Few 
in the Craven Cottage crowd mourned when he was packed out on loan to PSV 
Eindhoven. And almost all were amazed by the dazzling and, most of all, dynamic 
displays that he produced for his country at the World Cup, where he crowned 
his performances with the winning goal against Italy and his team’s goal in the 
last-16 game against Greece, won on penalties after a 1-1 draw. Somewhat 
surprisingly he did not change club in the summer but remained in the 
wilderness until Felix Magath was sacked as Fulham manager in mid-September. He 
has regained his place under the management of Kit Symons and scored four times 
in 18 appearances.

6 Vincent Enyeama, Nigeria







After keeping a record 11 consecutive clean sheets for Lille last season, the 
Nigerian secured his reputation as the best goalkeeper in Africa and one of the 
finest in the world with excellent performances at the World Cup. He continues 
to excel for Lille despite that club’s loss of form this season, but his 
international fortunes have deteriorated. After being condemned by some for 
calling on authorities to suspend the Africa Cup of Nations because of the 
Ebola crisis, Enyeama played in Nigeria’s 2-2 draw against South Africa, a 
result that meant the reigning champions failed to qualify for the tournament. 
The 32-year-old was on the five-man shortlist for African player of the year 
and is another goalkeeper regularly linked with Liverpool: he would certainly 
have the requisite skills with his feet as, in addition to his shot-saving 
ability, he has scored more than 20 times in his career, from free-kicks and 
penalties.

7 Raïs Mbolhi, Algeria




Yet another goalkeeper who enjoyed a strong World Cup, the widely travelled 
Algerian left CSKA Sofia in July to join Philadelphia Union. That was the 
latest step in a peripatetic career that has seen him play for clubs in 
Scotland, Japan, Russia, France, Bulgaria and now the United States. His debut 
for his latest club was delayed for a couple of months after he was involved in 
a car crash in France. He was handed the No92 shirt and has since made an 
inauspicious start to his career in the US, with his four appearances being 
most notable for a costly mistake against Chicago Fire that gifted a goal to 
another well-travelled professional, the former Cardiff City, West Bromwich 
Albion, Norwich City and Wales striker, Robert Earnshaw.

8 Enner Valencia, Ecuador




The striker hit three goals for Ecuador in Brazil (and one against England in 
a pre-tournament friendly), helping to persuade West Ham to splash out £12m to 
sign him from the Mexican side Pachuca, for whom he was the top scorer last 
season despite only joining in January. The now 25-year-old has adapted 
immediately to English football and thanks to his speed, trickery and 
exceptional aerial ability, helped to transform Sam Allardyce’s side into an 
uncharacteristically exciting combination, his partnership with the fellow new 
recruit Diafra Sakho being one of the success stories of the Premier League 
season. The last year, then, has brought huge progress in the career of a 
player who 14 months ago was still playing semi-professional football inEcuador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ecuador>.

9 James Rodríguez, Colombia




The Colombian returned from Brazil with the Golden Boot award and legions of 
new admirers, many of whom had been puzzled just a year previously when Monaco 
spent around £38m to lure him from Porto, where he helped them to three titles 
in a row. He scored nine goals in 38 appearances for Monaco and finished as the 
leading assist-provider in Ligue 1 before heading to the World Cup, where his 
performances inspired the belief thatColombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colombia> could win the tournament for 
the first time. His long-range goal against Uruguay was voted the best of 
tournament and his five others made him the top scorer. Real Madrid had seen 
enough to snap him up for nearly double the fee that Monaco paid. Rodríguez has 
looked at home alongside Cristiano Ronaldoet al, scoring and creating plenty of 
goals and, er, launching a personalised range of underpants.

10 Lionel Messi, Argentina




The Argentinian, below, started the World Cup as if ready to finally live up 
to his international billing and put Diego Maradona in the shade. But he faded 
as the tournament progressed so his Golden Ball award must go down as just 
another nonsensical Fifa decision. But there can be no arguing with the records 
that the new all-time leading Champions League and La Liga scorer has set 
since. His feats may never be matched. Or, on the other hand, Cristiano Ronaldo 
could surpass them any day now. It is the privilege of modern football fans to 
be living in an era when two of the best players in history seem to drive each 
other to ever higher peaks.

This article was amended to reflect the fact that Yacine Brahimi played 
against Athletic Bilbao and not against Atlético Madrid
 