
Lycamobile, one of the Conservative party’s largest corporate donors, is at 
risk of being struck off the register of UK businesses after failing to file 
accounts on time.

The company, which has handed millions to the Tory party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/apr/23/tories-third-largest-donor-tax>
, is already facing the possibility of a £9.5m bill from HM Revenue & Customs 
for unpaid tax.

Now Lycamobile, which sells international telephone airtime, has missed a 
deadline to publish accounts for last year by two months, according to 
Companies House filings.

Companies House is understood to have sent two warning letters to the company, 
controlled by the Sri Lankan businessman Subaskaran Allirajah, without reply.

The next step would involve having the company listed for late filing in the 
London Gazette in early February.


The listing would begin an ultimatum period that could see the company struck 
off the register of British businesses within two months.

At that point a new company would have to be set up to house Lycamobile’s UK 
business.

Despite its failure to file accounts, Lycamobile has been a generous donor to 
the Conservative party, handing it £1.5m since 2011.

Its latest available figures, from 2014, reveal it swelled Tory coffers by 
£146,600 last year, despite making a profit of just £767,000 after tax.

The delay in filing new accounts comes with Lycamobile facing a string of 
questions over its financial affairs.

The company is in talks with HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> 
over a potential tax liability of around £9.5m linked to its complex 
international corporate structure.

Accounts from 2014 reveal that Lycamobile paid £108m to Lycatelcom LDA, a 
company based in the Portuguese tax haven of Madeira, ostensibly for mobile 
phone airtime.

The payment, which involves 76% of its overall cost of sales for that year, 
had the effect of transferring income to the low tax jurisdiction.

Income accrued at a foreign subsidiary of a UK firm is subject to tax under 
the Controlled Foreign Company rules.

The latest available accounts for this Portuguese division show it had just 
four employees, despite reporting £433m of turnover.

Two of those employees, Richard and Filomena Benn, run a Madeira-based company 
that specialises in “tax planning”.

Accounts for WWW Holding Company – another firm in the Lycamobile network – 
reveal that HMRC has raised “initial inquiries” over £9.5m in potentially 
unpaid tax.

It is not clear whether these discussions relate to the Madeira-based 
subsidiary.

However, in a statement buried in the accounts, the firm admits: “The 
directors are in the process of assessing the company’s operating model and 
group structure with regard to the Controlled Foreign Company tax regime.”

Tax expert Richard Murphy said Lycamobile’s complex cross-border financial 
architecture raises questions over its tax contribution.


He said the arrangement gave him “considerable concerns about the pricing of 
this contract”.

“These accounts suggest that, firstly, we need more information to appraise 
the impact of the transactions this company undertakes, including full 
country-by-country reporting for all the companies with which it has 
relationships.”

He added: “Second, penalties for late filing of accounts, and prosecutions for 
doing so, need to be stepped up..”

Accounts from previous years show that Lycamobile’s UK arm did not pay any tax 
between 2008 and 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/jun/04/lycamobile-tories-biggest-corporate-donor>
, despite generating a turnover of between £47m and £88m.


The firm’s most recent accounts also show that auditors KPMG were not able to 
obtain enough information to sign off on adjustments made to financial 
information from previous years.

KPMG began auditing the firm after EY resigned from the duty in 2014.

Lycamobile’s failure to file its accounts, hard on the heels of admitting it 
is in talks with HMRC over its tax affairs, adds to the controversy around the 
company.

An investigation by BuzzFeed revealed that Lycamobile employees were 
depositing rucksacks full of cash, some containing up to £250,000 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=lycamobile%20buzzfeed>
, at the Post Office.

There is no suggestion of any connection to the late filing of accounts and 
Lycamobile has said its cash deposits were “day-to-day” banking sanctioned by 
the Post Office.

Another company in Subaskaran Allirajah’s business empire is under 
investigation in Sri Lanka, over allegations it was used to channel cash to the 
former president 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/janebradley/lycamobiles-offshore-empire-is-embroiled-in-corruption-probe#.bqK77mVPz>
.

Again, there is no suggestion of any link between the Sri Lankan investigation 
and the rest of the Lycamobile empire.
 