
The men on the prison roof laughed as they raised a hand-painted flag 
emblazoned with the initials of two of Brazil’s most dangerous drug gangs. In 
the yard below, other gang-members hacked the heads off prisoners from a rival 
mafia faction and lined them up in a row.

The horrific scenes were filmed on a mobile phone during a jail riot on 1 
January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/dozens-killed-in-gang-violence-at-brazilian-jail-manaus>
in which 56 prisoners were butchered near the Amazon city of Manaus – the first 
in a string of violent incidents in Brazilian prisons this year.

The next day, four more inmates were killed at another prison in Manaus. Five 
days later,33 prisoners died at a prison outside Boa Vista 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/brazil-prison-riot-inmates-killed>
, in Roraima state in the far north of Brazil. Then, early on Sunday morning, 
four more prisoners were killed in another Manaus jail which had been reopened 
to accommodate prisoners transferred after the 1 January massacre.

In a country long used to violent crime, the savagery has appalled Brazilians: 
local media reports have included footage of of dismembered corpses, and 
messages scrawled in human blood. 

Police and prosecutors have warned that a war between rival gangs to control 
Brazil’s lucrative drug trade has escalated to a new level of brutality – and 
there are signs that the battle has already moved from the country’s 
overwhelmed prison system to Rio de Janeiro, where it threatens to destabilise 
a city already reeling from a rise in violent crime.

“If security agents don’t exercise caution, there is a great chance of a 
bloody conflict happening all overBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>,” Josmar Jozino, a journalist who 
has written extensively about organized crime, wrote on security site Ponte.


Authorities say the latest wave of prison violence began when the Manaus-based 
Family of the North (FDN) – which is allied with Brazil’s oldest gang, the 
Rio-based Red Command gang (CV) – attacked rival gang members from theFirst 
Capital Command (PCC) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/aug/12/brazil.mainsection>. 

Brazil’s justice minister, Alexandre de Moraes, quickly announced plans to 
reduce homicide and tackle drug trafficking, with five new federal prisons for 
220 highly dangerous criminals and money for state prisons.
 See the full visual 
It is a drop in the ocean for Brazil’s overcrowded prisons, where 40% of over 
620,000 inmates have yet to be definitively sentenced. Manaus’s Anísio Jobim 
penitentiary complex was packed to three times its capacity when the first 
massacre happened. Identifying mutilated bodies took days.

Luíz Valois, a judge who negotiated the end of the riot, told the Guardian the 
jail was “absurdly overcrowded but it is not the worst in Brazil”.

He described a pile of dismembered bodies as “the most horrible thing I have 
seen in my life”.

Related: At least 30 inmates killed and mutilated in Brazil prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/brazil-prison-riot-inmates-killed>

Francilene Vargas, an officer from the Roraima narcotics department who 
witnessed the scenes inside the Monte Cristo agricultural penitentiary on 6 
January, said the gangs aimed to spread fear.

“It is a barbarity,” she said. “We cannot condone this marketing of terror.”

Vargas said that prisons in Roraima state are dominated by the PCC, Brazil’s 
biggest drug mafia, which was founded in 1993, a year after 111 prisoners were 
killed by police at the Carandiru jail.

Camila Dias, a professor of sociology at São Paulo’s Federal University of ABC 
who wrote a book on the gang, said it initially was formed as a response to 
“state violence”. The PCC offers prisoners medical assistance, legal advice and 
financial help for family members. It often states that its war is with the 
state, not other gangs.

“This ideological, political aspect is based on prison conditions,” Dias said. 

The PCC has almost 30,000 members and tentacles that stretch across South 
America <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/aug/12/brazil.mainsection>, 
said Lincoln Gakiya, a prosecutor in São Paulo state who has spent 10 years 
pursuing the gang.

“It is very close to a big company. We are talking about a monthly turnover of 
£5-8m,” Gakiya said. “They are just as violent, but in a more discreet way.”
 Smoke rises from the Anísio Jobim prison complex during a riot, in Manaus. 
Photograph: Xinhua / Barcroft Images 
But it is a smaller player in Brazil’s Amazon region, where it has been 
fighting the Family of the North for control of lucrative drug smuggling routes 
from Colombia and Peru, along the Solimões river to Manaus, then on to Europe.

Formed in 2006, the Family of the North dominates the drug trade in the 
region. According to its handwritten statute, included in a 2015 investigation 
by Brazil’s federal police, its objective is “peace, justice and freedom”.

“We are the right side of the wrong life,” read a cellphone message sent to 
prisoners in nearby Pará state to recruit new members.

As in the PCC, members pay a monthly fee. New prison inmates swear allegiance 
to the gang.

“The Family of the North has been growing frighteningly quickly, baptising new 
members practically every day,” the police report said.

The Family of the North has allied with the Red Command – one of three rival 
drug gangs running Rio favelas, where Brazil’s drug trade is concentrated, and 
where violence has steadily increased as amuch-vaunted “pacification” program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/24/brazil-army-rio-slums-violence-world-cup>
 has fallen apart.

Regarded by police as the most violent gang in Rio, the Red Command was 
founded in a hellish island jail in the 1970s by criminals inspired by the 
discipline of political prisoners jailed by the military dictatorship, which 
ran Brazil from 1964 to 1985.

For years it was allied with the PCC. But last September, the PCC announced a 
formal end to the alliance, accusing the Rio gang of killing its members.

Now police say the PCC is moving into Rio: wiretaps during an investigation 
last year revealed that an imprisoned PCC “general” was recruiting Red Command 
bosses in strategically situated favelas around the city.

During the phone calls from his cell, Gledson da Silva, known as Léo or 
Fantasma – or Ghost – sold the PCC as a company that was superior to 
unnecessarily violent Rio gangs.

“They prefer to kill each other, taking one favela from the other, to uniting 
to fight against the government, which is our war,” Da Silva said in one call 
to a potential recruit.

Now the PCC has formed an alliance with the Red Command’s bitter rivals the 
Friends of Friends, or ADA, threatening further instability. The ADA runs the 
drug trade in the huge Rocinha favela, close to upscale beach neighbourhoods 
like Ipanema.


Investigating Officer Antenor Lopes, who led the operation, said he believed 
the business-minded PCC had tired of the more chaotic Red Command’s taste for 
violence.

“The Red Command hides money in a box in the wall, or buried in the yard. The 
PCC puts it in gas stations and companies,” Lopes said.

“Brazil is getting out of control,” said Lopes.

 