
If the racing industry is about to go on strike, there were no clues here 
today. The mood was much more end-of-term than end-of-the-world as the big 
names of Flat racing gathered for the penultimate day's action of the year on 
the Rowley Mile.

After tomorrow's final card the track will close its gates to spectators until 
mid-April. Much more immediately the town's many trainers may be asked to 
support a "non-racing day" in the words of Paul Dixon, the president of the 
Racehorse Owners Association.

Dixon is determined to prove how much the sport matters to bookmakers, who 
make an insufficient contribution to prize money in his view, and has 
threatened a mass withdrawal of runners from all races on a particular day. 
There have been suggestions that such action was being organised for Monday but 
that now seems unlikely.

Trainers here said they had not been consulted about a strike and some openly 
doubted the wisdom of such a move. "I don't think it's the right thing, 
personally, because I don't think it will achieve anything at the moment," said 
William Haggas, who predicted a "disastrous" end to this weekend's levy 
negotiations.

Representatives of the racing and bookmaking industries were unable to reach 
agreement on how much the latter should pay to the former as a levy on their 
profits. If the deadlock persists until midnight on Sunday, it will fall to the 
government to determine a settlement.

Asked if racing might try a less adversarial approach in its dealing with the 
betting industry, Haggas retorted: "How? When bookmakers are only interested in 
themselves, making as much money for their shareholders as they can and showing 
that ghastly virtual racing?

"Bookmakers and racing don't go hand in glove. Chris Bell [a former chief 
executive at Ladbrokes] said at the Gimcrack dinner some years ago that racing 
and bookmaking should be like fish and chips. But the bookmakers are the fish 
and chips and we're the tartar sauce."

"I'm not a natural striker because I think it goes against the grain for most 
people in the industry," said Michael Bell, another Derby-winning trainer. "But 
we are being royally shafted by the bookmakers and the racecourses. I think 
it's up to the owners to lead it, not the trainers, because at the end of the 
day the owners pay the bills. But it has to be a united front or it won't work."

Other trainers including Jeremy Noseda and Richard Hannon Jr expressed concern 
about a strike but said they would consider supporting action if there was a 
consensus on the need for it. All appeared unperturbed about the fact that a 
firm chaired by Paul Roy, chairman of the British Horseracing Authority, had 
taken a £5m stake in Betfair, seen by some as a clear conflict of interest.

Betfair officials today said the company would donate £250,000 to the 
Horsemen's Group to be used as a boost to prize money at the most poorly funded 
fixtures this winter. Alan Morcombe, chief executive of the group, was grateful 
for the gift but denied it would make a strike less likely. "It's only £250,000 
so I don't think it goes anywhere towards addressing a serious shortfall," he 
said. "If it was £25m, it would make a difference."

Richard Hughes rode two winners here in the afternoon to trail Paul Hanagan by 
four winners in the jockeys' championship, which ends next Saturday. But 
Hanagan hit back at Wolverhampton last night, taking the first with the 7-2 
favourite Whispering Gallery, for Ann Duffield then extending the gap back to 
six with a superb ride on One Cool Bex (11-4 joint favourite) for the Newmarket 
handler Charlie McBride.

Hanagan was then agonisingly denied in the extended two-mile handicap in which 
Hughes had a very lucky escape as he was unshipped from Pearl, crashing to the 
floor but thankfully walking away unharmed from what was a spare ride.

Hughes had the last word, though, as he drove Star Links (11-2) home in the 
final race to deny the Hanagan-ridden Nicholas Pocock. Hanagan sits on 183 
winners to Hughes on 178. If Hughes is still in with a chance in midweek, he 
may opt to ride at Southwell on Friday afternoon before travelling to Kentucky 
to partner Paco Boy in the Breeders' Cup the next day. That would mean giving 
up the ride on Tale Untold at the American meeting on Friday night, with Ryan 
Moore likely to take the mount.
 