
Awarded first place in the CNCA’s Roberto Bolaño Prize for Young Literary 
Creation in thePoetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> category, 
27-year-old Francisco Ide Wolleter stands out from the latest generation of 
Chilean littérateurs. His Poems for Michael Jordan are miracles of observation, 
imbuing quotidian life with existential drama. You won’t ever watch basketball 
the same way again after this.

—The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com>

I


the ball’s porous plane
makes me think of human skin

a tactile nostalgia
though contact is always illusory

the facts are thus: we’re structured on emptiness
built of atoms,
atoms whose nature is to repel
and be repelled.

that’s why we don’t mix with things
that’s why when we touch
we haven’t really touched anything at all

V

the arc, precise distance, the power
ball in hand and control of the instant

as if nothing else existed
not hunger nor destitution nor blame
this is how one must approach it all

love is a discipline identical to that of basketball
and a game maintains the structure of life

you have to go mad with love while there’s still time
as if you’ve done away with everything else

I always played that way
and when my teammates understood this
they hewed tunnels through the air
for me and my master’s move to pass through

X

the ball in the air, fruit-like:

an orange suddenly bobs upon the waves

an eye seen through fogged glass

fate is 

the phenomenon of the ball
passing through empty space to arrive

at your empty hands


*****

 * Francisco Ide Wolleter (Santiago, 1989) has published Observatory 
(Corriente Alterna Editions, 2011), Yakuza (Cinosargo Editions 2014) and Poems 
for Michael Jordan (Luma Foundation, Zurich, Switzerland; Ajiaco Editions, 
Santiago; 2014). He was awarded a scholarship by the Fundación Pablo Neruda in 
2010. His texts were included in the anthologies Tea Party, Tri-national 
anthology of poetry: Peru, Bolivia, Chile (Cinosargo / La Liga Editions, 2012) 
and New poets from America: Young poetry from Chile to Nicaragua (Fundación 
Neruda, 2013). In 2013, he was awarded second place in the Lamas Médula 
International Poetry Contest (Buenos Aires, Argentina). In 2014, he was awarded 
first place in the CNCA’s Roberto Bolaño Prize for Young Literary Creation in 
the Poetry category, and honorary mention in the Novel category. He also won 
the Toribio Larraín City Prize. 
 * Tim Benjamin writes and translates from a new home base in Philadelphia, 
publishing reviews and commentaries on both US and South American culture and 
politics. He recently returned from just under half a decade living and working 
in Santiago, Chile.  