
Plans to allow millions of people to raise money by selling their pension 
annuities have been scrapped by the government, amid warnings that it could 
have turned into “the next big mis-selling timebomb”.

In a major U-turn 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-cancels-plans-to-create-a-market-for-secondary-annuities>
, the Treasury said that allowing pensioners to offload their existing 
annuities in return for a cash lump sum,as proposed by George Osborne when he 
was chancellor 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pension-freedoms-to-be-extended-to-people-with-annuities>
, “would put consumers at risk”, so it had decided to abandon the plans.


The announcement comes despite the fact that the government had previously 
confirmedthe change would be introduced in April 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/19/selling-annuity-cash-lump-sum-2017-rules-change>
.


The plans were originally announced in the March 2015 budget, with Osborne 
saying that he would be extending pension freedoms to around 5 million people 
who were locked into annuities they had already bought.


The then chancellor said at the time that these people “should have the same 
freedoms” as those enjoyed by the millions who had benefited from the 
government’s decision to scrap the requirement to convert a pension pot into an 
annuity – a product that provides an income for life – and let individuals do 
whatever they like with their retirement cash. That measure took effect in 
April 2015.


The Treasury said it was scrapping the plans because it had become 
increasingly clear that “creating the conditions to allow a vibrant and 
competitive market to emerge, with multiple buyers and sellers of annuities, 
could not be balanced with sufficient consumer protections”.


It added: “Consumer protection is a top priority for the government, and we 
are not willing to allow a market to develop which could produce poor outcomes 
for consumers, such as receiving poor value for their annuity income stream and 
suffering higher costs.”


Simon Kirby, the Treasury economic secretary, said: “It has become clear that 
we cannot guarantee consumers will get good value for money in a market that is 
likely to be small and limited. Pursuing this policy in these circumstances 
would put consumers at risk – this is something I am not prepared to do.”

Tom McPhail, head of retirement policy at investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown, 
said of the new announcement: “The pension freedoms were George Osborne’s baby. 
The secondary annuity market concept was enthusiastically supported by the two 
most recent pensions ministers.

“The fact that it has now been dropped could be indicative of a new government 
which is progressively shedding the legacy policies of the Cameron/Osborne era 
and is increasingly pursuing its own agenda.”

Shadow work and pensions secretary Debbie Abrahams said: “This U-turn is yet 
another example of Tory chaos over pensions, cancelling plans for a market for 
secondary annuities a few months out from its expected implementation.


“Only last week, the Office for Budget Responsibility stated that Tory pension 
reforms had blown a £5bn hole in the public finances by reducing incentives to 
long term saving. The Tories have no answers to the problem of providing proper 
security in retirement.”

Osborne had said that for most people, sticking with their annuity was the 
right thing to do, but some would welcome being able to sell theirs and receive 
a lump sum that they could, for example, give to their children or use to pay 
off debts.


However, many in the pensions industry were uneasy about the proposed 
secondary annuities market, and most commentators welcomed the U-turn – though 
over-50s specialist Saga said many pensioners would be “sorely disappointed”.


Investment firm AJ Bell said the plans “were always riddled with problems”, 
adding that the market would have been stacked in favour of buyers and posed 
unacceptable risks to savers, who could have seen the value of their pot 
“ravaged” by charges. It said some pensioners would have inevitably been 
targeted by “scammers”.


Close Brothers Asset Management said that “common sense has prevailed,” adding 
that this market “had the potential to be the next big mis-selling timebomb, 
given the sheer scale of consumer protection issues it would generate”.


Saga, however, said thousands of people in receipt of a meagre retirement 
income from an annuity they were forced to buy years ago would have benefited 
from being able to sell it. It said its research had found that 58% of those 
who wanted to sell their annuity were receiving such a small income, they could 
do nothing meaningful with it.


The original plan was that the government would remove the restrictions on 
buying and selling existing annuities to allow pensioners to sell the income 
they receive, without unwinding the original contract.

 