
The numbers were always going to be beside the point, and few raised an 
eyebrow at the government majority of 355. The Trident vote had always been 
lined up as David Cameron’s treat: a chance, after an unpleasantly divisive 
referendum campaign, to feel a bit of backbench Tory love by dancing over the 
unhappy, rotting corpse of the Labour party. Events rather put paid to that, 
and it wasTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> who got 
the strokes. But Dave had the date in his diary, and he was damned if he was 
going to miss this. So shortly before the debate on the renewal of Trident 
began, Dave took his seat on the backbenches. One or two Tory MPs even made a 
point of recognising him. Most ignored him. You find out who your real friends 
are when you’re on the way down.

With the government scrabbling around for something resembling a plan for 
Brexit, you’d have thought it might have had enough on its hands without going 
through the motions of an unnecessary debate. But the House of Commons can 
always make time for a little pettiness. This was a debate about nuclear 
weapons in name only, as the go-ahead to renewTrident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident> had been passed in 2009; its real 
purpose was to highlight the divisions on nuclear weapons within the Labour 
party.

May got the ball rolling with a barely serviceable advocacy of nuclear 
weapons. “Nukes are good, and even if I really don’t have a clue how much they 
are going to cost, they are still a bargain” was about the extent of her 
argument. She looked knackered: four days in Downing Street is the equivalent 
to four weeks out of it. But Theresa wasn’t there to be the star turn. She was 
there to be interrupted. And when the interventions came, she was only too 
pleased to take a breather.

Jeremy Corbyn opposes Trident renewal in Commons debate – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/18/trident-debate-renewal-corbyn-may-idealism-as-mps-prepare-for-trident-vote-politics-live>
“Whatever you may hear from the opposition front bench,” said Labour’s John 
Woodcock, “it is Labour party policy to maintain a nuclear deterrent.” May 
thanked him and a hint of a smile crossed her face. It was like taking candy 
from a playground full of five-year-olds.

The only time May came off autopilot was when the SNP’s George Kerevan asked 
her if she would be happy to launch a nuclear strike and annihilate a million 
innocent civilians. “Hell, yeah,” she screamed, with rather too much 
enthusiasm. Hopefully we can put that down more to the excitement of her having 
just been given the codes – “Oh go on, just a little one. No one will notice” – 
than see it as a sign of things to come.

Then came Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>. 
You can only admire the way in which he is turning the Labour party into a 
piece of dadaist performance art. However sincerely his views on nuclear 
weapons are held, there are few things more absurd in Westminster than a party 
leader who openly speaks against his own party policy. For a man who actively 
appeals to party loyalty in the defence of his leadership, Corbyn manages to 
make up his own rules as he goes along.

This hadn’t escaped Labour’s Angela Smith, who wondered why the Commons wasn’t 
hearing Labour party policy from the opposition frontbench. Corbyn was quick 
with an answer. “Party policy is also to review our policy,” he declared with a 
confidence that suggested he hadn’t actually thought through the implications 
of what he had said. If the overriding policy of the Labour party is that any 
policy is up for grabs, then it doesn’t actually have a policy on anything – 
just a vague wish list that can be updated hourly.

With the surreal made real, it was no surprise that the Ionesco farce spread 
through the fourth curtain on to the Labour frontbench.Diane Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/diane-abbott> hammered away on her 
mobile, rubbishing any Labour MP who dared to support Labour party policy on 
Twitter. Clive Lewis, the shadow defence secretary, just fidgeted uncomfortably 
before summing up.

As well he might. Faced with choosing between two principled arguments on 
either side, he’d chosen a third option, of not making up his mind. He and 
Emily Thornberry, Labour’s shadow foreign secretary, sat out the vote, neither 
with their leader nor with their party. Just when you think the Labour party 
couldn’t get any more divided, it finds ways to subdivide still further. It is 
now the retrovirus of British politics. It is also in urgent need of a 
deterrent against itself.
 