 A ceasefire was agreed in the Falklands last night after British troops had 
fought their way into the outskirts of the capital, Port Stanley. The Prime 
Minister told the House of Commons that white flags were flying over the town, 
and that the Argentinian defenders had thrown down their weapons.
At the Ministry of Defence, officials were more circumspect. British troops 
had been ordered to stand fast overnight, they said because it was impossible 
to move into the town in darkness without risk of further clashes. But there 
was every expectation that at first light, the British would resume their 
advance and disarm the defending garrison.

For the moment, it was true that the Argentinians had "surrendered," but not 
necessarily without conditions. Negotiations would resume at daybreak, said the 
ministry.

Initial contact between the opposing forces' headquarters was made by radio at 
6 pm. A ceasefire was then ordered. The two commanders General Mario Menendez, 
and the British second-in-command Brigadier John Walters, met at Moody Brook, 
the former Marines barracks with an interpreter.

The Ministry of Defence in London was kept in touch with the progress of 
negotiations at five-minute intervals through an open telephone line routed 
through Northwood, Middlesex.

Although no formal agreement was signed, and reports from Buenos Aires 
suggested that the ceasefire might last only until 10am this morning local time 
if the British surrender terms were unsatisfactory, defence officials in London 
were confident that the fighting was over.

The priorities in this morning's negotiations would be to stop the fighting 
throughout the Falklands, including West Falkland, where an Argentinian 
garrison of up to 2,000 men is still intact, to separate the defenders from 
their arms, and to secure the safety of all civilians.

There is no question of the Argentinians leaving the islands with their 
weapons. These would be handed over to the British troops. The aim would be to 
ship the Argentinian soldiers out in a very short time.

Whatever terms the British have offered, the Argentinians have little real 
option but to accept them. Throughout the day communiques issued in Buenos 
Aires had prepared Argentina for the inevitable defeat.

In London Mrs Thatcher told jubilant MPs last night: "After successful attacks 
General Jeremy Moore decided to press forward and the Argentines retreated. As 
our forces reached the outskirts of Port Stanley large numbers of Argentine 
soldiers threw down their weapons. They are reported to be flying the white 
flag over Port Stanley.

"Our troops have been ordered not to fire, except in self-defence. Talks are 
now in progress between General Menendez and our deputy commander Brigadier 
Walters about a surrender of the Argentine forces on the East and West 
Falklands. I will report further tomorrow."

The Prime Minister's statement was followed by loud cheers and waving of order 
papers.

The Defence Secretary, Mr John Nott, said later he assumed the Union Jack 
would be flying over Port Stanley within a few hours. "We have still got to get 
the final details worked out but it looks very good." Asked if the war was 
over, he said, " It looks like it."

This followed the news, announced by Mr Nott at his own ministry, that the 
defenders had been seen "streaming back into Port Stanley" as the British 
forces captured three of the four remaining hills to the west of the capital, 
and began their final advance into the town.

By the time Mr Nott gave this news, at about noon Falklands time, the leading 
British troops were within sight of Government House, at the western end of the 
Stanley waterfront, from which the governor Mr Rex Hunt was forcibly evicted 
two months ago.

The only high ground still apparently held by the Argentinians was Sapper 
Hill. Mount Tumbledown and Mount William to the south west, and Wireless Ridge, 
on the north western side of the harbour, had already fallen to the British - a 
combined force assembled form elements of the 3rd Commando Brigade, the 
Parachute Regiment, and the 5th Infantry Brigade - which includes Gurkhas, 
Scots and Welsh Guards.

On Tumbledown and Wireless Ridge the Argentinians put up fierce resistance 
from prepared positions, but even so British casualties were reported to be 
"incredibly light." It was from Mount William that the defenders were seen 
running back into the town, but it was not immediately clear whether they were 
retreating to trenches in the rear, so as to make the British fight their way 
across the flat ground leading into the town itself, or preparing to give up 
the struggle.

Whatever their intention, the British now have a stranglehold on the 
Argentinian garrison, able to shell and mortar them from two sides. The airport 
was also within range of the British 103 mm guns.

There will be no inclination among the British soldiery, therefore, to accept 
anything but an unconditional surrender - particularly after the casualties 
they have suffered - although even at this stage diplomatic pressure may force 
Mrs Thatcher's Government to give the Argentinians some way out.

Earlier reports from Buenos Aires yesterday suggested that President Galtieri 
had authorised General Menendez to give in, provided it was compatible with his 
idea of military honour.

The assault on Port Stanley began before dawn on Friday, when a first push 
carried the British up on to the Two Sisters ridge, on to Mount Harriet and 
Mount Longdon. It was the last of these, to the north west of the town, that 
saw the heaviest fighting, and accounted for most of the estimated 50 
Argentinian dead. Fatal British casualties in this first phase of the attack 
were less than half that number, although many more were wounded. By yesterday 
afternoon, "some hundreds" of Argentinian prisoners had already been taken.

There were several signs throughout the day that Argentine authorities 
themselves believed, and perhaps even knew, that the battle would be lost.

As the British advanced on Port Stanley the government news agency, Telam 
quoted an unidentified officer warning that "it has to be remembered that the 
enemy army forms part of the NATO forces and has equipment of high 
technological development."

For some time the authorities have been selling the idea that if Argentina is 
defeated it will be because it is up against not only Britain but the 
industrial West. Telan's officer maintained the line: " We are confronted with 
two great powers, Great Britain and the United states."

The high command's communiques yesterday began to emphasise that Argentina's 
troops defending Port Stanley faced an enemy superior in numbers and weaponry.

The Argentine people first began to know that the situation was serious when 
the communiques started to interrupt television coverage of the World Cup.

The Argentine garrison received nothing from the mainland, although the 
weather has been good enough for flying over the past two days. Four raids were 
mounted, but British defence officials characterised them rather as "flights 
over the islands" than as serious attacks.
 