
Stephen Moss wrote, I thought, agonisingly of his lifetime love-hate 
relationship with chess (The long read 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/truth-beauty-and-annihilation-a-life-in-chess>
, 14 September). In his desperation to improve he was prepared to sacrifice a 
great deal in his lifestyle and admitted that what really drove him was a need 
to crush his opponents “into the dust”. To my mind it was only when he quoted 
from earlier grandmasters and the artist/chess player Marcel Duchamp that he 
came close to the heart of the matter.

Chess isn’t just a game but an art form where words like “beautiful”, 
“elegant” and “artistic” can be used to describe a particular sequence of 
moves. The important thing is that when a chess player reaches a sufficient 
standard he/she may not be able to play like a grandmaster but is able to 
appreciate masterpieces (another apposite word) produced by great players. 
Inscribed on the cover of the record of my competition games is a quotation 
from the Argentinian grandmaster,Miguel Najdorf 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miguel_Najdorf>: “Chess is a mirror of the soul. 
Watch how a man plays chess and you will see his essence. Chess is a 
combination of art, knowledge, game and risk. Yes, risk because in chess you 
often have to venture and put fate to the test. Success often depends on 
accidental factors.”

So, Stephen, just relax a little and simply appreciate and enjoy the infinite 
variety and beauty of this wonderful game!
Michael Howseman
Milford, Surrey 

• Pretty well everything that Stephen Moss writes about chess also applies to 
that other ancient board game, backgammon. The one crucial difference is that 
backgammon, though requiring great skill, being a dice game also involves luck 
while chess involves virtually none. I venture to predict that Stephen Moss 
will never beat a chess grandmaster at their own game, whereas I, another 
ageing player with similar aspirations as my nearly namesake, can honestly say 
that I have occasionally been lucky enough to beat some of the best backgammon 
players in the world. So I would invite him to stop beating himself up and try 
playing a game that involves more than just skill.
Stephen Morris
Bristol 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 