
TS Eliot's conversion to high Anglican Christianity came as a colossal shock 
to Bloomsbury – his friends saw themselves as a conspiracy of the enlightened 
against stodgy leftovers of the world that had created the war, and here was 
one of their best and brightest telling them that they were wrong. Really they 
should not have been surprised. The pages of his magazine, the Criterion, were 
full of bile towards their world of adultery and smart parties – and he 
published it even though when socially convenient he was able to blame Vivienne 
for writing it. The best of his own work of the time betweenThe Waste Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2014/apr/17/ts-eliot-waste-land-radical-text-wounded-culture>
 and the first poems of conversion is full of anger and contempt. The Waste 
Land and the quatrain poems in which Sweeney first appears works of bright 
idealistic optimism compared to Sweeney Agonistes and The Hollow Men.

The Hollow Men is, after all, headed A penny for the Old Guy, which is to say 
it offers something up to be burned, something wrong and damnable and a threat 
to proper order. It uses as its epigraph "Mistah Kurtz – he dead" from Conrad's 
Heart of Darkness – Eliot had earlier contemplated another quotation from that 
work "the horror, the horror" as epigraph for The Waste Land until Pound talked 
him out of it. Since there is no evidence in either case that Eliot was 
especially concerned about Conrad's excoriation of Belgian colonial policy, it 
seems more likely that what drew Eliot to the novella was a desire to pick up 
on Conrad's sense of London, and modernity, as "one of the dark places of the 
earth". The idealistic dead – his father, Verdenal – are gone from us; what is 
left are scarecrows, stuffed shapes, presiding over fields no longer capable of 
fertility; the world is ending "not with a bang but a whimper".

The fragment Sweeney Agonistes is described as Aristophanic, that is to say 
quite specifically as satire of contemporary relevance; one of the reasons why 
Eliot left it as a fragment is that it says what it needs to. Inasmuch as it 
echoes classical Greek satirical drama, it is a fragment because it is a living 
remnant of a dead culture and should not be whole. In The Hollow Men, language 
is dead and empty "quiet and meaningless / as wind in dry grass / or rat's 
feet"; here Sweeney tells the others that he cannot talk accurately of what is 
important – "well here again that don't apply / but I gotta use words when I 
talk to you".

Life is a couple of working women in a flat that is more or less a brothel, 
conspiring to cheat their landlord and telling fortunes with cards while they 
wait for American clients. In the second part, Sweeney has joined them; in an 
earlier poem he had shaved heedlessly while the woman he had just had sex with 
has a fit and now the language he uses to flirt talks of cannibalism and 
murder. The women grow anxious because of the cards – "I drew the coffin" – and 
Sweeney talks of how "Any man has to, needs to, wants to / once in a lifetime 
do a girl in" and how one of his friends killed a woman and kept her in a bath 
of disinfectant, periodically calling on Sweeney for a drink.

Swarts, the interlocutor in what has suddenly become a minstrel show routine, 
says "these fellows always get caught in the end" but Sweeney knows better – 
the fragment ends with a nightmare chorus where waking might mean you are on 
the day of your own execution, or that something worse is coming for you – a 
childish nightmare that goes "Hoo Ha" or the Furies that are chasing Orestes in 
one of the two epigraphs. You might be alive and you might be dead, and perhaps 
there is no difference; perhaps echoing Macbeth, the fragment ends with the 
cast intoning a nine-fold knocking at the door.

Eliot was much obsessed with violent death – he and Vivienne went to a 
fancy-dress party as Crippen and his cross-dressed sailor-suited mistress, and 
Eliot dressed as Crippen for one he attended by himself. If Sweeney Agonistes 
is as important a hinge in his development as it seems to me to be – with its 
sense of modern life as a cannibal isle where all that is true is "birth, and 
copulation, and death" and sex ends in murder and madness – "a woman runs a 
terrible risk" – then something perhaps had to change.

Eliot's married life and his social life had left him full of anger and 
resentment and despair. Sweeney Agonistes has two epigraphs – the one about 
Orestes and the Furies is followed by one which poses what he saw as the one 
clear alternative to the world the poem shows. The mystic St John of the Cross 
proposed that "the soul cannot be possessed of the divine union, until it has 
divested itself of the love of created beings". Eliot had reached a pitch of 
emotional pain where he saw nothing between whoremongering or murder and 
sainthood – his father's sense of sex as diabolism had won in the end.

In 1926, on a trip to Rome with his brother, Eliot threw himself to his knees 
at the feet ofMichelangelo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/michelangelo>'s Pietà; the resolution 
of all his personal and philosophical dilemmas turned out to be to have himself 
rebaptised and then confirmed into the Church of England, and entirely to sever 
his relationship with Vivienne to the point of hiding from her in the 
lavatories at Faber rather than confronting her. Eliot's conversion was a 
turning away from temptation into rejection.
 