
China: Triumph And Turmoil
8pm, Channel 4


It's Niall Ferguson's turn to attempt stitching together the contradictions 
that make up China and to determine, as he puts it, whether we should be 
"scared" of the Chinese century. He's covering familiar ground – a so-called 
communist state filling up with billionaires, how free market economics and 
traditional authoritarianism meet in a country that houses a fifth of humanity. 
In the first episode he opts for the idea that China has always been an 
autocratic society, fearing being destroyed by internal strife.Martin Skegg

Scott & Bailey
9pm, ITV1


The Cagney and Lacey of Manchester return. Suranne Jones and Lesley Sharp 
bring quality chemistry to the title roles as they juggle their jobs in the Met 
with family life. Bailey (Jones) has a visit from her armed robber brother and 
Scott (Sharp) has a mother about the house causing tension. But that's nothing 
compared with what's going on at work, with the discovery of a series of burned 
bodies and a murder suspect who puts Bailey's life in danger.Hannah Verdier

Dirk Gently
9pm, BBC4


Expelled from university 20 years ago, Gently returns to Cambridge "in 
triumph" to become a security consultant for his former mentor, Prof Jericho 
(Bill Paterson). The triumph is shortlived as the detective and sidekick are 
charged with guarding a valuable robot, which promptly goes missing. Worse, a 
death follows and the two men attract the attention of the law. Better than 
last week's opener, it adds a hint of darkness and an unlikely love story to 
the series staples of outrageous coincidence, Gently behaving appallingly and 
plain silliness.Jonathan Wright

Storyville: Who Is Gorky?
10pm, BBC4


Painter Arshile Gorky <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/arshile-gorky>
, who committed suicide in 1947, is described as the last of the surrealists 
and first of the abstract expressionists. In this film, his granddaughter 
Cosima Spender takes a personal look at Gorky, his work and the impact his 
legacy has had on her family. Much of the film is taken up with conversations 
with his widow Mougouch (she was 19 when she met him), and Spender even follows 
Gorky to his birthplace in Armenia, which he had fled in 1915 to escape Ottoman 
persecution.MS

Spartacus: Vengeance
10pm, Sky1


With other shows it's easy to tell if an episode is supposed to be action 
packed or just there to move the plot along. Not so here.Spartacus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/spartacus> can burn down an arena 
full of Romans and anything less is a slow week, despite there being, as 
tonight, around 30-40 deaths. The rebel ranks are swelled by some Germans, 
which is good news for Agron if no one else. Ashur's impressively evil rise to 
power continues and Gannicus shows where his loyalties lie in a typically 
understated manner. Brutal business as usual.Phelim O'Neill

This World: Interviews Before Execution – A Chinese Talk Show
11.20pm, BBC2


The title of this documentary is taken from a Chinese talkshow in which 
condemned prisoners are interviewed. The film follows host Ding Yu as she 
conducts her encounters with the dead-in-waiting. If one can suspend the faint 
worry that one is being duped by some sly satire of a totalitarian dystopia, 
it's fascinating. One of the few advantages the subjects have over most of us 
is the knowledge that they are offering their final testaments: what would you 
want your last words to be?Andrew Mueller
 