
Sometimes, hype can be dispiriting. So it was with  The Alan Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> Diaries (BBC4). The 
billboards. The trailers. The chat show appearances. I appreciate this might be 
the show with which BBC4 comes of age, but it was all getting a little wearing. 
Indeed, so often have Jenny Agutter and Jane Clark popped up together to 
publicise the drama, I was beginning to think that they were conjoined twins.

And yet, it was worth persevering, perhaps risking an anaphylactic reaction, 
as the drama - Confessions of a Cabinet Minister - was jolly good fun, despite 
the surprising absence of sex. Thus far, Clark has been all talk and no action. 
But what talk. Backbenchers were "non-entity estate agents, merchant bankers 
and briefless barristers". Plymouth had "introspective, minuscule horizons". 
Clare Short had a "lovely Brummie accent". As the caddish Clark, John Hurt was 
the right mix of egomaniac and eager-to-please wee boy; vile womaniser and 
tender husband; political operator and total wally. We've only had glimpses of 
Agutter's Jane, but she seems real and rounded. (Clearly all that hanging about 
with Clark's widow has been most beneficial.)

But the most outstanding performance so far has been that of Julia Davis as 
Jenny Easterbrook, the head of his private office. She is a woman of few words. 
Mostly, she makes her opinion known with her eyes. They flash. She does 
death-stares very well. She has the air of an unruffled nanny, a nursemaid 
who's seen it all before and wasn't impressed the first time. And the words she 
does employ land like harpoons on Clark's crumpled hide. Effortlessly, she has 
him "in a tungsten steel jockstrap".

With this, and her brilliant Nighty Night on BBC3, Davis is dazzling. Much mud 
has been slung at the BBC's digital services: Davis is a one-woman argument for 
Freeview.

In much the same way that the girl behind the counter in the health food shop 
always looks a little pale and bedraggled, so celibates never look very happy. 
This casual observation was firmly confirmed by Flesh and the Devil (Channel 
4). Whether Hindus (some of whom opt for castration to extinguish the sexual 
urge), Buddhists (who bind the breasts of 14-year-old girls), or Roman 
Catholics (and you don't need me to tell you what trouble the Holy See is in), 
celibates are miserable to a man. And a woman. Sex, in case you don't get it, 
is fun of which God thoroughly approves. It's the oppression, malice and misery 
that He's not so keen on.

"Try and hide your wild enthusiasm at my return," snarled Dr Romano in  ER 
(E4). "I find overt displays of emotion embarrassing." We shall do our best, 
Dr, but I can't promise anything. Emotional carnage is de rigueur down County 
General, as certain as the Chicago rain.

Naturally, then, it returned with a bang (and a crash). "Don't do anything 
stupid," Carter told Kovac in the Congolese jungle. "Like what?" the Croatian 
growled. "Like get yourself killed." Carter should really know by now not to 
give Kovac any advice and expect him to follow it. It fell to new recruit Neela 
Rasgotra (Parminder Nagra) to accidentally break the bad news to the department 
- as well as make an enemy of Dr Chen and kill an old lady. And all on her 
first day. The girl is going to fit in fine.

Before Little Britons Matt Lucas and David Walliams appeared on  This Morning 
(ITV1), we were introduced to a woman who had turned her husband's ashes into 
diamonds. She had chosen this alchemical transformation so that she and her 
daughters could wear him as jewellery. Well, Fern noted in full 
concerned-presenter mode, "Brian was a geologist..."

And people wonder where Vicky Pollard, Emily Howard and the rest come from. 

Actually, Lucas and Walliams explained, they catch germs of ideas for these 
characters from Trisha and Kilroy. Now that the latter has been taken off the 
air, Walliams said, their rich seam has been somewhat depleted. Every silver 
lining has a cloud, I guess.

"You couldn't spot a deranged woman in your own rank and file," opined a 
snotty City trader in The Bill (ITV1). "What chance have you got of solving my 
case?" Obnoxious he may have been, but you couldn't argue with his logic. Un-PC 
PC Cathy Bradford, you'll be missed.
 