
After Channel 4's adaptation of David Peace's cult Red Riding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/mar/20/last-nights-tv> novels a 
couple of years ago the Yorkshire tourist board was probably in tears. The 
county, albeit in the 1970s and 80s, was shown as a place of relentless rain, 
darkness, corruption and fear. They'll be happier withSouth Riding 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00y5gm3> (BBC1, Sunday), Andrew Davies's 
adaptation of Winifred Holtby's novel. We've gone back further still, to the 
1930s, and the fictional seaside town of Kiplington and its surroundings are 
not without their problems: poverty (there was a lot of it about at the time), 
chauvinism, a lack of ambition, council corruption, small town pettiness and 
narrow-mindedness. But there is also hope: hope of change. Plus lovely sandy 
beaches, sunshine, country lanes, handsome chaps galloping on handsome horses, 
girls in flowing skirts on bicycles, laughter and poetry. And a hint of romance 
in the air.

Sarah (played with enthusiasm by Anna Maxwell Martin) breezes back home after 
time away to take up the post of headmistress at the girls' school. She's got 
lots of fresh ideas about equality and modernisation, not all of which go down 
well with the people who haven't been away. Chief detractor is grumpy, moody 
Robert, who sees Sarah as some kind of bra-burning Trot. She probably reads the 
Manchester bloody Guardian too. It's complicated though, because Robert (played 
by David Morrissey) is also a bit of a dish, and there's a certain chemistry 
between them, especially one night in a barn when a calf is being born. There's 
nothing like an arm up a cow and afterbirth all over the place to get you in 
the mood. But Robert also has a mad wife locked away somewhere (there's a whole 
Mr Rochester thing going on), as well as a difficult and extremely annoying 
daughter, which all adds to the complications. And to the intrigue.

Some of the girls school stuff isn't really for me – a game of something 
called "hare and hounds" on the cliffs, and Madam Hubbard's dancing school gala 
evening performance, which goes on for ever. But there is more to South Riding 
than jolly hockey sticks. It's a subtle story of ideological battle set against 
a backdrop of social change. Plus there's the barn action potential. Or, put 
another way, it encapsulates a time and a place, with sex on the cards. What 
more could you want?

Watercolours are perfect for capturing the beauty of the world, says the actor 
Sheila Hancock inSheila Hancock Brushes Up: The Art of Watercolours 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00yzgtn> (BBC1, Sunday). Their reputation for 
being cosy and wishy-washy is unfair, she says; once they were cutting edge, 
the photography of their day. She sets off on a journey in the footsteps of 
some watercolourists – some very famous, others less so – to big up the 
water-based medium. She goes to Turner's Venice and the Alps of Cozens and 
India, where an unhappy woman called Lady Canning painted a corner of the 
empire in watercolours from on top of an elephant. She looks at a soldier's 
watercolours of the current conflict in Afghanistan, and at some of the efforts 
(not bad, I think) of her own father.

And she ends up on the wobbly bridge across the Thames with St Paul's behind – 
perhaps because her father once painted St Paul's, or maybe because all 
documentary directors require at least one shot of their presenter on the 
wobbly bridge, regardless of what their film is about. It's becoming a cliche. 
Have you been there recently? You can't get across because of the bloody film 
crews.

Anyway, Hancock is lovely – so serene, and elegant (except when trying to 
mount an elephant, from behind). It's not demanding – art history for people 
like me, who know very little. Cutting edge? No. Cosy? Perhaps. But not 
wishy-washy. I'm watching with a straw hat on.

My weekend television guilty pleasure, now that Total Wipeout's not on? Dating 
gameshowTake Me Out <http://www.itv.com/takemeout/> (ITV1, Saturday). It's a 
great little formula, the perfect balance between joy and cruelty. I like Paddy 
McGuinness too, with his cheesy one-liners. "The love landlord to pull them a 
pint of real male." Ha. Get involved if you haven't already; just don't admit 
it.
 