 The body of Che Guevara was flown into this small hill town in south-eastern 
Bolivia at five o'clock last night.
From the moment the helicopter landed bearing the small figure strapped in a 
stretcher to the landing rails, the succeeding operation was to a large extent 
left in the hands of a man in battledress, who, all the correspondents here 
agree, was unquestionably a representative of one of the United States 
intelligence agencies.

He was probably a Cuban exile and so Che Guevara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/che-guevara>, who in life had declared war 
almost singlehanded on the United States, found himself in death face to face 
with his major enemy. The helicopter purposely landed far from where a crowd 
had gathered and the body of the dead guerrilla leader was hastily transferred 
to a van. We commandeered a jeep to follow it and the driver managed to get 
through the gates of the hospital grounds where the body was taken to a small 
colour-washed hut that served as a mortuary.

The doors of the van burst open and the American agent leapt out, emitting a 
war cry of "Let's get the hell out of here". One of the correspondents asked 
him where he came from. "Nowhere", was the surly response.

The body, dressed in olive green fatigues with a zippered jacket, was carried 
into the hut. It was undoubtedly that of Che Guevara. Ever since I first 
reported in January that Che was probably inBolivia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bolivia> I have not shared the general 
scepticism about his whereabouts.

I am probably one of the few people here who have seen him alive. I saw him in 
Cuba at an Embassy reception in 1963 and there is no doubt in my mind that this 
body was that of Che. It had a black wispy beard, long matted hair, and the 
shadow of a scar on the right temple, probably the result of an accident in 
July when he was grazed by a rifle shot.

On his feet he wore moccasins as though he had been shot down while running 
fleet-footed through the jungle. He had two wounds in the lower part of the 
neck and possibly one in the stomach. It is believed that he was captured when 
seriously wounded, but died before a helicopter could arrive to take him out of 
the battle zone.

My only doubts about the identity arose because Che was much thinner and 
smaller than I had recalled, but it is hardly surprising that after months in 
the jungle he had lost his former heavy appearance.

As soon as the body reached the mortuary the doctors began to pump 
preservative into it, and the American agent made desperate efforts to keep off 
the crowds. He was a very nervous man and looked furious whenever cameras were 
pointed in his direction. He knew that I knew who he was and he also knew that 
I knew that he should not be there, for this is a war in which the Americans 
are not supposed to be taking part. Yet here was this man, who has been with 
the troops in Vallegrande, talking to the senior officers on familiar terms.

One can hardly say that this was the factor with which Che failed to reckon, 
for it was his very purpose to provoke United States intervention in Latin 
America as a way of bringing help and succour to the embattled Vietnamese. But 
he certainly did fail to estimate correctly the strength and pervasiveness of 
the U.S. intelligence agencies in this continent, and this more than anything 
else has been the cause of his downfall and that of the Bolivian guerrillas.

And so he is dead. As they pumped preservative into his half-naked, dirty body 
and as the crowd shouted to be allowed to see, it was difficult to recall that 
this man had once been one of the great figures of Latin America.

It was not just that he was a great guerrilla leader, he had been a friend of 
Presidents as well as revolutionaries. His voice had been heard and appreciated 
in inter-American councils as well as in the jungle. He was a doctor, an 
amateur economist, once Minister of Industries in revolutionary Cuba, and Fidel 
Castro's right-hand man. He may well go down in history as the greatest 
continental figure since Bolivar. Legends will be created around his name.

He was a Marxist but impatient of the doctrinal struggles between the Russians 
and the Chinese. He was perhaps the last person who tried to find a middle way 
between the two and attempted to unite radical forces everywhere in a concerted 
campaign against the U.S. He is now dead, but it is difficult to feel that his 
ideas will die with him.
 