
Pension savers could be big losers from the Bank of England rate cut, as 
critics warned of a “hammer blow” to workplace schemes and forecast that 
pension payouts would fall to record lows.

Within minutes of the Bank’s decision to cut the base rate to 0.25% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
, yields on government bonds, otherwise known as gilts, dived to all-time lows.

Companies that still offer final salary pension schemes will as a result see 
the cost of maintaining them soar. Hymans Robertson, a pensions consultancy, 
said the rate cut meant a £70bn increase in the amount company schemes needed 
to meet their commitments to scheme members, to a total of £2.4trn.

“To put this in context, UK GDP currently stands at £1.8trn. This has pushed 
the aggregate UK [company scheme] deficit up to £945bn – the worst it has ever 
been,” it said.

Companies will have to find the money to fill the gap in their pension 
schemes, or like most already have, close them to new members. In extreme 
cases, some may attempt to redraw pension contracts to cap their future 
liabilities.

Patrick Bloomfield of Hymans Robertson said: “Pension schemes are being hit 
hard by recent events, but we need to remember that the impact will not be felt 
equally by all ... There are schemes with robust funding plans that don’t take 
more risk than they need to, which will be able to weather this. The gap 
between pension schemes that hedged their risks and those that haven’t is 
starker than ever before.”

Tom McPhail of financial adviser Hargreaves Lansdown said monetary policy was 
“proving to be pretty unpleasant medicine for pension schemes”.

“It may be supporting asset values and keeping the economy turning but it is 
also driving down annuity rates and driving up final salary scheme 
liabilities,” he said. “This means employers are having to pump more and more 
money into final salary schemes and individuals are having to save more and 
more into their personal pension if they want to buy an annuity.

“Too much of this medicine is not healthy for anyone’s finances and for final 
salary schemes in particular, there is a risk that it may actually be killing 
the patient. The government is going to have to intervene soon.”

The rate cut means that annuities, which promise an income for life, have 
fallen to new lows.

 The Association of British Insurers (ABI) called the rate cut 
“disappointing”. Yvonne Braun of the ABI said: “While we recognise there are 
wider economic judgements underlying this decision, continued low interest 
rates and sustained quantitative easing are the main factors keeping annuity 
rates low. This further drop of the interest rate to unprecedented low levels 
and the additional injection of quantitative easing are likely to put downward 
pressure on annuity rates.” 

But Gregg McClymont of Aberdeen Asset Management said the impact on annuities 
was partly offset by the rise in the stock market. The FTSE 100 surged by 
nearly 1.5% soon after the rate cut, and was around 12% ahead of its 
post-Brexit lows.

“Post-Brexit gains in government bonds (lowering yields) work both ways: 
making it more expensive to buy a pension at retirement, but increasing the 
value of the pension pot of those lucky enough to be de-risking towards 
annuities in the glidepath to retirement,” MClymont said.

 