
More than six in 10 workers were signed up to workplace pensions in 2015 as 
automatic enrolment continued to be rolled out in companies.

This was the highest number of workers saving for their retirement since 1997, 
but experts warn that millions of people remain ineligible for the scheme.

Auto enrolment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/03/how-is-your-auto-enrolment-pension-faring>
 was introduced in October 2012 in a bid to tackle growing concerns about a 
poverty crisis among people in old age. Employees can opt out of the scheme, 
which is being rolled out until 2018, with medium- and small-sized companies 
the last to sign up.

Official figures suggest a large takeup, with 64% of UK employees saving into 
a pension scheme in 2015, compared with 59% the previous year.

Some 87% of employees in the public sector had a workplace pension in 2015, 
compared with only 55% for private sector employees.

However, millions of workers are unable to take advantage of the new workplace 
schemes.

“Over 5 million people whose employers have gone through the auto-enrolment 
process aren’t being swept into the system, perhaps as they are too young, too 
old, or weren’t earning enough,” said Tom McPhail, pensions expert at 
Hargreaves Lansdown.

“Then there’s the 4.5 million self-employed people who can’t sign up. So while 
workplace membershp is increasing, for a lot of people that’s not helping them 
save.”

Around 60% of workers in the public sector and 15% in the private sector 
contributed 6% or more of qualifying earnings in 2015.

While this figure is greater than the current minimum auto-enrolment 
contributions of 2%, of which 1% must be paid by employers and the government, 
it is a long way from being able to provide for a comfortable retirement.

A review for the Labour party  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/02/pensions-retirement-savings-15-per-cent-workers-income-needed-review-finds>
published on Wednesday suggested that workers needed to put 15% of their 
earnings into a pension pot.


Total minimum contributions under auto enrolmment will rise to 8% by late 2018.

“In part this is a function of phasing contribution rates to avoid a sudden 
dramatic drop in income, but for a lot of people it simply won’t be enough to 
provide for retirement even when rates reach 8% of earnings,” said McPhail.

Under auto enrolment, a portion of an employee’s pay packet is automatically 
diverted to a savings pot for their pension, provided they are aged 22 or over 
and earning at least £10,000 a year. For each £100 a worker pays in, the 
government adds £25 and their employer adds £75. So for a £100 personal 
investment £200 is paid into a pension, doubling your money.

However, any worker earning over £5,824 can opt in to a pension and their 
employer is also obliged to contribute. Employers must inform eligible staff of 
the right to opt in to the company pension and get an employer contribution.

By 2018, the government estimates that between 6 million and 9 million people 
will save more into a pension or join a scheme for the first time.
 