
Britain’s four-decade membership of the EU has left it lacking experience in 
international negotiations, which will hamper it in trade talks and may lead to 
“a very hard Brexit”, Norway’s prime minister has said.

Erna Solberg, speaking to Reuters at a meeting of Bavaria’s centre-right CSU 
party in Germany, said that the UK worked slowly in discussions due to a lack 
of recent experience of entering talks alone. “We do feel that sometimes when 
we are discussing with Britain, that their speed is limited by the fact that it 
is such a long time since they have negotiated,” she said.

Solberg said she hoped the UK would be able to negotiate an agreement that 
kept it close to the EU, but it would not be easy. “I fear a very hard Brexit, 
but I hope we will find a better solution.”

The remarks reinforce those made by Sir Ivan Rogers, who resigned as Britain’s 
EU ambassador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
 this week.

Besides attacking “muddled thinking” and “ill-founded arguments” in the UK’s 
approach to Brexit, Rogers warned in his resignation email of the lack of 
negotiating experience in the British civil service compared with the EU 
institutions.

The Guardian view on Ivan Rogers’ resignation: a loss at a crucial time | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/the-guardian-view-on-ivan-rogers-resignation-a-loss-at-a-crucial-time>
“Serious multilateral negotiating experience is in short supply in Whitehall, 
and that is not the case in the [European] commission or in the council,” he 
wrote.

“Contrary to the beliefs of some, free trade does not just happen ... 
Increasing market access to other markets and consumer choice in our own, 
depends on the deals, multilateral, plurilateral and bilateral, that we strike.”

Jonathan Marland, a former trade envoy for David Cameron who chairs the 
Commonwealth Enterprise and Investment Council, also said he did not think 
Whitehall had the skills to conduct successful Brexit talks.

“My fear is that Whitehall as a whole has really not got the skill set to 
deliver a really hard-nosed negotiation,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today 
programme. “And I think we have really got to up-skill in that area to do it.”

The European commission handles trade and many other negotiations on behalf of 
the EU’s 28 member states. Some reports have suggested that when Britain, which 
joined the the bloc in 1973, voted to leave it had no trade negotiators of its 
own.

Oliver Letwin, the former head of the government’s EU unit, said in July that 
all the civil service’s British trade negotiators were employed by the EU. The 
commission employs around 600 specialists in international trade.

Theresa May has said she plans to trigger article 50 and begin the exit 
process by the end of March.

The government has said it thinks Britain should be able to negotiate new 
trade arrangements with the EU within the two-year article 50 process, but many 
experts believe this is unrealistic and the commission has insisted it wants to 
sort out Brexit before embarking on trade talks.

We pay, but have no say: that’s the reality of Norway’s relationship with the 
EU | Espen Barth Eide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/27/norway-eu-reality-uk-voters-seduced-by-norwegian-model>
Norway is not part of the EU but contributes to the bloc’s budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/can-the-uk-adopt-the-norway-model-as-its-brexit-solution>
 in exchange for membership of the single market, for which it is also obliged 
to accept the EU’s fundamental principles, including free movement.

Some in government, such as the chancellor, Philip Hammond, are arguing in 
favour of a soft Brexit: leaving the UK inside the single market, possibly in a 
Norway-style relationship with the EU, to minimise the economic downside of 
leaving.


Others, however, are pushing for a hard Brexit that would take Britain out of 
the single market and the customs union, and are insisting Britain should walk 
away from negotiations if the EU is not prepared to give ground on issues such 
as freedom of movement and the jurisdiction of the European court of justice.

Solberg told Reuters she thought it would be difficult for the UK to accept 
the EU’s four freedoms – the free movement of goods, capital, services and 
people – without having a vote on the council, which is made up of the heads of 
state or government of its members.

But she added she hoped “we will find a solution that leaves Britain as a 
partner in a lot of the European activities that we need them to be a partner 
in”.

 