
Within minutes of his Triple Crown victory Saturday afternoon at Belmont Park, 
horse racing fans began to ask the inevitable question: willAmerican Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah> race again?


It is one of the paradoxes of thoroughbred racing that the very achievements 
that the sport most trumpets and that fans most want to see – victories in 
Triple Crown races, and the ultimate triumph, a sweep of them – often lead to 
the swift retirement of the horse that accomplishes them, because his value is 
in the breeding shed far exceeds his value on the racetrack.


Kentucky breeders begin looking for stallion prospects early, and colts that 
can run a distance on dirt – and thus potentially produce aKentucky Derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kentucky-derby> winner – are the industry’s 
prized competitors. A nice-looking two-year-old that wins his first race 
impressively might merit a call to the owner, said Dan Rosenberg, the owner of 
Rosenberg Thoroughbred Consulting and the former president and CEO of Three 
Chimneys Farm in Versailles Kentucky. Currently the executive director of 
Thoroughbred Charities of America, Rosenberg was at Three Chimneys for 30 years.

American Pharoah wins, and fans enjoy the day at Belmont Park – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/jun/08/american-pharoah-belmont-park-scenes>
“Off that first race, we might not make an offer,” said Rosenberg, “but we’d 
express interest and start to build the relationship, staying in touch as the 
horse’s career unfolds.”

Charlie Boden, stallion manager of Darley America, the breeding operation of 
Dubai’s Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, said that interest gets serious 
after a horse wins a significant race.

“That could be as early as August of their two-year-old year,” said Boden. 

With stallion deals not uncommonly agreed before the Triple Crown races, 
included in the contract will be “kickers,” accomplishments that will trigger 
an increase in the contract terms, along with stipulations about who makes the 
decisions about when the horse will race.

Also included is what Boden called the “sunset date” for the horse’s racing 
career, commonly the Breeders’ Cup Classic, held each autumn, or the end of the 
horse’s three-year-old year. Rosenberg said that in all of his years 
negotiating contracts, he’d never seen one that stipulated that a horse be 
retired after winning the Triple Crown, though from a purely financial 
standpoint, such a move could make sense.

“It’s a double-edged sword,” he acknowledged, referring to winning the Triple 
Crown, or even winning one of the Triple Crown races. “I’ve read emails and 
posts from disappointed racing fans saying, ‘You greedy bastards, you retired 
the horse and you don’t care about us.’”

“But do the math,” he continued. “It’s really easy. If American Pharoah stands 
at $100,000 [per mating] and he’s bred to 150 mares, compare that to what he 
could win on the racetrack. It’s a no-brainer and you’d be out of your mind to 
risk him getting hurt and losing all that potential.”

American Pharoah the best Triple Crown winner? He's the most important anyway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/07/american-pharoah-the-best-triple-crown-winner-hes-the-most-important-anyway>
Still, he said, he expects American Pharoah to stay in training … for 
financial reasons, not for sporting ones.

“If he can beat older horses, this summer or in the Breeders’ Cup Classic,” 
Rosenberg said, “his value will go up.”

Boden agreed with Rosenberg’s prognostication, though for different reasons. 

“Purses these days are hefty,” he pointed out. “He’s got $10 million sitting 
there next March [in the Dubai World Cup]. That’s $6 million to him [if he 
wins]. The Breeders’ Cup Classic is $5 million. He stands to make another $10 
million before the end of March next year.

“If he’s going to the breeding shed, he could get 100 horses to breed to him 
at $100,000, but that’s a year down the road, assuming he’s fertile and if he 
wants to breed, and those are two big ifs. We know that we can run and beat 
just about every sumbitch that lines up next to him.”

Boden also noted that American Pharoah’s pedigree might work against him with 
regard to his stud fee. He is sired by Pioneerof The Nile, from the first crop 
of foals by a horse that finished second in the 2009 Kentucky Derby.

“He doesn’t have a really fancy kind of page that makes you drool,” said 
Boden. “Pioneerof the Nile is an exciting young stallion that’s probably going 
to stand for $100,000 next year because he got a Triple Crown winner, and it’s 
hard for the son to stand for more than the father.”

Setting aside geldings and horses that were injured after the Kentucky Derby, 
the 10 horses that won the Kentucky Derby from 2000 to 2014 raced an average of 
3.5 times after the first Saturday in May, not counting races in which they 
were attempting to win the Triple Crown. Only four of those 10 went on to race 
the following year.

The first Triple Crown winner in 37 years, American Pharoah is in uncharted 
territory, with no contemporary peers. The last Triple Crown winner, Affirmed 
in 1978, raced 13 times after hisBelmont Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/belmont-stakes>, running a full season as a 
four-year-old; Seattle Slew, the 1977 Triple Crown winner, ran eight times 
after the Belmont, through November of 1978. Secretariat raced six times after 
winning the Belmont and was retired at the end of the year.

“It’s the nature of the game, really,” admitted Rosenberg. “The really good 
ones have to retire. They have to keep their value.”
 