
A persistent surreal silliness lends some interest to this latest film in the 
interminable Underworld action vampire-horror franchise series: the fifth, in 
fact. It’s the franchise that simply refuses to die.

Kate Beckinsale <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kate-beckinsale> reprises 
her kinkily black-leather-clad role of the vampire Selene. She and the other 
vampires are now threatened by the lupine Lycans, who do lots of CGI 
transformation from human to beast and back again. They are led by the malign 
Marius (Tobias Menzies); Selene has on her side the hunky creature of the 
shadows David (Theo James), yet faces treachery of the outrageouslydécolleté 
sort from Semira (Lara Pulver), who is rocking a series of revealing outfits. 
Charles Dance comes on, selling his preposterous lines with absolute conviction 
and professionalism and giving everything a residual Game-of-Thrones vibe.

 Slinky Selene is all very well, but these days you can’t help but remember 
the role for which Beckinsale is now better known: Lady Susan Vernon in the 
Jane Austen dramaLove & Friendship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/26/love-friendship-review-whit-stillmans-austen-drama-is-a-racy-delight>
; in fact, this bloody vampire punch-up could do with some dry dialogue from 
Austen. It could certainly do with Tom Bennett sauntering on sporting fangs and 
a black, burgundy-lined cape, as a vampire version of his legendary 
aristocratic blockhead Sir James Martin, and burbling his appreciation of the 
exciting events: “Ah! Yes! Vampires! Isn’t it? Very good. Sucking ... sucking 
blood. Wearing black contact lenses. Black lipstick. And also blasting people 
violently with ... shotguns. Bang! Blood everywhere. Ooh! And sometimes 
shooting people while looking in the opposite direction. Very ... very cool. 
Insouciant, you know. But why not just look in the, ah, correct direction, 
what? Mm.”

This has been a regular payday for Beckinsale and she certainly gives it her 
all, but you have to wonder why she bothers, certainly now that we know what 
she can do with more interesting material. Surely there’s something just as 
lucrative and not quite as undead.
 