
The United Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/unitedarabemirates> overcame 10-man Iraq 
3-2 in an action-packed Asian Cup third-placed playoff to complete an 
impressive tournament for Mahdi Ali’s side.

 Ahmed Khalil netted twice before Ali Mabkhout converted a second-half penalty 
for his fifth of the tournament to take him top of the scorers’ charts with 
only Saturday’s final between hosts Australia and South Korea to come in Sydney.

 UAE playmaker Omar Abdulrahman was again at the heart of his side’s good 
play, with two brilliant assists for Khalil, who stepped in as skipper with 
goalkeeper Majed Naser rested after the 2-0 semi-final loss to Australia.

The opener came in the 16th minute when Abdulrahman controlled a long ball 
from deep and played a one-two with Mabkhout before sliding an inviting pass 
for Khalil to slot home under the onrushing Mohammed Hameed in theIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/iraq> goal.

 The neat counter-attack goal had a negative effect on the UAE, who knocked 
out holders Japan in the last eight, with Iraq taking a grip of the game and 
the lead just before the halftime break.

 Careless defending in the 28th minute allowed fullback Waleed Salim to break 
into the UAE penalty area and his right foot shot deflected home off Khamis 
Esmaeel.

 The 2007 champions, beaten 2-0 by the Koreans in the semis, had already hit 
the post via talismanic striker Younis Mahmoud and they deservedly took the 
lead three minutes before the break.

 A powerful drive by Ahmed Yaseen Gheni was parried by debutant UAE keeper 
Khalid Eisa with Amjed Kalaf on hand to divert home into an unguarded net.

 The match in Newcastle, watched by Fifa president Sepp Blatter and AFC head 
Salman bin Ebrahim Al Khalifa, turned on its head, though, early in the second 
half.

 A brilliant lofted ball by Abdulrahman put Khalil clear of the Iraq defence 
and he shifted past Hameed and slotted a second in the 51st minute to tie the 
game at 2-2.

 A sloppy clearance from the keeper four minutes later went straight to 
Mabkhout, who was bundled over by defender Ahmed Ibrahim in the penalty area.

 The Iraq centre-back was rightly sent off as last man with Mabkhout stepping 
up to roll in the spot kick.

 The UAE, Asian Cup runners-up in 1990, failed to press home the numerical 
advantage with Iraq threatening an equaliser as the Emiratis sat deeper.
 