
“Societies are absolutely fantastic at creating that sense of belonging that 
students need to keep them in education,” says Richard Brooks, NUS 
vice-president of union development.


“It’s about meeting people who are like you and who care about you. Plus, 
students who take part in societies are not only less likely to drop out – they 
also go on to get good honours degrees and have better employment prospects, 
too.”

Brooks, a judge on the inaugural National Societies Awards 
<http://www.nusconnect.org.uk/articles/the-national-societies-awards-2016> this 
year, has been impressed with the sheer diversity of the societies offered by 
student unions across the country.

“There’s everything from ninja and pirate societies to extreme sports, like 
rock climbing and mountaineering,” he says. “Then there’s the more traditional 
sports, community groups and activism – so there really is something for 
everyone,” he explains.

“It’s not just about students doing nice things or having a good student 
experience – ultimately, societies make students and their lives, as well as 
wider society, better.”

Student unions are always open to ideas for new societies as long as there’s 
enough interest, says Derby students union vice-president of student community 
Amy Horner.

“At the start of 2016, we held a campaign to encourage students to start up 
new societies. Some ideas were a bit ‘out there’ – suggestions included stitch 
and bitch [knitting], skydiving and snail racing – but everything is 
considered!”

Extreme sports

Ultimate frisbee Nottingham Trent University students can take part in this 
fast-paced team game of razor-sharp throwing skills and immense stamina and 
agility. Also at Leeds, Exeter, Edinburgh and more.

 Airsoft society Players eliminate opponents by hitting each other with 
spherical non-metallic pellets. Offered at the University of Derby.

Roller derby A full-contact women’s sport played on quad roller skates, by 
players skating around an elliptical track. The game consists of a series of 
two-minute countdown “jams”. Get your skates on at a range of universities, 
including Cambridge.

Extreme ironing Described as “combining the thrills of an extreme outdoor 
activity with the satisfaction of a well-pressed shirt”, extreme ironing sits 
somewhere between performance art and extreme sport. All you need is an ironing 
board, some laundry, and a remote or dangerous location/situation – maybe in a 
canoe or under a frozen lake – and you’re away. Available at the University of 
Nottingham.

Unusual clubs

Historia Normannis A 12th-century medieval reenactment group at the University 
of Derby, focusing on the events between the reigns of Henry I and King John.

Real tennis Middlesex University has the enclosed court needed to play the 
original tennis – which has as much in common with squash as it does with 
Wimbledon.

The Baker Street Irregulars Formed in 2015 at St George’s University of London 
by four graduate medical students, their areas of interest centre on clinical 
forensic medicine, pathology and Benedict Cumberbatch.

Pagan and occult Keele University offers this discussion group based around 
topics from the paranormal to the supernatural. Paganism and witchcraft feature 
heavily.

TV and film societies

Dumbledore’s Army This society for Harry Potter fans at the University of 
Derby has quizzes, online roleplaying, fan fiction and origami sessions.

Muggle Quidditch A full-contact, mixed-gender sport modelled on the 
broomstick-based sport from JK Rowling’s wizard world. At Derby.

Disney appreciation University of Manchester students can enjoy movie nights, 
quizzes and events based around all things Disney.

Ice and Fire Offered at the University of York, this is the society to 
appreciate all things Game of Thrones with socials, episode screenings and book 
discussions.

RuPaul’s Drag Race Watch episodes, get backstage gossip, and enjoy trips to 
Drag Idol UK and RuPaul’s Drag Race UK in London. At Keele.
 