
A big crowd spent most of the afternoon peering into a thick curtain of fog 
here on Saturday, but there was no mistaking the first horse to emerge from the 
gloom at the end of the Long Walk Hurdle. The bright green and gold colours of 
JP McManus, aboard the hot favourite, Unowhatimeanharry, landed a pre-Christmas 
blow for the punters as they crossed the line four and a half lengths to the 
good after his nearest challenger, Ballyoptic, fell at the final hurdle. As 
Harry Fry, the winner’s trainer, said: “The dreaming goes on.”

The big transformation in Unowhatimeanharry’s form since he joined Fry’s 
stable at the start of last season has been closer to a miracle than a dream. 
The eight-year-old had failed to register a win over hurdles in 11 attempts, 
and his form figures in early 2015 were 7P.

Eight months and one switch of stables later, Unowhatimeanharry lined up for a 
handicap hurdle at Cheltenham’s Open meeting and did so as the 7-2 favourite 
thanks to an avalanche of well-informed cash. An easy three-length victory 
kicked off a winning streak that is still alive six races later and now 
includes a second Grade One victory to add to his success in the Albert 
Bartlett at theCheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival>.

“Seven from seven is quite incredible,” Fry said. “It was a proper test today, 
as it was always going to be. Barry [Geraghty] has come back in and we’re 
relying on the jockeys to tell us what’s going on and he said he had to fight 
from four out, but then he only does what he needs to. If he keeps doing that, 
we’ll be happy.

“I’d have thought we’d probably look at the Cleeve Hurdle [at Cheltenham] at 
the end of January and then hopefully it’s all systems go for the big one [the 
World Hurdle] in March.”

Unowhatimeanharry was already towards the front of the market for the World 
Hurdle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/17/cheltenham-festival-2016-st-patricks-day-live>
 before his latest success and is now the clear favourite at around 3-1, ahead 
of the 2015 Champion Hurdle winner, Faugheen, who must be considered a doubtful 
runner.

“We couldn’t have ever hoped for this,” Fry said. “It’s extraordinary, but 
that’s what’s brilliant about National Hunt racing, sometimes these horses come 
along and they keep finding. He’s still progressing unbelievably and long may 
it continue. He’s got in the winning habit and sometimes when horses get a bit 
of confidence you never know where they’re going to end up.”

Cheltenham Festival 2016: Thistlecrack wins the World Hurdle - as it happened 
| Barry Glendenning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/17/cheltenham-festival-2016-st-patricks-day-live>
Nicky Henderson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nicky-henderson> has a 
strong team of novice chasers this season and the trainer said he will need to 
juggle them around a bit after Top Notch took the graduation chase here not 
long after Buveur D’Air’s impressive success on his chasing debut at equally 
fog-bound Haydock Park.

Buveur D’Air was the better of the pair over hurdles, ending his novice 
campaign in April with victory in a Grade One event at Aintree, and he made a 
very polished transition to fences under a confident ride by Aidan Coleman.

Coleman was content to sit several lengths off the pace and keep an eye on 
Cloudy Dream, his only significant rival in the market. He dragged his hind 
legs through the second last, but still made up several lengths in a few 
strides before the final fence before quickening three and a quarter lengths 
clear of Cloudy Dream at the line.

“He’s got loads of gears and it looked as if those still work all right,” 
Henderson said of Buveur D’Air. “He’s one that we always thought would go up to 
two and a half miles. You have the issue that there is another horse 
[Henderson’s top-class Altior] lurking there in the two-mile novice division, 
but that’s good because we always said the novice chasers needed to be good 
this year and they’re looking like quite a strong bunch.”

A meeting with Yorkhill could well lie ahead for Buveur D’Air after last 
year’s Neptune Novice Hurdle winner at the Festival meeting made a successful 
debut over fences in effortless fashion at odds of 1-8 at Fairyhouse on 
Saturday.

Yorkhill remains favourite for the JLT Novice Chase at Cheltenham in March at 
a top price of 5-1, while Buveur D’Air is second-favourite at 10-1. Willie 
Mullins, however, suggested that he was seeing Yorkhill as Arkle Trophy 
material. The trainer said: “He has huge scope for jumping and certainly has 
not lost any of his ability.”

The six-year-old is top-priced at 9-1 for the Festival two-mile contest, in a 
market headed by Altior at 7-4.

The fog at Ascot never quite obscured the final obstacles, but at Haydock it 
was all but impossible to see the finishing line by the off-time of the final 
race at 3.15, a handicap hurdle. With both the judge and the commentator unsure 
about the eventual finishing order, it took several minutes for Clyne to be 
confirmed as a the winner ahead of Le Rocher and El Terremento.
 