
Bad weather in ski resorts has instigated many a friendship. Locked in a 
mountain hut while high winds or blizzard conditions temporarily close lifts, 
there is not much to do except eat, drink and be merry. These were my 
alternatives one morning when high winds closed the gondola. But with wine and 
beer costing less than £1, if you have to hole-up anywhere, the tax-free 
principality of Andorra is not a bad choice.

That morning, instead of pounding the slopes at first light, I found myself 
cheek to cheek with a large table of ski-school instructors puffing on 
cigarettes and drinking cappuccinos. The new six-person gondola at the base of 
Arinsal wasn't going anywhere, so the stranded skiers, predominately British 
and Irish, headed for the nearest pub. Not only was the atmosphere like a 
British pub, but everyone was speaking English, even the ski instructors.

More than 100 of Andorra's 170 strong ski school are English speakers, and 
this is one of the reasons why Andorra is taking an increasing slice of the ski 
pie. The Andorran ski school has a reputation as one of the best in Europe. It 
is one of the few countries to welcome foreign instructors, and it has secured 
many of the best.

Language is not a problem in this tiny country. Catalan, the native tongue, is 
now being taught again in schools, but Spanish, French and English are 
interchangeable.

Stories of 28-hour coach journeys are a thing of the past. Instead, it's 
charter flights to Toulouse or Barcelona, often filled to bursting on the 
return trip with ski bags stuffed with duty-free cigarettes or neatly-packed 
camcorders.

Investment over the past few years has transformed Andorra from a budget 
resort to one that can seriously compete with many of Europe's finest in terms 
of service, quality hotel accommodation, ski and family facilities. Anyone 
comparing it with East European ski resorts, such as those in Romania or 
Bulgaria, is out of date. A further £47 million injection by Ski Andorra in its 
five resorts for the coming season puts it in the same league of investment as 
some North American resorts.

Andorra has listened to its guests' demands and, as a result, has inspired 
loyalty. In my hotel in La Massana, a base for the Andorran resorts of Arinsal 
and Pal, both mainly beginner's areas, I was surprised to find that I was the 
only first-timer to Andorra.

"I never thought I'd take to skiing, but this is our fifth holiday here," said 
Catherine from Tyneside. She and her husband bought a pair of skis on a whim 
and tried them out on a small hill in Britain. This year, they were taking 
advantage of the Inghams 4x4 programme, which includes a Jeep to drive to the 
five resorts. "We thought we'd try something different, but so far we only use 
the car to avoid taking the bus at the end of the day."

The next day, I headed out to Soldeu, an hour away, passing the capital, 
Andorra La Vella, and its bottomless duty-free shopping. Soldeu and the linked 
resort of El Tartar provide the most varied skiing and scenery in the Pyrenees.

There aren't the vast ski areas to be found elsewhere in Europe, and this has 
been one of the criticisms of Andorra. But this season, the link between 
Soldeu/ El Tartar and the other large area of Pas de la Casa/Grau Roig will 
finally be opened. For the time being, this is a simple drag lift, but work has 
already begun to make access easier and quicker.

The combined ski area now covers 150km with 50 lifts. Its early progress was 
held up by local politics. Disputes over grazing rights - much of the land on 
which the lifts are built was community farming land - and financial 
distribution of lift ticket profits periodically reached deadlock.

However, this rivalry among the communities has resulted in one-upmanship that 
skiers will benefit from. A new cable car from Encamp now goes to the back of 
Grau Roig and an eight-seater gondola will link Soldeu/El Tartar with the 
village of Canillo. Not only does this greatly expand the existing ski areas, 
it also gives a greater choice of accommodation.

"One of the advantages for beginners and intermediates is the variety of easy 
slopes," says Gordon Standeven, head of the British instructors in Soldeu. "It 
doesn't take long to ski from top to bottom as the slopes are wide and the 
gradient not too steep."

Standeven has now been in Andorra for 17 seasons. In the summer, he runs his 
own building maintenance company. Construction in Andorra is thriving, with the 
old 60s concrete eyesores gradually being replaced by tasteful hotels and 
apartments made of natural stone and wooden beams.

Over a glass of wine in Fat Albert's, a renovated barn with all the stylish 
trimmings of a city hotspot, it was clear that après-ski was one thing about 
Andorra that hadn't changed - it still requires stamina. Measures are generous 
and, at less than £2 for a vodka and tonic, the night can often be very long 
indeed.

The practicals

Seven nights at the four star Rutllan in La Massana start at £392pp, including 
4x4 car, flights and transfer, through Inghams (020 87804444). Other operators 
include: Panorama 01273 42777; Thomson 0870 1577775; First Choice 0870 7542754; 
Crystal Holidays 020 8399 5144; Top Deck 020 7370 4555.
 