 Vallegrande: The body of Che Guevara, the Latin American revolutionary, was 
flown into this small hill town in south-eastern Bolivia at five-o'clock last 
night.
From the moment the helicopter landed bearing the small figure, the succeeding 
operation was to a large extent left in the hands of a man in battledress who, 
all the correspondents here agree, was unquestionably a representative of one 
of the United States intelligence agencies.

He was probably a Cuban exile and so Che, who in life had declared war almost 
singlehanded on the United States, found himself in death face to face with his 
major adversary.

The helicopter purposely landed far from where a crowd had gathered and the 
body of the dead guerrilla leader was hastily transferred to a van. We 
commandeered a jeep to follow it and the driver managed to get through the 
gates of the hospital grounds.

The doors of the van burst open and the American agent leapt out, emitting a 
war cry of "Let's get the hell out of here". One of the correspondents asked 
him where he came from. "Nowhere," was the surly response.

The body was dressed in olive green fatigues with a zippered jacket. It was 
undoubtedly that ofChe Guevara <https://www.theguardian.com/world/che-guevara>. 
I am probably one of the few people here who have seen him alive. I saw him in 
Cuba in 1963 and there is no doubt in my mind that this body was that of Che. 
It had a black wispy beard, long matted hair and the shadow of a scar on the 
right temple, probably the result of an accident in July when he was grazed by 
a rifle shot.

On his feet he wore moccasins as though he had been shot down while running 
fleet-footed through the jungle. He had two wounds in the lower part of the 
neck and possibly one in the stomach. It is believed that he was captured when 
seriously wounded but died before a helicopter could arrive.

My only doubts about the identity arose because Che was much thinner and 
smaller than I had recalled, but it is hardly surprising that after months in 
the jungle he had lost his former heavy appearance.

As soon as the body reached the mortuary the doctors began to pump 
preservative into it, and the American agent made desperate efforts to keep off 
the crowds. He was a very nervous man and looked furious whenever cameras were 
pointed in his direction. He knew that I knew that he should not be there, for 
this is a war in which the Americans are not supposed to be taking part. Yet 
here was this man talking to the senior officers on familiar terms.
 