
Washington is running a secret intelligence campaign targeted at the 
leadership of theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>, including the secretary 
general, Ban Ki-moon and the permanent security council representatives from 
China, Russia, France and the UK.

A classified directive which appears to blur the line between diplomacy and 
spying was issued to US diplomats under Hillary Clinton's name in July 2009, 
demanding forensic technical details about the communications systems used by 
top UN officials, including passwords and personal encryption keys used in 
private and commercial networks for official communications.

It called for detailed biometric information 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/219058> "on key 
UN officials, to include undersecretaries, heads of specialised agencies and 
their chief advisers, top SYG [secretary general] aides, heads of peace 
operations and political field missions, including force commanders" as well as 
intelligence on Ban's "management and decision-making style and his influence 
on the secretariat". A parallel intelligence directive sent to diplomats in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi saidbiometric data 
included DNA, fingerprints and iris scans. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/202678>

Washington also wanted credit card numbers, email addresses, phone, fax and 
pager numbers and even frequent-flyer account numbers for UN figures and 
"biographic and biometric information on UN Security Council permanent 
representatives".

The secret "national human intelligence collection directive" was sent to US 
missions at the UN in New York, Vienna and Rome; 33 embassies and consulates, 
including those in London, Paris and Moscow.

The operation targeted at the UN appears to have involved all of Washington's 
main intelligence agencies. The CIA's clandestine service, the US Secret 
Service and the FBI were included in the "reporting and collection needs" cable 
alongside the state department under the heading "collection requirements and 
tasking".

The leak of the directive is likely to spark questions about the legality of 
the operation and about whether state department diplomats are expected to spy. 
The level of technical and personal detail demanded about the UN top team's 
communication systems could be seen as laying the groundwork for surveillance 
or hacking operations. It requested "current technical specifications, physical 
layout and planned upgrades to telecommunications infrastructure and 
information systems, networks and technologies used by top officials and their 
support staff", as well as details on private networks used for official 
communication, "to include upgrades, security measures, passwords, personal 
encryption keys and virtual private network versions used".

The UN has previously asserted that bugging the secretary general is illegal, 
citing the 1946 UN convention on privileges and immunities which states: "The 
premises of the United Nations shall be inviolable. The property and assets of 
the United Nations, wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall be immune 
from search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation and any other form of 
interference, whether by executive, administrative, judicial or legislative 
action".

The 1961 Vienna convention on diplomatic relations, which covers the UN, also 
states that "the official correspondence of the mission shall be inviolable".

The emergence of the directive also risks undermining political trust between 
the UN leadership and the US, which is the former's biggest paying member, 
supplying almost a quarter of its budget – more than $3bn (£1.9bn) this year.

Washington wanted intelligence on the contentious issue of the "relationship 
or funding between UN personnel and/or missions and terrorist organisations" 
and links between the UN Relief and Works Agency in the Middle East, and Hamas 
and Hezbollah. It also wanted to know about plans by UN special rapporteurs to 
press for potentially embarrassing investigations into the US treatment of 
detainees in Iraq, Afghanistan and Guantánamo Bay, and "details of friction" 
between the agencies co-ordinating UN humanitarian operations, evidence of 
corruption inside UNAids, the joint UN programme on HIV, and in international 
health organisations, including theWorld Health Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/world-health-organisation> (WHO). It even 
called for "biographic and biometric" information on Dr Margaret Chan, the 
director general of WHO, as well as details of her personality, role, 
effectiveness, management style and influence.

The UN is not the only target. The cables reveal that since 2008 the state 
department has issued at least nine directives to embassies around the world 
which set forth "a list of priorities intended to guide participating US 
government agencies as they allocate resources and update plans to collect 
information".

They are packed with detailed orders and while embassy staff are particularly 
encouraged to assist in compiling biographic information, the directive on the 
mineral and oil-rich Great Lakes region of Africa alsorequested detailed 
military intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/202678>, 
including weapons markings and plans of army bases. A directive on "Palestinian 
issues" sent to Cairo, Tel Aviv, Jerusalem, Amman, Damascus and Riyadh demanded 
the exacttravel plans and vehicles used by leading members of Hamas and the 
Palestinian Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/176247>, without 
explaining why.

In one directive that would test the initiative, never mind moral and legal 
scruples, of any diplomat, Washington ordered staff in the DRC, Uganda, Rwanda 
andBurundi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi> to obtain biometric 
information of leading figures in business, politics, intelligence, military, 
religion and in key ethnic groups.

Fingerprints and photographs are collected as part of embassies' consular and 
visa operations, but it is harder to see how diplomats could justify obtaining 
DNA samples and iris scans. Again in centralAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, embassy officials were ordered to 
gather details about countries' military relations with China, Libya, North 
Korea, Iran and Russia. Washington assigned high priority to intelligence on 
the "transfer of strategic materials such as uranium", and "details of arms 
acquisitions and arms sales by government or insurgents, including 
negotiations, contracts, deliveries, terms of sale, quantity and quality of 
equipment, and price and payment terms".

The directives, signed simply "Clinton" or "Rice", referring to the current 
and former secretaries of state, Hillary Clinton and Condoleezza Rice, form a 
central plank of America's intelligence effort and reveal how Washington is 
using its 11,500-strong foreign service to glean highly sensitive information 
on both allies and enemies.

They are compliant with the National Intelligence Priorities Framework, which 
is approved by the president, and issued by James Clapper, the director of 
national intelligence who oversees the CIA, the Defence Intelligence Agency, 
FBI and 13 other intelligence agencies.

Washington circulated to its Middle Eastern embassies a request for what was 
effectively a counter-intelligence operation against Mukhabarat, the 
Palestinian Authority's secret service, and Istikhbarat, its military 
intelligence.

The directive asked for an assessment of the foreign agencies' "signals 
intercept capabilities and targets, decryption capabilities, intercept sites 
and collection hardware, and intercept operation successes" and information of 
their "efforts to illicitly collect classified, sensitive, commercial 
proprietary or protected technology information from US companies or government 
agencies".

Missions in Israel, Jordan, Syria, Saudi Arabia and Egypt were asked to gather 
biometric information "on key Palestinian Authority andHamas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamas> leaders and representatives, to 
include the young guard inside Gaza, the West Bank", as well as evidence of 
collusion between the PA security forces and terror groups.

Taken together, the directives provide a vivid snapshot of America's 
perception of foreign threats which are often dazzlingly interconnected. 
Paraguayan drug traffickers were suspected of supporting Hezbollah and 
al-Qaida, while Latin American cocaine barons were linked to criminal networks 
in the desert states of west Africa, who were in turn linked to Islamist 
terrorists in the Middle East and Asia.

High on the list of requests in an April 2009 directive covering the Saharan 
west African countries, includingBurkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/burkina-faso>, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, Niger 
and Senegal, was information about the activities of fighters returning from 
Iraq and Afghanistan. Information was wanted on "indications that international 
terrorist groups are seeking to take advantage of political, ethnic, tribal or 
religious conflict".

Diplomats were told to find out about the links between drug traffickers in 
the region to Latin American cocaine cartels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/219058>, as well 
as terrorist or insurgent groups' income derived from the drugs trade.

Sometimes the directives appear linked to forthcoming diplomatic obligations 
of the secretary of state. In a cable to the embassy in Sofia last June, five 
months before Clinton hosted Bulgaria's foreign minister in Washington, the 
first request was aboutgovernment corruption and the links between organised 
crime groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/212446> and 
"government and foreign entities, drug and human trafficking, credit card 
fraud, and computer-related crimes, including child pornography".

Washington also wanted to know about "corruption among senior officials, 
including off-budget financial flows in support of senior leaders … details 
about defence industry, including plans and efforts to co-operate with foreign 
nations and actors. Weapon system development programmes, firms and facilities. 
Types, production rates, and factory markings of major weapon systems".

Top tips for dealing with defectors and turncoats

One cable offered a detailed and practical guide for embassies on how to 
handle possible defectors, known as "walk-ins", who turned up at embassies 
offering to switch sides. It called for them to be treated with considerable 
care because they "may be sources of invaluable intelligence".

"Walk-ins may exhibit nervous or anxious behaviour, particularly because 
access controls and host nation security forces around many of our diplomatic 
posts make it difficult for walk-ins to approach our facilities discreetly," it 
warned. "All briefings should also stress the importance of not drawing 
attention to the walk-in or alerting host nation security personnel."

Embassy staff should immediately copy the person's identification papers or 
passport, in case they got cold feet and ran off, it said. A walk-in who 
possessed any object that appeared potentially dangerous should be denied 
access even if the item was presented "as evidence of some intelligence he 
offers, eg, red mercury [a possibly bogus chemical which has been claimed to be 
a component of nuclear weapons] presented as proof of plutonium enrichment". 
 