
In Independence Day (1996) it's the president who nails it 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nq-cegxBEpM>: "The Fourth of July will no 
longer be known as an American holiday, but as the day the world declared in 
one voice, 'We will not go quietly into the night.' Today, we celebrate our 
Independence Day!"

American values – like freedom, and man's inalienable right to feature-length 
Will Smith – were now global values. That's what President Bill Pullman was 
telling us – just when the US blockbuster was firmly consolidating its 
worldwide hold. Independence Day represented politics and entertainment in 
perfect alignment; a great example of how the presidency itself has been one of 
Hollywood's most effective propaganda tools for spreading the 
red-white-and-blue gospel.
 Channing Tatum, as John Cale, and Jamie Foxx, as President James Sawyer in 
White House Down. Photograph: Snap Stills / Rex Features 
The US presidency is surely the most portrayed political office in cinema 
history.IMDb shows up 260 films 
<http://www.imdb.com/search/title?keywords=u.s.-president&title_type=feature> 
featuring the big cheese; compared to 124 for the pope, and 38 for the English 
monarch. And we're soon getting two more movie chiefs of state, both under 
attack in Washington: Aaron Eckhart's President Asher inOlympus Has Fallen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154314/olympus-has-fallen>, the tedious 
side-parted proxy leader of a gazillion action movies; and Jamie Foxx's 
President Sawyer, in the upcoming White House Down. By this point, the Oval 
Office – the exact centre of the US blockbuster universe, the eye of its storm 
– feels almost as familiar as our own front room.

This casual usage in so many films must reinforce the drumbeat of US supremacy 
and benevolence in the real world. Olympus Has Fallen is totally in step with 
that time-honoured blockbuster trend: portraying the American president as the 
seat of ultimate power and the ultimate moral good. Eckhart spends so much time 
sacrificing himself to Rick Yune's cherry-lipped North Korean terrorist, you 
wonder if he's trying to escape a second term. He's the respectable face, which 
allows Gerard Butler's 1980s throwback to enact America's unilateral revenge 
fantasies, complete with air-punching payoff quips about "the United People's 
Front of who-gives-a-fuck". (Too cute – but we know Butler is from another era 
since, during a crucial computer decryption scene, he has to ask where the hash 
key is.)

It's a case of depicting the US president as the strongest, or the wisest. 
Those are difficult notions to sell – or buy into – post-9/11, Iraq and 
Guantánamo. I doubt a film such as 1997'sAir Force One 
<http://www.imdb.co.uk/title/tt0118571/> would be greenlit now, with Harrison 
Ford's father of the nation preposterously combining vulnerable Clintonian 
family guy and authentic American maverick who Uzis his way through a 
plane-full of Russian hijackers. He also vows, rather unfortunately with 
real-world hindsight: "Never again will I allow our political self-interest to 
deter us from doing what we know to be morally right."

Twenty-first-century presidential movies have an awkward balancing act on 
their hands – indulging the old-school paragon the US mainstream wants to see, 
and introducing greater notes of vulnerability and realpolitik that make such 
subject matter more resonant with all-important overseas audiences. Olympus Has 
Fallen looks to be too retrograde to appeal properly to the second group, if 
its US/overseas box-office split (currently 93%/7% – though it's still yet to 
open in several international territories) is any indication. But it's still 
culturally sensitive enough to avoid identifying any real-life faction as the 
villains: Yune's terrorist isn't affiliated to the North Korean government, but 
to a splinter group. Maybe the makers should have been more alert to the threat 
posed by dodgy Bulgarian CGI than the loss of Korean box office.

It's a stretch to say that the optimal international version of Olympus Has 
Fallen would be one in which Yune's Blofeldesque scheme succeeds. American 
culture, the presidential halo, not to mention old-fashioned moral narrative 
closure, still have widespread appeal. But in the same way as 1980s and 1990s 
films that got behind the president generated their drama from the idea that 
the institution might have a dark side, any contemporary portrayal of the 
president playing the global field has to draw on the frisson that his 
omnipotence is fading. Or that it could be permanently broken.

So expect to see the current end-of-American-empire movie cliche – mournful 
use of the stars and stripes, or the Star-Spangled Banner (see also: The Master;
The Dark Knight Rises <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7fZL9T8D7h4>) – in White 
House Down. This will, of course, be director Roland Emmerich'ssecond 
despoiling of the White House <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eujwxh_r43E>. 
Judging byits trailer <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ekireB_P-U0>, the film 
sets the presidential office in the latter-day, beleaguered landscape even more 
firmly than Olympus Has Fallen. There's plenty of back-to-9/11 shakycam; a 
tagline suggesting that the strength of the US body politic has, somehow, 
crumbled from within ("America will be never be destroyed from the outside") 
and dialogue ("Tell me how much time I have") ominously relaying that the end 
is nigh. It's a beautifully cut 2mins 17sec – hushed, portentous, 
zeitgeist-caressing. You know the world has moved on when you're praising 
Roland Emmerich for being subtle.

• Next week's After Hollywood will focus on a Thai ghost-story phenomenon. 
What global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the column? Let 
us know in the comments below.
 