
The US was the principal player in the most sophisticated cyber-attack ever 
known and has been orchestrating a campaign againstIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> designed to undermine the country's 
nuclear programme, it has been claimed.

According to anonymous senior administration sources, quoted in the New York 
Times, President Barack Obama decided to speed up an initiative launched by his 
predecessor, George W Bush, codenamed Olympic Games, which aimed to use 
computer viruses to attack Tehran's uranium-enrichment programme.

The disclosures about Obama's role in the cyberwar against Iran appear to show 
beyond doubt that the US, with the help of Israel, was behind theStuxnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/stuxnet> virus, which sent some of 
Iran's centrifuge machines – used to enrich uranium – spinning out of control. 
The revelation will raise questions about whether Washington was also behind 
the Flamer virus discovered by experts last week.

Flamer also targeted Iran, though its main aim was to spy on the country's oil 
industry. It is believed to have downloaded vast amounts of information over 
two years and had technical capabilities never seen before.

The revelations about US involvement in cyberwar may be seized upon by China 
and Russia, which are regularly accused by Washington of cyber espionage and 
theft.

The depiction of Obama's hands-on role in cyber attacks follows the highly 
political disclosure in an election year that the president had taken a 
personal role in approving terrorist targets for US drone strikes. The 
revelations on Iran appear designed to neutralise Republican accusations that 
he has been weak over the issue of Iran's nuclear programme.

According to the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/01/world/middleeast/obama-ordered-wave-of-cyberattacks-against-iran.html?ref=global-home>
, Obama took the decision to accelerate the pace of computer sabotage against 
Tehran in 2010, even after details about one of the cyber weapons developed to 
attack Iran, the Stuxnet worm, accidentally leaked on to the internet. It had 
been designed to target Iran's Natanz nuclear plant.

At a meeting in the White House situation room within days of the Stuxnet 
leak, Obama asked his advisers, including Leon Panetta, the head of the CIA, 
whether the effort should be wound up because it had been compromised.

According to sources in the room at the time, Obama asked: "Should we shut 
this thing down?", before opting instead to push ahead with the attacks. The 
Natanz plant was hit twice more by versions of the worm, which damaged up to 
1,000 high-speed centrifuges then enriching uranium.

The revelation of Obama's involvement in ordering cyber-attacks on Iran in a 
joint programme involving Israel follows the disclosure that Iran had recently 
been hit by the Flamer virus, thought to be 20 to 40 times larger than Stuxnet.

According to the latest analysis of Flamer, it had a bluetooth capability 
never seen before in a computer worm. The computer security firm Symantec said 
any laptop infected with Flamer would search for other bluetooth-enabled 
devices, sucking up information that might include mobile phone numbers. This 
would help the attacker "identify the victim's social and professional circles".

The Kaspersky Lab, a Russian-based computer security firm that has studied 
Stuxnet and Flame, said the first Stuxnet attack on Iran took place around June 
2009, but its existence did not emerge until almost a year later, appearing to 
fit precisely the timeline proposed by the New York Times' sources. Some 
experts have said there are sufficient similarities between the worms to 
suggest they have the same source.

Last year the US deputy defence secretary, William Lynn, declined to reveal 
whether the US was involved in the development of Stuxnet. "This is not 
something that we're going to be able to answer at this point," he said.

The timing of the disclosure to the New York Times's David E Sanger, who 
boasts of access to Obama and his closest officials, is particularly 
significant. In recent weeks, the Republican candidate, Mitt Romney, has tried 
to portray theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> as weak and muddled 
on foreign policy, most recently over the crisis in Syria. Recent sympathetic 
media disclosures appear to have been designed to counter this suggestion.

Stuxnet was launched in 2006 after President Bush was advised that a cyber 
weapon might be more effective than sabotage – the CIA had introduced faulty 
materials into Iran's nuclear procurement networks.

The goal then was to secretly access Natanz's industrial computer controls, 
which had been designed by the German company Siemens, to acquire a blueprint 
of how it worked.

That achieved, a joint US-Israeli operation set about building a worm to 
attack the plant and make its centrifuges run out of control. As was suggested 
at the time, Stuxnet appears to have been introduced into the Iranian plant 
with contaminated computer drives.

"That was our holy grail," one of the architects of the plan said, referring 
to how the plant was physically accessed. "It turns out there is always an 
idiot around who doesn't think much about the thumb drive in their hand."

US sources quoted blame Israel for the eventual discovery of the worm. They 
said the Israeli partners modified Stuxnet and made a programming error that 
caused it to escape and replicate in cyberspace.

The disclosures throw fresh light on the rapid development of US cyberwarfare 
capability and reveal its willingness to use cyber weapons offensively to 
achieve policies.
 