
Hours before his final game for the USA, Landon Donovan made no effort to hide 
his anger at the manager, Jürgen Klinsmann, for omitting him from the 2014World 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>, saying “I still 
know I should have been there”.

 The face of American soccer for more than a decade, Donovan had been counting 
on going to his fourth World Cup. And then after practice at Stanford Stadium 
on May 22, Klinsmann called in the 32-year-old forward and told him he wasn’t 
going to Brazil Donovan was stunned and livid.

 “Although I didn’t agree with the decision and I still know I should have 
been there, it was also good for me to say, you know what, it’s not always 
going to go your way,” he said. “And it took time for me to get to that place. 
I’m human. I had some very real emotions after. But after a while I said: 
‘maybe this is a going to be a good thing’. And I wouldn’t have the opportunity 
to grow had it not happened. I certainly grew a lot more by that happening than 
if I had gone to the World Cup and played there, and in that way you can learn 
a lot from it.

 “I had the opportunity to feel what other players have felt in my career. A 
lot of times when I made a team I was so happy for me that I forgot about the 
guy who got cut, so for the first time it kind of put that in front of my face.”

 “Three, four months ago, if someone asked if this day would happen, I would 
have said you’re out of your mind and you’re crazy,” Donovan said. “I give all 
the credit to Sunil [Gulait, president of the United States Soccer Federation] 
for sticking with me through some hard conversations and understanding what was 
important and making it happen.

“I believe this is a day I deserve. I believe this is a day my family deserves 
for all the sacrifices they’ve made.”

 “ People forget, for those of us who weren’t selected this summer to play in 
Brazil, it’s not only difficult for us, it’s difficult for our families,” he 
said. “In many instances, our families had this amazing vacation trip of a 
lifetime planned, and that was taken from them.”

 Asked about his relationship with Klinsmann, all Donovan would say is: “You 
know.” It took him awhile to accept Gulati’s offer of a testimonial match. “The 
thought of being in this environment again didn’t seem all that appealing at 
the time,” Donovan said. “But at the end of the day I looked at the big picture 
and realized what a special day this could be. It’s almost like, if you care to 
believe this stuff, in many ways it’s meant to be. I think it’s no coincidence 
it’s 10-10 today.”
 