
Rich Ricci, the former banker who owns several of the most high-profile horses 
competing at Cheltenham this week, was apologetic but also unrepentant here on 
Tuesday following his unexpected decision to switch Vautour, the 9-2 
second-favourite for Friday’s Gold Cup, to run in the Ryanair Chase the 
previous afternoon.

Ricci, who is also the chairman of the online bookmaker BetBright, told a 
Cheltenham preview evening in early March that Vautour would either run in the 
Gold Cup “or stay at home.” He then underlined the point by explaining that 
Vautour would join Djakadam, another Ricci-owned horse, in Friday’s big race 
because his over-riding ambition was “to win a Gold Cup”.

The ante-post markets took Ricci at his word, with Vautour attracting money 
for the Gold Cup while betting on the Ryanair, in which Vautour will now start 
as a short-priced favourite, continued as though he was not in the market. As a 
result of Ricci’s U-turn, any punter who had a bet in the Ryanair over the last 
few weeks will now see their runner go off at a much bigger price and with far 
less chance of success.

BetBright later announced that it would settle all bets placed on Vautour for 
the Gold Cup as winners, though Ricci was unable to confirm how much would be 
paid out as a result.

“I don’t know how much or how little we paid out, I just said look, it’s the 
right thing to do, so let’s do it,” Ricci said.

“He hadn’t been working the house down. Last year before he came here, he was 
doing cartwheels and we haven’t seen that same type of performance from him in 
his work. He’s not working badly, he’s just not working to that standard.

“The plan all along has been to run in the Gold Cup, and even as late as 
Sunday it was to run in the Gold Cup. Yesterday we [Ricci andWillie Mullins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins>, Vautour’s trainer] started 
talking about it and Willie said he’s just not the horse he was last year 
coming into the Festival. If we run a 90% Vautour in that race [the Gold Cup] 
we’re going to do the horse some damage. The best chance he has of winning this 
week is in the Ryanair.

“I said that if he didn’t run in the Gold Cup, he wouldn’t run at all. I meant 
that at the time - but clearly that’s not the case and I apologise to punters 
if I got that wrong.”

Cheltenham Festival 2016: Willie Mullins’ guide to his team of runners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/29/cheltenham-festival-2016-willie-mullins-guide-to-his-team-of-runners>
While offering an apology, however, Ricci also said that he had no regrets 
about his clear statements that Vautour was being aimed at the Gold Cup.

“I don’t intend on changing my openness or candour,” Ricci said. “I try to be 
as honest and open as I can and sometimes you’re going to get it wrong. I meant 
what I said at the time, unfortunately it hasn’t worked out that way.”

All bookmakers will have made money from Gold Cup bets on Vautour as a result 
of Ricci’s decision, but will also be concerned about an incident that could 
diminish punters’ faith in ante-post betting.

“There were lots of bets for him after his run in the King George [at 
Christmas],” Jon Ivan-Duke, of William Hill, said. “All the way along, it’s 
been Gold Cup, Gold Cup, Gold Cup and now it’s the Ryanair. If you were a 
punter, you would feel that you’ve been duped by Rich Ricci.”

The news of Vautour’s switch generated a wave of anger and criticism on social 
media, but again, Ricci was unmoved.

“The hostility?” Ricci said. “Look, it’s not the first time I’ve been creamed 
on Twitter or in the media or anywhere else, and it won’t be the last, I’m 
sure. I’m as disappointed as anyone else, but we have to do the best for the 
horse, and that’s what we’ve done.
 