
Venezuela’s government has freed a former presidential candidate as well as 
several student activists who were jailed during anti-government protests in 
2014.

Former opposition candidate Manuel Rosales was imprisoned in October 2015 on 
charges of illicit enrichment, upon returning toVenezuela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/venezuela> after six years of exile in Peru.

A former governor of Zulia state who ran for president in 2006, he was 
released before dawn on Saturday with five other activists who opposition 
groups considered to be political prisoners.

Can Latin America avoid the global vortex in 2017?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/31/can-latin-america-avoid-the-global-vortex-in-2017>
The releases came as a two-month-old, Vatican-mediated attempt at dialogue to 
ease tensions stemming from the country’s deepeconomic and political crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/chaos-in-venezuela-as-nicolas-maduro-flip-flops-on-currency-withdrawal>
 hung by a thread, over the failure by President Nicolás Maduro to cede ground 
to opponents seeking his removal.

With many in the opposition pushing for a new round of street protests, the 
Democratic Unity alliance said it would not participate in the next scheduled 
meeting on 13 January unless the government meets its demands.

Those include releasing more than 100 people it considers to be political 
prisoners and naming a new board to the government-controlled electoral council.

The most prominent activist released Saturday was Gerardo Carrero, who led a 
group of hardliner students who camped for weeks outside the United Nations 
offices in Caracas, seeking to draw attention to a government crackdown on 
protests blamed for scores of deaths.

“Without a doubt, Venezuela is living a deep social crisis and these releases 
in some way are an escape valve that takes some pressure, especially 
international, off Maduro,” said Alfredo Romero, executive director of Foro 
Penal, a group of lawyers that defends dozens of jailed activists.

“But it’s important to remember that in 2016 there were 55 people jailed and 
only 43 released.”

Venezuela’s political crisis has been intensifying since October, when 
authorities blocked an opposition effort to collect signatures and force a 
recall vote against Maduro.

Many poor Venezuelans, who formed the base of the revolution started by the 
late Hugo Chávez, have abandoned their support for the government amid 
triple-digit inflation and shortages that have made putting food on the dinner 
table an all-consuming, daily ordeal.

Rosales, whose small Nuevo Tiempo party has been among the strongest advocates 
of dialogue, confirmed his release on Twitter. He remained under house arrest.

The five others released face charges stemming from their activities in 2014, 
for which they will have to periodically present themselves to judicial 
authorities.

All six prisoners had been held in Caracas’ El Helicoide prison, a 
spiral-shaped modernist landmark built as a shopping mall in the 1950s, at the 
height of an oil-dependent economic boom, but which in a fitting metaphor of 
the country’s decline is now the headquarters of the intelligence police.

It was unclear if there would be more releases in the coming days, but Romero 
said at least one more activist was linked to the same case for which Carrero 
was charged.
 