
Maverick directors Abel Ferrara, Roy Andersson and Fatih Akin lead the charge 
at this year'sVenice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival>, as a volatile lineup 
spotlights tales of crime and punishment, war, recession, and the existential 
crisis of a pigeon. Venice may lack the glamour of Cannes, or the gloss of the 
Toronto event that follows hard on its heels. But its wild menagerie should be 
enough to ensure a colourful, controversial edition of the world's oldest film 
festival.

Fresh from shocking the Cannes critics with Welcome to New York, Ferrara comes 
to the Lido with Pasolini, starring Willem Dafoe as the doomed Italian 
film-maker Pier Paolo Pasolini. Akin's The Cut casts Tahar Rahim as a mute 
father in search of his daughters, while Andersson's A Pigeon Sat on a Branch 
Reflecting the Nature of Existence promises a fresh flight of fancy from the 
iconoclastic Swedish director.
 Getting on a boat. Al Pacino in Mangelhorn, which will appear at Venice. 
Photograph: TIFF 
Five American films have been selected for competition, including Ramin 
Bahrani's recession drama 99 Homes and Andrew Niccol's Good Kill, which stars
Ethan Hawke <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ethan-hawke> as a drone operator 
in Afghanistan. Al Pacino plays an ex-con turned locksmith in David Gordon 
Green's Manglehorn. It will be Green's second visit to the Lido in as many 
years, having brought his Nicolas Cage drama Joe to the 2013 competition.

Other potential highlights include The Look of Silence, Joshua Oppenheimer's 
follow-up to his acclaimed 2012 documentary The Act of Killing, and Francesco 
Munzi's mafia saga Anime Nere. David Oelhoffen Loin des Hommes, meanwhile, 
focuses on the Franco-Algerian war and stars Viggo Mortensen as a teacher who 
befriends a dissident.
 The Act of Killing director Joshua Oppenheimer, who will bring his new film, 
The Look of Silence, to the festival. Photograph: Oliver Clasper 
 Away from the main competition, James Franco continues his journey through 
the landmarks of American literature, adapting William Faulkner's classic 1929 
novel The Sound and the Fury for the screen. Elsewhere, the organisers will 
screen the unabridged director's cut of Lars von Trier's Nymphomaniac. New 
films from the likes of Peter Bogdanovich, Ulrich Seidl, Joe Dante and Barry 
Levinson are also screening out of competition.

British hopes are relegated to the neighbouring Horizons sidebar and 
spearheaded by Duane Hopkins's social-realist thriller Bypass. Mohsen 
Makhmalbaf's The President and Naji Abu Nowar's Theeb are both listed as UK 
co-productions.

The 71st Venice film festival opens on August 27 with the premiere of 
Alejandro Inarritu's Birdman or the Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/10/birdman-venice-film-festival-opening-night>
. It closes September 6 with Ann Hui's The Golden Era, a tale of Japanese 
imperialism in China.
 