
Victoria Pendleton approaches a critical time in her plan to ride at the 
Cheltenham Festival <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival> when 
she visits the stable of top trainer Paul Nicholls in Somerset on Monday to 
discuss partnering the Nicholls-trained Pacha Du Polder at Wincanton on 
Wednesday – in what could be a rehearsal for the Festival’s Foxhunter Chase.

On Sunday the former dual-Olympic track cycling champion gained valuable 
experience when competing in a rough, incident-full novice-riders’ race at 
Larkhill point to point in Wiltshire. Pendleton finished sixth of the 15 
runners on a 25-1 outsider, According To Sarah. The mare raced prominently, 
jumping well until dropping behind higher-rated rivals.

Alan Hill, the mare’s trainer, said the jockey only just missed out on fourth 
place. “It was a rough race,” Hill said. “There were horses crossing in front 
of her, and lots of shouting, but Victoria kept the mare out of trouble.

“She had some strong criticism in her direction the previous weekend but this 
weekend she’s responded with great determination – showing strong will but 
riding in a well-thought-out way. It was great experience. She has definitely 
answered those critics. She’s reacting by being even more determined to do 
things right.”

The aspiring jockey endured a serious blow to her hopes nine days ago at 
Fakenham when she was unseated at the seventh fence from Pacha Du Polder, a hot 
favourite that day. Video footage later showed that Pendleton was dislodged 
from the saddle only after a collision with another horse falling at the same 
obstacle.

Pendleton has an amateur rider’s licence from the British Horseracing 
Authority which qualifies her to ride at Cheltenham. Her preparations are being 
guided by four highly experienced racing people – Hill and his wife Lawney, 
Nicholls and the eventing expert Yogi Breisner.

Pacha Du Polder is an intended runner on Wincanton’s Wednesday card and 
Pendleton has been booked to ride. Tactics will be discussed at Nicholls’s 
stables on Monday but the final decision on whether the same pair will race – 
or not – at Cheltenham on Gold Cup day is expected this coming Thursday or 
Friday.

There were betting market moves on Sunday in Cheltenham’s handicap hurdle 
races – mainly concerning Great Field, who made a most impressive Irish debut 
in the Foxrock Cup Hurdle at Leopardstown.

A multiple winner in France, the five‑year-old was having his first start for 
Willie Mullins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins> and the 
leading owner JP McManus. The 5-2 favourite, ridden by Barry Geraghty, 
quickened up on the run‑in to score by four and a half lengths.

Great Field is entered in the Coral Cup, the County Hurdle and the Martin Pipe 
Conditional Jockeys’ Hurdle at the Festival. Bookmakers cut his odds to as low 
as 10-1 for all three contests, just in case.

“He looked like a nice recruit to us. We couldn’t get him out earlier as he 
had a setback or two,” Mullins said. “He’s entered in the handicaps and we’ll 
see what he gets into. He was very keen and that wouldn’t be good going to 
Cheltenham, but they will be going a bit faster over there.”

The going at Cheltenham has dried out following an absence of any substantial 
rain. Track officials have described the going as good to soft, good in places 
on both the New Course and the Old Course, as well as on the cross-country 
course.

Davy Russell emerged on Sunday as a potential partner for Don Cossack in the 
Cheltenham Gold Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham-gold-cup> 
following post-racing gallops at Leopardstown.

Don Cossack’s owners, Gigginstown House Stud, have plenty of big guns for the 
Gold Cup, meaning retained rider Bryan Cooper will have a decision to make for 
the 18 March showpiece. Cooper rode the Gigginstown-owned Don Poli as he 
schooled with Willie Mullins-trained stablemates Vautour [Ruby Walsh], Pont 
Alexandre and Ballycasey.

Cooper was later on RSA Chase contender No More Heroes for Gordon Elliott as 
he jumped in company with King George faller Don Cossack, ridden by Russell. 
Elliott said: “The two of them were very good, I couldn’t be happier. Davy said 
he [Don Cossack] could have gone round again, I thought the two of them worked 
very well.

“Davy sat on him there, Bryan has to make a decision on which one he is going 
to ride. I would have no problem with Davy riding him.”

Russell, who won the Gold Cup on Lord Windermere in 2014, said: “He went well 
and he jumped great.” Asked if he would like to ride him in the Gold Cup, he 
said: “I’d be delighted to ride any Gold Cup horse.”

Mullins said of his quartet: “Vautour made a mistake at the first, I think he 
was just idling, but they all went well.

“They jumped eight fences and went about a mile and a quarter. It was just to 
get their eye in and have a day out rather than serious work, it wasn’t a trial 
or anything. It was also for the riders to get a feel of them.

“Don Poli is a very lazy horse and takes every bit of work we can give him. 
Him and Pont Alexandre were upsides in behind and Ballycasey led Vautour. As 
they said in the election, there’s lots done, more to do.”
 