
As an Olympic athlete, finishing outside the medals in the velodrome would 
have sentVictoria Pendleton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoriapendleton> into paroxysms of despair.


But just 12 months after first sitting on a horse she was giddy with delight 
after confounding a battalion of naysayersto finish fifth in the Foxhunter Chase
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/victoria-pendleton-fifth-foxhunter-chase-cheltenham-festival>
 at Cheltenham on Gold Cup day. She described it as one of the greatest 
achievements of her life, in a sport she had “fallen in love” with.

“It was a dream, it was audacious, it was ridiculous,” said the 35-year-old. 
“And you know what? I got round on the horse. I feel awesome about it.”

Victoria Pendleton fifth in Foxhunter Chase at Cheltenham Festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/victoria-pendleton-fifth-foxhunter-chase-cheltenham-festival>
The racing industry also breathed a huge sigh of relief at Pendleton’s safe 
passage aboard Pacha Du Polder, navigating the same fences over which Don 
Cossack had 40 minutes earliersoared to win the Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/bryan-cooper-cheltenham-gold-cup-favourite-don-cossack>
.

If either Pendleton or her horse had been seriously injured it would have been 
a grim finale to an unprecedented experiment. The circus surrounding her 
arrival to walk the course, in which a scrum of photographers literally fell 
over themselves to get a shot, increased the sense of jeopardy.

Instead, Pendleton rose to the occasion and she was quick to praise her horse. 
“A better, more experienced jockey would have won that race today. If I hadn’t 
had a ride that was that smart, that canny and that experienced I wouldn’t have 
got into fifth position,” she said.

Nor were fears that her exploits would overshadow the main event borne out. 
The National Hunt racing cognoscenti, gathering for the annual highlight in 
their tweed finery, had been split on the merits of the scheme, which had been 
conceived and paid for by the online bookmaker Betfair.

The course’s owner, the Jockey Club, and the British Horseracing Authority 
proclaimed Pendleton’s challenge as an opportunity to widen the sport’s appeal 
beyond those who would normally join the pilgrimage to the Cotswolds or tune in 
on television.

“I’m delighted she’s taken the plunge into our sport and the thing I’m 
delighted about is that she has fallen in love with it,” said BHA chief 
executive Nick Rust in the weighing room before the race.

Cheltenham Festival 2016 - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/mar/18/cheltenham-festival-2016-in-pictures-tom-jenkins>
Former jockey John Francome had been a prominent voice of caution, also 
perhaps speaking for others less vocal amid the chorus of official approval for 
Pendleton’s challenge.

Francombe said that based on her previous rides “if ever there was somebody 
waiting for a fall” then it was the double Olympic champion, who retired after 
winning gold and silver medals at London 2012.

Pendleton had been unseated in an earlier race at Fakenham, which had 
increased fears her inexperience would be telling.

“Nobody knew whether this was possible, myself included,” said a relieved, 
emotional Pendleton afterwards. “I could have fallen off and you would have 
been asking me a very different question.”

She paid tribute to trainer Paul Nicholls, who together with Alan and Lawney 
Hill and coach Yogi Breisner had prepared her for the challenge over 12 months.

A competitor to the last, Pendleton said she was kicking herself for not 
coming fourth after getting her whip trapped down the final straight.

“A novice mistake,” she said, but fifth on a horse that began the race at odds 
of 28-1 was no small achievement.

Nina Carberry, who won riding On the Fringe, said: “I’m delighted she got 
round – it’s an unbelievable achievement. May she go onwards from here.”

Pendleton’s loquacious eulogies to the sport had appeared to win over the 
record crowd on Gold Cup day but the cheer that greeted her return was 
certainly no louder than that for others. “The reception was almost like I had 
won coming back down. I didn’t expect to get that cheer on the way back,” said 
Pendleton, who was paid a reported £200,000 by Betfair for her trouble.

“That was quite humbling and an experience I’ll never forget. It ranks right 
up there with being in the Olympic Velodrome in 2012. It was special. Really 
special.”

After a week in which the usual drama, froth and colour of Cheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham> in front of more than 260,649 
spectators had coexisted with the deadening reality of seven equine fatalities 
on the course, the industry was celebrating a happy ending. But the real 
winners were Betfair, who took the term native advertising to a new level by 
choosing wisely in the tenacious, complex former cyclist.

“At the start a lot of people thought it was just a PR stunt and it was never 
just that. For us, identifying someone like Victoria Pendleton – with her 
integrity and her ability – it was never going to be a stunt,” said a spokesman.

There was ambitious talk afterwards of entering Pendleton at Aintree for the 
Grand National meeting in a few weeks’ time, which she quickly quashed. Instead 
said she would go back to getting changed in the mud on a plastic bag at 
point-to-point races. A week on Sunday she’ll be back riding at Kimble, without 
the crowds, cameras and expectation.
 