
The first inductees into a new video game hall of fame include Pong, the game 
that introduced millions to electronic play, Doom, which triggered a debate 
over the role of games and violence in society, andSuper Mario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/super-mario> Bros., whose mustachioed 
hero has migrated to everything from fruit snacks to sneakers.

The first six games to enter the World Video Game Hall of Fame cross decades 
and platforms, but all have impacted the video game industry, popular culture 
and society in general, according to the new hall at The Strong museum in 
Rochester, New York, where the games were enshrined on Thursday.

Joining Pong, launched in 1972, Doom, from 1993, and 1985’s Super Mario Bros. 
are arcade draw Pac-Man (1980), Russian import Tetris (1984), andWorld of 
Warcraft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/world-of-warcraft> (2004), 
which has swallowed millions of players into its online virtual universe.

The newly created hall of fame pays homage to an industry that rivals 
Hollywood in the entertainment pecking order. The Strong, which bills itself as 
the national museum of play and also houses the National Toy Hall of Fame, has 
been preserving and collecting games and artifacts for years through its 
International Center for the History of ElectronicGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>.

The inaugural hall of fame class was recommended by a panel of judges made up 
of journalists, scholars and other experts on the history and impact of video 
games. They chose from among 15 finalists that also included Angry Birds, Fifa, 
The Legend of Zelda, Minecraft, The Oregon Trail, Pokemon, The Sims, Sonic the 
Hedgehog and Space Invaders.

Nominations for the hall can come from anyone and be from any platform — 
arcade, console, computer, handheld, mobile. But they must have had a long 
stretch of popularity and left a mark on the video game industry or pop culture.

Doom, for example, introduced the idea of a game “engine” that separated the 
game’s basic functions from its artwork and other aspects, but even more 
significantly was one of the early games cited in the debate that continues 
today over whether violent games inspire real-life aggression.

World of Warcraft is the largest MMORPG — “massively multiplayer online 
role-playing game” — ever created and as of February, had more than 10m 
subscribers, represented by avatars they create, according to The Strong.

More than 150m Americans play video games, according to the Entertainment 
Software Association, and 42 per cent play for at least three hours a week. In 
2014, the industry sold more than 135m games and generated more than $22bn in 
revenue, according to the ESA.

Nominations for the hall of fame’s class of 2016 are open from now through the 
end of March.
 