
Spoiler alert: this article contains spoilers about both the first season of 
Better Call Saul <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/better-call-saul> 
and later seasons of Breaking Bad.

A spin-off is a dangerous thing (just ask Joey Tribbiani). But it’s even more 
risky doing a prequel to one of the greatest, best loved TV-drama series ever 
made. That’s what Vince Gilligan and co-writer Peter Gould did, taking Breaking 
Bad’s Saul Goodman back to his previous life as Jimmy McGill. It paid off.
Better Call Saul <http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/tv-and-radio/better-call-saul> 
doesn’t tarnish the legacy of its distinguished parent; in fact, it has become 
something in its own right – less epic perhaps, but hilarious, sad and very 
human. As season two launches on Netflix in the UK, the show’s creators open up 
about their new baby:


You described Walter White’s journey in Breaking Bad 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> as Mr Chips to 
Scarface. Do you have something similar for Better Call Saul?

Vince Gilligan: I wish I had a pithy answer. We set out to do a very different 
show. Breaking Bad was a story about transformation; Better Call Saul has 
similar bones, because it’s Jimmy McGill transforming into Saul Goodman. The 
difference is that, for many viewers ofBreaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>, the more Walter White 
turned into Heisenberg, the more interesting he became and the more fun they 
had enjoying his criminal misbehaviour. I think it was a shame that Walter 
White turned into Heisenberg and destroyed everybody he loved, but there was a 
visceral thrill to that. It’s something of a tragedy that Jimmy is going to 
turn into the person he’s going to become. I’m not looking forward to him being 
the bad guy.

Better Call Saul: second season is criminally good
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/15/better-call-saul-second-season-review>
Is Jimmy McGill a more interesting character than Saul Goodman?

Peter Gould: Jimmy certainly has more depth than Saul – it’s like he had his 
soul ironed out of him.

He was your character, right Peter? Where did you find him?

PG: It was my episode where he first barged into Breaking Bad, yes – but it is 
a group effort, and I’m not being falsely modest. I don’t mean to sound 
mechanical, but we needed a lawyer who was willing to work with underworld 
people knowingly, get Badger out of prison, help sell meth. And of course he 
grew from there. Bob Odenkirk was, frankly, originally brought in to play a 
comic role, but he added depth to the character in each successive year, which 
sparked us to investigate him further.

So you brought in Odenkirk just for laughs?

VG: I think that’s accurate. Laughs and structure. We felt the need to leaven 
things with more humour. Things got pretty dark in season two of Breaking Bad. 
The storytelling that grew organically out of that logistical need is fun, and 
ironic to me.

Is there a danger you’re getting to Saul too quickly? He doesn’t seem a 
million miles away ...

VG: He’s not. My fear was that people would be looking at their watches saying 
the title of the show is Better Call Saul and I don’t see Saul Goodman – I see 
a guy named Jimmy who doesn’t drive that flashy Cadillac, doesn’t have that 
ridiculous office with the constitution on the wall. This guy’s not who we 
signed on for; this is false advertising. I was worried we weren’t going to get 
to Saul fast enough. Now I’m worried we’ll get to him too fast because I 
realise just how great Jimmy is as a character. He really carries his own show.

It doesn’t have to stop at Breaking Bad-era Saul Goodman though – it could go 
beyond that.

VG: Yes and we have seen black-and-white glimpses of the future [an older 
Jimmy, working in a Cinnabon bakery in a mall]. Realising we don’t have to stop 
there was a wonderful revelation. So the question is how long does it take till 
Saul Goodman, and once you get there how much does the audience need to see 
because they’ve seen him on a whole other show. How far can we continue?

What’s the answer?

VG: We’re still figuring it. There is an inbuilt pitfall because in the future 
– which is to say the Breaking Bad present, the Better Call Saul future – 
there’s a big important character who cannot be around. We know Mike dies in 
Breaking Bad, so then the question is how long do we want to have the show 
without that all-important character?

Better Call Saul’s Bob Odenkirk: ‘Trump is hilarious. Until he wins'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/08/better-call-sauls-bob-odenkirk-trumps-ego-is-so-destructive-its-hilarious-until-he-gets-elected>
Are all your best characters men?

VG: I can’t help but come at it from a male point of view. A rap I have heard 
at Breaking Bad was that the female characters suffered, and I was always sad 
to hear that. I’m not arguing it, there’s probably truth to it, but that never 
came out of intention. I always liked Skyler and Marie, but other people didn’t 
like Skyler much and maybe that came through the writing. But we love our 
character Kim; we have a chance here to have a female character who is beloved 
across the board.

PG: That’s one of the things we’re proudest of in season two. We go much more 
deeply into Kim and find out that she’s as much of a striver and a struggler as 
Jimmy. She’s certainly not there to serve as Jimmy’s conscience; she has her 
own life and values and she’s had to climb up the hard way, just as Jimmy has.

It looks fun to write. Is it?

VG: It’s not fun, it’s satisfying – which is a deeper emotion. The older I 
get, the more I realise I don’t want to have fun. I want to be satisfied. Fun 
is transient; it doesn’t leave you with any profound feeling of accomplishment.

It was a big risk doing a Breaking Bad spinoff . Why did you do it?

VG: It could have been a huge flop. But I had this feeling that if I didn’t 
get back on the horse after Breaking Bad – if I took a year off to travel the 
world (which I felt I’d earned) – I’d be afraid to do anything else because I’d 
be afraid of failure. Jumping right back into this, I said to myself – like a 
mantra over and over again – “This will probably fail, this will probably fail” 
… But it didn’t, thank God. Maybe the comeuppance will come this season but I 
kind of knew in my heart the biggest risk was to do nothing and risk never 
working again.

Episode one of Better Call Saul, season two, is available on Netflix now.
 