
Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> has defended 
Russia's anti-gay laws in his annual address to both chambers of the Russian 
parliament.

In an apparent reference to the laws banning "propaganda of non-traditional 
relations", the Russian president said that on the international arenaRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> sees itself as a defender of 
conservative values against what it considers an assault of "genderless and 
fruitless so-called tolerance" which he said "equals good and evil".

He said Russia will oppose attempts to impose foreign political ideology on 
sovereign countries. Such attempts, Putin stressed, often lead to destruction 
and bloodshed, citing events in the Middle East and North Africa as an example.

In a typically wide-ranging speech, Putin portrayed Russia as a force for 
peace and morality that had no desire to be a global superpower.

Putin said he was counting on Ukraine to find a political solution to its 
crisis over President Viktor Yanukovych's decision to spurn a free-trade 
agreement with the European Union in favour of closer economic ties with Moscow.

"I very much hope that all political forces will manage to reach an agreement 
and resolve all problems in the interests of the Ukrainian people," he told the 
Russian parliament.

Speaking about Syria, he pointed out that Russia made a major contribution to 
the prevention of foreign intervention, setting this country 'on the path for 
dialogue' and putting its chemical arsenal under international control.

He also praised the progress in Iran, pointing out that it has the right to 
develop peaceful nuclear technology without putting international stability, 
and in particular Israel's security, at risk. Nodding towards the US and Nato, 
he remarked that although the perceived Iranian threat has diminished, plans to 
develop missile defences inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, which Russia sees as a threat 
to its nuclear shield, continue to be implemented. He warned the west against 
developing non-nuclear strategic military technology which could upset the 
global balance and lead to a new arms race. He said Russia was closely watching 
these developments and ready to respond by developing similar technology.

He said that a customs union treaty will be ready for Russia, Belarus and 
Kazakhstan to sign by 1 May, with accession roadmaps being drawn up for 
Kyrgyzstan and Armenia.

On the domestic front, Putin announced a major improvement in the country's 
demographic situation. He said natural population growth in Russia has been 
registered for the first time since 1991. But admitted that this trend could be 
reversed as those born in the 1990s come of age.

Responding to broad public concern, he touched the sensitive issue of 
interethnic relations, blaming "footloose people from southern republics" , 
"ethnic mafia", corrupt police and Russian nationalists for increased tensions.

Most of the speech focused on the economy. Putin conceded that although Russia 
feels the impact of the global economic crisis, its main problems are internal. 
He stressed the need to increase productivity, where Russia badly lags, Putin 
said.

He pointed out the fact that many Russian companies remain registered in 
offshore zones, citing the recent sale of TNK-BP outside Russian jurisdiction 
as an example. He suggested that legislation should be adopted which forces 
such companies to pay taxes in Russia, even if they wish to remain registered 
abroad. He also stressed the need to increase transparency of regulation bodies 
and reduce their pressure on businesses.
 