
Two days before the US election, state TV channel Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> 24 launched a countdown timer of the 
hours and minutes left until polls opened – a level of hype and anticipation 
far exceeding that witnessed during Russia’s own recent parliamentary elections.

But for all the professions of mutual admiration between Vladimir Putin and 
Donald Trump, the mood in the country post-vote should be described as 
confusion not euphoria. The response from some officials was joyous – members 
of the state duma gave a round of applause; Viktor Nazarov, the governor of the 
Omsk region, announced that Putin’s party, United Russia, had triumphed in 
America; and Margarita Simonyan, editor-in-chief of Russia Today TV, tweeted 
that she wanted to drive around Moscow with anAmerican flag 
<https://twitter.com/M_Simonyan/status/796281481874329600> flying from the 
window.

But officials higher up the chain treated the news with caution. The prime 
minister, Dmitry Medvedev, said Russia had more important problems to worry 
about than Trump’s victory. The foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, urged people 
to wait for Trump’s actions and not focus on his rhetoric. And Putin’s 
spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said it was too early to say whether the victory 
would improve Russian-American relations, which have plummeted to apost-cold 
war low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/19/new-cold-war-back-to-bad-old-days-russia-west-putin-ukraine>
.

It is unlikely that any Russian politician will admit to it, but Russia was 
much better equipped to deal with a Hillary Clinton victory that would have 
preserved the continuity of America’s foreign policy and the oppositional 
rhetoric that Russian politics has thrived on for years.

And despite public expressions of support for Trump, the Russian propaganda 
machine did not expect him to win. When polls opened in the US on Tuesday, 
Simonyan tweeted: “Democracy R.I.P.” The accusation that the US system cannot 
be trusted has been popular since 2012, the yearPutin became president for the 
third time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/05/russian-election-skewed-putin-favour>
.

According to Russian propaganda, the US has plunged Iraq, Libya and Syria into 
chaos and wants Russia to suffer the same fate. Under this narrative, Putin is 
the only person capable of holding the US back and saving Russia from 
catastrophe.

The US is also blamed for orchestrating the Euromaidan revolution in Ukraine, 
for stage-managing Russian opposition elements from the United States and for 
encouraging Europe to impose sanctions asa direct response to the Ukraine crisis
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/21/eu-to-extend-sanctions-against-russia>
.

For the past five years, the easy notion of the American enemy has permeated 
the everyday lives of Russian people. A few years ago car stickers saying 
“Obama is a wanker” became fashionable and Russian establishments, from cafes 
to hairdressers’ salons, that carried the sign “we do not serve Obama here” 
were often promoted on state TV.

A win for Clinton would have preserved these sentiments but Trump’s victory 
destroys them. Russian parliamentarians were applauding Trump, not realising 
that he actually undermines their political system, which will have to evaluate 
how it goes forward now that America is no longer the enemy.

There is another problem. Putin has always enjoyed being a part of the global 
neoconservative trend that was born from dissatisfaction with the world order 
that emerged in the beginning of the 21st century. Putin’s Russia loves to 
lambast the west for excessive interest in the rights of minorities, for 
refugee policy and other liberal issues. Now that the west is turning on itself 
in these matters, with victories for Brexit and Trump, the Kremlin doesn’t 
quite know where to turn.

The Kremlin needed Trump, but as a loser, not a winner. They wanted to be able 
to continue to oppose the international mainstream, not be a part of it. Now 
Putin’s main foreign policy objective must be to fall out with Trump, because 
without that, the Kremlin will have no one to blame for Russia’s problems but 
Russia.
 