
An opening slide on Wall Street has failed to curb enthusiasm in London, 
despite increasing jitters in Asia that the Chinese stock market is heading 
into bubble territory.

US economic data showing that orders for durable goods, excluding cars and 
planes, rose 1.1% in June, a better performance that the number-crunchers had 
been expecting, helped Wall Street reverse an opening slide.

An hour after the opening the Dow Jones is down about 25.24 points at 9071.40 
with the FTSE 100 index up 38.08 points at 4566.92 points.

Both indices seem to have shrugged aside increasing worries in Asia that a 
stockmarket bubble is forming in China, as evidenced by the spectacular arrival 
of China State Construction Engineering Corp on the Shanghai exchange overnight.

Shares in China's largest IPO since Petro China in 2007 rose more than 50% on 
their debut. It is the country's biggest housebuilder and has benefitted from 
the government's policy of encouraging a boom in infrastructure investment by 
leaning on the country's banks to increase lending.

Economists are worried about where this money is going - some of it seems to 
be finding its way into speculative investments - and its ultimately 
destabilising effect on the Chinese economy and hence the rest of the world. As 
a result of the jitters, indices across Asia closed lower overnight.

Back in London, shares in Rexam <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rexam> 
were the biggest fallers in the FTSE 100 in the afternoon session, down 20.5p 
at 255.75p, after the world's largest maker of soft drink cans announced a 
heavily discounted 4 for 11 rights issue to raise roughly £350m.

Announcing a 20% drop in first half profits and plans to axe its interim 
dividend, Rexam explained:

The Rights Issue will enable the Group to put in place a more conservative and 
resilient long term capital structure and significantly enhances the prospect 
of maintaining the Group's current investment grade credit rating. The issue 
will also put Rexam in a strong position from which to grow when markets 
recover.

Since the Interim Management Statement in May it has become increasingly clear 
that the effect of the recession on Rexam's trading will be deeper and more 
prolonged than previously thought with cyclical, more premium parts of the 
business disproportionately impacted by the downturn. Destocking has given way 
to reduced underlying customer demand reducing the Group's ability to generate 
cash and pay down debt.

The company wants to get its £2.1bn of debt under control. It has £3.2bn worth 
of loans and overdrafts and refinanced £1.3bn in the half year. It has already 
managed to secure another £453m of "bilateral facilities" to underpin its 
access to liquidity and renegotiated a substantial portion of its £775m 
revolving credit facility as well as several facilities which were due to 
mature in 2010. The cost of all this debt, however, has gone up.

The group's next major round of refinancing will be in relation to the £495m 
committed bank facilities due in 2011, followed by a further £904m of bank 
facilities due in 2012 with £1.062bn, comprising the €700m bond, the US bond 
and US private placement, due in 2013.

The rights issue price of 150p represents a 45.7% discount to yesterday's 
closing price.

Heading in the opposite direction were shares in Schroders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/schroders> as Morgan Stanley upped its 
stance on the fund management firm to overweight and increased its share price 
target to £10.45 from 710p. Having had a good look at the firm's pipeline of 
business, Morgan Stanley reckons:

We believe consensus (20% below our numbers) underestimates the earnings 
upside risk from a strong rebound in high-margin retail flows.

The shares are up 45.5p at 954.5p. Elsewhere in the financials sector, Aviva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> picks up 13.5p to 345.5p 
after Deutsche Bank raised its target price to 401p from 385p and moved from a 
hold to a buy.

Among the second line stocks, Inchcape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/inchcape> has added 3p to 25.5p after 
first half results fromn the car dealer that were not as bad as the City had 
expected. Pretax profits were down 58% at £65.4m, better than the £44m to £52m 
that had been forecast.

Finally, there are shenanigans going on at Gulf Keystone Petroleum. Shares in 
the AIM-listed oil and gas company, which has exploration rights in Algeria and 
the Kurdistan area of Northern Iraq, have leapt almost 25% afteran odd report 
<http://www.hindu.com/thehindu/holnus/006200907291523.htm> from an Indian 
newswire about a bid valuing the company at $2.23bn from the state-owned Indian 
Oil Corporation.

The report was picked up by the team at FTAlphaville 
<http://ftalphaville.ft.com/> this morning who, it is fair to say, took it with 
a truckload of salt. The figure would be staggering as Gulf Keystone is 
currently valued - even with the share price rise - at £51m.

The price might make a bit of sense if the figure should actually be read in 
rupees as that would work out at about £30m but sources close to the company 
branded the report as rubbish. The stock is up 2.75p at 14p.
 