
Two newly appointed figureheads of a campaign to breathe fresh life into 
English tourism are to start working next week inBlackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/blackpool> – the Lancashire seaside town that, 
despite its long reputation as a holiday resort, has been struggling to update 
its appeal.

On Wednesday Wallace and Gromit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/wallace-and-gromit>, the stars of a 
Oscar-winning series by Aardman Animations, are to attend the launch of the 
world's first theme park ride to be based on their adventures in the films A 
Grand Day Out, The Wrong Trousers and A Close Shave. Their creator, Nick Park, 
will be at their side as visitors try out the Thrill-O-Matic, the £5.25m new 
jewel in the crown of the Blackpool Pleasure Beach amusement park.

"I grew up in Preston, which is just down the road, so Blackpool feels like a 
natural home for Wallace and Gromit," said Park.

The ride – the result of three years of planning by Aardman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/aardman> and the amusement park staff – will 
take passengers, seated in a giant slipper, through key scenes from the films, 
including A Matter of Loaf and Death and The Curse of the Were-Rabbit. The park 
promises lots of special effects and some careful detailing, such as a holiday 
brochure to the moon and functioning representations of some of the 
contraptions invented by Wallace. Themed goods, including cheese-flavoured 
Blackpool "Moon Rock" and modelling clay kits, will be sold in the first 
Wallace and Gromit merchandise shop too.

Park revealed his plan to build a ride at Blackpool when he appeared on Radio 
4's Desert Island Discs in 2010. "It is not going to be a hair-raising, 
terrifying ride; it is a family-friendly ride. It's nice because they are a 
family-run business and Blackpool is just down the road. I used to go down 
there as a kid for the switching on of the lights and so it feels right," he 
said.

The Thrill-O-Matic ride replaces the Gold Mine run. Some veteran fans of the 
Pleasure Beach have been reluctant to see change – mourning the passing of the 
Blue Grotto cafe, as well as favourite old rides such as Turtle Chase and the 
Whip. Both were replaced during the modernising reign of the managing director, 
Amanda Thompson, great-granddaughter of William G Bean who founded the 
17-hectare (42-acre) theme park in 1896.

The Aardman animator chose the site of the first Wallace and Gromit fun ride 
amid competing offers from around the world. Its launch will also mark the 
start of a crusading English summer for his two best-known creations.

For Wallace and Gromit are about to follow the likes of Julie Walters, Judi 
Dench, Jamie Oliver, Stephen Fry and Harry Potter actor Rupert Grint, and front 
campaigns to encourage people to holiday at home in England. A television 
advert will be broadcast early next month that will see the animated characters 
travelling around England in their trademark motorbike and sidecar on a road 
trip intended to highlight tourist attractions.

The VisitEngland tourist board has recruited the duo to inspire Britons to 
take a "staycation" this year in a £4.5m government-funded push called Great 
Adventure. Next Sunday afternoon, Wallace and Gromit will be visiting the 
National Space Centre in Leicester, reflecting Wallace's interest in space 
travel, while other destinations are expected to emphasise the importance of 
the British cheese industry.

According to James Berresford, chief executive of VisitEngland, Wallace and 
Gromit are "a quintessentially English double-act with universal appeal at home 
and abroad.

"We hope this ad, which I think breaks the mould of cliche tourism ads, will 
capture the imagination of Britons to inspire them to visit their local travel 
agent and book a break at home this year."

The campaign is the second part of Holidays at Home are GREAT, 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=viCZ4XjTliY> a government-funded strategy 
launched last year and credited with generating £300m in additional tourism 
spending.

"The coup of landing Wallace & Gromit for the campaign's second push is great 
news," said the tourism minister, Hugh Robertson. "Their ad will no doubt 
capture the imagination, encourage people to have a fresh look at what England 
as a holiday destination has to offer and boost domestic tourism further."

And if anywhere needs a boost it is Blackpool, thought to have the highest 
level of youth unemployment in the north-west of England. The numbers of 
residents claiming jobseeker's allowance may have decreased from 6,226 in 
January to 6,179 in February, but there are thousands of young people hoping to 
get seasonal work at its tourist attractions this summer.

The town also faces a threat to its image as a safe place to sunbathe and 
swim, or ride a donkey, as it waits to hear whether the water quality of the 
sea is about to earn it a bathing ban.

Two years ago another of the town's traditional attractions, the illuminations 
along its lengthy promenade, were also tarnished by accusations from Blackpool 
businesses that the council were was scrimping on bulbs and had failed to 
repair storm damage

For Thompson, Park's decision to put his faith in Blackpool is crucial. "We 
are very proud of the ride and we know that families will want to ride it again 
and again to see all their favourite characters," she said.

Later this summer 1.5-metre (5ft) tall Gromits will appear on the streets of 
Bristol – where Aardman is based. Gromit Unleashed exhibition runs for 10 weeks 
from July, after which the sculptures, which have been designed and created by 
invited artists, will be auctioned to raise funds for the Bristol Children's 
Hospital Charity.
 