
For the typical worker over the age of 45, saving an extra £86 a month could 
make the difference between living a financially comfortable retirement and 
struggling in later years, according to latest research.

The figures come in a report from pension giant Aviva 
<https://drive.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/file/d/0By5bZ_jlgS4TMW5QTlAtWUZESWM/view?pli=1>
, which estimates that a pensioner needs a basic annual income of £12,590 a 
year, or £242 a week, to get by. The annual state pension averages £6,556 
(including entitlements to state second pension), so that leaves individuals 
having to find an additional income of £6,034 a year.

According to Aviva, the typical over-45-year-old in Britain has so far 
accumulated a modest amount of pension savings, averaging £53,793. This is 
enough to give them an income in retirement of £3,117 a year if they buy an 
annuity, or £3,635 if they enter a drawdown plan.

How to maximise your state pension
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/30/how-to-maximise-state-pension> 
The income gap between what the average person has and what they need for a 
minimal lifestyle in retirement is therefore £2,299.

Not surprisingly, the advice on how to avoid this shortfall is to start saving 
more each month – but the good news is perhaps not as much as you may fear.

Aviva calculates that saving an extra £86 a month is enough to close the gap 
for a 20% taxpayer. This should be enough to build an additional pension pot of 
£42,000, an amount which in today’s money Aviva says would bridge the gap, once 
the state pension is added to existing funds. This is based on the assumption 
that our 45-year-old will retire at 67.

Aviva says if you are 55 and have so far only saved around £50,000, you’ll 
need to put aside an extra £178 a month.

But what if you are in your 40s or 50s and have not saved a penny for your 
retirement? Here’s where the figures start to look a lot more gruesome. If you 
are 45 with no savings, to generate an income of around £12,500 a year, 
assuming the state is paying £6,500 a year, you will need to put aside £225 a 
month. If you are 55 and have saved nothing, the amount you will need to find 
will rise to £468.50.

So how should you put your money aside? The recommended route, perhaps not 
surprisingly as this is a report from a pensions company, is to increase your 
pension contributions, especially through your workplace scheme if the employer 
also contributes.

But the Aviva report also identifies how much the over-45s are relying on 
their property to get them through retirement. It says: “The average 45- to 
74-year-old has a property worth £286,126, which is £232,333 more than the 
value of their savings and investments (£53,793). Therefore it is not 
surprising that many people plan to utilise the value of their property as part 
of their retirement.”

Downsizing is the most popular option to release funds, although the figures 
suggest today’s 45-year-olds are not being realistic. The report found that 
while a quarter find the idea of downsizing attractive, as people get older – 
and closer to the date when they would have to move out of their home – the 
number willing to do so falls to just 14%.

It is not surprising that many people plan to utilise the value of their 
property as part of their retirement
Aviva 
Interestingly, only 6% of over-45s are considering doing equity release to 
finance part of their retirement. A separate report this week indicates 
that equity release is growing fast, with the average homeowner releasing 
about £68,500 in cash from their home.

According to Key Retirement, retired homeowners cashed in more than £750m of 
property wealth in the first six months of the year. Londoners are withdrawing 
the most from their property, taking out an average of £142,000.

Not all the money goes to create a regular income. Key Retirement said half 
the people releasing equity use the money to pay for home improvements, while a 
quarter use it for holidays. But beware the associated costs: interest rates 
charged are usually above 5%, and it will mean that very little will be left to 
your heirs if you start a plan in your 60s. Experts say it is better to 
downsize to release cash, or wait until your mid-70s or even later to do equity 
release.

Savers over the age of 55 have taken out £1.8bn from their pensions in the 
first 100 days since new rules were introduced allowing individuals greater 
access to their cash.

The figures from the Association of British Insurers underline just how far 
savers have deserted annuities, which are widely regarded as poor value. 
Annuities give savers a guaranteed income for life, but rates collapsed 
alongside interest rates. Pensioners are instead opting for “income drawdown” 
plans which let them take a regular income without losing all the cash should 
they die early.

Tom McPhail, pensions expert at Hargreaves Lansdown, says: “After the first 
100 days, we can draw some conclusions. Small pots are likely to continue to be 
cashed in: faced with the choice of an income sufficient to buy a cup of coffee 
every day, or a lump sum of £15,000 up front, investors are understandably 
deciding to take the money in one go.

“More investors are tapping into their retirement savings ahead of full 
retirement, and many are reporting an intention to work part-time ahead of 
finally stopping work. All this data shows that the retirement income market 
has changed fundamentally. The key message for investors is to engage with 
their retirement savings in good time and to make informed choices about how 
best to draw on them.”
 