
Name: Go.

Age: At least 2,500 years old.

Appearance: Smarties dropped on graph paper – well, if they were black and 
white Smarties and the graph paper was made of wood.

Which they basically aren’t. I don’t care. You get the picture. It’s an 
ancient Chinese board game with the counters that is played by tens of millions 
of people, mostly in east Asia.

Is this the one that isn’t mahjong? That’s right. Mahjong is more like rummy, 
whereas Go is more like chess.

And Go is the one that even the most powerful computers in the world can’t 
master? It was until this week. Google’s DeepMind software AlphaGo has just 
beaten the world Go champion, Lee Se-dol of South Korea, in the first of a 
series of five matches.

So this is like the Go equivalent of that Kasparov v IBM’s Deep Blue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/may/12/deep-blue-beats-kasparov-1997>
 chess match in 1997? Yes. And there is a $1m (£704,000) prize for the winner.

Yikes! Poor old Lee. How is he taking it? OK. “I was very surprised because I 
did not think that I would lose the game,” he said. “A mistake I made at the 
very beginning lasted until the very last.”

He should probably stop making mistakes then. You would make a great coach.

You bet I would. Especially if I knew the rules. Well, as I say, it is a bit 
like chess, just simpler and more complicated.

Eh? It’s simpler insofar as two players take turns to place pieces, known as 
stones, on the intersections of a grid, trying to seal off areas and surround 
each other’s stones, which are then removed from the board.

Sounds very simple. Yes, except that with its 19x19 grid, you end up with an 
unimaginably vast number of possible positions – more than the number of atoms 
in the universe. Hence, the challenge, even for computers.

Why do they call it “Go”? Does it mean something special in Chinese? It’s just 
what westerners call the game, based on the Japanese nameigo. In Chinese, it’s 
known aswéiqí.

That’s miles cooler. We should call it that. What does it mean? Encirclement 
board game.

Chinese is such a romantic language. You bet it is.

Do say: “If computers are getting so clever, why does my internet keep cutting 
out?”

Don’t say: “Computers aren’t infinitely clever, just cleverer than you.”
 