
Wayne Rooney <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wayne-rooney> has insisted 
he will not contemplate retiring from international football despite being 
dropped from a competitive England fixture for the first time in his career and 
a tacit admission from the Manchester United player that he was experiencing 
the most difficult period of his professional life.

Rooney’s removal from Gareth Southgate’s team to play Slovenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovenia> means England’s record scorer 
has now lost his place for both club and country after being relegated to the 
substitutes’ bench in United’s past three games.

England dropping Wayne Rooney is not courageous – it is long overdue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/10/dropping-wayne-rooney-england>
Jordan Henderson will take over the captaincy for England’s latest World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifier but Rooney 
maintains that he can still overtake Peter Shilton’s record of 125 caps and did 
at least manage some gallows humour to a question about whether he might return 
in the next match. “Do you mean United or England?” Rooney asked.

Rooney had asked to appear at England’s press conference in Ljubljana so he 
could react in person to Southgate’s decision and make it clear, two weeks 
before his 31st birthday, that he had reluctantly accepted the decision. His 
official status as captain will not change but the downturn in his career can 
also be measured by his wife Coleen’s emotional response on Twitter and 
Southgate voicing strong objections about the culture in football of people 
taking malicious pleasure.

“It is something which I have to go through,” Rooney said. “I am big enough to 
deal with it. I believe I can come back from this. I am 30 years of age. I am 
not 35 or 36 where you are thinking: ‘Can you get back from it?’ I will keep 
working and I have said before that I will not stop playing forEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> and start going to Dubai for a 
few days in the international break.

“After the summer it would have been easy for me to walk away and say: ‘That’s 
it, I’ve had enough,’ but that’s not me. I feel I have a lot to offer and I’ve 
made that clear [to Southgate], certainly until the World Cup in Russia. That’s 
what I want. I’m not suddenly going to turn round and say: ‘I’m not playing, 
I’m not going to turn up.’ I will turn up when called upon and be ready.

“Ryan Giggs at 30 wasn’t the same player he was at 18 and he played until he 
was 40. There’s lots of examples out there you can use – players re-evaluate 
and work out the best way to move forwards. I’m sure that will happen with me. 
I am not naive in terms of thinking that I am still a 20-year-old. I understand 
that. My game is different to that of a 20-year-old, but I also think I have 
qualities that can help move this team forward. I’m not denying it’s a 
difficult moment but I have to show the right attitude, try to be positive and 
make sure I am supportive of my team-mates.”

Southgate has decided to use Eric Dier alongside Henderson in the 
holding-midfield positions, citing “their defensive responsibilities, their 
experience of playing in that role and their athleticism” when he was asked why 
they been chosen ahead of Rooney. England’s caretaker manager described it as a 
“very straightforward” decision, adding that Dier was England’s best player at 
Euro 2016.

“It’s not something I take any pleasure from at all, but you put emotion and 
feeling to one side and make a decision that you think is right for tactical 
reasons,” he said. “It was not an easy decision to take because of the respect 
I have for him as a player and person. On a human level it’s a very difficult 
decision because I don’t like the idea that there might be an element of 
satisfaction for some people. I’m probably more annoyed by that than he is. 
He’s had to live with that sort of reaction throughout his career.”

The gravity of Rooney’s position can probably be gauged by the upset it has 
clearly caused his wife – “she has her opinion,” Rooney said – but he also 
indicated he was not entirely surprised by Southgate’s decision and accepted 
that a lot of football people, most notably Alan Shearer, had already stated he 
should have given up international football.

“I personally don’t know these people. They are entitled to their opinions. If 
it was Gareth or my manager at club level or friends or team-mates, that would 
be hurtful. People can say what they want. I’ve had it throughout my career and 
it doesn’t concern me. That’s what Alan believes. He stopped playing for 
England at 30 and that’s his opinion. He doesn’t know me as a person or as a 
player. He doesn’t see me day-in, day-out enough really to have those opinions. 
I respect him of course, as an ex‑player and I’ll move on.

“There are many players in the Premier League who can only dream of being part 
of an England squad. I’ve done it 117 times, but of course a time comes where 
there might be a bit of a change. I understand this is part of football.

“I’ve played 13 years non-stop for England, given everything, and a time comes 
when you’re not the first name on the team-sheet, like I have been in the past.”
 