
Arts television programmes tend towards the ephemeral. They commemorate – 
sometimes no more questioningly than a press release – a new novel or stage 
play or film, before disappearing into production-company vaults. One of the 
most notable exceptions isWays of Seeing, a 1972 <http://vimeo.com/3140633> 
series about western visual culture presented by the writer John Berger.

Controversial at the time – its focus on the tacit ideologies of Old Masters 
led one critic to liken it to "Mao'sLittle Red Book for a generation of art 
students" – it's now regarded not only as a landmark work of British arts 
broadcasting, but as a key moment in the democratisation of art education. Its 
40th anniversary has been marked at a series of public talks and at a major 
Berger conference at King's College London.

Forgotten in these celebrations is the role of the series' director, Mike 
Dibb. Born in 1940, the son of an East Yorkshire GP, he was responsible for 
some of its most striking sequences – he added a "Trespassers Keep Out" sign on 
to the tree behind Gainsborough'sMr and Mrs Andrews (1750). He says today, 
however, that though "the book and television series were both extremely 
collaborative processes", the prevailing idea became that he was merely "the 
executor of John's ideas rather than a participant in the shaping of those 
ideas".

In a career spanning almost five decades, it's possible Dibb has shaped more 
ideas and offered more ways of seeing than any other TV documentarian of his 
generation. The films he made in the 1970s with the likes of Berger, Raymond 
Williams, CLR James and Peter Fuller played a large, if unheralded, role in 
introducing radical developments in critical and cultural theory to British 
audiences long before they became institutionalised within academia.

"Raymond Williams was a huge influence on me," he said. "I'd grown up in the 
world ofthe Third Programme <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BBC_Third_Programme>, 
an intellectual middle-class space, and here was Raymond – just like Richard 
Hoggart inThe Uses of Literacy – finding a completely different definition 
of culture, one that could be rooted in mining or in Welsh communities. He 
showed me the division between high and low was very artificial. CLR was the 
same: he was wise but grounded. HisBeyond a Boundary wasn't at all an elitist 
piece of writing, but it was a book about cricket which made you think about 
almost everything historically, from Greek culture to imperial England."

Television <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> between the 
mid-1960s and late 1980s was both safe haven and test site for left-inclined 
film-makers such as Dibb. "Can you imagine, even on ITV, you hadDisappearing 
World, a long-form anthropological series, on at prime time? Or World in Action 
with radical 30-minute programmes every week? This was a period when TV 
had high ambitions and a lot of extraordinary things happened. They go on about 
making 'landmark series' these days; we had none of that self-consciousness. 
But we were full of idealism. And at the BBC we had a tremendous freedom, even 
if it was sometimes the freedom of indifference."

Dibb was an early advocate of the "film essay", now a fashionable term 
to describe documentaries driven by ideas rather than issues or human-interest 
stories. "I wanted to demonstrate that the film essay needn't have an inferior 
status to the written essay. In my 75-minute film about Don Juan you hear 
poetry about him, see images of him, explore his historical roots in Spanish 
culture: a rich brew. It might even give you more things than a written essay 
ever could. I'd like to feel my film might be as valuable a 75 minutes as you 
could possibly spend reflecting on the subject."

Jean-Luc Godard, about whom he made a film when the French director was in 
England to shoot his Rolling Stone pictureSympathy for the Devil (1968) – titled
One Plus One in Europe – was a major influence. "It was his spirit, the 
confidence he gave me to be bold about the presentation of ideas and direct in 
the visual style. I was taken by his belief that a film is neither on the 
screen or in the audience: it should exist in that space between the audience 
and the screen. Yet I was also struck by how he refused the experience of 
people; he would use prostitution as a metaphor, but would never talk to 
a prostitute".

Dibb, who saw television as a public space, rarely used presenters, voiceovers 
or "expert" analysis to structure his films. Instead, he adopted what he calls 
a "molecular approach" that "created possibilities for connection". At once 
discursive and concrete, he only liked "exploring ideas if they were grounded 
in everyday experience".

In recent decades, Dibb has worked with the likes of Edward Said and Roger 
Deakin, and won an Emmy in 2001 for a film about Miles Davis. But many of his 
most valuable films –Beyond a Boundary (1976); Fields of Play, a highly 
original 1979 series exploring the philosophy of play;Memories of the Future 
(1984) about John Ruskin and William Morris – which were originally seen by 
millions of viewers, and whose topics and aesthetic strategies prefigure much 
contemporary moving-image art, have been missing in action.

Now seems the right time to revisit this secret archive of public 
broadcasting. It's an antidote to the celebrity-led, format-driven nature of so 
many arts documentaries made today. It shows that it's possible to produce TV 
that is both populist and experimental.

And it also refutes the cliché that the 1970s was a decade only of crisis and 
downturn. "Feminism, political theatre,Ways of Seeing: I wasn't thinking, 'what 
a terrible time'. It was very dynamic, activist, political. Creatively it was 
very exciting. Yet all they show on those television retrospectives are 
episodes ofTop of the Pops."
 