
A lot of young people are angry at what they see as an older generation 
robbing them of their future by voting to leave the EU. But it’s not the 
future, it’s now – figures this week reveal just how much of the national pie 
is being taken by today’s retired people.

In 1994-95 the median net income of the average pensioner was 38% lower than 
those who were working for a living. In a staggering change, the median income 
of pensioners is now just 7% less than those in work.

It’s fair to say that a lot of pensioners will have lower spending needs than 
working people and families. Most will have paid off their mortgages, and the 
vast majority will no longer be paying out for children. Their commuting costs 
will have collapsed. Even prescriptions are free. On the flip side, they will 
be paying more for heating their homes. Arguably, they therefore enjoy a higher 
standard of living than working people, in many cases significantly so.

Since 2004-05 the average income of all pensioners has jumped from £250 a week 
to £297. For pensioner couples the average income is £444, or £23,000 a year. 
During the same period, incomes for working people have stagnated or fallen; 
even today, average net disposable income is below where it was in 2007-08.

Two factors have driven pensioner incomes up: first, the “triple lock” for 
state pensions, which has guaranteed that it rises every year by the highest of 
price inflation, earnings growth or 2.5%. During the global financial crash the 
triple lock meant pensioners received income rises even when pay for 
working people was falling. Income from welfare benefits has increased for 
pensioners since 1994-95, but fallen for working people.
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-30T10:16:56/embed.html>
The second factor is that today’s retired are the generation who benefited 
most from final salary-based pension schemes. The average occupational pension 
pays £148 a week, and around two-thirds of pensioners receive them.

But are we now at peak pensioner? Those generous final salary pension schemes 
are in catastrophic decline, now confined almost entirely to the public sector. 
In the private sector their replacements will only pay a fraction of the amount 
enjoyed by the generation before them. While many previously picked up 
two-thirds of their final salary, today’s workers will be lucky to pick up 
25%-30% of their former salary. Today’s well-off pensioners are, literally, a 
dying breed.

This is not an argument to say that today’s pensioners should in any way be 
stripped of their incomes. There is huge inequality among pensioners 
themselves. You know all those stories about pensioners saying their incomes 
have been destroyed by a decade of super-low interest rates? The truth is that 
the median weekly income from savings in retirement is just £6 a week. The 
average, though, is £64 a week. That tells you that a small number of 
pensioners have a large investment income, but the majority have almost nothing.

There is a debate to be had about generational fairness. Britain, like all 
developed nations, is an ageing country. How do we arrange our national 
finances so that the elderly are protected, while at the same time the young 
are not overly burdened paying for it?

The problem is that the reforms suggested so far fall on today’s working 
generation. For example, the age at which you will qualify for the state 
pension is rising steeply. That’s an inevitable consequence of improved 
longevity, but one that will hit people in their late 50s, especially women, 
hard, not the existing retired.

Another widely mooted reform is to slash pension tax relief, but the losers 
there are again the existing working population. Should better-off pensioners 
be expected to pay more as well? Maybe. But as we know from the referendum 
result, the old vote and the young don’t.
 