
People who cram all their exercise into one or two sessions at the weekend 
benefit nearly as much as those who work out more frequently, researchers say.


A study of more than 60,000 adults in England and Scotland found that “weekend 
warriors” lowered their risk of death by a similar margin to those who spread 
the same amount of exercise over the whole week.


The findings will reassure people who find it hard to make time for a daily 
exercise routine and opt instead to break a sweat once or twice a week in the 
hope of keeping fit.


Related: Health racket: tennis reduces risk of death at any age, study suggests
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/29/health-racquet-tennis-is-ace-at-reducing-risk-of-death-study-suggests>

“Millions of people enjoy doing sport once or twice a week, but they may be 
concerned that they are not doing enough,” said Gary O’Donovan, a physical 
activity researcher and author on the study at Loughborough University. “We 
find a clear benefit. It’s making them fit and healthy.”


The UK’s National Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Service 
recommends that to ward off an early death, people should spend 150 minutes a 
week performing moderate exercise, or 75 minutes a week doing vigorous 
exercise. As a rule of thumb, moderate exercise can be done while maintaining a 
conversation, whereas during vigorous exercise talking at the same time is too 
hard.


In the study, those who met the physical activity target by exercising through 
the week had a 35% lower risk of death than the inactive adults, with 
cardiovascular deaths down 41% and a 21% lower risk of cancer death.


But the weekend warriors also saw substantial health benefits if they met the 
physical activity target too. Their overall risk of death was 30% lower than 
the sedentary adults, with the risk of cardiovascular and cancer deaths lower 
by 40% and 18% respectively.


Related: The joy of steps: why humans are built to get a high from being on 
the move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/nov/03/the-joy-of-steps-why-you-dont-need-to-be-usain-bolt-to-get-a-runners-high-dopamine>

“Weekend warriors are people who meet the recommended volume of physical 
activity each week through only one or two sessions. There are doing a large 
proportion of vigorous exercise and that makes you fitter than moderate 
exercise,” said O’Donovan. Men and women benefited equally, according to the 
study published in theJournal of the American Medical Association: Internal 
Medicine <http://dx.doi.org/1.1001/jamainternmed.2016.8014>.


The results are based on medical data gathered for 63,591 adults aged 40 and 
above between 1994 and 2012. Nearly 9,000 of the study participants died in the 
period.


For those who have resolved to get fit in the New Year, O’Donovan recommends 
to start with moderate exercise, such as brisk walking, and then to set 
realistic, incremental goals to boost confidence without running the risk of 
setbacks due to injury. “A middle aged or older person should do as much as 12 
weeks of moderate exercise before introducing vigorous exercise,” he said.


Ulf Ekelund at the Norwegian School of Sport Sciences in Oslo said the study 
emphasised what researchers have found time and again: that even a small amount 
of regular exercise wards off death. In the study, those who exercised a little 
had a 29% lower risk of death than those who did no exercise at all. “The novel 
finding is that it appears the duration, and possibly the intensity, of leisure 
time physical activity is more important than the frequency,” Ekelund said.


“My take home message is that the greatest risk reduction and the greatest 
gain for the individual and for public health is if those who are physically 
inactive take up some activity,” he added.

 