
Thousands of disabled people will be hit by up to six different welfare cuts, 
with the very worst off potentially losing up to £23,000 each over five years, 
research shows.

The effect of the changes, the bulk of which kick in after 1 April, will be to 
plunge tens of thousands of disabled people deeper into poverty, says a study 
that captures the multiple impacts of social security reforms for the first 
time.

The research, carried out for the Guardian, estimates that by 2017-18 about 
3.7 million disabled people will collectively lose £28bn as a result of the 
reforms. Individuals will be hit by one of seven combinations of welfare cuts 
and small numbers could lose more than £20,000 each.

About 26,000 people will effectively no longer be counted as disabled in the 
eyes of the welfare system because the cuts will result in the removal of all 
benefits that identify them as having a disability, according to the study, 
carried out by thinktank Demos and the disability charity Scope.

Claudia Wood <http://www.demos.co.uk/people/claudiawood>, deputy director of 
Demos, said households hit by multiple welfare cuts were more likely to get 
into debt, become reliant on charities for crisis help and face social 
isolation and mental illness.

The welfare reforms come as cash-strapped local authorities impose growing 
restrictions on social care services used by disabled people. Charities 
estimate that105,000 disabled people will lose support 
<http://www.scope.org.uk/sites/default/files/The_Other_Care_Crisis.pdf> by 2015 
as eligibility thresholds for care tightens.

A Guardian survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/mar/25/council-cuts-social-care> of 
councils published this week showed that many councils will introduce charges 
or increase co-payments for care services from April.

Councils are also cutting other services relied upon by disabled people and 
their carers, including respite care, drop-in centres, public transport and 
advice centres.

By 2017-18 disabled claimants will be subject to a combination of cuts and 
restrictions to employment support allowance (ESA) and disability living 
allowance (DLA), the capping of rises to benefits and tax credits, and the 
abolition in many parts of the country of council tax benefit.

Those financial losses will be compounded for disabled claimants living in 
social housing, who from April will face potential reductions in housing 
benefit amounting to hundreds of pounds a year as a result of the so-called 
bedroom tax.

A separate study by the research firm CACI says residents of local authority 
areas in London and the north of England will face most pressure when the 
welfare cuts come into effect next week. Barking and Dagenham came top of the 
list with 61% falling into this category, followed by Tower Hamlets (58%) and 
Southwark (56%).

The Demos/Scope study, which uses official government data to analyse the of 
the effect of 13 separate welfare changes, estimates that:

• The biggest single group affected – comprising about 123,000 disabled people 
facing a combination of three benefit cuts – will see a reduction in income of 
up to £18,100 by 2017-18. A further 88,000 people subject to two cuts will lose 
£15,500.

• A group of up to 5,000 people will shoulder a combination of six benefit 
cuts simultaneously, seeing their income reduce by a total of £23,000 each over 
a five-year period, including a drastic £5,800 decrease in 2017-18 alone.

Richard Hawkes, the Scope chief executive, said: "In 2013 disabled people are 
already struggling to pay the bills. Living costs are spiralling. Income is 
flatlining. We know many are getting in debt, just to pay for essentials.

"What's the government's response? The same group of disabled people face not 
just one or two cuts to their support but in some cases three, four, five or 
even six cuts. In this context it's a frightening prospect that welfare could 
be capped in the June spending review, having already been slashed by billions."

Wood said the study's findings were an underestimate because it could not 
factor in the additional impact of cuts to child benefit, tax credits and the 
social fund. It also does not measure the impact of cuts to universal local 
authority services used by disabled people.

The government, which aims to save £18bn a year from the total welfare bill by 
2015, has published separate impact assessments for each of its reforms but has 
refused to analyse the cumulative impact.

Individuals who lose all disability benefits would be unable to access 
Motability cars, blue badge parking discs and equipment grants, Wood said. 
"Your disability won't change. It's just that a combination of someone deciding 
you aren't disabled enough and have claimed for too long means you will lose 
your benefits."

A previous Demos/Scope study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jun/22/disabled-people-hit-hard-cuts>
, which tracked the impact of initial welfare changes in 2011-12 on six 
households with disabled members, found that income losses over the year ranged 
from £270 for a single disabled woman to £2,100 for a man cared for by his 
wife. But those losses will accelerate as the reforms starting in April unfold.

A Department for Work and Pensions spokesperson said: "Our reforms will make 
sure the billions we spend every year give more targeted support and better 
reflect today's understanding of disability. Hundreds of thousands of disabled 
adults and children will actually receive more support than now with the 
combined effect of benefit changes under universal credit.

"We carry out thorough impact assessments on all our policies, as well as 
equality impact assessments on any policies that might have a disproportionate 
affect on disabled people."

The CACI study identifies a group it calls "social adversity" who will be most 
badly hit by measures such as cuts to council services, reductions to benefits 
and the bedroom tax. While many councils had 10% or fewer residents in this 
category, a handful in London and the north had more than 50%.

Liam Smith, leader of Barking and Dagenham council, said the council was doing 
all it could to support the most vulnerable residents but faced "unprecedented 
demands".

"Yet again people who are totally removed from normal life are trying to force 
people to live by the motto of eat or heat. I challenge these people to try to 
live [like our most vulnerable residents do] and see how far they get."
 