
Thomas Hitzlsperger <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/thomas-hitzlsperger> is 
confident West Ham United's unexpected and impressive victory over Liverpool 
will convince the team they can secure enough points from a daunting run-in to 
achieve Premier League survival.

Sunday's eye-catching 3-1 success at Upton Park ended Liverpool's eight-match 
unbeaten run and moved West Ham from the foot of the table, providing a timely 
response to Wolverhampton Wanderers' resounding win over Blackpool the previous 
day. Avram Grant's team must play Manchester United, Manchester City, Tottenham 
Hotspur and Chelsea in their final 10 games and the players should gain 
confidence from the manner in which they dismantled sixth-placed Liverpool.

"The way we approach the games is important, being positive and believing we 
can beat these teams," said Hitzlsperger, who was impressive alongside Scott 
Parker in his second appearance for the club after a lengthy thigh injury. 
"Liverpool are a very good side and had played well over the last few weeks but 
we had the confidence we could beat them. It starts with work-rate, closing 
them down, and we have to treat every game like this – it was not a cup final 
but a very important game. It doesn't matter if we're playing Manchester United 
or Stoke next week, they are all big games.

"It's pretty straightforward from now on in: we want to stay in the league. We 
have been in the bottom three for most of the season and now there are only 10 
games left. It's hard enough as we know the teams we are going to play against 
are very good and the next one against Stoke will be tough. They are a 
different side with a different style of football but it's close down there. 
There are so many that could still get relegated, so it will be a fight to the 
very last day."

Only six points cover Everton in ninth place to Wigan Athletic in 20th in a 
congested table, offering those currently below the cut-off genuine hope of 
survival. West Ham's prospects appear to have been boosted by their boldness in 
the January transfer window – the club's hierarchy strengthened throughout by 
sanctioning the signings of Robbie Keane, Demba Ba, Gary O'Neil and Wayne 
Bridge – and the team have now lost only once in their last six games in all 
competitions and have an FA Cup quarter-final, also against Stoke, to come.

There was encouragement to be taken, too, in Matthew Upson's ability to play 
against Liverpool where it had been feared he might miss the rest of the 
campaign with an achilles injury. "It is still a problem I need to sort out but 
it's getting a lot better, so I'm hopeful in the next few weeks I'll clear it 
up," said the England defender.

"There was a bit of cloudiness on the diagnoses, which was the problem and 
probably why it came out that I was out, because it was one verdict. But it 
isn't the case. I've had a couple of people look at it: it's been a confusing 
couple of weeks but I feel confident about it now and can play 90 minutes. It 
will not require surgery.

"That win against Liverpool was a major part in our survival campaign. The 
Wolves result had put us under pressure and, when you look at our fixtures, we 
are going to have to get points against teams you would say we would not beat. 
We are running out of teams to play in and around us.

We needed three points against a team like Liverpool to stay up. You always 
look around you to see where people are but we have to focus on ourselves. Only 
three points will do for us at the moment. We can nick a draw here and there 
but we need three-point games and, if we do that, we will give ourselves every 
chance.

"We have Stoke to come here on Saturday and you can't make games bigger than 
they are. Mentally it affects players in a negative way if you do. You just go 
into it as Stoke at home. We know what we'll do: it'll be a battle and a 
totally different scenario to the Liverpool game. The game will be won or lost 
in the air in both boxes and we have to be prepared for that."

West Ham have appointed their former captain Steve Lomas as reserve-team 
manager, succeeding Alex Dyer who left to become Charlton's assistant manager.
 