
West Ham have done the right thing four months too late. Avram Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/avram-grant> had been a dead man walking 
ever since his bosses tried to replace him with Martin O'Neill in January. 
Whatever the reasons for Grant staying then – some felt O'Neill was never going 
to come, others put it down to the shenanigans of David Gold, David Sullivan 
and Karren Brady in the media – it was a disastrous move.

Now the trio are just saving face. West Ham have been relegated but it did not 
have to be this way. Liverpool and West Bromwich Albion have both demonstrated 
the value of changing managers during the season. How different it all could 
have been if Grant had gone earlier.

Then again, how different things could have been if he had never been 
appointed in the first place. Only West Ham could look at a manager who 
finished bottom of the league with Portsmouth and decide that he is the man for 
the job. After all, this is the same club that beat Bury 10-0 in 1983 and 
promptly signed one of their centre-backs, Paul Hilton.

Grant has plenty of apologists, people often pointing to the Israeli taking 
Chelsea to the Champions League final in 2008 and losing to Manchester United 
only on penalties, but the fact remains that his side lost. As they did in the 
Carling Cup final to Tottenham Hotspur and in the quarter-final of the FA Cup 
to Barnsley.

Grant also took West Ham to the last four of the Carling Cup, where naturally 
enough they lost to Birmingham City. In that game West Ham were 3-1 up on 
aggregate at half-time of the second leg, only to collapse and lose in extra 
time. Afterwards supporters were bewildered to hear Grant reveal that he did 
not know what to say to his players at half-time, neatly exemplifying why West 
Ham were on their way down.

That admission immediately springs to mind now. Leading 2-0 against Wigan 
Athletic at half-time in a game they had to win to stay up, it was all too 
predictable that they would be incapable of hanging on. And so it proved, 
Charles N'Zogbia's goal confirming what many had suspected for a long time.

Once again Grant failed to respond to changes by the opposition's manager, 
Roberto Martínez's decision to throw on Victor Moses and Conor Sammon at the 
interval giving Wigan a greater menace in attack. In total West Ham have thrown 
away 22 points from winning positions, a damning indictment of their manager. 
Leads have been frittered away more clumsily than a hapless detective 
blundering his way through a case.

Last season West Ham also struggled and essentially they stayed up only 
because the three sides that went down, Burnley, Hull City and Portsmouth, were 
so wretched. Remarkably 35 points was enough to secure safety but it was clear 
that major rebuilding was required in the summer. It never happened. Even 
though Sullivan and Gold said that every player bar Parker was for sale, hardly 
the most inspirational of messages, the squad largely remained the same.

Going into the season without suitable full-backs was asking for trouble – 
five players have been used at left-back – while £8m was wasted on Pablo 
Barrera and Winston Reid, unforgivable errors of judgment when funds were so 
limited.

A 3-0 defeat by Aston Villa on the first day highlighted the problems and West 
Ham did not win until they beat Tottenham on 25 September, a game that 
ultimately provided nothing more than another false dawn. What is more, they 
have managed to win only two home games against sides in the bottom half of the 
table, picking up just two points against the three promoted sides at Upton 
Park. Too often Grant has changed his side from game to game, robbing it of 
consistency and continuity, while he is tactically incoherent, often asking 
strikers to play on the wing due to a misguided desire to use a 4-3-3 formation.

The blame cannot entirely be pinned on Grant, however, which is fortunate 
seeing that there is plenty to throw around. Robert Green has been shaky, still 
unnerved by his error against the USA in the World Cup. Matthew Upson has been 
so inspirational as captain that most onlookers assume Parker has the armband. 
Freddie Piquionne, though willing, is wayward in front of goal. Robbie Keane's 
loan deal stipulated that West Ham would have to pay £6m to Tottenham if he 
kept them up. His misses in recent games were so pathetic that conspiracy 
theorists might have wondered if he was doing it on purpose, simply so he would 
not have to spend another season at Upton Park. And then there is Carlton Cole, 
who failed to take a gilt-edged chance to win the game against Wigan in 
stoppage time. Little wonder supporters have taken to calling him 'Can't 
Control'.

Doubts must be raised about Sullivan and Gold, too. In their defence they 
rescued the club from going into administration when they took over in January 
2010 and inherited a mess from the dreadful Icelandic owners, whose part in all 
this must not be under-estimated. The new owners have also secured the Olympic 
Stadium but, other than that, positives are thin on the ground. Successive 
managers, Gianfranco Zola and Grant, have been critically undermined while 
Gold's and Sullivan's comments in the media have been ill-advised.

When West Ham were preposterously relegated in 2003 with a squad containing 
David James, Glen Johnson, Joe Cole, Michael Carrick, Jermain Defoe, Trevor 
Sinclair, Freddie Kanouté and Paolo Di Canio, their former chairman, Terry 
Brown, mused that perhaps it was just their turn. While that aside was met with 
scorn by supporters, few would dispute that this is a deserved relegation.

It is now five years since West Ham, who had finished ninth, contributed to 
the greatest FA Cup final in recent years, losing to Liverpool only on 
penalties. They had a bright young manager, Alan Pardew, and a team packed with 
exciting players such as Matthew Etherington, Yossi Benayoun and Dean Ashton. 
It has all gone wrong since then. A broken ankle suffered in training for 
England in 2006 eventually forced Ashton to retire, Carlos Tevez and Javier 
Mascherano came, went and cost millions, Eggert Magnusson's spending spree in 
the summer of 2007 crippled the club's finances, players like Craig Bellamy, 
James Collins and Lucas Neill have been replaced with inferior versions or 
simply not at all, and there have been three relegation battles in five 
seasons. If anything, they have done well to last this long.
 