
Avram Grant was sacked as manager of West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> on Sunday night. He was 
told of his fate in the players' tunnel after his side's 3-2 defeat at Wigan 
Athletic condemned the club to relegation from the Premier League.

The club later confirmed his dismissal in a two-paragraph statement and 
said that the first-team coach, Kevin Keen, would oversee West Ham's final 
match of the season next Sunday, at home to Sunderland.

The club's owners, David Gold and David Sullivan, who in January had aborted 
an attempt to sack the man they appointed to succeed Gianfranco Zola in the 
summer, will now attempt to find a replacement amid reports that Neil Warnock's 
position is not as secure it should be for a man who led Queens Park Rangers to 
the Premier League as champions.

Martin O'Neill, the man they targeted in January, is unlikely to want the task 
of reviving a club that is already £80m in debt and which Sullivan said would 
require a £40m injection of cash from the owners to endure relegation. The 
stadium, Upton Park, and the training ground at Chadwell Heath have already 
been put up as security to the banks and Sullivan confirmed before the game, in 
which West Ham saw a two-goal lead torn from their grasp, that they were "in a 
worse financial position than any other club in the country". He has already 
ruled out the possibility of the club going into administration.

Grant, after overseeing his second successive relegation which unlike last 
year's experience with Portsmouth did not have the consolation of an FA Cup 
final appearance, said: "It is a very sad day, the saddest since I started 
football almost 40 years ago. I cannot put it into words. I am very sad, 
especially for the supporters and the people at the club."

Grant came to Upton Park to succeed Zola, who was far more popular with 
supporters although he avoided relegation last season with only 35 points. "I 
arrived with a lot of desire but I knew the financial problems," Grant said. 
"The team was saved from relegation but the league was very weak. Most of the 
teams I have managed have been very happy with my work. The quality of football 
we played was very good but the results were not good and football is only 
about results.

"Yes, I take responsibility. I am not a guy who gives responsibility to other 
people. It is my responsibility to pick the team and choose the tactics. The 
results were my responsibility. My job was to keep this team in the league and 
I failed. I think I did well with the players. Scott Parker has had the season 
of his life. James Tomkins developed a lot, Danny Gabbidon had a very good 
season and Rob Green recovered very well from the World Cup."

It is the quality of his players that is the most damning evidence against 
Grant and Parker, who has become the first footballer of the year ever to 
endure the indignity of relegation, will be sold. Green and Thomas Hitzlsperger 
are also likely to leave while the spectre of West Ham inheriting the Olympic 
Stadium while in the Championship is now a clear possibility. There are five 
clubs that could join West Ham in the Championship – Blackburn Rovers, 
Wolverhampton Wanderers, Birmingham City, Blackpool and Wigan. Either Wigan or 
Blackpool could lose and be relegated – if Birmingham are thrashed at White 
Hart Lane.

Of the relegation candidates the most surprising is Birmingham, whose form has 
dipped alarmingly since overcoming Arsenal to win the Carling Cup in February. 
Even had West Ham won at Wigan they would still have gone down had Alex 
McLeish's side picked up a point at home to Fulham, a game they lost badly, 
2-0. They remain above the dotted line by having a goal difference that is one 
better than Blackpool and two better than Wigan.

McLeish's team know that even an unlikely win at Tottenham Hotspur would not 
secure their survival if Blackpool and Wigan enjoy wins by bigger margins, at 
Manchester United and Stoke respectively. "It's a tough task for us to go to 
Spurs and win but we've done it before," said McLeish. "It's about picking 
ourselves up and getting off the floor. The dressing room is hurting. We know 
we face a battle to retain our Premier League status."

• This article was amended on 16 May 2011. The original said, Both Wigan and 
Blackpool could lose and be relegated. This has been corrected.
 