
Avram Grant believes that Scott Parker should be crowned player of the year 
and says the midfielder's performances are the reasonWest Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> still have a chance of 
avoiding relegation.

The winner of the Professional Footballers' Association award will be named 
later this month and the Football Writers' Association's choice is announced in 
May. Regarding Parker, Grant said: "I think, without any doubt, that he's the 
player of the year. I don't see any player that is better than him.

"And if you also want to nominate a player who's a good example, it's good for 
everybody. He's a player who always gives everything, always trains well, is 
always positive and always gives everything for the team.

"Remember we played sometimes, in the first half of the season, without 10 
players, and all the midfielders around him and the forwards kept needing to 
change and he was the only one that stayed and kept us [in the fight].

"If we are in a position that we can stay in the league it's because we took 
points in the first half of the season, sometimes without 10 or 11 players. And 
he played and he was very good."

Parker's consistent form has also led Fabio Capello to recall him to the 
England squad and the 30-year-old started the 2-0 victory over Wales in last 
weekend's Euro 2012 qualifier.

When in charge of Chelsea Grant managed Frank Lampard, Dider Drogba and John 
Terry, and he names Parker among the best footballers he has coached. "His 
attitude is very good," he said. "You start when you are young because you love 
it and you have passion for it. But sometimes you see players who, because they 
have money now, they forget it. But Scotty always plays like it's his first 
game."

Grant is impressed with Parker away from the pitch, too. "It's very important. 
Sometimes we need to understand that these are young players. But they are also 
examples [role models]. If you take someone who has, no doubt, been a good 
example then it's good for the young players now."

Grant said of a player who has scored seven goals in 36 games in this 
campaign: "This season is his best season. I always like when my players play 
their best when I'm around. He can be even a little bit better, but he's taking 
the maximum from himself all the time," the manager said.

Grant also believes Parker could yet be a target for Manchester United or any 
of the other top teams. "He would fit in. Our target for West Ham for the long 
term is that we will have five or six players that all the top teams will want."

Grant was disappointed Rob Green did not play any part in Tuesday's friendly 
with Ghana. The goalkeeper was dropped following his mistake in the opening 
group game against the US in last summer's World Cup. Asked if it was unfair 
not to give the player a chance, Grant said: "Yes. Firstly the manager changed 
all the team. Secondly if you look at Rob Green in the last games, in the last 
month, he was the best goalkeeper in the country."
 