
'This is the tale of an ordinary man who had everything ... " the gravelly 
voiced man intones, as the Warner Brothers logo melts into a Victorian London 
street and tinkling suspense music starts up, " ... until a man of power stole 
his freedom, destroyed his family and banished him for life ... " Drums pound, 
bells clang ominously, skies darken, Johnny Depp flashes his cut-throat razors, 
Helena Bonham Carter flashes her cleavage, and blood spatters across the screen.

This is the trailer for Sweeney Todd, replaying ad infinitum at cinemas and on 
TV spots. It resembles a vintage Tim Burton movie, but nowhere does the trailer 
mention the fact that Sweeney Todd is a musical. In fact, it goes out of its 
way to conceal the fact that the movie is entirely sung, save for a few 
snippets of dialogue (and Alan Rickman's bits - which really can't be described 
as singing). Stung at paying to see a collection of tortuously constructed 
Stephen Sondheim tunes when they were expecting a gory Gothic thriller, a fair 
proportion of cinema audiences has been walking out of Sweeney Todd. A 
complaint has even been made to the Advertising Standards Authority.

Trailers are a language we assumed we all understood. We knew exactly how much 
to downgrade our expectations according to the number of explosions, the 
intensity of the pounding drums, and the presence of phrases such as "Academy 
Award Nominee" and "Adam Sandler". We have even become used to the fact that 
trailers promoting foreign-language films strenuously avoid all reference to 
the fact that they are not in English.

But the goalposts are shifting. Sweeney Todd's sleight of hand pales next to 
the trailer for National Treasure: Book of Secrets, which was recently exposed 
in the New York Times for featuring camera shots, scenes and lines of dialogue 
that weren't in the actual movie at all. "Apparently, the studios and all their 
lawyers feel it's not a legal problem," said National Treasure's director, John 
Turteltaub. "They cut together the trailers long before we have had time to cut 
the movie together." Turteltaub hastened to point out he was dead against the 
practice. "Great movies can get lost because of this," he said, although he 
declined to name any.

Perhaps it's better this way. If movies really were like their trailers, 
they'd be so exciting, audiences would routinely die of laughter, despair and 
fear. Instead, we should acknowledge the fact that trailers have become an art 
form in themselves. They aren't advertising, they're experimental short-film 
collages, assembled from existing movies by avant-garde marketing teams. 
Perhaps we could make an Oscar category for them.
 