
There's something soul-destroying about trudging off to a "family" film at a 
cinema, with a chubby, trusting, hot little hand in yours, knowing that the 
movie your offspring is so keen to see will be a boring, cynical, expensive 
insult to your own intelligence, and also to that of your child. Conversely, it 
is a happy day indeed when the film in question is made by a trusted purveyor. 
This Easter, that purveyor was Aardman Animations, with its latest offering,The 
Pirates! In an Adventure with Scientists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/mar/29/the-pirates-adventure-scientists-review>
.

Pirates! had great jokes, our favourite being: "Blood Island. So called 
because it is in the shape of some blood." But, like any really good piece of 
children's entertainment, it offered a simple, bright and upbeat analysis of 
the complex adult world. For me, a satisfying film is a film that stays with 
you. If you find it hard to remember what you were doing last Thursday, and 
eventually dredge up the memory of a trip to the Odeon, then – however amiably 
it passed the time – the film you saw was culturally worthless. Pirates! is a 
keeper.

Its main protagonists are a nice but dim pirate captain, called Pirate 
Captain, who yearns to win Pirate of the Year by amassing a larger haul of 
ill-gotten booty than his peers – despite his piratical incompetence – plus
Charles Darwin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/charles-darwin> and Queen 
Victoria. I'm mildly embarrassed to admit that the trio prompted me to think 
again about neoliberalism, natural selection and inherited privilege. I might 
have been taking it all a little too seriously. Nevertheless, inspiration 
without perspiration is always welcome, in whatever bizarre, Plasticine vehicle 
it may journey to you in. That's what I'm telling myself, anyway.

The stoutest defenders of neoliberalism tend to argue that the strength of 
unfettered capitalism, red in tooth and claw, is that it recreates natural 
selection, by encouraging "the survival of the fittest". By "fittest", however, 
Darwin didn't mean "strongest" – he meant "the most fit for purpose", the best 
adapted to the immediate environment in which a living organism is required to 
exist. Introduce money into the equation – which only humans do – and the need 
to adapt to the immediate environment is obviated. What is human civilisation, 
really, but a concerted human effort to impose itself on to the environment, 
in a concerted refusal to let the environment impose itself on us?

Quite simply, the more money you have at your disposal, the more resources you 
can marshal precisely in order to manipulate the immediate environment to your 
own needs, rather than adapt to suit it. This is, of course, why the political 
right is so desperately keen to deny that human activity is behind global 
warming, and the environmental catastrophe it fosters. It's also why the 
wealthiest countries have the biggest carbon footprints. In that respect, all 
human civilisation is a band of pirates in a dangerous adventure with 
scientists, the most successful pirates being the ones least likely to heed the 
warnings of settled scientific conclusion.

Unfortunately, capitalism's boast – that it accords with human nature – is 
actually capitalism's problem: that it rewards the most rapacious aspects of 
human nature, at the expense of the natural world more generally. Most of 
capitalism's critics understand this, and find it mightily frustrating that the 
right carries on regardless with the pillaging. The real problem, however, is 
that as an alternative to capitalism, socialism is a turkey, far more concerned 
with equality of distribution of the spoils (or, at the very least, equality of 
opportunity to have a go at grabbing some) than it is with tackling human 
dependence on wealth. One could even argue that socialism is even more perverse 
than capitalism, nothing more or less than its dark and negative mirror. After 
all, it focuses as obsessively on lack of money, and denial of access to 
resources, as the system it opposes does on accumulation of money, and access 
to resources. Capitalism accentuates the positive – wealth. Socialism 
accentuates the negative – poverty. The supposedly opposing ideologies are 
merely opposite sides of the same coin. It's because wealth itself confers 
power that Marxism's logical, unpalatable, unworkable "solution" is 
redistribution by force – revolution.

Many an idealist has dreamed of humans returning to nature, living 
self-sufficiently, freeing themselves from the fetters of money, in a return to 
noble innocence. I'm withJoseph Conrad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/josephconrad> on this one, though: 
civilisation may not be all it's cracked up to be, but there's no going back. 
However, what all current politics lacks – even green politics, which is in all 
sorts of ways the most commonsense response to where we are as humans now – is 
a way forward.

The right remains obsessed with creating wealth, the left with redistributing 
it (though, obviously, redistribution is and will always remain an important 
aspect of civilised behaviour). The task of redefining wealth, with a view to 
diminishing the necessity of money itself, is a task that seems impossible. Yet 
it's no more impossible than the peacefully redistributive dreams of socialism.

"Give a man a fish, you feed him for a day," the old saying goes. "Give him 
a fishing rod, you feed him for a lifetime." These days, the left is up in arms 
if you suggest that a recipe for a pasty is more useful than the ability to
purchase a pasty from Greggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/mar/30/pasty-tax-fuel-crisis-tory> 
without having to pay VAT on it. "Equality of opportunity" is really about 
maximising people's chances of competing in the jobs market, so that they can 
earn money to buy things, and thus transform their environment. Socialism is, 
in this crucial respect, just a sucker-punch feeder-system for capitalism.

What people really need is the ability to adapt to their environment, rather 
than be fobbed off with the promise that if they work hard, they can escape it. 
There is plenty of skill involved in accessing the many good things in life 
that are available for next to nothing – practical skills, creative skills, 
thinking, observing, seeking understanding for its own sake. Technology has the 
power to make the exploitation of such skills more achievable, not less. Humans 
need to start seeing money as the problem, not the solution. It will always be 
necessary. But as a measure of worth, as Pirate Captain learned, it's extremely 
limited and highly corrupting. Placing it at the centre of human existence is 
folly, and always has been. Though obviously, the cash expended on going to see 
an elaborate and expensive children's animation is an investment well worth 
making.
 