
Have you ever dreamt about failing an exam? If so, you’re in good company. In 
a database of surveys that ask if people have ever dreamed about certain 
topics, 45% of respondents said they’d dreamt about failing an examination. The 
data also shows that women are more likely than men to have these dreams, 
suggesting that the oppression of the patriarchy may haunt us in our sleeping 
thoughts.

 A note to anyone confused by the ‘Total’ column here - it won’t be a simple 
average of the male and female responses, because the respondents weren’t 
equally split 50/50 male/female. 
The database <http://sleepanddreamdatabase.org/> was created by Dr Kelly 
Bulkeley, a dream researcher and visiting scholar at the Graduate Theological 
Union in Berkeley, California. For more context on his findings, Bulkeley 
provided us with a short analysis of the five most common dreams.

Being attacked or pursued

Equally prevalent for both men and women, this theme is the basis for 
recurrent childhood nightmares that people remember throughout their lives. The 
theme has many symbolic possibilities. The attacker may represent an inner fear 
or desire that’s being repressed by the waking ego; it could represent someone 
or something in the external world posing a threat to the dreamer; and/or it 
could reflect the instinctual echoes of our primordial ancestors, whose 
survival depended on being ready to respond to attacks by large predators.

Schools, teachers, studying

People who have gone through some kind of formal education process often dream 
about it years later. The participants in these surveys were mostly college 
students, so school was a strong current life concern, especially it seems for 
women. School-related dreams are not only a modern phenomenon – there’s 
evidence the ancient Chinese had dreams and nightmares about the civil service 
examinations that determined one’s professional fate.

Academic anxiety dreams, and what they might mean | Jenny Rohn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2016/jan/04/academic-anxiety-dreams-what-they-mean-jenny-rohn>
Sexual experiences

There is a significant difference here in frequency between men and women, 
which corresponds to other research showing a higher frequency of sexual 
content in men’s dreams compared to women’s dreams. It’s hard to say if this is 
nature or nurture. Do men have more sexual dreams innately, or are they 
stimulated to have more such dreams by contemporary culture? Do women naturally 
have fewer sexual dreams, or are they culturally discouraged from having or 
talking about such dreams?

Current research can’t answer these questions. Freud would actually be 
disappointed – if dreams are supposed to disguise and censor our sexual 
desires, these findings indicate they do a rather poor job of it. A better 
explanation is to view these dreams as expressions of the strong biological 
instinct for procreation and the challenges of satisfying that instinct within 
the moral framework of one’s community.

Falling

Dreams of falling are much more frequent than dreams of flying; we are more 
likely to fall prey to gravity than rise above it. Such dreams may occur when 
there’s an abrupt shift in neurotransmitters in the brain from one stage of 
sleep to another. Even if there is a physiological instigator, dreams of 
falling can take on a host of symbolic meanings in terms of reflecting 
experiences of sudden change, disruption, loss or trauma. These dreams can, in 
extreme cases, shade into scenes of general entropic catastrophe: the world 
itself is falling to pieces, the apocalypse is upon us.

Trying again and again to do something

Sometimes the mind in sleep gets caught in loops of half-dreaming, 
half-thinking repetition, usually revolving around a stressful situation from 
waking life, which can generate intense feelings of frustration, powerlessness 
and fear. This too may have a physiological component involving the atonia 
(general muscular paralysis) of REM sleep. But it also reflects a deep human 
anxiety, going back to the Greek myth of Sisyphus, that we can become trapped 
in an endless cycle of futility. People today sometimes feel that way in their 
jobs, their schooling or their relationships, and these kinds of dreams 
articulate their fears of a looming shadow of existential dread. (From a 
Buddhist perspective, these dreams could be regarded as spiritual openings that 
reveal the futility of all attachments and highlight the need to escape the 
empty cycle of samsara.)

 