
For many people today the word “retirement” is synonymous with another: 
“freedom”. The freedom, after decades of work, to get up when you want, to 
choose how you will spend your day and to travel the world. But while some 
members of thethird age economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/series/third-age-economy> are lucky enough 
to enjoy just such a lifestyle when they retire, others will struggle to make 
ends meet.

We spoke to three 70-year-olds on different incomes to find out what life in 
retirement is really like in 2015.


‘I live within my means, and sometimes I even manage to save a little’

Liz Grant retired 10 years ago from her full-time job as a teacher, but 
continued teaching part-time until she was 67. She lives alone in a three-bed 
house in Northenden, a suburb of Manchester. She receives a final salary 
teacher’s pension of £11,000 a year, plus a state pension of £5,000 a year, 
bringing her annual income to £16,000.

“For years I was a single mother bringing up four children. We didn’t have a 
lot of money – just my teacher’s salary – so I learned to be economical. But as 
you get older your needs become smaller. I had no mortgage by the time I 
retired at 60, and my children had all left home. I have very little need of 
money nowadays,” she says.

“I live within my means, and sometimes I even manage to save a little bit. I 
don’t penny pinch, I just know how to shop for a bargain and to recognise good 
value. Plus, I cook from scratch and I bake.”

Grant spends three to four hours each day volunteering for a National 
Lottery-funded charity calledReal Food Wythenshawe 
<http://www.realfoodwythenshawe.com/>, which encourages local residents to grow 
and cook fresh food. “I like sharing my skills with young people in the local 
community, learning new skills from them and giving something back. I can 
afford to do it, and I enjoy it. It keeps my mind active,” she says.

Shortly after she retired Grant decided to downsize, so she could share her 
property wealth with her children. “I sold my four-bed house in the more 
prestigious area of Chorlton for £450,000 and bought my current place for 
£260,000.

“I gave £50,000 to each of my two eldest children, and invested the rest so I 
can help the other two as well, when they’re older. My bills are smaller now, 
and I still manage to go on holiday and have a good lifestyle. I don’t have any 
money worries. I consider myself to be very, very lucky.”

‘If the state pension didn’t exist, I’d have had it’

David Eton retired five years ago from his job in catering. He lives in north 
London with his wife, a care assistant, and her teenage daughter. His main 
source of income is the state pension –£152 a week – and, after he suffered a 
stroke, a heart attack and a crippling back injury, disability benefit of £300 
a month, which is a total of £11,504 a year. He has no savings and his 
one-bedroom flat (his wife’s daughter sleeps in the front room) is owned by a 
housing association.

“I spent my life working 12-hour days as a chef. I was a casual worker never 
knowing if I’d have a job from one week to the other. I earned just enough to 
pay my bills.

“You never thought about your pension in those days. Today, they tell you to 
save for one – but not then. And no one I worked for put anything aside for me. 
I got my wages, and that was it. If the state pension didn’t exist, I’d have to 
go around begging. I’d have had it.”

Unable to walk more than 10 yards unaided, his biggest expense is his car, 
which costs him £240 a month in loan repayments. “I need the car to go to 
hospital and church, but I hate being in debt.”

After paying for car insurance, hospital car parking charges, petrol, home 
contents insurance, water, gas, electricity and his TV licence, Eton is left 
with just £35 a week to live on. “Once a pound is gone you’re never going to 
get it back, so I try to spend it wisely. For example, I’ll shop for a £2 or £3 
chicken at the supermarket, usually in the evening when they start reducing 
their prices, then make it into a casserole. That will last us two or three 
days. Otherwise, I don’t go out much. I keep myself busy in the garden.”

His last holiday was in 2001, but he says what depresses him the most is being 
unable to afford an occasional beer in a pub. “Things are a lot more expensive 
than they used to be. It’s very hard. You work all your life and then it feels 
like you are on your own. I used to worry a lot about paying my bills. I would 
get angina. Now they give me pills to help with my anxiety, because I can’t do 
anything about it, can I? Life is what it is.”

‘We have more money than our annual needs. We enjoy life’

Colin Evans retired from his job as a financial adviser at 57, due to ill 
health. A few years later he met his now wife, Annette, and the couple moved to 
Cyprus in 2008. Their total annual income from pensions is £38,000 a year.

“Most of my income comes from private pensions I started saving into in my 
early 30s,” says Evans. “Fortunately, I’d had the good sense to buy pensions 
with guaranteed annuity rates of 10.5%. By today’s standards that’s an insanely 
high rate, but it wasn’t at the time.”

As well as his private pensions, Evans receives the state pension and more 
than £2,000 a year from an old employer: “That’s more than I used to receive in 
salary when I worked for them, thanks to a final salary scheme.”

The couple decided to move to Cyprus after spending some time in the village 
of Mandria on holiday. “It’s right by the beach, and when I first saw it I 
thought I’d died and gone to heaven. It was so quiet and peaceful,” says Evans.

They paid about £150,000 in cash for a house, using the proceeds of their 
property in the UK. “You get a much better quality of life and cheaper bills 
too. Our council tax is just £150 a year and our electricity and water bills 
come to about £51 a month in total. We spend the same amount on food as we 
would in England, only it’s fresher and mostly grown in the fields around us.”

His top financial priority is to get the best rate when he exchanges his 
pension income from the UK into euros. He says a recent find, the website
Transferwise <https://transferwise.com/>, has saved him about £1,000 so far 
this year.

Overall, Evans says he doesn’t have any financial worries. “We go back to the 
UK at least once a year to visit children and grandchildren, and have another 
holiday abroad every year as well. Because of the provisions we made for our 
old age during our working lives, we have more money than our annual needs. 
Now, we get to enjoy life.”
 