
Michael Owen, the narrator of alternate sections of What a Carve Up! and the 
apparent author of those parts written in the third person, has been a fan of 
Agatha Christie and Sherlock Holmes stories in his youth. When he visits 
Findlay Onyx, the elderly, camp private detective who has befriended him, he 
notices that his Islington bedsit is furnished exactly like the apartment of 
Thaddeus Sholto in Conan Doyle'sThe Sign of Four. The recognition is a symptom 
of his narrative self-consciousness.

"Mystery" is a word that Michael himself often uses. It signifies that he 
knows that he is a character in a plot. Indeed, he voices exactly this 
understanding near the end of the novel when he tells his new inamorata, 
Phoebe, "I thought I was supposed to be writing this story . . . but I'm not. 
At least not any more. I'm part of it."

This éclaircissement is more a confirmation than a surprise, for Findlay has 
already told Michael "the real mystery is you". Michael has been commissioned 
by the apparently mad but wealthy Tabitha Winshaw to write a history of her 
family, a collection of the nastiest and greediest and most successful 
individuals spawned by postwar British society. At the heart of his account, 
and the beginning of this novel, is the "mystery" of the disappearance of 
Godfrey Winshaw – the one decent member of the family – in a secret mission 
over Germany in 1942, and of Tabitha's deranged insistence that their brother 
Lawrence is to blame. While playing Cluedo with Joan, his friend from childhood 
and one of several women with whom he will fail to have an affair, Michael has 
had a premonition of his own involvement. He has been playing as Professor 
Plum, who, he realises, is the culprit: "I wondered what it would actually feel 
like, to be present at the unravelling of some terrible mystery . . . to find, 
all at once, that you were thoroughly and messily bound up in the web of 
motives and suspicions which you had presumed to untangle."

Michael was once a novelist, though as he begins his narrative he is a 
depressive recluse who has abandoned his career. In the middle of the novel he 
rediscovers a narrative fragment he wrote as a child called "The Castle of 
Mystery"; an awareness of mysteries is his narrative addiction. He keeps 
hearing the word. Joan uses it about his commission to write about the 
Winshaws. "So . . . are you going to tell me about this mysterious new project 
of yours?" He keeps using it himself of the odd events surrounding his attempts 
to catalogue the misdeeds of the Winshaws. When his own publisher has his house 
burgled and documents and photographs stolen, he is questioned by the 
publisher's formidable deputy: "The only effects of our conversation were to 
leave the mystery more clouded than ever." Riding a London bus to his next 
appointment with the hapless Findlay, he thinks of himself travelling "ever 
closer towards the next stage in a mystery . . ."

Made aware of "mysteries", the reader is alerted to the narrative significance 
of any otherwise unexplained detail. When characters smell jasmine, though 
there is none growing in any garden, we know it is a clue. When we hear that 
Lawrence wrote a note on the night of Godfrey's death containing the words 
"BISCUIT, CHEESE and CELERY" we realise that it cannot have been only an 
instruction for his supper. When Michael mentions twice that he and his parents 
never used to see his father's parents, we know that we will eventually 
discover the reason for this.

Mysteries are, in one sense, reassuring. For narrative mysteries, unlike 
mysteries in life, have solutions. Puzzles are set whose solutions a playful 
author has already envisaged. When Dickens died, he leftThe Mystery of Edwin 
Drood, his uncompleted novel, a mystery. What is the explanation of Drood's 
disappearance? We can at least be certain that there would have been an 
explanation. In life, mysteries tend not to have solutions, for there is no 
plot-maker (unless, like 18th-century novelists, you believe that God makes 
plots of all our lives). In the prologue toWhat a Carve Up! Michael ruminates 
on the mysterious death of his childhood hero Yuri Gagarin in an air 
"accident", and calls this "another of adulthood's ubiquitous, insoluble 
mysteries". Yet in the ending to this novel, Gagarin's fate is recalled and 
made part of Michael's story.

It is a mystery made into a final explanation, for explanation is always the 
other side of mystery.

John Mullan is professor of English at University College London. Join him and 
Jonathan Coe for a discussion on Wednesday 6 April in Hall One, Kings Place, 90 
York Way, London N1 9AG. Doors open at 6.30pm, talk starts at 7pm. Entry costs 
£9.50online <http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/> or £11.50 from the box office: 020 
7520 1490.
 