
Did you know that some body fat is worse than others? When I was a trainee 
surgeon, the fat that was on the inside, snuggled around the organs, was a 
glistening yellow, with a healthy blood supply. But these internal fat deposits 
are now accused of being health hazards. Like all sinister things, they go 
under various names – visceral, intraperitoneal, active or belly fat. And we’re 
not talking about “love handles” of subcutaneous fat beneath our skin.Visceral 
fat is linked to a higher risk of insulin resistance and diabetes 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21937614>. These, in turn, increase the 
risk of strokes, heart disease and some cancers.

The solution


It is not completely understood how visceral fat makes the body resistant to 
insulin (and hence allows blood glucose levels to rise).One theory is that the 
liver and muscles become less sensitive 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15173878> to insulin when there are higher 
circulating levels of fatty acids, which occurs when you have a deposit of fat 
inside. Fredrik Karpe, professor of metabolic medicine at theOxford Centre for 
Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism <http://www.ocdem.ox.ac.uk/home>, 
explains: “The turnover of visceral fat is more dynamic; if you don’t eat, then 
it reduces much more quickly than other fat depots. But visceral fat does 
something nasty.” Hip and leg fat accumulates slowly and is released slowly. 
But Karpe points out that, in terms of its evolutionary role, visceral fat 
generates a massive supply of energy from fatty acids when it is desperately 
needed. But, with our more sedentary lives and increased food intake, it now 
leaks fatty acids, whether we need them for energy or not.

If we are apple- or pear-shaped may depend on how our genes are expressed 
rather than any one gene defect. Karpe warns that, as well as diabetes, belly 
fat can cause sleep disorders, as it’s the equivalent of sleeping with a 
football inside your abdomen. This pushes your lungs up and can disrupt sleep.

The good news is visceral fat is so dynamic that you can shift it. You just 
have to eat less and exercise more – about half an hour a day of quite vigorous 
exercise should do it. If you can’t exercise without eating more, then just eat 
less: you need to have a negative energy balance for your belly to melt away. 
This is obviously not easy. But there is a handy way to see if you have a 
problem: measure your waist and then your hips (around the largest point) and 
divide the waist by the hip. If the resulting number is more than one for men 
or 0.85 for women, then you may have too much. You are excused from sit-ups – 
all they will do is help your abdominal muscles keep the fat in – but you 
should strive to shed it in other ways. Karpe is very clear: “It’s unwanted and 
you can’t have too little of it.”
 