
Television audiences have grown used to expelling Big Brother contestants, 
forcing minor celebrities to eat jungle insects, and crushing the dreams of 
tuneless pop hopefuls. A newChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> drama will take the trend to its 
logical conclusion, offering viewers the chance to shape an entire storyline by 
voting on the direction it should take and allowing them to play god with the 
fate of its central characters.

A host of British urban music stars have been cast in the gritty six-part 
series which hopes to encourage its predominantly young target audience to 
engage with issues, including guns and drugs.

The Mercury music prize-winning singer Ms Dynamite and many of the burgeoning 
new wave of British grime and rap artists, including Shystie, Rodney P and So 
Solid Crew, all appear in Dubplate Drama, which is due to air in November.

In an effort to reflect rapidly changing media habits, the interactive series 
will also air on the digital channels MTV Base and E4, and will be made 
available to watch on Sony's new PSP device and in a cut-down version on the 
mobile phone network 3. The ambitiousproject, believed to be a world first, 
will be watched with interest by other broadcasters who for several years have 
been considering how to make a viewer-led drama that retains a strong sense of 
scripted storytelling and takes advantage of innovations in mobile phone and 
interactive TV technology.

Last month, in a more limited application of the idea, BBC1 screened an 
amalgamated edition of the hospital dramas Casualty and Holby City in which 
viewers were given the chance to vote on which of two characters should be 
saved.

As ratings decline on traditional channels, broadcasters are looking for 
better ways to engage viewers and promote loyalty among fickle audiences. 
Younger people in particular no longer seem so keen on being passive viewers.

Each episode of Dubplate Drama will end with a dilemma for the central 
character, Dionne, played by the critically lauded female MC Shystie. Viewers 
will be invited to text in their decision, with their choice influencing the 
action in the next episode.

Sam Conniff, the co-founder of Livity, the youth marketing agency that helped 
put the project together, said: "Groups of teenagers will gossip for hours 
about their favourite MC but not [about] pressing social issues. That's the 
challenge."

The series is set in the world of south London tower blocks, MC battles and 
rival pirate radio stations, from which the grime scene, characterised by its 
skeletal beats and quickfire rapping in a defiantly British accent, sprang. Its 
25-year-old director, Luke Hyams, said the music was hugely popular, but 
because of its DIY ethos - with fans listening to pirate radio, swapping mix 
tapes and downloading songs from the internet - it made little impact on the 
mainstream.

Shystie said the motivation to make the series sprang from the paucity of 
television programmes reflecting black British youth culture. "We decided it 
would be great if we could put together a TV show dealing with our culture that 
kids can relate to," she said.

The series, in which Dionne also has to battle the dismissive attitude of her 
rival male MCs, attempts to provide a counterbalance to the idea that success 
in the genre is inextricably linked to guns and crime. "It's really positive, 
it's about showing that you don't need to get involved in the guns side of 
things," Shystie said.

"Black music and black culture is always shown as negative, we want to give it 
a positive twist."
 