
Six days after the presidential election, veteran reporter and anchor of PBS 
News Hour Gwen Ifilldied 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/postscript-gwen-ifill> at the age of 
61. One of the greats in her industry, Ifill thrived on complexity and research 
rather than the sound of her own voice. During presidential election cycles, 
she focused on issues in voters’ lives rather than on the race to name a winner.

While accepting an award from the National Press Foundation in 2007, Ifill 
said she was often asked to defend her profession. “Journalism is about asking 
the questions, not assuming the answers,” Ifill told the crowd.

Assuming the answers is precisely what most news media did this election, at 
the country’s great peril.

Last month, in a widely read essay for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/13/liberal-media-bias-working-class-americans>
, I called out the prevailing, erroneous assumption of 2016 election coverage: 
that the white working class was fueling Trump’s ascendence. All year, polls 
had shown that income, education level and other class markers did not predict 
Trump support. Still, the conflation of poor whiteness with political 
decision-making persisted within an elite media industry perhaps more 
comfortable discussing the racism of West Virginia than of Westchester, New 
York.

That industry now finds itself cast as public enemy by Americans across the 
political spectrum. Trump, Clinton and Sanders supporters criticized and 
accused the press all year, for different reasons – some valid, some false. 
And, just as trust in the news media is so weakened, a president-elect has made 
unprecedented threats to their freedom.

Dangerous idiots: how the liberal media elite failed working-class Americans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/13/liberal-media-bias-working-class-americans>
To find their center in such a sociopolitical storm, top news organizations 
could do less of the privileged bloviating that got them in trouble this year. 
They could spend more time on facts, however inconvenient to their personal 
ideas – like, say, that poor whites are the moral scourge of this country.

The next big mistake to avoid: the narrative of the divided nation

Exit polls revealed that the numbers my essay cited were correct. Trump got 
41% to 50% of votes – resoundingly white – at every income bracket. Among Trump 
voters, for every struggling white rural laborer, there was at least one 
comfortable white suburbanite.

Trump’s appeal has always been a white American problem, not a poor white 
American problem.

To show us “Trump country”, though, reporters drove rental cars into the poor 
hollers of Appalachia to ask poor whites why they were so angry. They set up 
cameras at Trump rallies to broadcast people in trucker hats screaming hateful 
things – an image that is endlessly palatable tosome white liberals, whose 
guilt over both race and wealth is assuaged by a story in which they are the 
good ones.

What America got out of it was a skewed understanding of this country and the 
election of a lifetime. What CNN got out it, on the other hand, was a reported 
$1bn dollars in gross profits this year.


It takes two to make a message work, though, and media consumers bear 
responsibility. Now, on the eve of a transfer in political power, we must 
resist another misleading media narrative. It’s the story Trump successfully 
banked on: the divided nation, symbolized by a dangerous red-and-blue map.

 If you’ve been watching news coverage, there’s a good chance this phrase is 
now bumping about in your mind:urban v rural. I have been both, and I promise 
you that one does not contain a people superior to or essentially different 
from the other. Reject this phrase.

Millions of people, members of my white, working-class Kansas family included, 
are heartbroken today in red states right along with New York. And millions of 
people in blue states voted for Trump. The clunky state map is good for gauging 
the electoral college at a glance, but a more accurate geopolitical rendering 
is one in whicheach state is a violet hue representing voting proportions 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=1000933210030046&set=a.133287786794597.21742.100003401290351&type=3&theater>
 or, even better, each county is a reddish or bluish purple. Such maps reveal 
that cities and countrysides, the coasts and the states between, have far more 
in common than we tell ourselves.

We are a divided nation in electoral votes, ideologies and self-selected 
social-media bubbles, there is no doubt.


On the ground, however, between human beings, is a more nuanced story. It’s a 
story that cannot be reduced to a red and blue map, or even a purple one.
Sometimes it involves people doing horrible things to others – an element of 
society magnified by news coverage for good reason. More often, it involves 
people trying their best. Being helpful and brave and petty in the same day. 
Being complicated individuals in a world bent on categorizing them: as voters, 
as consumer demographics, as suppliers of data and creators of content.

Step outside your whirring post-election thoughts and look another human being 
in the eye. The story you find there will never fit on a bumper sticker for a 
political campaign. It will never fit in a soundbite.


It will never be told by a mostly white, affluent coastal media, which many 
Americans rightly believe doesn’t speak for or to them. It will never be valued 
by profit-driven networks, one leader of which infamously said this year of the 
Trump phenomenon: “It may not be good for America, but it’s damn good for CBS 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/leslie-moonves-donald-trump-may-871464>.”

What’s broken about American media perhaps has less to do with a class system 
than with what created it: unchecked capitalism in which news is a fast product.

There isn’t some mass political conspiracy in the media. There is, however, 
historic wealth inequality in America, and the journalism industry reflects it 
like any other.


My essay speculating on these themes garnered a humbling wave of endorsements. 
The thousands of messages I received suggested that a diverse swath of society 
had reached a tipping point about class inequality. The messages were from 
working-class people who felt vindicated; middle- or upper-class people who 
broadened their perspectives; citizens of other countries who noted similar 
scapegoating of disenfranchised groups in the UK and beyond.

They were also from journalists saying they’d do better.

That such a varied group found something to align with in the same words 
confirmed what I have always believed: media consumers crave nuance.


In national media, however, fixation with an aggrieved working class never 
lessened. After reading my essay, some high-profile media outlets even framed 
my message – that the white working class was not Trump’s base – as “Trump 
supporters are misunderstood”. I was bearing witness to progressivism in 
so-called red states, but they saw me as some sort of Trump whisperer. That 
some interviewers insisted I speak for his voters ironically reinforced my 
message that entrenched narratives lead us away from the truth.

Forget about political stripes. Protect the press

Those who voted for Trump knew about the women stuff. They knew about the 
minorities stuff. Still, they weren’t deterred – believing, perhaps, that those 
caustic elements of their candidate’s personality wouldn’t affect them.

Here is something that will.

As of today, they are living under the protections of the first amendment to 
the constitution of the United States. Freedom of the press is a part of that 
amendment – one of the great markers of this democracy and a privilege people 
in totalitarian countries are persecuted without.

Two years ago, I spent a December evening with fellow journalists and PEN 
America, which protects free expression worldwide, writing holiday cards of 
solidarity to imprisoned journalists around the world behind held behind bars, 
possibly tortured and raped, for attempting to reveal corruption, genocide and 
other injustices that American citizens would be more vulnerable to without an 
unencumbered press.



Trump and the Republicans he is bringing to Washington do not care for a free 
press, as has been documented for the past year. The president-elect has denied 
credentials to those who dared to report unflattering facts; called Fox News 
host Megyn Kelly a bimbo after she described his misogyny; promised to 
dismantle free-speech laws for the purpose of filing libel suits; and named 
Stephen Bannon,executive chairman of extremist propagandist Breitbart News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/15/breitbart-news-alt-right-stephen-bannon-trump-administration>
, as a senior White House strategist. He has plainly admired the government of 
Russia, where so many journalistshave been murdered 
<https://cpj.org/killed/europe/russia/> in the recent years that they hold a 
national day of remembrance.

Such casual malice toward the people’s watchdog endangers every American, 
regardless of their political stripes.

How journalists should organize and fight in such an environment is a long and 
uncertain discussion. What is clear is that, even if they get every story right 
from now to eternity, they fight a losing battle without the trust and support 
of the American public.

To regain that trust, a good place to start would be media literacy outreach 
efforts in public schools, local organizations and other community spaces. 
Ideally, civics education would be fully restored in the public school system, 
with a robust unit on media literacy. Every American should be equipped to 
discern news from propaganda and all the gray areas in between in the digital 
21st century; understand the laws thatthreatened and protected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/12/amy-goodman-arrest-warrant-north-dakota-oil-pipeline-protest>
 Amy Goodman of Democracy Now in covering the Standing Rock protests this fall; 
and identify the various economic models and interests served in media.

Speaking of media literacy, it is worth noting that the coastal “media elite” 
were never meant to unearth stories across the middle of this country – those 
states ignored by presidential campaigns and therefore by the press corps that 
follow them. Someone else used to do that.


Local newspapers.

We must rebuild local journalism

It is no coincidence that the rise of endless cable and online sources, 
coupled with the economic fall of local and rural newspapers, occurred just 
before one of the most divisive political climates in American history.

There was a time when we all watched the same three national news networks 
and, locally, the same affiliate stations; we all read the same handful of 
national newspapers and, locally, the same city rags. One danger in that 
centralized information model was that a single group – college-educated white 
men – set the rules and told the stories.


In this new world, now is the time to support fearless, independent journalism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/nov/09/with-trump-victorious-time-to-support-fearless-independent-journalism>
The digital era, in which media sources are decentralized but not necessarily 
diversified, presents a new sort of danger. With half of us on Fox News, half 
of us on CNN or MSNBC, and nearly all of us on self-constructed pipelines of 
tweets and Facebook posts by like-minded individuals, we not only receive 
different information –we perceive different realities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/facebook-bias-bubble-us-election-conservative-liberal-news-feed>
.


For much of the country, less and less of that perceptioncomes from 
journalists who’ve stepped foot in our own states, let alone our towns or 
counties. Due to the economic withering of local news outlets, most of the 
journalists I trained with at the turn of the millennium have been laid off or 
fled to industries with more stable incomes.

Much was lost in that decline, but perhaps more was gained in the opportunity 
we now have to rebuild local journalism in a way that not only rectifies 
geographical imbalances but includes voices from previously unrepresented 
communities; harnesses technology to engage and include previously passive 
readers; and makes the stories of previously isolated people available not just 
to themselves but to the world.

Journalists across the country, myself included, are working on doing just 
that. In my region, seeThis Land Press <http://thislandpress.com/>, The New 
Territory <http://newterritorymag.com/> and Fly Over Media 
<http://flyovermedia.org/>, all of which were founded in recent years by 
mid-career midwesterners for doing in-depth, investigative, multimedia and even 
literary work about the American heartland.


The places they cover contain stories and lessons relevant to the entire 
country. Few would have been better equipped to handle Trump’s media 
manipulations, for example, than aKansas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/kansas> journalist.

That’s because, for decades, the hate-mongering, nationally infamous Westboro 
Baptist clan has resided in Topeka, the state capital. They frequently fan 
across the state with protest signs reading “God hates fags”. One of the first 
lessons I learned as a budding Kansas reporter was how to both dutifully report 
the news and not be used as a puppet.

Westboro receives coverage in Kansas outlets when warranted, but by and large 
their sidewalk show ceased to be newsworthy when it became a strategy to play 
the news media for free airtime.

This unwritten, situational code among Kansas journalists – who could instead 
sell papers and increase ratings by placing Westboro’s horrific stunts front 
and center – is one of the most dignified, human approaches to journalism I’ve 
ever had the honor of sharing. It is the opposite of a multibillion-dollar 
cable TV empire’s reveling in Trump’s rise.

You are part of the solution: the media consumer’s role

Media consumers might consider turning off those news sources that have proved 
themselves both easily manipulated and compromised by their own ideologies.

Trump knew the most powerful journalists would have a blind spot, whether 
willful or subconscious, to his supporters in their own economic class. His 
media mastery is such that he might create a TV network under the Trump brand, 
a veritable state television station with a profit-based mission.



Trump’s cynical media vision might have a blind spot itself. A ruthless 
businessman perhaps wouldn’t understand why most people become reporters – the 
vast majority of whom are the least elite bunch of rogues you ever saw wearing 
wrinkled Dockers from JC Penney.

It sure as hell isn’t for the money or the glamour, both of which are in short 
supply in most newsrooms. It is for the word (or image or sound) that informs, 
reveals, bears witness. It is for eschewing the human habit of making 
assumptions in order to dwell in questions, which rarely lead to infallible 
answers and always point toward universal human stories.

Undemocratic ideas will soon control all three branches of government. But, so 
long as the bill of rights remains intact and implemented, they will never 
seize the fourth estate. The passion that fuels a journalism career, or that 
fuels respect for and support of the profession, is the same passion that will 
work to keep this country out of the shadows for the next four years. Just shy 
of a week after the election – the day Gwen Ifill died – the American Civil 
Liberties Union tweeted that it was stronger than it had ever been, in its 
100-year history, after an influx of new supporters.

Yes, national, corporate, mainstream media got this election wrong and even 
played a leading part in its unfolding. But if you care about democracy, the 
sensible reaction to this fact is not to vilify all media or, as at least one 
Trump voter suggested with a T-shirt, hang a journalist.

The sensible reaction, as a media consumer, is to demand better of it and to 
do better by it. To acknowledge that your participation shapes it – each click 
begets more clickbait or, if you choose, something better. To be aware of its 
sources and funders. To pay at least as much for its best, fairest, most 
civically responsible outlets as you pay for coffee. And, above all, to 
understand the necessity of its freedom.

Without liberty, there is no true journalism. 

Without journalism, there is no America.

This story was produced with partial support from the Economic Hardship 
Reporting Project <http://economichardship.org/>, a nonprofit devoted to 
reporting about economic inequality
 