
Although 2016 sounded the death knell for the Independent’s print edition, it 
also witnessed the launch of weekly print newspaper, The New European – billed 
as a “pop-up paper” aimed at remain voters following the Brexit referendum. 
This year has also seen a growing audience for online magazines such as The 
Pool and The Lad Bible Group, which reaches more than 150 million people a 
month. In a time of such flux, we asked five industry experts what the future 
of publishing will look like:

Lorraine Candy, former editor-in-chief of Elle UK, incoming Sunday Times 
luxury content editor

I think the demise of print is a myth. There is enough evidence to prove that 
there will be print, and it will continue to be in many forms and be available 
in many places.

It is an ever-changing world driven very hard by consumers and by companies 
that aggregate content likeFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, but you have to adapt your 
business to fit a) where the money is and b) where your audience is.

All of these social media businesses are about telling a story and then 
building a business around it, and you have to be very collaborative. Those 
people at the top of their blogging game are knowledgeable and powerful and 
reach a new consumer. Why would I not work with them? Why would I not work with 
Instagram? It is a really brilliant place to put very beautiful images and we 
are in the business of beautiful images.

There will be a lot more brand extension in future. One of the things we were 
exploring at Elle was using our editors to work with brands before they create 
their advertising. [The future] will be about working in a much more 
collaborative, better and bespoke way.

Simon Fox, CEO, Trinity Mirror

I continue to hope there will be a role for print in 10 or maybe even 20 
years, but the challenge is, will the generation that has not grown up with 
papers migrate to print? There is no reason to think they will embrace print 
and therefore it is incredibly important that we as publishers get the right 
digital proposition, both editorially and commercially, and that is what we are 
struggling with. Publishers have a very strategic decision to make, which is 
how much of their content to make available on social media platforms and how 
that is going to be monetised in the future.


Adblocking is a very serious issue and we and other publishers need to 
recognise that digital advertising can’t be our sole revenue stream. It is a 
very important one, but we need to develop other revenue streams from our 
enormous digital audience. E-commerce is one area. The Sun has gone heavily 
into betting, for example, which is also important for us, because about one 
quarter of our content is sports related. Ticketing is another huge area that 
clearly make sense, particularly locally. These are nascent revenue streams but 
ones which are growing pretty fast.

Bob Franklin, professor of journalism studies, Cardiff University

When you’re teaching journalism, you teach students how to write that opening 
paragraph that will attract the attention of search engines but you get these 
grotesque “filter bubbles” [where website algorithms guess what content users 
would like based on previous behaviour]. A search engine knows what sort of 
things attracts readers so you put the words in and you take people down an 
ever narrower editorial road. In the end, all they read is stuff which 
reinforces their views, but never challenges their integrity.

There is also a lot of stuff going on in drone journalism, or “dronalism”. You 
just fly these things up in the air and they take pictures, or you park it 
outside someone’s room to overhear a conversation. All this stuff is producing 
stories; it’s big data. One big problem is that when people go online they stop 
buying and reading the print product and, there are various ratios, but one is 
that you’ve got to get 100 online readers to match the [ad] revenue income from 
one print reader. It’s a real uphill battle and you can’t run with that sort of 
business model.

Lucie Greene, worldwide director of The Innovation Group, J Walter Thompson, 
which recently published their own ‘pop-up’ magazine, Glass


There’s a parting of the ways occurring in publishing. On the one hand, you 
have mass market print brands shrinking (US title Teen Vogue will reduce from 
nine issues a year to four next year), and focusing on digital content 
strategies. You have new players, like The Pool, and The Midult launching 
online first and having events to bring this to life, rather than spending on 
print.

Increasingly new information is also going audio – we’re seeing branded 
podcasts becoming the next avenue of branded content. Amazon Echo is allowing 
people to seek information and content, listen to entertainment and shop, 
audibly, and people interact with it verbally. We’re discussing things with 
Siri, rather than emailing. People are publishing podcasts over blogs.


The flipside is that we’re seeing a renaissance in print titles – particularly 
design and women’s titles which are intentionally luxurious, in beautiful high 
quality paper, and priced at a luxury price point. The Gentlewoman, Riposte and 
Cherry BombBombe are all examples of print titles that make print a luxury 
experience, something slow, not disposable, and considered. It’s a counterpoint 
and a step away from the bigger mass market titles which have focused on scale 
rather than price point.

Roy Greenslade, Guardian columnist and professor of journalism, City, 
University of London

“What we thought would be a transition from mainstream to digital, which was 
already a big disruption, is now being disrupted by “new” digital tools, such 
as Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest and Instagram. Social media companies need to 
realise they do need us. And I think at the moment they don’t. They think they 
can use us and abuse us, but gradually they are killing the goose that lays the 
golden egg.

We ought to think about who set the agenda for the Brexit debate – undoubtedly 
the mainstream newspapers. If you look at the decline in print, in 10 years’ 
time they will not be in a position to do that. So what does concern me is, 
where will the forum be for a national conversation? Facebook? Facebook is an 
example of the “Daily Me”: you only want to read what you want to read, and 
Facebook feeds that back to you through algorithms and then you are not 
accessing new information, new ideas, new thoughts.

I still have faith in human beings. Algorithmic “dronist” journalism is 
frankly not the kind of journalism which will really provide enough 
intellectual insight to readers. Data journalism can be accomplished with 
algorithmic help, and drones can be very helpful, but in the end we need humans 
to analyse what they bring back.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 