
The decision by Trinity Mirror to “hand back” four of its Metro franchises to 
their ultimate owner, dmg media, “because of questions over profitability 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/pressure-on-profitability-sees-trinity-mirror-give-up-metro-franchises-in-scotland-cardiff-bristol-and-nottingham/>
” is not quite as it may seem.

What it really illustrates are the divergent strategies of two major 
publishers.Trinity Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror>, 
acutely aware of the difficulties of selling regional newsprint titles, is 
eager to forge ahead with a switch to digital.

By contrast, dmg media, the publishing arm of the Daily Mail & General Trust 
(DMGT), has managed to make a huge success of its nationally distributed free 
paper,Metro <https://www.theguardian.com/media/metro>. It has found a way to 
make newsprint pay, and handsomely at that.


That’s the reason it feels confident enough to increase its national 
distribution by 10% from 1 October, raising its total daily figure to a total 
of 1.47m.

In a sense, both publishers stand to gain from Trinity relinquishing the Metro 
contracts for Scotland, Cardiff, Bristol and the East Midlands.

Although those franchises are profitable, Trinity thinks the returns too 
marginal. Then again, aside from a single seller in Scotland, it didn’t set out 
to secure advertising for its Metros for obvious reasons: it needs its own 
papers in those regions to maximise the advertising take.

It is holding on, however, to its four other Metro franchises in the larger 
cities - Manchester, Liverpool,Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> and Newcastle - because, despite 
the competition with its own titles, it sees a benefit is doing so.

In fact, Metro is read by many more people in Birmingham and Newcastle than 
the print versions of Trinity’s own titles.

Metro’s managers are evidently delighted with the fact that Trinity is handing 
over four franchises and would be even more pleased if they could have the 
other four (plus the single contract, in Yorkshire, held by Johnston Press).

A Metro source told me the paper’s management were sure that the titles would 
make “an instant and significant” contribution to the bottom line. They believe 
the four can make healthy profits despite Trinity Mirror arguing otherwise.


It is well to recall that the original contracts between Metro’s owner and the 
regional companies were drawn up in order to defuse arguments about Metro’s 
intrusion into the regions.


Giving regional publishers the chance to print the papers and enjoy a portion 
of the advertising revenue can be seen as something of a truce deal.

Since then, as the digital revolution has rolled on, the situation has 
changed, as witnessed by Trinity Mirror’s online ambitions. Meanwhile, Metro 
has become a standout counter-revolutionary newsprint success.

I mistakenly wrote in May this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/may/27/suddenly-national-newspapers-are-heading-for-that-print-cliff-fall>
 that Metro’s profits - which dmg media refuses to break out from its overall 
figures - were slight. In fact, I am reliably informed that the paper makes 
more than £1m a month and, possibly, much more.

One major reason for that is the revenue it enjoys from classified 
advertising. So it’s no wonder that dmg media, which will have 75% of Metro in 
its grasp when it assumes responsibility for the Trinity quartet on 1 January 
2017, would like to control 100%.

London remains its most lucrative region by far. Most of the extra copies it 
will distribute from next month will be in the capital, with a greater presence 
on buses. Some 900,000 copies will be available each morning in the 
metropolitan area - up from 763,000 - and will therefore reach roughly the same 
distribution total as the London Evening Standard.

Charlie Cox, Metro’s chief executive, called the expansion a “testament to 
Metro’s continued success”, while its editor, Ted Young, referred to “the 
extremely low return rate we see on our London edition... [so] we know the 
appetite is definitely there for these extra copies.”
 