
From their flat in Southport, Merseyside, with boxes of medical supplies 
stacked next to a single bed, Charlotte and Jayson Carmichael are taking on the 
government – and with it arguably the most loathed social security policy of 
this decade.

Eviction is the last refuge for poor tenants | Dawn Foster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/18/eviction-poor-tenants-social-landlords-homelessness-welfare-cuts>
Charlotte, 43, has a severe spinal condition which leaves her partially 
confined to a specialist bed, and Jayson, 53 – her husband of 18 years – is her 
full-time carer. Sharing an ordinary double bed with Jayson would damage her 
permanent pressure sores, and their flat, partly adapted for Charlotte’s needs, 
is too small to put two singles in one room. Anyone who’s followed the news 
over the last three years can guess what I’m going to write next: in April 
2013, along with hundreds of thousands of other tenants, the Carmichaels had 
their housing benefit cut by thebedroom tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/27/the-bedroom-tax-explained>. 
Because Charlotte’s carer is also her husband, Jayson’s bedroom – a room in 
which he sleeps every night – is classed as “spare” by the Department for Work 
and Pensions, and the Carmichaels lose £12 a week.

Next week, as part of a group of five families, the Carmichaels will go to the 
supreme court in abid to prove the bedroom tax discriminates against disabled 
adults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/10/disabled-tenants-bedroom-tax-challenge-supreme-court>
 – a case that could have major ramifications for the entire system.

I’ve spoken to Jayson off and on since spring 2013: from the emergency 
application for discretionary housing payments (DHP) so he and Charlotte could 
pay the rent, to the almost two-year battle to get this month’s case to the 
supreme court. Meanwhile, the hospital appointments and the bills have kept 
coming.

Ask Jayson what’s kept him going and he’ll tell you, with a steadfast 
certainty, that it’s Charlotte – and “all the other disabled people” out there 
in their position. He’s hopeful, and lists successful legal challenges to the 
government for me as reassurance. But the stress is clear. “Month after month, 
there’s another hurdle,” he says. “Good news, then bad. It all takes its toll.”

In spring 2014 a local tribunal ruled them exempt from the policy but three 
months later the DWP began an appeal

“Sometimes I see him going off in his own little world … a depression,” 
Charlotte adds. “The bedroom tax is always there. It never goes away.”

In spring 2014, a local tribunal ruled the couple exempt from the policy (and 
reinstated their full housing benefit) – but three months later the DWP began 
an appeal. “It kicked the breath out of me,” Jayson says. “Now the DWP have 
paused the appeal until the supreme court decision.”

It’s not hard to see why Jayson describes their lives as being “stuck in 
limbo”. Charlotte’s mobility scooter blocks the flat’s hallway and boxes of 
incontinence pads and catheters are stacked in the front room. But because the 
bedroom tax means they’re only eligible for one-bed properties Jayson says 
their housing association won’t look for a bigger property for them. “We 
actually need more space,” he says. “But the DWP say we need less.”

He worries that if they lose the supreme court case the DWP will also win its 
appeal at the local tribunal – and he’ll have to start finding the extra rent 
again, and possibly arrears of about £1,500. Their only income is a mix of 
Charlotte’s sickness benefits and Jayson’s carer’s allowance.

“I don’t think we’d get a DHP this time,” he says. “The council says they’re 
cash-strapped. We applied for severe hardship pay for council tax when they 
dropped exemption for disabled people … We got help the first time but they 
turned us down last year.”

Disabled child's family 'mad angry' over Tories' bedroom tax appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/27/disabled-childs-family-mad-angry-over-tories-bedroom-tax-appeal>
“With that debt … We could get evicted and God knows what will happen to us,” 
he says. “Charlotte could have to go into residential care. If we have one 
bedroom, how can I care for her?”

That’s the thing with the bedroom tax. To a government minister, a tenner or 
so a week doesn’t seem much. But for the people that the tax targets – social 
housing tenants, largely struggling with disabilities or ill health – it can be
enough to push them over the edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/12/bedroom-tax-households-eviction-rent-arrears>
.

I ask if they’ll make it to London next week for the court case – or, as 
Jayson puts it, “this last final attempt to get some justice”. As ever, they’re 
going to try. “Our solicitor says she’ll try to get legal aid for us for a 
Premier Inn and accessible taxis,” Jayson says. “Health allowing.”

Charlotte had an operation at Christmas, and she finds it hard to get out of 
the flat. “Things without the bedroom tax are bad enough,” she says. “I don’t 
want to be in this bed. None of this has been a choice.”
 