
Research and analysis firm, The Economist Intelligence Unit 
<https://www.eiu.com/home.aspx> (EIU), recently surveyed 201 senior executives 
at businesses with annual revenues of $250m-$500m to find out about the 
progress of digital initiatives in their organisations, and their perceptions 
about the role of IT in digital transformation. The survey, sponsored by SAP, 
illuminated a fight at the front lines of business in a sector that is every 
bit as determined to benefit from the opportunities of digital technology as it 
is to mitigate threats of disruption from startups. A perceived lack of clear 
leadership, however, leaves the digital agenda disjointed and spotty across 
many small and medium sized businesses (SMBs). Should IT do more to drive 
digital transformation at SMBs? Many executives believe so.

Digital transformation with the customer at the centre

The survey revealed that digital transformation is a top priority for all 
businesses as they look to evolve and rise to the top. SMB executives, similar 
to their counterparts at large enterprises, expressed their overwhelming 
support for digital transformation to drive competitiveness, with two-thirds 
giving it a very favourable ranking among top priorities in their 
organisations. In fact, 22% of respondents identified digital transformation as 
their highest strategic priority, while an additional 42% classified it as a 
relatively high strategic priority. The objectives that SMBs want to achieve 
with digital transformation are also very similar to those of large 
enterprises. The most commonly cited objectives were “improving the way our 
organisation uses data and information” (42%) and “improving our products and 
services using digital technology” (41%).

In comparison to large enterprises or startups, SMBs encounter some 
significant challenges as well as advantages. For example, SMBs face notable 
challenges of scale and budget that are not commonly shared by large 
enterprises. To their benefit, however, SMBs are typically more agile in their 
ability to respond to market pressures. They also benefit from having more 
established customer relationships, when compared to nimble start-ups. It is 
therefore not surprising to see that SMBs are investing in digital technologies 
that enhance and amplify customer relationships.

According to the survey, in the past three years SMBs have been focused on 
customer-facing digital initiatives, with 64% of respondents saying that their 
organisation had launched new customer-facing digital channels – a 9% increase 
over large enterprise respondents. 63% say they have launched new products or 
services made possible by digital technology. Social media initiatives topped 
the list as the most common area of investment, named by 73% of respondents. 
M-commerce, the fastest-growing segment of the online retail sector, is another 
area of focus for SMBs.

Closing the leadership gap to improve results

Despite this investment in new technologies, SMBs still risk being left behind 
in digital transformation. The reason is simple: digital initiatives at SMBs 
are not producing optimal results. In fact, the survey uncovered a sizable gap 
in satisfaction with digital initiatives among SMB executives. Only 17% of 
respondents were able to say that their company’s initiatives are “highly 
effective” – compared to 27% of respondents at larger enterprises.

The reasons behind this are as varied as SMBs themselves, but some common 
themes appeared in the survey responses. For example, at SMBs there is often a 
lack of strategic oversight to guide digital projects, including the definition 
of a clear digital strategy. Additionally, digital initiatives at SMBs tend to 
be led by individual departments, rather than the IT department – as was cited 
in 32% of the survey responses.

The respondents were vocal in expressing their wishes to see the IT department 
step up to take on a more active leadership role in the organisation. Here is 
what they said:

 * 39% of SMB executives believe that the IT department should take up a more 
active role in improving organisational agility; however, just 9% report that 
their IT department takes active leadership in this area. 
 * 40% believe their IT department should lead the organisation in selecting, 
implementing, and integrating digital technology; however, only 14% report that 
it is doing this. 
 * 29% want their IT department to lead on opportunities to innovate; however, 
just 3% say that it does. 
Based on survey results, the EIU concludes: “The most valuable contribution IT 
executives at SMBs could make to their company’s digital fortunes is to 
initiate a conversation with their peers about devising a digital 
transformation strategy that offers a model of cross-functional collaboration 
that the rest of the organisation can follow.”

However, the EIU is careful to state that the IT department alone cannot lead 
digital transformation – not without a supportive corporate culture. Before 
SMBs can really begin to gain value from the IT department’s experience and 
expertise, the entire organisation will need to evolve.

Jacqueline Prause is an SAP journalist and senior managing editor at SAP News 
Services

To read the complete report from the EIU, see Digitising IT: Catalysts for 
Growth <https://go.sap.com/cmp/dg/crm-xm16-gam-sme-tr10/index.html>


This advertisement feature is paid for by SAP <http://go.sap.com/index.html>, 
which supports the Guardian Media & Tech Network’sDigital business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/digital-business> hub.
 