
As two young constables dash into the room of silently seated police men and 
women, making breathless apologies, one of them asks: “Have you started yet? 
We’ve been out on an eviction but we didn’t want to miss the meditation.”

This is lunchtime in inner-city Salford’s fortress-style Pendleton police 
station, and the man with a pair of Tibetan chimes facing the group is 
neighbourhood police officer, PC Ewen Sim, poised to deliver a session of 
mindfulness.

The bearded 39-year-old is one of 13 Greater Manchester police (GMP) officers 
who have volunteered to train as advanced mindfulness practitioners to deliver 
this secular form of meditation across the whole of GMP. The aim is to combat 
escalating absenteeism and stress across the 11,000-strong force.

Mindfulness is about keeping police officers fit for their role. There’s 
nothing mystical in this – it’s just practical.
Chief superintendent Zoe Sheard 
“There’ll be no hypnosis, beanbags or joss sticks today,” states Sim to his 
colleagues, some of whom look tense and sceptical. Many are still wearing their 
body armour, with radio sets at their shoulders.

He explains that if stress is like a train, then mindfulness is “about giving 
you something to get yourself off it – a couple of stops before it hits the 
buffers”. In the hour that follows, Sim’s voice slows as he promises a 
“full-file approach” (police speak for “evidence-based”) to mindfulness. He 
presents some science, acknowledges the stark reality they all face, of 
policing Salford in an era of austerity, and then takes the mixed-rank group of 
a dozen men and women through two meditations – one encouraging “focus on the 
breath” and the other deep relaxation.

For some it’s their first experience of meditation. Others are coming back for 
more. In the seconds following the ching of the Tibetan chimes, a gentle snore 
creeps into the silence and another officer surreptitiously mops his eyes with 
a tissue.

Stress, anxiety and depression are a major problem for all UK police forces. 
The number of police officers and police staff taking time off for 
psychological reasons went up 35% from 4,544 in 2010 to 6,129 in 2015,figures 
released to the BBC under the Freedom of Information Act show 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-35965223>. It is now the main reason for 
long-term absence.

Greater Manchester police’s sickness levels escalated by 20% from 2013-2014 to 
2014-15 
<http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:SCKhpIiDpZgJ:library.college.police.uk/docs/theses/OWEN-Supporting-staff-GMP-Research-Initiative-Focussing-on-Understanding-Absenteeism-Linked-to-Psychological-Illness.docx+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=uk>
. The equivalent of an entire GMP division (just over 460 staff, on average) is 
lost to sickness each day, at a cost of more than £17m per year (based on the 
average salary of a police constable). Anxiety and stress accounts for 28% of 
all sickness.

But mindfulness for stoic coppers? Chief superintendent Zoe Sheard is the 
wellbeing lead for GMP. She answers an adamant “yes”. “My view is that mental 
health is as important to a police officer as physical health.” she says. “We 
want them to go out and deal with conflict, but those same people will also 
have to deal with victims too – with compassion and often in the same incident.
Mindfulness <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/mindfulness> is about 
keeping them fit for each role. There’s nothing mystical in this – it’s just 
practical.”

The secret policeman: Stress leave? I remember when whisky was all we got | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/02/secret-policeman-stress-whisky-talk-job>
Growing evidence indicates that the integrative, mind-body based approach 
developed in the 1970s by Jon Kabat Zinn 
<https://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/a-to-z/m/mindfulness> helps people to manage 
their thoughts and feelings. It is recommended by theNational Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence as a preventive practice for people with recurrent 
depression 
<https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg90/chapter/1-guidance?UNLID=13698501201599233454>
.

Even the US Marines have experimented with the technique to build resilience. A
study in the American Journal of Psychiatry (2014) 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4458258/>found that the heart and 
breathing rates of mindful Marines returned to normal faster than those of the 
control group members after exposure to stress.

GMP had carried out a number of surveys over the past three years and 
identified mental health as a major problem. Sheard presented mindfulness to 
her senior colleagues as a way of maintaining staff health. Despite some raised 
eyebrows, around 100 police volunteers received an introduction to mindfulness, 
and of these 41 decided to try a four-week intensive course one day a week. A 
further 13 (including Sim) were trained to teach the practice to others.

With Sheard’s support, Sim was taken off his normal frontline duties after 
presenting a business case for delivering mindfulness to his colleagues in the 
Salford division over a six-week period. Attendance is voluntary. For some it’s 
a one-off. Others have attended several sessions on a weekly basis. To date, 
250 police and back-office staff, out of close on 700 staff, have attended 
Sim’s sessions. Similar projects may be set up across all 12 GMP divisions.

Sim, who is a practising Buddhist, is clear that mindfulness is not a magic 
bullet, but he sees it as a “strengthener” for colleagues who face a daily 
threat of assault, and sometimes have to operate solo. He says: “If you go to 
traumatic incidents day-in, day-out, as we do in Salford, you don’t know where 
[in you r mind and body] that stress is being stored.”

He was drawn to mindfulness after suffering anxiety following a divorce, on 
top of an already stressful job. He has to deal with sceptics. PC Steve Hough 
was one of them. After two cardiac arrests in three years he was struggling 
mentally, but initially wrote mindfulness off as “not for me”. He went back out 
of desperation. The third session – which he’d decided would be his last – 
changed everything for him. Hough says: “I came away feeling as though I’d had 
a power nap and that stress-free feeling stayed with me for the rest of that 
day. I’m looking to keep that going. The breathing exercises were particularly 
good and I use them to help me to sleep.”

PC Cath Hangnail, who is on the beat in Pendleton, does too – particularly 
when she changes shifts. She says: “I think it is fantastic. In this job you 
never know what you are going to face in a day - it could be anything from 
death to shoplifting. In the mindfulness session I went into my own little 
world and I came out walking on air.”

The impact of GMP’s mindfulness experiment is being evaluated at Manchester 
Metropolitan University and GMP chiefs are considering how best to make the 
technique available across the force. ThePolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Mutual society is considering funding a 
national pilot in Greater Manchester for its application to more senior police 
leaders.

Back at Pendleton police station, Sim is preparing his group of super-relaxed 
police officers for going back on shift, instructing them to raise their hands, 
palms forward and waggle their fingers (“jazz hands” style) and move their arms 
and legs: “Right, before you go back on patrol, go and have a bite to eat and a 
rest,” he says. “I don’t want you going out and doing jazz hands as you go 
about your work!”
 