
How simple these things used to be in the old days! In January 1921, Winston 
Churchill wrote to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Austin Chamberlain, saying 
he had a small problem. He was at present the holder of some £15,000 worth of 
South African stock. (That's about £330,000 today). But he'd also just agreed 
to become Colonial Secretary, and therefore, in a sense, was now in charge of 
South Africa. Ought he to sell? What did Chamberlain think? 'It is not easy,' 
the Chancellor began reflectively, 'for a man in public life, even with the 
most scrupulous care, so to invest his money that no one of his investments 
shall ever be affected or be capable of being affected by action of the British 
government.' (The exchange is contained in volume 4, part 3 of Martin Gilbert's 
companion volume to his Churchill biography.) The rest was more reassuring. 
There was, as far as he could see, no probability, or even possibility, that 
the holdings of these investments in a self-governing dominion could conflict 
with Churchill's performance of his duties or cause him embarrassment. All he 
needed to do was to tell the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of his interest, 
which he had done, and resolve to leave the investments unaltered during his 
term in office. 'More than this cannot properly be expected of us and will not, 
I believe, be demanded by any section of public opinion.' How some of today's 
ministers (and ex-ministers) must wish they were living with yesterday's press 
and yesterday's public opinion.

And that didn't just go for the Tories. Tribunites who've been vehement in 
condemning the Robinson/Mandelson loan may be unaware of the murky waters in 
which their great hero Nye Bevan was happy to swim. Patricia Hollis's biography 
of Bevan's wife, Jennie Lee, chronicles the help the couple received for house 
purchases, holidays, first-class fares on a Cunard liner, a small car, private 
health cover for Jennie and her family, and more, from a number of kindly 
benefactors, prominent among them the property millionaire Howard Samuel.

'I'm a revolutionary socialist,' said Jennie when the Mirror came inquiring, 
'but in my home life, I'm a real Scottish Conservative. I believe that, however 
big a public figure one may be, your private life should be your own secret.' 
Hollis also reveals that Jill Craigie, now Mrs Michael Foot, who failed to 
escape the clutches of Arthur Koestler, was also pounced on by Nye, but in this 
case escaped unscathed.

Nottingham Forest, Smallweed begins to think, would not recognise an open goal 
even if choirs of angels came and carried them through it.

When Dave Bassett was sacked as manager, it seemed obvious that the job should 
go to a man whose friends were openly forecasting that he might find a job in 
football: Gordon Brown's newly dislodged press secretary, Charlie Whelan. 
Whelan, a Spurs supporter, was said in profiles to have been a more than useful 
midfielder for Ottershaw School First XI, a claim which even his cronies could 
never make for this fellow Atkinson who's now got the job.

Whelan's immediate departure would have opened the way for his replacement at 
the Treasury by a man who could match him stride for stride both for 
combativeness and loquacity: Bassett.

Long ago Smallweed had the privilege of watching Bassett in action from the 
terraces of Plough Lane, then the home of Wimbledon. Bassett, who was known in 
those days as Harry, used to chatter away for most of the match, frequently 
raging at colleagues who, in Smallweed's judgment, were playing much better 
than he was. What's more, he coupled his work for the Dons, as I remember, with 
a job in financial services. I cannot find in my old Wimbledon programmes 
precisely what this was, though a Crystal Palace supporter (he was later 
manager there) thinks it may have been selling insurance.



They may want a low-key wedding but they're not going to get one from Fleet 
Street. That, in a sense, is the most conspicuous virtue of Prince Edward's 
engagement to some double-barrelled young woman. Those who skip all the sugary 
previews will be through the daily papers in no time. I commend as a model for 
such coverage the report in the Morning Star of Princess Anne's first wedding. 
This ran to one sentence. Traffic in central London, it said, was disrupted 
yesterday by the marriage of Miss Anne Windsor to Captain M. Phillips.

The Marquis of Vauvenargues writes: Another broken promise! Where is the 
explanation for the 36 forenames bestowed on the exotic conductor and concert 
promoter Jullien? Smallweed subserviently mumbles: Just coming, your majesty.

Just before the boy was baptised, Jullien's father, a violinist, was asked to 
appear as a soloist with the local symphony orchestra. The parish priest 
suggested that one of his fellow players might be a suitable godfather. But 
Jullien senior found choosing between them so invidious that he asked the lot. 
The secretary of the orchestra was given the future impresario to hold at the 
font. All the rest were recompensed by having their names bestowed upon the 
poor child.
 