
In dramas about office life, floor space and office dynamics are always 
directly and intimately linked. The corner office is a power cliche, an 
expression of executive omniscience represented by dual aspect windows. As a 
badge of authority, the size of the carpet is as fiercely negotiated and 
jealously defended as access to warm water ports. At least, that's the 
implication of a wicked bit of research by the shadow defence minister Kevan 
Jones into the size of ministers' offices. The findings have revealed that 
female ministers are given less space – a lot less space – than their male 
colleagues, and sometimes even less than men who are junior to them.

Jones, hoping to uncover downtrodden Liberal Democrats, asked every secretary 
of state to list the size of the offices of their ministerial teams. But he 
found it wasn't the junior coalition partners that existed, like needy 
relatives in the seat furthest from the fire, in diminished circumstances. It
was the women ministers 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/Politics/article1381992.ece>. Office 
allocation was apparently not a straightforward question of hierarchy, but 
instead had become part of the Tory problem with women. On average, the female 
ministers' offices are 230 square feet smaller than the men's. In two 
departments – international development and Northern Ireland, where Justine 
Greening and Theresa Villiers respectively are secretaries of state, their male 
underlings actually get more real estate than they do. All of a piece with 
David Cameron's record, it seems, ofonly 48 female MPs to 256 men 
<http://www.ukpolitical.info/female-members-of-parliament.htm> and barely a 
quarter of Tory ministers. Thus it is demonstrated. Well, maybe.

In some of the older ministries, the secretary of state's office is of 
imperial grandeur. This isparticularly true in the Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office <http://www.hok.com/design/region/europe/foreign-common-wealth/>, where 
any visitor to William Hague has to cross about 50 metres of territory from 
door to desk, under the chilly stare of larger than life-size portraits of the 
makers of British history. But this is the department where, according to the 
new research, the only female minister, poor Baroness Warsi, has been found an 
office the size of the merest cubby hole, probably the place where the night 
porter once dozed, despite being senior minister of state.

Whitehall used to relish the notoriety of the power to space ratio, where 
minute calibrations of hierarchy could be represented in size and style of 
carpeting under neighbouring desks and the acceptability of a desk light. But 
while that may be true of the few departments that are still in their original 
buildings – the Treasury and Foreign Office, for instance – most departments of 
state are now in offices that approximate rather more closely to reality.

Which is why this attempt to correlate office size with power is a shade less 
than convincing. To have an office at all is for most people a rarity, and not 
always seen as a privilege. I can think of at least two femaleLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> secretaries of state whose office 
walls were made almost entirely of glass.

It is possible to imagine short people who think that large offices represent 
some kind of compensation for nature. Just conceivably, that could account for 
some of the more startling results of the survey (Alan Duncan, the minister of 
state at the Department for International Development, whose office is twice 
the size of his boss Justine Greening's, is not a big man). But more likely, 
women just don't see the need for acres of unused space merely to send a 
message. There are much more practical considerations than that.

What a minister needs, once space for the appropriate furniture is sorted, is 
pictures on the wall that you like, a budget for fresh flowers, fruit instead 
of biscuits to snack on, and your special adviser located at your right hand. 
And, obviously but once most contentiously, a convenient and well-appointed 
lavatory. After that, the rest is the architectural equivalent of sitting with 
your legs wide apart on the tube.

Twitter: @perkinscomment
 