
Heading for a First… Which?

At the start of this week the Observer reported that well-respected consumer 
rights magazine Which? will now publish a guide to British universities. Not 
that much more evidence was required, it was further proof that our university 
system is moving toward a more market based system. And in the same way Which? 
has helped generations of consumers purchase the right car or kitchen 
appliance, universities are now next in the queue for the Which? treatment.

At the surface, the prospect of an independent, well researched assessment of 
what is provided in our universities should be welcome, particularly by 
prospective students and their parents, there are some considerations that need 
to be thought through. When deciding to assess a car or a washing machine, 
there are some pretty indisputable factors where transparent information is 
helpful. Whether that's reliability, price, dimensions or terms and conditions. 
But judging an education isn't quite so easy. It's not just difficult to decide 
which measures are the most important. Is academic progress more important than 
final degree outcomes? How important is the research environment for an 
undergraduate? How do you account for the distinctiveness of a small and 
specialist institution that may not benefit from the economies of scale, but 
more than compensate with a stronger sense of community. Talking of which, how 
do you begin to measure 'a sense of community'?

As I see it, for Which? to simply move beyond a compilation of the greatest 
hits from the plethora of league tables that already exist, their real 
challenge will be to try and capture the essence of different institutions, 
their mission, strengths and weaknesses. Simple metrics don't do justice to the 
broader importance and value of a higher education experience, so here's hoping 
for something more sophisticated than that.

Heading for a Fail… University applications

It always looked likely given the confusion and anger with the government's 
reforms to higher education funding, but this week we got the first signs of 
evidence that for the first year of higher tuition fees in 2012, university 
applications were indeed headed for decline.

Figures from the Universities and Colleges Admission Service (UCAS) showed 
that the applications received by 15 October were 9% lower than this time last 
year. It's important to note that the final deadline for applications is not 
until the middle of January 2012, so this is far from a definitive picture, but 
the early signs don't look good.

Personally I don't consider a small decline in applications overall to be a 
huge problem, there will still be more people applying for a place than there 
are places to go round. In fact even a 9% decline will mean that thousands of 
qualified applicants would still miss out on a university place. The analysis 
that is crucial is to determine which groups of students are applying in 
greater (or fewer) numbers than before. A fall in applications which hits 10% 
or more is politically damaging for the coalition. But if the decline is 
particularly concentrated amongst poorer applicants or certain ethnic groups, 
then it will be more damning.

At first glance, a 9% drop is fairly troubling though. But there are two 
important factors to bear in mind. The first is an issue of demographics, the 
numbers of 18 year olds eligible to apply in 2012 is actually fewer than 2011, 
as a consequence of a slowing of the birth rate in the early 1990s. This may 
account for as much as 5% of the fall. But countering that, a small amount of 
analysis of the early UCAS figures show that applications to Oxbridge, 
dentistry, medicine and veterinary science (which have an early deadline) fell 
by only 0.8%. This would therefore indicate that the fall everywhere else is 
actually closer to 20%, but it could also mean that applicants are actually 
taking more time to consider their options, but will still ultimately decide to 
apply.

Whilst it is important to monitor these figures closely, it's also important 
not to lose sight of two crucial issues. Despite the rising cost to the 
individual the broader benefits of higher education need to continue to be 
articulated, probably louder than ever before. And when it comes to the 
financial information, government through initiatives like theIndependent 
Student Finance Task Force 
<http://www.bis.gov.uk/news/topstories/2011/Jun/student-finance-taskforce> 
which has organised a National Student Money Day on Monday 14th November, need 
to maintain a visible presence to ensure that prospective students understand 
the deal, whether they agree with it or not.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 