
Monday

Nick Clegg is rarely seen in Westminster these days and has the air of a man 
who would like to resign his Sheffield Hallam seat if only he didn’t think the 
Lib Dems might lose the subsequent byelection. But if the country is not yet 
quite ready to forgive him for being hopelessly outmanoeuvred by the 
Conservatives during the coalition, the Lib Dems themselves are. At their 
annual conference in Brighton, Cleggmania was back. The queue for his 
book-signing snaked out of the exhibition hall, with many people clutching two 
or three copies in their hand, and the local Waterstones had completely sold 
out of his “non mea culpa”, Politics: Between the Extremes. Those who couldn’t 
get their hands on his book were snapping up Nick Clegg fridge magnets, letter 
openers and key rings. Long before the end of the conference, these too were 
all sold out; though there was still plenty ofTim Farron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tim-farron> merchandise on offer. Nor is 
the Clegg revival limited to Brighton. His book was also selling well at the 
Cheltenham literature festival and is now number 4 on the Sunday Times 
bestseller list. You now know what you will be getting for Christmas from the 
Lib Dem in your life.

Tuesday

Keith Vaz arrived late to Labour’s “Super Tuesday” NEC meeting and received a 
round of applause from most of the 32 other representatives on the party’s 
ruling body. The former chair of the home affairs select committee looked 
tired, but party officials said they were glad he turned up. “If you are a 
miserable party worker, waiting to get sacked by one of Jeremy’s Trotty 
friends, Keith was a reminder that some people really do have it worse,” said 
one. Though the eight-hour meeting failed to resolve the main issue of how to 
choose the shadow cabinet, it did help to clear the air on one other matter. A 
bit. Prior to the discussions there had been a lot of talk about Labour’s 
general secretary, Iain McNicol, being removed for supposedly being too 
moderate and being replaced by Jennie Formby, Unite’s south-east regional 
secretary. Formby used the meeting to say she had heard the rumours but wasn’t 
interested in the job. The future of McNicol hangs in the balance. ThoughJeremy 
Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> told him his job 
was safe, members of the Labour leader’s team were briefing they expected him 
to step down voluntarily.

Wednesday

I was a couple of hours late to Douglas Carswell’s latest Twitter row as the 
Ukip MP has blocked me from following him on the grounds that I don’t take his 
pronouncements quite as seriously as he does. Fresh from the disappointment at 
only being given five minutes to speak at his party’s annual conference the 
week before – there was more time allocated for toilet breaks – Dougie took 
issue with a comment made by Prof Paul Nightingale, a senior research scientist 
at Sussex University, comparing Britain’s trade deals with Ireland and China to 
gravity. “Jupiter is big, but the moon moves tides,” said Nightingale. Quick as 
a flash, Carswell rushed to correct him. “Actually it’s the gravitational pull 
of the sun. The moon’s gravity does Spring/neap tides,” he replied. Nightingale 
tried to be polite by pointing out “Sorry Douglas, you’ve been misinformed. 
Tides caused by moon not the sun (27m x bigger). Distance matters,” but Dougie 
was not to be denied. “Surprised head of science research at a university 
refutes idea sun’s gravity causes tides,” he snapped. To which Nightingale 
steered him in the direction of Newton’s Principia. Dougie headed instead to 
the Flat Earth Society.

Thursday

Not for the first time, the whole world seems to be asking the wrong question. 
Rather than endless soul-searching about whyAngelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> and Brad Pitt are splitting 
up, surely the more interesting question is how they managed to stay together 
for so long when absolutely no one treats them like normal human beings. My 
only close-up experience of Angelina was when she came to a House of Lords 
select committee on sexual violence in war with William Hague. The committee 
could barely contain its excitement at being in the presence of a true 
Hollywood A-lister and was torn between listening to her evidence and asking 
her to sign the eight copies of her DVD, In the Land of Blood and Honey, she 
had brought along as a gift. Meanwhile, Hague could barely utter a coherent 
sentence and blushed throughout. “Angelina and I,” he muttered demurely on 
several occasions, lowering his eyelids in private reverie. Angelina remained 
unfailingly polite but inscrutably detached throughout.

Friday

Brexit update. No sooner had Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> opened his mouth in New York and 
declared that Britain would definitely trigger Article 50 in January or 
February next year, than Theresa May had to slap him down yet again by issuing 
a statement saying no timetable had yet been agreed. She did, though, decline 
to comment on the foreign secretary’s subsequent comments that the trade 
negotiations with the EU would be a piece of piss with everything wrapped up 
well inside the two years allowed. Presumably because they were, even by 
Boris’s normal standards, too idiotic to elaborate on. The prime minister has 
now had to tick off the three ministers – Boris, David Davis and Liam Fox – to 
whom she has entrusted the Brexit negotiations on several occasions each for 
making up policy on the hoof. Quite apart from the fact that Boris, Davis and 
Fox find it hard to agree on anything, Boris has also now come under attack 
from Alan Duncan, one of his junior ministers in the Foreign Office, who 
accused him in a BBC documentary of having never wanted to leave the EU and 
using the referendum to further his career. Anyone might think that Theresa was 
not that keen on making Brexit happen.

Digested week, digested: Britannia doesn’t rule the waves
 