
Some debates are marked toxic from the start. Try the existence of our old 
chums fairness and balance in reporting Jeremy Corbyn, for instance. TheTimes 
clears its front page to announce that Jeremy’s “on course to win a bigger 
mandate” than he did first time round, according to YouGov. Perhaps that means 
the media campaign, real or perceived, against him isn’t working: or perhaps it 
shows the BBC and other supposed culprits aren’t hopelessly biased after all.

But stir in 170 or so dissident MPs and some equally decisive opinion polls 
pointing in a precisely different direction – down and out – and objective 
truth sinks into the mists, leaving only one vital difference behind.

Fairness and balance can be media mantras at general election time, or 
whenever they directly affect national decision-making. It’s not so certain, 
though, that they apply as tightly to the choices that are made within the 
closed circuit of internal political-party voting. The decisions there are for 
paid-up members, not Joe and Joanna Public. How does the fairness principle 
work with people who mostly made up their minds when they put £25 in an 
envelope?

In fact, in many ways the most contentious current election reporting doesn’t 
touch Labour at all. Last week, with only aflicker of media interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/03/ukip-hopefuls-golliwog-fan-putin-admirer-wrestler>
, Lisa Duffy, Bill Etheridge, Elizabeth Jones, Phillip Broughton and Diane 
James formally asked 39,000 Ukip members to choose one of them as successor to 
Nigel Farage.

Oh, Ukip! you say. Who wants day-by-day coverage there, profiles, constant 
polling, open debates, in-depth reportage plus the full three-ring circus 
treatment? Didn’t we see Nigel on the stump with Trump in Mississippi? Isn’t 
that fair and balanced enough to keep the BBC Trust in chocolate biscuits?

But consider … As a prescient Frank Field MP told the Times: “Who gets elected 
leader of theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party 
obviously matters in determining its future. But the centre of gravity is 
shifting. Already Labour’s future may depend less on who wins the contest 
between Jeremy Corbyn and Owen Smith than who is elected Ukip’s leader.”

Ukip scored 3,881,099 votes in the 2015 general election. More than the Lib 
Dems and SNP put together. Its current poll rating, even leaderless in the lee 
of Theresa, mostly hovers in the 14% region. Last June, at Brexit time, it was 
five or six points higher than that. Without Ukip, Remain would have won. 
Editorialists talked obsessively, post-referendum, about the disaffected white 
legions of the north and Midlands in revolt against London’s elite. Yet where 
is that newfound extra-metropolitan fascination when Ukip makes its own top 
choices?

The answer, of course, is that it’s convenient to forget. Only the Daily 
Express – mindful of Richard Desmond’s party donations – has made any 
consistent effort. TheTelegraph and the Mail, like the Mirror, seem happy to 
push the competing quintet to the periphery. Of course there’s some coverage: 
theGuardian, like the Times, keeps an eye on things from time to time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/30/ukip-leadership-race-exposes-ideological-faultlines-in-party-that-has-achieved-its-goal>
. But Frank Field’s centre of gravity hasn’t exactly shifted yet. No one bar the
Express seems to acknowledge it has Ukip readers on board.

Who cares? Labour supporters and mainstream Tories don’t want nonentities to 
become entities by bringing them in from the periphery. BBC interviewers 
obviously fret when immigration interviews lurch out of control. Five is an 
unwieldy studio number. You can understand, and possibly applaud, all of this. 
Pragmatic convenience. But is it fair? Is it balanced? Do such things – issues 
of supposed principle – matter if … well, if it’s just Ukip?
 