
The aubergine emoji
Consider this prettiest of emoji, the aubergine, which when deployed in a 
message can mean anything from vegetarian to “Shag M8?”, depending on how you 
use it (FYI: placing it next to the cutlery or peach emoji, respectively, will 
clarify this). This season, it’s not the shape (or the carnality), but the 
colour that’s inspiring. It’s the deep lilac seen at flagship labels Chanel, 
Christopher Kane, Mary Katrantzou and here, at Alberta Ferretti, replete with 
fringing and cross-body bag (two further trends for the season).

James Brown
Framing pretty much every trend this spring is the 1970s. This has been 
filleted down to its various obvious trends: cleavage, flares and giant belts 
in offbeat metallic and rust colours, all of which Louis Vuitton, with designer 
Nicolas Ghesquière at the helm, nailed. To the onlooker, it conjured up a 
singular image:James Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/music/james-brown>, 
rakish, legs splayed, in head-to-toe bodycon (before bodycon existed), his body 
entirely unzipped to the world. Too much.

George Harrison
Have we reached peak polo neck? Have we heck. The beauty of polo necks, which 
are drifting from season to season via various shapes and fabrics, from 
wide-necked and turtle through merino and nylon, is that absolutely anything 
goes. But this spring it’s all about the tight white polo neck: think a little 
bit Foucault and a lotGeorge Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/georgeharrison> circa Rubber Soul, as seen 
at Ralph Lauren, the preppy king who modernised it by making it super-tight, 
semi-sheer and decidedly more spring-like.

Educating Rita
Set on the cusp of the 1980s, Educating Rita was renowned for its spirited 
take on institution, class and pretence. But the film version, starring Julie 
Walters as the platinum-blond hairdresser, was overlooked for its wardrobe: 
tight, bright minis, candy-striped pencil skirts and white blouses tucked right 
in. The whole look was very cross-decade and, it transpires, very APC this 
season. Think suede, A-line skirts, cream silk blouses and giant pendants, 
overall a decidedly more feminine take on the 1970s trend.

Ellen Ripley
Aliens aside, Ridley Scott’s sci-fi horror tetralogy was a masterstroke in 
utility chic. To wit, Ellen Ripley, with her rock-solid perm and flameproof 
boiler suit. Boiler suits are a key look for SS15, via Whistles and Chloé but 
mainly Sonia Rykiel, who rolled out a number of versions. It was her 
sensational pillaging of the Ripley boiler suit – military green, tapered, 
serious buttons, trussed up with a faux-fur jacket – that grabbed us, even if 
it’s hard to go to the loo in.

Debbie Brill
The sportswear trend won’t die. Instead, it’s morphed, spectacularly, from a 
hint of athleticism to serious kit, via Stella McCartney x Adidas (whose new 
line is very golfwear) and, here, left-field rising star Nasir Mazhar. This 
athleisure mark 2 look goes big on branding and is inspired by real athletes, 
for example 1970s high-jumper Debbie Brill (of the head-first Brill Bend 
technique) with her tight perm, and two-toned and overtly branded Adidas kit. 
Think leisurewear with purpose and you’re halfway there.

Potato sacks
Sacks – bear with me – have an inescapable charm. Utilitarian, rustic and, 
when filled with potatoes, very Loewe spring/summer 2015. For his debut 
womenswear collection at the label, designer Jonathan Anderson dotted his whole 
collection with patches and flaps of jute and suede the colour of hessian. But 
it was the weighty potato sack-esque bags, which came in the softest leather, 
and swung beautifully, that looked set to be a staple this season, even if 
you’re off the carbs.

Huck Finn
Rebecca Minkoff said her dungaree-starring SS15 collection was influenced by 
the respected US photographer Deborah Turbeville, who changed the landscape for 
photographers by turning fashion into something wacky and avant garde. 
Poppycock. It, and the whole spring/summer 2015 dungaree movement (see also 
Sessùn and Alexa Chung for AG), was quite evidently inspired by Huckleberry 
Finn, who wore loose-fit denim dungarees and white shirts with aplomb. Straw in 
mouth optional.
 