
One of the key men behind Donald Trump’s transition to power is a 35-year-old 
real estate mogul, businessman and publisher called Jared Kushner. He is also 
married to Trump’s influential daughter Ivanka, and is in line to be arguably 
the most powerful son-in-law to ever set foot in the White House.

During the latter stages of the campaign it was Kushner who effectively 
functioned as Trump’s campaign manager. He advised him on strategy, drafted his 
speeches and ran the candidate’s digital media campaign.

But eight days after Trump’s unexpected victory, Kushner is now at the centre 
ofa messy and Shakespearean body-strewn transition process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/donald-trump-transition-team-disarray-adviser-purge>
, variously described as infighting, a “Stalinist purge”, and a “knife fight”. 
On Friday, New Jersey governorChris Christie was abruptly sacked as head of the 
transition team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/chris-christie-dropped-trump-transition-team>
 and replaced with Trump’s vice-president-elect, Mike Pence.

Christie’s ousting is thought to be the result of a feud with Kushner. As a 
federal prosecutor, Christie prosecuted Kushner’s father, Charles, who was 
convicted and jailed on charges of tax evasion, witness tampering and illegal 
campaign contributions. He got two years in jail, and was released after one. 
While he was in jail, Kushner took over the running of his father’s property 
business.

Earlier this week, two more senior members of Trump’s team were sacked. They 
were Mike Rogers, who had been handling national security, and Matthew 
Freedman, a lobbyist and liaison with business and foreign governments. Both 
were allies of Christie.

Good-looking, tall and patrician, Kushner studied at Harvard and New York 
universities. (According to Daniel Golden, author of The Price of Admissions: 
How America’s Ruling Class Buys Its Way into Elite Colleges, he was admitted to 
Harvard after his father donated $2.5m to the university.) At age 26, he was 
conducting his own mega-deals. In 2007, he bought an office building on Fifth 
Avenue for a record $1.8bn. Most of the cash involved in the acquisition was 
borrowed.


Kushner has one characteristic which sets him apart from Trump’s alt-right 
entourage: he’s Jewish. (Ivanka Trump converted to Judaism when they married in 
2009; the couple have three children who they’re raising as Orthodox Jews.) 
Kushner has defended his father-in-law against persistent accusations of 
antisemitism, including in a notable piece published by the New York Observer, 
which he owns.


Trump has described his son-in-law as a “great guy”. The president-elect has 
also reportedly taken the unprecedented step of requesting security clearance 
for Kushner to attend top-secret presidential briefings, the first one of which 
was on Tuesday. It’s unclear if the request will be approved. It marks an 
astonishing departure and invites the accusation of nepotism.

Kushner’s options for a White House job are limited given his family ties to 
the president, Richard Painter, who served as President George W Bush’s White 
House ethics lawyer, told the Associated Press. Congress passed an 
anti-nepotism law in 1967 that prohibits the president from appointing a family 
member – including a son-in-law – to work in the office or agency they oversee. 
The measure was passed after President John F Kennedy appointed his brother, 
Robert Kennedy, as attorney general.

But the law does not appear to prevent Kushner from serving as an unpaid 
adviser, and few doubt that Kushner will play a decisive role in shaping the 
Trump presidency, acting as policy adviser and gate-keeper. AsTrump and Barack 
Obama met privately at the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/barack-obama-donald-trump-white-house-meeting-transition>
 last week, Kushner strolled the mansion’s South Lawn, deep in conversation 
with Obama’s chief of staff. As Kushner walked through the bustling West Wing 
during Trump’s visit last week, he was heard asking Obama aides: “How many of 
these people stay?”, apparently blissfully unaware that the entire West Wing 
staff will leave at the end of Obama’s term.

His contacts already include Henry Kissinger and Rupert Murdoch; he has 
received foreign ambassadors. Like Trump, Kushner has never had a formal role 
in government, but he now appears set to be more important than many who do.
 