
We all know the siren song about fat cats. Theresa May sings it with gusto. 
But what happens when she urgently needs a good replacement moggie and the 
beast in question sniffs at the meagre feeding bowl on offer – and just walks 
on by? What happens when no one wants to be chair of theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>?

Thus far, amid the detritus of charter review and abolition of the short-lived 
BBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust>, we’ve been mostly 
concerned by Downing Street’s obsession with “taking control”: that is, giving 
the corporation a single great board and keeping the majority of the placements 
on it in No 10’s gift. But a good fight was fought on that front and now the 
incoming chair, plus deputy and regional reps, will be in a minority. One dark 
cloud lifted.

But no one, in the nature of things, stopped to see that same cloud shift to 
the other side of the hill. No one paused to ask who on earth would want to be 
BBC chair now.

Consider: though this is a three-day-a-week job, you’ll be on constant call if 
and when crisis strikes. Don’t plan any holidays far away. Don’t expect the 
phone to stop ringing. Maybe £100,000 a year sounded good enough when Messrs 
Cameron and Osborne were pondering terms and conditions long ago. But they were 
being political, not analytical, when they reached for the back of an envelope.

For the important thing to realise about this new board is that the scenery 
has shifted hugely, by design. This isn’t the trust – a regulator of 
performance, a setter of targets, a link to the licence-fee payer and buffer 
when things go wrong. Regulation, bar a few foothills, sits henceforth atop 
Mount Ofcom (though the oracles there have been rather too shrinking about ways 
and means). The BBC board now taking misty shape is strategic and theoretically 
all-powerful.

This board mirrors those in charge of other giant corporations. It’s 
responsible for deciding how and where £4bn or so shall be spent each year, for 
assessing fresh ways of raising revenue, finding fresh technical innovations to 
pursue, discovering fresh territories to conquer. In short, it’s in charge. Top 
of the shop for praise or blame. Clearly held to account by outside national 
auditors. More keenly judged than the old pre-trust governor system that 
mingled a little regulation with ambassadorial and other functions (and 
habitually welcomed members of the great Whitehall chumocracy to its table).

No: the new chair, on £100,000 a year, has to know – really know – about 
running an organisation 20,000-strong. He or she has to be up to speed with the 
pace and crucial decisions of media change; to have a management track record 
that makes its own case; to be as persuasive and convincing on camera as behind 
the scenes.

Scant wonder, then, that there’s been no rush of wonderfully qualified 
candidates. You’re looking for very big fish in a very small pond, and the bait 
on the line looks perfunctory, going on derisory. Worse, the headhunters aren’t 
chasing one favoured candidate who can be schmoozed by ministers on the way to 
the top: they’re required to draw up a whole list of possibles so that Downing 
Street has a theoretically pristine choice to make (of the number she first 
thought of).

Where’s the strategy behind such a vital strategic appointment? Horse laughs 
will grow as the months tick by. The PM whodumped the anointed transitional 
chair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/14/theresa-may-role-bbc-chief-exit-brutal-extraordinary-rona-fairhead>
, Rona Fairhead, because she was anancien regime choice, now has to deliver the 
goods. Is there an internationally recognised leader, with relevant experience 
of the media and political world, used to running a mighty machine, who’s 
instantly available and doesn’t mind earning £40,000 less than the prime 
minister? Ah! good morning, Mr Cameron …
 