
As a boy, I was entirely English. There was nothing else to be. This was true 
even though an education by Catholic monks offered alternative possibilities. 
Henry VIII, we learned, was a very bad man, and the heretics burned at the 
stake by Mary Tudor deserved their fate, whereas the victims of Elizabeth were 
martyrs and saints. The arrival from Holland of William of Orange, displacing 
the Catholic Stuarts in 1688, far from inaugurating the Glorious Revolution 
from which, as I now believe, most British constitutional freedom flowed, was a 
disaster for the one true faith.

 This bias in the teaching of history didn't touch our real allegiances in 
everything that mattered, cricket, soccer, rugby, the ubiquitous redness of the 
map, the naturally British order of things. Allegiance, with victory as its 
quest, was the habit that school instilled in me: gangs, cliques, houses, 
teams, Sheffield Utd FC, the Yorkshire County Cricket Club and all who played 
in it. There had to be something to support, and on the international plane 
Britain, or England, had to win.

 This tendency stayed with me for many years. It has never really gone. When 
Brits do well, it still gives me a warm glow. Cricket continues to matter, 
especially when Darren Gough plays a blinder, and partisanship defeated all 
temptations (those swilling lager louts, the Union Jack as offensive weapon) to 
forget the World Cup was going on. I'm obscurely glad that Simon Rattle is 
British. When a great British movie, like Secrets And Lies, captures the world, 
its national origin matters. When the SAS took the first Serbian war criminals, 
I remember feeling quietly pleased it was us.

 My esteem for Britishness also stretches into professional fields. We do some 
governmental things better than other people, and should want to keep it that 
way. Our public life is relatively honest, our judges are straight, almost all 
our politicians selflessly industrious. Our parliament is a living thing. As 
for our history, it's a wonderment, reaching out from this tiny island, 
producer of a language and a literature and a record of power that the people 
of pretty well every other nation must regard with awe.

 So I can confess to being disgracefully congruent with a typical reader of 
the Daily Telegraph. And in the early days of 'Europe', this collection of 
awarenesses sheltered me from the new cause. Voting Yes in the 1975 referendum 
was a routine orthodoxy, shared with two-thirds of the British people, 
including quite a number who now seem to have changed their minds. For years, I 
never felt zeal for either side. But now I do, and I wonder why. What has 
happened, while the majority allegiance appears to have gone into reverse, to 
push me effortlessly the other way? The initiation began with a book I wrote 
about the history of these matters. I started work on This Blessed Plot as a 
Euro-agnostic, but completed it a few years later in a state of struggling 
incredulity at the demons and panics I had uncovered: the British 
exceptionalism that has seduced generations of our politicians into believing 
that 'Europe' is somewhere to escape from: the hallucinations, both positive 
and negative, that have driven so much of the British debate for so long. 
Having begun with the idea of writing a history that might call itself 
detached, I found myself in a process of self-instruction that now concludes, 
as the new currency gets under way, with the great simplicity of describing why 
I am a European.

 The most obvious but least relevant part of this is cultural. It's easy to 
say how keenly I adore Schubert, and wallow in Proust, and am anticipating my 
next journey to consort with the shades of Virgil in the Roman Forum. But this 
is almost completely beside the point. European culture is the world's 
inheritance, absorbed on every continent, and the ability to appreciate the 
works of Johann Sebastian Bach, or even to speak his language, says nothing 
important about anyone's sense of 'being' a European.

 Even Peter Lilley loves Michelangelo, as he and his colleagues never cease to 
explain, by way of proving that they are not anti-Europe, merely anti- 
'Europe': the European Union, the artefact of federalists, the dismal construct 
that has illicitly purloined the received identity of what Europe is held to 
mean these days. Lilley has a house in France, and Michael Portillo has roots 
in Spain, and there's a cross-party agreement that Umbro-Tuscany is where the 
British political classes most like to take their holidays. Does this not show 
their un- insular engagement with the continent, and expose the calumny that 
they might be Euro-phobic? But the test cannot be who has heard more versions 
of The Ring between Bayreuth and Covent Garden. As the boy becomes a man, the 
discovery that Shakespeare has a peer-group who write in different tongues may 
begin to broaden the mind. It is helpful to learn that these are not rival 
cultures, a zero-sum game of allegiance, but that they mingled and grew 
together. This discovery makes no demand on anyone's sense of belonging. Though 
the Conservative government proposed a ban on Beethoven's Ninth as the theme 
music for Euro 96, a football competition staged in England, it's safest to say 
that a taste for the Renaissance and Enlightenment is too universal to be 
significant. Like the travel, it proves nothing.

 Very soon, therefore, what raises itself is the political question. About the 
culture, there is no issue. It may be important to many Euro-sceptics to be 
able to say that because they love Mozart, they love Europe, but this isn't 
what the argument is about. The division between the pro- and anti-Europeans 
is, in the real world, about nothing more or less than the European Union. 
Everything else is sand in your eyes, an evasion. The EU, enlarged, or not: 
reformed, or not: with or without all its multiple imperfections, is the only 
item on the agenda.

 It is not possible to be a European, in any meaningful sense, while opposing 
the EU. And it is not possible to support the EU without also supporting the 
success of the euro, and the belonging to the euro of every country that wants 
to call itself European.

 I can think of many points which, added together, make a formidable critique 
of the EU. Its bureaucracy is strong, its democracy is weak, its accountability 
is seriously under-developed. The complexity of its tasks is always in danger 
of overwhelming the consensus needed to carry them out. Getting it to act 
demands formidable energy and patience and willpower from national leaders. 
Ensuring the singleness of the market it purports to be is work that is far 
from completed.

 Equally, I can make the case against the euro, a project which fills those 
who support it with almost as much anxiety as it does excitement. Will this 
risk, which includes a repudiation of nationhood as traditionally understood, 
pay off? Will its hazards be sustainable? Is the closer political integration, 
which it undoubtedly foretells, something that the members, with or without 
Britain, have the wit, will and wisdom to express in acceptable forms? These 
questions don't fill me with horror. Their terrain awaits a long unfolding. 
They assume a process not voluntarily attempted anywhere in history: tampering, 
by common agreement, with aspects of national identity, and working to create, 
in limited but significant aspects, a new kind of consciousness. To modify the 
nation-state throughout Europe is an extraordinary ambition, full of risks and 
difficulties. Yet if I'm ever tempted to despair of it, I need only remind 
myself of the alternative world summoned up by those, most ferociously in 
Britain, who devote passion to dismantling it.

 They've had a long time to describe this non-European Britain, and the 
picture, where it is clear, is not persuasive. I conclude it is not meant to 
be. Portillo wrote not long ago that even to ask the question was 
'extraordinary'. All the future has to satisfy, in the minds of many 
Euro-sceptics, is the need not to be 'European'. As long as it meets that test, 
the details hardly matter.

 Thus, Little England (Scotland will be long gone from this) is, incorrigibly, 
a straitened place. Striving to define it, David Willetts, a Tory 
front-bencher, wrote a pamphlet, Who Do We Think We Are?, which, as well as 
saying our politics and economics were different from Europe, made much of the 
Changing of the Guard and Wensleydale cheese, calling in support some ancient 
paragraphs from T S Eliot and George Orwell to exalt the eternal time-warp in 
which England must be lodged. In all these tracts, the mystic chords of memory 
echo. Betraying history is most unimaginable, while predicting the future is 
subsumed into fantasy: the dream of an independent Britain, freed to assert her 
famous sovereignty, throwing herself on the mercy and markets of the 
non-European world.

 So the anti-Europe cave is claustrophobic. It is also being re-filled (for 
we've been here before) with futile arrogance, making it obligatory not merely 
to criticise Brussels but abominate the Germans, laugh about the French, find 
nothing good to say about another European country, lest this betray our 
beleaguered sense of Britishness. A smart-ass headline writer in the Sun can 
get attention when the BBC finds an item of punning xenophobia so funny as to 
be worth a mention in the news.

 At the heart of this is an impenetrable contradiction in the anti-Europe 
British mind. It cannot decide between terror and disdain. Britain is 
apparently so great, as well as so different, a place that she can afford to do 
without her continental hinterland. But she is so puny, so endangered, so 
destined to lose every argument with the continentals that she must fear for 
her identity if and when she makes the final commitment to belong among them. 
Studying the movements of sceptic thought, I see in their inability to provide 
a clear answer on this fundamental point a mirror of the vacillations, pro- and 
anti-Europe, that mark the personal histories of so many of the characters in 
the story. Either way, the conclusion points in the anti-Europe direction.

 The same axiomatic outcome has penetrated every stage of Conservative Party 
thinking about the euro. While often purporting to be technical, the discussion 
has in fact been wholly political. First they said the euro wouldn't happen: 'a 
rain-dance', Major called it. Then they said it wouldn't work. Then they said 
it might well work. Now they say that even if it does work, it cannot work for 
Britain, as they edge into a position that bets their entire political future 
on its failure.

 As each prediction is falsified the threshold for the euro's acceptance is 
raised. Shamelessly, the playing-field is tilted to make the game unwinnable, 
though most Tories still shrink from saying what they so plainly believe: that, 
as far as they're concerned, the British national identity as we know it can 
never coexist with membership of the European single currency. Thus the party 
that took Britain into Europe prepares to fight to the last in favour of 
excluding Britain from what 'Europe' any longer means.

 My own odyssey has been quite different. The euro presents massive political 
challenges, but there seems no point in being outside it, since our future - 
the only future anyone has been able, with any respect for realism, to describe 
- is entirely bound up with its success or failure. Far from the development of 
'Europe' being a conceptual barrier to belonging, it's the very reason why 
belonging ought soon to be seen as essential. I know the snags, and will argue 
for some radical political reform, but the European-ness of the euro is what 
makes it an exciting and benign adventure. We need to be a part. It should be 
Britain's own millennial leap, away from the century of nation-statehood, into 
a new time. All our neighbours are seeking a different way of bringing a better 
life to the continent and its regions.

 What is so strange about Britain - so particular, so fearful, so 
other-worldly - that she should decide to withhold her unique wisdom from the 
enterprise? I can reject the premise of the question because I've grown up. 
Allegiance, to me, no longer has to be so exclusive. I still need it, as a 
psychic prop, a way of belonging. But the threat to the national identity now 
strikes me as bogus. This categorising is what anti-Europe people insist on, 
but the best evidence of its falsity is to be found in the places that have 
been part of the new Europe for 40 years, as against our 25. Would anyone claim 
that Germany is less German as a result of the experience? We are all invaded 
by America. If cultural defences are needed, it's against transatlantic 
domination. But do I hear a single soul, on either side of the Channel, contend 
that France is less French than it ever was because of the EU? So it will be 
with Britain. This reality won't come easy. Decades of propaganda defining 
national identity in the language of scorn for other nations can't be wiped out 
at a stroke. Persuading the British that they are allowed to be European should 
be the simplest task, yet the accretions of history, manipulated by frightened 
politicians, make it difficult. Though the Queen in parliament already looks 
like a bejewelled dot on the ocean of the global economy, there are voices that 
insist the only way of being British is by proclaiming her supremacy.

 Redefining identity is not a task for the furtive. It cannot be done by the 
back door: another lesson of history. Nor will it be easily done by political 
leaders who still feel obliged to stand aside from the project they think they 
eventually want to join. But neither should the work be too alarming. In the 
21st century, it will be exciting to escape from history into geography: from 
the prison of the past into a future that permits us at last the luxury of 
having it both ways: British and European.
 