
Why do people run? It’s a question that continues to fascinate scientists, 
from psychologists to exercise physiologists. Even though it is predicted that 
driverless cars will transform society in the coming decade, running still 
retains an enduring appeal.


In 2014, a survey found there were 10.5 million runners in the UK 
<http://www.sportsmarketingsurveysinc.com/uks-running-population-reaches-remarkable-10-5m-says-sports-marketing-surveys-inc/>
, whose reasons for running included “maintaining fitness”, “stress relief, “a 
new challenge” and “competition”. Psychologists studying ultra-marathon runners
recently concluded 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1612197X.2015.1035736>that one of 
their main sources of motivation was not muscle-building or chasing PBs, but 
attaining the state of mind known as “flow 
<https://www.verywell.com/what-is-flow-2794768>”. But another study 
<http://www.runblogrun.com/2009/09/asics-reasons-to-run-survey-why-europeans-run-physical-benefits-outweigh-mental-benefits-by-sportson.html>
, of 3,500 runners across seven European countries, 40% revealed that they ran 
for the sole purpose of losing weight.


Why haven’t I lost weight after exercising? You asked Google – here’s the 
answer | Kate Carter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/23/why-not-lost-weight-exercise-google-autocomplete>
But while weight-loss is a goal coveted by many runners, it is not always easy 
to achieve. Theoretically, it seems straightforward. Roughly speaking, losing 
0.45kg involves burning off 3,500 calories, the equivalent of about 35 miles of 
running. But it rarely works out quite so simply.


One of the reasons is that, the more you exercise, the more the body naturally 
tries to compensate by altering your metabolism through a series of 
evolutionary-based protective mechanisms – firsthighlighted around 40 years ago 
 <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7211534>– which are designed to prevent 
starvation and indefinite weight loss.


“The human body has a pretty good capability for regulating its bodyweight,” 
says Glenn Gaesser, professor of exercise science at Arizona State University. 
“We all have a set-point range for our weight and, while the average person may 
consume three-quarters of a million calories per year, from year to year we 
weigh pretty much the same thing unless something happens that greatly distorts 
our lifestyle, such as a purposeful weight-loss diet, or some sort of tragic 
event that changes our behaviour.”


Following exercise, a range of small but significant compensatory processes 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25323965> kicks in that resist the 
intended energy deficit. Changes take place within the body’s tissue that 
reduce resting metabolic rate, especially during sleep, and as weight 
decreases, you burn calories less efficiently the next time you exercise. This 
seems to be particularly the case if a runner cuts their calorific intake at 
the same time as embarking on a new exercise regime.


In addition, there are certain psychological and behavioural changes that also 
combine to undermine attempts to shed weight 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23470300>. Many of us tend to overestimate 
the number of calories we have actually burned through exercise andincrease our 
energy intake 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0004515>, 
either consciously or subconsciously. This is one of the reasons why some 
people are dismayed to find that they have put on weight despite taking up 
running. Gaesser says it has been found that people who had watched promotional 
exercise videos tended to consume more calories than they would normally, 
despite having not done any exercise themselves.”

This is because exercise is thought to influence our eating behaviour by 
modulating both the pleasure we get from eating and the drive to eat, known as 
the body’s hedonic response to food 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1038/oby.2007.164/full>. While, in the 
long term, exercise is thought to help hone our appetite regulatory system, 
making it easier to cut down on snacking and instead eat at set times of the 
day, in the short term vigorous exercise stimulates brain areas associated with 
reward and dependence. This makes us crave high-fat, energy-dense foods, which 
can negate the beneficial effects of a running regime.


But perhaps the most common reason people don’t lose always lose the weight 
they expect to through running, is that, post-run, they simply slow down during 
the rest of the day. It is a trend many scientists have observed by fitting 
runners attempting to lose weight with motion sensors or heart-rate monitors.


“People often subconsciously modify their behaviour,” Gaesser says. “There are 
studies that show that when people take part in a structured programme of 30-40 
minutes’ running, three to five days a week, outside of the structured 
activity, some simply don’t do as much throughout the day as they would 
normally do. Usually, they would naturally get in around 7,000 steps a day 
through regular activities, but during the running regime that might fall to 
4,000-5,000 steps. And you can see that the people who had the biggest decrease 
in their spontaneous activity during the rest of the day are the ones who don’t 
lose as much weight as they were anticipating.”


Gaesser recommends that runners wanting to lose weight invest in an activity 
monitor so they can check that they are still maintaining the same number of 
steps and overall activity when they are not running. But it is also possible 
to boost your chances of burning more calories by adapting your running regime 
to include more high-intensity training.


Some runners experience an initial boost of weight loss before finding that 
the rewards plateau over time, despite their best efforts. “It’s not a 
clear-cut relationship between calories and weight loss,” Gaesser says. “So if 
you triple your calorie expenditure by running, you won’t necessarily triple 
your weight loss. It works to a point, but then there does seem to be an upper 
ceiling as your body’s metabolism adapts and resists. There is recent evidence 
to suggest that really high-intensity interval training can stimulate the 
metabolic rate to remain elevated for periods of time after exercise, which 
encourages weight loss as you continue to burn calories even when resting. But 
we don’t yet know whether that continues to work over a timespan of months and 
years.”


However, the sort of high-intensity training Gaesser is referring to requires 
pushing yourself to up to 80% of your VO2 max, the maximum volume of oxygen you 
can consume, over a period of at least an hour. This is far harder than many 
people are willing to push themselves.


But overall, science still indicates that if you want to lose weight, running 
is one of the better option as it uses a lot of big-muscle groups, key for 
calorie burning. In stark contrast, swimming tends to perform worst in studies, 
as the temperature differences in the water mean you lose a lot of heat. The 
end product is that body fat losses tend to be somewhat neutralised.


But as for how running shapes up to other activities in terms of weight loss, 
we simply don’t know. “We don’t know whether running is superior to cycling or 
rowing or even cross-country skiing in terms of optimal body-fat loss because 
there simply isn’t that data available,” Gaesser says. “But it’s superior to 
walking simply because you can run at a higher level of energy expenditure and 
still have the same level of physiological and perceived effort. So it’s a more 
efficient way to expend those calories.”

 