
As a female science fiction writer, feminist and a member of this year's 
judging panel for the Clarke Awards, I find myself in the interesting position 
of defending our choice of an all-male list. I'll start by saying that this was 
an outstanding year for submissions – 82 books in total, with some exceptional 
writing from authors of both genders from a variety of cultural backgrounds.

Much of this was quite some way into the "fantasy" bracket, but of the more 
SF-facing work, we found ourselves looking at a field dominated by big ideas, 
near – and far – future explorations of the solar system, and some very sharp 
takes on government intrusion into social affairs. I think the shortlist 
reflects the best of these three "themes" for 2012, demonstrating a return to 
both the "sensawunda" and to the critical thought that so many complain is 
lacking from contemporary SF.

As a feminist, I am opposed to including women writers in shortlists just 
because they are female: the work has got to hold its own in its field: we can 
discuss whether that field is a level one or not, but when you're judging a 
work, you're obliged to deal with what you've got, and to me, that means 
regardless of any ideological criteria.

This leads us into the wider conversation as to why, despite having a 
significantly enlarged entry this year (a 36 per cent increase on the 60 books 
submitted in 2012) we received disproportionately fewer from women, of which 
many were technically fantasy. We do not have to go far to look for the answer: 
over the last few years, the publishing industry in both Britain and the US 
(but particularly in the former) has been commissioning fewer and fewer SF 
novels by women. The running gag for some years now has been that the industry 
has had a Highlander approach to women who write SF: there can be only one, at 
least on contract.

Is this because women don't write SF? Patently not. Genre workshops are full 
of women writing all forms of the genre. As a freelance editor and writing 
mentor, I have seen what I regard as exceptional science fiction produced by 
women. But this doesn't seem to make it into pro publishing, and when it does, 
it tends to be reviewed in more negative terms than SF produced by men.

I am not, however, of the view that the industry is rife with sexism – at 
least not on an individual basis (the wider cultural context might be another 
issue). When I started writing, I was asked by at least two male editors to 
publish under my full name, not my initials (which I'd hoped to do due to 
having such a boring name), purely because of the issue of the visibility of 
women in SF. Throughout my career, I have had significant support from editors 
of both sexes, and from my peers. So this issue of publication and visibility 
is not a personal gripe: it's an observation about a disconnect between the 
work that women are doing, and its reflection in the wider arena of the 
industry. After all, women have been involved in the genre from its early days, 
ever sinceMargaret Cavendish published The Blazing World in 1666 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/short-stories/9780140433722/the-blazing-world-and-other-writings>
, throughClare Winger Harris <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clare_Winger_Harris> 
andGertrude Barrows Bennett 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gertrude_Barrows_Bennett> in the 1920s and 
onwards (and if you've never heard of these writers, ask yourself why not, and 
you'll start appreciating the core of the problem).

This has been a catch-22 for female genre writers for a long time: as my 
fellow judgeJuliet E McKenna <http://www.julietemckenna.com/> points out, the 
lack of visibility and discoverability of female writers "perpetuates the 
misconception that women can't write SF –  for people who don't understand that 
absence of evidence is not evidence of absence". As Juliet also says, changes 
in bookselling are a factor too: new releases have a very short commercial 
shelf life. The average chain bookseller puts them on the shelves for a handful 
of weeks: if they don't sell, they're returned – but bookshop browsing in 
retail outlets for new releases is now skewed to front-of-house promotions. 
These are biased towards "safe bets which then become self-fulfilling 
prophecies: such as 'female SF doesn't sell, so we won't include that' – which 
guarantees it doesn't sell." This may even go on to affect submissions to 
publishers … Are women writers, in fact, caught up in an enormous feedback loop 
of diminished expectation?

This, in turn, feeds us into the much wider, and much-discussed, issue of the 
changing nature of publishing itself. There's a general view that the 
mainstream publishers are increasingly concentrating on big names – but that's 
not to decry the quality of those names. I would argue that the work of quite a 
lot of white male writers is outstanding, and I believe that to be reflected in 
the Clarke shortlist this year.
 