
Britain’s press has turned into the Daily Trump. Over the past six days, 
coverage of the US president-elect has dominated national newspapers.

The Sunday Trump was remarkable. Across five titles - Observer, Sunday Times, 
Sunday Telegraph <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sunday-telegraph>, Mail on 
Sunday, Sunday Express - I counted 60 pages with content about Donald Trump.


All led their front pages with Trump-related stories, all carried leading 
articles about him, and he featured in most of the columns by senior political 
writers.

On Monday, Trump’s face stared out from most of the front pages, whether 
smiling alongsideNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> (the Brothers Grin?) or, in 
the Daily Mirror’s case, looking stern during his CBS interview.

I cannot imagine that a Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> victory would have 
generated such intense newspaper interest. As happened throughout the election 
campaign in the States, Trump has proved to be a media magnet.

Whether positive or negative - and the majority of the coverage has certainly 
been the latter - the undeniable fact is that he is monopolising the space.

In a similar, if somewhat lesser way, Farage also managed (and still manages) 
to attract undue attention from newspapers. Does that suggest some kind of 
inbuilt rightwing bias?

In at least one sense, I suppose it does because a leftwing demagogue would 
surely not have garnered as many headlines as Trump and Farage.

There is no denying that both men have been lampooned in newspapers, although 
the criticism has not amounted to demonisation. They have been portrayed as 
figures of fun rather than as evil incarnate (the fate of many Labour 
politicians - think Michael Foot, Tony Benn,Neil Kinnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/neil-kinnock>, Ed Miliband and now Jeremy 
Corbyn).

Britain’s rightwing papers have shown an underlying sympathy for the views of 
Trump and Farage, notably over their opposition to immigration and their 
consistent antagonism towards “the establishment”, whether in Washington or 
Westminster.

At the same time, papers with an eye to maximising their readership appeal 
have appreciated their naked populism and, with even greater intensity, their 
disdain for liberalism and the so-called liberal elite.

So Trump and Farage, even while being dismissed as mavericks and ridiculed for 
their lack of “normal” civility and tact, benefit from the underlying (and 
often overt) sympathy towards their central political messages.

In articulating the prejudices of their readers - the common people exercising 
commonsense - theDaily Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>, the 
Sun and Daily Express could do no other than find common cause with Trump and 
Farage.

Then there is the simple matter of the volume of coverage. Name (and face) 
recognition is immensely important in politics, and both men have enjoyed that 
because of widespread media coverage. Quite simply, they have prospered by 
having a platform.

Nor should we fall into the trap of seeing this as a peculiarly rightwing, 
top-down, conspiracy. The left-of-centre press, and the supposedly impartial TV 
and radio news broadcasters, have devoted a great deal of space and airtime to 
Trump and Farage.

It is true to say they have disparaged both men. But they have also been at 
pains - most obviously in TV news bulletins and current affairs programmes - to 
treat them as serious representatives of people they like to refer to as 
disenfranchised and disempowered.


In so doing, ever careful to maintain “balance” as part of the required public 
service remit, broadcast outlets have unconsciously given them credence.

And credence in politics is precious. We may be encouraged to laugh at Trump 
and even loathe him for being“an unstable bigot, sexual predator and compulsive 
liar” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-us-president-nightmare>
 (Jonathan Freedland’s winning phrase), but he has just enough credibility to 
survive the onslaught.

It is not so much that the people love him despite the mockery, but that they 
love himfor it, for being willing to take it and ignore it.

And Farage? Named as “Briton of the year” 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/leaders/article4307559.ece> by the Times 
in 2014, he has long risen above newspaper sarcasm. He revels in it, aware that 
“the media” is viewed by many of his supporters, and would-be supporters, as 
some sort of homogeneous liberal institution. It therefore forms part of the 
opposition.

In truth, Trump and Farage have not needed to manipulate the press and TV in a 
conscious sense. Having been moulded within the modern media landscape, it has 
become second nature to them to use it to their advantage.
 