
When a 53-year-old Sean Connery resurrected the role of James Bond in 1983 
after a 12-year break, even the title of the movie in which the debonaire 
Scotsman strapped on his Walther PPK and took on the forces of Spectre one last 
time seemed to hint at the project’s questionable nature. Never Say Never Again 
turned out to be a decent enough revival for Connery; certainly preferable to 
Octopussy, the official Eon-produced Bond film that emerged the same year with 
an even older Roger Moore as 007. But the history of Hollywood icons digging up 
the roles that made them famous and applying spark plugs hasn’t always been as 
laudable.

Harrison Ford gave Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> a kind of gnarly, yet 
soulful gravitas last year as the returning space scoundrel Han Solo. But he 
wasn’t quite so good when nuking the fridge in Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of 
the Crystal Skull. Sylvester Stallone won widespread praise, and an Oscar 
nomination, for his return to the role of aged blue-collar brawler Rocky Balboa 
inCreed <https://www.theguardian.com/film/creed>, but fans of the one-time 
heavyweight champ had to sit through at least three featherweight Rocky 
instalments before being treated to one last knockout uppercut.

It is therefore entirely understandable that Daniel Radcliffe continues to 
play it safe, like a newly arrived Hogwarts student who asks the sorting hat to 
place him in Hufflepuff, when asked about the possibility of returning to the 
role of an all-grown-up Boy Who Lived in a mooted future movie adaptation of JK 
Rowling’s stage playHarry Potter and the Cursed Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child>. “I’m 
never going to close the door; that would be a stupid thing to do,”he told the 
Hollywood Reporter this weekend 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/daniel-radcliffe-hed-return-harry-927617>
. “But I think I’ll be happy enough and secure enough to let someone else play 
it.”

Daniel Radcliffe: ‘If people are speculating about your sexuality, then you’re 
doing OK’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/17/-sp-daniel-radcliffe-speculating-sexuality-harry-potter>
“There’s a part of me that’s like, some things are better left untouched,” 
added Radcliffe. “If we went back to Potter, there’s a chance we’d make what 
Star Wars: The Force Awakens was to the original Star Wars, but there’s also 
the chance that we’d make Phantom Menace. So I don’t want to go back to 
anything like that and maybe sour what people have already loved.”

The casual observer might wonder what Radcliffe could possibly have to lose 
should Warner Bros – and right now reports hinting at a new Potter film are 
merely rumours – decide to move ahead with a new instalment in the second 
highest grossing movie saga of all time. But the 27-year-old actor has carved 
out a quietly impressive film career since shedding his Hogwarts uniform, even 
if his CV so far lacks even the barest sprinkling of true awards season magic 
dust. In wizarding terms, he’s bumbling along rather nicely as a sort of 
Hollywood version of Neville Longbottom – ever-present, strong in supporting 
roles and with the occasional moment of personal glory to celebrate, even if 
he’s unlikely to ever win the Hogwarts house cup.

And yet Voldemort-levels of danger surely loom should Radcliffe decide to dig 
out the stick-on lightning scar one last time. The nature of the Potter saga’s 
remarkable achievement, in maintaining the same young cast throughout eight 
movies and a decade in filming time, rather masked the odd wooden scene from 
its key trio. But critics and fans might be less forgiving were they to drop 
their wands as fully mature actors. Is it any wonder Radcliffe views the 
prospect of a new instalment with suspicion?

On the other hand, by the time the Englishman has matured enough to play a 
middle-aged Potter in a decade’s time – and should that one great role that 
establishes him indubitably in the Hollywood firmament fail to come his way in 
the meantime – it’s hard to imagine him continuing to play hard to get.

The situation regarding Anne Hathaway’s suggestion that she’d be keen on 
slipping into Catwoman’s slinky leathers once again in the new DC expanded 
universe of superhero movies seems more complex.Hathaway has complained in 
recent times that she’s not getting the roles she once was 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/gossip/la-et-mg-anne-hathaway-ageism-hollywood-losing-roles-glamour-uk-20150904-story.html>
 – thanks, she believes, to Hollywood’s systemic ageism towards even those 
female stars who remain in their early 30s. But would she really want to damage 
the legacy of her wonderfully vivacious turn inThe Dark Knight Rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-dark-knight-rises>, filled as it was with 
old school Hollywood poise and seductive, femme fatale elegance, by reprising 
the role in a very different era that has so far failed to convince the critics?

Anne Hathaway: five best moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/02/anne-hathaway-five-best-moments> 
Where Christopher Nolan’s Batman trilogy pitched a Gotham City closer to 
reality than any previous big or small screen iteration, the recently released
Suicide Squad <https://www.theguardian.com/film/suicide-squad>suggests Warner 
Bros wants its new universe populated largely with larger-than-life, 
mega-powered meta-humans. These films draw their energy from video game tropes 
and thoughtless CGI carnage rather than the sumptuously plotted, Michael 
Mann-inspired gangster noir of Nolan’s The Dark Knight, or the camp yet 
menacing supernatural stylings of the Tim Burton era. It is therefore a little 
hard to see where Hathaway’s stunningly effervescent yet relatively understated 
Catwoman fits in.

The other way to look at it is that Warner/DC might benefit from sprinkling a 
little Nolanesque magic on its faltering shared superhero universe. We should 
not forget that the studio allowed Superman to be reimagined with real world 
stylings as a direct consequence of the Dark Knight trilogy’s success in Man of 
Steel, though that template has been conveniently jettisoned for subsequent 
films. But just as Hathaway would be well-advised to think carefully before 
milking (sorry) one of her best-known roles, Warner probably knows it has come 
too far with its new, as yet rather fractured comic book vision to suddenly 
change direction now.

In the early 1980s, Connery was forced to roll back a 1971 promise that he 
would “never again” play the role of Bond when the opportunity arose to return 
to Her Majesty’s Secret Service for one last adventure. Both Radcliffe and 
Hathaway have sensibly learned from the Scotsman’s mistake: given the right 
circumstances, returning to past glories might just send both actors’ careers 
to new levels.

And yet there’s a reason the phrase Never Say Never Again is part of the 
English lexicon purely for its Bond associations. The rather better-known adage 
is the less ostentatious but rather more trenchant “never look back”.
 