
The last time a horse won the Triple Crown, cable television didn’t exist, 
much less social media like Twitter and Facebook.

When Affirmed won the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness, and the Belmont Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/belmont-stakes> in 1978, he was the third 
horse to do so in six years. Secretariat had broken the 25-year drought in 
1973, and Seattle Slew won it in 1977. By the time Affirmed did it, the 
accomplishment had become if not commonplace, at least not extraordinary.

Horse racing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/horse-racing> lacks the wide 
appeal that it had in the 70s, but the possibility of the Triple Crown captures 
the public’s imagination in ways that similar accomplishments in other sports 
do not.

The grand slam in tennis – Australian Open, French Open, Wimbledon, US Open – 
is arguably harder to win than the Triple Crown: it comprises four events, not 
three, on four different surfaces, and though players can compete for it year 
after year, unlike thoroughbreds, who can win the Triple Crown only at age 
three, the grand slam has been won just six times, three times by men, three 
times by women.

Yet tennis fans and casual sports fan don’t root for the grand slam above all 
else, and the tennis industry doesn’t devote itself to promoting it. It’s cool 
when it happens, but nobody cares when it doesn’t. Achieving it is not hoped 
for above all else.

But every spring, the winner of the Kentucky Derby becomes the most popular 
horse in the country. If he is fortunate or talented enough to win the 
Preakness, a media frenzy, unabated by repetition, ensues, blanket coverage of 
the horse’s attempt to win the Triple Crown emanating even from media outlets 
that ignore the sport the rest of the year.

That frenzy has only intensified since American Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah> won the Triple Crown in 
June at Belmont Park. Racetracks have engaged in a kind of arms’ race, adding 
hundreds of thousands of dollars to purses to try to entice his owners and 
trainer to get him to run at their tracks. Bonuses are built into the 
conditions of races for him, and whispers of appearance fees swirl.

As the horse traveled from California to New York this week for Saturday’s 
Travers Stakes at Saratoga Race Course, his fans could – and did – follow his 
charter plane online, tracking its progress across the country by tweet (and 
the cheeky#AirHorseOne <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23AirHorseOne&src=typd> 
hashtag). News stations posted photos of the van from the airport, making its 
way up the highway. The post-workout backstretch bath photo is so ubiquitous 
that it’s become a mocked meme within the racing industry, at the same time 
that it’s become almost de rigeur for even the most serious reporters. He is 
scrutinized every time he hits the racetrack, in the morning or the afternoon.

In winning the first Triple Crown in a couple of generations, American Pharoah 
has done more than bring prolonged coverage to a sport largely ignored. He’s 
also creating a template for how any future Triple Crown winner will be covered 
and, possibly, campaigned.

Steven Crist, the publisher for and columnist at the Daily Racing Form, hadn’t 
yet started covering racing in 1978, but he was a keen observer of the sport 
then and casts a skeptical eye on the aftermath of this year’s Triple Crown.

“I think people have gone overboard about it,” he said. “Both Sports 
Illustrated and the New York Times had a sort of ‘the poor racing world has 
been waiting 37 years to see a good horse, and now it finally did.’

“It’s absolute nonsense. We’ve seen a hundred good horses, and probably 25 
great horses, since 1978. The idea that the sport is on the verge of collapse 
and everyone in it is miserable is absolute nonsense.”

Unchanged, he said, is racetracks’ clamoring for the Big Horse to appear, 
though, he added, “One of the nice things about Affirmed and Alydar is that 
there was never any question that they were going to run in the races they were 
supposed to.”

That certainty no longer exists: while the Travers is the most prestigious 
race for three-year-olds in the second half of the year, the connections of 
American Pharoah, owner Zayat Stables and trainer Bob Baffert, didn’t confirm 
that they’d run in it until last Sunday, as other tracks offered to create 
races to the connections’ specification or offer bonus money for them to appear.

And while it might be something of a pleasant surprise that American Pharoah 
raced at all after the Triple Crown, it was a foregone conclusion that he 
wouldn’t race beyond this year. The first Triple Crown winner in the era of the 
Breeders’ Cup will race once, maybe twice more, and then be retired to a 
stallion career. Both Seattle Slew and Affirmed raced at four before heading to 
stud farms.

Fans of thoroughbred racing are enjoying American Pharoah while they can, 
immersing themselves in the coverage across myriad platforms, and his legacy as 
a racehorse is cemented, his brilliance undisputed, even should he not win the 
Travers on Saturday or the Breeders’ Cup in October.

His effect on the sport is more equivocal. Will the casual fans who have 
followed him devotedly become racetrack regulars? Will they become bettors? Or 
will they turn their attention elsewhere and only come back to racing if the 
2016 Kentucky Derby winner also wins the Preakness?

Does it make sense for racetracks to allocate resources to attract a horse 
who’s already earned more than $5.5m for his owner, who will make millions more 
from the horse’s stallion career, particularly when that money is taken from 
purses for local horsemen and everyday racing? Does it make sense to try to 
create new, lucrative races just for this horse? Does it make sense for an 
industry to go all-in on one horse whose retirement in a few months is certain?

“Racing needs a Triple Crown,” we have heard as handle, attendance, and TV 
coverage of the sport have waned. Now racing’s got one, which is good news in 
2015, for a few racetracks and a lot of fans. Whether it will matter next year, 
or whether it’s created precedents that will benefit the industry, is anything 
but a sure bet.
 