
I am the lead developer on a multiplayer survival game named Rust 
<https://playrust.com/>. Last week, we made a change to the game that upset a 
lot of people: we made half of our players, picked at random, play as women. We 
also made some of them black. The response has been extreme.

Rust is not a game about identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/24/the-identity-paradox-why-game-characters-are-not-but-should-be>
. The objective in Rust is to survive. This is made difficult by things such as 
starvation, dehydration, radiation, exposure and bear attacks. The biggest 
threat in the game comes from other players who are trying to survive in the 
same conditions. You will survive better if you’re a part of a group, but this 
takes a lot of mutual trust. If you kill someone you’ll be able to loot their 
corpse and take all their food, medicine and weapons. This makes the game very 
interesting socially, since players struggle with trust and slowly build up 
relationships with one another.

The identity paradox: why game characters are not us, but should be
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/24/the-identity-paradox-why-game-characters-are-not-but-should-be>
The game is in “early access”, which means it’s in active development and we 
update it every week. Despite this, it has sold over 3.5m copies since it was 
first released in 2013, and around half a million people play every week. 
Whenever a project has this kind of popularity, people become very passionate. 
But the range and strength of opinions have never been this intense.

Originally every player appeared in game as a white bald guy. We were still in 
the early stages of development and had other things to focus on. Recently, 
though, we decided to change this. We decided that we didn’t want players to 
pick their own appearance. We felt that player customisation had got a bit out 
of control in other games. And we didn’t want to spend six months making a 
player customisation tool – we wanted to concentrate on the game. We also 
wanted the appearance of the players to be consistent over time. A survivor 
shouldn’t be able to attack another then come back later with a different 
gender or race and befriend the same player. They should be recognisable 
consistently and long-term – so anyone likely to commit a crime would be more 
likely to wear a balaclava or a face mask.

So this is what we did. Gender <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> and 
race are randomly selected and linked to a player’s account, permanently 
unchangeable.

Inevitably, there are people who like it and people who don’t. Some players 
have praised what we’re doing. Like us, they think that who you are in the 
game, your race and gender, makes no difference to the actual gameplay – and 
are happy to have the diversity. Others aren’t so positive. They feel that 
playing a gender or race that doesn’t match their own is detrimental to their 
enjoyment.

For race, this seems to be a regional thing. For example, most complaints 
about being black in the game have generally been from Russian players. With 
gender it seems to be more of a geography-free complaint.

Here’s one of the many messages we’ve received from disgruntled male players: 
“Why won’t you give the player base an option to choose their gender? I just 
want to play the game and have a connection to the character like most other 
games I play. Not have some political movement shoved down my throat because 
you make the connection we can’t choose our gender in reality so let’s make it 
like that in game too.”

Others have accused us of forcing them to accept our “feminist ideals”. Some 
have told us that they are quitting the game entirely. One called the move the 
dumbest thing we’ve ever done.

Our female players seem more pragmatic. They point out that they’ve already 
being play Rust as men for the past two years. Some have got in touch to thank 
us. Mostly they see it as no big deal.

Pro-gaming tournament attempts to limit gay and transgender players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/04/pro-gaming-tournament-attempts-to-limit-gay-and-transgender-players>
We’ve also received complaints from transgender players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/04/pro-gaming-tournament-attempts-to-limit-gay-and-transgender-players>
. One called the new system horrifying, unpleasant and uncomfortable. Another 
argued that assigning a fixed sex was reminiscent of real-world transphobia.

It’s maybe understandable why some male gamers wouldn’t want to play as women. 
They’re just not used to being forced to. You could probably count on your 
fingers the number of major, big-budget games where you have no choice but to 
play as a woman, never mind having no choice but to play as a black woman. 
Female gamers are obviously more forgiving – they’ve been playing games as men 
for most of their lives.

I understand the arguments from transgender players – well, as much as a 
straight man can. But it feels to me like the same response stands. We’re 
assigning gender randomly in game – not in real life.

Ultimately the decision comes down to gameplay. We don’t believe that letting 
you choose your race and gender would improve the game. On the other hand, 
randomising everyone’s gender and race meets all our requirements. We get an 
even spread of races and genders that make players more identifiable – while at 
the same time making the social aspects of the game much more interesting.
 