
Gabriella Saponara was considering studying accountancy at university, until 
she heard employers talking about school-leavers' programmes at a careers fair. 
Recognising that this could offer her a fast track into the profession, she 
applied for a job at the accountancy firm Ernst and Young.

Now 18, she is six months into Ernst and Young's three-year school-leavers' 
programme, on a salary of about £21,500 a year, and has no regrets. "I visited 
some university friends recently and they were living off something like £50 a 
week. It really opened my eyes to how lucky I am to be in this position," she 
says.

Saponara is one of a growing number of young people choosing to forgo 
university and head straight into employment.Barclays 
<http://seemore-bemore.com/programmes/school-leaver-programme/>, Natwest and 
Tesco <http://www.tesco-careers.com/home/students> are among those offering 
training programmes specifically for school leavers – many of which lead to 
professional qualifications at degree level and sometimes beyond. Others are 
offering shorter programmes that give young people practical skills for the 
workplace.

The broadcasting and communications company Sky is one such example. Each 
year, it offers about 22 school leavers a year's full-time paid employment with 
the company as part of its school-leavers' programme. The experience has given 
18-year-old Dean Kemp, who has always wanted to work in television, a foot in 
the door of a very competitive industry. "By the end of my placement,  I'll 
have experienced every stage of getting a TV programme to air, from being a 
studio runner to working on promos," he says. "Most of my friends have gone off 
to university, but I don't feel I'm missing out in any way. I've gained a lot 
more from my work experience here than I ever would have with a degree course; 
I've got practical skills and experience to offer an employer."

Globe Education at Shakespeare's Globe in London offers year-long paid 
placements for school-leavers – primarily in its education department – aimed 
at giving them experience of working in the arts. "My brother graduated from 
university two years ago and hasn't been able to find work because he hasn't 
got any experience and I know there are a lot of people in that position," says 
19-year-old Lucy Bird, one of five young people currently on the Globe 
Education programme. "I definitely feel I am in a much stronger place now," she 
adds.

Following an increase in tuition fees (now £9,000 in many institutions) 
university applications have dropped by about 8%. And with graduate 
unemployment also on the rise, fear of debt is not the only thing forcing young 
people to question the value of university.

"We're definitely having a lot more conversations with students … things like 
'OK, you're going to university but where will that degree take you and what 
kind of path can you go down with that?" says Jenny Worby, lead practitioner of 
academic support, inclusion and wellbeing at Milton Keynes College.

Vince Pearce from the National Careers Service agrees: "There has been a 
definite shift over the past four or five years, with young people looking into 
other options rather than university."

For Saponara, getting on the career ladder early is the best decision she ever 
made. "The £50k or so of uni debt these days was really off-putting … but in 
the current economic climate I am really grateful to have a job in a global 
firm. I have heard stories of graduates that are struggling to find employment 
and I wanted to avoid being one of them."

The employer's view


Liz Bingham, managing partner for People, UK & Ireland, Ernst and Young

We've recruited school-leavers for around 20 years, but recently started a 
formal training programme for that group of employees. We had about 60 joiners 
last year, which we hope will rise to 100 this year. The training programme 
lasts for five years, during which time they work towards professional 
accountancy qualifications, which we fund, and many continue their careers with 
the firm.

School-leaver programmes have always been popular, but we've seen a big surge 
of interest this year, which we think is partly down to the increase in 
university tuition fees. We're keen to attract a diverse range of people, 
including bright school leavers who are capable of going to university but have 
chosen not to. If we didn't look at them we would be excluding ourselves from a 
potential pool of talent that is perfect for our organisation.

The average London salary for school leavers at Ernst and Young is £21,500. By 
the time their peers are graduating and looking for work our school-leavers 
will be part-qualified and have three to five years of incredible work 
experience behind them.

The school-leaver's view 


Connor Sullivan, 20, tax associate at Deloitte UK

I left school at 18 because I wanted a qualification and money in the bank and 
I didn't want to get into debt. I did get good A-level results; I just didn't 
want to carry on studying. I liked the idea of working for Deloitte because 
it's a reputable company with plenty of opportunities for progression. I've 
already been promoted to tax associate. I'm just coming to the end of a two 
year school-leavers' programme, at the end of which I'll have an entry-level 
qualification in tax with the option to continue my studies and eventually 
become a chartered tax adviser. When I compare myself to my peers, I'm in a 
much stronger position. I can afford to go on holiday and, unlike some 
students, I never have to eat cereal for dinner. I don't feel I've missed out 
on the university experience because it's really sociable here and you make 
friends fast. I have no regrets at all. VA
 