
Among the several good objectives of Boris Johnson’s Vision for Cycling in 
London 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/Cycling%20Vision%20GLA%20template%20FINAL.pdf>
, produced in 2013, is an increase in the variety of Londoners who travel by 
bicycle. As Johnson himself puts it on page 5:

I want more women cycling, more older people cycling, more black and minority 
ethnic Londoners cycling, more cyclists of all social backgrounds – without 
which truly mass participation can never come.

He claims that such a diversification of the cycling demographic, building on 
what he calls the “admirable Lycra-wearers” and “enviable east Londoners on 
their fixed-gear bikes”, will be brought about by his “creating a variety of 
routes for the variety of cyclists I seek,” encompassing fast routes for 
“cyclists in a hurry” and quieter, side street ones for the more cautious. Is 
his optimism justified?

A study by academics at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 
<https://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/1179/1/Cycling_and_the_city_published_author_copy.pdf>
 (LSHTM) published in 2011, explores why in London “cycling is 
disproportionately an activity of affluent, white men” or, as Transport for 
London (TfL), has put it, why the London cyclist is “typically white, under 40, 
male, with medium to high household income.” Funded by TfL and NHS Camden, it 
examines in-depth interviews with 78 Londoners: women and men of assorted 
ethnicities, cultural backgrounds and occupations, some of them cyclists, some 
of them not and some of them thinking about taking cycling up.

How middle-aged men in Lycra are boosting the need for cycle insurance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/aug/10/cycle-insurance-high-spec-bike> 
One of its main findings concerns the congruence between being someone who 
cycles and an entire social identity bound up with class, ethnicity, values and 
aspirations. In other words,London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
cyclists were seen as being a certain sort of person: “Somebody who’s quite 
environmentally friendly, probably quite independent, maybe a bit of a leftie, 
vegetarian,” observed a woman called Michelle. Another participant, Julia, a 
cycling young professional, was very candid about these cultural associations 
and embraced them. “I mean, to be fair, it does make me feel smug, my friends 
joke that it’s very middle-class and they joke that it sort of fits with the 
lifestyle of gardening, listening to Radio 4, eating organic food…”

As the study points out, such accounts show that cycling “signifies a 
specifically bourgeois sensibility” that simply doesn’t resonate with many 
black and Asian Londoners. A Muslim woman called Jasmine said that riding a 
bicycle would, for her, be “socially unacceptable”. A group of Asian women 
thought the idea that they might cycle “ridiculous” almost by definition. A 
young, black professional, Leanne, indicated that for her, unlike white peers, 
being “a cyclist” would not signal high social status: “When you’ve made it, 
you buy a car, not a bicycle.” Another, Marvin, said he’d only consider cycling 
if he became “really poor”. He added that among black communities, cycling was 
seen as a fun or even deviant youth activity, rather than something for 
successful adults.

For several female participants in the study, being a cyclist – or choosing 
not to be one – was very much entangled with concerns and convictions about 
femininity, appearance and their inclusion in a highly visible minority 
transport culture – a sort of club. One, Rachel, new to cycling, described 
uncertainties about what to wear: “I swing between, should I go all in Lycra or 
should I go for a more girlie look.” Others recognized the dilemma but felt 
they handled it quite comfortably, and some fully embraced the cyclist look: 
“I’ve got the kit, I’m a cyclist, yeah.” There was also outright rejection: 
“The women that do cycle are probably more blokey than feminine.”

I belong on the road as much as any man. Male rage won’t scare me off my bike 
| Nell Frizzell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/26/bike-women-cyclist-pushed-pedestrian-social-media>
The common theme was that, one way or another, cycling entailed personal 
negotiations with notions of femininity, whether accepting them, challenging 
them or reaching an accommodation with them. Something similar emerges in 
women’s observations about cycling and aggression. “The more immediate risks of 
the road, from the dangers of road traffic injury, were particularly salient 
for those considering cycling,” the study says. “Although not necessarily 
objectively greater for female cyclists, the meanings of protecting oneself 
against such risks were gendered, in terms of whether those risks were 
acknowledged, welcomed or disavowed.”

For example, a cyclist called Abigail said of other cyclists: “I do see those 
people and you can tell they’re professional cycle commuters because they adopt 
the other attitude that I think, almost, you can see in their faces - they’ve 
gone from feeling vulnerable to being aggressive to other people...” She was 
concerned that such an outlook was contagious, that being a cyclist in London 
“could actually change you to be an aggressive person.”

For two male cyclists, the opposite was true. “I think a lot of the time I’m 
cutting cars up, rather than the cars cutting me up,” says William. And then 
there’s Russ: “I’m a hardened cyclist. I won’t have people just cutting me up…I 
might consider myself a bit of, what they might call an urban warrior on a 
bike.” Not that the “warrior” attitude was wholly confined to men. “I kind of 
identify with people who cycle. I feel slightly warrior-like,” says Katrin. In 
the view of Molly, the very idea that cycling in London is inherently perilous 
should be challenged: “I don’t think cycling is dangerous, I think it’s an 
excuse ... I think it’s just about being assertive.”

These are just some of the rich insights the LSHTM study provides into the 
complex and varied reasons why some sorts of Londoners choose to cycle, others 
don’t and how cyclists see themselves and are seen by others. In theory, 
cycling in London can transcend social class, ethnicity and age. In practice, 
for now, it is very much the minority pursuit of affluent, young white males, 
and one, which, in the study’s words, “can offer a certain bourgeois 
distinction to those whose identities are not threatened by the possibility of 
poverty.”

'If there aren’t as many women cycling as men … you need better infrastructure'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/09/women-cycling-infrastructure-cyclists-killed-female>
Some cycling campaigners get very touchy when such inconvenient truths are 
pointed out. But they are vitally important to keep in mind when the mayor has 
committed close to £1bn to realizing his cycling plans and such a handsome sum 
could have been spent instead on, say, the night bus service, which would 
immediately benefit some of London’s poorest workers.

This is not to assert that the expenditure will not be justified. Improving 
conditions for cycling is a desirable objective for London, one which, if 
balanced sensitively with the equally desirable objectives of encouraging 
walking and (greener) bus use, can help to greatly improve London’s streets in 
all respects. It is a cheap form of transport, which is good for the health of 
individuals and for the urban environment. As the LSHTM study points out, it 
can also offer “the ultimate in autonomous, efficient travel” and signal female 
empowerment. It adds, in conclusion, that the challenge for public policy in 
London is to foster cycling for all, “rather than just those whose social 
identifies are commensurate with being ‘a cyclist’”. Johnson says his policy 
will achieve this. Itsoutcomes are awaited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/sep/29/will-boris-johnsons-vision-for-cycling-deliver-what-its-promised>
 with interest.


Read the LSHTM report in full here 
<https://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/1179/1/Cycling_and_the_city_published_author_copy.pdf>
.

 