
Who was the first modern Englishman to take a bath? For my money it was Sir 
Thomas Herbert in 1625. That was the year the Yorkshireman toured Persia, 
returning with wild talk of hot water and bodily cleanliness. People were agog 
for foreign marvels in those days – even bananas could cause a sensation. 
Fluffy towels and soap were novelties, and not necessarily welcome ones. After 
all, no self-respecting Englishman had been required to wash for over 1,000 
years, not since the Romans packed up and took off, abandoning us to cack and 
head lice.

Fortunately or not, it still remains well-nigh impossible to have a decent 
bath this side of the Bosphorus. And by a bath, I mean a proper dousing in 
scalding hot steam and water, a vigorous scrub, a violent massage and a long, 
gentle recline with a glass of sweet tea and a hookah pipe. Istanbul, it's 
true, has a couple of grand establishments, but the languid slow-moving culture 
of the oriental hammam has been sadly eroded. No, the modern Herbert has to go 
a little further, maybe to Syria. That was where I chose: Aleppo, the ancient 
Silk Road city.

My mission, once ensconced in the town, is to locate the best baths. The 
guidebook recommends the Hammam Yalbugha near the citadel, but it's closed for 
repairs and looking as if it may not open for a long time. That's a shame since 
it is said to be the most architecturally spectacular.

Sitting on the wall outside the citadel, I get quite a crowd of advisers 
debating where I should go. The first choice, Hammam al-Bayada, is another 
failure. I am chased from the foyer by the bathkeeper: "This is ladies' day!" 
There is no mixed bathing, of course, unless you possess a harem, and I haven't 
brought mine.

My guides point me in the direction of a second choice: "You want Hammam 
al-Nahasin in the souk."
 Donkeys can spend their whole lives in the souk. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
Entering via a cave-like door near the citadel, I am swallowed up by Aleppo's 
vast covered bazaar. This massive, many-headed beast is not somewhere to pop 
into for a pint of milk. It's more like a world in itself. People live here. 
Donkeys spend their entire existence in it.

You can grab a local speciality – kibbeh burghul (balls of meat, pistachios 
and bulgar flour) – and wash it down with fresh pomegranate juice; you can have 
a haircut and get measured for a wedding or a funeral; you can buy timeless 
fashion accessories such as Kurdish pants – they grip your ankles but allow 
plenty of air to move above with four yards of heavy woollen cloth in the 
waist. Then there are spices, coffee, rugs, frilly dresses, wigs, scarves made 
from antelope hair… "Do they kill the deer to get the hair?" I ask.

The shopkeeper smiles sweetly. "You're so charming. Are you gay?" That's 
another thing. I've never been propositioned so many times anywhere. (It is 
very illegal, so if that's your thing, take care.)

Hammam Nahasin is on one of the many side arms of the beast. A rather homely 
pine door leads to some steps down into a large vaulted hall. In the centre are 
various tables stacked with red and white chequered towels and sarongs. Around 
the sides are booths, carpeted and cushioned, all filled with dozens of youths 
watching television. It is one of the few modern developments in a place that 
has been operating for around 800 years, ever since towels were invented (a 
great side trip from Aleppo is to Hama, 140km south, where you can see the 
ancient art of towel weaving in operation at the Al Madani family workshop).

I choose to have the full works, and receive a bar of soap plus a mizar 
(sarong) andmanshafa (towel/scarf). Changing into my gear, I amble through a 
side door into the baths. To my surprise, it is empty. Everyone is watching the 
film. There is a series of domed rooms with niches and benches, some larger 
than others. The building is clearly ancient, but modern white tiles have been 
thrown over everything. The once beautiful water chute is out of use. In the 
main domed hall is a huge stone bench and behind it, the steam room. I sit in 
there and soak it up. I soak it up for quite a long time. Eventually I go out 
and bellow, "Haya! Gad jaahiz!" My Arabic is rusty, but I hope this loosely 
translates as: "Oi – I'm ready!"

After a further 10 minutes, presumably time for the film to finish, I hear the 
outer door open. A bare-chested man ambles in carrying a large copper pot, an 
enormous sponge and some intimidating items that look like oversized Brillo 
pads. This is themukayyis, the scrubber. He is wearing a mizar and some 
tattooes. One on his right arm reads, in English, "Leave me alone".

"Where did you get that?" I ask brightly.

Scowling, he directs me into one of the domed recesses. "Sit down."

I do so. He throws several pots of warm water over me. His left pectoral, I 
notice, is inscribed with the message, "Death or Freedom". His left upper arm 
has a worn and faded image: once possibly a female figure, it now resembles a 
corpse after a dose of napalm. Undoubtedly, I reflect, this is the right djinni 
for the job.

He sets to with a scourer on my legs and feet. The abrasion comes with 
powerful squeezing of muscles, and by the time he gets on to my torso I'm 
already in that weird rag-doll state of being pummelled into submission. He 
does my armpits with the same intensity. Then he pinches the flesh on my back, 
grunting with effort, working his way up to my head like a giant lobster. I 
lose sense of time. I turn over when slapped. My eyes close. The process is 
punctuated by sudden douches of hot water. Then, with a final dismissive 
splosh, he steps back, still grimly unsmiling, to make way for a second 
character, themunashfi.

This tiny man, barely five feet tall, is dressed in football kit and a huge 
pair of sea boots. He is also very cheerful and gentle. If the hammam were a 
Greek tragedy, and in some ways I think it is, this man's entry is theperipeteia
, the moment of dramatic reversal that marks the beginning of catharsis.

He smiles and talks softly, shampooing my hair then wrapping me in towels and 
leading me outside to be plied with tea and tobacco. I lie in a booth, 
empty-headed, skinless and blissful. Slowly, very slowly, words and pictures 
begin to assemble themselves inside my mind into something resembling what is 
commonly called "thought". I dress and leave, walking at the speed of a zombie 
on tranquilisers. I drift around the souk, unable to summon up the energy to 
leave.

Eventually I escape and make my way to the Jneina part of town where the Beit 
Sissi restaurant lies, reputedly the best eating house in town. I try the kebab 
labania – lamb with yoghurt – and the local red wine. A violinist plays 
bittersweet Syrian folk tunes and strange reworkings of Puccini to ecstatic 
applause from the tables.

The restaurant is a dark and dreamy throwback to when Agatha Christie haunted 
Aleppo, waiting for her husband, Max Mallowen, to finish his archaeological 
digging. There are cabinets here, filled with curiosities; maybe Mallowen dug 
some of them up. An old man with a cane and handlebar moustache talks to me 
energetically, explaining each item. His words are lost in the wailing violin, 
but I don't care, and nod gently at everything he says. Later I head back to my 
hotel, determined to recover the power of speech by the following morning.

"Are you OK?" asks the receptionist, peering into my face.

I nod, trying to form some words. Time passes. His face lights up. "You went 
to the hammam?"

I nod. He smiles. "I will send tea for you."

I'm sure Thomas Herbert, were he alive, would vouch that I had had, most 
definitely, a decent bath.

• BMI <http://www.flybmi.com/bmi/en-gb/index.aspx> flies from Heathrow to 
Damascus daily from £375 return inc taxes.Exodus <http://www.exodus.co.uk/> 
(0845 863 9601) offers a Week In Syria which takes in Damascus, Aleppo, 
Palmyra, Bosra and the Dead Cities of Syria, from £1,089pp, including BMI 
flights (trip code AXD). The Monuments of Syria, by Ross Burns (IB Tauris, 
£14.99), is an excellent guide to the country's ancient cities and sites. A 
good general guide is the Bradt Travel Guide to Syria, by Diana Darke (new 
edition for 2010, £15.99). Traditional Syrian towels and bathrobes,
loomed-almadani.com <http://www.loomed-almadani.com/>.
 