
Why does the left so hate Nick Clegg? Even to ask this question here suggests 
an appalling failure to grasp the obvious. The left, so far as Comment is free 
is concerned, is practically defined by people who hateNick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg>. This is an atmosphere in 
which someone can write "I really think this is one of Steve [Bell]'s all time 
bests – Hitler, bin Laden and now Clegg!" and it passes without comment. No 
amount of reasoning is going to shift this, which is why I am interested in the 
phenomenon.

I think that the explanation is a discreditable and unfortunate one, best 
understood by returning to an embarrassing time: our leader proclaiming that 
the last election was "a liberal moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/apr/30/the-liberal-moment-has-come>
". It wasn't. How could so many clever, nice people (as our leader writers are) 
get things so wrong?

The answer is that we had failed to notice that when they are given a vote, 
the British do not in fact want liberal policies much, and they certainly don't 
get excited about them. They don't actually believe they live in a secular 
democracy, and they don't much want to, either. Compare the excitement 
generated by the royal wedding with that about theAV referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av-referendum>. If we really thought that 
democratic politics said as much, as interestingly, about being British as the 
wedding does, there would surely have been a great deal more excitement about 
this.

Sometimes there is. I remember the fall of Thatcher as an electric moment, and 
the election of Tony Blair. But for the most part, democracy is like drains. 
You miss it dreadfully when it's not there. But you don't want to think much 
about drains or democracy, and the people who think that the most glamorous and 
impressive bits of their house are the bathroom fittings are just weird.

The failure of the Lib Dems and their projects is the simple and endlessly 
repeated proof of this. But it is difficult to keep going in politics with the 
idea of being part of a perpetual minority. So we need ways to work around the 
failure and unpopularity of Lib Dem policies, and in this light hatred of Clegg 
is a simple scapegoating mechanism. Does anyone seriously suppose that any 
other Lib Dem leader could have played the hand differently or better? I know 
he's been on telly, but is Vince Cable really so charismatic that he could have 
turned back a 68% to 32% defeat, even if he had danced for it?

The hatred over student fees in particular is evidence that even Liberal 
Democrat voters don't want a more open and equal country. Of course, the Lib 
Dems knew this, which is why in opposition they took up a policy of "free" 
education for university students. "Free", because someone still has to pay for 
the whole thing; just not the beneficiaries. There is nothing particularly 
rightwing about student loans: the Swedish social democrats introduced them in 
1960, under Olof Palme, when he was minister of education. The outcry against 
them comes from people who see themselves losing a privilege they had 
considered as a right. There's a word for that, and it's not "liberal".

Hatred of Clegg is concentrated on the fact that he betrayed some of the 
policies he ran on; but he did so because the country voted against them. 
That's democracy. Sometimes the majority is wrong. Sometimes it disagrees with 
you. But the majority still gets to decide, as the Lib Dems, in coalition, have 
discovered. There's no reason whatever that a party with 23% of the votes 
should get 100% of its programme through. The people who think it should are 
not being democratic.

If even Lib Dem supporters are neither liberal nor democratic, it's hard to 
see why the rest of the country should vote for their – our – policies either. 
But to admit this is just about impossible. It so much easier and more 
satisfying simply to hate Clegg.
 