
In June, Adam Ant will embark on a five-date tour of seaside towns 
<http://www.adam-ant.net/whatsnew.html> – and revive a long lost tradition in 
the process. As an astute observer of pop culture, the Antman must know that 
British coastal towns provide the quintessential homegrown music experience, 
what with the fading Victoriana and the licence for blustery fun and – even 
better – anarchy.

The big cities might think they're at the cutting edge, but it's the seaside 
where British pop first thrived – from postwar gigs to seaside brawls between 
mods and rockers. The mix of showbiz, cheap pills and even cheaper thrills 
combined to forge an English pop vision far more vivid than that created by art 
schools.

Growing up in Blackpool, I felt cut off from the epicentre of pop action. But 
if I had been a teenager in the 60s I could have seen endless Beatles gigs, 
watched Jethro Tull, or witness Jimi Hendrix set fire to his guitar on stage 
(one of only two occasions this actually happened).

The 60s was the last decade that Blackpool could be considered the second city 
of showbiz; even Frank Sinatra would think nothing of playing there. A few 
decades earlier, George Formby, the UK's biggest homegrown star, would happily 
live in Blackpool and perform there for months on end. He even recorded songs 
about the place, such as the lascivious and censor-bafflingLittle Stick of 
Blackpool Rock <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QvNh40ZIRa0>.

Back then, seaside towns captivated the public imagination. The Beatles would 
dress up for pantomime pictures on the beach in Margate and play residencies in 
coastal townssuch as Bournemouth. It was a huge part of the pop conveyer belt 
and probably a cheap thrill in the days before LSD and touring America. The 
Beatles never left behind the inspiration of the seaside, though. Paul 
McCartney is believed to have thought up Magical Mystery Tour while looking at 
one of Blackpool's illumination trams.

Unfortunately, by the time the Specials fell apart on their own seaside tour 
<http://www.2toneposters.co.uk/2-tone-poster-shop/the-specials/the-specials-seaside-tour-poster-with-the-bodysnatchers-and-the-go-gos>
, the tradition was dying along with the towns themselves. Perhaps they were 
too old fashioned for the amphetamine-driven cynicism of the era. Morrissey, of 
course, wrote one of his best songs, Everyday Is Like Sunday, about a visit to 
Borth in Wales.

Since then, Brighton has become a hip enclave and Blackpool has bravely 
soldiered on as a piss-up paradise. Elsewhere, other seaside towns have become 
fascinating curios ignored by the showbiz and entertainment culture that was 
once part of their DNA. Maybe Adam Ant's jaunt will revive this tradition and 
more artists will feel the need to be beside the seaside.
 