
Last week the UK’s culture secretary John Whittingdale described adblocking 
companies asacting like a “modern-day protection racket” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/02/adblocking-protection-racket-john-whittingdale>
. We asked our readers why they use adblocking software when browsing the web, 
and what they thought media companies should do to fund content in the future.

‘Familiarity breeds contempt’ - Lorrie Beauchamp (58), writer, Montreal, Canada

 Lorrie Beauchamp 
I worked in the advertising world for 30 years. It’s an industry that profits 
from mindless consuming but, if they don’t change their tune and their business 
model, the industry will perish. Consumers are getting smarter, and the 
“tricks” used to influence us are becoming increasingly obvious. If I want to 
buy something, I turn to comments and user reviews now. I have stopped all 
impulse buying since I eliminated advertising from my diet. My life is simple, 
peaceful, and there’s less of a sense of “I need more, more, more!”

I don’t agree with John Whittingdale’s saying that adblocking is a ‘modern-day 
protection racket.’ I think content sharing is the new way in a new world. We 
need to find another way to appreciate content, and we need to find it soon. We 
need to think more like artists, who will produce regardless of whether or not 
they are paid. Passionate people are happy people, and a society can be 
productive and happy without profitability. How about just fair wages and no 
competition? Then everyone wins. Capitalism is woefully unsustainable, as greed 
has become pandemic.

‘Ads should be designed around the user’ - Courtney Allen (28), digital 
communications, London

Online advertising is often done in a way that is obtrusive to the experience 
you expect when you go to a site. Some sites force you to view a full screen 
video, when you came to read a text article. In addition some of these ads cost 
you more money in data than you would have expected from viewing a page of text 
and images. They are designed in a way to make you look at them. The overt 
ones, in some cases, make you lose interest in reading what you intended to 
because it is not worth the hassle of being forced to sit through the ads. I 
don’t agree with the whitelisting process being implemented. I think all ads 
should have an opportunity to appear on the web if they follow a set of 
standards that ensure they aren’t aggressively obtrusive. They should not have 
to pay for that.

I favour subscription models for ad free access to content. Adverts should be 
unique to the design of a website and work for the needs of a user. Breaking up 
long pieces of text can be good for the user, there just needs to be a line.

Whittingdale’s statement is an extreme one with a clear purpose. There might 
be a reduction of content, or possibly even lower quality content, but there’s 
no chance we’ll see the world going back to printed media to recover cost. All 
ads aren’t bad but the aggressive ones force users to resort to blocking them. 
If the ads are designed around the user and not dictated by the goals of big 
brands, there is no reason why they can’t have a permanent place online.

‘For every free item a company gives away, someone somewhere is being robbed 
to pay for it’ - Ben Lloyd (37), copywriter, Essex, UK
 Ben Lloyd Photograph: Ben Lloyd 
I can accept the annoyance of online advertising, and even the detrimental 
effect it has on page loading times, because I understand that businesses have 
bills to pay and that advertising helps cover some of those costs. What I can’t 
accept is being stalked across the web by various ad-selling agencies using 
beacons and cookies, which in any other industry would be called ‘spyware’ or 
‘malware,’ to track my every movement online. Modern online advertising is more 
about building individual profiles than it is about selling ads - and that’s 
wrong.

But I completely agree with Whittingdale. The public need to understand that 
for every free item a company gives away, someone somewhere is being robbed to 
pay for it. In the case of newspapers, that person is a journalist. We’re all 
rapidly becoming enslaved to ‘free,’ enriching shareholders in mega brands, but 
cutting the value and earnings of everyone else in the process. In effect, 
‘free’ is simply speeding up the transfer of wealth to the super-rich.




Adblocking is a small part of the bigger question, who controls the media?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/06/adblocking-control-publishers-mobile-web-access>
‘Companies need to start vetting those who want to advertise and start 
respecting the customer’ - Sam Fleming (27), Educator, Manchester

Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> providers have 
caused this situation for themselves by allowing their ads to contain phishing 
links, malware, pornographic images, irritations such as flashing colours and 
sound, stealing data and draining data allowances. I use an adblocker because I 
don’t trust advertising providers to offer safe content on websites I visit. 
Companies should be blaming advertising networks for the reputation they have 
given themselves instead of blaming the end users who are just trying to stay 
safe.

I agree with Whittingdale’s statement, however I don’t believe advertisements 
are always the way people should pay. Services like Netflix for example seem to 
have the right idea. Companies need to start vetting those who want to 
advertise and start respecting the customer in the process. I don’t like 
feeling tricked or deceived into buying a product by celebrity endorsements.

‘I told Facebook I’m 106, and now only get ads for bingo and late life love’ - 
Kate (45), freelance writer, Yorkshire

A family member died in tragic circumstances a few months ago. Adware clearly 
picked this up from my emails and, ever since, when I occasionally use a 
non-adblocked browser, the web is still trying to flog me black clothes and 
funeral plans, often in the creepiest language. It’s futile for the advertisers 
and invasive for me. I see them in a small time way as the enemy, and take 
pleasure in outwitting their attempts to shower my online environment. I always 
lie on demographic forms if they are forced on me. I told Facebook I’m 106, and 
now get ads only for bingo and late life love, which amuse me very much.

I also dislike the whole manipulative language of advertising. I’d feel less 
low grade resentment towards something more straightforward. Whittingdale is 
correct, but if services want me to turn the adblocker off, they need to switch 
back to non-flashing non-filmic ads down the edges, rather than increasingly 
aggressive ones which seem almost designed to make users cross. I wonder if the 
evolution of micropayments might offer a solution. I wouldn’t mind that.
 A screenshot from an Adblock Plus promotional video in 2013. Photograph: 
Video screenshot 
‘I imagine a return to a more traditional system in a new format’ - Sadie 
(25), student, Sydney, Australia

I find targeted advertising to be stereotyping, sexist and intrusive. I 
understand that websites I enjoy and truly appreciate rely on this revenue, but 
I see this as an in-between time; as more and more people continue to use 
adblocking software, websites will have to switch to user-pay systems and rely 
on subscriptions for revenue. I don’t think this is necessarily a bad thing. 
I’m happy to pay for news, and do already pay for some. I imagine it’ll be a 
return to a more traditional system in a new format.

‘The consumer needs to have control over the type of adverts they are exposed 
to while browsing’ Louise (23), Horsham, UK

As a person with autism I am extremely sensitive to adverts which contain loud 
sounds and flashing images. Often these kinds of adverts will pop up when I’m 
halfway through watching a video on Youtube and they will actually trigger an 
autistic meltdown. During a meltdown I lose all control of higher cognitive 
functions, such as speech and the ability to reason and think rationally, and I 
become violent towards myself. It’s a very frightening experience.

Another reason why I block adverts is that you can’t control the type of 
adverts that you will see on the internet. Recently on youtube there were 
adverts for horror movies, which I detest due to their disturbing content, and 
adverts for awareness on sexual abuse in schools. While I know the latter issue 
is very serious and needs more public awareness, the advert is very shocking 
and I know a few people who have been emotionally triggered by it, due to their 
similar past experiences in schools. Needless to say, it was very distressing 
for them to relive those memories, when all they were trying to do was watch a 
video on youtube.

I believe that if there are to be adverts on the internet, the consumer needs 
to have control over the type of adverts they are exposed to while browsing. If 
I had the ability to control the adverts I was personally exposed to, they 
would have to be autism friendly; no loud noises, no flashing images, no bright 
colours, no rapid speech and no disturbing content. They would also have to 
present themselves before the video I wanted to view started playing as adverts 
which pop up mid-activity disrupt my routine and can also trigger a meltdown 
simply with their poor timing. Companies need to be aware of people on the 
autistic spectrum when it comes to online advertising. We have very specific 
needs which must be catered for to ensure a good quality of life. Opt-out 
systems need to be introduced; consumers need to be allowed to control which 
adverts they are exposed to.

While money does make the world go round, this issue is never as clear cut as 
Whittingdale presents it. Wikipedia is a prime example of this. The website 
survives on non-compulsory donations from users, without the need for adverts 
cluttering its articles. As someone who uses Wikipedia on a daily basis, I 
really appreciate the fact the website has retained its academic environment, 
allowing me to freely use their content without being disrupted by adverts. I 
donate to Wikipedia regularly to ensure this type of practice remains viable.
 Samsung is the first major Android phone manufacturer to introduce adblocking 
following a move by Apple in September. Photograph: Manu Fernandez/AP 
‘Content has many purposes’ - Rishi <https://twitter.com/rishil> (36), 
marketer, UK

Adblocking is a 'modern-day protection racket', says culture secretary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/02/adblocking-protection-racket-john-whittingdale>
In my professions I have to scan hundreds of search engine result pages, and I 
use adblockers to cut down on PPC results to reduce the paid media clutter on 
the results. But I don’t necessarily support adblocking, primarily because it’s 
unfair to content creators. A lot of media organisations spend a lot of money 
and effort to put out content that interests people, admittedly page views, ad 
impressions and clicks are motivations. Without those motivations will good 
content exist? Maybe. But I don’t think it would in it’s current high volume.

The only other way publishers can make money is subscriptions, which doesn’t 
work well for many types of content. Apart from that advertorials and partnered 
paid for content could be a good revenue stream, however I think in many 
organisations this would lead to bias towards advertisers.

I disagree with Whittingdale. Content has many purposes, for example YouTube 
videos will still grow as people use that medium to market their own services. 
So people willing to get something out of publishing good content, beyond 
simply ad views will always put out good content.

‘There has to be a way to manage it better’ Patrick (47), health and safety 
officer, Washington DC

I do not use adblocking but I can see why people want to. It is becoming as 
horrible as some print newspapers, where advertising takes up more space on 
pages than actual stories. There has to be a way to manage it better. I can 
understand those who prefer not to have certain ads show up, be it personal 
preference, children, or other reasons. Blocking everything just isn’t 
realistic, however, webmasters have to be reigned in or risk losing traffic. As 
a business owner I’d fire my webmaster if ads were clogging our site. Ads need 
to be clean, simple and creative - not overwhelming and tiresome.

I’m all for advertising but webmasters and companies have to understand not 
everyone has the latest fastest greatest PC, or the fastest upload capability. 
By simply altering this perception, web pages can be better designed, built and 
managed. How much traffic do they lose because a potential customer does not 
have the latest PC or the fastest upload capability? I’m a fan of online 
newspapers, however, I’ve seen a number of them, especially in the US, succumb 
to atrocious web management practices. Forget adblocking software - people 
simply do not return.

Advertisers get paid to be creative, to fit a niche, to stand out from the 
crowd. The bigger and louder approach is not king, neither is using video for 
each and every advertisement. Smaller banners and a creative use of space could 
be more productive practices. It hurts the small business owner to succumb to 
the larger corporations who want to run and own the digital highway.
 A previous ad campaign by Adblock. Photograph: Adblock 
‘There need to be more granular options for paying for content’ Laura 
<https://twitter.com/tokyololas>, Tokyo

I dislike targeted ads that are the result of search history data scraping. 
Not everything users search for online is of lasting interest to the user. It 
also feels creepy to constantly be confronted by the fact that your search data 
has been scraped, when you visit a page and see a targeted ad. There need to be 
more granular options for paying for content (for example, short term passes). 
Websites also need to allow users to turn off targeted ads, but perhaps have 
those users agree to general, non-targeted ads.

I agree with Whittingdale’s statement. Nothing is free and it’s unrealistic to 
think that businesses can continue to operate without being paid at some point 
along the chain. In addition professional journalists, editors, and 
photographers need time and money to develop meaningful content. At the same 
time businesses should not take the easiest or laziest route to increasing ad 
revenue and, in doing so, assume that users will remain complacent about what’s 
served to them.

What's wrong with adblocking?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/02/adblocking-page-load-times-publishers>
‘The onus should be on the publishers to find a way around this problem’ - 
Lucy (26), London

I had no issue with online advertising until about five years ago, when a 
number of my favourite websites for reading online articles introduced “site 
takeovers.” This means that the entire website is framed by an enormous product 
advert, which is often animated and always extremely distracting. This was in 
addition to normal banner advertising and pop-ups so the strain on page load 
times was ridiculous. I would often accidentally click on these adverts while 
trying to navigate websites.

Essentially my patience has been exhausted by these companies. They have no 
respect for their readers, so I see no reason to respect their right to finance 
their content. We hear a lot about the plight of publishers who describe 
themselves as being “respectful” or “one of the good guys,” but I’ve yet to 
find one whose adverts are genuinely unintrusive. I have a lot of sympathy for 
publishers losing revenue, I really do, but I’ve yet to hear a case convincing 
enough that I’m willing to give up my adblocker. My viewpoint is that the onus 
should be on the publishers to find a way around this problem, which they 
themselves created, not on the consumer to stop using the software.

I’m not a fan of advertorial content but I suspect this will be the future of 
online publishing. The only way to circumvent the ad blockers will be to make 
the advertising part of the editorial. Many people highlight the ethical 
problems with this type of content, but it’s really no different to the paid 
promotional features that many magazines already run in their print issues.
 More than 40% of those surveyed by GlobalWebIndex said they were interested 
in blocking ads on their mobiles in the future. Photograph: Chris Radburn/PA 
‘I have to constantly prepare for becoming suddenly and seriously ill’ Lilac 
(41), healthcare, Australia

I have chronic vertigo. Flashing, spinning or other sudden movements can set 
off a serious vertigo attack. I use an adblocker to make the internet 
accessible. Without an ad blocker as part of my toolset, the internet is simply 
not accessible to me. I have to constantly prepare for becoming suddenly and 
seriously ill.

Ways to improve the user experience are subscriptions and guaranteed small 
text-only (or text-and-still-picture only) ads that don’t contain scripts, 
animation or sounds. Publishers should also stop relying on outside advertising 
providers that often supply inappropriate content, like pornographic ads on a 
business site.

I agree with Whittingdale to an extent, but it’s also true that a lot of 
content, both online and off, doesn’t need to exist and he’s clinging to 
obsolete media models.
 