
This should be a column looking forward to a weekend that promises to be among 
the most memorable for many years. A thrilling contest for the Flat jockeys' 
title is into its final week, while Kauto Star, Midday and Workforce are all 
due to race in the next five days. Above all, two of the greatest racemares of 
all time, Goldikova and Zenyatta, will both go for unprecedented third 
victories at the Breeders' Cup meeting.

Instead, thanks to the stubborn refusal of both racing and the bookmakers to 
act like adults and reach an agreement on the levy, it must be about the period 
of drift and uncertainty facing an industry that employs tens of thousands of 
people. Until Jeremy Hunt, the culture secretary, decides on the appropriate 
sum to be returned from betting to racing, racing can only inch forward into a 
murky future, and if he fails to consider it a pressing priority, frankly, who 
can blame him?

While he ponders whether to lean towards the bookies or the British 
Horseracing Authority, it seems likely that Paul Dixon, the president of the 
Racehorse Owners' Association and chairman of the Horsemen's Group, will be 
organising strikes designed to "exert maximum harm" on the bookmaking industry. 
Rich people striking for more money from their hobby. That's really going to 
play well with an austerity government.

Dixon is one of several people – all of them men with big egos, by no great 
coincidence – who emerge from this sorry mess with no credit whatsoever. Ralph 
Topping, the chief executive of William Hill, is another. Topping seems to pick 
fights with racing as much because he enjoys fighting as anything else, which 
is not in the long-term interest of bookmaking or racing (or, for that matter, 
William Hill's shareholders).

He is also willing to use the levy process as cover in a separate, commercial 
battle with Betfair, which he loathes because it offers some punters – though 
not necessarily the most profitable ones - such an innovative, low-margin 
betting product that traditional bookies struggle to compete.

But Ralph Topping does not represent the views of every bookmaker any more 
than Paul Dixon reflects those of every owner. They are just louder, more 
belligerent and more blinkered than the rest, unable to see beyond the 
boundaries of their own, narrow self-interest.

For the real architect of the levy deadlock, though, it is necessary to look 
to the very top. Bookmakers have contributed to the failure to reach an 
agreement but, throughout the process, they have been able to sit back and wait 
for a determination, safe in the knowledge that the eventual figure will be 
much closer to their offer than to the racing industry's ludicrous demand for a 
minimum of £130m, and ideally another £20m of icing on top.

The BHA's insistence that racing deserves an unprecedented boost to the levy 
at a time when everyone else is cutting back has poisoned the whole process, 
and for that the ultimate blame must lie with Paul Roy, the Authority's 
chairman.

It is, or should be, surprising that Roy is still in charge, following the 
disclosure that his City firm invested heavily in Betfair when the exchange 
floated less than a fortnight ago. Given his repeated (albeit highly 
questionable) claims that Betfair is leeching money from racing, buying its 
shares suggested that either Roy is very stupid, that he employs very stupid 
people, or that in his list of priorities, racing comes well behind the 
(further) enrichment of Paul Roy. None of these scenarios makes him fit for 
office.

There are plenty of people with questions to answer over the failure to reach 
agreement on the levy. The first, and ideally only, one for Roy to address, 
though, is: why are you still here?
 