
Brendan Rodgers was left confused by the first question posed over Celtic’s 
interest in Darlington Nagbe. Asked about a player called “Darling”, the 
Northern Irishman didn’t immediately process who or what he was being pressed 
on. It’s fair to say Nagbe’s name isn’t exactly renowned in Scottish soccer 
circles.

Seattle's triumph, and good riddance to Gerrard: the 2016 MLS season in review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/seattle-gerrard-2016-mls-season-review>
They might not hear his name again, after the midfielder’s proposed £3m move 
to Celtic from thePortland Timbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/portland-timbers> fell through. Nagbe made 
back page news in Scotland, with the 26-year-old first snapped as a guest of 
the Scottish champions at a Champions League game against Barcelona in 
November. Their interest was genuine, with negotiations between the Glasgow 
club and the Timbers coming to a head last week. Now, however, the move would 
appear to be dead in the water after the Timbers held firm on their valuation 
of the player.

Nagbe is Portland’s best player, after all. Their difference-maker and 
match-winner. It’s understandable that they would dig their heels in over his 
mooted exit. But from the perspective of the player himself, the prospect of 
Nagbe making a move this off-season, whether it is to Scotland or anywhere 
else, is a compelling one. Considered one of the brightest American talents for 
quite some time, he finds himself at something of a juncture in his career. Now 
26, Nagbe must make the next step if he is to fulfil his undoubted potential. 
The time is right.

As one of the best players in MLS, Nagbe has found his comfort zone, but that 
has seen him stagnate. Having reached the height of his career in 2015, winning 
theMLS <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mls> Cup for the first time as the 
Timbers’ star man, the 2016 season was something of a lull for Nagbe. What was 
supposed to be the year the midfielder blossomed into a truly top-tier talent 
turned into 12 months in which his trajectory plateaued. His influence in 
Portland waned as the Timbers put up a dismal title defence, with his 
international future also called into question after turning down Jürgen 
Klinsmann’s invitation to take part in a series of national team friendlies in 
October.

And so this off-season would appear to be the perfect jumping-off point. What 
more has Nagbe got to left prove in MLS? Sure, he could add some consistency to 
his game – with just one goal to show for his 27 appearances last season he 
could certainly sharpen his goalscoring instincts – but in a wider sense Nagb 
ehas gone as far as he can go at the Portland Timbers. There is nothing left 
for him to achieve in MLS.

Nagbe needs a new challenge, a new test, even if that doesn’t mean much in the 
way of a step-up in quality. He should look at how competition has helped Omar 
Gonzalez make the next step in his career despite joining a club in Pachuca and 
a league in Liga MX that didn’t exactly represent the most obvious of upward 
movements for the US international defender. Nagbe must, in the same way, open 
his mind to find the same thing.

Celtic might have offered him that. They could have provided Nagbe with a 
platform that transcends Scottish soccer. The Hoops faced Barcelona, Borussia 
Mönchengladbach and Manchester City in the Champions League this season, also 
playing six continental matches in qualifying for the competition. If Nagbe 
wants to put himself in the shop window for even bigger and better things, 
Celtic had the potential to put him there.

As things stand, though, Nagbe will still be a MLS player next season. The 
Timbers are overhauling their squad ahead of the 2017 campaign, but they are 
reluctant to give themselves a void that would be harder than most to fill. 
Their valuation of the player, their best player, reflects his worth to 
Portland rather than the true quality of Nagbe. It’s for this reason suitors 
might be priced out of a move for the 26-year-old.

But even those at the Timbers must begrudgingly recognise that Nagbe needs 
taking out of his comfort zone. Players like Gonzalez at Pachuca and Perry 
Kitchen at Hearts – both of a similar age to Nagbe – have set a precedent by 
seeking pastures new in not the most obvious of places. It’s not necessarily 
about making the move expected of you, but making the move that presents the 
best chance of progression. It’s about finding the right fit.

Timbers CEO Merritt Paulson isn’t one for being bullied, especially when it 
comes to the sale of his team’s best player. However, with Portland granting 
Nagbe permission to attend the November match between Celtic and Barcelona it 
would seem the Timbers are at least open to the notion of selling the 
26-year-old. If they were to do what’s best for the player and his future, 
they’d let him leave.
 