
The first time that someone urged me to read Elena Ferrante, he mentioned her 
anonymity, along with her evocation of Naples, and her peerless representation 
of women’s friendships, as among her most impressive qualities. This was in 
2013, shortly after the critic James Wood hadintroduced 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/01/21/women-on-the-verge> Ferrante to 
readers of theNew Yorker, in an essay that dwelt on her anonymity. “Compared 
with Ferrante,” Wood wrote, “Thomas Pynchon is a publicity profligate.”

A few things were known about the writer, thanks to Ferrante’s generosity with 
written interviews, which routinely feature her anonymity. She grew up in 
Naples. She had a classics degree. She believed books should stand alone. Wood 
quoted a letter to her publisher, from 1991. “I believe that books, once they 
are written, have no need of their authors. If they have something to say, they 
will sooner or later find readers; if not, they won’t.”

Elena Ferrante: the global literary sensation nobody knows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/31/elena-ferrante-literary-sensation-nobody-knows>
Enough of her readers now appear to share this austere analysis to justify a 
thorough rethink, in the media, of its coverage of novelists. “No one really 
wanted to know the identity of Elena Ferrante,” wrote Frances Wilson, in the
Times Literary Supplement. In which case, maybe people don’t, really, want to 
know about John le Carré’s dad or the latest revelations about Elizabeth Jane
Howard <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/01/21/women-on-the-verge>. We’re 
above all that. “Let’s restore authentic centrality to the books themselves,” 
Ferrante says.

Mercifully for her publisher, Ferrante’s books did find many thousands of 
readers, after which speculation about her identity intensified, even among 
admirers of her work. Wood, for example, mentioned a rumour about an Italian 
novelist,Domenico Starnone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/15/who-italian-novelist-elena-ferrante>
. He guessed at confessional reasons for her reticence, such as only confirmed 
her honesty. “As soon as you read her fiction, Ferrante’s restraint seems 
wisely self-protective.”

There’s an echo of the conjecture that followed the publication of Jane Eyre, 
under the name Currer Bell. “Who, indeed, but a woman,” wrote one reviewer, 
“could have ventured, with the smallest prospect of success, to fill three 
octavo volumes with the history of a woman’s heart?”

The earlier review is quoted in a brilliant study by John Mullan, Anonymity: A 
Secret History of English Literature 
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/8745.html>, in which context Ferrante’s 
reticence and the avid response to it look far more like a return to literary 
convention than a rebuke to celebrity culture. As with Charlotte Brontë, it was 
a matter of time, given the sales and adulation, before Elena Ferrante was 
identified. Following years of false starts, a reporter, Claudio Gatti, now
exposes <http://www.nybooks.com/daily/2016/10/02/elena-ferrante-an-answer/>his 
“suspect”, in the manner of a police sergeant, as the Roman-based translator, 
Anita Raja. That Raja is married to Starnone is unlikely to end speculation 
about his involvement. As for Gatti, his reward, to date, has been sustained 
abuse. A British journalist proposed him as “the most despised Italian on the 
planet” and said he deserved to be bashed on the head, Ukip style, with a copy 
ofMy Brilliant Friend. The TLS editor, Stig Abell, protested that exposure had 
been achieved in the beastliest sort of way, involving money, as opposed to via 
the more agreeable, practical criticism. If only Gatti had been nicer, less 
Brexity, or better still, a woman. Abell is not alone in recoiling from a 
painfully gendered pursuit, of a woman whotold  
<https://www.ft.com/content/1f019b5c-9d18-11e5-b45d-4812f209f861>the Financial 
Times’s Liz Jobey: “Male power, whether violently or delicately imposed, is 
still bent on subordinating us.”

While the wretched Gatti is excoriated, anyone who shares his interest might 
as well, you gather, admit to a sneaking respect for Mazher Mahmood. The Booker 
prize winner Marlon James wrote on Facebook:, “Seriously though, who is thisNYRB
 [New York Review of Books]Elena Ferrante article for? What kind of person 
supports this shit and cared to find out?”

The public know almost as little about Ferrante, unveiled, as they did before

OK, this kind. I’m glad we know who wrote Jane Eyre and where she lived. And 
I’m curious about Ferrante. Not merely because I belong to the same, debased 
trade as Gatti and do not share my friends’ enthusiasm for the novelist. 
Despite dogged attempts to enjoy Ferrante – and to suppress conjecture about an 
oddly male glint, in some scenes – I find Neapolitan novels fiction (the 
interviews are great) much as I did the magic realism of the 80s: lurid and 
prolix. It came as no surprise to find Salman Rushdie posting in Ferrante’s 
support, notwithstanding his own generous offering, to inquisitive readers, of 
Joseph Anton, in which true-life romances are thrillingly explored.

But individual taste has no bearing on the principle that Elena Ferrante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/elena-ferrante> had a right to concealment. 
Whether she could reasonably expect full compliance, once she was revered and 
famous, sole cause of a tourism spike in Naples, is a different matter. JK 
Rowling, discussing her own outing as the detective writer Robert Galbraith, 
sounded resigned. “I always knew if the books had any success, it would become 
harder and harder to remain anonymous because, quite reasonably, people would 
say, well, I would like to interview him or ask him some questions.”

In that respect people are unchanged since they enjoyed guessing – as they 
were sometimes intended to – about the authorship, among others, ofThe Rape of 
the Lock, Gulliver’s Travels, Joseph Andrews, Pride and Prejudice, Ivanhoe, 
Frankenstein, Evelina, Mary Barton, Middlemarch, Alice’s Adventures in 
Wonderland, Father and Son, The Bell Jar, The Diaries of Jane Somers. “A good 
proportion of what is now English literature,” John Mullan writes, “consists of 
works first published, likeThe Rape of the Lock, without their authors’ names.”

Seriously, again to quote Marlon James, what kind of person supports this shit 
and cared to find out? Might they not be Ferrante’s admirers? In his time, 
Thackeray was not above biographical speculation. “I have been exceedingly 
moved and pleased byJane Eyre. It is a woman’s writing, but whose?” The English 
reading world, Elizabeth Gaskell wrote in her biography of Brontë, “was in a 
ferment to discover the unknown author.”

Insisting on the gendered aspect of the Ferrante outrage, some have argued, 
not entirely unlike women who defend the burqa, that Gatti violated a 
self-effacement that is peculiarly womanly. If so – and that behaviour did not 
originate with patriarchal restrictions on female writers – there is, still, 
the consolation that the public knows almost as little about Ferrante, 
unveiled, as it did before. As intended, her books prospered under anonymity, 
they speak for themselves and no loyal reader will care if she wasn’t raised in 
Naples, a disclosure that only accords with Ferrante, inVanity Fair, on “the 
centrality of the work”.

For the tiny number of Ferrante-resistant readers, the violence of last week’s 
response may be as interesting as the unmasking. What’s this sudden consensus, 
among eager consumers of author interviews and confessions, from regular 
participants in literary festivals and talks, that a decent reader is 
interested only in texts? Should publishers accordingly trim, if such a thing 
were possible, their publicity budgets? Or does that strange phenomenon – 
Ferrante fever – account for an anti-biographical fury that remained dormant 
during the exposures, respectively, of Belle de Jour,JK Rowling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling> and Banksy? True, Ferrante 
threatened never to publish again. But that was as the novelist raised in 
Naples.
 