
A bit of frothy speculation is probably not what brewing group SABMiller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sabmiller> wanted before Wednesday’s 
full-year results, which are expected to see profits down by about 5%.

The company behind Peroni and Grolsch, which also owns 58% of MillerCoors, has 
been hit by lacklustre trading, with volume growth forecast to be up just 1%, 
and the dollar riding high against the currencies in some of its key markets. 
Analysts at Numis forecast a fall in profits from $6.45bn to $6.1bn, with the 
trading outlook in Latin America, North America and Europe remaining tough. 
MillerCoors, which generates around 12% of group earnings, had recently issued 
an uninspiring update, with first-quarter net revenue down 0.9%. However Numis 
is sticking with a buy recommendation, “predicated on the view that SABMiller 
is an industry consolidation target”.

Which brings us to the jump in the company’s share price at the end of last 
week, as traders reheated talk of a possible consortium bid worth £80bn. The 
suggested partners were Anheuser-Busch Inbev, Warren Buffett and investment 
group 3G Capital. We have been here before, of course, and ABInbev’s management 
indicated after announcing strong quarterly results last week that there was no 
pressure to take part in mergers and acquisitions. So perhaps froth is all it 
is.

Calm descends at Capita


In a parallel world where Ed Miliband became prime minister, with the Labour 
party supported by the SNP, this week’s update from outsourcing groupCapita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> would probably have been 
full of cautious comment.

In the runup to the election, the company’s share price has been volatile. 
Labour was likely to clamp down on the drive to put more and more public sector 
services into the hands of private companies. Around 47% of Capita’s bid 
pipeline is exposed to the public sector, according to Morgan Stanley, up from 
41% in 2010.

Indeed, the uncertainty over the election delayed the awarding of many 
potential contracts: the company has not announced any new deals since its 
results in February.

But the Conservatives’ success is now likely to mean business as usual, 
especially with the new government committed to further cuts in public sector 
spending. Credit Suisse analysts said: “We expect the benign policy backdrop of 
recent years to continue and that Capita will play a meaningful role in the 
both the government’s cost-reduction programmes as well as its ongoing 
expansion into the private sector in the UK and Germany.”

…and at the Bank of England


One thing the new UK government will not have to worry about is an interest 
rate rise on Monday.

In the Bank of England’s latest decision – delayed from Thursday because of 
the election purdah imposed on Mark Carney and his colleagues – rates are 
expected to be held at 0.5%, and the asset purchase programme target kept at 
£375bn.

Economist Howard Archer at IHS Global Insight said: “With the UK’s GDP growth 
slowing more than expected in the first quarter, survey evidence for April 
mixed and consumer prices remaining flat year on year in March, the case for 
unchanged interest rates for the time being has, if anything, strengthened.”

Wednesday’s quarterly inflation report will be more interesting: it is likely 
to repeat the view that inflation will rise from its current low levels to 
above the Bank’s 2% target in the second half of 2017. The Bank may also 
downgrade its 2015 GDP growth forecast from 2.9% after the first-quarter 
figures came in below expectations.

All that means that, while interest rates are likely to remain at current 
levels for the rest of this year, they may start rising early in 2016. Archer 
is forecasting an increase from 0.5% to 0.75% in February next year, gradually 
rising to 2.5% by the end of 2017.
 