
Opening up and novelty have been the themes of an autumn awards season rich in 
firsts: first US author (Paul Beatty) winning the Man Booker prize; first title 
about a non-mainstream sport (surfing in William Finnegan’sBarbarian Days) 
chosen as William Hill sports book of the year; and, this week, the first time 
a translated novel –The Day Before Happiness by Italy’s Erri De Luca, 
translated by Jill Foulston – has provided the risible romp selected for the 
annual Bad Sex award.

Like the Booker, the Literary Review’s prize for “poorly written, perfunctory 
or redundant passages of sexual description” has steadily widened its 
international scope. Launched by the monthly’s then editor Auberon Waugh in 
1993, it too began with British novelists, mock-honouring the erotic swagger of 
the likes of Melvyn Bragg, Philip Kerr, Sebastian Faulks and AA Gill in the 
decade of resurgent laddism.

But it subsequently introduced Americans earlier and Commonwealth authors 
later, alternating ageing but still rampant transatlantic grandees (Tom Wolfe, 
Norman Mailer, John Updike) with some more cocksure Brits in the noughties, 
before picking recent winners from India, Canada and Nigeria as well as the US 
– Morrissey, crowned last year, is the UK’s only Bad Sex laureate in a poor run 
of form since 2008. Now it has gone beyond the Booker (which bars translated 
fiction, leaving it to its sister award, the Man Booker international prize) by 
welcoming in continental Europe and potentially non-Anglophone countries 
further afield.

At the ceremony beneath the chandeliers of the (“In and Out”) Naval and 
Military club in St James’s, the two very English shortlisted home entries, by 
Tom Connolly (“he watched her passport rise gradually out of the back pocket of 
her jeans as she sucked him”) and Janet Ellis, right, (“I am pinned like wet 
washing with his peg”), won ironic cheers when read out. De Luca’s effort (“My 
body was her gearstick”), also well received but less warmly, nevertheless 
triumphed.

Drawing, like Elena Ferrante, on a 50s childhood in Naples, De Luca, 66, has 
already been unfairly slated here as a Ferrante copycat (“jumping on the 
Neapolitan bandwagon” thundered the Spectator) although The Day Before Happiness
 appeared in Italy in 2009, two years before her quartet began withMy Brilliant 
Friend. And picking his passage (“una scena molto hard” – very graphic or porny 
– as La Repubblica put it, reporting the Italian victory) also seems harsh, 
since, like other Bad Sex winners, it could be defended as first-person, not 
authorial, narration: the images and ideas are comically crude and exaggerated 
because they reflect the orphaned urchin hero’s first wide-eyed experience of 
sex.

This was a non-vintage year for Bad Sex, in which the shortlist tellingly 
consisted of only six passages (rather than the usual eight or more), and 
Auberon Waugh’s son Alexander didn’t perform his customary 
continuity-preserving role as compere. De Luca was the sixth consecutive winner 
not to receive the prize in person, but in his case there was no witty message 
in place of attendance and no one from his UK publisher Allen Lane – perhaps 
they were stunned, as the cerebral Penguin imprint is not known for fiction, 
let alone erotic fiction – appeared on the podium to collect the trophy from 
Lucius Malfoy, aka Jason Isaacs.

As with the Booker, becoming more international could either be seen as a 
positive initiative or as a tacit admission of dissatisfaction with what’s 
available without it. On Wednesday evening, the Bad Sex prize had the 
disoriented air of a project whose original purpose – ridiculing high-profile 
literary novelists for their filthy bits, and so deterring others – was 
achieved long ago, leaving it lacking a raison d’etre. For better or worse, its 
work is done: classy potential contenders now either cut out sex scenes 
entirely, or – as with Eimear McBride’sThe Lesser Bohemians, which apparently 
was deemed to be good, or at least non-objectionable, sex – carefully avoid the 
kind of details and metaphors that sound ludicrous when removed from context 
and drily read out by actors to a champagne-swilling crowd in a gentlemen’s 
club.
 