
Dire horse racing results at the Cheltenham festival and high-value internet 
gamblers imposing restrictions on their own betting have triggered a profit 
warning for bookmakerWilliam Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/williamhill>.

In a surprise trading update on Wednesday, the bookmaker said it expected 
operating profit for this year to fall to between £260m and £280m,from £291m 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/william-hill-blames-gambling-taxes-for-profit-slide>
. Analysts’ average forecast was for profit of £307m from a range of £284m-318m.

William Hill shares fell 11% to 329p and were the biggest fallers in the FTSE 
350 group of leading shares after a second profit warning in five months. 
Shares in rival bookmaker Ladbrokes fell more than 2%.

James Henderson, William Hill’s chief executive, said the worst Cheltenham in 
living memory and unfavourable European football results meant online revenues 
were about £15m worse than expected with almost three months of the year gone.

Customers choosing to opt out of gambling online will cut online profits by up 
to £25m this year, he added.

Bookmakers said last week’s Cheltenham was the worst ever for them as three 
out of four favourites in championship races won and the second-favourite won 
the fourth. Overall, nine favourites and one joint favourite won in the 28 
races over four days.

Henderson apologised to analysts for publishing a trading statement so soon 
after the company’s results on 26 February.


He said: “Events have moved at a pace and we have seen two issues come 
together in accelerated fashion and I felt it was appropriate to provide an 
update. I can’t remember having four loss-making days at Cheltenham in my 
career.”

Investors were more concerned by a jump in customers opting out of gambling 
than the short-term pain caused by Cheltenham. The rapid rise had City analysts 
clicking on William Hill’s website to learn how the opt-out system functions.

Under rules introduced by the Gambling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gambling> Commission in October to combat 
problem gambling, online customers can tell a bookmaker they want to take 
between 24 hours and six months off from gambling while keeping their account 
open. They can also close their account for between six months and five years 
by ticking a box online instead of calling the bookmaker as before.

Customer “time outs” on their gambling have increased by 50% from the start of 
this year, affecting 3,000 accounts a week at a cost of £2m so far. Customers 
“self excluding” have doubled and those customers had typically spent three or 
four times the average, Henderson said.

Paul Hope, the Gambling Commission’s Consumer consumer policy director, said: 
“We expect operators to put social responsibility at the heart of their 
business. Recent changes we’ve made to our regulations have provided consumers 
with more effective tools to manage their gambling. It is up to consumers to 
decide how best to use them.”

Henderson said opting out was on the rise across the industry but William Hill 
was affected heavily because it is the UK’s biggest online operator with higher 
spending customers.

Henderson said the Cheltenham results and the rise in opt-outs would not 
probably not have prompted a profit warning on in isolation but the combined 
impact meant “it was appropriate to go to the market”.


He said: “The opportunity to put the tools in people’s hands is to make it an 
automated process and perhaps this has prompted people to do it a bit more than 
recently.”

From next year, gamblers will be able to exclude themselves from all online 
bookmakers in one move instead of doing so with individual companies, 
potentially putting further pressure on the bookies.

Henderson said: “One of the analysts asked me: ‘What are you forecasting for 
2017?’ but it’s almost impossible to forecast what is going to happen in the 
future. All we can do is update the market.”

William Hill’s shock update followed an earlier warning in October when it 
said a string of favourites winning horse races 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/23/william-hill-profits-plunge-favourites-win>
 had affected results. Last month the company mainly blamed new gambling taxes 
fora 22% fall in operating profit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/william-hill-blames-gambling-taxes-for-profit-slide>
 from £372m a year in 2014.

The betting industry has been under attack from MPs and campaigners over its 
reliance on compulsive fixed-odds betting terminals in branches, often in poor 
parts of the country. The government introduced a point of consumption tax in 
December 2014 and increased the duty on machine games from 20% to 25%.
 