
Quite a few of the races this week have had a sense of inevitability about 
them as yet another Willie Mullins-trained, Ruby Walsh-ridden rocket cruised to 
the lead and that was never more true than in the case of Vautour, the horse 
who should have been running in Friday’s Gold Cup. Dropped at short notice into 
the shorter, easier Ryanair Chase, this powerful beast romped round to score by 
a very comfortable six lengths.

Any horse achieving success at a third consecutive Festival ought to be an 
occasion for celebration but some of the air was taken out of this balloon by 
his controversial reassignment on Tuesday morning, after months in which the 
horse’s owner, Rich Ricci, had insisted the Gold Cup was his target. And it 
seemed here that Ricci had some lingering regret about the volte-face, 
describing this victory as “an odd feeling”.

Cue Card going for a £1m bonus for win in the Cheltenham Gold Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/cue-card-one-million-pound-bonus-cheltenham-gold-cup>
“Don’t get me wrong. It’s great to win at Cheltenham,” he said. “But, with all 
the furore, and my new nickname, Switch Ricci ... I’m disappointed. I want the 
horse to run in a Gold Cup in one sense. In another sense I’m delighted.”

Pressed once more about whether he “felt bad” for punters who had lost money 
backing Vautour for the Gold Cup, Ricci said: “Of course you do. You don’t want 
to disappoint punters but you can’t have it all ways. I try to be as open and 
as honest as I can and say what I think. Sometimes you’re going to get it wrong 
and I hope people will forgive me.”

Mullins discussed the reasons behind his decision – for it certainly was his 
decision and not Ricci’s – to run Vautour in the Ryanair. “I think he’s a Gold 
Cup horse,” the trainer said, but added: “He wasn’t working like a Gold Cup 
horse.

“He was the same last year and this was a bigger task. Last year I came here 
on a wing and a prayer and I came here the same this year. We did what we did 
last year. It wasn’t working on him.

“I completely changed the way we train him. I changed the way we ride him, the 
tack he wears and I trained him out the field. I didn’t put him in a stable. 
The only stable he’s been in, the last 10 days, are the two nights here. I 
brought him here very late and it was all last-minute. We had to try something 
different because what we were doing wasn’t working.” Mullins feels the new 
regime, plus some sunshine and a drying racecourse helped produce this 
impressive performance from Vautour. But asked if he therefore regretted 
pulling the horse out of the Gold Cup, which the trainer has never won, he 
said: “No, I’m delighted I made the switch. Because he won.”

Cheltenham Festival 2016: Thistlecrack wins the World Hurdle - as it happened 
| Barry Glendenning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/17/cheltenham-festival-2016-st-patricks-day-live>
As we saw with Quevega, Mullins is perfectly happy to run some horses below 
their level if it means they can win a nice pot and avoid clashes with 
stablemates, so that Walsh can ride as many of them as possible. Delaying 
decisions until the point where they simply must be made is also classic 
Mullins behaviour, which should perhaps have prepared us for Tuesday’s news. 
Ricci will presumably be more guarded in his future comments and punters will 
certainly be more careful about acting on them.

Even so, there was no evidence of ill feeling from racegoers towards this 
victory. It was quite the opposite, in fact, as Vautour’s thousands of backers 
in the stands hailed his jockey with chants of “Roo-bee! Roo-bee! Roo-bee!”

There was a much less happy ending for anyone who backed Zabana in the opening 
JLT Novice Chase. The Irish raider was broadside to the tape when the starter, 
Robbie Supple, unaccountably let the nine-runner field go, with the result that 
Davy Russell was unseated by Zabana whipping round to follow the others.

As has been seen before, the British Horseracing Authority wants to hold 
everyone to account except itself and its own officials. Jamie Stier, its 
director of regulation, said Supple was not to blame because “things happen 
very quickly down at the start”.

Indeed Stier preferred to point the finger at Russell, saying: “When the 
starter calls them to line up for a standing start, they’re meant to face 
forward and be ready. Davy, because he wished to be on the outside, commenced 
to turn his horse, so yes, that did play a part.”

But Zabana was clearly facing the wrong way at the point when Supple activated 
the tape. Nor was he the only horse moving at the time of what was supposed to 
be a standing start. Supple is a veteran starter, respected by jockeys, but he 
got this one wrong and the refusal of his employers to acknowledge that is 
baffling.
 