
Vautour, a winner three times at the Cheltenham Festival in March and one of 
the best steeplechasers in training, has been put down after breaking a leg in 
a freak accident at theWillie Mullins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins> stable, the trainer said on 
Sunday.

An impressive winner of the Ryanair Chase at Cheltenham eight months ago, 
Vautour was the ante-post favourite for theKing George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> at Kempton Park on 
Boxing Day, in which he finished a close second behind Cue Card last year after 
jumping the last fence in front. He was also prominent in the betting for both 
the Ryanair Chase and the Gold Cup at next year’s Festival.

“It’s been a lovely, dry day here and Vautour was out in the paddock with his 
usual companion, Shaneshill,” Mullins said on Sunday.

“One of the girls went out to feed him. There didn’t appear to be anything 
untoward as Shaneshill was grazing away but Vautour was found to have broken 
his foreleg.

“He goes out there every day and it’s just a freak accident. It is tough to 
take.”

For Mullins, Ireland’s champion trainer and a close runner-up in the British 
title race last season, the loss of Vautour is a huge blow after what has 
already been a difficult start to the new campaign. In September the leading 
owner Michael O’Learyremoved 60 horses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/28/willie-mullins-loses-60-gigginstown-stud-horses-training-fees-row>
 from the Mullins stable in a dispute over training fees, including several 
leading contenders for next year’s Festival.

The horses to leave the yard included Apple’s Jade, an outstanding juvenile 
hurdler last season, and Valseur Lido, runner-up to Vautour in last season’s 
Ryanair Chase. Valseur Lido was an impressive winner at Down Royal on Saturday 
for his new trainer, Henry de Bromhead.

Vautour, who raced in the colours of Rich Ricci, the biggest owner in the 
Mullins yard, joined Mullins from Guillaume Macaire’s stable in France in the 
summer of 2013. He immediately established himself as a major talent with 
victories on his first three starts over hurdles, including the Grade One 
Deloitte Novice Hurdle at Leopardstown in February 2014, and started as the 7-2 
joint-favourite for the Supreme Novice Hurdle at Cheltenham the following month.

Vautour ran out an easy six-length winner of that race, with horses including 
Josses Hill, Valseur Lido and Wicklow Brave, who recently took the Group One 
Irish St Leger on the Flat, strung out behind him. Sent straight over fences 
after his novice season over hurdles, Vautour returned to Cheltenham in March 
2015 to win the Grade One JLT Novice Chase before completing a hat-trick at the 
Festival in the Ryanair earlier this year.

In all Vautour made 14 starts for Mullins and recorded 10 victories, five of 
which were at Grade One level.

The news that Vautour had been put down came on a terrible day for the Mullins 
stable, as the trainer also lost Avant Tout, the second-favourite for the 
Hennessy Gold Cup at Newbury later this month, after the six-year-old suffered 
an injury in a race at Naas.

Avant Tout jumped deliberately at the first fence in the Grade Three Poplar 
Square Chase and was pulled up before the second by Paul Townend, his jockey.

He was found to have suffered a deep laceration to his off-fore tendon and was 
put down shortly after arriving at the Anglesey Lodge veterinary clinic on The 
Curragh.

Ballydoyle’s quiet man Seamie Heffernan makes Breeders’ Cup quantum leap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/06/seamie-heffernan-breeders-cup-turf-frankie-dettori-highland-reel-horse-racing>
Ivanovich Gorbatov, the winner of the Triumph Hurdle at Cheltenham in March, 
finished well beaten behind De Plotting Shed on his seasonal debut in the 
Priory Walls Of Kilgowan Hurdle on the same card at Naas.

Joseph O’Brien’s four-year-old was a 6-4 chance to beat De Plotting Shed, who 
was sent off favourite at 11-8, but never threatened to overhaul the winner, 
who made all the running.

“His form tailed off after the Triumph Hurdle and you would have to say he was 
disappointing today,” Barry Geraghty, who rode Ivanovich Gorbatov, said.
 