
Winning tip: Schatzalp, Davos, Switzerland

This is a beautiful, art-deco hotel above Davos with its own funicular access, 
so as soon as you arrive you feel far from the madding crowd. Once in, it's 
like you step back in time, but there is free Wi-Fi and mod cons. The view is 
incredible and there's a botanical garden with more than 3,000 types of Alpine 
plant, as well as a spa, sauna and its own ski area. If you love the mountains 
but like a sense of decorum from another era, this is for you.
+41 81 415 5151, schatzalp.ch <http://www.schatzalp.ch/>, doubles from £150
MaiZing

Chalet l'Etable, Morzine, France 
 The Chalet l'Etable retreat in Morzine, France. 

Chalet l'Etable – a stable and barn conversion with three bedrooms – is a 
great retreat. Owners Tom and Nicky are skilled with beams, wiring and decor, 
and are wonderful cooks. They will drive you to any slopes in the Portes du 
Soleil area or let you snuggle down with a book near the log burner, or 
snowshoe in hills near the chalet. It is a homely, cosy place. I'm going back.
+33 4 50 72 11 37, chaletetable.com <http://www.chaletetable.com/>, doubles 
from €76 a night half-board
jaynie3

Turisticna Kmetija Lenar, Logarska Dolina, Slovenia
 The Turisticna Kmetija Lenar farmstead in Logarska Dolina, Slovenia. 

We spent two weeks driving around Slovenia but the highlight was Logarska 
Dolina, a stunning glacial alpine valley in the north near the Austrian border. 
Just 30 people live in this national park. Stay in Turisticna Kmetija Lenar, a 
typical farmstead, and a perfect place to warm up with a stew in front of the 
fire between walks. But there was nothing better than waking up in the morning 
and spending a few hours sat on the balcony taking in – and the views are 
spectacular.
+386 3 838 9006, enar.si <http://www.lenar.si/>, doubles from €54 a night B&B 
linny2 

Refugio Frey, San Carlos de Bariloche, Argentina 

This rustic mountaintop retreat in southern Argentina can be reached by a 
number of technical routes, or by meandering trails that wind their way up the 
stunning Andean valleys. At the top, hikers can camp outside and enjoy the 
lakeside vistas, or stay in the bunkhouse and eat homemade pizza with fellow 
travellers. This hostel is the perfect staging point for further climbs and 
hikes, or a trip in its own right.
refugio-frey.com.ar <http://www.refugio-frey.com.ar/>, $130pp a night 
half-board
ID5060342 

Casita Buena Vista, Bubion, Spain
 Casita Buena Vista in Bubion, Spain 

Tucked within the Sierra Nevada natural park and Unesco biosphere reserve is 
the village of Bubion in Andalucía. An hour's drive from the Sierra Nevada ski 
resort and 45 minutes from the coast, it boasts the best of both worlds – snow 
and sun. Casita Buena Vista looks out over the Poqueira valley and the rooftops 
of Bubion village. Whenever I go there feeling a bit stressed, all I have to do 
is sit on the terrace and stare out at the mountains, listen to the wind in the 
valley, breathe the fresh mountain air, and I feel the tension lift. The 
laid-back atmosphere and slow pace of life make this a great place to de-stress.
alpujarraretreat.com <http://www.alpujarraretreat.com/#sthash.0uGrpkz4.dpbs>, 
five nights self-catering from £169
ID2980271 

Riffelalp hotel, Zermatt, Switzerland


The mountain retreat that ticks all the boxes for me is Riffelalp in 
Switzerland. It takes two trains and a journey of two hours to get to the hotel 
at 2,222m. There is an infinity pool and spa, and the place is not cheap, but 
the rest and peace make this special. Watch the sunrise on the Matterhorn and 
enjoy the stillness of the Alps, the wildlife and friendliness of the staff. 
The hot chocolate and croissants are great, too.
+41 27 966 05 55 , riffelalp.com <http://www.riffelalp.com/the_resort.html>, 
from £273pp a night half-board
Fi_Bee 

Haus Gothensitz, Igls, Austria
 Haus Gothensitz in Igls in the Austrian Tyrol. 

Every Christmas we head to the idyllic mountain village of Igls in the 
Austrian Tyrol. Only 15 minutes from Innsbruck on public transport, it's 
surrounded by mountains, beautiful forests and a well-maintained network of 
walking paths (not to mention ski trails). It has many historic buildings and, 
most importantly, the sun shines brightly most days. We have found a delightful 
apartment hotel, the Haus Gothensitz, dating from 1905, that sits in its own 
park (no roads) and has glorious views of the mountains. Enjoy lovely sunrises 
and sunsets and the feeling of being one with nature.
+43 512 377211, gothensitz.com <http://www.gothensitz.com/>, apartments for 
two from €47 a night
JoAnnR69
 