
A 26-year-old woman has been arrested on suspicion of assisting an offender in 
connection with the death of a 16-year-old girl in Rotherham.

The woman’s arrest on Tuesday night came after the arrest of an 18-year-old 
man on suspicion of murdering the teenager, named locally as Leonne Weeks. Both 
remain in custody and are being questioned by police.

The body of the victim – who has not yet been formally identified – was 
discovered on a path in the Dinnington area of the South Yorkshire town on 
Monday after friends and family had issued desperate appeals on social media 
for her whereabouts.

South Yorkshire police said they were called to the scene at about 10.55am 
after receiving reports from members of the public. At a press conference on 
Monday night, they said they were treating the death as suspicious because of 
“concerns around the state of the body and injuries”.

Supt Sarah Poolman said police had received a missing persons report 20 
minutes before the body was found and that additional police patrols would be 
in place over the coming days to provide “reassurance to the local community 
and wider general public”. She urged anyone with information about the incident 
to come forward.

Facebook posts from Monday morning show friends and family appealing to anyone 
with information about the girl’s whereabouts to contact them, after Leonne did 
not return home on Sunday night.

On Tuesday morning, the victim’s uncle, Danny Bowskill, wrote on Facebook: 
“Rest in peace my wonderful niece never thought I would ever be writing this 
but Leonne Weeks you [were] and still are loved by so many. I’ll be there for 
your dad and mum all the way.”

The alleyway where Leonne’s body was found, remained cordoned off and under 
police guard on Tuesday morning. A growing pile of flowers included notes 
paying tribute to Leonne. “All our thoughts are with you. Heaven has gained an 
angel. Fly high sweetie,” read one.

On Tuesday morning, forensics experts were seen entering a house on a nearby 
street, with a police car and crime scene investigations van outside.
 