
Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> who take the 
contraceptive pill are more likely to be treated for depression, according to a 
large study.

Millions of women worldwide use hormonal contraceptives, and there have long 
been reports that they can affect mood. A research project was launched in
Denmark <https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark> to look at the scale of the 
problem, involving the medical records of more than a million women and 
adolescent girls.

It found that those on the combined pill were 23% more likely to be prescribed 
an antidepressant by their doctor, most commonly in the first six months after 
starting on the pill. Women on the progestin-only pills, a synthetic form of 
the hormone progesterone, were 34% more likely to take antidepressants or get a 
first diagnosis of depression than those not on hormonal contraception.

The study, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) 
Psychiatry 
<http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.2387>
, found that not only women taking pills but also those with implants, patches 
and intrauterine devices were affected.

Adolescent girls appeared to be at highest risk. Those taking combined pills 
were 80% more likely and those on progestin-only pills more than twice as 
likely to be prescribed an antidepressant than their peers who were not on the 
pill.

The researchers, Øjvind Lidegaard of the University of Copenhagen and 
colleagues, point out that women are twice as likely to suffer from depression 
in their lifetime as men, though rates are equal before puberty. The 
fluctuating levels of the two female sex hormones, oestrogen and progesterone, 
have been implicated. Studies have suggested raised progesterone levels in 
particular may lower mood.

The impact of low-dose hormonal contraception on mood and possibly depression 
has not been fully studied, the authors say. They used registry data in Denmark 
on more than a million women and adolescent girls aged between 15 and 34. They 
were followed up from 2000 until 2013 with an average follow-up of 6.4 years.

The authors call for more studies to investigate this possible side-effect of 
the pill.

Other scientists said the research should not put women off using hormonal 
contraception. Dr Channa Jayasena, a clinical senior lecturer in reproductive 
endocrinology at Imperial College London, said: “This study raises important 
questions about the pill. In over a million Danish women, depression was 
associated with contraceptive pill use. The study does not prove [and does not 
claim] that the pill plays any role in the development of depression. However, 
we know hormones play a hugely important role in regulating human behaviour.

“Given the enormous size of this study, further work is needed to see if these 
results can be repeated in other populations, and to determine possible 
biological mechanisms which might underlie any possible link between the pill 
and depression. Until then, women should not be deterred from taking the pill.”

Dr Ali Kubba, a fellow of the faculty of sexual and reproductive healthcare of 
the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, also said further 
research was needed.

“There is existing clinical evidence that hormonal contraception can impact 
some women’s moods, however, from this study there is no way of linking 
causation, therefore further research is needed to examine depression as a 
potential adverse effect of hormonal contraceptive use,” he said.

 “Women should not be alarmed by this study as all women react differently to 
different methods of contraception. There are a variety of contraception 
methods on offer including the pill, implants, injections, intrauterine 
devices, and vaginal rings and we therefore advise women to discuss their 
options with a doctor, where they will discuss the possible side-effects and 
decisions around the most suitable method can be made jointly.”
 