
The government is likely to come under increasing pressure to provide a better 
deal for women affected by changes to the state pension system after 
campaigners succeeded in securing a fresh parliamentary debate.

There have been growing calls for ministers to take action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/09/state-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign>
 following claims that several hundred thousand women born in the 1950s have 
had their retirement plans “shattered” by state pension age increases.


A petition <https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/110776> demanding “fair 
transitional arrangements” for these women had, by Wednesday 13 January, 
secured more than 118,000 signatures, and as a result a parliamentary debate 
will now take place in parliament’s Westminster Hall on 1 February.


For decades the state pension age (SPA) for women was 60. An increase to 65, 
phased in between 2010 and 2020, was included in thePensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Act 1995, but in 2011 the 
coalition government pushed through a speeding up of the latter part of the 
timetable. The SPA for women will instead increase to 65 between April 2016 and 
November 2018. On top of that, it was announced that the SPA for both men and 
women would rise to 66 by October 2020.


Most of those campaigning on this issue agree that pension ages should be the 
same, but say the change has been badly handled.

A one-year difference in age can result in a three-and-a-half-year difference 
in the SPA, and some of the affected women say they will effectivelysuffer a 
loss of up to £30,000 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/work-and-pensions-committee/understanding-the-new-state-pension/written/25287.html>
 as a result of having to wait longer for their state pension. It has emerged 
that the government did not write to any women affected by the rise in the 
pension age for nearly 14 years after the law was passed in 1995.


A group calling itself Women Against State Pension Inequality 
<https://www.facebook.com/WASPI-Women-Against-State-Pension-Inequality-Campaign-877054125688402/>
 has been leading the campaign for fairer transitional arrangements; its 
petition on the UK government and parliament petitions website stated that the 
changes had been implemented in an unfair way.


On 7 January the issue was debated in the Commons, with the Scottish National 
Party’s Mhairi Black telling MPs that women were being “shafted and 
short-changed”. On that occasion, MPs overwhelmingly backed calls to give extra 
financial help to the affected women.

Opposition MPs forced a vote on a motion calling on ministers to immediately 
introduce further transitional arrangements for those women negatively affected 
by the changes, which was supported by 158 votes to zero. However, the motion 
was non-binding and therefore the government was not compelled to act.


Helen Jones MP, the chair of the petitions committee, will lead the fresh 
debate on 1 February at 4.30pm.

Tom McPhail, head of retirement policy at investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown, 
said: “This is absolutely the right decision. The weight and momentum which 
this campaign has gathered warrants a full and considered response from the 
government.

“As part of this process, it should be possible to explore the options and 
costs of any potential transitional arrangement. Without this debate, the 
obvious sense of injustice felt by many of these campaigners will only poison 
the forthcoming rollout of the new state pension in April.”

The Department for Work and Pensions has already said it “will not be 
revisiting the state pension age arrangements for women affected by the 1995 or 
2011 Acts”, adding: “The decision was approved by parliament in 2011 and there 
is no new evidence to consider.”
 