
More than 1m people are to be forced to join company pension schemes in a 
dramatic reversal of a flagship Thatcherite policy which led to millions of 
employees being ripped off in the £11bn private pensions mis-selling scandal.

Ministers have brushed aside charges of authoritarianism to restore a 
regulation - abandoned by the then chancellor, Nigel Lawson, in 1988 - which 
will require employees to join an occupational pension scheme as a condition of 
employment.

Up to 1.5m people have lost out on the benefits of company pension schemes in 
the last decade, a figure which has alarmed ministers who regard occupational 
schemes as the 'great welfare success story of this century'.

Alistair Darling, the social security secretary, is planning to announce the 
reintroduction of the old regulation this autumn to give pensions groups plenty 
of time to adjust before the government's new 'stakeholder' pension comes into 
force in April 2001.

Under the government plan, companies will be allowed to demand that employees 
join their own schemes, ensuring that the stakeholder pension will be focused 
on people earning £9,000- £18,500 and whose employers do not provide an 
occupational scheme.

Ministers decided to act after occupational pension scheme managers expressed 
fears that employees will leave company schemes for the low-cost 'stakeholder' 
pensions. William Mercer, the big employees' benefits consultancy, warned 
recently that occupational pensions, which are worth a total of £640bn, must be 
'ring-fenced' from the effects of the stakeholder or risk a 'disastrous' 
erosion.

A government source said Mr Darling had taken these fears on board. 'There is 
no point in reforming the pensions system in one area if we end up undermining 
it in another. We are aware that we may be accused of acting in an 
authoritarian way, but we are determined to maintain the confidence of 
occupational pension schemes.'

The decision shows the government has toughened up its carrot-and-stick 
approach since December's green paper on pensions reform in which he said he 
wanted to do more to encourage people to join company pension schemes, but 
stopped short of restoring the pre-1988 rule.

The decision in 1988 by Lord Lawson to abandon compulsion was designed to 
encourage people to invest in private pensions, but ended up exposing people to 
the pensions mis-selling scandal which cost £11bn.

Tony Blair has placed pensions at the top of his welfare state reforms agenda 
because of growing fears of a crisis in the next century which could see 
millions retiring into poverty unless action is taken. Recent figures showed 
that by 2050 one in three people will retire to a level where they will need 
means-tested benefit.

The stakeholder pension is aimed at the 14m earning between £9,000 and 
£18,500. People earning below £9,000 are to be helped by a second state pension 
which will give a minimum pension guarantee.

Ministers have turned their attention to tax rates which disproportionately 
benefit the rich. A working party is looking at the possibility of evening out 
the rates to help those on lower incomes.

In one example, cited by a government source, working mothers who take a 
career break to care for their babies are penalised if they make payments to 
their pension scheme because they receive minimal tax breaks out of work. On 
the other hand, higher rate taxpayers in work only have to pay 60p for every £1 
that goes into their pension fund.
 