
Christopher Priest has won the Arthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward> for his war tale, The 
Separation. The book was awarded the British SF award last month and is only 
the third novel in the history of the prizes to achieve this double accolade.

The Clarke award is decided by a jury while the winner of the British SF award 
is chosen by popular vote. Priest said, "I'm particularly happy to have won 
both awards as it shows that The Separation appeals to critics and ordinary 
readers alike. I feel relieved, after working for over four years on the book, 
to have received this kind of affirmation."

The book is set during the second world war but, in Priest's alternate reality 
version, the war ends with the British-German armistice in 1941. A present-day 
historian is investigating twin brothers who took different routes through the 
conflict.

Priest's novel itself has an alternate history. The book was originally 
published by Simon and Schuster under its Scribner imprint but Priest was 
unhappy with the way the book was marketed after a change of management at the 
publishers.

He explained: "There was no apparent in-house support for the book. It was 
published as an expensive trade paperback without any publicity or marketing 
effort and most of the chain bookstores either didn't stock it or took only a 
handful of copies."

After hearing of Priest's discontent, the managing director of Gollancz 
approached him with an offer to buy back the rights to his book from Simon and 
Schuster and to reprint it as a hardback. Gollancz is now planning to republish 
Priest's backlist.

A spokesperson for Scribner commented, "We are very happy that Christopher 
Priest has won the Arthur C Clarke Award. His book reached our expectations 
when it went on sale under our imprint and we issued a reprint. We were aware 
that he was a hot contender for the award, and, when we were approached by 
Gollancz a few months ago we negotiated the rights to the book on that basis."

Priest, who has always been on the SF/mainstream boundary and named in 1983 as 
one of Granta's Best Young Novelists, was a surprise winner of the award. M 
John Harrison's return to space opera, Light, had been hotly tipped for the 
prize and was also shortlisted for the British SF award.

The other shortlisted authors for the Arthur C Clarke included China Miéville 
with The Scar, The Years of Rice and Salt by Kim Stanley Robinson, Speed of 
Dark by Elizabeth Moon and Kil'n People: A Future Thriller by David Brin.

SF writer and reviewer Jon Courtenay Grimwood, who was shortlisted for the 
award last year, said "The Clarke Award is the Booker of the SF world and at 
least three novels on this year's short list deserved to be there and would 
have made worthy winners. The Separation is a complicated book, for some people 
too complicated, but it's deeply heart-felt."

Priest's win was announced in a ceremony at the Science Museum, London on 
Saturday and he received an engraved bookend and a cheque for £2,003.
 