
Looking to silence critics sceptical of Qatar's ability to host the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>, members of the 
Qatari royal family inadvertently provoked a PR disaster last week, when the 
Asian Cup final between Australia and Japan in Doha ended in a storm of protest.

Al Jazeera reported: "Thousands of ticket-holding fans were turned away as 
police imposed a lockout." The gates were closed early to ensure a security 
blanket around the royals as they were ushered in, said Jassim al-Rumaihi, the 
tournament's operations director. Al Jazeera described how fans were confronted 
by riot police at the gates. "The guy went mental on me," one said. "There was 
blood all down my hands."

To add insult to injury, a volunteer told the broadcaster that immigrant 
workers had earlier been bussed in to avoid the embarrassment of a half-empty 
stadium. "The people outside the ground had tickets – they were waving them in 
the air. The people who were brought in were being handed balloons and flags to 
make them look like real fans," he said.

For Japan, who won 1-0, it was a victory to be celebrated, and as Asahi Shimbun
noted, it "finally healed the trauma of 'Dohano higeki'" – the tragedy of Doha, 
when a draw with Iraq in the city prevented the Blue Samurai from reaching the 
1994 World Cup.

But it remained a disaster for Qatar, where, despite offers of refunds, 
Arabian Businessquoted a Saudi visitor saying: "How do they expect to organise 
the 2022 World Cup? They can't even organise this." Another said: "It was 
chaos. A sad experience." But the final word, damningly, belonged to the 
broadcaster set up by the Emir of Qatar. "There was confrontation for no 
reason," commented Al Jazeera. "If they did that with slightly aggravated 
football fans at the World Cup there would be a riot."

USA: Socialism, titty-twisting and the liberal cesspool

Commentators in the US were vexed last week after the comedian Bill Maher 
dared suggest, ahead of tonight's Super Bowl, that: "Americans must realise 
what makes NFL football so great: socialism." As he argued that its system of 
revenue sharing "put all of it in a big commie pot and split it 32 ways " was 
not only instructive but entertaining as well. "You have to laugh – the same 
angry white males who hate Obama because he's 'redistributing wealth' just love 
football, a sport that succeeds economically because it does exactly that."

"Suffice to say, anyone who finds this illuminating either hasn't thought it 
through or has the brains God gave trout," says theWashington Examiner. Maher 
was "misrepresenting the truth to advance his liberal agenda," argues 
Newsbusters.org (dedicated to "exposing and combating liberal media bias"). The 
Tea Party's Walter Hudson talks of "the kind of rhetorical titty-twister Maher 
regards as legitimate intellectual combat".

Maher's use of the "S" word seems to have riled just about everyone, the 
AmericanThinker.com noting: "Bill Maher, the Hollywood Jesus-hater" had a grasp 
of the NFL "so trite that one wonders who's higher, him or Snoop Dogg". 
Although the author's bio suggests his own agenda: "Greg Halvorson is an island 
of conservative clarity in the liberal cesspool that is Portland, Oregon."

And tonight's top tipster

... is Sports Illustrated's Peter King, who in their 2010 NFL season preview 
correctly picked Green Bay and Pittsburgh to meet in the Super Bowl. An 
extraordinary prediction, given a full season and knockout eliminators were 
needed to reach the game. He called the exact score as Steelers 33 Packers 27 
and is sticking with the forecast. 
 