
It’s spring, so time for the annual ritual of Sir Martin Sorrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-martin-sorrell>, WPP chief executive, 
collecting a large payment in shares. The year’s sum is £36m, which should 
inflate to £40m or more once short-term bonuses are added next month. Add it 
all up and Sorrell has been paid £87m in the past three years – call it £1m 
every fortnight.

If the advertising firm continues its jackpot-paying ways for the next two 
years, the workaholic boss can expect another £90m or so to arrive from his 
super-charged co-investment scheme, known as Leap, or Leadership Equity 
Acquisition Plan.

Hold on, you might say, wasn’t WPP a victim of the inelegantly-named 
“shareholder spring” of 2012? Didn’t the shareholders rise in rebellion and 
insist that Leap be squashed andWPP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/wppgroup> observe modern pay norms?

Well, yes, but there were two important details. First, Leap was allowed a 
lingering death. The scheme works on a five-year cycle, so the thumbs-down in 
2012 actually meant more leaping until the end of 2016. As WPP chairman Philip 
Lader says, this year’s £36m was determined by the “arithmetic application” of 
the 2009 terms. And, as he also argues, WPP investors have done very nicely in 
the period: £1,000 invested in WPP shares has become £2,207, versus £1,213 for 
the FTSE 100 index as a whole.

The second detail is that, even when Leap finally expires, Sorrell and 
colleagues will hardly be boardroom paupers. Last year’s annual report 
explained that the pay committee still imagines Sorrell getting £7.8m for an 
“on plan” performance or £19.2m in a “maximum” year.

You wouldn’t even get that for running GlaxoSmithKline, a company more than 
four times the size of WPP, brilliantly.

Thus it’s odds-on that the other spring ritual – about a quarter of WPP’s 
shareholders voting against the pay report – will also be observed. This year’s 
twist may be a political row because the final pay numbers will be published a 
week before the general election. Sorrell has spoken of Labour’s 
“business-bashing” tendencies so he can hardly be surprised if he receives a 
thump from Ed Miliband.

If it happens, it would be hard to symphasise with the hero of adland. Sorrell 
is a unique individual and the rise of WPP is an extraordinary achievement. 
But, on pay, WPP is in a world of its own.

Few allies for Alliance


It’s a long way from Buenos Aires to Dundee, but New York hedge funds roam 
widely these days. Elliott Advisors, fresh from chasing the Republic of 
Argentina over debt restructuring terms, has decided that grand old Alliance 
Trust, stalwart of the investment trust sector, deserves of dose of activist 
medicine.

Alliance’s board, led by chief executive Katherine Garrett-Cox, will not be 
surprised by this turn of events. The likes of Elliott do not accumulate a 12% 
holding to stand in the wings offering polite applause.

Nor is Elliott the first outsider to regard Alliance as too sleepy for its 
investors’ good. Four years ago Laxey, a much smaller activist, had a go. It 
failed to oust Garrett-Cox but did see Alliance perform a philosophical U-turn 
by starting to buy in shares to close the gap between the value of the assets 
and the market value of the trust.

The discount, though, is 12% today, wide enough to be embarrassing. Elliott is 
taking a subtler tack than Laxey. It is proposing three new non-executive 
directors, none of whom look like standard patsies. They include Peter 
Chambers, former chief executive of Legal & General Investment Management, the 
type of person Alliance might appoint under its own steam.

Naturally, Elliott also has specific complaints. The investment portfolio has 
performed sluggishly, it says; costs are too high and inflexible; and two 
subsidiaries, a fund administration platform and a third-party asset management 
business, have been drains on resources.

Alliance, when it makes its defence, will be able to make a few 
counter-arguments of the “be patient” variety. Investment performance has 
improved, even if “second quartile” is not the best boast. Costs are falling. 
And the two subsidiaries are at least gathering assets.

The crew of 50,000 private investors, by repute, are the patient sort but 
Elliott’s agitation may test their loyalty. Could outside managers squeeze 
better returns from Alliance’s portfolio? It’s not outlandish to suggest that a 
trio of experienced outsiders should examine the idea, among others. 
Garrett-Cox has a battle on her hands.

Thorn in AO’s side


Apparently Richard Rose always planned to off-load a few of his shares in AO 
World <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ao-world> a year after flotation. 
In the event, the non-executive chairman has shed almost nine-tenths of his 
holding, raising £10m. Rose is entitled to do as he wishes, of course, since 
the post-flotation lock-up period has expired, and AO says he remains committed 
“both as a shareholder and as chairman.” OK, but his commitment as a 
shareholder ain’t as big as it was. That’s a chunky sale in anybody’s language.
 