
As I write, I couldn't claim, quite, that my fingers are dancing across the 
keyboard. But they are making their way at a stately pace appropriate to my age 
(and figure), unimpeded by cramping of the limbs or brain. I enjoy writing for 
the Guardian, doing this occasional series of bibliobits, and am animated by my 
ongoing conversation with my readers.

At the same time, as I sit here at our house in New Zealand, I am trying to 
begin writing my next book, which is provisionally titled (in my mind, if not 
yet that of my publishers) The Life and Death of the Book. I have reason to 
feel cheerful, for I have another book coming out in April –Lost, Stolen or 
Shredded: Stories of Missing Works of Art and Literature 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/art/9781846684913/lost-stolen-or-shredded-or-has-anyone-seen-the-mona-lisa>
 – the publication of which will engender a lot of relief, as well as the usual 
anxieties.

As I began work on the new book, I wrote a yellow post-it and stuck it up over 
my desk: "Write as if you were writing for the Guardian. Make it fun." Because 
something that is fun to read – which is my hope with these occasional columns 
– is usually easier to write. If you bring a concentrated light-heartedness to 
the act of composition – even if you have to will it – you are, in my 
experience, more likely to write well, if not easily. Writing well is never 
easy.

Admittedly, the new book covers weighty ground, from cave art to Kindles 
(without being for a moment a "history of the book") and its many topics and 
obligations do not always flow trippingly off the pen. This problem is no doubt 
exacerbated by the fact that I am learning as I go along, but then again I like 
doing that, and believe that an author enjoying the process of discovery is 
often more agreeable to read than one mired in his or her own expertise. (One 
of the reasons I rather admireGeoff Dyer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/geoff-dyer>).

The new book is both more demanding and harder than burbling on about this or 
that for a column. But is it really all that different? Same me. Same (I hope) 
voice. Yet the differences are enormous, and the effects catastrophic. I 
arrived for my six weeks in New Zealand with the modest hope that I might 
produce, say, 12,000 words. Three hundred a day. Maybe a bit more, but 
acceptably and realistically perhaps a little bit less. But after three 
excruciatingly cramped weeks, whimpering at the keyboard every morning, I was 
unable to compose a single sentence as compelling, even, as the afternoon's 
shopping list. I could count 3,000 words, but they were faltering, joyless 
drivel.

I had to give it up. It was not merely making me miserable, but ornery as 
well. I railed against myself, was horrid to my very dear wife, was rude about 
New Zealand generally andHawkes Bay  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hawke%27s_Bay_region>(as close to paradise as you 
may find) particularly. Frustrated and depressed, I looked every day at my 
post-it sticker, until I pulled it down in a rage and binned it. "Fun?" What 
fun? It was as unmitigated as misery can get without a genuinely serious cause.

What went wrong? Aristotle 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/34560/Aristotle> says that a tragedy 
shows a good man declining from a state of happiness to one of misery, through 
a great error of judgment. I presume the tragic hero was, in his happy 
emotional state, writing a column, and in the miserable one a book – and that 
his error was in moving from the one to the other. Hence his downfall. He 
should have known better.

But we inhabit a world made up only transiently of columns and blogs, and more 
abidingly of books. It's no good, then, basking in the relative ease of the 
lesser endeavour, while shirking the more significant and difficult. Writing a 
good book, which is what one tries to do, is one of the great human activities, 
and if an author is good enough and lucky enough, the result will be around for 
generations.

Perhaps it is that thought that is so daunting? When I write one of these 
columns it flows off into the ether, people read it or they don't, make 
occasional comments, and then it is to all intents and purposes gone. It is to 
me anyway, though all of these pieces can still be found, and to a sensibility 
more contemporary than mine, presumably have the same longevity as a book.

But a book, a form that I both revere and fear, is another thing altogether. 
It requires more time, more research, more thought, more acute efforts of 
composition. It tests the authorial self severely, and consequently there is 
more at stake in its composition.

And reception. This may account for why authors are so unaccountably concerned 
with what the reviewers may say. Writers know that a review is simply the 
opinion of a person more or less fit to deliver a verdict. We are aware that, 
given that Joyce and Proust had their detractors, so may we. Yet our 
sensitivity to bad reviews can be so acute that, even if we do not entirely 
sympathise, we can understand Alain de Botton's response to a New York Times 
reviewerwho had an adverse opinion  
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/28/books/review/Crain-t.html?_r=2&>of his new 
book: "I will hate you until the day I die."

But the fact that our work goes out into the world and gets publicly commented 
on doesn't seem enough, quite, to account for the anxiety that writing causes. 
The real concern, after all, is not what some damn reviewer or other may think, 
but quite simply whether the book is a good book. And though some authors are 
great praisers of their own products, most, I suspect, harbour an inward fear 
that the book is not, quite, good enough.

John Banville  <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/johnbanville>says that he does 
not read his reviews, not so much because it would be painful if they were 
slighting, but because he already knows – "better than any reviewer" – what is 
wrong with his books, the places in which he is painfully aware that they could 
have been better. Why read someone less likely to know where the sore spots are?

Writers, like all artists, are Platonists 
<http://www.thefreedictionary.com/Platonists>. We have an inkling of something 
perfect and ideal, which haunts our imaginings and prompts every stroke of the 
pen or keyboard. We are aware that with a great effort of attentiveness, 
formulating and reformulating, listening closely to our own voice, modulating 
it into more tuneful harmonies, we might do something not just good, but 
perfect. And occasionally in phrase or sentence or paragraph we do just that. 
But I know of no writer who is not, finally, just that little bit disappointed 
with the final product. (Well, I know some who are not, but they are never the 
good ones).

Maybe a "little bit disappointed" is mitigated by the further "but it is the 
best I can do". That's what writing a book demands of you. Whereas writing an 
occasional piece – such as this – isn't as daunting because one is not aiming 
for the unattainably perfect. I write this carefully, and as best I can, but 
mostly I am just having some (serious) fun, and hoping my readers are too.

So that's it, then. That's where the error lies. I cannot write the new book 
in the same spirit or voice as I write this column, nor should I have tried. 
Silly me. It is genuinely enjoyable to do these. Writing this book is harder, 
and worse, and better, and more important. And it requires, which is at the 
heart of the problem, that I keep my eye in different directions at the same 
time. Cross-eyed composition (looking at both the keyboard and my research 
notes) gives me a headache and makes me crazy, and is not conducive to an 
(apparently) effortless flow.

This seems a relatively flaccid conclusion: It's easier to write a column or 
blog than a book? Duh. You know that, and so do I. Or so did I. I seem to keep 
forgetting it, and need to remind myself every time I start a book. I never 
learn, keep sticking up those post-it notes, and then tearing then them down.

The fun comes later, once it the book is written. As long as the reviews 
aren't too bad…
 