
Hidden in the furthermost recesses of a dank and dusty cellar, thousands of 
feet beneath the huddled hovels of Hoddesdon, Herts, the Marquis of Sansovino. 
. .

 The Marquis of Vauvenargues writes: This is, as we say in France, the giddy 
limit (le comble vertigineux). All last year I was subjected by Smallweed to a 
malign neglect attributable only to characteristic English envy of France's 
success in the 1998 World Cup. Now, as a new year dawns, I find myself 
supplanted by another alleged marquis, whose very name proclaims his 
inferiority. My seconds will shortly be calling on your reader's representative.

 Smallweed hastily responds: Not so fast, your eminence. Just as, in the year 
now departed, I achieved my cherished ambition of attending a game at the 
Central Park ground, Cowdenbeath, so now I proclaim 1999 as the year, weather 
permitting, of the Marquis of V: a year in which, all being well, I may even 
attempt a visit to Vauvenargues. Indeed, entirely by chance, and nothing to do 
with threats, to which I remain at all times impervious, weather permitting, I 
was about to pay the Marquis a tribute of exactly the kind he appears to 
solicit.

 One of the Marquis's seconds writes: Get on with it, then. 

 Over the Christmas break I acquired a copy of the Oxford Dictionary of 
Aphorisms. Turning at once to the index, I resolved, weather permitting, to see 
which aphorist had scored the highest number of mentions. The results may come 
as a shock for those who assumed an outright victory for the Duc de la 
Rochefoucauld. (Look away now if you don't want to see them.) This is how the 
leaderboard looks: Johnson, Dr Samuel: 88; Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm: 55; 
VAUVENARGUES, LUC DE CLAPIERS, MARQUIS DE: 52; Schopenhauer, Arthur: 48; 
Hazlitt, William: 47; Whelan, Charlie: 0.

 But here is the test of a true aphorist: what has he to say that sheds light, 
even today, on the topics of the hour? 'The most absurd and the most rash hopes 
have sometimes been the cause of extraordinary success,' he tells us. Does this 
help explain Peter Mandelson's success, until now? 'Men's passions are so many 
roads by which they can be reached': which explains, perhaps, why some get 
beholden to those it is better not to be beholden to. 'Men despise great 
projects when they do not feel themselves capable of great successes': could 
that be a judgment on those who disparage Mandelson's Dome? (A project, come to 
think of it, which involved getting money off other people for spending which 
on any sound calculation must be accounted excessive.) 'Too much secrecy in our 
affairs and too little,' the sage also remarks, 'are equally indicative of a 
weak spirit.' But all of these, I fear, are outclassed as comments on the 
Mandelson matter by this from Disraeli: 'Next to knowing when to seize an 
opportunity, the most important thing in life is to know when to forgo an 
advantage.' Shortlist for the BBC's 'poll' to name the Personality of the 
Millennium supplied to a newspaper which asked him by the Tory MP Peter 
Bottomley: Florence Nightingale; Elizabeth I; William Rufus; Captain Scott; 
Elgar; Bill Morris of the TGWU.

 And now, as the year of Peskabids (People Everyone Should Know About But I 
Don't) slithers into the pit of oblivion, here's a brand new theme for 
exhilarating '99: Plutoids, or People Largely Unknown To Otherwise Informed 
Deipnosophists. (A sadly neglected word, this, meaning persons who converse 
learnedly over dinner.) The first Plutoid, who will possibly not be surpassed, 
is a son of the Marquis's country: the conductor Adolphe, or Louis Antoine, 
Jullien - or to spell his name out in full, Louis George Maurice Adolphe Roch 
Albert Abel Antonio Alexandre Noe Jean Lucien Daniel Eugene Joseph-le-Brun 
Joseph Bareme Thomas Thomas Thomas-Thomas Pierre-Cerbon Pierre-Maurel 
Barthelemi Artus Alphonse Bertrand Dieudonne Emanuel Josue Vincent Luc Michel 
Jules-de-la-plane Jules-Bazin Julio Cesar Jullien (1812-1860). There's a 
splendid account of his life by Keith Horner in Grove's Dictionary of Music, 
which I can merely summarise.

 Dubbed in his youth, 'the Paganini of the Alps', if only by his father, he 
studied at the Conservatoire but had to leave, because he preferred writing 
dance tunes to counterpoint.

 Perhaps to escape his creditors, he turned up in London in 1838 and became a 
leading concert promoter; he also toured the United States at the invitation of 
PT Barnum, conducting 214 concerts in less than a year. A typical Jullien 
concert would surround a Beethoven symphony with quadrilles, solos, gallops, 
waltzes and so on.

 But even the Beethoven would get the Jullien treatment, involving the 
addition of ophicleides, saxophone and side drums. He went bankrupt after 
staging a season of opera at Drury Lane: Berlioz, who conducted, described him 
as having 'the incontestable character of a madman'. He died a pauper, in an 
asylum.

 The edition of Grove I consulted (Stanley Sadie's of 1980) has a most 
evocative drawing of Jullien conducting, from the Illustrated London News. You 
can see why he drew the crowds. One critic said of him: 'Undoubtedly the first 
who directed the attention of the multitude to the classical composers. . . 
(he) broke down the barriers and let in the crowd.' I see him as the spiritual 
father of Classic FM.

 The Marquis of Vauvenargues writes: I'm afraid by the time he was born, I was 
already dead. Can you tell us how he got his rather unusual name? Smallweed 
replies with a grovelling deference horrible to behold : Gladly, your 
reverence. But my space has run out, and I fear you will have to wait till next 
week.
 