
People who struggle to maintain a healthy weight after dieting may do so 
because their gut bacteria retains a “memory” of their past weight, according 
to scientists.

The study, in mice, suggests that yo-yo dieting is not simply a reflection of 
people returning to unhealthy eating habits, but could be driven by long-term 
changes in gut bacteria brought about by obesity.

Obesity alters brain structure and function
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2016/nov/23/obesity-alters-brain-structure-and-function>
The scientists observed that the changes to the gut microbiome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/25/gut-reaction-surprising-power-of-microbes>
 brought about by obesity persisted for five times as long as the actual period 
spent dieting and predisposed the mice to rapidly regain weight.

Eran Elinav, an immunologist at the Weizmann Institute in Israel and lead 
author, said that the findings, if replicated in people, could help develop 
more evidence-based methods for weight loss. “It may explain some – more than 
some – of our failure to control weight by dieting,” he said.

Simon Cork, a medical researcher at Imperial College London, said the study 
was one of the first to show that gut bacteria could actively drive weight 
gain, rather than simply being associated with it. However, he cautioned that 
it was unclear whether the findings could be extrapolated to people.

“We do know that this yo-yo effect is caused by quite a few different 
mechanisms and it’s likely that gut bacteria is only going to play a small 
role,” he said. “Ultimately, the main reason why people yo-yo is because they 
don’t stick to the diet.”

In the study, published in Nature, 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature20796> obese mice were switched 
from a high fat diet to balanced nutrition until they were indistinguishable 
from a control group of mice in terms of weight and a range of metabolic 
factors, such as blood sugar levels.

However, the scientists found that the formerly obese mice retained 
differences in their gut bacteria after dieting that tended to increase the 
rate at which they put on weight once they were given access to high fat food. 
When the guts of the control mice were seeded with bacteria from the obese 
group they too put on weight more rapidly.

The scientists suggest that the mechanism may have evolved to act as a 
physiological “buffer” against weight loss in times of food scarcity.

However, in the case of obesity, the mechanism may work against the person by 
leaving them liable to put weight back on rapidly once they stop dieting.

Weight loss drug fools body into reacting as if it has just eaten
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/05/weight-loss-pill-diet-meal-fat-metabolism-fexaramine>
In mice, the microbiome slowly shifted back towards the mix of bacteria seen 
in the control group over a period of six months (about a quarter of the 
lifespan of a mouse in captivity). In humans, the scientists predicted, the 
equivalent period could be anything from months to years. “I know this is a 
sobering thought,” said Elinav.

However, he added that if the human microbiome undergoes similar changes, it 
might be possible to target this to help people maintain a healthy weight after 
dieting. “Once you get rid of the differences in the microbiome then you close 
this window of risk,” he said.

Cork said that the composition of gut bacteria is notoriously difficult to 
shift, however, and that any treatment would involve a long course of 
antibiotics to eradicate the existing population of microbes, rather than being 
a case of eating “a few probiotic yoghurts”. “If you try to introduce something 
else in a small quantity the bacteria in your gut out-competes them,” he said.

The study also showed that the rate at which individual mice put on weight 
could be predicted by based on the composition of their microbiome.

The scientists did not fully investigate how the changes to the microbiome 
influenced weight gain, but said that the data suggested there was a change in 
metabolism, that meant the gut bacteria were converting more energy into fat.

Previous research suggests that when people who have long-term obesity lose 
weight through dieting, in up to 80% of cases they put weight back on again 
within 12 months.
 