
There's a new book out by Dr John Coleman, the title of which poses a crucial 
question –Why Won't My Teenager Talk To Me? 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781138017344>
 The book goes to great lengths and uses considerable research to try to answer 
the question. But I can save you the trouble of doing so. The reason your 
teenager won't talk to you is because you're boring and they're not going to 
waste their time.

But why are you boring? Well, you may just be a boring person – many people 
are – but you are probably just boring in teenage terms. That is, the things 
you consider important and interesting are simply not the same as the ones that 
teenagers consider important and interesting. And even the ones where you can 
find common ground are not really up for discussion – such as oral sex or why 
Tiffany is being a bitch to Emma again, when, like, Emma is so totes dench.

Beyond this, there is a problem with parents and teenagers and it is this: 
parents want to help, they want to be supportive. And as the very essence of 
being a teenager is achieving a sort of separation from parents, from their 
values and interventions, this desire is going to act as a barrier.

You may think you are being non-judgmental when you are listening to your 
teenagers, but you're not and they know it. If they have behaved badly, you are 
disappointed. If they are putting themselves in jeopardy, you are worried.

Teenage years are the time when the chief influence on a child moves from the 
parent to the peer group – and it is a rather dispiriting fact for parents that 
a lot of research shows that peer groups are a great deal more influential than 
parents in moulding behaviour and personality. Parents, during the teenage 
years, are having to learn for the first time to take a back seat.

When my first daughter was in her teens – she leaves them, officially, this 
July – I used to try to get her to "talk to me", usually with very little 
success. I did at one point lapse into cliche and suggest that "a problem 
shared is a problem halved". To which she replied: "Well, that's one of the 
biggest loads of shit I've ever heard."

She has a point.

We are drunk on the confessional culture, but this doesn't leave much room for 
protecting each other's space. And this is one of the key elements of teenhood: 
the appropriation of space – emotional, physical and intellectual – from the 
adult.

We do not want to let go of our children. We can be as reliant on them as they 
are on us. To refuse to talk to us is to say, "You do not occupy the 
prime position you once did in my life."

And that is painful. So we pester them to communicate, which just pushes them 
further into the realm of self-imposed isolation.

Of course you should be there for your children – particularly if you are one 
of those relatively rare adults who has the ability to listen to what is being 
said (and not said) with sensitivity and understanding and, furthermore, 
respond in a manner that allows the teenager to take that advice on board 
without being humiliated.

You only get so many chances – once you disappoint your children with your 
inability to "get" them, they will quite quickly give up on the whole process.

We all want to be the wise parent dispensing the wisdom of ages to our 
grateful progeny.

However, I suspect the best we can do is leave ourselves open. Not tug at 
their guts so that they will spill them, but simply let them know you are a 
safe space in which they can find comfort if they so wish. And if your children 
do not so wish, then so be it. Get over it – it's more your problem than theirs.

• Follow Tim on Twitter @timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 