
When it opens its doors to the public in time for that big day, the Millennium 
Dome is expected to play host to all that is forward-looking and optimistic 
about Britain. Dome operators hope for at least 12m visitors.

And 15 months later, in April 2001, social security and treasury ministers 
will be hoping that the stakeholder, the sleek and shiny new pensions vehicle, 
attracts the same approval - and around the same 12m headcount, many of whom 
will have been drawn to tax-free investments for the first time.

That number could even include some of the children who visit the Dome - as 
the stakeholder has no minimum age or earnings requirements.

Ministers now say anyone will be able to buy one - including housewives and 
house-husbands and the self-employed.

You will be able to put money into as many stakeholder plans as you like, 
provided you don't exceed the contribution limits. If you put in more than 
£3,600 a year, the rules relating to personal pensions kick in. These allow 
people to put in between 17.5% and 40% of their earnings, depending on their 
age.

The big carrot the government is dangling is the promise of a boost from its 
coffers. Everyone - even non-earners - will receive at least basic-rate tax 
relief on their payments. That means that for every £100 a typical individual 
contributes, £129 will be invested in the pension.

Stakeholder pensions are 'money purchase' schemes - what you receive on 
retirement will depend on factors including investment performance and annuity 
rates.

To call themselves stake holders, the schemes will have to meet several 
standards. They must be flexible - you will be able to stop and restart 
contributions without penalty, transfer money built up in other schemes, and 
switch over to other stakeholder providers without charge.

You will be able to open one for as little as £10, there will be no startup 
fee, and the maximum a company is likely to be able to charge for managing the 
funds is 1% a year. But this charge will only cover the cost of basic advice.

Stakeholder pensions will be offered by insurance companies, banks and 
financial advisers, but they will also be available through the workplace and 
from organisations such as trade unions. Because the new pensions don't come in 
until 2001, fears have been voiced that many people who should be paying into 
pensions now will use this delay as an excuse for doing nothing.

This, the experts say, is a big mistake. According to one company's figures, a 
25-year-old man contributing £100 a month into a pension could expect to have 
built up a fund of £206,000 by 65. But if he delays starting his payments until 
he is 30, the final fund is likely to be worth only £146,000.

If you are in work and eligible to join the company pension scheme, this is 
generally the best place to be because your employer will usually top up the 
money you put in.

For some people their only option will be to take out personal pensions. 
Graham Bates at the independent financial adviser Bates Investment Services 
says people have two options. They could start by leaving the whole question of 
a pension on one side for a moment, and save through an Isa (an individual 
savings account).

Or they could take out personal pensions now. If you want to go this route, Mr 
Bates recommends selecting companies that offer no-penalty transfers into their 
own stakeholder pensions.

Most big pension companies will offer people taking out personal pensions now 
the opportunity to transfer at no cost. Some companies have gone further than 
others. Legal & General says no one will lose out financially.
 