
The proportion of employees saving money into a workplace pension scheme is at 
its highest level for 17 years, driven by a huge increase in the number of 
people in their 20s saving for retirement.


In 2013, half of all employees saved into their company pension; this grew to 
59% in 2014, according to figures from the Office for National Statistics. 
Although the increase was across age groups, the biggest leap was among the 22- 
to 29-year-olds, with 53% saving into a workplace pension last year compared to 
36% in 2013.

The increase, which reverses more than a decade of falling workplace pension 
scheme participation, is largely down to the government’s automatic pension 
enrolment programme.

Auto enrolment was introduced at the end of 2012 to compel employers to enrol 
all workers aged between 22 and the state pension age and who earn more than 
£8,000 a year into a workplace pension scheme.

“Auto-enrolment is a huge success and has reversed the decline in the numbers 
saving into pensions,” said the TUC’s head of campaigns, Nigel Stanley. “Like 
the minimum wage, compulsory employer pension contributions have gone from 
controversial to consensus in just a few years.”

 He added that under the current rules contribution levels were not enough to 
give people “a decent retirement income”.

“Once every employer is covered by auto-enrolment we need to start raising 
minimum contribution levels and make sure we include the part-time women 
workers [who are] excluded from saving each time this government has raised the 
earnings level that triggers auto-enrolment,” he said.

When auto-enrolment is rolled out completely in 2018 the minimum contribution 
into a scheme will be 8% of an employee’s qualifying earnings, of which at 
least 3% must come from the employer. Currently employees only have to pay in 
1% of their earnings, with their employer matching this with a further 1%.


The ONS statistics showed that almost half the employer contributions made in 
2014 were under 4%, while a third of employees contributed less than 2% of 
their salary.


While the proportion of people saving in a pension through work grew overall, 
those who are doing it through a “gold-plated” final salary scheme fell to its 
lowest level ever. For the first time since ONS records began defined benefit 
(final salary) pension schemes represented less than half of total workplace 
pension membership.

While the increase in pension participation has been largely driven by 
auto-enrolment, there is also evidence that those who do not qualify are saving 
more.

There was a surprising increase in participation among 16-21 year olds, who 
don’t qualify for auto-enrolment. The proportion saving in final salary schemes 
increased from 3.5% to 4.4% between 2013 and 2014 and the number in defined 
contribution, or stockmarket linked, schemes grew from 4% to 4.5%.

 