
Over the past few years, there has been considerable government investment in 
vocational qualifications and career opportunities for young people – including 
the introduction of higher apprenticeships and a new technical baccalaureate – 
that will provide an alternative route for 16-18 year olds.

But there is still a lot of work to do in making sure young people have access 
to independent advice and guidance to help them make informed decisions about 
their future. Since 2011, schools have had responsibility for providing this, 
with no additional funding to do so. And there is no longer a legal requirement 
for schools to provide opportunities for work-based learning.

This means young people are getting very different experiences of careers 
advice and guidance. Some schools are buying in the services of careers 
advisers and providing quality work experience opportunities for their pupils. 
Others may be relying on online materials, which have their place but cannot 
replace face-to-face, independent advice and guidance.

And it's not just young people who need support. Our research shows that 
parents and teachers are key influencers of young people, and their knowledge 
isn't always as up-to-date as it could be. In the case of apprenticeships, for 
example, there is sometimes a perception that they are rather messy jobs, 
concentrated in the traditional craft areas, and mainly for boys. In reality, 
however, high-quality apprenticeship opportunities exist in most employment 
sectors, and that's a message we really need to get out there.

What we'd really like to see is a minimum entitlement offer for careers advice 
and guidance for all young people, regardless of the school they attend, which 
is embedded in the curriculum.Careers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/careerseducation> education should not 
be a one-off conversation that happens at a certain point in a young person's 
school career. It needs to be an ongoing dialogue, in which information and 
opportunities are discussed at every stage of their education.

• Jan Hodges is the CEO of Edge Foundation <http://www.edge.co.uk/>
 