
Goldenport, one of the last shipping companies left on the London Stock 
Exchange <https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup>, has 
delisted from the market and sold off six of its remaining eight vessels for $1 
(69p) each.

The giveaway reflects the most dismal shipping conditions in decades, caused 
by economic slowdown in China combined with an oversupply of vessels due to a 
building spree during a previous boom.

The Greek owners are looking for buyers for two remaining vessels and are 
taking Goldenport off the stock market, saying it no longer makes sense to list 
shares which have dropped from highs of £50 in 2007 to less than 1.5p.

John Dragnis, the chief executive of Goldenport, said the company’s lenders 
and shareholders had agreed to the fleet sell-off at a time when the company 
had debts of more than £100m to RBS and other banks. “The value of the vessels 
is less than the value of the loans due to extreme market conditions.”

He added: “Dry bulk vessels generally have fallen in value by around 60% over 
the last year partly because of extreme oversupply and partly because of low 
demand for coal as China moves towards renewable energy to curb [carbon] 
emissions.”

Dragnis said family and management controlled almost 60% of Goldenport and had 
suffered along with all other shareholders from the downturn. The Athens-based 
shipowner declined to predict when market conditions might pick up although he 
thought it could be between one and three years.

Goldenport would continue as a private company but admitted in a statement to 
the stock market that its cash reserves had been “drained”. It added: “The 
prevailing market conditions are probably the worst of the last 30 years with 
the Baltic Dry Index dropping to historic lows, and average daily hire rates 
falling below even a vessel’s daily operating expenses.”

The six ships already sold have been transferred to the ownership of small 
companies owned by the Dragnis family which originally set up Goldenport and 
brought the company to the stock market.

The announcement of plans to float in 2006, when the shipping markets were 
riding high on China’s fast-tracked industrialisation programme, boasted of the 
value to come.

Goldenport was active, it said, in two main segments of the international 
shipping market, containers and dry bulk “enhancing stability of revenue 
streams”. It added that there would be “highly predictable cash flows due to 
long term contractual arrangements with large established charter 
counterparties”.

The boom before 2005 encouraged shipbuilding – particularly in China – but 
caused huge overcapacity as the market turned to bust after 2012. All but one 
of the Goldenport vessels themselves were built in 2010 and 2011.

Richard Fulford-Smith, the founder of the Affinity shipbroking firm and a 
leading figure in the London maritime scene, said the bulk shipping markets 
were in “a sad state” and there could be more bankruptcies and exits before any 
bounce back. Fulford-Smith, 60, added: “I will probably be retired by the time 
there is any real recovery.”
 