
It’s that most wonderful time of the year, folks. That’s right, it’s the 
holiday season, which means that people like me are frantically trying to come 
up with things to write about that don’t take a ton of time so that we can piss 
off to our vacations! And what more time-honored sportswriter tradition is 
there than prematurely predicting year-end awards two months before the 
All-Star break? That’s right, there isn’t one. I’ve got a case full ofNBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> MVP hot takes sitting in a case mounted 
on my wall with a bit of glass over it that reads “Break in case of emergency.”

It’s way too soon to choose an MVP, but for the purposes of this column, let’s 
pretend it’s not. This year’s crop of candidates is as strong as it’s ever 
been, which makes this exercise slightly less ridiculous. We have multiple guys 
on pace for historically significant seasons, so this will at least be less 
wanky than all the years people refused to vote for Kobe Bryant because he 
didn’t “play the game the right way.” By the way, Kobe Bryant’s 2005-06 season 
was one of the greatest of all time (shoutout to Slam magazine forpointing this 
out <https://twitter.com/slamonline/status/809465444918759425> on Twitter 
recently), statistically, but Steve Nash won the MVP. If that doesn’t show you 
the rather tenuous nature of the MVP system as it stands now, then nothing will.

Let’s look at the top three candidates as of mid-December and try to suss out 
who has the upper hand. Obviously, some guys who deserve a look didn’t make the 
cut, so these are my honorable mentions: Giannis Antetokounmpo, Anthony Davis, 
Chris Paul, Kevin Durant. Sorry, guys.

LeBron James

If LeBron wins this year, that would give him five MVP awards, tying him with 
his own personal measuring stick, Michael Jordan. If you think King James isn’t 
making this a priority, shaking hands with voters, and kissing their babies, 
you’re dead wrong.By his own admission 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2016/08/lebron-james-michael-jordan-ghost-greatness-motivation-nba>
, he’s chasing a ghost that played in Chicago. He wants it, and he might get it 
for sentimental reasons.

So far, he’s averaging 25 points and nine assists a game and having his third 
best season of his career in effective field goal percentage,per Basketball 
Reference <http://www.basketball-reference.com/players/j/jamesle01.html>. On 
the down side, he’s also on pace for his worst turnovers per game average in 
his career. Such is life for a guy who clearly loves distributing the ball.

The case is always there for LeBron to be an MVP, since he’s easily the most 
valuable player on any team he plays on, but there’s the age-old debate about 
whether or not MVP truly means most valuable or is simply a player of the year 
award.

Russell Westbrook

If we awarded the MVP to the guy who has made me throw my remote out the 
window so that my wife can’t change the channel as easily when said player is 
playing, then it would immediately go to Russ. It’s been an absolute pleasure 
watching him do his job this season. He’s averaging a triple-double (30.5 
points, 10.5 rebounds, 10.6 assists), his effective field goal percentage is 
45.8, and his PER is 28.5. LeBron has a higher effective field goal percentage, 
at 56.3, but he has a lower PER (26.3). The historical importance of the 
triple-double average sways me towards Westbrook, plus he’s slightly more 
valuable to his team than LeBron. If James left the Cavs, they’d still likely 
be a mid-tier playoff team in a bad conference. If Westbrook left the Thunder, 
I think they’d be quarantined. His usage rate is 41.2 this season, which would 
be the all-time record. By the way, Russ is already number two on that list, 
behind … Kobe Bryant.

James Harden

James Harden certainly passes the eye test, assuming “the eye test” means that 
you want to stab your eyes out with a salad fork when you watch someone play. 
No offense to James Harden, but his interminable top-of-the-key dribbles, 
propensity for drawing convoluted fouls that grind the game to a halt, and 
other classic Harden-isms make it difficult to want to vote for him. Plus, he 
got his coach fired and drove Dwight Howard out of town last year. That 
shouldn’t matter at all, but they do contribute to the aforementioned Black 
Mamba Syndrome that prevented number 24 from winning MVPs in some of his most 
prolific seasons. (This is the last Kobe reference, I promise.) People just 
plain did not like him.

A case could be made that without the Beard, the Rockets wouldn’t be a playoff 
team either, but while he’s clearly very important to Houston both as a leader 
and as a statistical necessity to win basketball games, Westbrook is slightly 
more necessary. Harden is fourth in usage rate to Westbrook’s first. What stat 
better illustrates someone’s pure value to a team than usage rate? Still, 
Harden is having a great season, averaging 27.6 points per game, 7.8 rebounds, 
and 11.8 assists. All three of these guys could end up averaging a 
triple-double when the season is over. All three are cornerstones of their 
teams. All three are in the top five in total turnovers, so no one has been 
particularly careful with the ball. None of them are in the top 50 in defensive 
rating. So…

Your pre-Christmas MVP is Russell Westbrook. All things being relatively 
equal, Westbrook is the one on track to make history. His team is the one that 
would truly implode without him. The narrative of him winning the MVP after 
being jilted by Kevin Durant will be irresistible to voters. He also has a 
better in-game defiant snarl than either of his opponents. Russ, your 
pre-Christmas MVP trophy is in the mail. Please enjoy.
 