
Zlatan Ibrahimovic has expressed his sympathies for fellow Parisians after the 
attacks that left more than 130 dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/15/paris-attacks-car-found-with-kalashnikovs-as-gunmans-relatives-questioned>
, hundreds injured and the city traumatised. “It’s sad, tragic. Things like 
that shouldn’t happen,” the Paris Saint-Germain striker said after Sweden beat 
Denmark 2-1 in the first leg of their Euro 2016 play-off. “I stand behind those 
who have passed on and the families there. I tried hard to focus on the game, 
which was very hard.”

The stadium in Stockholm was lit up in the red, white and blue national 
colours ofFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> and a minute’s 
silence was observed. The players also wore black armbands.

Erik Hamren said the attacks had affected preparations. “The terrible and 
despicable has happened,” Sweden’s coach said. “We had a chat when we assembled 
and we must show that evil cannot be allowed to win, that football is important 
on days such as this.”

Sweden <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sweden> scored a goal either side 
of half-time but Denmark’s coach, Morten Olsen, believes his side can overturn 
the deficit. Emil Forsberg scored the opener and also won a 50th-minute penalty 
that Ibrahimovic converted before Nicolai Jorgensen snatched a late goal to 
leave Tuesday’s game in Copenhagen delicately balanced.

“You have to be confident,” Olsen said. “I think we have the players who can 
make the difference. It will be a different game.”

A tight, tense affair for much of the first 45 minutes, the game came to life 
on the stroke of half-time when the winger Forsberg swept Mikael Lustig’s pass 
beyond Kasper Schmeichel.

The crowd had barely taken their seats at the start of the second half when 
Forsberg was up-ended by Thomas Kahlenberg after a surging run into the box and 
Ibrahimovic thundered home the spot kick.Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/denmark>, who failed to score in their 
final three group games, created few chances until Jorgensen stole in at the 
far post to poke the ball home in the 80th minute.

Billed as a Scandinavian clash between rival strikers Ibrahimovic and Nicklas 
Bendtner, the more direct approach of the Swedes paid dividends while the Danes 
put on a remarkably flat performance until their late goal.

Jorgensen’s late goal rattled the Swedes and Denmark dominated the final 10 
minutes without managing to find the equaliser.

“It’s always disappointing to concede a goal,” said Hamren. “I thought our 
defence was good for 60 minutes. “We have won the first game. We know it’s only 
halftime and … it’s going to be exciting on Tuesday.“

In Saturday’s other play-off first leg Ukraine beat Slovenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovenia> 2-0 in Lviv. Ukraine, who have 
not won a play-off for a major tournament finals in five previous attempts, 
took a firm grip when the winger Andriy Yarmolenko opened the scoring with a 
low shot into the far corner of the net in the 22nd minute.

He set up the second goal in the 54th minute for the striker Yevhen Seleznyov 
who met his cross to supply the finishing touch to a swift counterattack.

Seleznyov could have added a third goal 15 minutes later when he scuffed his 
shot when well-placed butUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ukraine> 
will still be in a strong position in Tuesday’s second leg.

Slovenia provided little threat up front although Branko Ilic fired just over 
the bar from the edge of the penalty area in the first half following a clever 
header from Milivoje Novakovic.

The visitors, bidding to repeat their Euro 2000 play-off victory over Ukraine, 
never looked like getting back into the game after the break.

Samir Handanovic, captaining Slovenia, produced a great save from a header by 
Denys Gamrash before Seleznyov struck the woodwork in the 69th minute.
 