
This isn't just another list of great movies. It's a rallying cry for films 
that for a variety of reasons - fashion, perhaps, or the absence of an 
influential advocate, or just pure bad luck - have been unduly neglected and 
should be more widely available. You know that feeling when someone hasn't 
heard of a film you've always loved and you want to show it to them? Or, in a 
different way, when you get annoyed because a picture hasn't been accorded the 
position you think it deserves in cultural history or the cinematic canon? 
That's the sort of film we have included on this list. Salt of the Earth, for 
instance, is a landmark film few have seen, though it was a cult movie to the 
radical students in John Sayles's debut, The Return of the Secaucus Seven, 
which is itself now a cult movie, though Sayles is represented on our list by 
his lesser known Lianna. We have also included the thoughts of some of 
Britain's most interesting film-makers about their favourite under-rated work. 
For sanity's sake, we restricted ourselves to English-language feature films.

When I began my DVD Club column last January, many readers sent in lists of 
films they thought should be released on DVD. This roster of neglected films, 
only 18 of which are available on DVD in the UK, is intended to provoke 
discussion, dissension and your own suggestions.

To champion your favourite lost classic, visit our arts & entertainment blog (
blogs.theguardian.com/film <http://www.blogs.theguardian.com/film>), or email 
us (review@observer.co.uk <mailto:review@observer.co.uk>). We'll publish the 
most inspiring suggestions in next weekend's Review.

We've also included here comparisons to more famous works, to help you decide 
which ones you should scour festival and television schedules for. We think 
you'll like them.
PF

1 Salt Of The Earth
Herbert Biberman, 1953

Made at the height of McCarthyism by blacklisted left-wing artists (the 
director was jailed as one of the Hollywood Ten; screenwriter Michael Wilson's 
name was kept off Bridge on the River Kwai and Lawrence of Arabia), this 
politically committed movie recreates a strike by Mexican-American zinc workers 
against the appalling conditions at their new Mexican mine. A marvellous 
mixture of naivety, passion, agitprop and forceful feminism, it was the subject 
of official harassment during production and banned from US screens for a 
decade but became a cult movie for young radicals in the 1960s.
PF

See this if you liked ... Strike, Silver City

2 Petulia
Richard Lester, 1968

Richard Lester may be better known as the director of the Beatles movies A 
Hard Day's Night and Help! but he made Petulia in 1968 and it remains his 
masterpiece - bursting with the experimentation that typified his early career, 
but allied with a more adult sense of malaise and pessimism. Set against the 
backdrop of swinging Sixties San Francisco, Lester senses the darkness that 
would soon overwhelm the peace and love generation in the tale of the midlife 
crisis of George C Scott's doctor and his doomed romance with the much younger 
Julie Christie, playing it determinedly kooky. Edited in a bold, fragmented 
style, the story loops backwards and forwards to stunning effect. It's no 
surprise to discover that Nic Roeg was the film's cinematographer - he later 
employed not only the editing style but also Julie Christie for his own 
masterwork Don't Look Now.
Peter Webber; also nominated by Philip French

See this if you liked ... Point Blank, Don't Look Now

3 The State Of Things
Wim Wenders, 1982

This is the film to show to all budding directors and producers as a warning 
of the calamities that can unfold. When production on his first US film, 
Hammett, started going awry, Wenders took time out to style this ultimate 
B-movie about a film crew attempting to make a sci-fi flick out on the 
Portuguese coast. They find themselves beached in more ways than one as one of 
the producers absconds with the money to America. When the unsurprisingly irked 
director tracks him down to LA, he meets his match in the Mob. Featuring a 
cameo from the great maverick director Sam Fuller, this is Wenders's wry 
meditation on an artform that asks the greatest sacrifices of its brethren.
LF

See this if you liked ... Lost in La Mancha, The Big Knife

4 Newsfront
Phillip Noyce, 1978

Many of the early movies of the Australian new wave turned their attentions to 
the formative years of the new nation. This one looked at the crucial decade 
after the Second World War as reported on by rival teams of newsreel cameramen 
and it made a star of Bill Hunter as a photojournalist of Orwellian integrity, 
who actually looks like Orwell. Rarely seen nowadays but one of the finest 
Australian pictures and among the sharpest ever about postwar changes in the 
media.
PF

See this if you liked ... Picnic at Hanging Rock, Robert Spottiswoode's Under 
Fire

5 Fat City
John Huston, 1972

In the early Seventies my local cinema was the Screen on the Green in 
Islington. During the week they screened low-budget American gems and I would 
go to these movies pretty much on my own until one day I plucked up the courage 
to ask a classmate, Jackie Littleton, to come with me to see Fat City. I was 
16, on my first real date, and John Huston's elegiac tender boxing meditation 
really affected me. From the opening lyrics 'Take the ribbon from your hair', 
sung by Kris Kristofferson, I was hooked. And of course it starred probably the 
greatest unsung actor in cinema history, Jeff Bridges. I haven't seen Fat City 
since but I was too enthralled to make a play for Jackie, which I regret to 
this day, and although she did let me walk her home silently, I will never know 
what she thought of this American masterpiece.
Stephen Woolley

See this if you liked ... Harold and Maude

6 I Wanna Hold Your Hand
Robert Zemeckis, 1978

Produced by Spielberg, this directorial debut by his star protege takes a 
delightfully affectionate comic look at a party of New Jersey high school kids 
invading Manhattan in February 1964 to catch a glimpse of the Beatles, in town 
to appear on the Ed Sullivan Show. It's like A Hard Day's Night seen from the 
fans' point of view and looks back nostalgically to a turning point in popular 
culture, with a cast of then unknowns, Nancy Allen among them.
PF

See this if you liked ... Back to the Future

7 The Swimmer
Frank Perry, 1968

Adapted from a John Cheever short story, this is Hollywood at its eccentric 
best. Burt Lancaster is mesmerising as the middle-class dropout whose nose dive 
from suburban society precipitates the strangest odyssey. Adorned only in 
swimming trunks and his startling muscle tone, he pool dips his way across his 
Waspish East Coast neighbourhood and attempts to understand his downfall. 
Structured episodically, there is an elegant craziness to this satire of sorts, 
as if it has been dreamt up in vivid Pucci-esque colours after one too many dry 
Martinis. But it captures the schizophrenic mood of late-1960s America - as one 
nation burned, another cooled off by the pool.
LF

See this if you liked ... The Ice Storm

8 Under The Skin
Carine Adler, 1997

Carine Adler's debut is a visceral and moving exploration of grief. Samantha 
Morton drew much attention in her big-screen debut, playing Iris, a young woman 
whose mother's death prompts a breakdown of sorts. Her sense of self flatlines 
as she rejects her boyfriend, instead finding solace in a series of risky 
sexual encounters. Adler explores extremes with every element of the film, from 
Morton's heartbreaking performance to the visuals (suburban England is depicted 
in an exotic palate), to a soundtrack that had Massive Attack next to a 
delicate Chopin chorus. British cinema at its risk-taking best.
LF

See this if you liked ... In the Cut, Breaking the Waves

9 The Front Page
Lewis Milestone, 1931

Hecht and MacArthur's classic newspaper comedy is frequently revived on stage 
and has been filmed four times. This first film version, a milestone work in 
every sense, helped, through its fast, wise-cracking dialogue and rapid 
editing, to change the sight and sound of the new talkies. Adolph Menjou as the 
suave, double-crossing editor Walter Burns and Pat O'Brien as his star reporter 
head a great cast.
PF

See this if you liked ... His Girl Friday, The Front Page

10 The Damned
Joseph Losey, 1961

Losey, a McCarthy-era exile, was taking any respectable work he could get 
(initially under pseudonyms) until his major breakthrough with The Servant in 
1963. Hammer didn't know what to do with this fascinating, visually dazzling 
sci-fi thriller centring on a top-secret research station housing radioactive 
children in Dorset. So they released it as the second half of a horror 
double-bill without a West End screening. It's one of the best nuclear-angst 
films.PF

See this if you liked...  The Servant

11 Ace In The Hole
Billy Wilder, 1951

Wilder's first solo movie after ending his 12-year partnership with 
writer-producer Charles Brackett is a cynical study of mass hysteria and the 
yellow press with a stunning performance from Kirk Douglas as an unscrupulous 
journalist exploiting a local tragedy to get back into the big time. Among the 
great newspaper pictures, it was a flop (even when re-released under a 
different title) and has never been available here on tape or disc.
PF

See this if you liked ... Citizen Kane

12 The Beaver Trilogy
Trent Harris, 2001

Receiving rare but rave screenings at festivals, this gives experimental 
cinema a great name. Set in Beaver, Utah, it is a triptych shot in the 1980s 
that repeats the same small-town tale of an Olivia Newton John obsessive who 
aspires to perform like her at the local talent show. A young Crispin Glover 
and Sean Penn appear in succession, dragging up for the central role. It's 
Stars in their Eyes as directed by Andy Warhol. Hilarious.
LF

See this if you liked ... Fast Times at Ridgemount High, Back to the Future

13 Top Secret!
Jim Abrahams, David and Jerry Zucker, 1984

Many acknowledge Airplane! as a comic masterpiece but this follow-up from the 
team is just as funny, spoofing WWII movies with both affection and visual wit. 
It's more in the style of Mel Brooks than the frenetic gag-a-second joys of the 
Airport parodies. Val Kilmer's best-ever role was as the rock'n'roll spy sent 
behind German lines to resuce a scientist - cue Yiddish jokes and the French 
resistance fighters Chocolate Mousse and Deja Vu.
JS

See this if you liked ... Bananas, Young Frankenstein

14 Bamboozled
Spike Lee, 2000

Spike Lee's angriest, most savagely funny film, this media satire about a 
network's ratings success with a minstrel show is the bravest film about race 
ever made, though it was too hot a potato for many. Lee rails against buppy 
culture, wiggas, institutional racism, faux-liberal whites, Jews and blacks. 
The music's still great and the superb tap dancing is from Savion Glover, 
currently the model for the penguin in Happy Feet.
JS

See this if you liked ... Network

15 3 Women
Robert Altman, 1977

I tumbled out of the cinema in 1977 feeling like I had been inside someone 
else's head and very uncertain about who I was at all. Sissy Spacek is 
brilliant as Pinky, a gauche country girl who pitches up in Los Angeles and 
gets herself a job in a solarium. She's dazzled by a co-worker, Millie (Shelley 
Duvall), who believes herself to be very popular and cool even though it's 
horribly obvious that she's neither. Same themes but much less solemn than 
Bergman's portentous Persona.
Penny Woolcock

See this if you liked ... Bridget Jones's Diary, Trash

16 Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me
David Lynch, 1992

Freed from the constraints of TV, David Lynch pulled no punches with this 
eerie, elegiac fable of incestuous urban horror. Sheryl Lee shimmers with 
incandescent sadness as the doomed Laura Palmer, slowly succumbing to the 
demonic possession of a deadly, dirty secret. Composer Angelo Badalamenti 
conjures a symphony of suspended chords that hang in the air full of dread, 
grief, and terrible magic. Dim-witted hacks mercilessly savaged the film, yet 
this is up there with Eraserhead as Lynch's most powerful, passionate and 
personal work.
MK

See this if you liked ... Blue Velvet

17 Let's Scare Jessica To Death
John D Hancock, 1971

The title might suppose another in the kitsch overblown gothics spawned by 
Whatever Happened to Baby Jane. Instead it is a creepy and very surreal ghost 
story. Starting a new life in a remote village might not have been the best 
move for the titular heroine, particularly when she has spent a stint in a 
sanatorium in an attempt to cure her of her morbid fascination with death. 
Regular horror ingredients are all mixed up into something truly terrifying. 
One of Stephen King's favourite films.
LF

See this if you liked ... The Shining

18 The Low Down
Jamie Thraves, 2000

Beautiful, funny, poetic, brilliantly directed film about the moment in life 
when you have to question whether you can be young and carefree for ever. In 
essence it's the oldest story - boy meets girl ... but in this case, it's in 
north London and the boy's life undergoes a series of subtle, but seismic 
shifts as the relationship develops. Like most British films of any cinematic 
quality, it was ignored on release, except by the odd cinephile, and most 
British film directors.
Ben Hopkins

See this if you liked ... A Bout de Souffle

19 A New Leaf
Elanie May, 1971

The sometime genius May (whose shtick routines with Mike Nichols were 
benchmarks for comedy in the 1960s) made a droll directorial debut. She also 
took the lead playing an eccentric millionairess botanist subject to the 
amorous, but suspect advances of aging roue Walter Matthau. As with all May's 
work it boasted a sophisticated humour pivoting around this odd couple, yet did 
little to enamour her to the studio establishment, with the director's cut 
running at a reported three hours while May wanted to disown the final film.
LF

See this if you liked ...  About Schmidt

20 Quiemada!
Gillo Pontecorvo, 1969

Edward Said called this dramatised Marxist essay the best film ever made about 
neo-colonialism. It stars Marlon Brando as a cynical 19th-century English 
aristocrat who first arranges the overthrow of the Portuguese rulers of a 
Caribbean island, then subverts the supposedly democratic government he's 
helped to create. Intelligent, articulate, beautiful-looking, but due to 
Spanish interference and Hollywood cold feet it was first rewritten then 
half-heartedly released.
PF

See this if you liked ... The Battle of Algiers, Salvatore Giuliano

21 The Hired Hand
Peter Fonda, 1971

A beautful, acid-trip western, directed by Peter Fonda as an elegiac reply to 
Easy Rider. It was shot by Vilmos Zsigmond in a kaleidoscope of bold colours 
and washed-out sepias. Fonda's cowboy returns home to regain the love of his 
wife, who at first employs him only as a worker on her farm. He has to earn her 
trust back, but news of his old partner, the mighty Warren Oates, tempts him 
back in the saddle. This is a moving account of love, loyalty and the passing 
of time.
JS

See this if you liked ... The Getaway

22 Safe
Todd Haynes, 1995

Haynes's second feature should have been made an instant classic. There's a 
spare and eerie charge to this tale of 'homemaker' Carol White (Julianne Moore) 
who lives a life as blank as her name and who ends up succumbing to an unnamed 
malaise, retreating from the Californian suburbs to find a cure in the 'safe' 
haven of a new-age clinic which turns out to be the most creepy of places. A 
true horror film for the 1990s.
LF

See this if you liked... The Stepford Wives (Bryan Forbes's original), Far 
From Heaven

23 Housekeeping
Bill Forsyth, 1987

Forsyth eschewed the comic whimsy of his earlier films, such as Gregory's Girl 
and Local Hero, for his first US studio foray. Based on Marilynne Robinson's 
modern classic, it's a heartbreaking tale of two young sisters haunted by death 
and family dysfunction that boasts a superb performance from Christine Lahti as 
the aunt who attempts to step into the shoes of their dead mother. No doubt the 
studios hoped for something cute and eccentric, taking the central ingredients 
of orphaned moppets and wacky relatives, instead Forsyth delivered a searing 
examination of the ties that bind.
LF

See this if you liked ... Sweetie, The Hours

24 Le Petomane
Ian MacNaughton, 1979

A forgotten masterpiece short starring Leonard Rossiter as Joseph Pujol in the 
true story of a man who had an elastic anus. What do you do with such an 
affliction? Well, Joseph performed impersonations for the pleasure of European 
royalty - like the Royal Variety Show, only classier. Directed by Ian 
MacNaughton (Python) and written by Galton and Simpson, I just remember being 
in hysterics at school as I described the plot to fellow pupils. The teacher 
caught me mid-sound effect and although I explained that it was a true story, 
unfortunately history was lost on the maths teacher.
Chris Shepherd

See this if you liked ... Entertaining Mr Sloane

25 Lianna
John Sayles, 1982

John Sayles is one of the great US independents (way before Steven Soderbergh) 
who has been able to combine studio savvy - he started out penning genre pics 
such as the fish frightener Piranha - while directing such singular, often 
political visions as Matewan, a strike saga, or Brother from Another Planet, a 
sort of black ET. Going against the grain of early-Eighties censure or tabloid 
titillation, Lianna brought a refreshing tenderness and humanity to the 
coming-out love story of a thirtysomething wife and mother.
LF

See this if you liked ... Passion Fish

26 Bill Douglas Trilogy
Bill Douglas, 1972-78

Douglas started working on this while still at film school. It charts his 
growing up in a Scottish mining village in the 1940s - a stark childhood evoked 
with an unsentimental lyricism. Sadly the only other full-length film he made 
was the sweeping epic Comrades, about the Tolpuddle Martyrs. One wonders what 
longer career this true poet of cinema might have had, had he been born in 
France rather than Newcraig hall.
LF

See this if you liked ... 400 Blows, Ratctcher

27 The Parallax View
Alan J Parker, 1974

Complex political thriller mixing elements of the Kennedy assassination with 
Watergate in a heady paranoid tale of a crusading journalist (Warren Beatty) 
following a trail of corpses leading to a streamlined corporate Murder Inc. One 
of the finest conspiracy movies, its relevance is constantly being renewed and 
is current highly topical through the Litvinenko case.
PF

See this if you liked ... either version of The Manchurian Candidate, All the 
President's Men

28 Babylon
Franco Rosso, 1980

With one of the best soundtracks and best lines in British cinema, it's better 
than the enormously over-rated Withnail and I. I first saw it as a teenager on 
acid at the Scala cinema in the late Eighties and it scared the living shit out 
of me. Favourite line: 'Brixton dem'a caal dis?'. I still use it today.
Joe Wright

See this if you liked ... anything by Shane Meadows

29 Dreamchild
Gavin Millar, 1985

Alice Liddell (played by the late, great Coral Browne) recalls the Victorian 
childhood that inspired Lewis Carroll (Ian Holm), from the vantage point of 
ripe age and now transplanted to jazz era New York. Scripted by Dennis Potter, 
this woefully neglected British gem bore out his perennial fascination with 
memory, while Jim Henson's Creature Shop brought to life the wild things of 
Carroll's imagination. A sublime and touching take on the biopic.
LF

See this if you liked ... Pan's Labyrinth

30 Ride Lonesome
Budd Boetticher, 1959

In the late 1950s Boetticher directed seven Randolph Scott westerns in a row. 
None was ever given a press show here, and the director wasn't discovered by 
most critics until after his virtual retirement. One of the best is the taut 
and intelligent Ride Lonesome, in which poker-faced bounty hunter Scott 
traverses hostile Indian country with a bunch of outlaws in pursuit of villain 
Lee Van Cleef.
PF

See this if you liked ... Stagecoach, Ride the High Country

31 Breathless
Jim McBride, 1983

Critics howled at the blasphemy of Hollywood remaking Godard's A bout de 
souffle as a racy erotic thriller, but Jim McBride's joyous crime against 
cine-academia is a rip-roaring rock'n'roll ride. Terrific location work makes 
this one of the best LA movies of the Eighties, while a finger-popping 
soundtrack jitterbugs between Jerry Lee, Link Wray, and the Pretenders. Richard 
Gere looks great in ridiculous checked trousers, and even better out of them. 
Memorable scenes include Dick shagging a shower to pieces to the naked strains 
of Elvis's 'Suspicious Minds'.
MK

See this if you liked ... American Gigolo, Great Balls of Fire

32 The Day The Earth Caught Fire
Val Guest, 1961

A brilliant London film, a great journalist movie and a classic example of 
period sci-fi cinema. Leo McKern is thrilling as the Daily Express writer (it 
was shot in the paper's old Fleet St HQ) who has discovered global warming - 
Val Guest's film seems more prescient every year. Also, there's an early cameo 
from Michael Caine as a policeman ushering crowds out of the city, a scene 
eerily reflected in Alfonso Cuaron's Children of Men this year.
JS

See this if you liked ... The Day The Earth Stood Still, 28 Days Later

33 Less Than Zero
Marek Kanievska, 1987

An example of an over-rated book being beaten by the film version. When 
researching my Eighties-set film The Business, it brought back all the neon 
lighting, the fashions and the emptiness of the era. It has this amazing 
sadness and helplessness to it and at its heart there's a career-defining 
performance from Robert Downey Jr. It prefigures all that twitty teen stuff on 
Beverly Hills 90210 and the weedy OC.
Nick Love

See this if you liked ... Miami Vice

34 Day Night Day Night
Julia Loktev, 2006

New York-based documentary film-maker and installation artist Loktev's feature 
debut is an intense and revelatory experience that follows a young woman, of 
indeterminate origins, as she prepares herself for a suicide bomb mission in 
Times Square. We are spared backstory details, to focus on the minutiae of the 
hours leading up to the task at hand. Feted by critics, fellow filmmakers and 
festivals, it has been neglected by distributors here.
LF

See this if you liked ... Battle of Algiers, Joan of Arc

35 Tin Cup
Ron Shelton, 1996

A rarity this, a serious golf movie, with another rarity, a cool performance 
by Kevin Costner, playing a washed-up pro taking a shot at the big title. 
There's a purity of narrative, as if it follows the trajectory of a perfect 
golf shot. Bizarrely, the story prefigured the real-life, self-destructive 
hillbilly hero, John Daly.
JS

See this if you liked ... Happy Gilmore, For the Love of the Game

36 The Ninth Configuration
William Peter Blatty, 1980

'I believe in the devil, because the prick keeps doing commercials.' In an 
experimental asylum, combat-shocked soldiers adapt Shakespeare's plays for dogs 
('I'm doing Hamlet, but if I cast a great Dane ...') under the mysterious 
Colonel Kane. This tragic-comic cult weirdie is endlessly quotable.
MK

See this if you liked ... Shock Corridor, One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest

37 Cutter's Way
Ivan Passer, 1981

Czech film-maker Passer went into US exile with his friend Milos Forman in 
1968, and this post-'Nam thriller, a minor masterpiece, is as good as Forman's 
best. John Heard plays a crippled army vet obsessed with pinning a brutal 
murder on a rich citizen of Santa Barbara. A box-office failure, but a neo-noir 
classic.
PF

See this if you liked ... Intimate Lighting, Chinatown

38 Save The Last Dance
Thomas Carter, 2001

A dance-movie story of a ballerina from a private school who moves to the 
inner city. Fine hip-hop tunes invade the world of ballet in what is still one 
of the only mainstream films featuring a successful inter-racial romance.
JS

See this if you liked ... Saturday Night Fever, Step Up

39 The Mad Monkey
Fernando Trueba, 1989

Despite several Goya Awards (Spanish Oscars), this extraordinary adaptation of 
Christopher Frank's book was wrongly trashed by critics in Britain and America. 
A spine-tinglingly twisted take on Peter Pan, this intense psychological 
thriller boasts a career-best performance by Jeff Goldblum.The climactic Paris 
morgue scene is heartstopping.
MK

See this if you liked ... Misery, Peter Pan

40 Cockfighter
Monte Hellman, 1974

Hellman's masterpiece, based on Charles Willeford's novel about clandestine 
sporting contests in the Deep South (and scourge of animal rights protesters) 
was shown only twice, and refused a BBFC certificate. Terrific performances 
from Warren Oates and Harry Dean Stanton, lovingly photographed by Nestor 
Almendros.
PF

See this if you liked ... Badlands

41 The Narrow Margin
Richard Fleischer, 1952

Lapel-grabbing, low-budget thriller about a cop (Charles McGraw) dodging the 
mob while escorting a gangster's widow by a transcontinental train to give 
evidence before a Los Angeles jury.
PF

See this if you liked ... Midnight Run

42 Terence Davies Trilogy
Terence Davies, 1984

Davies's debut conjures a metaphysical experience that follows the life and 
death of its gay Liverpudlian protagonist. It stars Wilfrid Brambell (eschewing 
his Steptoe and Son persona) in an outstanding performance.
LF

See this if you liked ... Distant Voices, Still Lives

43 Wise Blood
John Huston, 1979

Huston's low-budget masterpiece adaptation of Flannery O'Connor's 1952 novel 
about rival fundamentalist preachers in America's Bible Belt.
PF

See this if you liked ...  Elmer Gantry

44 Robin Hood
Wolfgang Reitherman, 1973

Never counted among Disney classics, but my favourite because Robin was a 
cool, Flynn-style hero and Marian was, well, a fox. Peter Ustinov's spoilt-brat 
King John is pure joy and still one of the best-ever voiceover performances.
JS

See this if you liked ... Aladdin

45 Two-Lane Blacktop
Monte Hellman, 1971

This magnificent, existential road movie pits sportscar-driving conman Warren 
Oates against hot rod aces James Taylor and Dennis Wilson. Best of its time.
PF

See this if you liked ...  Five Easy Pieces

46 Beautiful Girls
Ted Demme, 1996

An unassuming character study from the sadly deceased Ted Demme. Tim Hutton is 
wonderful and it's Natalie Portman's finest role to date.
Peter Webber

See this if you liked ... Days of Being Wild

47 Millions
Danny Boyle, 2004

Danny Boyle's Capra-esque modern morality tale deserved to be a much bigger 
hit. I loved the way it used kids in an un-schmaltzy way.
Gurinder Chadha

See this if you liked ... Playing Away

48 Round Midnight
Bertrand Tavernier, 1986

This under-rated director's tale of a jazz fan rescuing his hero elicits a 
great performance from Dexter Gordon whose sax playing and acting are mellow 
and moving . Martin Scorsese cameos.
JS

See this if you liked ... Straight, No Chaser

49 Jeremy
Arthur Barron, 1973

Like falling in love for the first time, this wonderful, heartbreaking, teen 
romance won 'Best First Work' at Cannes.
MK

See this if you liked ... Gregory's Girl

50 Grace Of My Heart
Allison Anders, 1996

New York's Brill Building provides the hit-factory backdrop for this fabulous 
tale of a Carole King-style singer-songwriter's quest for fulfilment.
MK

See this if you liked ... That Thing You Do

The Champions: Who's on our panel

· The majority of the list was chosen (after much soul-searching) by The 
Observer's film criticPhilip French, our film writers Jason Solomons and Mark 
Kermode and producer Lizzie Francke, the former director of the Edinburgh Film 
Festival.

· We also asked a few of our favourite British film-makers to tell us about 
their lost classics - directors Peter Webber (Girl with a Pearl Earring), Ben 
Hopkins (37 Uses for a Dead Sheep), Joe Wright (Pride & Prejudice), Gurinder 
Chadha (Bend It Like Beckham), Nick Love (The Business), Penny Woolcock 
(Mischief Night), producer/director Stephen Woolley (Stoned) and 
animator/director Chris Shepherd (Silence is Golden)

· Help us celebrate more brilliant lost films by sharing details of your 
favourites on our blog:blogs.theguardian.com/film 
<http://www.blogs.theguardian.com/film>
 