
Some say that looks can kill. But in the central Chinese city of Zhengzhou, 
they get you a free bowl of kimchi soup.

A Korean eatery called Jeju Island in the capital of Henan province has been 
offering a special promotion since 10 January: every day, its 50 most 
attractive customers eat for free.

Before diners are seated, they’re encouraged to scan their faces at a “beauty 
identification area” 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/photo/2015-01/13/c_127381720_2.htm>in the front of 
the restaurant, according to online reports. The images are then sent to a 
panel of “expert” judges from the promotion’s joint sponsor – a local cosmetic 
surgery clinic. According to Xinhua, China’s state newswire, diners’ scores are 
prominently displayed on the restaurant’s second floor.

The deal quickly attracted media attention, raising the ire of conservative – 
and perhaps aesthetically challenged – local officials. On Tuesday, urban 
managementauthorities dismantled a large sign hanging outside 
<http://shanghaiist.com/2015/01/12/zhengzhou-restaurant-good-people-eat-free.php>
 the establishment, according to the state-run China News Service. “Pay with 
your face! If you’re good looking, you can eat for free!” it said, in gaudy 
neon letters. Below that, in English, it said: “Free meal for good-looking.”

The authorities claimed that the restaurant had “installed an outdoor 
advertisement without permission” and, somewhat ironically, that it had 
disturbed “the appearance of the city”.

When contacted by the Guardian, restaurant staff said that it would be 
“inconvenient” to talk about the turn of events.

“The restaurant has been open for the past half-year – we have many 
fashionable, young clients, so we teamed up with a plastic surgery clinic for 
this promotion activity,” the restaurant’s manager Xue Hexin told the news 
service.

He said he had spent 20,000 yuan (£2,120) on the sign, and had to pay another 
few thousand for its removal.

While Xue apologised for not “thinking through” his decision to hang the sign, 
he added that the promotion would continue.
 