
The fate of Livingston <https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> is 
set to be decided by the Scottish Football League after administrators began 
making staff redundant today.

The development came after the chairman, Angelo Massone, failed to meet a noon 
deadline to accept £25,000 for his controlling interest. The controversial 
Italian ignored the ultimatum from the interim manager Donald McGruther – from 
the administrator Mazars – who was appointed by the Court of Session on Friday 
after West Lothian Council took legal action to reclaim a £330,000 debt.

Massone claims his lawyer advised him not to accept the offer made to him by 
McGruther, who insisted he would wind up the "hopelessly insolvent" club unless 
the Italian relented.

McGruther started making staff redundant this afternoon but the playing squad 
and the majority of the key personnel will not lose their jobs until he meets 
the Scottish Football League tomorrow. It appears it will have the final say as 
to whether Livingston go under, but McGruther said any reprieve would involve 
the SFL breaking its own rules. He admitted Massone still had time to limit the 
damage but only if the Italian agreed to walk away.

"That's crucial and, without that – or an absolute revolution in the rules of 
the SFL – Livingston are out of business," McGruther told BBC Scotland. He said 
the noon deadline was necessary to allow interested parties enough time to 
convince the SFL they could save the club.

Livingston are also due to play Albion Rovers in the first round of the 
Co-operative Insurance Cup on Saturday.

McGruther said: "If we move forward with the interested parties, that game can 
easily take place and the future fixtures can take place under guarantees from 
interested parties. The problem is, again, no one will give those guarantees 
until Mr Massone is out of the picture."

Massone arrived at Almondvale shortly after today's deadline, facing a hostile 
reception from a number of fans. He remained defiant, claiming he had the funds 
to pay players and staff their wages for July.

He said: "I propose to pay immediately – to run the club and try to save the 
club – the player wages for July and the staff wages for July. The 
administrator didn't accept that."

Should Livingston fold, it is likely that Airdrie would be promoted to the 
First Division and Cowdenbeath to the Second Division after both lost in 
promotion/relegation play-off finals last term. There would not be enough time 
to add to the Third Division, leaving it with nine teams.
 