
The dilemma I have been having a dreadful time with the menopause for the past 
two years and a mental health team is now involved with my care. My husband and 
I split up seven years ago, but we remained close and see each other often. My 
husband has stayed the past couple of nights as I’m in quite a scary place, but 
we ended up having sex, and lots of it. I have not had sex for a long time and 
our sex life when we were married was never good, it was a real chore for me. 
We talked so much and have felt totally relaxed around each other. Please tell 
me what’s happening to me as I am meant to be having a breakdown, but I am 
having the most wonderful time with my husband. I had not slept for three 
nights before that when the psychiatric nurse prescribed me sleeping tablets. 
My mood swings are horrendous, yet I feel I have fallen in love with the man 
who has always been my rock. It’s like I am seeing him for the first time.

Mariella replies Perhaps you are! Thank you for providing a sliver of tangible 
proof to back up my specious theory that the devil you know can occasionally 
reinvent himself. What a relief to the many frustrated couples out there 
despairing of ever rekindling passion. That’s the good news!

You are in the throes of a particularly malevolent menopausal period, in the 
care of mental health experts and on medication, the side effects of which I am 
entirely unaware. It’s fair to say there are a lot of potential disrupters to 
your state of mind. Before you rush to your wardrobe to dust off your wedding 
dress, I suggest you share this latest development, not only with me, but with 
those professionals who are charged with your welfare.

It may be bizarre, but it’s certainly not shameful that you and your ex have 
rediscovered your mojo. But just as antidepressants can curtail your sexual 
appetite, so other forms of medication can heighten and exaggerate your 
physical and emotional responses. When the meds wear off you don’t want to find 
yourselves facing each other across the kitchen table and wondering what on 
earth it was that propelled you back under the same roof.

Hot flushes are not the only symptoms. Perhaps a voracious sexual appetite can 
be thrown into the pot

It’s early days, of course, but it has always struck me as odd that we have no 
expectation of passion resurfacing. In life we enjoy repetition in so many 
areas, and plenty of them are sensual – food, massage, scents to name a few – 
so why do we think that once an attraction fades, it will never take on a new 
form and appeal again?

There’s another reason I welcome your letter and that’s because it mentions 
the menopause. Generally the only news we’re given on that front is bad – most 
recently the connection between HRT and the increased risk of breast cancer a 
further addition to the grim tidings. Clearly the hormonal disruption that has 
affected your mental health so badly is nothing to go whoop about, but your 
reawakened sexuality definitely is.

There is an unfathomable mystery to this hormonal readjustment, despite being 
experienced by 50% of the world’s population. Much of it is down to the shroud 
of shame too often draped over the workings of women’s bodies. The trickle-down 
effect of titbits of information from those brave enough to acknowledge the “M” 
word has led us to realise that hot flushes and flaring tempers are not the 
only symptoms. Anxiety, sleeplessness, mania, out-of-character behaviour and, 
perhaps, judging by your experience, a renewed and voracious sexual appetite, 
can all be thrown into the pot labelled “natural” symptoms. Surely it’s time 
for a serious investigation into the scientific truth and cultural taboos 
around the menopause – a condition we understand so little about that it’s 
burdened with the same level of stigma as a terminal illness.

I’m delighted that, in this dark passage of your life, light has poured in 
with the presence of your ex. He’s certainly worthy of reconsideration for 
being at your side during troubled times and in your bed these last few days. 
That said, the fact that you haven’t slept for three nights makes me worry 
about your capacity to make rational judgments. I suggest you continue to enjoy 
the pleasure of his company, but wait until the mist of medicine clears before 
you leap to any long-term conclusions. Also, be honest with the professionals 
helping you, because their ability to support you depends on understanding what 
you are feeling. And enjoy this gift of life-affirming passion and 
companionship from what seems an unlikely quarter.

I’m not so sure our relentless march forward is in our best interests as a 
species.Relationships <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/relationships> 
can be victims of bad timing or immaturity, compelling alternative distractions 
and many other changing priorities. So when we walk away from a person with 
whom we’ve shared chemistry, who’s to say that a future spark can’t reignite 
that inferno?

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 