
So, it's off to Brighton to meet Preston, sometime lead singer of the 
here-today-gone-tomorrow indie band the Ordinary Boys, erstwhile CelebrityBig 
Brother <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/big-brother> housemate, 
ex-husband of Chantelle Houghton, the fluffiest, blondest non-celebrity 
celebrity of recent times. And now, if his press release is to be believed, a 
born-again pop hero.

It seems such an awfully long time ago now, the Preston and Chantelle romance, 
long enough ago anyway that Big Brother was still a cultural force, or, at 
least, still watched by significant numbers of people, and not in the awful 
embarrassing death throes it's currently experiencing nightly on Channel 4. 
Although when I look it up, I discover it wasn't long ago at all. It's only 
three years since Preston and Chantelle were ordained as the Burton and Taylor 
of the Heat generation, a will-they-won't-they affair that sprawled messily 
across the tabloids and finally culminated in a £300,000 wedding on the front 
cover of OK! (although this is "finally" in the celebrity sense, ie eight 
months later).

And then, for Preston at least, it all seemed to go a bit wrong. First there 
was an appearance on Never Mind the Buzzcocks in which he flounced off when 
Simon Amstell started reading extracts from Chantelle's autobiography. Then, 
when the marriage didn't quite work out, came Chantelle's revelations: she 
wasn't allowed to wear fake tan and make-up or, most heart-wrenchingly of all, 
"to watch soaps or TV after 8.30pm". And then, he quite simply vanished.

In fact, he went to America to cool his heels and regroup and the result is 
detailed on a press release that outlines his new album and change of musical 
direction: "'I am ready to be a pop star,' declares Preston, one time Ordinary 
Boy, now returning as a solo artist who is anything but ordinary. 'I want to be 
a pop star, and I'm going to do that on my own terms!' Having endured years of 
photocopied personalities and identikit pop idols, Preston is returning with 
his first solo album, Whatever Forever, to change all that."

Oh dear. According to his blog, he's been acting on the advice of a friend and 
pursuing a course of "silence, exile and cunning", but I'm not sure a couple of 
years of not giving interviews to Heat qualifies. Given his OK! marriage, and 
his OK! divorce, and his appearances in Chantelle's TV programme, Living the 
Dream (which possibly should have been subtitled Until Your Decree Nisi Comes 
Through), Siberia might have been more appropriate. And then I get a call to 
say he's fallen off his bike and fractured both his arms.

They're hanging uselessly in slings when I arrive so it's Abby, his new 
American girlfriend, who answers the door. Abby is a student Preston met in 
Philadelphia, the scene of his most recent exile, and after she graduates she 
tells me that she wants to do a Masters in library and archive science. It's 
fair to say that she's not an awful lot like Chantelle. But then Preston is not 
an awful lot like Preston either. For a start, he and everyone he knows calls 
him Sam (his first name). And secondly, he's perhaps the least likely person 
ever to have had an OK! wedding.

He's a self-described "nerd" who can bang on at length about his current 
passion for Richard Dawkins and the mysteries of evolution, and although he has 
the indie boy look with Love and Hate tattooed in what looks like child's 
writing on his toes, he's inescapably middle class. He has extensive rock 
star-style tattoos up his arms, but they include the Penguin logo and the seal 
of Châteauneuf-du-Pape, "because I love love love red wine. I was practically 
brought up on it".

It's the first interview he's done since his marriage and divorce and the 
split-up of the Ordinary Boys, and it all comes rushing out in a spate, a 
tangle of chronological confusions and jokes, and groans when I quote some of 
his old interviews back at him, and statements of contrition, and digressions 
about Dawkins or whatever, and here's the confounding thing - he's really 
nothing like I was expecting, not indie-boy sulky, or attempting to play it 
cool, he's just talkative and engaging, and he has a sense of humour about 
himself that, from reading his previous interviews, I wouldn't have even 
guessed at.

"You have to," he says. "You have to pip people to the post. And also I don't 
think it's a defence tactic so much as an actual realisation that I was absurd."

Preston grew up just a few miles down the road in Worthing, his American 
mother the daughter of a professor of English at Princeton university, his 
father the public school-educated great great great grandson of Earl Grey. He 
formed the Ordinary Boys in his teens with his friends from school. They had 
almost immediate critical success, sold 100,000 copies of their first album, 
Over The Counter Culture, and acquired a loyal band of die-hard indie-girl 
fans. So far, so good, but the album-tour-album-tour schedule had already 
started to wear thin when he got the call from Big Brother.

"I was doing the most depressing tour of my entire life. Opening for Paul 
Weller. I hated it. I would cry. I would genuinely cry. And then I got a call 
saying, 'Do you want to go onCelebrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> Big Brother? And I do love 
Big Brother. I think it's absolutely bizarre and weird. I remember seeing the 
first one on the screens in Leicester Square and thinking, 'This is the 
future,' and so, of course, I was like, 'OK.'"

The band, though, had other ideas.

"They hated it. They were like, 'No, no, you're not doing that.' And the thing 
is I'd been... I'd always let them... no, that's not the right term, I'd always 
encouraged everybody to do what they wanted. Maybe I was really controlling. 
Although I don't think I was. But maybe I was... So I was just, like, 'Look, 
I'll be fine. It'll be so funny. Imagine turning on the telly and seeing me!'"

In the end, they were both right. If it hadn't been for his on-screen 
flirtation with Chantelle, a 22-year-old Paris Hilton lookalike fromEssex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/essex>, who was put into the house as a 
"celebrity ringer" (she wasn't one, but then unless you happened to read NME, 
you wouldn't have heard of Preston either; even Mark Frith, the then editor of 
Heat, said he had no idea who he was when he walked into the house), he might 
have remained under the public radar. But he didn't. The romance filled the 
tabloids, Chantelle won the show, and by the time Preston was kicked out, the 
press excitement had propelled the Ordinary Boys into the Top 10 and secured 
them a sell-out gig at the Brixton Academy.

But the band still considered these mixed blessings. The week Preston left the 
house, the Ordinary Boys' guitarist told Heat: "We want to be respected for our 
music, not because our singer is on TV having a drunken fumble with a blonde."

Even then, Preston might have faded from view. He had a girlfriend, Camille, 
and nothing had actually happened with Chantelle. But then it did. "It was at 
the Brixton Academy, which was the biggest gig I'd ever done. And I think we 
just shared a kiss. I can't even remember why I did that. It was definitely the 
wrong thing to do. It was just so exciting. I knew that the kiss would lead to 
absolute thrills. I guess post-Big Brother it was all dying down around me, and 
this little kiss was making it all jump up again. But also I was taking a lot 
of sleeping pills and drinking, so I don't really know what I was thinking."

So, it was almost a bit contrived?

"I was, 'Yeah, I love her. I absolutely love the girl. And I'm like a little 
nerd. And she's a page 3 model.' At the time I thought it would be absurd not 
to do it. Obviously experience has taught me that that's not necessarily the 
case. Also the little interesting differences in culture and whatever, the 
things that set us apart, they were so endearing and cute at the beginning. I 
remember thinking I don't think I'll ever get bored of her cute little things. 
It hadn't occurred to me that she'd get absolutely infuriated by mine. She'd be 
like, 'Why do you have to overthink everything? Why are you acting like that? 
You must be gay. Are you gay?' And I'd be like, 'No I'm really not gay, I'm 
slightly camp, it's different.'

"I bought her, and I still can't believe this, I might as well have gouged out 
my own eyeballs with a rusty spoon, but I bought her a personalised number 
plate which was M155 LTD. Miss Living The Dream. We'd had an argument. And I 
thought what can I do, what can I do that she'd really like? But thinking about 
it now, it's just funny."

When they married, the Evening Standard asked: "Is it a modern fairytale? Or 
are we looking at the cynical union of two celebrity-obsessed souls so 
terrified of dwindling fame that they are willing to wrap their ill-considered 
lives around each other?" To most people there didn't seem much doubt. His 
ex-girlfriend, Camille, told the Mirror: "I'm surprised they got together 
because Chantelle and I are so different. We have different interests, 
personalities and backgrounds. He loved that I had a politics degree and a 
Masters. We sat for hours discussing politics and the state of the world, and 
had a real connection. Then he leaves me for someone so different."

It's not until I meet Preston that I appreciate just how different he and 
Chantelle were. He was brought up with books. His grandfather was an author. 
His brother, Alex Preston, has just been signed to Faber and his first novel is 
coming out next year, on the table is the new Dave Eggers which he's currently 
reading, and then there's his all-time hero, Will Self, who in recent years has 
also become his friend.

He's his "surrogate father figure" he says, the one who gave him the "silence, 
cunning and exile" maxim and who told him to kick the sleeping pills. Preston 
has written his own novel about a roadie in a "rather polite band", the writing 
style of which he says was in no small way influenced by Self. "I just love all 
that word play and laboured puns and to really overthink things," he says. 
"It's very much written from the experience of being in a very sensible band 
and having a roadie come in and say, 'Guys, I've got some coke!' And them 
saying, 'Oh right, I've just got myself some camomile tea actually, thanks.'"

This, then, is the background to his marriage to Chantelle. And it's hard to 
know how cynical the union was, or naive, or calculating, or impulsive. Or all 
of these things together. And it doesn't seem that Preston has quite worked it 
out either.

"It was a bit of a whirlwind. I don't know. Things seem to move faster when 
they're being written about in the tabloids. The whole thing, I'm well aware of 
the absurdity of the situation now, but it just didn't seem ... When you're 
caught up in it... It's so hard to know now. It did make sense in a way. I was 
the rock star with the eye-candy wife. But, of course, I wasn't a rock star. I 
was in a little indie band. And she wasn't a supermodel, she was a page 3 
model. It was such a Primark version. I was madly in love with her, though. The 
thing about that girl, she has this huge natural beauty. But she covers it up 
so well. She uses the same tricks ugly girls use, like tanning yourself orange 
and bleaching your hair. But when she'd just woken up in the mornings, when 
she's just totally natural, she looks like Brigitte Bardot - she's gorgeous."

It's genuinely fascinating hearing Preston talk about his OK! period, because 
it's like listening to one of your friends who'd just accidentally happened to 
become a celebrity for a month or so, and had the full-on Katie Price and Peter 
Andre wedding, and then afterwards simply gone back home and returned to 
normality. And although he's taken a huge step back from it, there's still some 
confusion in his own mind about it all: on one level he's appalled by his 
behaviour; on another, he's still fascinated by it.

He grew up with celebrity culture, and when he describes what it was like 
stepping into the pages of OK! it's like hearing him describe stepping through 
a Narnia-like portal to the Land of Glittering Success. "When you're entering 
into this whole world of magazine deals, you don't take it seriously because it 
is so surreal. I'm wary to say that I didn't take marriage seriously. Because 
obviously I do... But it's like having to turn up for a photo shoot or 
something."

Allied to this, he is, by his own definition, an attention-seeker. And the way 
he describes fame is not unlike his previous dependency on sleeping pills.

"It's really addictive. It really is. Even if you don't really want it, as 
soon it goes, you're just, like, 'What's wrong with me? Why don't you love me 
any more?' It's just an odd, odd beast. You feel like you've achieved it so you 
want to enjoy it. And when you allow yourself to enjoy it and to revel in it, 
it's just the most exhilarating thing."

But then, on the other hand, he says his greatest fear is to be famous for 
having been on Big Brother and not for actually doing anything. "I want to try 
and recategorise myself. To be famous for doing something good. That's the last 
thing I have yet to achieve. Which I know is quite a lot to ask."

It's rather easier this way around, isn't it, though? It's much harder to 
become famous through one's great talent than through a reality show. It is, he 
agrees, which is why he says he'll be "eternally grateful" to it, but also why 
he's spent the last two years working on his new album, Whatever, Forever

The website Popjustice has given it "the award for most surprising pop 
comeback/reinvention type thing of 2009", describing it as "elegant" and 
"stylised", as well as noting that Preston "no longer looks like the tramp who 
came last in a fight over the last sausage roll in the bins round the back of 
Greggs".

Certainly he's a talented lyricist and there's some fun to be had parsing the 
remnants of his marriage in lines like, "She's got a heart of gold, It's hard 
and cold..." And he's given up the sleeping pills. He says he'd been taking 
Zolpidem, a hypnotic, for several years, and the doctor had warned him that 
giving them up would take a long time and might not ever be fully possible. 
"But I was just so happy with the album, and I just decided to get healthy. So 
I gave up drinking and I cut them out."

I'm no judge if the record is going to be a hit or not, but it is upbeat and 
poppy, the sort of thing you can hum along to. And, in any case, Preston is 
obviously bright and witty and engaging. He tells funny anecdotes, he takes the 
piss out of himself. I have no doubt that he'll be back in some form or 
another. But,

I also feel a bit like Simon Amstell, the compere of Never Mind the Buzzcocks, 
who, when Preston walked out, said, "What? Do you think you can go on Big 
Brother and just get away with it?" At one point, he says of his friends: "I've 
got ones who think they are intellectuals to the point of being unbearably 
pretentious. It's all art installations and bizarre poetry. And they love Big 
Brother."

But you're treating it as some sort of ironic post-celebrity joke, I say.

"That's the only way to treat it perhaps. I genuinely believed that at one 
point."

Believed what?

"I genuinely thought I've infiltrated the celebrities! They think I'm one of 
them! Little do they know that I'm actually really weird and awkward!"

It's such a common trope, this, the person who thinks they're subverting 
something, only to become part of what it is they're trying to undermine.

"That's exactly what happened to me. But I'm still awkward and weird and I'm 
not going to stop being that. I'm not going to end up living in a sunbed. I did 
get dangerously close to the precipice, of falling in."

But having your wedding on the front cover of OK! is rather more than 
"dangerously close". Do you mean you were close to the precipice? Or had you 
actually fallen off?"

"I'm desperately crawling out even if it's giving me bloodied fingernails. I'm 
just praying that this record will save me."

The other thing, of course, is whether Chantelle thought an OK! wedding was 
some sort of great ironic post-celebrity joke. She really was living the dream. 
Although she now seems happy enough, having had the breast enlargement Preston 
begged her not to, dating footballers and, according to last week's papers, 
flirting with the newly single Peter Andre. She's been taken on by Jordan's old 
agent and seems to be trying to take over some of Katie's old territory.

But then, Preston, now 27, is living his dream, too. Growing up in Worthing, 
Brighton was the fabulous mecca just down the road, and he's now living in what 
he calls his "dream flat", a comfortable, stylish but not huge maisonette in 
central Brighton ("Me and Chantelle lived two streets away in a stupidly large 
house"). And although Abby grimaces at the mention of a Chantelle-era tattoo he 
still has on his chest ("Baby, I Love You"), he's had an "Abby" inscribed on 
his calf which seems to have reassured her.

In the past, Preston has spoken about people off Big Brother who "have their 
two months of fame then the rest of their life is teetering on the edge of 
failure, whether it's a career in pantomime or being forced to admit to deeper 
personal tragedy. I've never cheapened myself like that. My integrity has 
remained."

"Uh oh," he says when I remind him of this. "Maybe I shouldn't have allowed 
myself to be the judge of that. I don't really know how to respond to that. 
What gets me into trouble is that I just say these absurd things."

He does. But it's part of his charm. And I agree with him when he says, "That 
whole OK! thing; I thought I could do something clever with it. And actually 
there was no leeway at all and I ended up doing something very very stupid."

It was pretty stupid. But nobody died and Preston, or "Sam" as I now think of 
him - in a Katie Price-versus-Jordan sort of way, Sam being the sensible one 
who reads literary novels and goes to the pub with his mates, Preston being the 
unhinged exhibitionist who marries models - is perhaps one of the few people 
who could do it and have enough self-knowledge to make something interesting of 
it.

• The single, "Dressed to Kill", is released on 16 August
 