 It was the night before the German grand prix, and David Coulthard was doing 
the ironing. This is not something you would expect to read in connection with 
the great heroes of motor racing history. Who could imagine the Marques Alfonso 
de Portago y Cabeza - Ferrari driver of the 50s, Olympic fencer, bobsleigh 
champion and legendary lover - doing the domestic chores?
But the times are different, and so is David Coulthard, the courteous, 
unassuming and thoroughly sensible 29-year-old Scottish grand prix driver who 
hit the front pages three months ago when he pulled his fiancée from the 
wreckage of a private jet in which the pilot and co-pilot had perished. 
Coulthard is different from the heroes of the mythical past, different even 
from his contemporaries. And different, some say, from the David Coulthard that 
he used to be.

A year ago Coulthard would have stuffed his dirty washing in a hotel laundry 
bag and called down to get it picked up. If a friend asked him which hotel he 
was in, he would probably have needed to consult his key tag. This year, all 
that has changed. Instead of leapfrogging from hotel to hotel, now Coulthard 
parks a large blue and white motorhome - the colours of his racing helmet, 
patterned on the flag of St Andrew - in a corner of the pad dock. In the 
virtual world of Bernie Ecclestone's formula one, this looks very much like one 
man's way of restoring a bit of normality to his life.

"That's absolutely correct," he says, sitting in the office of his father's 
haulage company in Twynholm, a village half an hour's drive from Dumfries. And, 
with telling clarity, he recalls the decisive moment. "One day, about two years 
ago, I was at a test session in France, at the Magny Cours circuit, and I felt 
absolutely lifeless. I remember finishing early and checking in at the hotel 
and asking at the reception, 'What is there to do in this area?' And the guy 
didn't have an answer for me because there was nothing to do. Magny Cours is in 
the middle of nowhere. I went to my room. I had a book to read but I had no 
motivation to do that, and there was no one that I particularly wanted to talk 
to on the phone. I thought, what am I doing? It just felt like I was giving 
away part of my life to ... nothing. That's when I decided to get the 
motorhome."

Racing drivers don't often talk like this. More usually, they want you to know 
what a great time they had with a bunch of supermodels at that party in Milan 
last week, or how fast their new speedboat will go. Coulthard is indeed engaged 
to be married to a model, the very thin and very blonde Heidi Wichlinksi, and 
his current salary is around £5m a year but he seems to have held on to the 
sort of self-questioning modesty that befits his solid upbringing in a village 
where the name of Seaman Thos W Coulthard RN is on the memorial to the victims 
of the 1914-18 war.

 "I suppose this is slightly bizarre," he says, "but last weekend at 
Hockenheim I was in the motorhome alone because Heidi was working, and I did 
some laundry. I did some ironing - I haven't ironed in a long time. I guess it 
doesn't sound very glamorous, but I thoroughly enjoyed ironing a pair of 
trousers and watching the telly and getting myself ready for the next day. I 
like organising my own little environment. I can invite into it those I want to 
be there and keep out those I don't."

 Along with the desire to reclaim a bit of his life this year came a deter 
mination to rid himself of the reputation for lacking a mean streak on the 
track, largely the result of his honourable behaviour in Australia in 1998, 
when he stuck by the terms of a pre-race agreement and moved aside to let his 
team-mate, Mika Hakkinen, win the race. "I went through a period when I was 
perceived as being a soft touch, somebody who moves over, who is not hungry 
enough to win," he says.

Some suggest the ordeal of the air crash added a final touch of steely 
resolution to his character. He is reluctant to discuss the event and its 
consequences, unwilling to do anything that might cause further distress to the 
families of the two men who died, but in any case such a melodramatic claim 
crumbles under scrutiny. Since the accident he has indeed won two races, but he 
had won at Silverstone immediately before it.

Tall, slender and unusually square-jawed, Coulthard can look - sitting in his 
car during a practice session, wearing his flameproof balaclava - like a 
Burne-Jones knight on the eve of battle. He has been racing since his father 
put him in a go-kart at the age of eight, he made his formula one debut in 
1994, as Damon Hill's team-mate, and he currently stands second in the 
championship, which intensifies the requirement for him to fit endless 
sponsorship commitments around his schedule. And now, in Twynholm, his father 
has opened a small David Coulthard museum. But the image side of the grand prix 
world is not his thing. "I go through periods when I think that, other than on 
the track, this isn't really very much fun," he says. "It's having to try to 
deal with the constant questioning when things aren't going very well, people 
poking you to try and get a response and perhaps taking you close to the edge 
emotionally."

He lives in Monaco, like several of his rivals. "It's a very closed, 
controlled environment," he says, with evident approval. "When you're there you 
don't get any reminders that you're a grand prix driver. But every other 
Thursday, when I walk through into the paddock at a grand prix, and there are 
1,000 cameras there, the reality comes back - this is the part of this world 
that I don't like, but I have to endure it because it gets me to the bit I do 
enjoy."

As a man to whom being grown-up means being in control of his emotions, he 
dislikes leaping around on the victory rostrum but does it because that's what 
the photographers want. "I think, why the hell do I have to be a showman? But 
then I realise that the reason you get the opportunity to do this is because of 
the public's dream that it must be fantastic to do this job, and they want to 
see that it's fantastic. They want to live it through you. I haven't quite 
sussed that part out yet, and I don't know if I ever will."

One part he may be getting sussed out is the significance of personal 
conflict, a vital factor in formula one's vast box-office appeal. As a boy, 
Coulthard watched on television as Mansell, Prost, Senna and Piquet fought 
often ill-tempered battles. Now he and Michael Schumacher are indulging in an 
acrimonious run ning squabble of their own. Two years ago, after a couple of 
mid-race collisions, Schumacher accused Coulthard of trying to kill him. This 
season the German and the Scot have tangled again. "It makes life a wee bit 
interesting," he says, without giving the impression that he enjoys it.

So what does he really think of Schumacher? "Two different things. As a man I 
think he's a decent guy, a family man, quite straightforward. Given the hero 
worship and his vast wealth, it would be very easy for him not to be quite as 
normal as he is, privately. Publicly, as a racing driver, I'm not entirely 
comfortable with his inability to realise that he does make mistakes and it's 
not always someone else who's entirely to blame.

"I had a conversation with him last year, and I said: 'In your home, are you 
always right and your wife is always wrong?' He went: 'No, no, that's 
different.'

"I said: 'It's not different. It's values. It's understanding what right and 
wrong are. I believe I have those values and you clearly don't. Now we can 
leave this room today and never speak to each other again, and I'll have a 
happy life and you'll have a happy life, but it would be a shame because we 
live in the same world, as competitors, and part of the enjoyment I get from 
competing is to look my fellow competitors in the eye. The human side is very 
important.'

"He had to agree on that and we shook hands and walked away. Until the next 
time we fell out."

Their latest spat erupted when Coulthard complained about Schumacher's habit 
of weaving across the track. For a couple of races they didn't talk to each 
other but before the grand prix in Germany 10 days ago, Schumacher made an 
unexpected move. "It was a bit like what happens after two kids have fallen out 
in the playground. Eventually the one who thinks that maybe he was a little bit 
wrong makes the gesture of coming back and saying, 'Do you want a sweetie?' As 
we were coming out of one of the corners in the forest, Michael tapped me on 
the shoulder and said: 'Do you think there should be a kerb on the outside of 
this corner?' There was absolutely no need for a kerb at that part of the 
circuit. But I took it as his gesture at trying to start the conversation 
again. And I accepted it."

He will retire to start a "normal life", he says, when he loses the buzz he 
experiences before a race, when he gets "as nervous as I did when I was 11". 
But losing his nerve is unlikely to play a part. "I think some guys will 
probably never get fear in their whole lives, and other guys will get it. I 
think in Damon's case, he came up against fear. At Hockenheim last year I 
remember him saying to me, 'I can't do this any more.' I was pretty shocked. I 
was thinking, God, we've still got a few races to go - if you're saying that, 
why not stop now? Why take the risk? There are considerable risks in doing 
these speeds, and if you don't see that as a challenge and a thrill, then it's 
got to be too frightening. I never want to put myself in a position where I'm 
frightened. I just don't do things that frighten me."
 