
For many of us, there’s a time before you know the amount actors are being 
paid to perform off-Broadway, and then there’s the time after. The first, more 
innocent life is full of breezy trips to wonderful shows, the occasional 
standing ovation, a flush of pleasure when an old favorite wins an award. How 
happy everyone is at the curtain call! How delighted we all are to have come 
together for art, for entertainment, for something beautiful!

Your life after is a bit less breezy. I remember when someone first told me 
that actors in a show I had seen were taking home less than $500 a week. These 
were the bright lights of the theatre; I was at a prestigious venue; I had paid 
more than $100 to be there. What the hell?

When Hollywood meets Broadway: the big star's fatal attraction to theater
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/21/broadway-cast-hollywood-star-theater-stage>
As happens every few years, Actors Equity, which represents actors and stage 
managers, is renegotiating its off-Broadway contract, which technically expired 
on 6 November. In outline this contract governs a host of practices and 
financial minimums for people producing off-Broadway. Within Equity, a pressure 
group called Fair Wage Onstage has moved the union position toward asking for a 
historic increase in the minimum permitted salary. Currently the graduated 
agreement  
<https://owa.tcg.org/owa/redir.aspx?SURL=AWQJZve-QPR4LUGARqLjcDa_lqtn-mPorTLqPZ4EYnbyMPF2jArUCGgAdAB0AHAAOgAvAC8AdwB3AHcALgBhAGMAdABvAHIAcwBlAHEAdQBpAHQAeQAuAG8AcgBnAC8AYQBnAHIAZQBlAG0AZQBuAHQAcwAvAGEAZwByAGUAZQBtAGUAbgB0AF8AaQBuAGYAbwAuAGEAcwBwAD8AaQBuAGMAPQA1ADIAMAA.&URL=http%3a%2f%2fwww.actorsequity.org%2fagreements%2fagreement_info.asp%3finc%3d520>
allows small theatres (under 199 seats) to pay actors $593 a week, and though 
minimums increase as the house size increases, many off-Broadway contracts pay 
this amount.

Though negotiations are ongoing – they’ve been extended to 20 November – the 
Fair Wage folk have gone on record saying a take-home minimum of $815 a week 
would be a livable income in New York where, they hardly need point out, the 
cost of living is excruciatingly high. For an accounting of where that number 
comes from, I encourage you to read Fair Wage Onstage’s ownwebsite 
<http://fairwageonstage.org/> and to watch one of the group’s many testimonial 
videos (this one fromRobert Stanton 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wYw1W_qYix4> being the most financially 
specific).

But several anonymous sources with knowledge of negotiations have noted that 
management seems very far from agreeing to that goal. The recent presidential 
and congressional election results may have a chilling impact. As Jonathan 
Bank, artistic director of the Mint, put it: “There’s a lot of uncertainty 
right now. No one feels fat enough to make what might be existentially 
threatening increases, though really that’s always true.”

The Mint isn’t in these negotiations, as it’s a microbudget outfit compared 
with the ones in the Off Broadway League. But Bank thinks there will be a 
trickle-down effect – and that it may have already started. The contract has 
historically covered commercial productions and the so-called Big Six: 
non-profit theatres Playwrights Horizons, Signature Theater Company, the Public 
Theater, Second Stage, Atlantic Theater Company andNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> Theater Workshop.

But in an odd development, this year the ANTC theaters (Association of 
Non-Profit Theater Companies) have folded their negotiations in with the Off
Broadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> League, despite having 
budgets only a fraction the size. To make the most extreme comparison, the 
Public’s budget this year is near $40m, while the Women’s Project Theater, an 
ANTC theatre, has an annual budget that can dip well under a million. How can 
one salary minimum cover both? Anonymous sources on both sides seem bewildered 
– I have heard elements of both constituencies claim that this “packaging” of 
these wildly divergent organizations was the other side’s idea. So what’s true?

Did you know that Off-Broadway salaries are often below minimum wage?! Join me 
and sign this petition to show your support for higher wages! Everyone deserves 
a living wage! #FairWageOnStage #LinkInBio to the full video on my Facebook 
page and a link to the petition! <https://www.instagram.com/p/BMcrWPEAlcC/>

A video posted by Lupita Nyong'o (@lupitanyongo) on Nov 5, 2016 at 5:10pm PDT

People are scared to talk about these issues on the record, especially while 
negotiations are ongoing. Of course they are – theatre in New York is a tiny 
community. Actors and stage managers don’t want to complain about pay, because 
it’s not fun to anger your collaborators; artistic directors love their actors 
and don’t want to publicly deny them anything. Participants in the ongoing 
talks are prohibited from making any comment at all. Equity has no comment 
until the negotiations are concluded. Producers are likewise keeping silent.

Still, and as part of their activism, several of the spokespeople for Fair 
Wage Onstage shared their financial struggles. Nick Westrate won a Drama Desk 
Award for sustained achievement in a year in which he acted in four 
off-Broadway plays – a year that forced him into bankruptcy. In a conversation 
with an unnamed producer, Westrate says, he did broach the issue. “I asked, 
‘When are you going to pay us more money?’ and this person said, ‘As soon as 
you ask me to.’”

Diane Davis, another actor, sees the demand as going beyond a mere request for 
a raise. “It’s not so much about money as it is about dignity and living,” she 
says. “There’s a real humiliation I feel about the money I make on these 
contracts. As much as I believe artistic directors value me as an artist, the 
action lies in what they’re paying you.”

Davis’s statement gets to the heart of the issue: the “fair” part rather than 
the “wage” part. Watching the many, many videos on the Fair Wage website, you 
realize how the optics of big new theatres (the Signature) and new lobbies (the 
Public and the Atlantic) feel to performers. Says Stanton: “I don’t want to rob 
Peter to pay Paul, but I look at the high production values, and I look at 
capital campaigns for things like lobbies, and I look at where we are in terms 
of priority.” One actor who also works as a technician at places like the New 
York Theater Workshop told me, anonymously, “From a tech point of view, I see 
design decisions get made that are impractical. I’m all about room to fail, but 
sometimes you’re building a set element that you know is costing $15,000 and 
they say, ‘Let’s try something else.’ And then they spend $10,000 fixing the 
$15,000 thing! People are allowed a budget for experimentation on a scale that 
completely dwarfs what the actors are getting paid.”

Why Hamilton is making musical history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/05/why-hamilton-is-making-musical-history>
What’s clear is the sense of despair – and the way that the movement itself 
has accelerated it. One actor, while avowing his total support for the Fair 
Wage Onstage campaign, admitted that the conversation around it might be 
driving him out of the theatre. “If the people at the peak of the profession 
are in these financial straits,” he said, “why stay in a profession that values 
our work so little?” A stage manager who works constantly (49 weeks last year), 
said she never manages to feel ahead financially. “It’s inspiring to watch 
collective action,” she said of the Fair Wage movement. “It’s so important! But 
it’s also depressing. I spend a lot of time with management, and this 
negotiation is really difficult for the smaller places. But the Signature has a 
huge operating budget. It’s just – how is the money distributed.”

The off-Broadway contract isn’t, of course, the only contract that Equity 
strikes with theatres. The series of regional (or LORT) contracts covers 
theatres outside New York, as well as some Broadway non-profits like Lincoln 
Center and ManhattanTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Club. 
Ryan McCarthy, an actor working on a LORT-D contract at Arkansas Repertory 
Theater, is getting $700 a week, which is the minimum ($637 a week) plus 10%, 
so the theatre covers his agent fee. Outside New York this “plus-10” is common 
and, he said, “Some people do pay well above minimum,” referring to the 
regional theatres. Paying above minimum, as far as I could determine from my 
sources, doesn’t happen in New York.

It’s this refusal to go above the minimum no matter the situation that I found 
most shocking. When Elevator Repair Service brought Gatz to the Public, for 
instance, the actors were stunned to find out what their salary would be. Says 
Ben Williams, who has been with the show since the beginning, “I was offered 
this Equity contract through the Public’s liaison – and it was $539 a week. I 
was so naive,” he laughs, “I wrote them back and said, ‘I can’t do it!’ I 
thought I could negotiate a better contract for me, for all of us! I said, 
‘Come on, this is a show that’s toured the world. We’ve had a huge review – 
we’d just been in the Sydney Opera House and the tickets there were over $130. 
It’s a proven hit!’ And by that point we’d been doing the shows for six years. 
The least we’d been paid up to that point was $600 a week, and that was when we 
were doing it for donations at the door at the Performing Garage.” Needless to 
say, he didn’t manage to negotiate a higher rate.

“We talk often and loudly about how we believe the Equity rates are much too 
low. We’ve asked for more and they’ve said no,” said ERS producer Ariana Smart 
Trueman. I ask her to repeat this: the off-Broadway theatres ERS has worked 
with have explicitly said no? She confirms it. “Part of how our co-production 
agreements are structured, we get a guarantee. We have said, ‘Instead of giving 
us a large guarantee, just give our actors more!’ They say no, we can’t set 
that precedent.”

So ERS comes up with other ways to help their company. “We pay higher per 
diems, or we pay higher than Equity minimums when we’re the producer. We also 
cover or split childcare costs while we’re rehearsing and performing. We don’t 
want to create a culture in which people have to make sacrifices; we want 
people to feel relaxed when they’re working with us. For an organization that 
produces a season of many different pieces with changing groups of artists – I 
suppose they don’t have that same incentive. But I firmly believe if they make 
that commitment, they could do it. We made a decision about our culture, and 
off-Broadway theatres could too.”

 So little ERS is doing its best to help. And the little Mint, says Jonathan 
Bank, is trying to help as well – though he’s adamant that he couldn’t double 
the salary he offers. “If the position of the union is that we need to 
fundraise better, that’s not particularly realistic. We’re all fundraising as 
best we can!” But even at the low rates the Mint pays, Bank thinks constantly 
about ways to take care of actors within the theatre’s limited means. The 
Equity-determined contribution to health insurance, for instance, is around 
$190 a week. Eleven weeks of work gets an actor six months of health insurance, 
so sometimes Bank might hire someone as an understudy to tide her over to the 
magical 11-week mark.

“What I do is inefficient, and I think everybody’s better off because of that 
inefficiency,” Bank said. So yes, small theatres with small budgets are often 
wildly creative in their efforts to balance survival and fairness. Still, it 
remains mystifying why these little organizations should be lumped together 
with the Big Six, where the financial landscape is so very different.

I write this at a time when many in the New York theatre are feeling bruised 
by the national election. It’s been a clarifying time. It’s also, as it turns 
out, a moment to take real action. No one is under any illusions about the 
finances of off-Broadway theatres, and many theatres simply can’t pay more. But 
some can. These negotiations aren’t just negotiations any more; they’re a way 
to send a message about what’s at the core of our art. In the theatre, of all 
places, we should take care of our people.
 