
Far more important than Jamie Reid’s motives for resigning (by their exit 
strategies shall ye know them…) is the upcoming bellwether contest in his 
Copeland seat – a first acid test of Labour’s post-referendum prospects in a 
“Labour-leave” seat (Corbyn critic quits and triggers election test for Labour, 
22 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
). Labour’s chances will stand or fall on the party’s ability to articulate – 
finally – a position on Brexit that’s both principled and comprehensible.

Something like: “We believed in June, and still believe today, that leaving 
the EU is a disastrous choice for Britain. We make no apologies for that 
conviction. But we acknowledge the outcome of the referendum. And precisely 
because we hold the convictions we do, you can trust us to fight for the best 
possible deal for Brexit – one that protects jobs, will not sell out workers’ 
and consumers’ rights or the environment, and recognises that Britain’s 
prosperity depends on amicable relations with our fellow Europeans – our 
closest neighbours, our historic allies and our biggest trading partners. We 
understand how much uncontrolled immigration concerns voters and we will put 
forward a policy that is humane and realistic”.

Voters – even those who don’t agree with every sentiment – will reward clarity 
and honesty, just as they will punish (continuing) incoherence and evasiveness. 
Furthermore, provided Labour don’t select a leave candidate – a suicidal and 
self-defeating choice which would reap absolutely no electoral dividend – those 
centre-left voices calling for a progressive alliance must renew our call for 
unity among anti-Tory, anti-Ukip, anti-hard-Brexit forces. By choosing not to 
field a candidate in a contest where they stand no chance, the Lib Dems can 
demonstrate greater political maturity thanLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> did with their futile candidacy 
in Richmond Park last month.

For the Green party <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/green-party> this 
will be more difficult, given their opposition to nuclear power and the 
certainty of a pro-nuclear Labour candidate. But the far bigger prize of 
holding down May’s majority should be worth swallowing even that bitter pill.
Professor Barry Langford
Royal Holloway, University of London

• Steve Richards argues persuasively for “taking back control” being a slogan 
for the left (Opinion, 20 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/take-back-control-slogan-left-power-right-state-intervention>
), but there is a great flaw at the heart of his case: there is no practical 
definition of the “left” that is today capable of supporting his case. Labour, 
in its belief that it owned the left, relied on that massive bloc of voters 
that identified itself by class, trade union membership or employment, and 
automatically voted for the party.

As a group those voters have gone. Heavy industry has all but disappeared, the 
unions, faced with adverse economic conditions, cannot preserve jobs and are 
themselves struggling; and class solidarity is drifting increasingly towards 
identification with rightwing parties, primarily Ukip or, as most vividly in 
Scotland, with nationalist parties. This misalignment of Labour’s core voters 
with the party’s views is far from being new, but Labour took their votes for 
granted until it was too late.

Now there is the great paradox that these electors want low prices, but reject 
the dependence on imports from lower-wage economies overseas, or from the 
employment of new immigrants. It is similar to deploring the disappearance of 
the corner shop, but steadfastly shopping at the supermarket. The “right”, 
whether Ukip or even much of the Conservative party, can mouth slogans, but 
their world is a chimera and their appeal is fraudulent. The past, as this 
swathe of good, solid citizens remembers it, has gone and cannot return in the 
same form. What is needed is a commitment to long-term support for different 
but worthwhile jobs, for domestic policies that provide the basis for 
rebuilding local communities, and for an emphasis on human values that do not 
depend on high earning.

It is not easy to combat selfishness – particularly when a few earn shamefully 
high salaries while average wages decline in real terms – but there is no 
stability nor worthwhile future if we do not succeed.
Michael Meadowcroft
Leeds

• As a Christmas present to Jeremy Corbyn’s critics, you headline a report 
from a group of Labour MPs hostile to Corbyn, rightwingers you refer to as 
“moderates” (‘No passion’ – swing voters’ damning verdict on Corbyn and Labour 
party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/23/labour-mps-must-isolate-themselves-from-jeremy-corbyn-says-report>
, 24 December). The report is based on focus groups of Ukip sympathisers and – 
surprise, surprise – advises those same MPs to “isolate from Jeremy”. Just what 
they want to hear. You then repeat playground insults from the same source.

Any disarray or disunity in the party is the responsibility of those MPs. They 
attack Corbyn and John McDonnell day after day, refusing to promote party 
policy on jobs, housing, transport or the NHS, the core concerns of those they 
should represent. They offer no support, in parliament or outside. Worst of 
all, they show contempt for the hundreds of thousands of new members, mainly 
Corbyn supporters, who have made Labour the largest political party in Europe.

This bunch of political losers are intent on the destruction of a Labour party 
they cannot control.
Ken Loach
Sixteen Films, London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 