
After a seemingly endless summer break of 75 days, two hours and nine minutes, 
weekends have at last a purpose again: Europe's best-supported*, 
highest-scoring** and most deliciously random league is back on Friday night 
with champions Wolfsburg taking on contenders VfB Stuttgart. But for one 
unlucky manager, the first game of the 2009-10 campaign has already come too 
late. On Monday, newly-promoted Mainz 05 fired their head coach Jorn Andersen 
after a shock defeat in the German FA Cup against VfL Lübeck and a dreadful 
pre-season that has seen a pile-up of injuries. No one has ever lost his job 
this early in the history of the league, not evenPeter Neururer 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Neururer>.

Andersen, if dressing-room whispers are to be believed, had behaved 
increasingly erratic in recent weeks. He banned all family photos from lockers 
in order that players should "concentrate properly", spent more time golfing 
than on the training pitch and had turned into a bit of a caricature dictator. 
"We know we can only survive in this league with great team spirit, that's why 
we had to make this decision now," explained the general manager Christian 
Heidel.

The youth coach Thomas Tuchel has now taken over. But Mainz are probably 
doomed either way and likely to be relegated alongside Hannover (no new 
players, no confidence in manager Dieter Hecking), Gladbach (not enough 
quality) or perhaps even Frankfurt (more stagnant and lifeless than the Dead 
Sea). Perennial scrappers Bochum will definitely be at the wrong side of the 
table again, too, and are set to answer the curious "DO YOU FOOTBALL" slogan on 
their chest enthusiastically in the negative: their shirts even come ina 
pre-stained, always-dirty look <http://www.vfl-bochum.de/fanshop/index.htm>. 
It's an excellent idea, this. Imagine what a bit of fake muck might do for the 
popularity of Berbatov, Adebayor et al in the Premier League.

Bavarian traditionalists, meanwhile, can sleep easy again. Malicious rumours 
of orange away shirts for the moderately Dutchified, Louis van Gaal-trained
Bayern Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> have been 
wide of the mark. Their new little number, with its grey collar and weird 
pin-stripes, has a whiff of Burger King uniform about it, but is at least 
reassuringly white.

Sixteen out of 18 Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> managers polled see 
Bayern as firm championship favourites, only Freiburg's Robin Dutt ("Hamburg, 
Leverkusen, Bayern and Wolfsburg all have new coaches, one has to see how 
things pan out") and Van Gaal himself beg to differ. "My aim is to win a trophy 
– and produce better football," he said. "I don't think that it will be very 
easy. We'll have to fight very hard for the league." Van Gaal's first match in 
charge on Saturday evening will take him to last season's surprise package TSG 
Hoffenheim.

As is their want, Bayern have treated themselves to a spot of retail therapy 
after their second trophy-less season in three years. A net sum of €50m (£42m) 
has been spent on new recruits but unlike this column, they crucially forgot to 
start from the back. Instead of bringing in a goalkeeper worthy of the name and 
a decent right-back, €35m went towards addressing a problem that didn't exist. 
In Mario Gómez (Stuttgart), they have signed their third tall, slightly 
immobile centre-forward. He's good, no doubt, but it was a classic impulse buy 
from general manager Uli Hoeness, bereft of any imagination, simply borne out 
of fear that somebody else might get him.

The former manager Ottmar Hitzfeld foresees plenty of friction in the dressing 
room, especially from Luca Toni who he perceives as "a world champion of 
discontent". Franz Beckenbauer, on the other hand, thinks this is "the best 
Bayern squad of all time". A bizarre assessment, or sarcasm of the bleakest, 
cruellest type, who can tell? Next week, "Der Kaiser" will claim the squad's 
not good enough to beat Upper Giesing, the local amateur side. It'll be also 
interesting to see how Franck Ribéry will take to his new designated position 
at the tip of a midfield diamond. The Frenchman will stay for another 
inglorious quarter-final exit in the Champions League before moving to Real 
Madrid next year.

The fact that the Bundesliga has managed to hold on to all the big-name 
players with the exception of Diego (Juventus, €25m) bodes very well for the 
season. Stuttgart, who welcome back the home-sick Alex Hleb and have signed 
Pavel Pogrebniak from Zenit St Petersburg, will be a formidable outfit and 
grade A Meisterschaft material. The same is true of Hamburg under Bruno 
Labbadia (insert your ownUmlaut-based joke 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0889583/> here, if you're inclined that way) and 
maybe Hoffenheim, again. You can't even discount Wolfsburg, even though playing 
in the Champions League will probably take its toll. Bremen, Dortmund (watch 
out for new Argentinian goal machine Lucas Barrios), Hertha and Leverkusen 
could all feasibly finish third, too. There are hardly enough also-rans to go 
around this time; all those nice, middle-class sides who used to turn the other 
cheek when richer neighbours or plebeian street fighters from the relegation 
gutter come to town, have somehow disappeared. You're either a potential 
Champions League side or 2. Bundesliga fodder in this league.

Schalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> 04, however, will be 
neither. Their manager Felix Magath has found only cobwebs in the Royal Blues' 
safe and downscaled his ambition in a desperate attempt to manage expectations. 
"I want to win the championship, but I don't know when that'll be," he said. 
"When I talk about making it into Europe, there's a lot of hope involved." Last 
year's Meistertrainer has been severely frustrated by the lack of quality in 
this one-paced, utterly mediocre side. Last weekend in the cup, TV cameras 
caught him loudly querying whether his men on the pitch had "shit in the brain".

But Schalke have potentially even bigger problems. A few days ago 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2009/aug/04/schalke-anthem-muhammad-protests-islam>
, a couple of Turkish newspapers somewhat belatedly discovered a curious 
passage in S04's club song that has been sung in Gelsenkirchen since 1963. 
"Muhammad was a prophet who doesn't understand football," the fans chant every 
week before kick-off, "but out of all the beautiful colours, he chose blue and 
white." (It barely rhymes in German, in case you wondered) "Out of thin air" 
(Frankfurter Rundschau), Schalke have received more than 200 threatening emails 
that demand an end to this practice. "Jihad on Schalke," wrote Süddeutsche 
Zeitung about a wave of protest that has been taken serious enough by the club 
to get the police and federal authorities involved. An expert in Islamic 
theology has also been consulted.

There are no logical reasons for the Muhammad reference in the song, only the 
suspicion that the composer Hans J König was inspired by another obscure, 
folkloristic piece that mentioned the prophet's affinity to the colour green. 
The large Turkish contingent among the Schalke supporters has certainly never 
taken any offence to these harmless lines before; even the articles in the 
Turkish press were actually rather benign. The sudden outrage feels very 
manufactured. The question is: by whom?

At least one website frequented by German Islamic activists has distributed 
the email template used by most of the protesters but some Schalke fans suspect 
right-wing extremists have orchestrated the whole affair to stir up resentment. 
One can only hope that everybody concerned will soon be far too aggrieved by 
the Royal Blues' poor performances to care about the infidel song, because a 
fully-fledged "fatwa on Schalke" (taz) would pose organisational problems. As 
much as Magath might enjoy going underground and turning up unannounced at the 
odd match or two with a beautiful lady on his arm, it's just not a feasible 
arrangement.

* average attendance was 41,900 last season, a new record for the seventh 
consecutive season.

** the Bundesliga has seen the highest number of goals per game compared to 
the other four big leagues in each year since 1989.
 