
Cosmetic surgery is a consumer practice yoked to fantasies of personal 
transformation. It is addictive insofar as, if it goes well, people want more, 
and if it goes badly, they need more. The General Medical Council hasproposed a 
series of guidelines for cosmetic surgery 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-33029250>, including a mandatory cooling-off 
period between the initial consultation and committing to the procedure.

This is the culmination of an ongoing effort on the part of the British 
Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (Baaps) and the British Association 
of Plastic Surgeons (Baps) to educate the public, including the understanding 
that cosmetic surgery is real surgery. But it’s a struggle to make the public 
recognise the medical reality of a practice both marketed and experienced 
(emotionally, ideologically, economically) as a facet of consumer culture along 
with consumer culture’s attendant fantasies of euphoric fulfilment and minimal 
risk.

Patients frame their cosmetic surgeries as consumer rather than medical 
choices, covered by discretionary income. Surgeons are well aware that their 
patients often are deciding between, say, breast implants and a summer holiday 
or a down payment on a new car.

The practice has nothing in common with beauty treatments; it’s real surgery, 
not a bloodless day at the beauty salon

While requiring a cooling-off period is no doubt largely intended to derail 
the intense push on the part of any unscrupulous practitioners to get people to 
sign on the dotted line immediately or risk losing that astonishing discounted 
price on a life-altering lipo/lift combination, one might ask how such mandated 
reflection will ultimately benefit any of us craving the rush of body-morphing 
retail therapy. Following the initial consultation, how long is long enough for 
patients to reflect – research the procedures, talk it over with friends and 
family? Or does it even matter?

In 2011, Groupon was censured for a promotional email 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/nov/23/groupon-cosmetic-surgery-ad-banned>
 offering discounted breast implants from a clinic in Manchester to those who 
signed up “by midnight.” Baaps and the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) 
maintained that it was unethical to market a medical procedure with significant 
risks as if it were a visit to a spa or a discounted entrée at a new 
restaurant. A three-day turn-around time eventually was deemed more reasonable. 
But consider that it’s still acceptable for cosmetic surgery to be marketed 
through Groupon – where, frankly, I’ve never found deals on gall bladder 
surgery or an appendectomy.

A cooling-off period certainly makes sense. After all, dazzled by the prospect 
of a great deal on, say, a tummy-tuck, the patient is distracted from the 
medical fine print about haematomas, scarring, and death. The GMC is also 
taking measures to enable consumers to check the qualifications of everyone 
practicing cosmetic surgical and nonsurgical (fillers, Botox) procedures. But, 
typically, the less-qualified practitioners charge less and so even 
well-informed patients, who could not otherwise pay for the interventions they 
crave, might go with what’s affordable. As the president of the American 
Society of Plastic Surgery, Dr Scot Bradley Glasberg, observed: “Price is 
usually the impetus to go to someone less trained.” Based on before-and-after 
data, however, Glasberg is highly optimistic that educating the public prevents 
misunderstandings regarding both the actual limits of surgical transformations 
and the risks.

“Be careful what you wish for” is what I say to the board-certified surgeons 
of Baps and Baaps and their American counterparts. We can strive to educate the 
public that cosmetic surgery (especially when surgical) has nothing in common 
with beauty treatments; that it’s real surgery, not a bloodless day at the 
beauty salon. But the practice of cosmetic surgery, including its wild success, 
is tied to consumer fantasy not medical reality. The central premise of 
cosmetic surgery is that it triumphs over the constraints of the flesh. Even 
many of its opponents represent cosmetic surgery as miraculous, a temptation to 
be resisted.

Arguably, if patients fully appreciated the limits of surgical interventions, 
they would be less likely to seek it as the solution to their woes. Dr Neal R 
Reisman, president of the Aesthetic Surgery Education and Research Foundation, 
the research and education arm of the American Society for Aesthetic Plastic 
Surgery, says that a red flag for plastic surgeons is someone who has 
experienced recent trauma – say, a divorce, loss of a job, or the death of a 
spouse or child, and is in search of a quick fix for her pain. In such cases, 
thoughtful surgeons recommend that the patient wait a few months and 
reconsider. But the patient’s conviction that they can heal the inside through 
manipulating the outside reveals that choosing cosmetic interventions is never 
rationally motivated. There are so many other ways to try and feel better (from 
psychological and religious counselling to a bottle of vodka) – what led them 
to the cosmetic surgeon’s door in the first place? And what about the more 
general and arguably cumulative trauma, of not being good-looking enough in a 
society preoccupied with physical appearance? What is the recommended waiting 
period for that?

In the end, cosmetic surgery as a cultural practice is driven by fantasies of 
the body’s limitless possibilities. Though laudable, inviting reasoned 
reflection on the part of consumers might be beside the point. Your boss told 
you to “start looking elsewhere”, you’ve spent the last three years of your 
life nursing both of your aged parents and now you look as old as them, you 
can’t bear to leave your house any more because everyone stares at what you 
imagine is your hideous flaw (your big nose, your saddle bags or oversized 
thighs or wobbly upper arms), your partner left you for someone younger, 
thinner, more attractive and in general better than you, and surgery is your 
only chance to be better than you are. It’s hard to cool off in the face of 
such urgency.
 