
A feature of the Guardian's cryptic crosswords, as compared with those in 
other broadsheets, is that their range of "difficulty" is very wide. When the 
Manchester Guardian ran its Crossword No1 in 1929 - incidentally, the year 
before the Times started theirs - the compilers were anonymous, and the 
standard of difficulty was pretty consistent.

Araucaria set his first puzzle for the Manchester Guardian in 1958, but 
compilers were still anonymous at that point. It was not until 12 years later, 
in 1970, that my predecessor as crossword editor, John Perkin, had the 
brainwave of giving compilers noms de plume (perhaps noms de guerre would be 
more appropriate) so that solvers knew who they were up against.

From that point on, John Perkin's deliberate policy was to have a wide range 
of hardness, whereas others crosswords, like the ones from the Times and the 
Telegraph, remained much more homogenised. I feel strongly that John's policy 
is still the right one for the paper.

If puzzles are of a similar standard every day, those who find them too hard 
are daunted by the constant failure to solve a single clue, and so never get 
the bug, and those who find them too easy just get bored. Only those in the 
middle are satisfied most of the time.

The policy means that my mail continually contains letters from people 
complaining either that a particular puzzle was an insult to their intelligence 
and that they had finished it by Potters Bar, or that another was so impossible 
that, if things don't change, they are switching paper. My only comfort here 
are the words of the late Tory politician John Boyd-Carpenter. Springheel Jack, 
as he was known because of the odd way he walked, used to say that, if the 
shouting in his right ear was about the same volume as the shouting in his 
left, then he felt he was going in roughly the right direction.

Which compiler you find hard/middling/easy will be a personal thing. But for 
setting the schedule I class Bunthorne, Enigmatist, Fidelio, Paul, Shed and 
Taupi as hard drugs, with Audreus, Janus, Logodaedalus, Quantum and Rufus at 
the more recreational end of the scale and the others in the middle. Araucaria, 
of course, is in something of a class of his own, since to a beginner he is 
hard but, once you get to appreciate the way he sees the world, things become 
easier for most people.

This classification of mine is based on absolutely zero objective research, so 
I should be very interested to know what others think.

___________________

The other large component of my mailbag is offers to compile puzzles for the 
Guardian. These often include examples of puzzles already compiled. I try to 
reply as constructively as I can to each offering. The answer though, all too 
often, is that "the puzzles you sent me are more than competent/highly 
professional/clearly of a standard that could be published in the paper (or 
whatever the case may be), but all I can do is to put your name and address on 
my waiting list for some future time."

There are, I am afraid, several dozen people already on that waiting list who 
could perfectly well join our regular team tomorrow. Wannabe crossword 
compilers, I fear, are in a buyers' market, even though it is somewhere between 
hard and impossible to make a living as one.

I am sometimes asked why I don't give a number of new compilers the odd 
outing, instead of sticking with the existing team. My answer goes back to John 
Perkin and his noms de plume. My sense is that regular solvers do identify with 
particular compilers. But for this to be possible, individual compilers have to 
appear a minimum number of times a year.

So here are the figures. We publish 311 puzzles a year and last year used 24 
compilers. Of these, Araucaria has 55 and Rufus 41. The complaints start 
flooding in if either of these miss two weeks on the trot. That leaves 205 
slots in a year for the other 22 regulars, an average for them all of well 
under one a month. My own view is that solvers would lose any sense of 
identifying with the compilers if their average hit rate dropped below that.

The positive side of this is the confirmation that compiling (and solving) 
crosswords keeps Alzheimer's at bay - so, my doctor friends tell me, does 
smoking, but crosswords have few adverse side effects. Selfishly, I am 
encouraged by the evidence that being a crossword editor is also good for one's 
health. The only other person at the Guardian to have had the title formally 
was John Perkin, who was crossword editor for 37 years from 1959 to 1996. On 
that basis, I have a while to go.
 