
Fallout from John Pidgeon's attack on the language and cultural references 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/feb/02/crossword-puzzles> of 
Guardian crosswords being out of touch with the world of younger solvers is 
still producing sharply differing comments. I am, therefore, particularly 
pleased to have been sent a scientific (and, therefore, entirely objective 
analysis) of the situation by a management consultant, born in the UK but now 
living and working in the US. He has sent me his conclusions in the form of a 
17-page PowerPoint presentation, admitting that, in his wife's opinion, he must 
have too much time on his hands.

His data and analysis of cultural references in Guardian puzzles are based on 
50 cryptic crosswords published between 11 February and 18 April this year 
(which do not include any Saturday prize puzzles). These 50 puzzles produced a 
total of 1,393 clues and solutions. For the purposes of this analysis "cultural 
references" were taken to include books, movies, sports personalities, 
politicians, singers and Kermit the Frog. Each "cultural reference" was then 
assigned a decade with which he, she or it was/is primarily associated. 
Nineteen setters had puzzles covered by the data, with Araucaria, Rufus and 
Paul between them accounting for nearly half of that total.

Excluding pre-20th century "cultural references" (eg Shakespeare or Oliver 
Twist, which by definition are likely to have passed into generally recognised 
social and literary history), there were only 45 such references in all of the 
1,393 clues (only 3.2 per cent). This rather contradicts the notion that the 
puzzles are stuffed full of cultural references that ring no bells with younger 
solvers. Of those 45 references, 38 were classified as "post-1970" and, within 
that total, 28 (or 62 per cent of the total) as "post-2000". From the period 
1930 to 1949 the only references found were "Any Old Iron", "Brave New World", 
jiving. John Maynard Keynes and George Orwell. As a crude cross-check on the 
modern resonance of these "old" references, the only one to score less than a 
quarter of a million Google hits was "jiving" at 50,800, the next lowest being 
"Any Old Iron" at 276,000; while, at the other end of the scale, Orwell scored 
3,340,000. Enough said?
 _____

I hope that paying subscribers from the olden days will forgive me if I repeat 
here a couple of points that they have read more than once before, because 
newcomers meet old problems. First, I am delighted to get any and all of your 
emails but, if they have to do with technical problems either at your end or 
ours, could you send them not to me but tosubshelp@theguardian.com 
<mailto:g2@theguardian.com> If your messages come to me a) I am totally 
incompetent to answer them and b) there will be a delay as I then have to 
forward what you have written to the saidsubshelp@theguardian.com 
<mailto:g2@theguardian.com>. This applies, particularly, to those of you who 
want to know things like why all you can get on your screen is a little red 
square. Most/many of these technical issues seem to have to do with Java 
(whatever that may be) and onlysubshelp@theguardian.com 
<mailto:g2@theguardian.com> can give you the Java Guidance Counselling that 
your computer's particular relationship with the Guardian is calling out for.

Second, for those of you who still remain mystified as to how a particular 
cryptic clue produces the solution even after it has been published, could I 
draw your attention to the fact that for each Saturday prize puzzle and each 
monthly Genius puzzle we have for some time now offered annotated solutions. 
All you have to do is to bring the puzzle up on your screen after the deadline 
for submission has passed, click on "Solution" and then click here for 
annotated solutions. There are also other places where these things are 
discussed. One such ishttp://fifteensquared.net/ <http://fifteensquared.net/ 
puzzles>. There is also, of course, the old-fashioned possibility of talking to 
someone you know who is also interested in crosswords to see if you can work 
things out together. (NB If you use the Guardian's archive search facility for 
this or any other purpose, remember that serial numbers have to be typed in 
without a comma; eg 12422 and 24701 not 12,422 and 24,701.)

On one technical detail, I pass on this tip from Michael at Loja in Granada in 
Spain to those of you who want to make the type of our PDFs (or anything else) 
larger. Save the PDF to your computer; open it and go to Tools - Select and 
Zoom - Snapshot Tool. Then, starting at the top left hand corner with the left 
click held down, draw a box tightly round what you want to print. When you let 
go of the left click the puzzle itself should be highlighted and you can then 
print it out to fit a full A4 page.

_____

The April Genius attracted a large number of entries, 301 in total. The first 
correct one was received at 6.07 GMT from Peter at Montville in Queensland, 
Australia. Those living in time zones east of Greenwich are at something of an 
advantage here, so I also record that the first correct UK entry was from 
Oxford at 8.28 GMT. There were 36 by the end of the first day.

Incidentally, the deadline for each month's Genius is determined by a formula 
almost as complicated as that which decides the date of Easter (which is, of 
course, the first Sunday after the first full moon following the spring equinox 
in the northern hemisphere). The deadline for Genius entries is 23.59 GMT on 
the Saturday before the first Monday of the following month. As some may find 
this a bit hard to remember, from now on we shall put a note of what this means 
in practice above each monthly puzzle. And please note that the system requires 
that you register your name and email address with us once in order to be able 
to submit your entries online. Previous paying subscribers are automatically 
registered. For newcomers, details of how to register will also be put above 
each puzzle.
 