
Baking <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/baking> is so often about 
making hearty comfort food that it’s difficult to even imagine what “summer 
baking” would look like. The heaviness of suet is certainly off-limits, as are 
hefty gateaux, steamed puddings and ladlefuls of hot custard. Heavy chocolate 
concoctions, and those rich with cream, caramel and syrup, sit uneasy in the 
summer heat, too. But lighten dessert up with a touch of something floral and 
the whole thing comes back into focus: sweet, mild camomile alongside a tart 
pineapple curd perhaps, or a quivering orange-blossom panna cotta with 
strawberries. You could play around with rose or even lavender buds if you’re 
brave, and watch your baking come to full bloom.

Summer pineapple camomile cake

This mellow camomile cake sits perfectly with the sharpness of a thick layer 
of bright pineapple curd. The recipe below will make more curd than you need, 
but just store it in a clean, dry jar for up to 1 week in the fridge. It’s just 
as good on toast, through ice-cream, on your little finger as in is in this 
cake, so I doubt you’ll have trouble using it up.
 Ruby’s summery pineapple camomile cake. Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian
You can use camomile teabags if you can’t find the loose flowers – just swap 1 
teabag per tablespoon of dried camomile buds. They’re less potent, though, so 
give them plenty of time to steep and do source loose camomile if you can. 
Health food stores sometimes have it, or look online at souschef.co.uk.

Serves 10-12
250g unsalted butter
100ml milk
6 tbsp dried camomile buds
300g caster sugar
Zest of ½ lemon
2 tsp vanilla extract
4 large eggs
350g plain flour
3 tsp baking powder
¼ tsp salt

 For the curd
2 large egg yolks
1½ tbsp cornflour
40g caster sugar
100ml pineapple juice
Juice from 1 lemon
1 tbsp unsalted butter

 For the icing
225g unsalted butter
6 tbsp dried camomile flowers
300g white chocolate
200g icing sugar
Zest of ½ lemon
15-25ml milk, if needed

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Grease and line two 20cm round 
cake tins – preferably loose-bottomed or springform ones.

2 Combine the butter, milk and camomile in a pan and set over a low heat until 
the butter has completely melted and the mixture has just begun to simmer. 
Remove from the heat and leave to cool and infuse for 5 minutes or so before 
straining into a large mixing bowl, leaving the camomile flowers behind while 
squeezing as much liquid from them as possible.

3 Add the sugar, lemon zest and vanilla extract to the infused butter mixture 
and whisk to combine. Add the eggs one at a time, mixing well between each 
addition. In a separate bowl, stir together the flour, baking powder and salt 
before adding this dry mixture to the wet ingredients. Whisk until the batter 
is smooth, then divide it between the prepared tins.

4 Bake for 25-30 minutes, until well-risen and golden brown. A small knife 
inserted into the middle of each cake should emerge clean. Leave to cool in 
their tins before unmoulding.

5 While the cakes are cooking and cooling, make the curd. Whisk the egg yolks, 
cornflour and sugar together in a small pan, then slowly add the pineapple and 
lemon juices. Set the pan over a low heat and stir constantly for 5-10 minutes 
– as long as it takes for the curd to reach the consistency of very thick 
custard. It’ll be resolutely liquid for the first few minutes, but don’t give 
up on it. As soon as it’s ready and just about to start bubbling, remove it 
from the heat, stir in the butter and leave it to cool to room temperature.

6 To prepare the icing, melt the butter with the camomile over a low heat 
until the butter starts to bubble. Remove from the heat and leave to cool for 
10 minutes before sieving out the camomile flowers. While the butter cools a 
little, chop the white chocolate into small chunks and melt in a heatproof bowl 
set over a pan of simmering water (you can also melt it carefully in the 
microwave in short bursts, if you’d rather). Stir the melted white chocolate 
into the slightly cooled, strained butter and leave to cool to room temperature.

7 Once the butter and chocolate mixture has cooled, put the icing in the 
fridge for 20 minutes to firm to the consistency of softened, creamed butter. 
Stir it at 5 minute intervals to avoid lumpiness. Once it’s thick and smooth, 
add the icing sugar and lemon zest and gently mix. Add a dash of milk, if 
necessary, to give a spreadable, buttercream texture.

8 Spread a few dollops of the curd on top of one cake layer, sandwich it with 
the other, then spread the icing evenly over the top and sides of the sandwich. 
Drizzle the top with a little more curd or scatter with dried camomile flowers.

Orange blossom panna cotta with strawberries

The simplicity of panna cotta isn’t something to be messed with, but a drop or 
two of orange blossom water really works to bring out the delicacy of this 
dessert. Make sure you leave plenty of cooling and setting time in making these 
for a special meal.
 Orange-blossom panna cotta. Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 
Makes 4
3 leaves gelatine, cut into large pieces
300ml whole milk
90g caster sugar
Zest of 1 orange, coarsely grated
100ml single cream
Orange-blossom water, to taste
175g strawberries
30g caster sugar

1 Soak the gelatine leaves in cold water for 5 minutes or so, until softened. 
Meanwhile, heat the milk, sugar and orange zest until scalding hot.

2 Drain the liquid from the gelatine pieces, then add the pieces to the hot 
milk mixture, whisking immediately to combine. Set back over a low heat and 
bring to the boil. As soon as the mixture starts to simmer, take it off the 
heat, stir in the single cream and add orange blossom water, to taste. Strain 
the liquid through a fine sieve to remove the orange zest.

3 Lightly grease 4 individual 150ml pudding moulds or ramekins and divide the 
panna cotta mixture between them. Leave to cool to room temperature before 
placing in the fridge for a few hours to chill and set. I find it’s best to 
leave them overnight, but as long as you can spare2-3 hours of fridge time, you 
should be fine.

4 Hull and quarter the strawberries, then toss them in a bowl with the caster 
sugar and a few more drops of orange-blossom water, to taste. Place in the 
fridge to macerate while the puddings set.

5 To unmould the panna cotta, carefully dip the bottoms of each basin or 
ramekin in hot water for a few seconds before quickly inverting the pudding on 
to a plate. If the panna cotta sticks stubbornly in its mould, try running a 
small knife around the edge toor dipping into the hot water for a few moments 
more. Serve with the macerated strawberries.
 