
I spent the best part of two years as a chef in Bombay. It’s a bustling, 
chaotic city that is predominately vegetarian – some of them Jain, strict 
vegetarians who won’t eat vegetables with roots below the soil. I’d often turn 
to Goa, India’s smallest state, to escape the clatter of the city and for a fix 
of meat and fish. Each time I arrived in Goa, I would be greeted by the same 
taxi man. And when I reached the beach, I’d be welcomed with hugs. It’s a 
wonderfully warm place, in more ways than one, and I would spend most of my 
time there learning to cook the typical dishes, such as sausage pao and 
sweet-and-sour fish curries.

This particular Goan meal draws inspiration from a trip in January when, in my 
favourite restaurant nestled inland in the north of the state, we ate a 
stunning feast of different dishes, including pork sausage fry, egg appam and 
beetroot chutney. The centrepiece of the meal was a meen curry, a sour and 
spicy fish dish like those they serve in toddy shops, the south Indian drinking 
establishments that serve alcoholic drinks made from palm trees. This would 
normally be served with mashed tapioca, but we’re serving it with bright lemon 
rice, a refreshingly light thoran and a sweet and sour pineapple pickle.

Jack Monroe’s Chinese chicken curry recipe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/18/jack-monroe-chinese-chicken-curry-recipe>
Toddy shop meen curry with hake and samphire

If you can’t find it, kokum – a sour fruit commonly used in Goa – can be 
susbstituted with tamarind. Halibut is a handsome alternative to hake.

Serves 4
1 tbsp coconut oil
20 curry leaves
1 onion, sliced
1 tbsp each of garlic and ginger, crushed
2-3 green chillies, slit lengthways
3-4 pieces kokum 
1 tbsp chilli powder
1 tbsp ground coriander 
½ tsp ground turmeric
½ tsp ground fenugreek 
250ml coconut milk
4 x 200g hake/halibut steaks
300g samphire
Salt

1 Heat the coconut oil in a large pan, add the curry leaves and then the 
onions and cook until they are soft and start to brown.


2 Add the ginger, garlic, green chilli and cook over a medium heat for another 
couple of minutes. Then add the kokum, chilli powder, coriander, turmeric and 
fenugreek and stir for a minute or two to cook the spices – take care not to 
burn them.

3 Next add the coconut milk, bring to the boil and season with salt. Gently 
put the fish pieces into the sauce for a few minutes, and cook on a low heat 
until just cooked. Add the samphire to the sauce at the end to heat through and 
serve.

Recipe for a pad Thai feast | Feasting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/04/pad-thai-recipe-feasting-henry-dimbleby>
Pineapple pickle

5 tbsp vegetable oil
1 tbsp black mustard seeds
30 curry leaves
1 whole dried kashmiri chilli 
1 small pineapple, peeled, cored, and cut into 1cm cubes
1 tbsp dried kashmiri chilli powder
1 tsp ground turmeric 
4 tbsp coconut or white wine vinegar
70g jaggery or brown sugar
A pinch of salt

1 Heat the oil in a large pan until hot. Add the mustard seeds – they should 
pop straight away. Next, add the curry leaves and 1 whole dried chilli, then 
the chopped pineapple. Cook for 2 minutes, then add the chilli and turmeric 
powders.

2 Once the pineapple is nearly cooked, add the vinegar, sugar and salt. Cook 
for 1-2 minutes on a high flame until the oil has separated from the spices and 
the pineapple is cooked, but still with a little bite. Remove from the pan and 
serve at room temperature.

Lemon rice

400g basmati rice
1 litre water
3 tbsp vegetable oil
1 tbsp black mustard seeds
1 tbsp channa dal
20 fresh curry leaves
1 tsp ground turmeric
Juice of 3 lemons
Salt, to taste

1 Wash the rice in cold running water until it is no longer starchy and runs 
clear. Drain well.

2 Bring 1 litre of water to the boil in a large saucepan, then add the rice 
and cook, uncovered, for 8–10 minutes, or until the grains are cooked. Drain 
with a sieve.

3 Heat the oil in a large pan to a high heat, add the mustard seeds and channa 
dal and let them pop.

4 Next, add the curry leaves and the turmeric and stir for 1 minute. Add the 
cooked rice, lemon juice and salt, then gently mix together.

Hispi cabbage and carrot thoran

3 tbsp coconut oil 
1 tbsp black mustard seeds
20 fresh curry leaves
1 tsp cumin seeds
2 dried kashmiri chillies
30g fresh root ginger, finely grated
½ tsp ground turmeric 
1 tsp salt
½ tsp black pepper
250g hispi cabbage, finely shredded
2 carrots, diced
2 fresh green chillies, slit in half
100g fresh or frozen grated coconut

1 Heat the oil in a large saucepan set over a medium heat. When hot, add the 
mustard seeds followed by the curry leaves, cumin seeds and dried chillies. 
Stir for about 30 seconds, then add the ginger, turmeric, salt and black pepper 
and fry for 30 seconds.

2 Stir in the cabbage, carrots and green chilli and cook, covered, over a 
medium heat for 5-7 minutes, or until the vegetables are tender, adding a 
little water if they start to stick.

3 Stir in the coconut, heat through for a minute and serve.

 * Will Bowlby co-runs Kricket, a modern Indian restaurant in London’s Pop 
Brixton @kricketbrixton 
 * This article was amended on 19 March 2016 to correct an error in the first 
paragraph. An earlier version mistakenly stated that the population of Bombay 
is predominantly Jain.  