
To start on a positive note, I can report that, despite all the rival 
distractions of the festive season, the December Genius entry level held up at 
214, higher than Araucaria himself had expected for a puzzle that he described 
as being of a sort that he himself would never dream of trying to solve. The 
first correct offering (from Tony of Uxbridge) was clocked in at 09.43 GMT on 
Monday 1 December.

Conspiracy theorists filled my December email file, set off by the fact that 
on 1 December the clue "Rat swallows a river insect (6)" (for SCARAB) appeared 
in the crosswords of both the Guardian and the Daily Telegraph. Dr B in Suffolk 
found that his paranoia about the similarity of crossword clues in newspapers 
had been vindicated by this event and many others demanded that we do something 
to avoid such duplication in future.

It is never easy to persuade the chronic paranoid that a surprising pattern of 
events may just be a coincidence. To feed such fantasies, in the Quick puzzle 
for 9 December the clue "Indo-European (5)" appeared for ARYAN and on the very 
same day on the other side of the Atlantic the New York Times crossword puzzle 
had "Indo-Europeans" for ARYANS. Could it be, a correspondent asked, that our 
setter was also moonlighting for the New York Times. If so, it would be polite 
to those who happen to do both puzzles if she/he could be persuaded not to use 
the same clue in both papers on the same day.

Beyond giving my personal assurance (for what it is still worth) that the 
Guardian Quick crossword setter in question does not work for the New York 
Times (and never has) there is not much more that I can say to calm the 
conspiracy theorists' minds. Nor can I honestly claim that there is anything 
that can be done to prevent such coincidences happening again. For the fact is 
that, though I am on more than civil terms with the present crossword editors 
of the Daily Telegraph, the Times, the Independent and the Financial Times 
(though not, sadly, the New York Times), we have neither the time nor the 
inclination (nor the right) to send each other the puzzles that we have edited 
before they are published. It follows from this that, if the same thing appears 
in two papers on the same day or in the same week, this is not evidence or 
collusion, nor of incompetence; it is something called coincidence.

Perhaps the most famous crossword coincidence was the one that so worried MI5 
in 1944 when, in the weeks immediately before D-Day, five Telegraph puzzles 
contained as solutions top secret code words connected with the landings (Omaha 
was one). The puzzles were all the work of Leonard Dawe, who had been setting 
for the paper from the beginning in 1925 and who was by then headmaster of a 
school which had been evacuated to Surrey. As a result, he was staying with his 
brother-in-law, a senior Admiralty official with access to secret information. 
Dawe admired German culture, had frequently visited Germany before the war and 
had a Prussian-looking haircut. Enough said.

History does not relate who in the D-Day planning staff had spent his spare 
time that summer doing the Telegraph crossword: nor whether MI5 was also on to 
the fact that, in August 1942, an earlier Dawe puzzle had included the clue 
"French port (6)", just two days before the disastrous Dieppe raid.

In crosswords these coincidences will certainly become more rather than less 
frequent because of computers. Almost all setters now use programs that can 
fill empty grids with words that fit. Most would privately admit to using this 
facility at least to help with that difficult final corner of the puzzle. These 
programs contain an inevitably finite vocabulary and, as a result, setters who 
use the same program will tend to get offered the same words. In addition, all 
these programs have a facility for storing clues in a database. Within recent 
memory, in fact, one of our broadsheet newspapers (which shall be nameless) 
tried to draw the logical conclusion from the new technology and do away with 
crossword setters entirely. The paper proposed to buy individual clues, enter 
them in a database and use the computer to construct puzzles from it. On that 
occasion, a general outcry forced the paper's then deputy editor, Boris 
Johnson, to run up the white flag, but machine intelligence is an increasingly 
powerful backdrop to the world of crosswords and I confidently predict that 
"coincidences" in cluing will steadily increase without this requiring any 
human conspiracy. For, never forget, there is no copyright in a crossword clue.

But back to our SCARAB. On this occasion, it is true that the setter in 
question was the same person for both papers. Most of the best known setters 
work for two, three or even more outlets. The money for setting is so poor that 
they have to if they are relying on setting crosswords for any significant part 
of their income. Several have set for all five of the London "broadsheets" and 
other outlets as well. They try hard (and in general they succeed) not to 
repeat the same clue in the same paper in the same decade and they keep 
elaborate records of what has appeared when and where to help them. The late 
Ruth Crisp (Crispa to the Guardian), who set for all five and produced puzzle 
No 1 for the Independent, had an amazing card index system. Rufus now has his 
on computer. But, of course, the more prolific setters will re-serve good clues 
from time to time to different audiences, just as professional comedians repeat 
good jokes. And unintentionally, after all, which of us does not repeat 
themselves without necessarily being aware of the fact?

But, if a particular clue appears on the same day in different newspapers, 
that is a pure coincidence: a pure coincidence in the sense that two different 
crossword editors, without the slightest idea what the other is doing, have 
plucked two particular puzzles out of their large available unpublished stock, 
some of which may have been sitting in the files for five years or even more, 
and chosen independently to use them on the same day.

I don't expect anyone to believe this, but I thought that it was worth trying, 
at least, to explain how things work.
 