
If you discover your favourite aromatic plants and herbs are looking chewed 
this autumn the culprit is almost certainly therosemary beetle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2006/apr/18/gardens> (Chrysolina 
Americana),an unwelcome new addition to the UK’s gardens – thanks to climate 
change.

Despite its name, Americana, its original home is the Mediterranean and North 
Africa, but the increasing warmth of the British climate means it can now 
survive and thrive here. It was first seen London in 1994 and after a slow 
start it has rapidly spread in England and now reached Scotland and Northern 
Ireland.

While, as the name suggests, it is often found on rosemary, it also eats 
lavender, sage, thyme and other related aromatic herbs. These are plants which 
are normally pest free so this makes the beetle a doubly annoying invader.

Both the rather startling metallic green and purple striped adult beetles and 
the more inconspicuous slug-like greyish white larvae feed on the same plants, 
chewing their leaves to stumps. The adults, about 6-8mm long, can be found at 
any time of year, but larvae that grow to the same size, are particularly 
active during warm autumn weather. A large infestation can reduce most of the 
plants in the herb garden to skeletons by spring.

This has alarmed, among others, the Royal Horticultural Society (RHS), which 
has ahelpful guide to this invader 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?pid=555> and how to control it. It also 
has a campaign to try and track where the beetle has now reached.

The most recent map <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y-BUNHiA1N4> shows that 
it is now all over the south-east of England but elsewhere seems to do best in 
cities, like Manchester, where it is warmer. Large areas of countryside with 
frosty winters are so far still free of this pest.

The curious case of the case-bearing carpet moth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/24/pests-moths-carpets> 
One of the problems with control is that many people grow the species that the 
beetle eats (apart from lavender) to flavour their cooking. Most pesticides 
which kill the beetles and their lava, also render the herbs uneatable, 
although the RHS suggest some brands that the makers say are not harmful to 
humans. However, pesticides will also kill a lot of beneficial insects 
including bees.

Picking the adult beetles off is laborious so the RHS recommends giving the 
plants a good shake. On the advice site is a helpful video demonstrating how to 
place a big piece of white paper under a rosemary bush to catch them all. 
Someone else suggested an upturned umbrella. How this works for low growing 
thyme is not shown. In any event once captured they have to be squashed.

The larvae remain active all through the winter or until they are fully-grown. 
By April all will have dug their way into the soil to pupate, emerging in early 
summer. Because the beetles live a long time they can be found on the plants 
all the year round.

The adults do not appear to eat much in summer but in August they start 
munching, mate and lay eggs.

The good news is that, come the spring, when the larvae disappear into the 
ground, most chewed plants recover, throwing out new growth to replace their 
lost leaves. However, the beetles have no natural predators in this country and 
will soon re-emerge, so control will be needed. Since the beetles are slow, and 
just hang about on their food plants, the summer is the best chance to fight 
back.
 