
Coach Graham Arnold knows the target on Sydney FC’s back grows larger with 
everyA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> win. But he is 
backing his title favourites to finish the season undefeated, fuelled by his 
belief that “miracles can happen” in such a close-knit, quality squad.

At the halfway mark of the campaign, Sydney are well on their way to claiming 
their first piece of silverware in seven years. Last weekend they set a new 
Australian record for a best-ever start to a top-flight season, and Friday 
night’s clinical 2-0 victory over Brisbane extended the Sky Blues’ unbeaten run 
to 13 games and ensures they will see in the New Year 10 points clear at the 
summit.

Paying credit to Arnold’s repeated claim his team are the fittest in the 
league, Sydney backed up four days aftertheir four-goal triumph in hot and 
humid Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/arnold-applauds-intimidating-sky-blues-reds-demolition>
 and ran out 95 minutes at Allianz Stadium.


Australia's sporting year in review – fairytales, flops and fiascos of 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/australias-sporting-year-in-review-fairytales-flops-and-fiascos-of-2016>
That they played with 10 men for the final half hour only added to the 
impressive nature of the triumph, in which skipper Alex Brosque and star 
playmaker Milos Ninkovic scored before Brosque was sent off for a second 
bookable offence.


While still looking for further improvements on the field, Arnold felt there 
was an X-factor off it that could deliver his team the title. “I don’t think, 
in my time at this club, we’ve had a group of players who trust each other and 
fight for each other, enjoy each other’s company and enjoy every day coming to 
training and being part of a team,” Arnold said.

“It’s a happy group, and in a happy group miracles can happen. I got asked a 
question if we wanted to go through to being Invincibles. Of course I want to. 
Do I believe it? I believe it. I know we’ve got a target on our back and I know 
it’s getting bigger, but these boys are getting better and there’s no reason 
why we can’t attempt to do it.”

Brazilian striker Bobo delivered his strongest display of the season, 
orchestrating both goals and setting up several other chances, while Alex 
Wilkinson and Matt Jurman were near-impenetrable and Danny Vukovic a rock in 
goal.


“I thought Bobo was unbelievable,” Arnold said. You saw the complete package 
nearly, except if he’d scored a goal it would have topped it off. But he gave 
two fantastic assists, his movement was great and he can hold the ball up and 
bring players into play.”

Brosque will miss Sydney’s next clash against Central Coast in Gosford while 
he serves his mandatory suspension while midfielder Josh Brillante will also be 
sidelined after accruing his fifth yellow card.
 