 The dreaded calamity which last week we hoped might be averted has, 
nevertheless, occurred and today we can do little else than record our 
heartfelt sorrow at a loss which has fallen not only on our country but on all 
civilised nations, and by reason of its intensity made the whole world kind. It 
is not necessary for us to retrace the events of the past few days, beyond 
noting that the condolences of other nations with grief-stricken England are so 
genuine and universal as to compensate largely for sentiments of a very 
different character which have sometimes been ascribed to them, perhaps too 
hastily.
It would really seem as if the bickerings and jealousies of the past few years 
were but a superficial and transient feature in the relations between Great 
Britain and her Continental rivals, and the true underlying feelings they 
entertain for her are better gauged by the dignified and even touching 
expressions which have poured in from every capital in Europe, to say nothing 
of more remote regions.

To select a few examples may perhaps seem partial; but it is impossible to 
help expressing one's gratification at the attitude of the French President and 
the feeling utterances of M. Waldeck-Rousseau and M. Delcasse. Great Britain is 
so closely knit to France by social intercourse, commercial relations and the 
thousand and one miscellaneous ties that spring up between countries which are 
rather united than separated by face and twenty miles of sea, that it would 
have been strange indeed if your neighbours had failed to manifest that 
impulsive warmth of heart for which the national character is known.

We can hardly say we are surprised at the striking demonstration of opinion 
throughout the other great Republic where community of origin, language, 
religion and the better understanding that now happily exists between the two 
people had prepared us for affectionate sympathy. Nevertheless England is 
sensible of many State Legislatures, stretching over the vast expanse of the 
American continent, and fitly crowned by the President's message of condolence 
to our king.

Of the Russian and German Emperors, who both of them intend to be present at 
the funeral obsequies, it is difficult to speak too gratefully. We trust that 
the Tsar's recovery of health may be complete enough to enable him to carry out 
his noble and affectionate purpose. The German emperor has shown himself a 
worthy monarch of the great country over which he so admirably rules. His very 
first apprehensions of possible danger and the resolute way in which he has 
cancelled important engagements of State to enable him to remain and pay a 
tribute of personal respect at the funeral of England's Queen will be 
remembered.

The universal cry of mourning and condolence has, after all, its less 
sorrowful aspect. An event which touches the hearts of so many millions of 
foreigners and bids them grieve with us is a force, insensibly it may be that, 
but powerfully working in the direction of these softened asperities and calmer 
feelings that should lead to general peace.

We must not be understood as arguing that if it were not for our recent bitter 
loss there would be increased danger of war. But we do believe that where a 
sorrow, common to all humanity, comes home to men, there must ensue a 
mitigation of those unfriendly comments that but too often lead third parties 
to infer that the relations of the other two are far more strained than they 
really are. Mr Kruger quite counted on this international unfriendliness 
ripening into actual hostility and active intervention and this ignorance and 
want of judgement have cost his country her independence.

Lastly, these great and powerful expressions of popular condolence are all 
tributes to personal rule which, with all deference to our Republican friends, 
we believe to be the best guarantee of peace in these days. The old medieval 
conceptions of monarchical rule are as obsolete as plate armour; instead, 
thereof we see monarchs, even those of the youngest kingdoms vying with one 
another in cheerfully sacrificing their resources, their leisure, their 
pleasure, nay their very lives in furthering the welfare of their subjects. It 
is after all one of the beneficial results of newspapers that the publicity 
cast upon modern thrones has fired the ambition of the best sovereigns, whose 
example others have been constrained to follow.

In consequence we find every ruler from the princelets of India up to the sons 
of Edward II or Wilhelm II, educated for their high posts with a scrupulous 
fidelity and perfection of training which less conscientious ages would have 
almost laughed at.

Herein, we find the true moral of our late Sovereign's death and her son's 
accession. It marks a solemn step, a fresh link in the chain of personal and 
responsible rule that girdles most of the powerful States of the world.
 