 He has festered in a cell for more than seven years without trial, but 
judgement day for Belgium's most hated man - paedophile Marc Dutroux - is 
finally close at hand. On March 1, the bearded electrician who has become a 
symbol of everything that is rotten in Belgium's anarchic and incompetent 
judicial and police system will at last stand trial.
The charges against him are wearily familiar to the country's jaded public and 
could not be more serious. Dutroux is said to have kidnapped and abused six 
girls aged between eight and 19 and killed four of them. He is also alleged to 
have murdered an accomplice.

The crimes he is charged with were carried out with a particularly high level 
of sadism and apparent indifference to human suffering. Two of his alleged 
victims - Melissa Russo and Julie Lejeune, both eight - were sexually abused 
and tortured in in metal cages in a makeshift dungeon in his basement. Their 
bodies were later found buried in Dutroux's garden in southernBelgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belgium>. They had starved to death while 
Dutroux did a short stint in jail for theft.

Two other girls - An Marchal, 17 and Eefje Lambrecks, 19 - also met their end 
in his custody. Their decomposed corpses were discovered at another of his 
houses. Laetitia Delhez, who was then 14, and Sabine Dardenne who now works in 
a factory, escaped with their lives but will never be the same again.

The authorities' handling of the case has been characterised by an appalling 
litany of legal, ethical and procedural errors. When Dutroux was eventually 
arrested and incarcerated in 1996, the police were forced to admit that he was 
no stranger to them. He had been sentenced to 13 years in prison for child rape 
in 1989 but was released after just three years for good behaviour.

Police had also searched the house where Julie and Melissa were hidden three 
times but failed to find them. On one occasion they even heard cries for help 
but accepted Dutroux's claim that the noise was coming from children playing in 
the street.

In 1998 the humiliation was completed for the police when Dutroux - supposed 
to be Belgium's best-guarded prisoner - briefly escaped custody. To add insult 
to injury, it emerged recently that he was allowed to correspond romantically 
for two years with a 15-year old school girl from his prison cell and to groom 
her.

The public have also had to watch with horror in recent years as Dutroux 
mounted an ultimately unsuccessful bid for release on the grounds that he had 
been held for too long without trial and in inhumane conditions. Crucial 
evidence has disappeared, several prosecutors, policemen and important 
witnesses have committed suicide and the parents of the victims themselves have 
been subjected to often appalling treatment at the hands of the authorities.

Dutroux claims he procured the girls for the sexual gratification of a network 
of senior establishment figures and that a massive cover-up is underway. Some 
believe him, but most prefer to think he was a depraved lone predator.

He also claims that some of the deaths were accidental or committed by someone 
else.

With his long-awaited trial so tantalisingly close, Belgium is currently 
re-living Dutroux's alleged crimes in a kind of surreal time warp. More than 
seven years may have elapsed but to look at the media you would think they had 
only just heard of "the monster of Marcinelle" as he has been dubbed. His 
bearded face stares out from newsagents' hoardings, newspapers carry enormous 
feature articles on the case every day and the tabloid press in particular is 
having a field day raking over the case's morbid and horrific detail.

Dutroux's trial is a prime opportunity for Belgium that should not be 
squandered. His alleged crimes have traumatised the country more than any other 
event since the second world war and the country's spectacular failure to bring 
him to justice in a reasonable timeframe has become an embarrassing stain on 
it's conscience.

The trial will be a chance to exorcise old demons, but it will also be a 
chance for Belgium to prove that it can do something right in the Dutroux 
affair. It cannot afford to get it wrong again.
 