
Uncertainty lies at the heart of what physicians do on a daily basis. 
Sometimes they are entirely aware of it, and sometimes they fail to appreciate 
it.Doctors <https://www.theguardian.com/society/doctors> – and I am one – do 
not often “know” what they are doing with the same kind of mathematical 
precision that we associate with chemical engineers.

Several years ago my father collapsed and a neighbour called an ambulance. 
Unbeknown to the paramedics, my father had a “do not resuscitate” order in 
place. He was revived, intubated and taken to hospital. He was 76 and had 
various medical problems. But the team of doctors never even hinted they were 
considering withdrawing care and began a treatment known as a “hypothermia 
protocol”. The family turned to me, as the lone physician in the bunch, waiting 
for an explanation.

Only I hadn’t heard of hypothermia protocol – a treatment that lasted 72 
hours. It had been more than five years since I had last worked in an intensive 
care unit, and I wasn’t familiar with this new practice. I called some 
colleagues back in Massachusetts– first a few neurologists to learn more about 
prolonged hypothermia, and then a palliative care doctor familiar with the 
ethics of situations such as these. What I learned was a case study in 
uncertainty. Far from bringing patients back to resuming anything close to 
their previous lives, those who survived events like these through hypothermia 
protocols were assessed in terms of their ability, for example, to hold a 
toothbrush six months after the event.

It’s entirely reasonable that some patients and families should want such 
treatment without question, but it also seemed clear to me that this isn’t what 
my father would want. Eventually we became more assertive with the physicians, 
finally convincing them to extubate. He passed away several days later.

Looking back, what astonished me most about my own role in the saga of my 
father’s final days was how much I was intimidated by the process. After all, I 
know medicine; I know how to talk to doctors, I know how they think. I also 
knew without any doubt what my father wanted out of the medical system. But 
faced with a new set of variables, I hesitated.

I am providing this as an example about what can be done when speaking to 
doctors. Diagnoses are often just educated guesses, and prognoses less certain 
still. Based on data collected about cancer patients over the past four 
decades, doctors can talk about the odds of survival. For example, we know that 
a patient who has localised bladder cancer has about a 70% chance of being 
alive at five years. But oncologists telling patients that they have a 70% 
chance of survival at five years is a very different thing from predicting that 
they have about four years left of life, as some patients with bladder cancer 
will decline very quickly and others will live for many years.

Such discussions entail an honest admission by clinicians that they cannot 
look into the crystal ball, and such statements are only meant for patients and 
families to weigh the risks and benefits as they make decisions about their 
care, because cancer treatment can often make patients very sick and reduce 
their quality of life.

The key to good health might lie in the ability to recognise the hype created 
by medical reports and how the media treats health stories and health scares. 
It is important to sense when to push a physician for more testing or to resist 
a physician’s enthusiasm when unnecessary tests or treatments are offered.

With polite but firm insistence, we got the doctors to understand that this 
was not about their plan but my father’s. We can learn from this that embracing 
uncertainty – and asking the right questions – allows for more humane 
treatment, less anxiety and better care. But to do that we need to confront 
some sobering realities of our modern medical system.

Snowball in a Blizzard: The Tricky Problem of Uncertainty in Medicine by 
Steven Hatch is published by Atlantic Books at £14.99. To buy a copy for £11.99 
go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/406147/>
 