
Doing crosswords makes you acutely aware of the fact that English is a living 
and changing language. For example, take the grammar conventions on whether 
something is one word or two, or hyphenated.

Is it living-room (6-4) or living room (6,4)? Is it ice-cream (3-5) or ice 
cream (3,5)? Is it pepper mill (6,4) or peppermill (10)? In France there would 
be no problem. The right answer would be whatever the Académie Française deemed 
correct and that would stay the right answer until it said something different. 
In the same way, the Spanish Academy makes binding rules for the Spanish 
written from Madrid and Seville to Bogota and Havana. Even under Franco, 
Castro's Cuba was never excluded from the Spanish Academy.

English is different in that correct English is much more a concept like 
common law, rather than statutory law. What is considered right is decided by 
custom and precedent, as recorded from time to time in new editions by the 
editors of commercial dictionaries. And different common law has produced 
different English languages: Irish, Scottish, American, Canadian, Australian, 
New Zealand, Indian, Caribbean, East African, West African, South African.

On the living room/living-room issue I detect a clear trend. Hyphens are seen 
as increasingly old-fashioned and to be avoided wherever possible (though 
old-fashioned still has one). The two-word option is increasingly preferred. 
But there is also an almost equally strong tendency to make two-word nouns into 
one word.

All of this leaves crossword editors open to letters of complaint from solvers 
(and compilers) who don't like the option chosen. My only line of defence is to 
invite the person complaining to compare the 1993 Chambers Dictionary with the 
1999 Chambers 21st Century Dictionary. It bears out the view that things are 
changing in the direction described.

_____________

 On the subject of dictionaries, is there any one that is better than another? 
Some crossword editors in other papers, which shall remain nameless, insist 
that words or phrases can only be used as a solution if they appear in a 
single, identified dictionary.

I can see the point of such a rule and it makes things simpler for solvers. 
But the Guardian has never been so prescriptive and I think that you rule out a 
lot of legitimate fun by being so limited. The Oxford English Dictionary is, of 
course, the grandfather of them all and has spawned a family of one-volume and 
shorter editions. Incidentally, if you have not read "The Surgeon of 
Crowthorne" by Simon Winchester, you are in for a treat. It tells the tale of 
an insane US Civil War surgeon, locked up in Broadmoor for murder, who became 
one of the leading compilers of the first edition of the OED.

Traditionally, Chambers is the crossword compiler's dictionary of choice. This 
may be because it includes (and, therefore, validates the use of) more arcane 
words, or forms of words (eg oratori as an alternative for oratorios, or timist 
for someone who keeps time). It also includes a useful smattering of Scottish 
words or usages that do not appear elsewhere.

However, Chambers does not include many proper nouns and it excludes famous 
people almost entirely. The Guardian has always allowed people and places into 
its puzzles and I think that they are the better for it. So my answer would be 
that a Guardian crossword solver should be able to get by with Chambers and 
Collins (and an atlas with an index!). The only problem with the Chambers 21st 
Century Dictionary is that the number of words in it is noticeably fewer than 
in the 1993 edition. So my older one is definitely still in active service.

___________

A regular feature of my complaints mail is related to the changing nature of 
English. The answer to one recent clue was "nuanced". "Since when has the noun 
'nuance' been a verb?", wrote Disgusted of Manchester. The answer is rather 
surprising. It does not appear as a verb in the 1975 edition of the full OED. 
But, by 1993, Chambers had it also as a verb, meaning "to give nuances to" and 
as an adjective. The 1983 Collins only has it as a noun, but its 2000 21st 
Century Edition, dated 2000, also gives it as a verb, defined as "to give 
subtle differences to". So the answer to Disgusted of Manchester would seem to 
be that nuance became a verb at some point in the final quarter of the last 
century.

However, that is not the end of it. The most up-to-date (still hyphenated!) 
edition of the OED, which is now only available online, gives an example of 
nuance being used as a verb as long ago as 1897. Pity the poor crossword editor 
and his problems!
 