
A friend of mine makes something called “coat-on sauce”. You may well know the 
recipe – it isMarcella Hazan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marcella-hazan>’s. A big tin of plum 
tomatoes, a peeled onion cut in two, a thick slice of butter and salt put in a 
pan with the lid ajar, then left to blip and burp for 45 minutes, in which time 
everything welds felicitously into a rusty red, richly flavoured tomato sauce. 
While it does, you boil some pasta.

It is a divisive recipe: not everyone is a fan, I know. Those of us who are 
fans love it for its deep flavour and the fact that most of the work is done in 
a little less than 2 minutes – possibly the moment you have walked in the door, 
still with your coat on – hence “coat-on” sauce. By the time the sauce has come 
together, you have not only cooked the pasta, but taken your coat off, and done 
other things besides.

I make a coat-on cake, for which everything is measured in a yoghurt or 
ricotta pot, and several coat-on soups, and acoat-on baked vegetables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/20/baked-courgettes-potatoes-tomatoes-mediterranean-vegetable-stew-recipe>
. Not that I am generally wearing a coat when I make them, but the sense is the 
same: things that you have made so many times that the process is almost 
automatic, and economical with time, energy and equipment. Dishes that, once 
pulled together, simmer or bake away slowly while you get on with other things. 
Fast, then slow. There is also fast, then fast: coat-on bowl of cereal, coat-on 
Heinz tomato soup and – my absolute favourite – coat-on cold sausage eaten in 
front of the fridge.

I have coat-on biscuits too. Although I don’t think I have ever worn a coat 
when making them. Like Marcella’s sauce, they require four things: ground 
almonds, icing sugar, lemon zest and eggs. They are based on Sicilianpasticcini 
– the almond sweet or biscuit you find in every pasticceria in Sicily. 
Depending on where you go,pasticcini vary in form – some round, some pinched, 
other the shape of a crescent moon – and texture; some soft like a lozenge of 
marzipan, others crisper. Depending on who you ask, you might be told to use 
sugar syrup, glycerine, honey or eggs (just the whites or the whole things) – 
opinions are strongly held.


At the pasticceria almost under our house in Gela (southern Sicily) – a time 
capsule of glass-fronted cabinets, sugar, almonds and religious icons run by a 
man whose lack of teeth should put you off. They use sugar syrup and pinch the
pasticcini into an S-shape, some of which are covered with flaked almonds or 
pine nuts. Whatever the recipe, the principle is the same, ground almonds and 
sugar brought together into a marzipan-like mixture, which is shaped and baked.

Rachel Roddy’s green bean and potato bake recipe | A Kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/01/italian-green-bean-and-potato-bake-recipe-rachel-roddy-a-kitchen-in-rome>
I buy ground almonds in 350g bags to have at the ready, and icing sugar in 
Rome comes in 100g packets, meaning they can go straight into a bowl with no 
need to measure! Then I remember I don’t have any eggs. Do I grab my shoeless 
son, shove him under my arm and run to the shops, or just pour everything in a 
bag and and try again tomorrow? Try again tomorrow.


When you have all four ingredients, you don’t need to be too fussy about 
absolute measurements. The Italians say “qb” –quanto basta; how much is enough 
– which isn’t a question, but the assumption you know when the mixture looks, 
feels and tastes right, which is always down to practice and experience, even 
with baking.

 I err on the side of not too sweet, and I grate in lots of lemon zest, a task 
that should be prescribed as an everyday antidepressant. Alternatively, you 
could use a few drops of orange flower water. The mixture is like sticky 
marzipan, so you need to dust your hands well with icing sugar, which also 
gives a nice finish to thepasticcini. For even less mess, roll the balls over 
the bowl rather than on the work surface.

Baking – how long is enough? Well, it depends. Do you want them golden, firm, 
but chewy (14 minutes in my oven), or still pale and soft and fudgy like 
marzipan (11 in my oven) or somewhere in between – you decide.

Pasticcini di mandorle – soft almond biscuits

Makes 12-16 biscuits
350g ground almonds
150–200g icing sugar, plus more for dusting
Zest of 1-2 unwaxed lemons
2 medium eggs

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4 and line a baking tray with baking 
parchment.

2 In a large bowl, mix together the ground almonds, icing sugar, lemon zest 
and eggs to form a soft, slightly sticky dough.

3 Dust your hands with icing sugar, and scoop out a walnut-sized ball of 
dough. Then gently roll it between your palms. You can also roll it on the work 
surface as long as it is dusted with icing sugar. Repeat. Put the balls on the 
baking tray and make an indentation in the centre of each.

4 As they bake, the biscuits will crack gently. For soft and marzipan-like 
biscuits bake for 11-12 minutes, for a firmer, chewier biscuit 14-15 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack to cool. They will keep in an airtight tin for a month.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-quarters.html> (Saltyard) and winner of 
the André Simon food book award  