
At the unveiling of the Williams-BMW FW23 at Silverstone earlier this year the 
team's owner Frank Williams quipped: "We hope for a win or two, if the grey 
cars or the red cars make a mistake."

In yesterday's San Marino grand prix Ralf Schumacher delivered the first of 
what promises to be rather more than "a win or two" in a welcome and long 
overdue restoration of one of Britain's most popular teams to its familiar 
winning ways.

A bleak 54-race famine had followed Jacques Villeneuve's triumph in the 1997 
Luxembourg grand prix at Germany's Nürburgring circuit, the longest absence 
from the winner's circle in the team's 24-year history. Since Clay Regazzoni 
posted the team's maiden grand prix win at Silverstone in 1979, only one of the 
following 18 seasons, 1988, saw a Williams fail to win at least one race.

Villeneuve's success marked the end of an era. It was to be the final victory 
for a Renault-engined Williams and instead Williams found itself having to pay 
a massive £14m in lease fees to use fixed-specification "customer" Renault 
engines - badged as Mecachrome V10s.

The moment the French company indicated their intention to quit, Williams and 
his technical director Patrick Head knew they needed to seek out an ambitious, 
high-technology partner, and as early as late 1996, Williams made their first 
approaches to BMW.

The German company had been an active engine supplier during the era of 
turbo-charged engines in formula one during the early 80s, scoring their final 
victory of that era when Gerhard Berger won the Mexican grand prix at the wheel 
of a Benetton in 1986. Throughout the mid-90s, however, BMW had taken careful 
notice of the promotional benefits their rivals Mercedes-Benz were gaining from 
their association with the McLaren team, however, and gave the green light for 
a formula one engine programme at the end of 1997.

On the driver front Williams also had a major clear-out. At the end of 1998 
Villeneuve moved to the fledgling British American Racing team and Heinz-Harald 
Frentzen was dropped from the line-up, moving to Jordan. Villeneuve's sudden 
departure caused the most disruption to the team, who wanted to pair the 
experienced Canadian driver with the Colombian rising star Juan Pablo Montoya, 
who had been their test driver in 1998.

However, once Villeneuve left, they decided that Montoya had insufficient 
experience and sub-contracted him to the Ganassi Indycar team for two seasons. 
Instead they recruited Ralf Schumacher and Alex Zanardi, who had been racing in 
the United States for three seasons and was never to feel at ease in the new 
generation of narrow-track formula one cars. He was bought out of the remaining 
two years of his contract for around £3m.

Determined to give Montoya a chance to return to formula one, Williams then 
signed the British rising star Jenson Button to partner Schumacher in the 
maiden season with the new BMW-engined cars in 1999 and Montoya replaced him at 
the start of this season.

Williams did a remarkably effective job to finish a distant third in the 2000 
world championship but it took the arrival of a brand new BMW V10 engine at the 
start of this year, plus a new tyre contract with Michelin, before the team 
could seriously aim for the big time once again. Before the start of the season 
the BMW executive Mario Theissen, who shares the role of competitions manager 
with the now retired Berger, said that BMW took the decision to build its new 
engine even before the start of last season and admitted: "It is quite 
difficult to hit the edge of technology required by the F1 business, without 
going beyond it." Yesterday it seemed that they not only hit the target but 
scored a bull's-eye.
 