
The bad news may not have reached you that Bunthorne (Robert Smithies) died 
unexpectedly in his sleep on July 31 at the age of 72. His two "day jobs" were 
as a photographer, first for the Manchester Evening News and then for the 
Guardian in Manchester and as a television journalist with Granada. His first 
cryptic crossword appeared in the paper in 1966, to a volley of complaints that 
it was too difficult, and he continued to delight, tease and infuriate solvers 
from then until the day he died. In fact, you have not seen the last of him, as 
I have several of his puzzles in stock and his family are happy that they 
should be published posthumously.

You can read his full obituary here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/obituaries/story/0,,1835760,00.html>, which 
appeared in the Guardian on August 3. There are also many personal tributes to 
him on the website'stalkboard 
<http://talk.theguardian.com/WebX?50@663.4y4akX8E8FS.1@.77593b57>, which can 
also be reached by following the slightly cumbersome sequence of Talk/Join our 
talkboards/Guardian Unlimited talk/start talking/crosswords/Bunthorne.

Here, though, is the section of that obituary dealing with Bob as a crossword 
setter: "Bob Smithies began setting 'to fill in the time spent hanging around 
hotels on photo assignments'. But he had learned the pleasures of esoteric 
information and of language and literature from his father, a self-taught man 
like himself. Bob delighted his father at an early age by pointing out what the 
name on the Gartons vinegar bottle read if spelled backwards.

"The range of his knowledge and interests was extraordinary. It was the quarry 
from which he crafted his clues. Gilbert and Sullivan was one important source, 
starting with his nom de plume: Bunthorne being the aesthete and sensitive poet 
who woos Patience in Patience or Bunthorne's Bride. But, to solve a Bunthorne 
clue, you might also need to recall that Gilbert's childhood nickname was Bab 
and that, before he teamed up with Sullivan, he wrote The Bab Ballads. Or that 
St Paul for a time followed his father's trade as a tent and sail maker. Or 
that Oley Speakes (who died 1948) wrote the music for songs like On the Road to 
Mandalay and When the Boys Come Home, which were sung in the Smithies household 
in pre-television days.

"Austen, Burns, Kipling, Dickens, fine wines, obscure French cheeses, jazz, 
classical music, both the Old and the New Testaments, the papacy, Judaism, 
Greek Orthodoxy, oriental religions, the heroes of the great Magnum photo 
agency, gardening, these were just some of the worlds that he brought to his 
clues. It was important to him that he was setting puzzles for the Guardian, 
both because he was a quintessential (Manchester) Guardian man and because he 
thought that Guardian solvers would be on his wavelength. Most of them were 
most of the time and his craftsmanship with clues excited real admiration from 
fellow setters. For example, he once used "s'il vous plait" as an anagram 
indicator, meaning that you needed to plait (ie twist) the letters involved. 
For some solvers he could be a bit too clever, but even then the pleasure of 
being able to crack even half of one of his elegant puzzles was in itself 
sufficient reward for the effort.

"The clue, though, of which he was (rightly) most proud was simplicity itself: 
'Amundsen's forwarding address (4)'. Answer: Mush!"

__________

New dictionaries (or new editions of old ones) seem to come thicker and faster 
than ever. The Chambers Dictionary is coming out in September in a new 10th 
edition. It is described as a "makeover", defined in the dictionary as "a 
complete change in the style of a person's dress, appearance, etc". And that 
just about sums it up: the changes from the ninth (2003) edition are more 
cosmetic than substantial. The preface tells us that "hundreds more new words 
and meanings" have been added, picking out modern activities such as blogging, 
happy slapping and Sudoku; new technologies such as chip and PIN, and 
podcasting; new entertainment terms such as flash mob and MP3 player; and 
exotic foodstuffs such as mizuna and noni.

But the promotional material is clear that the main selling point for the new 
edition is design. "Whilst the jacket design is up-to-date and minimalist, 
strikingly elegant and stylishly simple, it also reflects the values of 
heritage, authority and tradition that are at the heart of the Chambers 
Dictionary, and of the Chambers brand itself." To let it "sit on a dusty shelf 
... would be to deny the coffee table a must-have addition!" (I wonder what 
William and Robert Chambers, who started out in the book trade in Edinburgh in 
1818, would have thought of this kind of guff.)

Chambers remains the dictionary of choice for most crossword setters (and 
Scrabble players), because the range of its entries (except for people's names) 
is so much wider than that of most of its rivals. And the layout of the ninth 
edition was a huge improvement on the previous 1993 version, where you can have 
real difficulty in finding an entry because so many of them are listed together 
under a single head word. But, aesthetics and some new words apart, there is 
little in the new 10th edition that was not in the ninth. The short essays at 
the front on the history and varieties of English are unchanged, as are the 
handy lists at the back of first names, alphabets, Roman numerals, books of the 
Bible, plays of Shakespeare, symbols, scales etc. Even Melvyn Bragg's 2003 
foreword is given another outing.

In other words, if you are still working with the 1993 edition and have £35 to 
spare, this would be an excellent buy. But, if you already have the ninth 
(2003) edition, then I can think of better things to spend your money on.

· Hugh Stephenson is the crossword editor
 