
Aaron Wilbraham scored two early goals to lift Bristol City off the bottom of 
the Championship table with a 2-0 victory overNottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> at Ashton Gate.

But for an outstanding second-half display from the Forest goalkeeper Dorus de 
Vries, the hosts would have marked their first home win of the season with a 
more emphatic scoreline.

City poured forward from the start and took a fourth-minute lead when their 
new loan signing from Norwich City, Elliott Bennett, saw his right-wing cross 
flicked on by Jonathan Kodjia for the veteran striker Wilbraham to sidefoot 
home at the far post with the help of a deflection.

The 35-year-old forward was celebrating again seven minutes later after rising 
powerfully to head home a Derrick Williams cross from the left.

Wilbraham had been preferred to another loan recruit, Simon Cox, up front and 
it proved an inspired decision by the manager Steve Cotterill, in charge of 
City for the 100th time.

Cotterill is a former manager of Forest, leaving the east Midlands club in 
July 2012. On 3 December 2013Cotterill was appointed manager of League One side 
Bristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2014/oct/30/bristol-city-chelsea-steve-cotterill-jose-mourinho-unbeaten>
 on a three-and-a-half-year contract. Promotion was gained on 14 April 2015 
after a 6-0 away win at Bradford City.

Forest almost replied on 17 minutes when a Jack Hobbs header from Henri 
Lansbury’s corner brought a brilliant save from Frank Fielding.

But it was a rare first-half threat from the visitors. Luke Freeman’s shot 
from long range was inches wide and Kodjia had a volley deflected for a corner 
as City continued to look the more dangerous side.

Kodjia’s direct running often had the visitors in trouble, while Freeman and 
Korey Smith were energetic forces for the hosts in midfield.

Forest’s attack lacked a quality final ball and most of their first-half 
efforts came from distance. Lansbury failed to trouble Fielding from 30 yards, 
but the visitors were gaining a greater share of possession as half-time 
approached.

Forest began the second half brightly, with Daniel Pinillos and Lansbury 
shooting wide from outside the penalty area.

City had a narrower escape on 57 minutes when a poor clearance fell to the 
impressive Lansbury, whose volley from the edge of the area hit the angle of 
post and crossbar.

Wilbraham went close to a hat-trick when volleying over on 65 minutes.

At the other end the Forest substitute Jamie Ward saw his angled drive pushed 
wide of his near post by Fielding.

De Vries kept the visitors in the game with outstanding saves from Kodjia, 
Luke Ayling and Wilbraham twice as City looked to press home their advantage.

The home fans cheered their team to victory in the dying minutes and gave them 
a standing ovation at the end.

Steve Cotterill’s industry inspires Bristol City to fly high | Jeremy Alexander
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/07/steve-cotterill-bristol-city-scunthorpe-united>
Last season’s League One champions have taken a while to adjust to the higher 
level but on this evidence are capable of climbing the table quickly.
 