
Perhaps the Marco Silva revolution is on. This was Hull City’s first league 
victory since early November and as the songs of ire against the club’s owners 
were exchanged for ones in support of their new manager, a great escape this 
season suddenly glimmers on the horizon.

Abel Hernández scored twice in a comeback that caught Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> completely off-guard, with 
Eddie Howe’s side having dominated the first half-hour and squandered numerous 
chances to put the game out of Hull’s grasp.

Related: Chelsea bandwagon rolls on as Marcos Alonso double sees off Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/leicester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>

However, Hull demonstrated impressive character and, where Hernández is 
concerned, a killer instinct. This was the first league game the Uruguayan had 
started since City’s last league win, on 6 November, and it was no coincidence 
that Hull looked far more dangerous in attack.

In Silva’s first Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> match there was much to be 
positive about. Junior Stanislas had given Bournemouth the lead with an early 
penalty but Hernández’s double and an own goal from Tyrone Mings move Hull to 
18th, above Swansea and Sunderland.

Silva said: “When I saw my team with the big speed we had during this game, 
the big attitude, I’m happy. It was important to win the game.

“I saw many things different in our team. It was a good day for our fans and 
there was a fantastic atmosphere in the stadium. I said pre-match that we need 
them and they played with us.

“It was my first game in the Premier League, in one week we play three games 
and we win two which is fantastic. In the last two months we didn’t win one 
game. I’m sure the players believe more, that they are starting to believe and 
understand better what I want for the team.”

However, things could hardly have got off to a worse start. Barely two minutes 
had been played before Bournemouth were given a golden opportunity to go ahead 
from the penalty spot, after Harry Maguire tripped Ryan Fraser inside the box.

It was a clumsy challenge, and one that Martin Atkinson did not need to dwell 
on before penalising the defender. Stanislas smashed the resulting penalty past 
Eldin Jakupovic, scoring his seventh league goal of the season to go alongside 
his seven assists.

Bournemouth then enjoyed a period of concerted pressure during which they 
should have increased their advantage. Jack Wilshere had a shot charged down 
well by Curtis Davies on the edge of the area before Harry Arter curled an 
effort narrowly wide in the 15th minute.

Their best chance, though, came from some inept Hull defence. A long ball was 
punted forward and after Michael Dawson allowed it to bounce Benik Afobe raced 
in behind for a one-on-one with Jakupovic that the goalkeeper did extremely 
well to block.

Related: Arsenal canter to easy win as Swansea concede two costly own goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/swansea-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>

It was all Bournemouth. Indeed, Hull did not register their first serious 
effort until the 31st minute when Robert Snodgrass shot speculatively over from 
25 yards. It was the spark they needed to provide some attacking impetus and 
soon they were level.

The Hull full-back Andy Robertson received the ball in a deep position down 
the left and swung in a precise and inviting cross to the far post where 
Hernández headed home. The game then swung dramatically in Hull’s favour, 
Silva’s side pressing well until half-time.

They were rewarded five minutes into the second half. This time Hernández did 
all the hard work himself, receiving the ball down the right and jinking into 
the area, deceiving Mings before firing left-footed into Artur Boruc’s 
bottom-right corner.

Mings was the unfortunate man who sealed Bournemouth’s demise. Huddlestone 
unleashed a powerful shot from the right edge of the penalty area that took a 
significant deflection off the defender.

Howe said: “We were dominant for the first half-hour, it was the perfect start 
for us. We were in control of the game but I don’t think we went for the throat 
of Hull. I felt we were content with one and then the flow of the game changed 
when they equalised. From that moment we never really got control back.”

On Hull’s survival chances, he added: “I don’t think it would be a miraculous 
escape, they’re in among it. There’s minimal difference between the mid-table 
teams, the bottom teams. Anything can change at this stage of the season.”
 