


The Jam's That's Entertainment played as Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> completed their lap of honour 
at Celtic Park. At least someone at the stadium displayed a sense of humour.

This was an awful League Cup final, hallmarked by the fear of losing rather 
than anything tactically positive. Not that Aberdeen will care; the Pittodrie 
club's 19-year wait for a trophy has ended, courtesy of this 4-2 penalty 
shootout win overInverness Caledonian Thistle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/invernesscaledonianthistle>.

How Aberdeen enjoyed their celebrations, as they were fully entitled to after 
year upon year of abject failure in cup competitions. They won this trophy 
without conceding a single goal in the tournament.

Earlier, it looked as if Aberdeen might again wilt under the weight of 
expectation. They had 40,000 supporters here, thereby dwarfing the visiting 
contingent of only 7,000, but fans do not win matches; Aberdeen's status in 
Scottish football has been contradicted by recent underachievement.

"Whether we won by four or five goals, playing sparkling football, or we won 
the way we eventually did it; I said beforehand that it was all about winning," 
said the Aberdeen manager, Derek McInnes. To be fair, McInnes had been hampered 
by the absence of Peter Pawlett through injury. Aberdeen's creative presence 
was further restricted as Jonny Hayes departed the final scene with a damaged 
shoulder, only five minutes into the match.

Those problems should have been offset by the award of a 35th-minute penalty 
after Adam Rooney was fouled by Josh Meekings. John Hughes, the Inverness 
manager, cited a "stonewall" claim of his own during the second half after 
Richie Foran toppled under an Andrew Considine challenge. Foran later 
concurred. "I'll be expecting a call from the referee through the week to 
apologise," said the Inverness captain.

The only clear-cut opportunity of regulation time fell to Niall McGinn, who 
blazed wildly over after capitalising on a mix-up in the Inverness defence. 
Extra time was similarly lacking in incident, save free-kicks for both teams in 
the dying moments which were both, fittingly, lashed over the crossbar.

Inverness missed their first two kicks of the shootout, thereby giving 
Aberdeen impetus they never looked like giving up. Rooney, a former Inverness 
player, scored the decisive penalty.

"We have tasted success now and it's important we have that success again," 
added McInnes. "This is a special day."

Indeed it was; if the culmination of an instantly forgettable game.

Man of the match Russell Anderson (Aberdeen)
 