
Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> moved to within one 
point of Premiership leaders Celtic after battling from behind to beat Partick 
Thistle 2-1 at Firhill.

After a blank first half, midfielder Steven Lawless gave the home side the 
lead on the hour mark with a thunderous drive and the visitors wobbled.

Scottish roundup: Billy McKay heads Dundee United into the semi-finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/05/scottish-premiership-cup-roundup-dundee-united-hearts>
Derek McInnes’s side had passed up several chances to put Celtic under 
pressure this season and it looked like another would be missed. However, two 
headers in three minutes from defender Andrew Considine and striker Simon 
Church turned the match in Aberdeen’s favour and bolstered their title hopes, 
albeit they have played one more game than Celtic.

The original match at Firhill was postponed due to a waterlogged pitch and the 
surface was asked to withstand another deluge in the early stages.

Aberdeen were boosted by the return of influential midfielder Jonny Hayes from 
a hamstring injury, but took some time to get warmed up.

The visitors came close in the 37th minute when Hayes’s free-kick into the 
Thistle box was headed on by defender by Mark Reynolds, with Church clipping 
the crossbar with his close-range shot.

Both teams went at each other from the start of the second half and in the 
54th minute Craig Storie’s driven free-kick from the left was cleared off the 
line by the back-tracking midfielder Sean Welsh.

The travelling support urged their side on, but the home fans were equally 
enthusiastic and roared in delight when Lawless, from 25 yards, hammered the 
ball high past the flailing Scott Brown.

Aberdeen had now to contend with title anxiety as they fought back and they 
became increasingly disjointed. In the 68th minute, after great work by forward 
David Amoo in the Aberdeen area, only a great save from Brown prevented Mathias 
Pogba heading in a second for Thistle.

The points looked to be slipping away from Aberdeen, but they dramatically 
drew themselves level when Hayes’s cross from the left ended up at the back 
post where the unmarked Considine headed in from four yards out.

The Dons fans went wild, but there was more drama just two minutes later when 
Church glanced in a corner from Barry Robson, who had replaced Storie, leaving 
Thistle stunned.

Substitute Kris Doolan, on for Pogba, missed a great chance for Partick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/partick> Thistle to equalise, dragging a 
shot from 10 yards wide, but Aberdeen held out for the win which puts pressure 
on Celtic.
 