
Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> battled back from two 
goals down to salvage a 2-2 draw at home to Inverness but missed the chance to 
go top of the Premiership.

The Dons had not lost since the defeat to Celtic at the end of October and 
came into the match seeking a fifth successive victory. But goals either side 
of half-time from Liam Polworth and Greg Tansey looked to have put Inverness on 
course for a second upset win over Derek McInnes’s men this season.

However, Niall McGinn got Aberdeen back in the game with 17 minutes left and 
then Adam Rooney slotted home a stoppage-time penalty to snatch a point for his 
side, which means they trail Celtic only on goal difference, though the league 
leaders do have two games in hand on their closest rivals.

Inverness had already brought to an end one impressive Aberdeen run this term, 
winning 2-1 at home in September to halt the Dons’ eight-game winning streak at 
the start of the campaign, and they gave early warning of their intent to do 
likewise with a Miles Storey shot that the goalkeeper Danny Ward blocked.

That came after just 10 minutes and not long after Aberdeen were caught again 
with Storey once more the man set free. This time his deflected shot had to be 
pushed around the post by the on-loan Liverpool goalkeeper Ward.

Aberdeen’s only decent effort on goal until that point had been a Kenny McLean 
free-kick from distance which squirted wide of the upright. And Inverness were 
rewarded for their first-half efforts when they took the lead four minutes 
before the interval, Ross Draper doing well to hold off the challenge of Andrew 
Considine before cutting back for Polworth to stroke home from eight yards. The 
goal was the first Aberdeen had conceded this month following a run of three 
successive clean sheets.

Just two minutes after the interval, Tansey doubled the advantage from the 
penalty spot. Paul Quinn seemed to slip as Draper went past him and in the 
process bundled the Inverness man over. The referee, Willie Collum, had no 
hesitation in pointing to the spot, and Tansey stepped up to send Ward the 
wrong way.

It was looking grim for Aberdeen but their response was strong, and McGinn cut 
the deficit after 73 minutes. The midfielder caught Gary Warren in possession 
before advancing on goal and beating the Inverness goalkeeper Owain Fon 
Williams from close range. The strike was the former Celtic forward’s 50th for 
the club.

Fon Williams had earlier received lengthy treatment for a head injury but had 
continued and he somehow got a fingertip to turn McLean’s 86th-minute 
piledriver on to the bar. But Aberdeen were not to be denied and Collum gave a 
second spot-kick of the game in the 90th minute.

David Goodwillie’s shot into a ruck of bodies was adjudged to have come off an 
arm, and Collum again saw enough to point to the spot. The cool figure of 
Rooney stepped up and he drove the ball to the goalkeeper’s right as he dived 
in the opposite direction, to earn McInnes’s side a share of the spoils and 
extend the Dons’ unbeaten run to seven games.

“We found it difficult to break them down, but there was a lot of good play 
despite the difficult conditions,” said McInnes. “We’re trying to concentrate 
on the positives and the players were relentless in trying to get something 
from it.

“Our pressure and play deserved an equaliser, and from that point I thought we 
were either going to win it or run out of time. The only thought was to go and 
try to win the game.”
 