
With the treble now gone, even the most certain of certainties are now being 
questioned atCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>. Ronny Deila 
needed a domestic clean sweep this season to brush away the lingering indignity 
of a second successive failed European campaign, but found his side exposed 
once more with Sunday’s League Cup semi-final loss to Ross County. Now their 
domestic dominance might not be so much of a foregone conclusion either.

Celtic victories over Aberdeen were also once taken as a given, with the Hoops 
winning 35 of their past 40 matches against the Dons dating back to 2005. That 
certainty has gone too, as Aberdeen completed their first home double over 
Celtic in nearly 25 years. Three points still separate the two sides at the top 
of theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>, but the title race 
once more looks something like a race.

“I accept that this is a bad situation, of course,” Deila said when asked 
whether his side faces a crisis at present. “But we are still top of the league 
by three points – although sometimes you feel like it’s relegation almost, 
that’s the feeling. I’m disappointed the same as everyone else, but we need to 
stay calm, keep believing in what we are doing and in the end we will get 
results.”

This was Celtic’s chance at a response, three days after their Hampden Park 
humiliation. Instead it was another stark demonstration of their failings, 
which increasingly make Deila’s position at the club harder and harder to 
justify. Once seen as the measured, thinking man of Scottish football’s 
simmering hotbed, the Norwegian is now the coach of a team that seemingly does 
very little thinking at all.

On the contrary, Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> 
offered a bullish retort to those who have claimed they lack the bottle or 
nerve to truly challenge Celtic for the title. “I always think it’s very unfair 
on my players when people refer to that,” said Derek McInnes. “You could roll 
out games that people think we have not handled the pressure well, but there 
has been far more when we have dealt with it. Sometimes that gets forgotten.

“None of you actually believe we can win [the league]. I’m asked that question 
all the time, but my players have demonstrated consistently enough now that we 
– when we bring our performance – win more often than we don’t.”

Celtic looked lively initially, as the hosts weathered a storm as strong as 
anything to come off the North Sea in recent weeks. And yet it was Celtic who 
bore the brunt of Storm Jonny just after the half-hour mark. With Aberdeen’s 
first effort of the match Jonny Hayes struck a fierce drive on the bounce, 
catching out Craig Gordon at his near post. Six minutes later, the Dons doubled 
their advantage as new signing Simon Church bundled home Hayes’ inswinging 
corner, via a Kenny McLean header.

Leigh Griffiths halved the deficit in stoppage-time – finding the bottom 
corner with a low shot from the edge of the box – but Celtic had already 
folded. A team so accustomed to high-pressure situations shouldn’t be so 
fragile, but such weakness has become a crippling hallmark of Deila’s side this 
season. Calls for the Norwegian’s dismissal are now pandemic, marked by gleeful 
chants of “sacked in the morning” from the home fans. Some Celtic fans might 
have joined in.

“Some people have their opinions, but I’m confident that I’m the man to do 
this,” Deila said when asked whether his job is under threat. “Big managers 
have had problems at the start of their careers at clubs – just look at Alex 
Ferguson. We’re going to get stronger, win this league and fight for the Cup as 
well. I believe that we are the best team. I see the future with this team and 
we have something to build on. I think we are going to get stronger and 
stronger.”
 