
A 95th-minute equaliser from Gary McDonald denied Raith Rovers a shock victory 
againstAberdeen in their fifth-round tie. A brilliant first-half volley from 
the Rovers midfielder Iain Williamson looked to have won the tie at Stark's 
Park.

The First Division side, winners of the League Cup in 1994, appeared set to 
become the fifth Scottish Football League side to defeat the Dons in the past 
four seasons, but five minutes' added time proved to be the undoing of Raith, 
with the Dons' relentless pressure finally paying off when McDonald met a cross 
to force a replay.

Alan Gow marked his Hibernian debut with a superb solo goal as the Easter Road 
side cruised into the quarter-finals with a 5-1 victory overMontrose. Gow, on 
as a substitute, found the net with two minutes left, although the result was 
beyond doubt by then. Colin Nish scored twice in the first half while Derek 
Riordan and Abdessalam Benjelloun also found the target, and theMontrose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montrose> midfielder Chris Hegarty had 
his moment of glory with a 25-yard consolation effort.

Dundee recovered from going behind to a 10th-minute Tam McManus goal to beat 
Ayr 2-1 with goals from Ben Hutcheson and a deflected shot from Lee Griffiths 
either side of half-time.

Liam Kelly scored his first two goals for Kilmarnock as Jimmy Calderwood's 
side booked their place in the quarter-finals of the Cup with a 3-0 win at home 
toInverness Caley. Conor Sammon put the SPL side ahead with a cool finish over 
the goalkeeper Ryan Esson midway through the first half. He then set up Kelly 
to net from the edge of the area seven minutes later. The scorer doubled his 
tally just before the hour.

Gary Wood scored a hat-trick and Michael Gardyen got two as Ross County 
hammeredStirling Albion 9-0. County, who are second in the First Division, 
coasted into a three-goal advantage by half-time against the Second Division 
team.

A scrambled goal from David Goodwillie on the stroke of half-time was enough 
to sendDundee United through at the expense of Tayside rivals St Johnstone 1-0.

Lukas Jutkiewicz gave Motherwell victory against Hamilton Accies in the sole 
SPL fixture. Jutkiewicz bundled in his 10th goal of the season to continue the 
Steelmen's revival and keep their Lanarkshire rivalsHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> at the bottom of the table.
 