
What is the Guardian app for BlackBerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blackberry> 10?

The Guardian app for BlackBerry 10 delivers all the best content from 
theguardian.com to your phone. Read the latest news, sport, comment and 
reviews, watch video, listen to podcasts and browse stunning picture galleries 
while on the move.

What features does it have?

- navigate by section, topic or contributor 
- browse our award-winning audio and video content
- swipe through stunning full-screen picture galleries
- share articles and galleries via built-in BlackBerry share options 
- view content in portrait or landscape orientation
- choose UK or US edition
- swipe from the left to ‘peek’ back a step; hold the back button and swipe 
from the left to return to the homescreen

Will it work on my phone?

The app will work on BlackBerry 10 smartphones only.

How much does it cost?

The app is free.

Where is the app available?

The app is available now from BlackBerry World in all locations worldwide.

How do I customise the homescreen or create favourites?

We haven’t built customisation into this version of the app, but hope to 
enable it in future versions.

What content is available offline?

The app stores content in the cache so you will be able to read a certain 
amount of stories while offline. In the settings menu, you can choose whether 
to include images and galleries.

How do I share content?

From an article or gallery page, tap the share icon at the bottom of the 
screen. This will bring up a list of options based on the applications 
installed on your phone. You can potentially share content via BBM, email, 
Twitter, Facebook and more.

Why don’t I see any images, even when the articles have appeared?

The app downloads pictures after text to ensure you get a better all-round 
experience. When using Wi-Fi or 3G you should see pictures appearing instantly. 
If the connection speed is too slow, however, pictures will be prevented from 
loading altogether.

Can I use the Guardian app when I’m abroad?

We advise checking with your operator prior to using the app abroad as most 
monthly plans charge extra for data roaming when outside your home country. As 
this can often be expensive, either use wi-fi or contact your service provider 
for details of how to purchase cut-price roaming tariffs.

Why isn’t my content being updated?

The app needs a connection when opened to retrieve the latest content (unless 
you’ve recently synched it). Without a connection the app will display the 
latest content it can find. When connected, by default the home page will check 
for the latest content every time it is opened or after every 10 minutes of 
use, though you can adjust this in the settings menu. There is also a manual 
refresh option at the top-right of the screen if you want to update more 
frequently.

How do I change the font size?

From an article page, press the text size (Aa) link at the bottom of the 
screen. Use the slider to select the text size you would like to view. This 
will be saved for future articles.

How do I choose the US/UK Edition?

The edition of the app can be selected using the Settings option in the menu 
(by swiping down from the top of the screen).

How do I remove the app?

On the installed apps page, hold down your finger on the app icon until a 
delete badge is displayed - then tap the delete badge to remove the app from 
your smartphone.

How do I switch off auto-rotate?

It is not possible to switch off auto-rotate for individual apps. To switch it 
off for all applications, swipe down from the top bezel on the home screen of 
your smartphone and tap the Rotation Lock icon in order to toggle auto-rotate.

How do I give you feedback/ideas on how the app can be improved?

We’d like to hear from you if you have any problems or suggestions on how we 
can improve the app. To send feedback, while using the app, go to “Help” from 
the menu, then select “About this app” and “Send feedback”. You can also get in 
touch via email at userhelp@theguardian.com or our Twitter account 
@guardianmobile where you can get news from the Guardian mobile team including 
updates to the BlackBerry 10 app. Please note that queries will be answered by 
the Userhelp team during UK office hours, Sunday - Friday 8am-6pm BST/GMT.
 