
What is this?

A CAPTCHA is something that protects websites against automated attacks by 
generating and tests that typically humans can pass, but current computer 
programs cannot. For example, humans can read distorted text like the ones 
shown above, but current computer programs cannot easily.

(The term CAPTCHA stands for Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell 
Computers and Humans Apart. For more background information, please look at the 
following website:http://www.captcha.net <http://www.captcha.net>/ )

Why do you use CAPTCHAs?

Because our services are on the public internet, it is possible for those with 
malicious intent to write software that automatically fills in forms on our 
site, for example to automatically create user accounts.

Automated scripts otherwise known as "bots" could be used by people trying to 
penetrate the Guardians systems, subvert them, or otherwise put your personal 
data and our systems at risk. Therefore for some of our services, we attempt to 
detect automation, and in these case we display a CAPTCHA that must be 
completed.

I am not a computer, so why am I seeing one?

We have tried hard to ensure that only on rare occasions will anyone see a 
CAPTCHA. If you do see one, it means that we are currently seeing higher than 
normal activity from your IP address to the service being protected. Filling in 
the CAPTCHA correctly should stop you from seeing further CAPTCHAs.

The other case where me may use CAPTCHAs is where we are currently seeing 
higher than normal levels of activity to a service as a whole. In this case, 
all users need to complete CAPTCHAs until the activity levels return to 
normality.

Are your CAPTCHAs accessible?

The CAPTCHAs we are using come equipped with an accessible audio version.

I'm still having problems.

Please contact us at userhelp@theguardian.com <> and we'll look into it for 
you.

How is the CAPTCHA produced?

We use the recaptcha.net <http://recaptcha.net> service, which is run by 
Google. The words that you see (or hear) in the CAPTCHA come from digitised 
images of books, newspapers and old radio shows. By filling in the words you 
are helping, in a small way, to digitize these valuable archives.
 