
The sense of loss at the Circuit of the Americas was palpable as the 
motorhomes that should have been filled by Marussia and Caterham – both now in 
administration – stood empty in the paddock.

They had taken down the Marussia badge and chairs were stacked beside buckets 
of paint. The stilled electric fans were not needed to combat the growing heat 
from the Texas sunshine. The home that would have been Caterham’s was even more 
starkly empty, just cold, grey cubicles and some torn-up pieces of cardboard. 
The ancient and ruined city of Petra could scarcely have felt more deserted 
than this. But there will have to be tumbleweed blowing through the paddock 
before anyone does anything, it seems.

It was achingly poignant that, as the latest bulletin on the condition of the 
Marussia driverJules Bianchi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jules-bianchi> 
– who was injured in the Japanese Grand Prix – was issued, his team were 
nowhere to be seen. “It will be four weeks this coming Sunday since Jules’ 
accident and he remains in the Mie General Medical Center in Yokkaichi,” the 
statement read. “His condition continues to be classified by the medical 
professionals here as critical but stable. Although we have no new information 
to give, we recognise that there are a huge number of people all around the 
world who are supporting Jules and willing him on in his fight.”

In Austin there was the helpless realisation that nothing is being done to 
confront Formula One’s many problems. The former Jordan executive Gary 
Anderson, who is now an F1 columnist for Autosport, said: “The sport’s in big 
trouble and it should be addressed now. I’m very disappointed that these 
problems weren’t tackled a long time ago. We had over 30 cars in a grand prix 
not long ago. We’re a long way from that now. The people managing it now, or 
who should be managing it now, are not doing their job correctly. We have two 
teams, 4,000-5,000 people, sitting at home right now.

“Bernie Ecclestone would have been able to do something in the past but now he 
doesn’t seem able to do anything, or has decided not to do something. People 
should be looking at this and saying ‘this is not right’. The spectacle has 
been good this year but the big teams are making all the decisions and getting 
the majority of the prize money.

“Sauber and Lotus are the two most financially critical now. We could end up 
with six teams. We could even end up with four teams. And four teams, even with 
three cars [each], is only 12 cars.”
 