
At the end of a historic week in League Two’s third automatic promotion spot 
John Coleman urgedAccrington Stanley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/accringtonstanley> to embrace the thrill 
of it and suggested the visit of Morecambe to the Crown Ground was “the biggest 
game the club has been involved in”. Sadly the embrace seemed to suffocate them 
and a 2-2 draw, while extending their unbeaten run to eight games, dropped them 
back to fourth. A win would have put them second.

The rare atmosphere may have been responsible. Stanley have not been in the 
third tier since 1960, failed to complete the 1962 campaign, regrouped in 1968 
and on Friday celebrated the 10th anniversary of their return to the League at 
all. They are now the longest residents of the division. Coleman, who took them 
up then and came back for more in 2014, is not resting on legendary laurels. 
“We stopped playing after the second goal and the points we have thrown away at 
home could be fatal for us,” he said. “We got our noses in front, then tried to 
coast and that’s suicidal.”

From the outset the weather seemed more in control than Accrington. In the 
12th minute Morecambe’s Shaun Miller was allowed to run left to right past four 
challenges before pulling the ball back on to his left foot and curling it into 
the far corner. At once glorious spring sunshine gave way to a fierce storm 
that pelted the rejoicing but unprotected visiting fans at the Coppice End – 
hail and farewell perhaps until Seamus Conneely released Josh Windass, who cut 
in and beat Kieran O’Hara as his father, Dean, beat keepers for Hull City.

The sun returned and stayed for Windass, who is heading for Rangers next 
season, to put Stanley ahead with a penalty after Billy Kee, whose 17 league 
goals justified close attention, was adjudged for once to have been manhandled 
too far by Andy Parrish. But half an hour later – all hail again in another 
weather change – came Morecambe’s equaliser. Brad Halliday was the fall guy, 
delegated guard as the centre-backs went forward, letting through Tom 
Barkhuizen with a miskick in midfield. “We gifted it from our own corner and 
had warned the players about that,” lamented Coleman.

Incidents which might have been forgiven and forgotten in August are hard to 
overlook in April. There were more to come as Kee was inches short of turning 
in Windass’s shot-cum-cross at the far post, then Tariqe Fosu, on loan from 
Reading, hit a post and O’Hara denied Shay McCartan with a stunning block in a 
final goalmouth scrimmage. These last two were Coleman’s final throws from the 
bench. His first had brought on Andy Procter, a leggy midfielder, who played in 
Stanley’s firstLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> match at Chester City.

“It feels like a defeat,” said Coleman. “But on the balance of the whole game 
a draw was a fair result.” He has a soft spot forMorecambe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/morecambe>, who followed Stanley up from 
the Conference for the first time a year later and are now safe. He had six 
years as a player for them and welcomed Jim Bentley, five years their manager, 
as a “good friend”. The point, coupled with York’s defeat, assured their 
safety, though Dagenham & Redbridge were relegated and replaced by Cheltenham, 
returning at the first attempt. Northampton, meanwhile, were confirmed as 
champions.

Peterborough on rise from their ‘rock bottom’ to leave Doncaster in mire | 
Jeremy Alexander
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/20/peterborough-rise-rock-bottom-doncaster-rovers-league-one>
For Stanley, presumptuously down Livingstone Road which, going through a 
housing estate, suggests nothing more recreational than swings, roundabouts and 
seesaws at its end, promotion presents intriguing challenges. The capacity is 
just over 5,000 and average attendance less than 1,700, better only than 
Morecambe’s. There is talk of a stand along one side, adding 1,500 to what is 
barely a chicken run at present. The first ball went over it inside half a 
minute and, 30 seconds from the end, Miller nodded the last, unchallenged, in 
an innocent piece of shrugging mischief. Meanwhile, for the next three weeks, 
football will surely provide its own swings, roundabouts and seesaws.
 