
The Accrington Stanley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/accringtonstanley>
 managing director, Robert Heys, has been suspended from all football activity 
for 21 months by the Football Association after breaching their betting 
regulations.

The governing body charged Heys at the start of the month and he admitted to 
735 breaches of their betting rules at a hearing last Thursday.

Stanley's managing director, who was also fined £1,000, intends to appeal 
against the punishment.

Heys, who has been with Stanley for more than 10 years, posted a lengthy 
statement on his website in which he shed light on the charges which had been 
brought against him.

He revealed that he had made more than 200 bets on games involving his own 
club, including 37 matches in which he had backed Accrington to lose.

He said: "Last Thursday I attended a Regulatory Commission at the FA where I 
made a full and frank admission to 735 breaches of the FA betting rules, 
spanning a period of 10 years. These bets were made via a number of online 
betting accounts which I had at that time – all of which are now closed.

"Of the 735 bets that brought the charges, 231 were on games involving 
Accrington Stanley. These were small stake bets and many were part of an 
accumulator bet where there was also a reliance on other clubs to win as well – 
clubs that had no connection to Accrington Stanley.

"Of those 231 bets, 137 were placed on Accrington Stanley to win, 37 to lose, 
and 57 other types of bet which were predominantly that there would be a total 
of more than two goals in a particular game, scored jointly by both teams."

Heys' statement continued: "Anyone who knows me personally will know that I 
only ever want a win for my team. This has always been the case and on 
occasions when I have very occasionally bet against my club over the last 10 
years I would always have been very happy to lose the stake and take the 
result."

Heys also announced his intention to appeal, adding: "I accept that I broke 
the rules and that I must receive a punishment. However, on consideration and 
following consultation with my representatives, we do feel that a suspension 
period of 21 months is severe and inappropriately harsh.

"I fully intend to appeal against the excessiveness of the penalty in an 
effort to get it reduced so that I may work towards resuming my career within 
the football industry."
 