
One of several factors that deem the tenure of Derek McInnes at Aberdeen as 
worthy of praise is the ability to dodge banana skins. For years, Aberdeen had 
been accustomed to being victims of cup shocks; Bohemians, East Fife, Queen of 
the South and Queen’s Park offer testament to that. Since McInnes took office 
at Pittodrie in 2013,Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> 
have formed a useful habit of swatting aside lower league opposition.

So it proved again here, McInnes and his players booking a League Cup final 
place with a victory overMorton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morton> 
which was fully merited on the balance of play. This was not a particularly 
memorable encounter in confirming to semi-final stereotype, but Aberdeen were 
always the more menacing side.

Morton battled to the point where they were never overawed but did not carry 
sufficient attacking threat to conjure thoughts of an upset. The reward for 
this club from Scotland’s second tier will be a bumper payday, as meaningfully 
enhanced by pulled funds from Sunday’s Old Firm game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/celtic-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-match-report>
.

When Aberdeen ruled Scottish football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2016/mar/09/aberdeen-scottish-football-alex-ferguson>
Aberdeen had failed to make territorial dominance count during the first half. 
They forced 11 corners, with two of them within as many minutes of kick-off at 
least triggering panic in the Morton backline. From the first, Kenny McLean 
forced Andy McNeil into an excellent save. Jonny Hayes then headed against the 
bar, with James Maddison again the set-piece architect.

These flurries aside, Morton were perfectly comfortable. They should also have 
been ahead before half-time as Jai Quitongo eluded the Aberdeen defence when 
collecting an Andrew Murdoch pass. The striker, who perhaps had too much time 
in thereby reducing the opportunity for an instinctive finish, fired straight 
against the legs of the Aberdeen goalkeeper Joe Lewis

In the last act of that first period, Adam Rooney clipped the Morton crossbar 
with a header. Immediately after starting the second, Aberdeen’s Niall McGinn 
received a rather unfortunate booking for diving. The questionable part related 
to McGinn not actually claiming for a penalty when dodging the challenge in 
question. Scottish referees remain a strange breed.

Morton were entitled to cherish this day in the sun. Three decades have passed 
since they were a force in the Scottish game with, in many respects, the club’s 
stagnation reflective of a grim economic scene in Greenock. The personal 
investment of Douglas Rae in recent times meant the club chairman was 
especially worthy of positive attention.

The sad and completely avoidable element related to the choice of semi-final 
venue. Those in charge of organising – and, presumably, promoting – Scottish 
football were guilty of shocking negligence by insisting this tie was played at 
Hampden Park. A lunchtime kick-off and attendance of 16,183 meant Tynecastle or 
Easter Road, as used for similar fixtures, would have been the logical host 
ground. Instead, the picture as beamed across the UK was of 35,000 empty seats.

It was the Aberdeen contingent who were afforded 69th-minute celebration. 
Andrew Considine headed an Andrew Shinnie cross into the path of Rooney, who 
had the relatively simple task of converting from three yards. A legitimate 
Morton complaint would have stemmed from Rooney’s offside position when 
Considine knocked the ball forward. Even before that Rooney intervention, the 
first goal had appeared crucial. Shinnie blazed wildly over the bar when 
afforded a great chance to double the Premiership team’s lead, with Morton 
clearly affected by the breaching of their containment game plan.

Aberdeen were eventually to claim a second. McGinn’s drive across goal was 
only parried by McNeil, straight into the path of McLean. The midfielder tapped 
into an unguarded net. Aberdeen will return to Hampden next month, seeking to 
claim the League Cup for a second time in three seasons.
 