
Adam Rooney scored twice as in-form Aberdeen stretched their unbeaten run to 
12 games and drew level with Celtic at the top of theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>.

An injury to Andrew Considine in the warm-up led to Mark Reynolds being 
promoted from the bench prior to kick-off. But Aberdeen secured the victory 
that their manager, Derek McInnes, had demanded to exert pressure on the 
defending league champions. The visitors leaked two late goals but still held 
on for a 4-3 success,three days after the 2-1 win at home to Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/03/aberdeen-celtic-scottish-premiership-match-report>
.

St Johnstone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone>, now without a 
win in eight matches, gave the visitors cause for anxiety for long spells of 
the second half. However, Aberdeen deserved their win.

Rooney secured an early lead but St Johnstone were denied a leveller by the 
upright in the 10th minute when Tam Scobbie’s powerful drive swept beyond 
goalkeeper Scott Brown only to crash back into play.

Peter Pawlett had given Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> a 2-0 interval advantage when 
he scored after 20 minutes but David Wotherspoon provided battling St Johnstone 
with fresh hope soon after the half-time break.

The Aberdeen substitute Niall McGinn cashed in on an error by his former 
colleague Joe Shaughnessy for the third in the 72nd minute to the relief of 
travelling fans in a 5,712 crowd.

Rooney’s second goal, a deflected but ultimately decisive 77th-minute strike, 
gave Aberdeen a 4-1 cushion and looked to have killed the game. But the 
visitors’ nerves were jangling again in the closing minutes.

The St Johnstone defender Steven Anderson headed a Liam Craig corner into the 
net off Rooney, and then the goalkeeper Scott Brown could not prevent Tam 
Scobbie’s shot finding the net in the 89th minute.

But Aberdeen held firm in four minutes of stoppage time to share top spot with 
a Celtic side on Scottish Cup duty this weekend.

McInnes planned three changes to the Aberdeen starting lineup following the 
win over Celtic in midweek but Mark Reynolds, who was due to drop to the bench, 
was hastily pitched in when Andrew Considine was injured in the warm-up.

The home manager, Tommy Wright, was forced into making five changes to the 
side which lost a League Cup semi-final to Hibernian, with former Hearts winger 
Danny Swanson handed his debut in place of Rangers-bound Michael O’Halloran.

Aberdeen got off to a perfect start in the fifth minute when Rooney rushed in 
at the back post to slam home a delivery whipped over by right-back Shay Logan.

St Johnstone were denied a leveller by the upright in the 10th minute when 
Scobbie’s powerful drive swept beyond goalkeeper Brown only to crash back into 
play.

Pawlett then struck with a raking 25-yard free-kick which seemed to take a 
deflection to wrong-foot Alan Mannus.

Five minutes from the interval Graham Cummins swept past Brown but the 
Irishman was forced to shoot from the tightest of angles and the ball rolled 
past the far post.

Scobbie was denied again minutes after the restart when Graeme Shinnie headed 
his dipping volley off the line.

Wotherspoon reduced the deficit in the 52nd minute when he calmly finished off 
a flowing move from close range.

Rooney squandered a glorious chance before the hour mark when he curled a 
16-yard shot inches wide.

McGinn gave the anxious Aberdeen breathing space in the 72nd minute when he 
dispossessed Shaughnessy deep inthe the penalty area and tapped the ball into 
an empty net when Simon Church rolled the ball into the six-yard box.

Rooney made it 4-1 with his 18th goal of the season, but rather than coasting 
to the finish Aberdeen were made to sweat when Anderson and Scobbie threatened 
to snatch a point from a thriller in Perth.
 