
Adelaide United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> have 
stunned Melbourne City 2-1 in their A-League clash at Coopers Stadium, courtesy 
of a dramatic 87th-minute goal by young substitute Mark Ochieng. The Reds were 
forced to come from behind on Thursday night after Bruno Fornaroli opened the 
scoring in just the fourth minute.

It was just the defending champions’ second win of the season and a 
less-than-ideal return to Coopers Stadium for former Adelaide assistant and 
interim City coach Michael Valkanis.

It was a pulsating opening and the Reds thought they had broken the deadlock 
inside two minutes when Sergio Cirio found the net following a cross from Ben 
Garuccio, but it was questionably ruled out for offside.

Just two minutes later, Adelaide hearts sank again when two of their former 
players combined to set up Fornaroli for the opener. Ruon Tongyik played Bruce 
Kamau in behind United’s defence and the winger squared the ball for the City 
skipper who made no mistake from close range.

David Squires on ... Melbourne City's next coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2017/jan/11/david-squires-on-melbourne-citys-next-coach>
The Reds did grab an equaliser shortly after when Dylan McGowan rose highest 
to head in a well-delivered free kick from the right from Isaias. On the 
half-hour, United almost took the lead when Michael Jakobsen was robbed in 
defence by Ryan Kitto, but the young Adelaide flyer couldn’t direct a shot on 
target with only keeper Dean Bouzanis to beat.

City found the net for a second time when Nicolas Colazo rounded Eugene 
Galekovic and put the ball in but it also was controversially ruled out for 
offside. In the dying seconds of the first half, the home side had another 
great chance when Isaias supplied Cirio with a defence-splitting pass, but the 
Spaniard couldn’t find a way past Bouzanis.

Both sides found it difficult to carve out clear-cut chances early in the 
second half but, as time wore on, City imposed their dominance. Kamau had a 
powerful shot from a tight angle saved by Galekovic on 72 minutes before Ivan 
Franjic blazed over from similar range.

Substitute Fernando Brandan was lively after his introduction and was causing 
the Reds’ defence all sorts of problems on the left. But United had the last 
say with Ochieng netting the winner in the 87th minute, five minutes after 
being introduced to the action.

Midfielder James Holland found substitute Sergi Guardiola out wide who 
released Ochieng with a sublime first-time volleyed pass. Ochieng raced through 
the City half with just Bouzanis to beat, and made no mistake slotting his shot 
into the top corner. There were more than a few anxious moments in the final 
stages but United held on for maximum points.

Adelaide United coach Guillermo Amor was delighted with the Reds’ win but 
refused to get carried away. “It is important to enjoy today, the result and 
the performance,” he said. “But we must think it’s just the second game we win.”

City coach Michael Valkanis felt his side deserved all three points. “I think 
we had them against the wall and completely dominated and the stats show that 
as well,” he said. “But, unfortunately – one moment, a counter attack – and it 
was a goal.”



 