
Extra time was beckoning and the murmurings of discontent were becoming 
audible when, with one imperious swipe of his right foot, Adnan Januzaj 
dispersed the growing Wearside gloom.

The Manchester United loanee’s glorious turn and shot into the top corner from 
outside the area not only gave David Moyes his first win as Sunderland’s 
manager but also offered reasonable compensation for a horribly laboured home 
performance from an extremely young side.

“We’re disappointed,” said Micky Mellon, Shrewsbury’s manager who saw the 
substitute George Waring miss a presentable headed chance at the death. “I’m 
proud of my players. The only difference was that, in one moment, Januzaj 
showed why he’s worth millions.” Moyes, whose sidevisit QPR in the third round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/24/northampton-town-manchester-united-efl-cup-third-round-draw>
, body-swerved the post-match press conference.

Until Januzaj’s intervention, a sub-14,000 crowd had been seriously 
underwhelmed by Sunderland’s failure to outmanoeuvre League One opposition. In 
mitigation, a lengthy casualty list dictated Moyes’s central midfield was again 
staffed by non-specialists.

In the rested Jermain Defoe’s absence Joel Asoro enjoyed his first senior 
start. Strong and speedy, the 17-year-old Swedish striker quickly caught the 
eye but it seems Sunderland’s manager is far from his only fan. Indeed Paris 
Saint-Germain are reputedly monitoring the progress of a forward eventually 
hoping to follow in the footsteps of Zlatan Ibrahimovic.

David Moyes keen to keep Lamine Koné but rues Sunderland budget restraints
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/david-moyes-lamine-kone-sunderland>
Moyes sees Asoro more as “a young Defoe” and hopes he can add goals to some 
slick link-up play. If the youngster failed to trouble Shrewsbury’s goalkeeper, 
Jayson Leutwiler, all that much, his change of pace did swiftly see Gary Deegan 
booked for crudely flattening him. Moreover, Leutwiler made an important block 
to deny Patrick van Aanholt following Asoro’s clever swivel and flick and, 
then, much later, the teenager should have had a penalty after being upended by 
Adam El-Abd.

That little cameo temporarily lifted a decidedly flat atmosphere in which 
shirt-sleeved supporters who had spent the day basking in warm sunshine soon 
started shivering as a damp, chill mist began rolling in off the North Sea.

With the unsettled Lamine Koné still absent from the teamsheet, Moyes once 
again deployed Jack Rodwell at centre-half and finally found a place for Wahbi 
Khazri wide on the left.

Khazri had an early headed chance but directed it wide after connecting with 
Donald Love’s cross. Recently arrived from Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/11/sunderland-sign-manchester-united-pair-paddy-mcnair-donald-love>
, Love had some uneasy moments at right-back but with the former Liverpool loan 
signing Javier Manquillo undergoing a medical on Wednesday night after agreeing 
to swap Atlético Madrid for Sunderland, he could soon be given time to properly 
find his feet.

Moyes’s players – who could soon also be joined by Vicente Iborra, the Sevilla 
defensive midfielder – were dominating possession without really hurting
Shrewsbury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury>.

If Januzaj’s wing play invariably delighted, his final ball, initially at 
least, had an unfortunate habit of letting him down. Similarly when an inviting 
chance fell to Steven Pienaar, the South African’s shot flew over the bar in 
the wake of a surging, exhilarating, advance.

Defensively intelligent and well organised, Mellon’s side were unambitious in 
the attacking sense, with Jordan Pickford in theSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> goal coping easily enough 
with Louis Dodds’s early header. Later Ivan Toney, on loan from Newcastle 
United and impressing here, forced Pickford into a fine diversion of his 
dangerously swerving right foot shot.

Moyes, meanwhile, could have done with Asoro scoring rather than shooting 
straight at Leutwiler after meeting Januzaj’s inviting cross but the latter 
would soon save his night. Sure enough, seven minutes from time Duncan Watmore 
and Khazri cued up the Belgian for his evening-changing moment and, finally, 
Sunderland’s manager had something to smile about.
 