
Neal Ardley admitted the AFC Wimb ledon matchwinner, Tom Beere, could have 
been left out of the squad for the first leg of the League Two play-off 
semi-final withAccrington Stanley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/accringtonstanley>.

Beere was almost not even named on the bench having only recently returned 
from a loan spell at non-league neighbours Hampton & Richmond.

The 21-year-old was sent on with four minutes left of Saturday’s first leg and 
scored a stoppage-time winner to give the Dons a 1-0 advantage going into 
Wednesday’s second leg.

“Football’s a funny game,” Ardley said. “Tom might have been 19th man if 
Connor Smith had been fit, but he wasn’t. So Tom has come in and I had a 
feeling something might just drop to him. He’s a good striker of the ball and 
he showed great composure.

Portsmouth’s Cook angry with Jamille Matt after Plymouth playoffs draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/12/porstmouth-plymouth-paul-cook-playoffs>
“It leaves us with a slight advantage and a little bit of a cushion, but we 
can’t go there and sit back. We’ll pay them maximum respect as they are an 
outstanding team.”

The Dons had finished 10 points behind their visitors and kicked off as 
underdogs, 28 years to the day since the old Wimbledon’s finest hour, the 1988 
FA Cup final victory over Liverpool.

“I was aware of the exact date, it’s been quite important in Wimbledon’s 
history,” Ardley added. “But I didn’t tell the players. There’s enough nerves 
already. What they have done at this club over the last few years is 
incredible. There’s a togetherness about this club and this group understand 
what they are playing for.”

For Accrington it was more late heartbreak, just a week after they were denied 
automatic promotion by a last-gasp Bristol Rovers winner, having only been able 
to draw their final home game against Stevenage.

On this occasion they had hit the post through Tarique Fosu, and must have 
thought they had survived the Dons onslaught when Adebayo Akinfenwa was also 
denied by the frame of the goal. But after another frenetic goalmouth scramble 
Beere tucked the ball through a host of defenders and into the corner of the 
net.

John Coleman was less than impressed with what he branded “rough-house 
tactics” by the Dons. The Accrington manager added: “We’ve got a lot of players 
injured by late challenges and it was allowed to go unpunished. There wasn’t a 
card shown, and if people keep getting away with it, they’re going to keep on 
doing it.

“We’ve always bounced back when things have gone against us this season and 
there’s no reason why we can’t do it again. We’ve got to believe, we’ve got 
players who can win a game. We’ll keep plugging away. If there’s any justice in 
this world, we’ll win the game next week.”
 