
When the devastation wrought by Storm Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/storm-desmond> as it rampaged through 
Cumbria last month began at last to ease, a communion also stirred among the 
rubble. It was the process of a much-loved football club deepening its bonds 
within its own community as it reached out to its stricken neighbours.

On Saturday, at Brunton Park, home of Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> United FC, people gathered to 
say thank you and to support their heroes in blue as they drew 1-1 with York 
City in their quest for promotion to the next level of the Football League. 
Some here had cheerfully billed this as “The Flood Derby”; York also having 
seen storm damage. It was Carlisle’s first game back at their home after it was 
almost wholly engulfed by the swollen waters of the river Eden early in 
December.

Senior steward Jim McBride, a big, gallus Glaswegian now rooted in Cumbria, 
points across the pitch towards the goalmouth at the far end. “The water was at 
the height of the crossbar and half the terracing was under water. I’m 
astonished that we’ve managed to get this place match-fit so soon after that.”

Andy Hall, Carlisle United’s media officer, remembers the moment when his club 
decided to stand up and be counted in their city’s hour of need. “We were 
arriving back from our game against Welling and the players were looking out 
the windows of the team bus in shock at the storm damage in Warwick Road and 
the streets surrounding.

'The flood water was rising – I grabbed our Carlisle United season tickets'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/08/flood-water-rising-grabbed-carlisle-united-season-tickets>
“Then I got a tap on my shoulder from Danny Grainger, our captain. ‘We need to 
be helping people; I don’t care how much or whatever it takes but we need to 
help these people to get their bottom floors emptied. The people of this town 
have been there for us through our ups and downs and we must be there for them 
now.’ Danny’s from Penrith, a local lad, so he’s embedded in this community and 
he could feel its pain. The following Tuesday, every member of the first-team 
squad along with our manager, Keith Curle, stepped up to the mark.”

Initially, the club had identified four houses that looked to be the worst 
affected by flood damage, but as the day wore on they all simply went where 
they felt they were needed. In the end the manager, his captain and the players 
helped to empty 15 homes.

The following day those residents were queueing up outside battered Brunton 
Park, eager to assist in the clear-up of their football neighbour’s own home. 
“More than a few people at this club got quite emotional when they saw these 
poor people turning up to help us. At the end of the day, we are a business and 
we will recover but some of these people had no insurance and saw their lives 
being swept away by the floods. It was very humbling.”

As club officials rooted among the debris of their offices and dressing-rooms 
outside, on the park itself, a small miracle was taking place. The Brunton Park 
turf has been a thing of beauty for those who play football on it.

Now it lay mangled and bedraggled. Soon, though, 20 wagons bearing the 
unmistakable livery of the stalwart local haulier, Eddie Stobart, rolled up and 
delivered rolls of new turf. Then head groundsman David Mitchell “the best in 
the country”, I’m told later, began to work his magic: digging and laying; 
kneading and stitching. Today, an immaculate surface greets the players as they 
run out for the first time in almost two months.

Curle was a fine defender who once captained Manchester City in the 
Premiership and played for England. He is all too aware of the sacred bond 
between Carlisle United and its community, a rebuke to the shallowness and 
instant self-gratification of the Premier League. “Sometimes what our players 
do isn’t always noticed but whenever we get asked there’s always a willingness 
by the players to help,” he said on Friday afternoon. “The work that the 
players did during the flood, I think, has been appreciated. They didn’t just 
do it for PR reasons; they did it because they wanted to. They care about these 
things and they wanted to help.”

United’s goalkeeper, Mark Gillespie, whose penalty save against Yeovil Town 
earned them a money-spinning tilt at home to Everton next weekend in the FA 
Cup, also spoke of matters beyond mere football. “The fans will pack out 
Brunton Park for the Everton game,” he said, “and it will be emotional. There 
are a lot of people I know in the city who have been hit hard recently. It will 
be a nice day out for them and the rest of the city.”

Kate Rowley and Keith Elliott have been watching Carlisle, their triumphs and 
vicissitudes, for more years than either cares to remember. They are two of the 
mainstays of the Carlisle United Away Supporters travel club and, as such, 
belong to an elite group among English football fans, being the furthest 
travelled each year in support of their team. “We probably clock up around 
17,000 miles a season,” says Keith. Whenever the Blues face a midweek fixture 
on the south coast – Plymouth or Portsmouth perhaps – Kate, Keith and 25 other 
stalwarts will not arrive back in Carlisle until about six the following 
morning.

“But we really appreciate it when we see the players and management going the 
extra mile for us,” says Kate. “It’s not always been like that though, but this 
manager, Keith Curle is doing something special here and the fans can feel it. 
He seems to be encouraging the players to belong to this community, even those 
from the Midlands or London.

“He’s signed some good players and we’re playing a brand of football that 
hasn’t been seen here for years but the character of the players is important 
to him and that, I think was borne out by their actions during the floods.”

Carlisle expect a sellout crowd next Sunday for the visit of Everton. A 
£250,000 payday will be their bounty and further riches will accrue if they 
win. But none of this can compare to the treasure this club found when the 
storm came and the floodwaters rose.
 