
There isn’t a major political party in the world that doesn’t at least pay lip 
service to the idea that one of their primary objectives is to create jobs. The 
idea of full employment as a desirable political goal is so taken for granted 
that we barely think about it.

But what if work – in the form of paid employment – isn’t the unalloyed good 
we routinely presume it to be? What if, in fact, more work is the problem?

This is the challenging idea at the heart of a report released by the Green 
Institute <https://www.greeninstitute.org.au/>, a progressive thinktank headed 
by Tim Hollo. The institute was founded in 2008 to provide policy advice to the 
Australian Greens but Hollo says his goal since being appointed executive 
director in early 2016 has been to make the organisation more outward-facing.

The report, Can Less Work Be More Fair? 
<https://www.greeninstitute.org.au/can-less-work-be-more-fair>, comes at a time 
when concerns about jobs being displaced by robots and other forms of 
technology are heightened. “If we fail to analyse these trends and look to the 
future right now, we’re missing a huge issue,” Hollo says.

He argues that we need to reexamine attitudes to work and see it as less 
central to defining who we are. “Our culture has increasingly told us that paid 
work is where we find our dignity and our place in society and if we aren’t 
able to find paid work, we are less worthy.”

Basic income for all: a 500-year-old idea whose time has come?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/basic-income-for-all-a-500-year-old-idea-whose-time-has-come>
But, he says: “There is so much more to life, to contributing to society, than 
paid work.”

In the report itself, that view is expressed this way: “What if, instead of 
trying to recreate an old world of abundant paid work, we … built systems, 
institutions and cultures in which less paid work could lead to greater equity, 
reinvigorated democracy and civil society, better environmental outcomes, and a 
more caring, creative, connected community?”

If that is the philosophical underpinning of the report, then its practical 
aspects rest on a discussion of two key policy positions: shorter working hours 
and a universal basic income. The policies are presented as the pillars of a 
new approach to economic management, one that would see Australia move towards 
what report contributor Prof Greg Marston, a sociologist at the University of 
Queensland, calls a “steady-state economy”.

“This is an old idea in economics, which simply means an economy of steady or 
mildly fluctuating size,” Marston explains.

“So if the pie isn’t going to get any bigger,” Marston argues, “we need to 
focus on a fairer distribution of wealth, which is a critical component of 
sustainability and the steady state economy.”

This is where a UBI comes in. This suddenly popular policy – the idea of 
paying everyone a basic wage, whether they are working or not – is being tested 
in jurisdictions around the world as governments realise that the traditional 
labour market, predicated on everyone having a full-time job, is increasingly 
failing to provide the security it once did.

Marston and other contributors to the report see UBI and shorter working hours 
as the way to address these problems, problems likely to be exacerbated as 
technology threatens more and more jobs.

“I think the two policies reinforce each other,” Marston says. “They send a 
message that a healthy society is one where we don’t have a simultaneous 
problem of overemployment and underemployment, as we currently do in Australia.”

He makes the important point that a UBI is a floor on earnings, not a ceiling, 
and that therefore, “there is nothing about UBI that is incompatible with paid 
work”.

Despite the report basically championing UBI, Hollo himself worries that the 
concept is being oversold by its proponents.

Amazon Go means more than just job losses, it will restructure the economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/09/amazon-go-means-more-than-just-job-losses-it-will-restructure-the-economy>
“UBI is often posited as a silver bullet, and I am deeply sceptical of that 
view. It will need to be one small part of a broad suite of policies, 
addressing universal health and education, affordable housing, job sharing and 
much more.

“So it’s my belief that working less should be a central aim of a prosperous 
and fair society. But what policy settings we use to get there, I am not sure.”

This open-mindedness about the best way forward is a welcome attribute in a 
political landscape now dominated by ideologues and authoritarians. It means 
the report he has overseen is more about opening up a discussion of our future 
than closing it down with ready-made answers.

Hollo thinks the argument the report is making can win people over, even those 
in politics and business who might be inclined at first to dismiss it.

Mark Carnegie, a venture capitalist based in Sydney, is indicative of business 
leaders at the cutting edge of the economic change discussed in the report. He 
is just as concerned that business and government simply aren’t prepared for 
the change that is coming.

“The software robots are coming to eat all the jobs, of that there is no 
doubt,” he says. But most of us are “floating down the big river in Egypt 
called Denial”.

He worries that a “couple of generations could easily be flushed down the loo 
as society adjusts,” and although, historically Australia has been at the 
forefront of developing innovative social policy, he believes that isn’t the 
case at the moment.

“We’re doing nothing about thinking about the bigger issues. We’re just trying 
to trim our existing system,” he says, adding that will not be good enough.

Carnegie thinks a UBI is the one of the few substantial new policy ideas that 
has any hope of coping with the changes being wrought by technology. He relates 
it to previous periods of technological change where it took “hundreds of 
years” for a countervailing powerto restore equity back into the system.

Ultimately Hollo believes there’s a potential win-win available if everyone 
can see past their entrenched positions.

“People actually work far better when they are treated better, when they work 
less hard, when they feel respected and valued,” he says. “Many companies are 
coming to understand that, and I believe those ideas will spread, more than 
anything, because they are so obviously true.”

With his history of taking part in public debates about climate change, Hollo 
knows that what is “obviously true” doesn’t always prevail. At least the report 
offers a stepping-off point for the serious and very necessary discussion.
 