
AGL has pleaded guilty to 11 counts of failing to declare political donations 
when submitting a development proposal for a coal seam gas project, which 
combined could attract penalties of up to $242,000.

In August 2014, community members in Gloucester in the NSW Hunter region 
uncovered undeclared donations from AGL to major political parties. With the 
NSW Environmental Defenders Office, they complained to the NSW environment 
office, which investigated and charged AGL with 11 criminal counts of breaching 
the act.

Each count carries a maximum fine of $22,000, although since AGL committed the 
crimes the fine has doubled.

AGL pulls out of coal seam gas across Australia, leaving farmers ‘ecstatic’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/04/agl-pulls-out-of-coal-seam-gas-across-australia-leaving-farmers-ecstatic>
“We were looking at something in the original planning documents because we 
always thought there was something not quite right about it,” says Jenni 
O’Niell, a resident and member of the Gloucester Groundswell, an anti-CSG group.

The NSW Environmental Planning and Assessment Act states that all political 
donations must be declared for up to two years before an applicant submits a 
development proposal.

By comparing donations listed by the Australian Electoral Commission and those 
in AGL’s development application for CSG fields in Gloucester, O’Niell and a 
local barrister, John Watts, found the company had failed to declare political 
donations in the development application.

“Sometimes you don’t quite believe what you’re seeing. You suspect you might 
be missing something,” says O’Niell.

In 2015, after the complaints were made, AGL changed its policy 
<https://www.agl.com.au/about-agl/what-we-stand-for/our-commitments> so it 
would no longer make political donations.

The news of the criminal convictions comes just a week after AGL declared it 
was pulling out of CSG in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/04/agl-pulls-out-of-coal-seam-gas-across-australia-leaving-farmers-ecstatic>
, and was not going ahead with its planned CSG field in Gloucester.

O’Niell said she thought the investigation and impending conviction might have 
been an important factor in AGL deciding to pull out of the project.

The NSW Department of Planning and Environment said AGL cooperated throughout 
the investigation. Sentencing would occur in June.

O’Niell said the whole saga shows the system of environmental assessment in 
NSW was broken.

“The only way that this has come to light was the community researching and 
working to bring this into the light,” she said. “We have to ask how many other 
companies might turn out to be doing the wrong thing if these things were 
looked at properly.”

Sue Higginson, from the NSW Environmental Defenders Office, said that on one 
hand this showed the laws could work.

“They’re extremely important laws because they’re about the integrity of the 
planning system not being influenced by vested interest,” she said.

“But at the same time let’s be frank here: these illegalities might have gone 
unchecked if it wasn’t for the community and our legal centre being proactive 
about this and pursuing it.”

AGL said it had cooperated with the department but said as sentencing had not 
yet happened it was not appropriate to comment further.
 